Title: Prints - Buy art prints and posters online

URL Source: https://desenio.com/posters-prints/

Markdown Content:
Welcome to the Swedish online store Desenio! We help create beautiful homes around the world with our large assortment of prints, posters, and art prints! Scandinavian design is in our DNA and our unique and on-trend art prints suit a lot of different home interior styles. Our assortment consists of popular designs by well-known artists, photographers, and illustrators, mixed with our own designs created by our very own Design Studio exclusively for Desenio.

STYLE YOUR WALLS WITH DESENIO’S PRINTS
--------------------------------------

With our prints and posters, you can give your walls a makeover, expressing your style through wall art. Go for supersized art prints if you want your art to be the focal point of your room. We offer prints and posters in various sizes up to 39” x 59”. Choose wall art that suits your style and interests. By combining your favorite designs you can create your very own gallery wall to reflect your personality. Mix and match different sizes and materials to create your own look! Check out our ”gallery walls” category for examples of popular gallery walls - perhaps you might find some favorites of your own? Our gallery walls can be purchased as sets, with both frames and art prints ready to be assembled on your wall!

BROWSE OUR PRINTS CATEGORIES
----------------------------

Our art prints are divided into different categories so you can easily find what you're looking for. Check out our Bestsellers to browse our most loved styles. Are you looking for wall art to go in a specific room? Use our filter function to search art prints perfect for your bedroom, living room, kitchen, or nursery. Browse our large assortment of beautiful art prints suitable for every corner of your home!

HIGH QUALITY IS IMPORTANT TO US
-------------------------------

When you receive your new print we want you to love it as much as we loved creating it! All our posters and prints are high quality and are printed on uncoated 100lb uncoated premium paper with a matte surface to ensure a glare-free finish. Our printing technique ensures a high-quality color reproduction that won’t fade with time. We also offer fast shipping - we know how eager you are to style your walls after placing your order!

OUR PAPER
---------

*   100lb uncoated premium paper

*   Uncoated paper

*   Age-resistant paper

*   Exclusive finish

*   Art prints are FSC certified

CHOOSING YOUR POSTERS & PRINTS
------------------------------

Decorating your home with prints should be a relaxing and fun activity. Choosing which poster and art print you want to hang on your walls can also be a challenge, which is why we divide our styles into different categories and offer a useful filter function to help you find exactly what you're looking for. By combining different sizes, colors, and materials you can curate a gallery wall to suit your personal style. If you need inspiration, we recommend checking out our gallery walls where you find different combinations created by our stylists.

PRINTS, POSTERS, OR ART PRINTS?
-------------------------------

Wall art goes by many names. The word ‘posters’ might feel nostalgic to you, like the pictures of artists that often came with magazines back in the day. We prefer using the term prints seeing as it represents our product in the right way. Our wall art is printed in high quality on paper that is much thicker and heavier than those from a magazine. Our prints have a matte surface to ensure a glare-free finish - you can both see and feel the quality!

GET IN TOUCH
------------

If you have questions regarding our art prints, your order, or anything else, don’t hesitate to contact our customer service and we’ll be happy to help! Buy your posters and prints online at Desenio to style your walls with unique and on-trend art!
