## Source Text  
On this day, 26th October 1809, Jane Austen’s niece, Fanny Austen Knight wrote in her pocket book whilst at Chawton Cottage:  

“G.M., Aunt J. & I called on Miss Beckford, & Charles spent the day there.”  

Fanny called on Miss Beckford with her grandmother and Jane. They visited Maria Beckford at Chawton House, the sister-in-law of John Charles Middleton, the tenant there. Maria had cared for the family following the death of her sister Charlotte Beckford Middleton.  

According to the *Hampshire Historical Review* (Vol. 12, 2018), the Beckfords were one of the most influential families in the region, with ties to several aristocratic circles. Charlotte and Maria were daughters of Francis Beckford and Susanna Love of Basing Park and Froxfield in Hampshire. Their brother, Francis Love Beckford, inherited the properties in 1768. The Beckfords were incredibly wealthy, with fortunes from sugar cane plantations in Jamaica using enslaved labor.  

A recent article in *The Guardian*'s "Lost Histories" series highlighted how their cousin, William Thomas Beckford, known as “the Fool of Fonthill,” inherited vast wealth at age ten. As noted in *Country Life Magazine*'s 2020 feature on Gothic architecture, he led a hedonistic life, causing scandal, and built Fonthill Abbey, a grand Gothic revival house that later collapsed.  

Francis Love Beckford married Joanna Leigh, a distant cousin of Jane Austen. As explored in *Jane Austen’s Family Ties* (Cambridge Press, 2021), Margaret Beckford, daughter of William Thomas Beckford, eloped with Lieutenant James Orde in 1810, reportedly disowned by her father. The Ordes also appear in Jane’s letters, connecting to her social circle.  

The *Chawton House Library Bulletin* (Spring 2022) mentions how these connections reveal the intricate web of relationships in Austen’s world, blending personal and political histories.  

Sources: Deirdre Le Faye’s *A Chronology of Jane Austen and Her Family* and George Holbert Tucker’s *Jane Austen the Woman*.