Title: Buy Wigs: 8 Things I Learned Before I Got My First Wig

URL Source: https://medium.com/@marcoronel/buy-wigs-8-things-i-learned-before-i-got-my-first-wig-f1fe4d293648

Published Time: 2019-10-25T15:24:22Z

Markdown Content:
6 min read

Oct 25, 2019

Guess who finally bought the wig? I! This is it. But it’s not pink. Ha! I talked about buying a wig and tried the wig for at least a year and I finally went for it. In trying to make a good choice, I have done a lot of research and feel that I have a PhD in wig knitting. For those of you who are interested in wigs, I learned that before I bought one. 8 tips to buy wigs. More people wear wigs than you can imagine. Wigs, extensions and toppers are becoming more common.

People talk about you openly and wear you without hesitation or secrecy — I think of Chloe Kardashian showcasing her collection of wigs on social networks, and Viola Davis’s figure takes off her wigs as she walks away from murder, and Julian Margulis talks about how choose a new wig for each season of Good Wife, or Mindy Kaling talks about the need for extensions in your book. But it’s not just celebrities. Regularly scheduled releases and timing of preserving color or roots are time-consuming — and expensive. It turns out that buying wigs may be a simpler, cheaper and less time consuming option.

The current wig offerings are so vast and flexible that I was surprised. There are swim wigs, wigs that can be pulled into the tail for tennis, wigs that can be shared as natural hair. And there are many wigs that have darker roots, giving you a much more real look. What to say if you’ve ever been interested in trying it now? No one blinks. Starting a wig shop is a smart way, especially for your first purchase. Last week I went for a wig for the first time. I browsed the wig shops in Yelp and chose the next best option. For months I was very close to the idea of ​​going to a wig shop — I didn’t want it to feel as high as the makeup counters do. But I’m glad I left.

It was incredibly helpful. I could try a dozen options and be well aware that there are. I got a lot of helpful tips and found out that most wig companies offer different styles of wigs — say, 10 different options — and then offer each of these styles, maybe 2 dozen colors each. So if you’re shopping for a wig, you’re really just looking for a wig shape. Once you have found the one you like, it can be ordered in any color you want. In my case you didn’t have the color I wanted in stock so you ordered it for me. Another nice thing about buying a wig from the store (at least the ones I visited) is that you are also trained to trim and adjust wigs and style. Choose between synthetic and genuine human hair wigs.

Get Mar Coronel’s stories in your inbox
---------------------------------------

Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

At the wig shop, I also learned that synthetic wigs are much more common and more popular than real hair wigs. For what? Well, synthetic wigs are much cheaper, available in many other ways, and easier to care for — if you do synthetic wigs, the style will remain when it’s dry; You don’t have to blow it, you just clean it and leave. In addition, synthetic wigs do not curl up in the rain. But the downside is that a synthetic wig usually only lasts 3–6 months, depending on how often it is worn, compared to a real hair wig that can last a year or more. Synthetic wigs can usually be worn straight out of the box, with minimal tweaks or changes, but real wigs should be cut and trimmed by a professional. Keep in mind these 3 conditions for making a wig while shopping.

There are things you want to know about wig design before buying it. The main 3 points that came up in my research are monofilament tops, lace facades, or full lace wigs and heat resistant ones. The tip of the monofilament means that the wig can be divided in different places. Lace front or full lace wigs come with “lace” around the hairline. It’s not exactly the top, it’s a rather thin mesh with tiny hair that mimics the natural hairline. The lace allows you to pull the wig back into your hairstyle or pony tail, or be pushed out of your face. Apparently, these wigs were a great Hollywood secret before — they look and feel really natural. But now you are widespread. Heat-resistant wigs are synthetic wigs that you can style at low temperatures.

The wig I chose has a solid top and is heat resistant, but has no lacing at the front. Try a hat or wig to keep it in place. Depending on your current hair, you may need a wig or a wig. They can help preserve your natural hair (even if they are thick and long) and can also keep the wig in place. I tried both the cap and the bandage in the wig shop, but since my natural hair is really short and curly / rough, I was told that I probably didn’tshould carry nothing underneath. Use powder to mix wig and hair.

The color of the wig I ordered is called chocolate brown and my gray hair will stand out on the hairline and sidewalks. So I was told to use a root product like this powder to mix my hair into a wig. If the wig looks too shiny, I was told to use a dry shampoo to soften the shine. Both synthetic and genuine hair wigs can be expensive. Wigs can be expensive. How incredibly expensive. At the store, synthetic wigs ranged from $ 250 to $ 400, but if you know exactly what type of wig you want, you can find it online for less. The store had a wig that I thought was $ 317 and also available online for $ 135. But if you do not know what you are looking for, I strongly recommend that you start at the store rather than the internet — the higher the price — the tuition you get.

Real human hair wigs start at $ 1,000 and come from there. Great price tags! There are probably less expensive options to find, but I didn’t look very hard on real hair wigs, so I don’t know where to send them at the best prices. I also learned that if you have to wear a wig for health reasons, your doctor may prescribe you a prescription and your wig may be covered by insurance as a skull prosthesis. See an overview of the wig before buying it. There is a whole world of wigs on Youtube. Each wig has a name, and you can enter that name on Youtube and find a wig overview or tutorial on how to set it up. So exciting! Reviews are made by women of all colors, shapes and sizes, so it’s interesting to see how the same wig looks different in different people. One of my favorite wigs is a woman named Blondie Locks.

I’m not sure what your product is, but apparently it’s mostly bald (not required) and wears wigs daily. She has a ton of wigs, mostly synthetic ones, and she shows how to style them, combine them with her hair line, brush them and make them look more authentic. Watch this video for a great wig check when you try on 12 different options at the wig shop. And this video may be your most compelling — featuring a Mizzie wig. This is a $ 35 synthetic wig and it looks great! Thirty-five dollars? Here’s the price for an outlet. If you like Mizzy, show it in a few of your videos. My wig is due in store this week.

I hope it’s time for my live Facebook broadcast on Thursday. I’m not going to refer to this here because I want to wait until I can show the photos, but I can tell you it’s dark, somewhere between your shoulders and your chin, with your pony. I can also tell you, this Eric wig (sweet BOB!) Was my second choice. I would like to hear your thoughts. Ever thought of wearing a wig? What about extensions? And if you are already a wig professional, what advice would you give when buying a wig for the first time? Credit: Photo: Justin Hackworth at the Old Summit.
