Title: The Rose Among Thorns - The Rose Among Thorns Poem by Gerry Legister

URL Source: https://www.poemhunter.com/poem/the-rose-among-thorns/

Published Time: 2020-06-12T21:05:00Z

Markdown Content:
Overgrown hedges overlap the fences 

Into summer nights the wild bushes grow tall. 

But in the garden standing out among flowers, 

you will see the most beautiful rose petal.

Their colours adapt to our personality and dignity. 

Green and blue, red-orange pink and violets too. 

Dress with sweet fragrance reeling in the beauty, 

But prickly thorns eat away moral integrity in you.

And spring up dishevelled blackthorn skeletons 

Bare and brash spiralling necks drowning the view. 

Suffocate the fragrance formed among the thorns 

With a bitter shade captures the morning dew.

Frothy hedges leap to mislay the scent of rain, 

Over atmospheric changes and waterlog farms, 

climbing forbidden walls and down into the ravine. 

I stumble upon a Rose among prickly thorns.

Among melancholy anger boisterously wander 

I smile along the dreary road upon which I strode. 

The romance of bones along cobblestones to ponder 

Treasures found in the single rose-scented abode

No rose of her kindred kind look with such delight, 

Turned away from scentless fondles leaves. 

In the light, no flower blossomed so fresh and bright 

Reflect, the beauty in her eyes with blushes.

The Rose I knew, from a Ukrainian meadow 

Sit poised on a green glow dice among prickly thorns, 

Matured shade whose love was made to grow, 

Evoke elegance to plant the essence of our beings.

Since this charm of beauty in our hearts is alive, 

We give a rose to express love strong feelings. 

Like the pearls in the path of an entangle beehive, 

That makes life full of bliss and dreams.

In Ukraine, I stumble upon a rose among thorns, 

But the image of dark razer twigs needs trimming. 

To challenge all her lovelier companions 

with purer deep hearts of ephemeral lasting.

Thorny brows roam and ramble in bushes and brambles 

bathe in frown like angry people getting tall. 

Reckless and lofty, they climb up walls and fences 

But cannot smile like the roses upon which they fall.

The rambling brambles sit nearby the wild 

Honeybees, make friends with wasps and hornets, 

But the Rose among thorns makes butterflies inside 

With their scented dew perfumed tears and gifts.

Friday, June 12, 2020

**Topic(s) of this poem:** rose
