Title: Is Grad School Right For Me?

URL Source: https://careers.umd.edu/explore-careers/pursuing-graduate-degree/is-grad-school-right-for-me

Markdown Content:
Many Terps consider graduate studies. But do you know if further education is the right next move for **YOU**? When you think about continuing on with your education are you considering a master's or doctoral degree? And why? There are good and not so good reasons to attend graduate school. You should consider the pros and cons of going straight to graduate school versus working for a few years first to earn money, gain experience, and clarify your longer-term career and life goals.

Reasons to attend graduate school include:

*   You have done the self-exploration and research and you definitely want to be a doctor, lawyer, professor or work in specific career that requires additional training to enter the profession
*   You have a passion for and interest in a particular subject and wish to gain additional expertise on the topic
*   You have appropriate time and financial resources to devote to further education

Reasons not to attend graduate school include:

*   You hope to postpone the “real world” for another two or more years
*   You don’t know what you want to do so you’re buying time until you figure it out
*   You wish to stay in school longer to avoid a poor job market
*   You lack self-defined career goals and are simply doing what others are telling you you should do next

You may also struggle with the decision to go straight to graduate school or work first. There are positives and negatives to both decisions. Working first can be a good way to gain real-world work experience, clarify your larger life goals, and confirm your career goals while saving money. Some graduate programs prefer or require prior work experience. On the other hand, going straight to graduate school may be a better and more common pathway for other fields, especially if you know your dream career requires further study or you are concerned you won’t be able to return to school in a few years for financial or motivation-related reasons. Set aside time to reflect on your goals and reasons for pursuing graduate study. You may want to talk through your reasons and the information you gather with a faculty member, career advisor, academic advisor, or a student who is currently pursuing the graduate degree you are interested in (they’ve walked through your shoes and can give you perspective and help you identify factors you may have not yet considered in your decision-making process).

Earning a doctorate is an incredible commitment of time-4-8 years on average, energy and potential lost wages from delaying your entry into the workforce. Talk to current doc students and program alumni, not just the faculty in the programs you are considering. This will give you a much fuller picture of what you will get into. Ask if there is available data about the types of employment graduates obtain after completing their degree and information about career trajectories and salaries 10 or 20 years after graduation.Ask about the kind of support you can expect or not expect (e.g. one-on-one mentorship, department level scholarships/financial assistance) from faculty or students in the program you are considering

Before applying, do your homework:

*   Review program options at Peterson's
*   Once you’ve narrowed down your options, review each program’s website
*   Contact the directors of your programs of interest
*   Speak with a current student in the program(Best way to get to know a program!!)
*   Contact and visit potential programs with specific questions
*   Attend graduate school open houses and fairs
*   Speak with faculty, alumni, current grad students, friends and family who are in your targeted profession
*   Seek guidance from UMD’s Pre-Law Advising Office or the Reed-Yorke Health Professions Advising Office, if appropriate

Things to consider when researching your options:

*   Type of program/ degree (PhD, Master’s, professional degree, and more!)
*   Academic prerequisites
*   Reputation of the program in your career field
*   Location and networking/hands-on learning opportunities
*   Job placement rate
*   Curriculum, course load, and concentrations
*   Faculty and staff support
*   Cost and available funding (your own and from the programs)
*   Timing- Is this the right time in your life for graduate school? For your field, is it better to gain work experience first?
*   Full-time vs part-time enrollment options
*   Admissions requirements and your eligibility

Take some time finding a program that is a good fit for your long-term career goals. Invest in your future before diving in! Good Luck!
