Title: If you were to write a dystopian novel, what would it be about?

URL Source: https://www.quora.com/If-you-were-to-write-a-dystopian-novel-what-would-it-be-about

Markdown Content:
If you were to create your very own post-apocalyptic novel, what would you have as a theme and what would be the story?

The Story centers around me, naturally, as I would be fighting the Zombies in the Apocalypse, regardless if you make other characters they are all you in your facets of self in reflections on how you see yourself while occupying self. What is it that allows me to lean in interest for others, what things do I do and what are the things that I say?

To see me now in society, and what I paint now and afterward now in a Zombie Apocalypse, which view is important.

Mr. Howie just come out from the bar where he sought shelter for some time as the Zombies lost interest in their prey, just then he kicked a pop can that was in some debris in his path of course the can now making tons of noise as it rolled around aimlessly the sound bouncing off the walls, he just watches and dreaded it in seconds of saying can you be so noisy really! Then Howie stepped on the can making it silent under his foot, shut up already. Then the dreaded moans could be heard and yes they were now in pursuit of the lost prey, as one of the Zombies was seen trying to sniff the air as some sorted alien would do, energized from the bar pit stop, and getting a few more supplies, his legs were given the signal and off he went to sprint, but hesitated to see a tall man, sporting knight’s plate armor and a large Bowie knife make absolute more noise than the pop can and one of the Zombies close made as a fast stride towards the man in armor as the man lifted a shield ⛨ in front with spikes jetting out from the center and used it to bash directly at the Zombies melon the impact made a distinct cracking noise than in a swift tossing the Zombie was cast to the side where if flopped like a rag doll as it fell onto the pavement, than the man moved towards the next one as it lunged when it was only a meter away arms out looking to grasp the man but ended up grabbing the shield and try to force its teeth to bit at anything snapping then and darting its head around looking for an opening of opportunity when it bit on the side of the shield in a flurried motion the knife came into view as it struck the head of the Zombie as another crack thud was head and than the man flick the Undead off the knife using its own limp weighted body to do the work it fell and hit the ground like a Jell-O bounce shock was the last thing it made as it flopped lifeless now against the pavement.

I looked over to see a man of average build, as an office-type person caught up in something, sporting a traveling knapsack like a bicyclist with minimal wear for traveling short distances, he also carried a shop kitchen knife for food preparation, but the look on the man’s face, like puzzle bewilderment he found himself in, just starring really like a deer in headlights like he was not sure, what he was in I quickly washed off my knife and seated it back into the sheath and made my way over and offered my hand as friendliest as I could, as not to overly cause fear or panic and introduced myself “hello wonderful to meet you” I’m Rodney Johnson and shook the man’s hand as he put his knife in his left hand to shake my hand, receipting the friendly gesture, Hello I’m Howard or Howie as everyone calls me. Pleased to meet you Mr. Howie I said with enthusiasm, to match the extensive handshake.

Well, Mr. Howie in case you wondering, yes, I was prepared for the Zombie Apocalypse of the Undead 🧟‍♂️ in case you wondering about that as it is written in the Bible as the Wrath of Jesus. Hopefully that sums up why you see me like this, naturally. And yes I am an older ex-military as to why the military dress I was with the 48th Highlanders Reserves as I had on my kilt and antique sporran of the regiment and a new white leather belt holding onto the sporran and a plain work jacket of the military with a matching kilt sash with a thistle theme broach pinned it in place and regiment brass collar pins of the falcon, followed by plate armor hiding most of it. It has an instinctively authoritative vibe, as someone to distinguish on a battlefield, underneath that was a layer of a chemical bio-suit, and under the helmet was a Ratnik gas mask with yellow lenses and a pair of glasses.

Like being semi-dressed up for a war, on the battlefield of old. Yet well protected even from the elements as being rubberized disallowing any transfer of bloody fluids and the stench of rot in the air, as the cesspool was splashed and painted in all places telling you - you now in a horror game, whether you like it or not, as dead/Undead things now littered the streets. Thorn and Thistle were the kilt dress theme. As a big leather belt and a large thistle belt buckle that wrapped around the kilt’s waist, and on the kilt was a thistle pin, The odd thing was the rubber boots had an armor covering of spats and it is where the noise was coming from as attached to the heel of the boot where spurs with chimers the rankling jungles against the rakes as the boots give off distinctive sound of the heel first thudded lightly like something walks this way that has a cadence a purpose in movement. To be crisp of tidy walking around the Zombie Apocalypse of chaos and madness yes it was odd but somehow comforted someone that there was a tethering of hope, that things might get better.

I gestured to Howard to adventure forward as we would talk along the way, as I cleaned off the front of the shield with a kit I keep on me, a disinfectant wash spray a brush, and a drying rag, Howard then gestured to the spikes attached to the boss of the shield 🛡 “are those railroad spikes” he said smiling Yes I replied I tig welded them on, then I applied a clear coat, easier to keep clean I said. The pattern was slightly twisted with a lean, looking like trauma waiting to happen on the receiving end, like sharpened chisels.

I made a quick stop and grabbed the cart that I towed behind me where there were apply supplies and quickly grabbed a new pair of construction gloves that were quite protective of the hands little more form-fitting, offering the user substantially more protection than bare-fisted fisted especially wielding a short knife and offered to Howie, he thanked me and took them, I than attached the cart to my waist belt and started to walk with Howie in a relaxed walk as he was putting on the gloves and flexing them around to get a feel of them I mentioned that there were rated for impacts and crushing and tear puncture resistant.

Howard then mentioned finding a hardware store or sports store to get more protected gear as dressed he would not last long, now looking at someone who prepared for this, Howard was smiling feeling embarrassed, that he had set out to find his parents and sister, and not even prepared, how could have he imagined to save his sister, when he was the one in jeopardy, yes he did manage to fight off some Zombies, but at a distance and one at a time. He only just escaped from them by running out the back as the building went up on fire 🔥.

This man was a fighting man who had come prepared for the enemy at hand a melee predator and a melee warrior. He knows what is required to survive, what would happen if I had to take one out would I even survive the encounter, now as he looked down at gloves he could imagine punching a Zombie hard, and not even feeling it, protection from there teeth and any bio they may have, this was a destiny Howard was thinking 💭, this is not a coincidence,

I then offered Howie another weapon a spear and cross-pound bow and a double-handled long sword with a double edge. I also had more cleaning supplies and snacks. I also carried an air-arrow rifle with double barrels and a quiver of deadlier arrows with impacted blades that spring open making for an explosive hole 🕳to open up. It was powered by a portable air cylinder pump that was built into the armor making it somewhat Mandalorian of modern plate armor with a weapon in mind, with a built-in survivalist gear for 72 hours emergency supply, it also housed a water bladder neatly arranged to house a rechargeable battery 🔋 for the lights 🚥 on the helmet and the comms system and the solar panels that keep it charged up. The air rifle sported a wrath digital scope and software that made it idiot-proof to shoot anything, as you could have 10 presets installed since it was an IR scope and made it see the Zombies as they do not illuminate any energy and appearance as shadows, being able to identify targets from a distance.

And it had a high-end recording system of gig storage, this way you can re-watch and pick out the good and bad and just drop new gig storage, when full. Howard was intrigued by the survival plan that went into the plan of surviving Than also mentioned that it is good to have for intelligence gathering you might see something that you missed, like a survivor with a help sign. Then I stopped Howard and gave him a quick spraying of the disinfectant, to neutralize your scent and give a layer of protection, then I also mentioned the gloves were washable. Howard then showed me the washing tag that he noticed.

Howard then pointed to my Gauntlets, I guess I need a pair of those as well, yes we can make you some as a DIY as I have the cutout patterns for the armor just trace and cut, Howard then looked inside my cart to see what survival equipment I carried along with me, he was surprised that I had rechargeable power tools and a bunch of premade parts for securing doors and windows. boxes of long screws and nails with some self-tapping bolts, hammer, pray bar, welding vise grips, rope, and extension cord.

I told Howard I used to be a welder fitter and had experience in making things and in earlier years an auto mechanic. The cart was smartly fashioned for all the supplies with straps and fasteners designed for everything, It was not a Bungie rope affair Howard once used to secure stuff onto his backpack to make more room on the inside and hang stuff on the outside like his thermos, couple times it worked to lose and had to re-fix it, now Howard thought that was something he could no longer afford was to make mistakes as this was a keeper game of either win or lose. and lose was a quick slow death.

What was I thinking as Howard rummaged through the man’s cart, look at all this planning Howard thought 💭 I mean I left with almost nothing like this this was a field trip for the day, come on Howard where is your thinking cap 🧢. What impressed Howard was the small rechargeable chainsaw the outside of the cart also had small solar cells, that kept the batteries charged up I then gave Howard a communications headset with a walkie-talkie handset that way we could gently talk and be heard, I told him he speaks clearly and wait for any responses as there might be a delayed response. This way we do not need to shout over distances. I had a package of 10 of them they were made for work sites, I have used them before, very ideal when in a group spread over distances, I told Howard that if he did not mind I would like to travel with him as Contenders in the Gauntlet of Greatness before the Lord. I told Howard this was the starting of the band of brothers as more would join us.

Howard started talking about getting his sister When the man abrupted and said Yes absolutely let us not hesitate and lead the way, Howard. Howard then started to explain how far it was and where exactly she lived he was also looking for his parents but he had not heard from them in hours and had feared the worst for them. Since they did not rendezvous when they were supposed to and now we are traveling on a route they would have taken and we now going to their house, my dad was talking to a friend of his and may have gone there to help him out. At least my sister texted me and said she would wait for me to arrive a few hours ago, too has not heard from Mom or Dad in hours, my sister is safe for now and has gathered supplies and her building is mostly empty with secured doors and she is up in the air on the 8th floor and has made a spear. Even my sister was better prepared.

Howard then made a pack with himself that he wanted to be better prepared and would learn to be better at this and committed to changing this as Mr. Johnson made his way taking out every Zombie that they encountered as he instructed Howard to be the wrangler for now until a better armor could be had. Howard was to be a distraction and would use the spear and the side wind to get behind the knee and pull the Zombie's leg forward tripping it.

It was such a simple tactic for now, as Howie realized that the biofluids might not be something he wanted to get on himself and keeping a safe distance, Mr. Johnson also gave Howard some rubbing chest ointment to help with the smell of not gaging every minute the wind brought a stench of death his way. and also a pack of disinfectant towels, just in case.

Howard applied the ointment readily under his nose and was instantly relieved by the soothing minted vapers it seemed to aid a bit with catching his breath in opening up the passages. as two men strolled relatively quickly and lightly talking over the comms system.

I could see Howard’s focus now as he seemed to be less drained and fearful than he felt earlier now with both of them operating as a tag team the Zombie’s groups of size, easily fell, giving Howie assertive confidence that yes he was going to save his sister.

It appeared to Howie that Mr. Johnson was a killer as he was elegant and smooth always using every tactic to his advantage, most times once the Zombie fell to the pavement next second the shield would come down like a punch press as Mr. Johnson used his knee and weight to drive the railroad spikes home into the zombies skull any fluids were masked by the shield as a covering protector. Howard felt like it was like a production line as it was simple and productive. Mr. Johnson every so often would do a field sweep with the rifle scope allowing us to see far ahead of the field of travel and this allowed us to change directions if the Zombie groups were far greater than the two of us could manage, as the emphasis was on Howie being the weakest link in the chain 🔗
