Title: 

URL Source: https://aapor.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/AAPOR-Task-Force-on-2020-Pre-Election-Polling_Report-FNL.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 17 Nov 2022 18:14:58 GMT

Markdown Content:
# TaskForceon2020Pre-ElecƟonPolling:

# AnEvaluaƟonofthe2020GeneralElecƟonPolls1

Josh Clinton (Chair), Vanderbilt University 1

Jennifer Agiesta, CNN 

Megan Brenan, Gallup 

Camille Burge, Villanova University 

Marjorie Connelly, AP -NORC Center 

Ariel Edwards -Levy, CNN 

Bernard Fraga, Emory University 

Emily Guskin, Washington Post 

D. Sunshine Hillygus, Duke University 

Chris Jackson, Ipsos 

Jeff Jones, Gallup 

Scott Keeter, Pew Research Center 

Kabir Khanna, CBS News 

John Lapinski, University of Pennsylvania 

Lydia Saad, Gallup 

Daron Shaw, University of Texas 

Andrew Smith, University of New Hampshire 

David Wilson, University of Delaware 

Christopher Wlezien, University of Texas 

This report was commissioned by the AAPOR Executive Council as a service to the profession. The report was 

reviewed and accepted by the AAPOR Executive Council. The opinions expressed in this report are those of the 

author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the AAPOR Executive Council. The authors, who retain the 

copyright to this report, grant AAPOR a non -exclusive perpetual license to the version on the AAPOR website and 

the right to link to any published versions.      

> 1The Task Force thanks Sarah Lentz (Universit y of Pennsylvania), Rezwana Uddin (NBC News), Mellissa Meisels (Vanderbilt
> University), Sara Kirshbaum (Vanderbilt University), Ami Ikuenobe (University of Pennsylvania), and Grayson Peters (Universit y
> of Pennsylvania) for outstanding research assistance. The data collection and analysis would not have been possible without
> their careful and exhaustive work on behalf of the Task Force. In addition to the Task Force members, we would also thank
> Eunji Kim (Vanderbilt University), Steve Rogers (St. Louis Unive rsity), John Sides (Vanderbilt University), Alan Wiseman
> (Vanderbilt University), and seminar participants at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at Vanderbilt University
> for thoughtful and constructive feedback on an earlier version.

2

# EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

The November 3, 2020, presidential election was historic by many standards, most notably because it was 

conducted during a global pandemic that resul ted in a record high proportion of voters casting their ballots early 

and by mail. The election also featured the highest rate of voter turnout in decades. 2

Most national polls accurately estimated that President Joe Biden would get more votes than Presi dent Donald 

Trump nationally, but Biden’s certified margin of victory fell short of the average margin in the polls at both the 

national and state levels. Polling overstated support for Biden relative to Trump, and Biden’s 306 -232 victory in the 

Electoral College was narrower than predicted by many election forecasters. 3

The shadow of 2016 hung over the 2020 election. Presidential election polls were widely criticized for “getting it 

wrong” in 2016. Many believed the polls predicted the wrong winner altho ugh the 2016 national polls were 

remarkably accurate in estimating former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s national popular vote margin. Still, 

polls in a handful of key states overstated Clinton’s lead or underestimated Trump’s lead, leading to widesp read 

discounting of Trump’s Electoral College chances by election observers and rendering his victory a shock to many. 

The state -level polling error became the focus of a task force the American Association for Public Opinion Research 

(AAPOR) convened in s pring 2016 to evaluate the accuracy of that year’s polls, which resulted in very specific 

methodological recommendations for political polling (Kennedy et al. 2016). 4

In October 2019, the Executive Council of AAPOR proactively convened a task force to ex amine the performance of 

pre -election polls in the 2020 elections. The Executive Council appointed 19 members to the Task Force on 2020 

Pre -Election Polling from industry, nonprofit organizations, media, and academia to ensure a diversity of opinions, 

appr oaches, and expertise. 

The Task Force collected all publicly available poll results at the national and state levels for the purpose of 

evaluating 2020 polling error and the extent that polls overstated the Democratic -Republican margin in the 2020 

general election. The main findings of that review are as follows.  

> 2

https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2021/01/28/turnout -soared -in -2020 -as -nearly -two -thirds -of -el igible -u-s-voters -cast -

ballots -for -president/  

> 3

Initial returns suggested that polls did even worse than they ended up doing after all of the votes were counted. The outcome 

was not decided on election night: During the ongoing pandemic, the process of cou nting early votes and mail -in votes after 

Election Day resulted in the initial election returns being more favorable for Trump than the final certified vote.  

> 4

https://www.aapor.org/Education -Resources/Reports/An -Evaluation -of -2016 -Election -Polls -in -the -U-S.aspx 3

# The 2020 Pre -Election Polling Error 

● The 2020 polls featured polling error of an unusual magnitude: It was the highest in 40 years for the national 

popular vote and the highest in at least 20 years for state -level estimates of the vote in presidential, 

senatorial, and gubernatorial contests. 5 Among polls conducted in the final two weeks, the average error on 

the margin in either direction was 4.5 points for national popular vote polls and 5.1 points for state -level 

presidential polls. 

● The polling error was much more likely to favor Biden over Trump. Among polls conducted in the last two 

weeks before the election, the average signed error on the vote margin was too favorable for Biden by 3.9 

percentage points in the national polls and by 4.3 percentage points in statewide presidential polls. 

● The polling error for the presidential elect ion was stable throughout the campaign . T he average error matched 

closely for polls conducted in the last two weeks, in the final week, and even in the final three days. The 

challenges polls faced in 2020 did not diminish as Election Day approached. 

● Bey ond the margin, the average topline support for Trump in the polls understated Trump’s share in the 

certified vote by 3.3 percentage points and overstated Biden’s share in the certified vote by 1.0 percentage 

point. 6 When undecided voters are excluded fro m the base, the two -candidate support in the polls 

understated Trump’s certified vote share by 1.4 percentage points and overstated Biden’s vote share by 3.1 

percentage points. 

● The overstatement of the Democratic -Republican margin in polls was larger on a verage in senatorial and 

gubernatorial races compared to the presidential contest. For senatorial and gubernatorial races combined, 

polls on average were 6.0 percentage points too favorable for Democratic candidates relative to the certified 

vote margin. W ithin the same state, polling error was often larger in senatorial contests than the presidential 

contest. 

● Whether the candidates were running for president, senator, or governor, poll margins overall suggested that 

Democratic candidates would do better and Republican candidates would do worse relative to the final 

certified vote. 

● No mode of interviewing was unambiguously more accurate. Every mode of interviewing and every mode of 

sampling overstated the Democratic -Republican margin relative to the final certified vote margin . There were 

only minor differences in the polling error depending on how surveys sampled or interviewed respondents. 

Regardless of whether respondents were sampled using random -digit dialing, voter registration lists, or online 

recru iting, polling margins on average were too favorable to Democratic candidates. 

● On average, polls overstated the Democratic -Republican margin in states more supportive of Trump in 2016. 

In states Trump won by more than five points in 2016, the average signed error on the margin was 5.3 

percentage points too favorable for Biden; on the other hand, in states Clinton won by more than five 

percentage points in 2016, the average signed error on the margin was 3.5 percentage points too favorable for 

Biden. Even after controlling for state -level differences in demographics and voting administration, the 

average signed error was larger in states that favored Trump in 2016.   

> 5It was the largest in 40 years for the national popular vote, but the performance of the state -level presidential polls has only
> been tracked since 2000.
> 6This calculation includes undecided voters in the base.

4

# Factors That Do Not Explain the Polling Error 

Several proposed explanations can be ruled out as primary sources of polling error in 2020. Our analyses suggest 

the following. 

• Polling error was not caused by late -deciding voters voting for Republican candidates . More voters voted 

prior to Election Day in 2020 than ever before and the number of undecided voters was relatively small. Only 

4% of poll respondents, on average, gave a response other than “Biden” or “Trump” when asked by state -level 

presidential polls conducted in the final two weeks. Unlike in 2016, respondents deciding in the last week 

were as likely to support Biden as Trump, according to the National Election Pool exit polls. 

• Polling error was not caused by a failure to weight by education. A suspected factor in 2016 polling error was 

the failure to weight by educatio n (Kennedy et al. 2016). In the final two weeks of the 2020 election, 317 

state -level presidential polls (representing 72% of all polls conducted during this period) provided information 

on the statistical adjustments accounting for coverage and nonrespons e issues; of these 317 polls, 92% 

accounted for education level in the final results. 

• Polling error was not primarily caused by incorrect assumptions about the composition of the electorate in 

terms of age, race, ethnicity, gender, or education level . The re is no evidence that polling error was caused 

by the underrepresentation or overrepresentation of particular demographics. Reweighting survey data to 

match the actual outcome reveals only minor changes to demographic -based weights. 

• Polling error was no t primarily caused by respondents’ reluctance to tell interviewers they supported 

Trump .7 The overstatement of Democratic support occurred regardless of mode and the overstatement of 

Democratic support was larger in races that did not involve Trump (i.e., senatorial and gubernatorial contests). 

• Polling error cannot be explained by error in estimating whether Democratic and Republican respondents 

voted . Trump supporters and Biden supporters were equally likely to vote after saying they would. This 

conclusion is b ased on validating the vote of registration -based samples shared with the Task Force by some 

AAPOR Transparency Initiative members. 

• Polling error was not caused by the polls having too few Election Day voters or too many early voters. 

Amo ng the 23 state -level presidential polls conducted in the final two weeks that reported how respondents 

said they would vote, the proportion of Election Day voters closely matched the percentage of certified votes 

cast on Election Day.     

> 7It is plausible that Trump supporters were less likely to participate in polls overall. Nonetheless, among those who chose to
> respond to polls there is no evidence that respondents were lying. A separate and likely problem is that some people chose not
> to respond to polls at all.

5

# Factors That May Explain the Polling Error 

Some explanations of polling error can be ruled out according to the patterns found in the polls, but identifying 

conclusively why polls overstated the Democratic -Republican margin relative to the certified vote a ppears to be 

impossible with the available data. Reliable information is lacking on the demographics, opinions, and vote choice 

of those not included in polls (either because they were excluded from the sampling frame or else because they 

chose not to part icipate), making it impossible to compare voters who responded to polls with voters who did not. 

Some educated guesses are possible based on patterns emerging from available data but conclusive statements 

are impossible. It cannot be ruled out that there i s a multitude of overlapping explanations for the pattern of 

polling error. 

Voter file information and certified vote information were compared to poll results but the most relevant 

information is unavailable; for example, it is unknown if Republicans wh o responded to polls voted differently than 

those who did not respond. 8 If the voters most supportive of Trump were least likely to participate in polls then 

the polling error may be explained as follows: Self -identified Republicans who choose to respond to polls are more 

likely to support Democrats and those who choose not to respond to polls are more likely to support Republicans. 

Even if the correct percentage of self -identified Republicans were polled, differences in the Republicans who did 

and did not respond could produce the observed polling error. 

This hypothesis is not unreasonable, considering the decreasing trust in institutions and polls especially among 

Republicans (e.g., Cramer 2016). Trump provided explicit cues to his supporters that polls were “fake” and 

intended to suppress votes (e.g., Haberman 2020). These statements by Trump could have transformed survey 

participation into a political act whereby his strongest supporters chose not to respond to polls. 9 If so, self -

identified Republican voters who participated in polls may have been more likely to support Democrats than those 

who chose not to participate in polls. Unfortunately, this hypothesis cannot be directly evaluated without knowing 

how nonresponders voted. Not only is the percenta ge of voters who self -identify as Republicans unknown but so 

too is the vote choice of the self -identified Republicans who chose not to participate. 10 

Many potential explanations for the polling error cannot be evaluated without knowing how respondents an d

nonrespondents compare. The polls may have differed relative to the 2020 electorate as follows: too many 

Democrats or too few Republicans, too many new voters or too few, or the wrong percentage of unaffiliated 

voters. 11 Or p erhaps the polling error was caused by differences in the vote choice of the voters who were and 

were not included in polls (perhaps because the voters refused to participate). Any or all of these possibilities 

could produce an overestimate of the Democrat ic -Republican margin, but it is impossible to identify the precise 

cause(s) of the polling error documented here without knowing the opinions and demographics of voters who 

were and were not included in polls.     

> 8An analogous argument extends to unaffiliated voters and voters who were new or newly energized to participate in the 2020
> election.
> 9On the importance of elite cues for public opinion and behavior see, for example: Barber and Pope 2018; Bullock 2011;
> Broockman and Butler 2017; Lenz 2012.
> 10 Voter files can be used to estimate partisanship but estimates of individual -level partisanship in the absence of party
> registration data (or participation in a party primary) are often based on either precinct -level data or an imputation based on
> demographics (along with correlations between demographics and partisanship among past survey respondents) . The former
> raises questions about the validation of ecological inferences and the latter must assume that the relationship among survey
> respondents can be used to impute partisanship among survey nonrespondents. But that is precisely the problem of conce rn.
> 11 While we have estimates of these percentages based on voter file records, the characteristics that are of most interest are
> often estimated.

6

Even so, the present analyses help quantify t he nature of the polling error and suggest what may have happened. 

● At least some of the polling error in 2020 was caused by unit nonresponse . The overstatement of Democratic 

support could be attributed to unit nonresponse in several ways: between -party nonresponse, that is, too 

many Democrats and too few Republicans responding to the polls; within -party nonresponse, that is, 

differences in the Republicans and Democrats who did and did not respond to polls; or issues related to new 

voters and unaffiliated voters in terms of size (too many or too few) or representativeness (for example, were 

the new voters who responded to polls more likely to support Biden than new voters who did not respond to 

the polls?). Any of these unit nonresponse factors could have c ontributed to the observed polling error. 

Without knowing how nonrespondents compare to respondents we cannot conclusively identify the primary 

source of polling error. 

● Factors that worked well in correcting for nonresponse in previous elections (including demographic 

composition, partisanship, or 2016 vote) did not render accurate vote estimates for the 2020 election. Poll 

data provided by some AAPOR Transparency Initiative members were reweighted to match the 2020 certified 

outcome. It was neces sary to increase the percentage of Republicans (or 2016 Trump voters) and decrease the 

percentage of Democrats (or 2016 Clinton supporters) in the outcome -reweighted sample. In contrast, there 

are only slight differences between the originally weighted poll data and the outcome -reweighted data in 

terms of standard demographic categories. 

● Weighting to a reasonable target for partisanship and past 2016 vote does not fully correct the polling error. 

Reweighting the polls to reproduce the 2020 outc ome requires a much larger margin for Trump in 2016 than 

actually occurred among respondents who report voting in 2016. The larger 2016 margin for Trump among 

those who reported voting for Trump in 2016 could be caused by the following: an issue with the w eighting 

targets, i.e., the implied vote share among 2016 voters who voted in 2020 was different from the 2016 actual 

outcome; or differences in opinion within groups that responded, e.g., the 2016 Trump supporters who 

responded to polls were more likely t o vote for Democrats than those who did not. It is impossible to know 

which caused the larger 2016 margin. 

● It is possible that 2020 pre -election polls were not successful in correctly accounting for new voters who 

participated in the 2020 election. There were many new voters in 2020 and it is unclear whether the 

proportion of new voters in the polls matched the proportion of actual new voters. It is also unclear whether 

the new voters who responded to polls had similar opinions to those who did not respond . Given the relative 

proportion and self -reported voting behavior of these new voters in the data available to the Task Force, this 

group of voters pushed the overall polling margins in the Democratic direction. Error in polling this group 

could have produ ced the observed polling error. 7

# INTRODUCTION 

AAPOR Executive Council charged the Task Force on 2020 Pre -Election Polling with the following. 

1. Evaluate the accuracy of 2020 pre -election polling for both the primaries and the general election on the 

presidential race and other races. To facilitate this analysis, the Task Force should attempt to gather the 

necessary information for each poll on an ongoing basis during the election season. 

2. Where necessary, examine why specific polls and/or methodologie s failed to correctly estimate support for 

major party candidates, whether at the national level or state level. 

3. Review variation by different survey methodologies. 

4. Identify significant differences between pre -election polls in 2020 and polling in prior el ection years including 

2018, 2016, and 2014. 

5. Create an archive of the data collected for the analysis for 2020 and for prior years to enable AAPOR to 

continue this work in future years. 

The Task Force report analyzing the performance of polling in the Dem ocratic presidential primaries was released 

in October 2020. 12 This report analyzes the performance of pre -election polls leading up to the general election 

held on November 3, 2020 , by focusing on the presidential contest at the national and state levels as well as 

senatorial and gubernatorial contests. This report provides a comprehensive summary of the overall performance 

of public polls and it does not evaluate the performance of specific polls or pollsters. 

To evaluate the performance of the 2020 general election polls the Task Force collected every public poll in 

existing databases (e.g., Real Clear Politics, FiveThirtyEight) and actively monitored media stories to collect polls 

that were not included in exi sting databases. All told, the topline information on more than 2,800 public polls was 

collected for analysis. No polls were intentionally excluded from our analysis, but nonpublic polls (e.g., internal 

candidate and party polls that were not made public) were necessarily excluded. For each poll, we collected all 

available public material, including news coverage, press releases, cross -tabulations, and methodology reports. 

Using this information, we classified polls according to their mode and other informa tion relevant for assessing 

variation in polling error, such as the field period, sample source, the population represented (e.g., registered 

voter, likely voter), and demographics used in weighting procedures. 

We collected information on every public po ll conducted during the election cycle we could find, but we followed 

past practices and focused on the average performance of polls conducted in the final two weeks of the campaign 

(i.e., polls with a field period ending between October 21 and November 3, 2020). The Task Force is exceptionally 

grateful for the individual -level data shared with us by AAPOR Transparency Initiative members and the ability to 

use Task Force members’ access to private voter files. These data were essential for our investigation s.  

> 12 https://www.aapor.org/Education -Resources/Reports/2020 -Pre -Election -Polls -Performance -of -the -Polls -i.aspx

8

The report proceeds in two parts. Part one describes the performance of 2020 pre -election polls, including how 

polling error varies across types of races, modes of interviewing respondents, and states. 

Part two begins the process of identifying what did not contribute, and what might have contributed to, the polling 

error we observed. This analysis is more speculative and limited. We are able to rule out some factors, but our 

conclusions are limited given the available data. Without knowing how the voters who were included in polls 

differed from those voters who were not, including how the opinions and vote choice of respondents compared to 

the opinions and vote choice of nonrespondents, we cannot conclusively determine the source(s) of polling e rror 

in 2020. We follow the available data as best we can and we offer some suggestions as to what might have 

happened, but many explanations could produce the same patterns we document. We do not presume to be able 

to provide the last word on what happene d, but we hope our efforts help guide continued exploration and 

examination into the extremely difficult task of predicting close elections in a highly partisan and politicized 

environment. 

# PART ONE: PRE -ELECTION POLLING IN 2020 

Part one describes the types of polls conducted in 2020 and how well they did with respect to polling error, using 

several measures across the national - and state -level races. Each section begins with the key takeaways for that 

section. These concise conclusions ar e followed by a summary of the data and analysis behind them. The polling 

error is described in eight sections as follows. 

• Section 1 describes the number of polls and the types of polling ahead of the 2020 election, including the 

number of polls conducted at the national and state levels for presidential, gubernatorial, and senatorial 

contests, and how 2020 polls compare to 2016 polls in terms of how respondents were interviewed. 

• Section 2 defines the metrics used to evaluate the accuracy of pre -election polls. 

• Section 3 compares the performance of 2020 pre -election polls to the performance of polls in prior election 

cycles, according to evaluations conducted by AAPOR and the National Council on Public Polls (NCPP). 13 

• Section 4 looks at how w ell polls were able to identify the winning candidate given the reported margin of 

error. 

• Section 5 evaluates whether or not the performance of polls depends on how respondents were interviewed. 

While comparisons are difficult given the differences betwe en polls and pollsters, no mode was obviously 

superior to the others. 

• Section 6 shows that the overstatement of the Biden -Trump margin was larger in states that were more 

supportive of Trump in 2016. This is true even after accounting for between -state d ifferences plausibly related 

to the difficulty of polling in a state. 

• Section 7 shows that polls overstated the Democratic margin for senatorial and gubernatorial candidates more 

than they overstated Biden -Trump margin within the same state. 

## • Section 8 comp ares the polls’ average topline support for Biden and Trump to the certified vote share. The 

polls appear to understate the support for Trump and overstate the support for Biden.  

> 13

Unlike postmortems that focus on a subset of the polls or the performance of individual pollsters (e.g., Silver 2021), the 

present ana lysis includes every public poll. 9

# 1. The Extent and Nature of 2020 Pre -Election Polls 

Throughout 2020 there were 529 national popular vote polls by 97 pollsters, 1,572 state -level presidential 

polls by 221 pollsters, and 757 senatorial -gubernatorial poll results by 161 pollsters. 

Based on news reports, press releases, and other collections of public poll result s, the Task Force collected 

information on 2,858 polls containing a general -election horserace question. Private polls that were conducted on 

behalf of candidates, parties, and organizations and not publicly reported were excluded from our analysis. Table 1

reports the number of polls and pollsters by contest and proximity to Election Day. 

There were 529 national presidential polls collected over the course of the campaign, including 66 polls conducted 

by 38 different pollsters in the last two weeks of the campaign, that is, polls with a field period ending between 

October 21, 2020, and November 3, 2020. 

At the state level, the Task Force collected information from 1,572 state -level presidential pre -election polls by 221 

different pollsters starting in la te March 2020, including 941 polls in states where the final margin in the 2016 

presidential election was five percentage points or fewer. 

Number of Polls  Number of Pollsters 

National Presidential: All  529  97 

National Presidential: Last 2 Weeks  66  38 

National Presidential: Last Week  41  31 

National Presidential: Last 3 Days  20  18 

State -Level Presidential: All  1,572  221 

Competitive States Only  941  137 

State -Level Presidential: Last 2 Weeks  438  90 

Competitive States Only  250  63 

State -Level Presidential: Last Week  288  62 

Competitive States Only  173  49 

State -Level Presidential: Last 3 Days  181  26 

Competitive States Only  92  22 

Senate -Gubernatorial: All  757  161 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last 2 Weeks  181  66 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last Week  124  44 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last 3 Days  63  15 10 

Table 1. Number of 2020 Public Polls Collected by the Task Force on 2020 Pre -Election Polling by Timing and Races 

Covered. Last 2 Weeks includes any polls with a field period ending on or between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20, Last 

Week includes any poll with a field period ending on or between 10/27/20 and 11/3/20, and Last 3 Days includes 

any poll with a field period ending on or between 10/31/20 and 11/3/20. Competitive States are states where the 

certified 2016 margin was five percentage points or fewer in the presidenti al contest. 

Polling was prominent throughout 2020, although we focus on the “Last 2 Weeks” for continuity with prior AAPOR 

reports. The prevalence of pre -election polling throughout 2020 is illustrated in Figure 1, which graphs the timing 

of the 1,572 public state -lev el presidential polls relative to Election Day. The largest concentration of polls 

occurred within the last five days of the election, but many polls were conducted and released throughout the year 

2020. 

Figure 1. Number of State -Level Public President ial Polls by Days Before the 2020 Election. This histogram reports 

the number of polls ending in each five -day period prior to Election Day for all 1,572 state -level public presidential 

polls that were collected by the Task Force on 2020 Pre -Election Polli ng. No public poll was intentionally excluded. 11 

# 1.2 Comparing 2016 and 2020 Survey Modes 

Pre -election polls in 2020 were more likely to be done online or using mixed methods than in 2016. More 

than 60% of all polls were done online and phone polls were less frequently used in 2020 relative to 2016. 

To compare 2020 with 2016, each poll was cl assified by mode of interviewing, according to the categories outlined 

in the 2016 Task Force report and the descriptions in public releases. Information from pollsters was sometimes 

missing or difficult to interpret. 14 Nonetheless, the comparison s graphed in Figure 2 reveal several important 

trends. 

First, the use of online polls increased sharply between 2016 and 2020. In 2016, only 38% of national presidential 

polls were conducted online but that percentage grew to 64% in 2020. The percentage of online polls in 

competitive battleground states increased from 38% in 2016 to 50% in 2020. Sixty percent of all 2020 state -level 

presidential polls were conducted online. 

Second, the share of phone polls with human interviewers decreased for national pol ls but remained largely stable 

among state -level presidential polls. In 2016, 36% of national phone polls used human interviewers and random -

digit -dialing (RDD); in 2020, this figure dropped to 6%. The percentage of state -level presidential polls using hum an 

interviewers to interview RDD or registration -based (RBS) samples in competitive states remained relatively 

steady, increasing only slightly from 18% in 2016 to 19% in 2020. 15 

Third, for state -level polls, the percentage relying exclusively on in teractive voice response (IVR) technology fell 

from 14% in 2016 to almost none in 2020. This decline was offset by an increase in polls using multiple 

interviewing modes.  

> 14

As emphasized below, considerable variation exists in the methods used within each category. That makes it difficult to 

interpret between -mode differences. Using publicly available information on the methods of interviewing, the polls were 

classified as f ollows: Live Phone (RDD) refers to polls conducted by human interviewers calling numbers generated via Random 

Digit Dialing (RDD); Live Phone (RBS) refers to polls conducted by human interviewers calling numbers from a voter registration 

list (RBS); Phone & Online refers to polls that combined interviews conducted by human interviewers, using either RDD or RBS 

samples, and interviews conducted online; IVR Only refers to polls conducted using interactive voice recording technology for 

telephone numbers obtai ned using either RDD or RBS samples; IVR & Phone refers to polls that combined interviews using 

interactive voice recording and human interviews for telephone numbers obtained using either RDD or RBS samples; IVR & 

Online refers to polls using interactive voice recordings for telephone numbers obtained using RDD or RBS samples, and polls 

conducted online; Online refers to polls conducted online; and Other/Unknown includes polls conducted using relatively rare 

methods (e.g., Text/SMS) or polls conducted usin g unreported methods.  

> 15

Registration Based Sampling (RBS) refers to polls that attempt to contact respondents from a voter registration list that 

includes contact information. (See, for example, Kennedy et al. 2018). This contact information is not present for all voters on 

the list; there can be can be errors in matching contact information to voter records; and there can be variation in how the 

samples are selected, e.g., by quotas based on information in the voter registration list. Such differences betw een RBS -based 

polls (relating to lists and sampling methods) are not considered in this overview. 12 

Figure 2. Distribution of Mode of Data Collection for State -Level and National Pre -Election Polls, 2016 and 2020. All 

polls whose last field period day was between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are included. The 2016 results are from 

Figure 3 of the 2016 AAPOR Task Force report (Kennedy et al .). 16 

Changes in interviewing methods are important not only for describing how polling has changed since 2016 but 

also for identify ing factors contributing to variations in the overall performance of polls varies over time. Over -time 

differences in performance could be due to changes in the types of polls (i.e., how respondents are selected and 

interviewed and how the results are adjusted to correct for nonresponse and non coverage) or changes in the 

electoral environment , which may make accurate polling difficult to achieve regardless of how polls are conducted. 

Changes in the electoral environment may include, for example, third -party candidates or the difficulty of 

identifying voters . Even though performance can be compared across time with relative ease , it can be very 

difficult to interpret observed differences . 

> 16 https://www.aapor.org/Education -Resources/Reports/An -Evaluation -of -2016 -Election -Polls -in -the -U-S.aspx

13 

# 2. Measuring the Accuracy of Pre -Election Polls 

There are several ways to analyze the performance of polls. Unlike in 2016, only a small fraction of 

respondents in 2020 did not choose a major -party candidate when asked. 

There are several ways to measure the accuracy of pre -election polls. In prior evaluations, AAPOR Task Forces have 

used a pair of measures previously employed by the National Council on Public Polls (NCPP): signed error and 

absol ute error. 17 These measures are defined in terms of the 2020 presidential election as follows. 

• Absolute error is the absolute value of the margin in the poll (%Biden – %Trump) minus the same margin in 

the certified vote (%Biden – %Trump). 

|(% Biden Poll – % Trump Poll) – (% Biden Vote – % Trump Vote)| 

• Signed error is the same calculation without the absolute value. 

(% Biden Poll – % Trump Poll) – (% Biden Vote – % Trump Vote) 

The absolute error compares the margin in the poll to the mar gin in the certified vote and then takes the absolute 

value. For example, if Biden beat Trump by seven points in the certified vote, a poll showing a 10 -point Biden lead 

over Trump would produce an absolute error of 3 points , that is, |10 – 7| = |3| = 3. Similarly, if Trump beat Biden 

by seven points in the certified vote, a poll showing a 10 -point Trump lead over Biden would also produce an 

absolute error of 3 points , that is, |-10 – (-7)| = | -3| = 3. 

The signed error describes the direction of error, t hat is, whether the polling margin over estimates or 

underestimates the candidate’s certified margin of victory. Using the same examples above, if Biden beat Trump 

by seven points in the certified vote and the poll had a 10 -point Biden lead then the poll’s signed error would be 

+3 , that is, 10 – 7 = 3. However, as another example, if Trump beat Biden by 10 points and the poll had a only a 

seven -point Trump lead then the signed error would be -3, that is, 7 – 10 = -3. 

In this analysis, p ositive signed errors indicate polling margins that are too large for Biden (or another Democratic 

candidate) relative to the certified vote margin (i.e., an overstatement of the Democrat minus Republican margin). 

Negative signed errors indicate polling margins ar e too large for Trump (or another Republican) relative to the 

certified vote margin (i.e., an under statement of the Democrat minus Republican margin) .

Considering both absolute and signed error s is important because positive signed errors (poll margin too 

Democratic) and negative signed errors (poll margin too Republican) offset when averaging signed errors across 

polls. A poll that is 10 points too favorable towards Biden on the margin (+10) and a poll that is 10 points too 

favorable towards Trump on the margin ( -10) average out to zero points of signed error. In contrast, the average 

absolute error on the margin would be 10 points because the absolute error quantifies the size of the polling error 

on the margin regardless of its direction.  

> 17 The website of the National Counci l of Public Polls is available here, although it is no longer being updated:
> http://www.ncpp.org/

14 

When computing the absolute and signed errors we follow past practices and use the topline candidate marginals 

reported by each poll. As an example, i f a poll reported that 49% backed Biden, 45% backed Trump, and the 

remaining 6% chose an alternative respo nse (e.g., “other” or “don’t know”), then the values of 49% and 45% are 

used to compute the poll’s margin (here 49 – 45 = 4) that is compared against the certified vote margin. 

The proportion of undecided voters was relatively small in 2020 , unlike in 20 16 when a sizable proportion of 

respondents were undecided (e.g., Silver 2017) . In 2020 , respondents rarely ever gave an answer other than Biden 

or Trump when asked. As Table 2 summarizes, only 4% responded with something other than Biden or Trump 

when asked in state -level presidential polls in the last two weeks. Respondents were also often willing and able to 

choose a candidate in polls for senatorial or gubernatorial contests. 

Number of Polls  Mean 

% NOT Choosing a Democrat 

or Republican 

State -Level Presidential: All  1,572  5.9 

State -Level Presidential: Last 2 Weeks  438  4.0 

State -Level Presidential: Last Week  288  4.0 

State -Level Presidential: Last 3 Days  181  3.5 

Senate -Gubernatorial: All  757  10.0 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last 2 Weeks  181  6.1 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last Week  124  5.8 

Senate -Gubernatorial: Last 3 Days  63  4.8 

Table 2. Mean Percentage of Respondents Choosing a Response Other than a Major Party Candidate. This 

percentage was computed as follows : 100% – Dem % – Rep %. 15 

# 3. How Well Did the Polls in 2020 Fare Relative to Prior Years? 

On average, national presidential polls had their worst performance in 40 years and state -level 

presidential polls had their worst overall performance in 20 years. The polls overstated the B iden -Trump 

margin by 3.9 points in the national popular vote and by 4.3 points in state -level presidential polls. 

We begin by considering how well the 2020 pre -election polls performed relative to the pre -election polls of prior 

election cycles using the traditional measures of polling performance: the average signed error and average 

absolute error. 

To put the polling error of 2020 in a larger context, Figure 3 compares the national 2020 error to the polling error 

for every presidential election followin g the infamous 1936 election. Larger polling error has certainly occurred in 

the past; for example, the 6.0 points of absolute and signed error in 1980. Nonetheless, the average performance 

of polls in 2020 was among the worst in recent memory. The polling error was similar in 2020 and 1996 but 

expectations were not high at the time and the 1996 performance was considered acceptable (Mitofsky 1998). 18 

Figure 3. Mean Signed and Absolute Polling Error Over Time: National Presidential Polls. The grey line re presents 

average absolute error on the margin. Bars represent average signed error on the margin . (Positive values indicate 

overestimation of the Democratic vote margin; negative values indicate overestimation of Republican vote 

margin .) 

> 18

Of course, the 1996 election was complicated by Ross Perot, the Reform Party candidate whose presence could have changed 

the electorate and the difficulty of polling. 16 

Table 3 compares polling error for the six most recent presidential elections. The 2020 pre -election polls that 

focused on national -level presidential popular vote had an average (mean) signed error of 3.9 percentage points 

(i.e., they overestimated Biden’s margin by 3.9 percentage points). Even among polls conducted within the last 

week of the election (i.e., polls whose last day in the field was between October 27 and November 3), the average 

signed error was considerable. The average (mean) absolute error of 4.5 percentage points in the 2020 national 

polls more than doubled the corresponding absolute error of 2.2 in 2016. 19 

Mean National Popular Vote Polling 

Error 

Mean State -Level Presidential Polling 

Error 

Year  Signed Error  Absolute Error  Signed Error  Absolute Error 

2000  -1.1  2.8  -1.9  4.6 

2004  1.4  2.1  0.8  3.2 

2008  0.7  1.8  -0.1  3.4 

2012  -2.4  2.9  -2.3  3.5 

2016  1.3  2.2  3.0  5.1 

2020  3.9  4.5  4.3  5.1 

2020 

(Last Week) 

4.2  4.6  4.1  4.9 

2020 

(Last 3 Days) 

4.4  4.5  3.9  4.7 

Table 3. Mean Signed and Absolute Errors for National and State -Level Presidential Polls for Presidential Elections 

Since 2000. Only polls with a field period ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are included in the 2020 

calculations. Last Week results include poll s with a field period ending on or between 10/27/20 and 11/3/20. Last 3 

Days results include polls with a field period ending on or between 10/31/20 and 11/3/20.    

> 19 The size of average (mean) polling error is instructive relative to Table 3. The avera ge signed error on the margin (4.3) in the
> state polls exceeds the percentage of respondents who failed to give a candidate response (4.0); hence, the polling error in
> 2020 is not explained by the last -minute decisions of undecided voters. As will be shown in part two, there simply were too few
> late -deciding voters to attribute the observed polling error to them.

17 

State -level presidential polls performed similarly. Among all polls conducted in the final two weeks, state -level 

polls overestimated Biden’s margin by 4.3 percentage points, the highest signed error in at least 20 years. The 

overall average absolute polling error was 5.1 percentage points, the same average error as 2016. Calculating 

media ns instead of averages to minimize the impact of outliers changes the characterization only slightl y: T he 

median signed polling error was 4.0 percentage points and the median absolute polling error was 5.0 percentage 

points. 

Moreover, polls conducted in t he final week did about as well as those done within the last two weeks. In terms of 

signed error, state polls conducted in the last week overstated Biden’s margin by 4.1 percentage points, and polls 

conducted in the final three days overstated Biden’s mar gin by 3.9 percentage points. While the size of the average 

signed error decreased among polls done closer to Election Day in 2020, the signed error of 3.9 points for polls 

done in the last three days of the 2020 election was still larger than the average signed error for polls done in the 

last two weeks of the 2016 election (+3.0). 

To facilitate comparisons, Figure 4 graphs the average signed and absolute error in state -level presidential polls 

over time to highlight that although the average absolute err or was similarly high in 2016 (and nearly as high in 

2000), the 4.3 points of signed error was the highest in recent years. Unlike in earlier election cycles , signed and 

absolute error s are similar in 2020, which is as expected for errors largely defined b y the overstatement of the 

Democratic -Republican margin. 

Figure 4. Mean Signed and Absolute Polling Error Over Time for State -Level Presidential Polls. The grey line 

represents average absolute error on the margin. Bars represent average signed error on the margin (positive 

values indicate overestimation of the Democratic vote margin; negative values indicate overestimation of 

Republican vote margin). 18 

To illustrate the stability of the polling error in state -level presidential polls across the election campaign, Figure 5 

graphs the distribution of signed error and absolute error for all state -level presidential polls conducted in the last 

two weeks, the last week , and the last three days of the 2020 election. Regardless of the timeframe, the 

distributions and the averages (indicated by a vertical line in each histogram) of the polling error are nearly 

identical. 20 

Figure 5. Distribution of Signed and Absolute Error in State -Level Presidential Polls. Last Two Weeks , Last Week, 

and Last 3 Days indicate field period s ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 , between 10/27/20 and 11/3/20 , and 

between 10/31/20 and 11/3/20 , respectively . Vertical lines denote the average of each distribution. 

# 3.1 Senatorial and Gubernatorial Polls 

Polls of senatorial and gubernatorial contests overstated the Democratic -Republican margin by 6.0 points 

relative to the certified vote, on average. The six -point overstatement of the margin for Democratic 

candidates was larger than the polls’ overstatement of the Biden -Trump margin. The average absolute 

error of 6.7 points was the largest in at least 20 years. 

Polls for senatorial and gubernatorial elections were examined to determine whether the polling error in 2020 was 

confined to polls asking about support for Trump.  

> 20 Figure B1 in Appendix B compares the distribution of signed error for polls where more than 5% of the sample chose neither
> Biden nor Trump to th e distribution of signed error among polls with fewer respondents doing so to determine how the
> presence of more undecided voters in earlier polls affects the signed error. Replicating the analysis using polls with relati vely
> few undecided voters reveals s imilar conclusions.

19 

Table 4 compares the performance of polls in 2020 to the performance in earlier elections according to prior 

evaluations. 21 In some cases, the s ources included state -level presidential polls ; in other cases, the sources 

excluded state -level pre sidential polls. In these results, b oth types are averaged for the sake of continuity and 

co mparison. 

Year  Election Day  Polls Included (Source)  Mean 

Absolute Error 

Mean 

Signed Error 

2002  11/5/2002  Senate, Governor (NCPP)  4.8  NA 

2004  11/2/2004  President, Senate, Governor (NCPP)  3.4  NA 

2006  11/7/2006  Senate, Governor (NCPP)  4.0  NA 

2008  11/4/2008  President, Senate, Governor (NCPP)  4.0  NA 

2010  11/2/2010  Senate, Governor (NCPP)  4.8  NA 

2012  11/6/2012  President, Senate, Governor (NCPP)  3.8  NA 

2014  11/4/2014  Senate, Governor (NCPP)  5.8  4.1 

2018  11/6/2018  Senate, Governor (AAPOR)  4.6  0.1 

2020  11/3/2020  Senate, Governor  6.7  6.0 

2020  11/3/2020  President, Senate, Governor  6.2  5.5 

Table 4. Comparing Gubernatorial and Senatorial Poll Error Over Time. Only polls with a field period ending 

between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are included in the 2020 analysis. This period included 157 senatorial polls and 24 

gubernatorial polls. AAPOR did not evaluate the performance of senatorial and gubernatorial p olls in 2016.  

> 21 It can be difficult to interpret the variation in the performance of senatorial and gubernatorial polls over time because the
> states holding senatorial and gubernatorial contests vary across time. Moreover, unlike presidential contest s where the same
> major -party candidates are on every ballot, the variation in who is running may also impact the difficulty of polling (perhaps by
> affecting voter turnout).

20 

In terms of average absolute error for the senatorial and gubernatorial polls, Table 4 shows an error of 6.7 

percentage points, i.e., the largest in 20 years regardless of whether or not presidential state -level polls are 

included. It is unclear how this compares to the error in 2016 because the 2016 AAPOR Task Force did not examine 

the performance of senatorial and gubernatorial polls , but 6.7 points in 2020 is nearly 1.5 times the average 

absolute error of 4.6 points in 2018 . This increa se is not driven by a few extreme errors since the median is nearly 

the same as the average. 

The average absolute error on the margin slightly decreases to 6.2 percentage points when including presidential 

polls , indicat ing larger poll ing errors for senatorial and gubernatorial contests than for the presidential contest. 

In terms of the signed error for senatorial and gubernatorial contests , polls overstated the Democratic -Republican 

margin by six points regardless of whether we use the mean or median to summarize the performance of polls. 

The average signed error decreases from 6.0 to 5.5 points when presidential polls at the state level are included, 

indicat ing that the Democratic margin was overstate d more in senatorial and gubernatorial conte sts than in 

presidential contests. 21 

Figure 6 graphs the distribution s of polling error for g ubernatorial and senatorial polls in a manner analogous to 

Figure 5, which shows comparable distributions for presidential polls at the state level. The frequency (vertical 

axis) of the error (horizontal axis) is presented for three time periods with bottom histograms closest to Election 

Day . Distributions of signed and absolute errors are plotted separately in histograms on the left and right, 

respectively. 

Analogous with the state -level presidential poll distributions , most senatorial and gubernatorial polls overstated 

Democratic margin s relative to the certified vote and this did not change closer to Election Day. The polling error 

for polls co mpleted in the final three days was very similar to the polling error for polls co mpleted in the final two 

weeks. 

Figure 6. Distribution of Signed and Absolute Error in Gubernatorial and Senatorial Polls. Last Two Weeks includes 

polls with a field period ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20, Last Week includes polls with a field period ending 

between 10/27/20 and 11/3/ 20, and Last 3 Days includes polls with a field period ending on or between 10/31/20 

and 11/3/20. Vertical lines denote the average of each distribution. The height of the histogram indicates the 

number of polls within each three -point range of error. 22 

# 4. Identifying the Winning Candidate in 2020 

Seventy -nine percent of state -level presidential polls and 69% of senatorial and gubernatorial polls had the 

winning candidate in the lead. Among polls with a candidate margin more than twice the reported margin 

of error, 98% of state -level presidential polls and 90% of senatorial -gubernatorial polls correctly identified 

the winning candidate. Accounting for the uncertainty of polling is essen tial to contextualize the results in 

close contests. P olls are often unable to distinguish the margin from a tie .

How well polls identified the winning candidate was evaluated using several measures to account for narrow 

margins both in the polls and in t he outcomes. Regardless of the close ness of the poll or the election, one simple 

approach is to note whether or not the candidate leading in the poll won the election. 

Two additional measures were applied to evaluate polls that reported a “margin of error .” Out of the 438 state -

level presidential polls conducted in the last two weeks , there were 348 (or 79% ) that reported a margin of error 

along with the poll margin .22 

The second measure only counts polls as correct if the winning candidate had a poll margin (also called candidate 

margin) greater than twice the margin of error . This size of poll margin is statistically distinguishable from zero at 

conventional levels. In other words, a mong polls that reported a candidate mar gin greater than twice the margin 

of error , how likely was it that the leading candidate won? Although it is not the statistically correct calculation to 

quantify the standard error associated with the difference between two correlated proportions from a m ultinomial 

distribution, it is easy to place an upper bound on the precision if the margin is “within the margin of error” using 

reported information. 23 This measure effectively removes polls with narrow margins relative to the margin of 

err or. 

“Twice the margin of error” is much more conservative than the actual standard for determining whether a poll 

margin is statistically distinguishable from zero using conventional levels of statistical significance . A conventional 

statistical test is a 95% confidence level but this “twice the margin of error” approach is a reasonable choice ,

especially considering the many sources of error that go beyond sampling variability (Goel and Rothschild 2016). 24 

(Table B 1 in Appendix B replicates the analysis using just the m argin of error and make s the point that coverage 

focusing on the margin of error for an estimated proportion rather than the margin of error for the difference in 

proportions creates a mistaken impression that polls are more precise than they actually are. ) 

> 22

Some online polls report a “Bayesian credible interval” or another measure of uncertainty; that said, 74% of the online polls 

reported a quantity called a “margin of error.” Only measures called a “margin of error” are included in this evaluation. The 

res ults of this evaluation could be replicated using the sample size of each poll to calculate the implied margin of error for e very 

public poll, but the qualitative conclusions would be unchanged compared to the conclusions reached using only polls that 

repo rt a “margin of error” in the public material.  

> 23

If X is the estimated support for candidate 1 and Y is the estimated support for candidate 2, the variance of the margin of t he 

poll is the difference between the two random variables X and Y reduced by twic e the covariance: Var(X -Y) = Var(X) + Var(Y) –

2COV(X,Y). Given that support for Biden and Trump from the same survey are obviously correlated, using the twice the margin 

of error is higher than the actual standard error on the difference (Kish 1968, Scott and Seber 1983, Franklin 2007).  

> 24

Technically, whether or not a margin is statistically distinguishable from zero would require using the standard error on the 

difference of the multinomial distribution. We have focused on a quantity that is more easily a ccessible to explain and analyze, 

i.e., twice the reported margin of error. 23 

The third measure focuse s on the certified margin (or vote margin) being twice as large as the reported margin of 

error. In these polls, it should be possible to identif y the winner from the size of the electoral victory and the 

margin of error. This measure differs from the second because it only considers the accuracy of polls in elections 

with a certified outcome that was “ not close” (defined as a vote margin at least twice as large as the margin of 

error for each poll ). Again, what fraction of polls correctly identify the eventual winner when the margin is 

statistically distinguishable from zero according to the reported margin of error? This measure effectively removes 

polls from closely contested states (relative to the margin of error). 

Type of Poll  Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: 

Simple 

Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: 

Poll Margin > 2xMoE 

Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: 

Vote Margin > 2xMoE 

National -Level 

Presidential 

100 

(N=66) 

100 

(N=66) 

100 

(N=66) 

State -Level Presidential  76 

(N=438) 

98 

(N=223) 

94 

(N=215) 

State -Level Presidential 

in a state with 

Gubernatorial or 

Senatorial Contest 

79 

(N=261) 

100 

(N=86) 

96 

(N=89) 

Gubernatorial and 

Senatorial 

69 

(N=181) 

90 

(N=69) 

78 

(N=35) 

Senatorial  66 

(N=157) 

87 

(N=54) 

77 

(N=56) 

Gubernatorial  72 

(N=24) 

100 

(N=15) 

89 

(N=9) 

Table 5. Percent of Polls that Correctly Identified Election Winner from Polls Conducted in the Last Two Weeks by 

Contest Type. The “S imple ” estimate is based on whether or not the winning candidate was in the lead regardless 

of the margin of error. The second measure reports on the percentage of polls with the winning candidate leading 

among polls with a candidate margin at least twice as large as the poll’s reported margin of error. ( The average 

reported margin of error was 3.9.) The third measure reports the percentage of polls with the winning candidate 

leading when the final certified margin is at least twice as large as the poll’s reported margin of error. 

All 66 national presidential polls conducted in the last two weeks correctly identified Biden as winning the national 

popular vote. Amon g the 438 state -level presidential polls, 76% had the winning candidate ahead. After removing 

the polls with margins that are within twice the margin of error, 98% of the remaining 223 polls had the winning 

candidate in the lead. In states where the final margin was twice as large as a poll’s margin of error, 94% of the 215 

polls correctly identified the winner. The ability of polls to correctly identify the winning candidate when the 

margin or outcome could be statistically distinguished from zero highligh ts the importance of accounting for the 

uncertainty of polls when discussing their results. Losing candidates were more likely to be leading in polls where 

the candidate margins were not statistically distinguishable from a tie using conventional significa nce levels. 24 

Even though the “not close” polls performed as expected and accounted for the margin of error in comparison 

with the candidate margins , most of the politically interesting contests are excluded by such a standard. Only 223 

out of the 348 state -level polls (64%) had a candidate margin more than twice the margin of error, meaning the 

candidate margin could not be statistically distinguished from a tie using standard levels of statistical significance 

in 36% of the state -level presidential polls. 

The performance of senatorial polls was notably worse. 25 Overall, only 66 % of the 157 senatorial polls correctly 

identified the winning candidate. Among the 69 polls that had one candidate leading by more than twice the 

margin of error, the leading ca ndidate won only 90% of the time. Moreover, in states where the election margin 

was greater than twice the margin of error in the poll , and hence the polls should have been able to identify the 

winning candidate , only 78% of the polls identif ied the winner . Polls were better able to identify the winners in 

gubernatorial contests, but there were only a few such polls conducted in the last two weeks of the election. 

Clearly, knowing the margin of error is essential to confidently identify the winning candidate . Additionally, polling 

error can be compared with the margin of error to evaluate performance. D id the reported absolute error on the 

margin contain more or less error than expected from the margin of error? If the margin of error gives an accurate 

estimate of uncertainty then most polling errors should be less than twice the reported margin of error . Whether 

or not the polling error agrees with the reported margin of error provides a benchmar k for performance. 

Figure 7 plots the distribution of absolute error along with the average margin of error and twice the average 

margin of error for the 348 (o ut of 438) state -level presidential polls that reported a margin of error. The overall 

average margin of error was 3.9 points. 

Figure 7 . Comparing the Distribution of Absolute Polling Error to the Average Margin of Error Reported by the 

Polls. Only sta te -level presidential polls conducted in the Last Two Weeks are included.   

> 25 For the two Georgia senatorial races, the certified vote and outcome of the November general election was used because
> that election was relevant to the polls conducted for those two races.

25 

Figure 7 reveals that 45% of the state -level presidential polls had an absolute error less than the average margin of 

error ; and 79% had an absolute error less than twice the avera ge margin of error. 

A more important finding is that 21% of the polls had an absolute error on the margin that was more than twice 

the margin of error, i.e., larger than a difference that would be statistically distinguishable from zero. T hat means 

the si ze of the polling error in 21% of the polls was larger than what would be expected based on sampling error 

alone using a larger -than -usual confidence interval (i.e., twice the margin of error). This finding confirms that many 

decisions made in conducting pre -election polling can augment the polling error . T he margin of error cannot 

adequately account for all of those decisions. 

Compar ing the margin of error and the average absolute error also clearly reveals the inadequacy of using the 

margin of error to describe the error on the margin . In that case, 55% of the polls had an absolute error that was 

larger than the reported margin of er ror. 

Focusing on the margin of error (or even twice the margin of error) provides an overly optimistic account of the 

size of the polling error in 2020. 

# 5. Average Performance of 2020 Polls by Survey Mode 

The Biden -Trump margin was overstated regardle ss of mode, and no mode was obviously more accurate. 

Polling error in 2020 for particular method s of interviewing respondents was examined. The polling error 

was similar despite variation in methods, questions, and the adjustments that were made by pollste rs. 

Examining the effects of the mode of interviewing on polling error is useful for understanding the extent of the 

error but it is difficult to disentangle interview -mode effects from effects that are related to sampling frame 

coverage, methods of selecting respondents, likely -voter modeling, and the statistical adjustments that are used to 

correct for nonresponse and noncoverage . (See, for example, Crespi 1988; Cohn 2016; and Groves et al . 2009). 

Comparing the performance of polls across modes can be difficult if certain modes are used more frequently in 

some contests than others. The level of interest in the contest and the costs of polling (e.g., phone polls may not 

be used as much as online polls in less competitive contests) may complicate comp arisons by introducing 

additional sources of error. 

In the analysis of the performance of the polls by interview mode , the focus was primarily on state -level 

presidential polls, following the precedent of the 2016 Task Force report . State -level president ial polls are the 

appropriate focus as they ask about the same candidates , which obviates examining whether candidate differences 

contribute to mode differences. 

Among presidential state -level polls it was difficult to determine the methodology of about 10% of the polls (Figure 

2) , especially for polls conducted by non members of the AAPOR Transparency Initiative . When multiple methods 

were used for reaching and interviewing respondents , the relative mix was often unclear even when the reported 

combination was similar. 26 

Another difficulty in comparing the effects of modes on polling error is that some modes were dominated by a 

single pollster. Since n early 50% of the Phone/Online polls were conducted by the same pollster , i t is not clear 

whether the performance is due to the Phone/Online mode or decisions on weighting made by this one pollster. 

Figure 8 plots the distributions of absolute and signed error for state -level presidential polls by interviewing mode. 

(Appendix C repeats the analysis for “m ixed” vs. online vs. phone and yields similar conclusions when comparing 

mixed vs. single -mode surveys.) The violin plots show the distribution of the error for each polling mode, the 

location and range of the 25th -75th percentiles of the error (the thick black line), the median error (open circle), 

and the range of the error within 1.5 times the interquartile range (thin black line). 26 

In such distribution plots, t he wid th of the violin -shaped plot reflects the number of polls shar ing a particular range 

of polling error , e.g., among online polls there are many more polls with an absolute error of +5 than there are 

with an absolute error of +15 and there are no IVR/Online polls with an absolute error of +15. The top and bottom 

graphs show the distribution of absolute and signed error , respectively. Since the average polling error can differ 

from the median polling error because of outliers, the average error for each mode is also reported in Figure 8.  

> 26 Polls were omitted if the mode was unknown, relatively unique (e.g., there were only four IVR -only polls could be identified),
> or ambiguous (e.g., “email”).

27 

Figure 8. Distributions of Absolute and Signed Error in State Presidential Polls by Survey Mode. The analyses 

include 262 Online polls, 42 IVR/Online polls, 32 Online/Phone polls, 27 Live phone - RDD polls, and 31 Live phone -

RBS polls. The width of each “violin” reports the distribution of polling error for each mode. The single horizontal 

line represents the overall error averaged across all modes, while t he average polling error for each mode is 

reported numerically along the bottom. 

As the top graph of Figure 8 shows, the polls have similar levels of average absolute error regardless of how 

respondents were interviewed. The average absolute error varied from 4.4 points for IVR/Online polls to 6.0 points 

for Live phone – RBS polls. Conducting a t -test to determine if this average difference is statistically distinguishable 

from zero reveals that the difference is not distinguishable from zero at conventional levels (p=0.1). 28 

Examining the variation in signed polling error by interview mode reveals a si milar conclusion. The average signed 

error range d from 2.4 points in Phone/Online polls to 6.0 points for Live phone – RDD polls .27 With the exception of 

Phone/Online polls, more than 75% of the polls had a positive signed error , meaning that most polls in most modes 

overstated the Biden -Trump margin .

Examining the percentage of polls that correctly identified the winning candidate according to the certified vote, 

Online polls did the best (82%) and Phone/Online polls did the worst (56%). That Phone/Online polls had the lowest 

average signed error and t he highest percentage of losing candidates ahead in their polls highlights the complexity 

of interpreting polling performances. This seemingly odd pattern of performance is because Phone/Online polls ,

i.e., the polls dominated by a single pollster , were mo re likely than other polls using other modes to indicate that 

Trump would win . The se polls were also more likely to be conducted in states with narrower margins in 2016 

(average margin of 2.4 points). As a result, it may have been both easier to estimate t he margin (which was 

expected to be close) and harder to predict the winner . That is exactly the pattern that is observe d.28 

In Appendix C, Table C1 exclude s respondents without an opinion t hereby remov ing question -wording differences ;

Table C2 focus es only on polls conducted in competitive states, and look s at mixed -mode surveys versus those 

using a single method of interviewing. The conclusions are similar : T he overstatement of Democratic support 

occurred regardless of the mode of interviewing, and no mode of interviewing was clearly more accurate. 

# 6. Performance of 2020 Polls by Electoral Competitiveness 

Polls overstated the Biden -Trump margin more in states that Trump won by larger margins in 2016. 

Was polling error large st in states that often v ote Democratic, states that often vote Republican, or in closely 

contested states ? Put differently, were the polls more likely to overstate the Democratic -Republican margin in 

states with more Republican or more Democratic voters? Determining where larger polling error occurred may 

help narrow the search for possible explanations. 

Figure 9 graphs the distribution of absolute (left) and signed (right) error for polls conducted in states Clinton won 

by more than five points in 2016 (Solid Dem), states whe re the certified vote difference between Clinton and 

Trump was five points or fewer in 2016, and states Trump won by more than five points in 2016 (Solid Rep).  

> 27

This difference is statistically distinguishable from zero but we would urge cau tion when interpreting this number, as nearly 

50% of the polls were from a single pollster and it is impossible to know whether the difference is due to the mode of 

interviewing or to the adjustments that were being done. Moreover, as we note below, the lo w signed error for Phone/Online 

polls is offset by a lower ability to identify winners.  

> 28

By way of contrast, the average 2016 margin for Online polls was four points, the average 2016 margin for IVR/Online polls 

was 3.7 points, the average 2016 margin for Live phone – RBS polls was 3.1, and the average 2016 margin for Live phone – RBS 

polls was 2.7 points. 29 

Figure 9. Distribution of Signed and Absolute Error in State -Level Presidential Polls by 2016 State Competitiveness. 

There are 49 polls in solid Democratic states (won by Clinton in 2016 by at least five points), 239 polls in 

competitive states (certified vote margin between Trump and Clinton five points or fewer in 2016), and 139 polls in 

solid Republican states (won by Trump in 2016 by at least five points). Horizontal lines denote the overall average 

polling error. 

The left -hand side of Figure 9 shows that the average absolute error was lowest in states where the final 2016 

margin was five points or fewer and where the 2020 election was therefore also expected to be close (average 

absolute error of 4.5). In less competitive states the average absolute e rror was higher , and it was especially high 

in states that Trump won by more than five points in 2016. The average absolute error was 6.2 points in states 

Trump won by at least five points in 2016 , which compares to 4.9 points in states Clinton won by more than five 

points. This difference in average absolute error between the polls done in these two groups of states was 

statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels (p=0.02). 

According to t he distribution of signed error ( right -hand side o f Figure 9 ), margins were too favorable to Biden 

regardless of the how competitive the state was in 2016. However, the largest overstatement of the Democratic -

Republican margin occurred in states with a higher percentage of Trump voters. The average signed error of 5.3 

points in states Trump won by more than five points in 2016 is considerably higher than the 3.9 points in 

competitive states and the 3.4 points in states Clinton won by more than five points. For polls in states won by 

Trump or Clinton in 201 6 by more than five points , t he difference in average signed error is statistically 

distinguishable from zero at conventional levels (p=0.03). The largest overstatement of the Democratic -Republican 

margin occurs in states Trump won handily in 2016 , i.e., t hose states with a larger proportion of Trump supporters. 30 

To describe the relationship between 2020 polling error and the level of Trump support in 2016, Figure 10 plots 

the average signed error in each state against the support Trump received in 2016. Although t he polls overstated 

Trump support in some states (e.g., LA, MS) and were nearly exactly right in other states (e.g., GA, NM, CO, MD), 

the polls in many states significantly overstated the Biden -Trump margin. In states where Trump won 55% or more 

of the vote in 2016, the average signed error was often considerable. In the states of MT, UT, NE, TN, KY, IN, ID, 

ND, and WY, for example, the polls overstated the Democratic -Republican margin by 10 points or more. 

Figure 10. Average 2020 State -Level Signed Error by 2016 Trump Vote Share. The sloped l ine represents the simple 

regression line of average signed error on 2016 Trump vote . (Intercept = – 2.3 (std. err. 2.8), slope = 0.15 (std. err. 

0.05) , and R2 = 0.13 )

Figure 10 confirms that the largest average polling errors in 2020 occurred in states with a larger percentage of 

2016 Trump voters , but what this indicates about the source of the polling error is unclear. If Trump supporters 

were less likely to respond to polls than Biden supporters then larger errors would occur in places with more 

Trump support , exactly as observed. On the other hand, if Biden supporters were more likely to respond in those 

states, perhaps because they were enthusiastic about expressi ng their displeasure with Trump, then this too could 

have produced the same correlation , exactly as observed. This observation and association helps describ e where 

larger polling error occurred but cannot fully explain the source of polling error. 31 

# 7. Performance of 2020 Polls by State 

Polls in most states overstated the Biden -Trump margin. Even within states, polls overstated the 

Democratic -Republican margin in senatorial and gubernatorial contests more than they overstated the 

Biden -Trump margin. The polling error was larger the more support Trump received in 2016 even after 

accounting for other between -state differences plausibly related to polling error. 

The correlates of polling error by state can be examined by exploring whether or not the aver age polling error in a 

state correlates with a state’s political environment. 

Figure 11 begins this exploration by plotting the average signed error for each state. It is immediately obvious that 

polls overstated the Biden -Trump margin in nearly every s tate. Polls overstated the relative support for Trump in 

only a handful of states .

Figure 11. State -Level Average Signed Error by State. Circles denote the average signed error for each state. The 

signed error of individual polls in each state are plot ted in grey points. 32 

In nearly every state the average signed error is positive , because poll margins were too favorable towards Biden in 

nearly every state. Consequently, the pattern of average absolute error by state in Figure 12 is very similar to the 

pattern in Figure 11 . Unlike in prior elections, the nearly pervasive pro -Democratic polling bias results in similarly 

sized signed error and absolute error across states. Although individual polls in some states were more accurate ,

the overall average of t he state -level average absolute error is nearly six percentage points (5.9). 29 

Figure 12. State -Level Average Absolute Error by State. Circles denote the average absolute error for each state. 

The absolute error of individual polls in each state are plotted in grey points.   

> 29 This is higher than the average absolute error of 5.1 points reported in Table 2 because 5.9 points is the average of the state
> averages. Put differently, the average absolute error of 5.1 is the average for all polls whereas the 5.9 points is the avera ge of
> the state -level average of absolute error.

33 

The overstatement of Democratic support was not unique to the presidential contest . Figure 13 graphs the 

average signed error s for senate contests (i f any) as well as presidential contest s for every state. Comparing the 

average state -level signed error among presidential state -level polls in states with (bottom) and without (top) a 

senate contest reveals two patterns. 

First, the presence of a senat ori al contest did not affect the polling error of state -level presidential polling. Polling 

error did not depend on whether other state -level races occurred. 

Second, polls overestimated the Democratic -Republican margin in Senate races more than polls overest imated the 

Biden -Trump margin even within the same state. 30 More respondents chose a response other than the Democrat 

or Republican candidate in senat orial polls (an average of 6.1% of respondents) compared to presidential polls ( 4% 

of respondents), yet th e difference in the average signed error seems hard to attribute to differences in 

respondent indecision , considering the magnitudes of each. 

Overall, whatever caused the presidential polls to overstate the Biden -Trump margin in 2020 produced an even 

larger Democratic overstatement in senatorial polls.  

> 30 In other words, either the support for Democratic S enate candidates was more overstated relative to Biden, the support for
> Republican Senate candidates was more understated relative to Trump, or some combination of each.

34 

Figure 13. Average Signed Error for Presidential and Senate Polls by State. An open circle denotes the a verage 

signed error for state -level presidential polls, and a black solid dot denotes the avera ge signed error for the 

senatorial polls in each state (if any). 35 

# 7.1 Correlates of Average State -Level Error 

Polls overstated the Biden -Trump margin more in states that Trump won by larger margins in 2016 , even 

controlling for other between -state differences. All else equal, the overstatement of the Biden -Trump 

margin was also larger in states that were Whiter and less densely populated. States with a higher level of 

COVID -19 per capita had a slightly highe r polling error as well. 

The correlation between state -level polling error and features plausibly related to the difficulty of polling in the 

state were examined t o further characterize the nature of state -level polling error in 2020 . Examples include the 

racial diversity of the electorate in the state, the amount of early voting in a state, and the impact of the COVID -19 

pandemic. The extent to which 2020 polling error is associated with 2016 support of Trump in the state , after 

controlling for other b etween -state differences , is of particular interest .

Many state -level factors that might have affected the 2020 polling error were examined , including the following: 

whether the state allowed same -day registration ; early voting in 2020 compared to 2016 ; the ease of voting in the 

state using an index constructed to measure the costs of voting in the time of COVID -19 (Schraufnagel, Pomante, 

and Li 2020) ; the per capita incidence of COVID -19 as of Election Day ; the percentage of Black residents ; the 

percenta ge of residents with at least a bachelor’s degree ; the percentage of the state population over the age of 

65 ; the log of the population density in the state ; and the median income in the state. 

Table 6 reports on this analysis of correlated variables. Th e results support the simplest explanation of the 

variation in polling error between states. (Table B2 in Appendix B shows similar result s after controlling for the full 

set of covariates.) When predicting the average signed error , positive (negative) valu es indicate a larger 

overstatement (lower understatement ) of the Biden -Trump margin ; w hen predicting the average absolute error ,

positive (negative) values indicate correlates of larger (smaller) polling error .36 

Descriptive 

Statistics 

Regression Results 

Mean 

(Std. Dev.) 

Signed Error on the 

Margin 

(Standard Error) 

Absolute Error on the 

Margin 

(Standard Error) 

Trump’s 2016 Certified Vote %  49.9 

(10.1) 

0.25 *

(0.07) 

0.20 *

(0.06) 

Percentage of the State that is Black  10.2 

(8.8) 

-0.33 *

(0.06) 

-0.27 *

(0.06) 

Log (State Population Density)  4.6 

(1.4) 

1.27 *

(0.43) 

1.11 *

(0.38) 

Percentage with a Bachelors’ Degree  32.4 

(5.2) 

0.14 

(0.12) 

0.09 

(0.10) 

Total COVID -19 Cases Per Capita as of 

Election Day 

0.03 

(0.01) 

102.6 *

(42.9) 

115.9 *

(36.5) 

Intercept  -17.0 

(6.6) 

-12.95 

(5.9) 

Number of polls  49  49 

Adj. R 2 0.48  0.53 

Table 6. Regression of Signed Error and Average Absolute Error on Characteristics of States and State Presidential 

Polls Conducted in the Final Two Weeks. An asterisk ( *)d enotes statistical significance at 0.05 or better. The first 

column provides the mean and sta ndard deviation for the state -level characteristics. 

The results for the state -level average signed error reveals that one of the strongest predictors of state -level 

polling error is the 2016 state -level support for Trump . Even after controlling for other factors, a one -percentage -

point increase in Trump’s 2016 vote share is associated with a 0.25 -percentage -point -larger signed error on the 

margin. All else equal, one standard deviation (10.1 percentage points) in the suppo rt for Trump at the state level 

correlates with a 2.5 percentage points (0.25 x 10.1) deviation from the average signed polling error. Put 

differently, the average signed error on the margin for polls is predicted to be 2.5 percentage points larger in 

sta tes where Trump received 55% of the vote in 2016 compared to the average signed error in states where Trump 

received 45% of the vote in 2016. 31    

> 31 The importance of Trump’s 2016 state -level certified vote percentage in predicting the variation of polling error across states
> can be appreciated by re -estimating the models in Table 6 without that measure. Recalculation results in adjusted -R2values of
> 0.33, 0.28, and 0.31 for regressions predicting the average signed error on the ma rgin, average Trump error, and average Biden
> error, respectively. Some of the between -state variation in polling error can be predicted using other factors but better
> predictions are obtained by accounting for Trump’s 2016 vote share.

37 

Controlling for Trump support, polling error was larger in Whiter and more rural states . A one -standard -deviat ion 

increase in the percentage of the state population that was Black (i.e., an 8.8 -percentage -point increase in the size 

of the Black population) was associated with a 2.9 -percentage -point decrease in the signed error and a one -

standard -deviation increase in log population density increase s the average signed error by 1.8 percentage points. 

The signed error was also higher in states that were more affected by the COVID -19 pandemic as of Election Day. A 

one -standard -deviation increase in cases per capita is associated with a 1.1 -percentage -point increase in signed 

error. 32 

Predicting the absolute error produces similar findings. Considering that the signed errors favored Biden in nearly 

all states and that there were so few state errors in the other direction , the similarit ies are not surprising. 

That the polls overstated Biden’s support more in Whiter, more rural , and less densely populated states is 

suggestive (but not conclusive ) that the polling error resulted from too few Trump supporters respo nding to polls. 

Similar to patterns described earlier, a larger polling error was found in states with more Trump supporters. These 

correlations are consistent with a polling error caused by too few Republican -supporting respondents (or by 

Republican respo ndents indicating support for Democrats and then voting for Republican s) but these correlations 

cannot conclusively identify the underlying cause. For example, polling error might have been caused by 

unaffiliated voters ( including unaffiliated new voters) motivated to participate in 2020 because of Trump. Those 

voters may have may have been less likely to respond to polls , follow ing Trump’s exhortations to ignore “fake 

polls .” The observed patterns could be produce d if those voters were more likely to live in states that were more 

rural, Whiter , and supported Trump in 2016 ; the same pattern would result even if the percentage s of Democrats, 

Republicans, and independents polled correctly matched the 2020 electorate. 33   

> 32 Strengthening the inference of a real COVID -19 pandemic effect requires comparing the survey error within a state over time
> to better leverage the available variation.
> 33 Alternatively, e ven if the Republicans and Independents who responded were representa tive of those who did not (and
> Republican supporters participated at the same level as they have in the past), if Democrats were motivated to participate
> more than usual and their participation was highest in places were Trump did the best in 2016, this co uld also produce the
> patterns we observe.

38 

# 8. Performance of Polls: Candidate Error 

The average topline support for Biden and Trump in polls overstated the support for Biden relative to his 

actual vote share and understated the support for Trump. This characterization depends on whether we 

include or exclude the 4% of respondents who chose a response other than Biden or Trump. How polls ters 

report their results can affect impressions of the polls. 

A Democratic -Republican margin that is too favorable to Biden can be the result of overestimating suppor t for 

Biden, underestimating support for Trump, or some of each given the symmetry in a two -candidate race. To 

characterize polling error we investigated the average candidate error in state -level presidential polls. 

Candidate error is measured using the candidate’s percentage in the poll minus the candidate’s percentage in the 

certified vote. For example, if Trump received 54 % in a poll and 58 % in the certified vote, the candidate error for 

the Trump in the poll would be – 4. Even though only a small per centage of respondents (on average 4% in state -

level presidential polls conducted in the last two weeks) provided a response other than Biden or Trump (e.g., 

“don’t know”), whether the respondents who choose an answer other than Biden or Trump are included or not 

affect s the magnitude of the candidate error. 

We focused on the topline poll results for Biden and Trump rather than the two -candidate support because t opline 

percentages typically are the ones discussed in poll coverage. Such coverage may have led people to interpret the 

topline polling percentages as predictions of the certified vote share . Insofar as this is true, comparing the topline 

poll results with the certified vote share highlights how poll results often are reported and interpreted in ways that 

shap e public perceptions and expectations. 39 

Figure 14. Polling Error on Trump by State. All polls with a field period ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are 

included. Circles denote the average polling error on Trump’s vote share for each state ( as reported within each 

circle). Trump error is computed as Trump’s percentage in the poll minus Trump’s percentage in the certified vote. 

Results are sorted by th e average Trump error in the state. Trump error for individual polls are plotted in grey 

points. 

Figure 14 shows that the average support for Trump in the polls understated Trump’s certified vote share in nearly 

every state. Overall, the average differenc e between Trump’s support in the polls and his certified vote was – 3.3 

percentage points , indicating that the support Trump received in the topline poll results was 3.3 percentage points 

lower than the vote share Trump received in the certified vote. More over, for polls that reported a margin of error, 

the difference between the reported percentage of voters supporting Trump and Trump’s certified vote share in 

the state was greater than the margin of error in 44% of the state -level presidential polls. The fact that the error on 

the proportion was often larger than the margin of error again highlights the inadequacy of the margin of error as 

a quantification of uncertainty and error. 40 

The polls did a better job estimating the support for Biden (Figure 15). In several states , e.g., TN, RI, UT, ID, and ND ,

Biden’s estimated support was much higher than the certified vote ; but the difference between Biden’s average 

support in the polls and the certified vote was often within a percentage point or two. Across all polls, the average 

candidate error for Biden was 1.0 , indicating that the topline polling number for Biden was one percentage point 

higher than what Biden received in the certified vote. Moreover, for 86% of the polls that reported a margin of 

error, the difference between the support for Biden in the polls and his certified vote share was within the margin 

of error. 

Figure 15. Polling Error on Biden by State. All polls with a field period ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are 

included. Circles denote the average polling error on Biden’s vote share for each state (reported within each 

circle). Biden error is computed as Biden’s percentage in the poll minus Biden’s percentage in the certified vote. 

Results are sorted by the average Biden error in the st ate. Biden error for individual polls are plotted in grey points. 41 

The patterns in Figures 14 and 15 are consistent with the claim that the polls had too few Trump supporters, but 

they cannot prove that this was the case and it is important to not overinter pret the patterns. Depending on how 

we treat the 4% of respondents who give a poll response other than “Biden” or “Trump,” the characterization of 

the candidate error changes. 

As Figures B2 -1 and B2 -2 in Appendix B reveal, removing the 4% of respondents who gave an answer other than 

Biden or Trump to focus on the two -candidate vote increases the support for each candidate in polls by changing 

the denominator. Comparing the two -candidate support in each poll to the certified vote reveals that 86% of polls 

had Trump’s support within the margin of error, and 65% of polls had Biden’s support within the margin of error. 

Looking at the two -candidate support relative to the two -candidate vote share (that is, “percentaging out the 

undecideds”) leads to a conclusi on that the polls understated Trump’s certified vote share by 1.4 points and 

overstated Biden’s certified vote share by 3.1 points. In other words, using the two -candidate support rather than 

the topline polling result would change our conclusion about whe ther the larger contribution to polling error is the 

overstatement of Biden support or the understatement of Trump support. 

Even though it is impossible to resolve whether the larger source of polling error is an overstatement of Biden 

support or an under statement of Trump support based on this analysis, the differences in the conclusions that are 

reached highlight how the decision to report a topline number based on all respondents or based on the two -

candidate share can affect how the performance of the polls is perceived and evaluated. Poll coverage of topline 

polling results likely creates an expectation that the reported toplines can be used to estimate vote shares and 

diagnose polling error even though the topline support is affected by the number of response options that are 

given to respondents (e.g., the presence of “Don’t know” or “Other”). 

Our characterization of how well the polls performed for each candidate depend s on whether we use the topline 

support or the two -candidate support . This fact highlights the importance of seemingly small decisions on how the 

results of polls are interpreted and characterized (Mitofsky 1998). It also highlights t he difficulty of using poll 

results to diagnose what actually produced the polling error in 2020, a task to which we now turn. 42 

# PART TWO: EXPLAINING WHAT HAPPENED 

Having described the overall performance of the polls and how it varied or not across dif ferent types of polls and 

contests, we now examine the factors that can and cannot explain the patterns documented in part one. 

Explanations unfortunately can be complicated and d efinit e conclusions are often impossible . Certain d ata that are 

essential to fully assess what happened can be unknown (e.g., how pollsters weighted their data to account for 

nonresponse, identify likely voters, etc.) or unknowable (e.g., what the electorate actually looked like and how poll 

respondents compared to nonresponders). 

Without knowing the number , opinions, and vote choice s of voters not included in polls , either because they were 

not included in sampling frames or because they chose not to participate, it is not possible to conclusively identify 

the source(s) of polling error. Given the se limitations , the initial objective is to eliminate several potential 

explanations of polling error. By narrowing the set of explanations , the remaining explanations for polling error can 

be identified as well as the patterns that the errors must explain. 

The pattern s in part one point to s ome causes of polling error that can be immediately eliminated as follows. 

● The underlying understatement of Republican support or overstatement of Democratic support almost 

certainly did not result from questions about a specific c andidate. The polls favored Democrats at the expense 

of Republicans regardless of interview mode and regardless of contest. Respondents lying to pollsters about 

their support for Trump, for example, would not explain why the error was larger for Republican candidates 

for governor and Senate. 

● The polling error was not caused by errors in the sampling frame due to the exclusion of new voters. Polling 

error was observed regardless of how respondents were sampled or contacted ; that is, it was similar for 

onl ine, RBS, and RDD surveys. 

● Polling error was not due to last -minute changes or shifts in voter sentiment. The size and nature of polling 

error among polls conducted in the last two weeks was similar to the polling error among polls conducted in 

the last t hree days. Whatever the cause of the larger -than -usual polling error may be, it affected polling 

throughout the election. 

In the next five sections, several additional possible explanations are consider ed and eliminate d or not as follows. 

• Section 9 shows that polling error in 2020 was not due to certain issues that affected polls in 2016. There was 

no evidence of late deciders causing polling error, and most 2020 polls accounted for the education of 

respondents when weighting for nonrespons e. 

• Section 10 shows that polling error in 2020 was not caused by Biden supporters reporting that they had voted 

when they had not. The expanded use of in -person early voting and mail voting (i.e., early/mail voting) did not 

overrepresent Biden supporte rs by reason of respondents who falsely claimed they voted. 

• Section 11 investigates how alternative voting methods might underrepresent Election Day voters. Based on 

the data available to us, this did not appear to be the case. 43 

• Section 12 considers the effects of the historic turnout and the extent that new voters posed challenges for 

polling. New voters cannot be eliminated as a source of polling error. 

• Section 13 builds on the analysis of Section 12 by considering a bundle of potential issues, including 

coverage/sampling (e.g., were Republican supporters less likely to be contacted and/or Democrats more likely 

to be contacted?); between -party nonresponse (e.g., were Republican supporters were less likely to respond 

than Democratic supporters?); and within -party nonresponse (e.g., were the Republicans who responded 

more likely to support Democrats than Republicans who did not respond?). The analysis points to several 

patterns, but the conclusions depend on many assumptions. It is impossible to identify who did not respond 

and why by looking only at who did respond; information on those who voted but did not respond either is not 

yet available or does not ex ist. 

# 9. What About the Issues Identified in the 2016 Report? 

The 2016 Task Force report identified three principal sources of polling error. 34 First, late -deciding voters and 

earlier -deciding voters behaved differently , which may have caused an understatement of Trump’s support in pre -

election polls. Second, weight ing to account for differences by education level may have understated Trump’s 

support , especially among White voters . Third, assumptions relating to turnout and the composition of the 

electorate turned out to be incorrect , which is discussed in later sections. 

This section addresses whether or not the first two issues identified in the 2016 Task Force report contributed to 

polling error in 2020. 

# 9.1 Error Due to Late Deciders: Not an Issue in 2020 

The number of late deciders is not large enough and their opinions are not distinctive enough to cause the 

overstatement of the Biden -Trump margin. 

In 2016, late -deciding voters supported Trump at a much higher rate than early -deciding voters, especially in 

critical Midwestern states. A sizable fraction of the 2016 electorate decided in the final few days, according to exit 

polls, and the re were enoug h late -deciding Trump supporters to account for some of the observed polling error. 

This was not an issue in 2020. Early in -person voting and voting by mail were prevalent in 2020 due to the COVID -

19 pandemic and, as a result, many voters decided well bef ore Election Day. As indicated in Table 2 , almost every 

respondent answered either “Biden” or “Trump” when polled. Even if all of the 3.5% of respondents who 

answered something else ultimately voted for Trump , that w ould not account for the observed pollin g error in 

2020.  

> 34 https://www.aapor.org/Education -Resources/Reports/An -Evaluation -of -2016 -Election -Polls -in -the -U-S.aspx

44 

Exploring further and following the lead of the 2016 Task Force , the size and vote choice of late -deciding voters 

was examined using the National Election Pool national exit poll. Fewer than 5% of respondents at exit polls said 

they decid ed in the final week , c onsistent with Table 2. 

Even though voters who decided “in the last week” were more likely to support Trump over Biden (by 16 points), 

they shift ed the margin by less than a percentage point since they made up only 5% of the electorate (.05 x .16 = 

.008). There is no evidence that late -deciding voters caused error in estimates from the national polls in 2020. 

Table 7 shows that late -deciding voters in each state not only make up a comparatively small fraction o f the overall 

electorate , but also were more likely to report voting for Biden over Trump. Only in Wisconsin did the voters 

slightly break for Trump in the final week, and the size of the effect in Wisconsin was less than two -tenths of a 

percentage point ( .05 x .03 = .0015). 

State  Avg. 

Signed 

Polling Error 

% of Voters 

Deciding in Final 

Week 

Margin Among 

Voters Deciding in 

Last Week 

Margin Among Voters 

Deciding Earlier Than 

the Last Week 

Difference 

National  +4  5 Trump +12  Biden +4  Trump +16 

Florida  +5  4 Biden +4  Trump +1  Biden +5 

Georgia  0 4 Biden +16  Biden +1  Biden +15 

Michigan  +4  4 Biden +16  Biden +5  Biden +11 

Minnesota  +3  6 Biden +18  Biden +10  Biden +8 

North 

Carolina 

+2  3 Biden +8  Trump +1  Biden +9 

Texas  +4  3 Biden +9  Biden +3  Biden +6 

Wisconsin  +8  5 Trump +3  Tie  Trump +3 

Table 7. Vote of Late Deciders in the Last Week in Critical States. Results based on the final weighting of the 

National Election Pool’s exit poll. Average signed error is from all public polls conducted in the last two weeks. 

According to the exit polls , few voters decided in the last week and many support ed Biden over Trump ; therefore it 

is unlikely that the polling error in 2020 was caused by late -deciding voters. 45 

# 9.2 Error Due to a Failure to Account for Educational Differences: 

# Not an Issue in 2020 

Unlike 2016, almost all polls in 2020 accounted for education level when weighting their results. Our 

analysis in Section 12 below reveals no evidence that the weigh ting targets were incorrect. 

Another issue identified by the 2016 Task Force report was that only a handful of state -level polls accounted for 

education -related differences when weighting their results to account for nonresponse and coverage issues. 

Votin g choices in 2016, particularly among White voters, were highly correlated with educational attainment. 

College graduates heavily favored Clinton in 2016 and non -college graduates heavily favored Trump. The failure to 

account for education differences was a problem for polling in 2016 because individuals with more education were 

also more likely to respond to polls relative to those with less education, resulting in an overrepresentation of 

Clinton supporters among the weighted respondents. 

Almost all sta te -level, pre -election polls followed the advice of the 2016 Task Force report and weighted the results 

using education. Among the 438 state -level polls conducted within the last two weeks of the election, weighting 

parameters could be identified in 317 po lls; among those 317 polls, 292 (92%) used education in their weighting 

methodology, and only 25 (8%) did not. 35 Whether or not the weighting targets used to weight education level 

were correct is impossible to know, but most polls attempted to account for nonresponse error correlated with 

educational attainment by weighting responses using education. 

Nearly every state -level presidential poll in 2020 weighted responses by the education level. Since the 

recommendations of the 2016 Task Force report were a dopted by the industry, the issues affecting polling in 2020 

went beyond what accounting for education alone could correct. Although incorrect assumptions about education 

levels could possibly account for part of the 2020 polling error, the analysis presen ted in Section 12 does not 

identify this factor as a primary source of polling error. 

# 10. Error Due to Differences in Self -Reported Intent to Vote: Unlikely to 

# Be a Factor 

Biden supporters and Trump supporters were equally likely to vote after reporting that they would. 

Overstatement of the Biden -Trump margin was not a result of Biden supporters saying that they would 

vote and then failing to do so. 

Another potential explanation is based on unequal numbers of Biden and Trump supporters who did not vote after 

saying they would. Democrat ic supporters being more likely than Republican supporters to overreport their 

likelihood of voting could explain the overstatement of the Democratic -Republican margin in the polls. This error 

would include not only self -reported intention to vote, but also the self -reported behavior of respondents who 

claimed they already voted . 

> 35

Some polls that did not to use education as a weighting factor instead used geographic divisions within the state (or 

urban/rural classifications) or income. 46 

The accuracy of self -reported voting intention and behavior was especially relevant in 2020 because of the 

politicization of voting methods. Pre -election polls ty pically only count those who say they are extremely likely to 

vote and those who say they already voted , or the y rely on past voting behavior. Democrats were more likely than 

Republicans to vote by mail or vote in person early , and Republicans were more li kely than Democrats to vote on 

Election Day . T hese differences could affect the accuracy of polls , according to whose responses were counted by 

polls. For example, respondents who said they had already voted in -person early or by mail might always be 

count ed in the polls , while Election Day voters might only sometimes be counted according to their likelihood of 

voting . Mistaken self -reports of Biden supporters could result in too many Biden supporters being included in the 

polls. 

For the 2020 election, there is n o evidence that respondents who supported Biden were more or less likely to vote 

than respondents who supported Trump. On the contrary, an AAPOR Transparency Initiative member organization 

measured the v alid ity of the self -reported vote of RBS poll respons es . Results shared with the Task Force revealed 

that Biden and Trump supporters were equally likely to vote. If they are equally likely to vote when they sa y they 

will vote, then it seems unlikely that any combination of likely -voter models and self -report ing error could produce 

the polling error in 2020. 

Table 8 reports on polls match ed to a voter file using the voter -file crosswalk ( Pct. Matched ). This set of well -

matched polls includes states with large (e.g., MI, PA, and WI) and small (e.g., GA, NC) po lling error. Of primary 

interest is whether the accuracy of the self -reported voting intention of Biden supporters is lower than the 

accuracy of the self -reported voting intention of Trump supporters. 

Sample Size 

(Report Intention 

to Vote) 

% Sample 

Matc hed with 

Records 

% Intending to 

Vote Who Did 

% of Biden 

Supporters Who 

Voted 

% of Trump 

Supporters Who 

Voted 

Arizona  1,252  99  92  94  93 

Florida  1,451  99  92  94  94 

Georgia  759  84  99  88  82 

Iowa  753  99  90  92  92 

Kansas  755  98  88  93  89 

Michigan 1  856  98  82  83  85 

Michigan 2  1,231  99  89  90  89 

Minnesota  1,005  98  93  93  93 

Montana  758  99  95  98  94 

Nevada  809  99  87  92  89 

North Carolina  758  99  95  98  94 

Pennsylvania  1,862  99  91  93  92 

Wisconsin  1,253  98  95  96  95 47 

Table 8. Accuracy of Self -Reported Vote Intention . Results are from comparing self -reported vote intention or 

report of early voting to voter file. Michigan 2 and Minnesota use a different pollster and voter file. The 

percentages are unweighted but calculations us ing the weighted proportions reveal similar patterns. 

There is no evidence that Biden supporters were any less likely to vote than Trump supporters. In Arizona, for 

example, 94% of Biden supporters included as a likely voter s did vote , and 93% of Trump su pporters who reported 

they were going to vote actually voted. If anything, self -reported Biden supporters were slightly more likely to vote 

than Trump supporters. 

The lack of differences in Table 8 could mask variation s in the accuracy of self -reported in tention to vote ,

depending on the self -reported method of voting . This possibility was investigated by cross -checking the voting 

method against the percentage of respondents who were confirmed to have voted for each candidate in the states 

of Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin .

Table 9 reports on the percentage of respondents validated as having voted ( % Voted ) for each voting method . It 

also states how large that group was relative to the set of weighted respondents who indicated that they 

supported Biden or Trump. 36 Although s ome differences emerge, polling error that is due to absentee and in -

person early voters exaggerating their likelihood of voting for Biden is not supported by evidence. 

% Validated as Having Voted  % of Weighted State Sample 

Michigan 

Election Day Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

83  30 

Election Day Voters: 

Biden Supporters 

69  11 

Absentee Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

86  9

Absentee Voters: 

Biden Supporters 

88  31 

In -Person Early Voters: Trump 

Supporters 

84  7

In -Person Early Voters: Biden 

Supporters 

90  12 

Pennsylvania 

Election Day Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

93  40 

Election Day Voters: 

Biden Supporters 

94  20 

Absentee Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

93  8

Absentee Voters: 

Biden Supporters 

87  33    

> 36 Thus, only responses of “Biden” or “Trump” are counted. These are compared with the weighted percentage of Biden or
> Trump supporters who indicated that they were voting by each method relative to the total (weighted) number of Biden and
> Trump supporters in the state. This approach removes undecided and third -party supporters from the denominator and
> weighting and shows the robustness of the earlier conclusions.

48 

Wisconsin 

Election Day Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

94  28 

Election Day Voters: 

Biden Supporters 

93  11 

Absentee Voters: 

Trump Supporters 

95  24 

Absentee Voter: 

Biden Supporters 

96  40 

In -Person Early Voters: Trump 

Supporters 

95  10 

In -Person Early Voters: Biden 

Supporters 

94  17 

Table 9. The Percentage of Biden and Trump Supporters Who Voted by a S elf -Reported Voting Method in Three 

States . The p ercentages incorporate respondent weights . The size of each group is relative to the weighted 

number of respondents who choose either Biden or Trump. 

Table 9 reveals only small differences between Trump and Biden supporters. Most differences are within a 

percentage point of one another. 

The largest discrepancy in Table 9 is among Biden Election Day voter s in Michigan . Although only 69% were 

validated as having voted , the effect is small for several reasons: only 11% of the sample were Election Day Biden 

supporters and Biden supporters were 14 percentage points less likely to actually vote than Trump suppo rters ;

hence the overall margin is shift ed by only 1.5 points (.14 x .11 = .015) relative to the validated vote margin. This 

small amount can matter in close elections, but there does not seem to be a systemic pattern of differential self -

reporting error t hat would explain the tendency of the 2020 polls to overstate the Democratic -Republican margin. 

An important caveat is that only one set of polls was examined. The types of likely voters in these polls could differ 

from the types in other polls. Th at no differences were found in the voting behavior of respondents in the se polls 

does not preclude the possibility that th ese factors would account for an importance source of error in different 

polls that use other methods of selecting respondents and id entifying likely voters. 

# 11. Error Due to Method of Voting and Likely Voters: 

# Unlikely to Be a Factor 

The relative percentages of Election Day and pre -Election Day voters were quite accurate for the polls 

conducted close to Election Day. The polling error was not obviously due to too few (weighted) Election 

Day voters. The overstatement of the Biden -Trump margin was largest among those who reported that 

they were voting prior to Election Day. For polls conducted more than two weeks prior to Election Day, the 

self -reported method of voting was not very accurate. 49 

Pre -election polls in 2020 faced more uncer tainty than usual in estimating the likely electorate because many 

states changed how they allowed their citizens to vote due to the COVID -19 pandemic. Party leaders also 

politicized the various methods of voting: Democratic voters were encouraged to vote early via mail or in person 

and Republican voters were urged to vote in person before or on Election Day. If polls predicted too many early 

voters and too few Election Day voters, then the overstatement of the Democratic -Republican margin could have 

been r eplicated. 

To determine if the polls contained the correct proportion of voters by method of voting, the percentage of votes 

cast using each method of voting, according to certified vote reports and voter files, was compared to the 

proportion of self -repo rted voting intention among the polls. Unfortunately, not every poll reported the required 

information, and there were often notable differences in how polls asked about the method of voting. 37 

Among the 23 state -level presidential polls conducted in the final two weeks, the signed error on the percentage of 

respondents who reported using the different methods of voting, on average, was accurate. (See Table 10.) In 

other words, averaging across polls and states to provide enough observations for analysis reveals that the 

proportion of voters who indicated that they were voting on Election Day or before Election Day closely matched 

the proportion of votes that were cast using those methods. 

Even when average absolute error is used to avoid the cancellation of offsetting errors (i.e., if some polls 

overestimated the size of the Election Day vote and others underestimated the size of the Election Day vote, the 

average of those errors may be zero because the errors cancelled each other out) the ave rage absolute error is 

modest. Among polls conducted during the last two weeks, the average absolute error on the size of Election Day 

voters was four percentage points and the average absolute error on the size of early/mail voters was five 

percentage poi nts. Given the small size of these errors, it can be concluded that neither the overstatement of 

Democratic support nor the understatement of Republican support in the polls was caused by polls predicting too 

few Election Day voters or too many mail -in or in -person early voters. 

Signed Error  Absolute Error 

Voting Mode  Size  Margin  Size  Margin 

Last Two Weeks (N = 23) 

Early/Mail  0 +8  +5  +9 

Election Day  0 -3 +4  +8 

All Polls (N = 42) 

Early/Mail  -7 +15  +10  +16 

Election Day  +6  -4 +9  +9 

Table 10. Error in the Size and Vote Choice of Early/ Mail and Election Day Voters Pooled Across States. This table 

pools polls in Georgia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Iowa, South Carolina, and Texas because those were the only 

states with multiple polls reporting breakouts in the last two weeks. A p ositive signed error indicate s an 

overstatement by the polls.  

> 37 The polls containing the individual -level data analyzed in Section 9 are included in this analysis.

50 

Disaggregating the signed error and absolute error in these polls to calculate the polling error by method of voting 

reveals the polls overstated t he Biden -Trump margin by eight points among self -reported early/mail voters and 

understated the Biden -Trump margin by three points among self -reported Election Day voters. In terms of the 

average absolute error, the error was nine points among self -reporte d early/mail voters and eight points among 

self -reported Election Day voters. While strong conclusions are impossible given the limited data, the 

overstatement of Biden -Trump support seems to be concentrated among respondents who reported that they 

would v ote prior to Election Day. 

Although not obviously relevant for polling error in 2020, note the size s of the errors for polls conducted more 

than two weeks prior to Election Day. ( See the bottom two rows of Table 10 .) When all 42 of the polls are include d

in the analy sis, respondents self -report that they are more likely to vote on Election Day (by six percentage points) 

and less likely to report voting early or by mail (by seve n percentage points) compared to the proportion of the 

electorate that actuall y did. Whether these discrepancies were because of the new voting procedures used du ring 

the pandemic or because respondents were unsure about how they would vote, it is worth noting that early poll 

results provided a misleading portrait of how respondents intended to vote. Going forward, it seems wise to treat 

early self -reported methods of voting with caution. 

# 12. Error Related to “New” Voters: Yes, in Part 

The percentage of voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 was large enough to produce much of the 

polling error. Biden support was greater among new voters than suggested by the difference between 

votes cast in 2020 versus 2016 . Without knowing the size of this group of voters and how they voted , the 

difficulty of polling new voters cannot be state d conclusively to be the cause of the overall polling error in 

2020, but available data suggest it cannot be ruled out as one possible cause. 

One explanation of polling error is the dramatic increase in the number of 2020 voters . Nationwide, 22 million 

more certified votes were cast in 2020 than 2016. New voters includ e newly eligible vote rs as well as newly 

energized voters who were inspired to participate by the candidacies of Trump or Biden. To the extent that the 

2020 outcome was shaped by the presen ce of “new” voters who had not voted in 2016, those new voters could 

affect the accuracy of pre -election polls in 2020. 38 

A lower bound on the percentage of voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 is obtained by assuming that every 

2016 voter also voted in 2020. In that case, 14% of the certified votes cast in 2020 would be due to voters who did 

not vote in 2016 (22 million ove r 158 million). The actual percentage of voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 is 

certainly higher since not every 2016 voter also voted in 2020. The additional voters in 2020 relative to 2016 could 

have had a large effect on the overall polling error. 

We focus on two questions : Did the polls have the right proportion of new voters? And did the candidate 

preferences of the new voters who were included in polls reflect th e preferences of those voters not included in 

the polls ? 

> 38 Those who voted in 2020 but not 2016 are the main focus for the sake of a nalytical traction, recognizing also some who voted
> in 2012 and then sat out 2016 before voting in 2020.

51 

It is a logical truth that the opinions of respondents cannot be compared with the opinions of nonrespondents ;

likewise, differences between new voters who did and did not respond to the polls cannot be determined. 

Nonetheless, s everal benchmarks were used to explore the effects of new voters on the 2020 polling error .

Several measures are used to estimate how many voted in 2020 but not 2016. As a lower bound , the difference 

between votes cast in 2020 versus 2016 can be as a percentage of votes cast in 2020 ( Lower Bound). The 

assum ption that every 2016 voter also voted in 2020 is clearly wrong , but this estimate puts a lower bound on the 

number of new voters . In Arizona, for example, 3.4 million votes were cast in 2020 and 2.6 million voters were cast 

in 2016. If every 2016 voter also voted in 2020 , then 800,000 vote d in 2020 but not 2016. 39 As a fraction of the 

total votes cast in 2020, roughly 23% of the Ariz ona electorate voted in 2020 but not 2016. 

Besides this lower bound calculation, voter files were used to identify the number of voters who voted in 2020 but 

not 2016. Track ing registered voters over time can be difficult since they move and change their names . T wo 

different proprietary data files were used to perform the calculation , given the difficulty of tracking voters (see, for 

example, Ansolabehere and Hersh 2014). 

Table 11 lists various estimates of how many voted in 2020 but not 2016. In nearly e very state, the voter -file -based 

estimates greatly exceeded the lower bound, vote -based calculations . Highlighting the difficult y of the task, even 

many months after the election and final certification , i t remains un clear how many “new voters ” voted in 20 20. 

Critical for our purposes, the fraction of new voters is considerable. It is often large enough to affect the overall 

polling error in 2020. If the Voter File 1 estimate is accurate, for example, and 34% of Michigan voters voted in 

2020 but not 2016 , then size of this group in the overall electorate means that errors made when polling this group 

could greatly affect the overall polling error. If the new voters were three points more likely to support Biden and 

three points less likely to support Trum p, then a six -point error on the candidate margin among a third of the 

electorate would shift the overall error on the margin by two points. 

It was even more difficult to determine if the new voters included in polls reflect ed new voters who were not. To 

provide a benchmark for how the new voters may have voted , 2020 voters must be compared to 2016 voters . In 

particular, support among new voters can be estimated by comparing the change in Biden/Clinton votes (from 

2016 to 2020) to the change in Tru mp votes in the same period. I n Arizona, for example, comparing 2020 to 2016, 

Biden received 511,000 more votes and Trump received 409,000 more votes. The difference of these differences 

(102,000) can be expressed as a fraction of increase in votes going t o either Trump or Biden (920,000). This 

calculation suggests that Biden’s margin must have been 11 percentage points larger among these voters. 40 If

every voter who voted in 2016 voted the same in 2020 as 2016, how must the new voters vote to produce the 

difference in results between 2020 and 2016 ? Such calculation s are crude benchmark s at best , yet they arguably 

help to ballpark expectations. The results of these calculations are reported in Table 11 as the Vote Margin (Est) .41   

> 39 Of course voters can move between states, i.e., some "new” voters may have voted in 2016 in a different state

.    

> 40 The denominator here is the sum of the votes for Trump and Biden (920,000). There are 920,000 “new” voters but only
> 780,000 new votes when accounting for third -party candidates in 2016.
> 41 While Biden's margin among 2016 nonvoters cannot be known, these fi gures serve as a rough benchmark under the
> assumptions that neither Trump nor Biden disproportionately netted votes from vote switching or differential turnout. To be
> clear, our approximation of Biden's margin based on increases in certified totals isn't t echnically correct because it could also
> result from vote switching and differential turnout of Clinton and Trump 2016 voters. While approximate, it is hard to imagin e
> that these factors could explain the 20 -point differences between this calculation and t he poll results.

52 

In terms of si ze and support , b enchmarks could also be compared to the results of polls that asked whether 

respondents had voted in 2016. Table 11 reveals that the percentage of 2020 poll respondents who said they did 

not vote in 2016 ( % Not Voting in 2016 ) was often cl oser to the back -of -the -envelope calculations ( Lower Bound )

than to the voter -file estimates ( Voter File 1 Size , Voter File 2 Size ) regardless of the voter file used. In Michigan, for 

example, the percentage of poll respondents who indicated that they did not vote in 2016 was 14% , which is close 

to the 13% estimated using the difference in certified votes being cast but less than half the size of the voter -file 

estimates. 

It wa s not possible to ascertain whether or not RBS polls ref lect larger trends, but the se results certainly suggest 

that the fraction of voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 was too small in the polls that were analyzed. In 

Wisconsin, for example, the percentage of voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 was less th an half of what the 

two voter files suggest. Among these polls, the proportion of new voters appeared to be considerably understated. 

A similar disconnect is revealed in determining if vote choices of new voters closely match best estimate s the 

same. Resp ondents who indicated that they were voting in 2020 and had not voted in 2016 were far more likely to 

support Biden than Trump. This was true regardless of whether the margin was calculated using all of the new 

respondents ( Poll Margin ) or just the new res pondents who chose either Biden or Trump ( Poll Margin (No DK) ). It 

is interesting that many new voters declined to choose either Biden or Trump when initially asked ( % Initial 

DK/Refusal ). 42 

Lower 

Bound 

Size 

Voter 

File 1 

Size 

Voter 

File 2 

Size 

% Not 

Voting 

in 2016 

Vote 

Margin 

(Est.) 

Poll Margin  Poll Margin 

(No DK) 

% Initial 

DK/Refusal 

Arizona  23%  39%  36%  30  Biden +11  Biden +27  Biden +28  12 

Florida  15%  31%  30%  19  Trump +14  Biden +25  Biden +32  20 

Georgia  17%  31%  31%  22  Biden + 23  Biden +4  Biden +5  14 

Iowa  7%  24%  23%  15  Biden +4  Biden +17  Biden + 22  16 

Kansas  14%  29%  28%  17  Biden +18  Biden +11  Biden +13  10 

Michigan  13%  34%  27%  14  Biden +18  Biden +39  Biden +56  18 

Montana  18%  30%  22%  13  Biden +2  Biden +6  Biden +8  10 

Nevada  20%  51%  38%  20  Biden +2  Biden +24  Biden +26  12 

North Carolina  14%  30%  29%  17  Biden +11  Biden +21  Biden +29  16 

Pennsylvania  11%  30%  25%  21  Biden +13  Biden +15  Biden +19  19 

Wisconsin  10%  33%  25%  12  Biden +10  Biden +30  Biden +37  13 

Table 11. Estimates of the Proportion of “New” Voters in the Electorate and Margin for These Voters. Estimates of 

the proportion of new voters are based on calculations using certified vote and voter -file estimates. Margin for 

new voters is estimated in ea ch state based on state -wide partisan results for 2016 and 2020. Poll results are 

based on the analysis of a set of polls provided to the Task Force. Poll results are weighted. 

Considering the vote choice of these new 2020 voters reveals substantial support for Biden with a margin of 

support often far greater than the admittedly crude vote -based calculation would suggest. While this cannot prove 

that the polling error was related to the new voters, the magnitude of the effects reported in Table 11 could easily 

account for the polling error.  

> 42 Roughly half of these respondents gave an answer when pushed. The distribution was roughly similar to the initial break and
> the sample was small; nonetheless, this initial reluctance is mentioned and emphasized in case those reluctant vo ters were less
> likely to report truthfully.

53 

In Arizona, for example, among the 30% of respondents who reported not having voted in 2016, the 28 -point 

Biden margin changed the overall ma rgin by 8.4 points (.3 x .28) toward Biden. (If we exclude the 12% who did not 

give a candidate response, the margin still moved 7.4 points toward Biden because of these voters (.88 x .3 x .28).) 

Even in states with a smaller proportion of new voters such as Wisconsin (12% of the sample) or Michigan (14%), 

the large pro -Biden margins among new voters in these states greatly affected the overall margin. In Michigan, the 

56 -point Biden margin among voters who reported voting in 2020 but not 2016 shifted the o verall margin by 7.8 

points (.14 x .56), and the 37 -point Biden margin in Wisconsin shifted the overall margin by 4.4 points (.12 x .37). 

Precise and conclusive statements are impossible given the number of assumptions required to produce the 

benchmark co mparisons reported in Table 11. Even so, the discrepancies in terms of the size and vote choice of 

new voters are noteworthy. The polling margins are far more supportive of Biden than the vote -based 

approximations would suggest (except in Georgia and Kansa s) and the magnitude of the differences (e.g., 39 points 

in Florida, 21 points in Michigan, 20 points in Wisconsin) . These differences could have noticeable effects on the 

polling error given the voter -file estimates of how many new voters there may have been in 2020. If the margin 

among new voters in the polls was 20 points too favorable towards Biden among the 30% of new voters (according 

to the voter file estimates) this would produce six points of polling error (.30 x .20). Six points of polling error is 

larger than the average polling error documents in part one. 

To be clear, t he 2020 poll data do not allow the conclu sion to be drawn that new voters who responded to polls 

were representative of all new voters , or that the polls had too many or too fe w new voters in their samples. Also, 

it is not sure how the new voters who responded to polls compare in number and opinion to those who did not .

Different calculations and data sources provide different benchmarks . It is also unsure whether or not the pat terns 

found in the polls can be generalize d more broadly. 

Even with all this uncertainly, clear ly there were enough voters who voted in 2020 but not 2016 to account for a 

large portion of the polling error. Among the polls examined, the new voters seemed to be too few and too 

supportive of Biden relative to the benchmarks . The pattern is consistent wi th the polls missing new Trump voters, 

but without knowing the actual number and vote choice of the new voters and who did and did not respond to 

polls, definitive conclusions are impossible. 

# 13. Error Due to Likely Voter Models, Noncoverage, or Nonresponse: 

# Likely to Be Factors 

Reweighting the results live phone (RBS and RDD) polls to match the 2020 outcome required the largest 

changes to the weights for partisanship and 2016 vote choice. For weighted poll results to match the 2020 

outcome , the percentage of Republicans (or 2016 Trump voters) had to be increased by several points and 

the percentage of Democrats (or 2016 Clinton voters) had to be decreased by several points. Similar 

patterns were found for RBS and RDD surveys , suggesting that the polling error is not due to coverage 

issues related to the use of voter files. Implications pertaining to source s of polling error depend on the 

nature of the nonresponse . If the opinions of the partisans included in polls reflect the opinions of the 

parti sans not included in the polls, then there is no within -group non response and the patterns would 

identify the source of polling error as having too many Democratic respondents and too few Republicans. 

On the other hand, i f Republicans (or independents or n ew voters ) included in 2020 polls were more likely 

to support Biden than those not included in the polls, then it is impossible to identify why the polls differed 

from the final outcome based on the available data. 54 

Some explanations of polling error are harder to prove than others because of lack of data and because the polling 

error is consistent with multiple observationally equivalent mechanisms. 

The term “missingness” encompasses those voters excluded from the possibility of contact (e.g., not i n a voter file 

list , contact information missing, or lack of internet access) as well as individuals contacted but unwilling to 

participate in polls. Similar patterns are observed across various sampl ing and contact methods, so polling errors 

seem more lik ely to be from lack of response than from lack of coverage ; however, coverage issues cannot be 

ruled out entirely. Therefore the term “ missingness ” is preferred rather than “nonresponse. ”

In general, surveys using random digit dialing ( RDD ) to contact resp ondents weight the data to match population 

parameters for the general public and then use questions about voter registration and likelihood of voting to 

identify the electorate. (Panels with a general population sample can also use a similar procedure.) In contrast to 

RDD, r egistration -based samples (RBS) must directly estimate the likely demographic composition of the 

electorate. 

RBS, if possible, us es reliable variables such as sex, age, and region/location (and perhaps race in some states) from 

the vo ter file, but other adjustments are more difficult. Education, in particular, is problematic . It is not clear how 

well the available information (e.g., the Current Population Survey’s most recent voting supplement) can provide 

guidance on the educational d istribution of the current electorate .

Considering these difficulties, the polling error could well have resulted from incorrect assumptions about the 

electorate, i.e., about who would vote in 2020. Pollsters routinely adjust their samples to account for those 

excluded from the sample , those unwilling to respond , and likely voters , but these adjustments may have 

predicted electorate that did not materialize . Perhaps they postulated an electorate that was too Democratic 

because of assumptions ab out the age, race , or even partisanship of the electorate. Details about statistical 

adjustments are rarely reported in sufficient detail to allow reviewers to ascertain what was done, hence it is 

difficult to fully assess the effects of such adjustments on polling error .

A second possibility is that the failed attempts of pollsters to account for missingness by not fully taking into 

account the nature of the missingness . They may have failed to fully account for unwillingness as a basis for 

nonresponse or to fully account for noncoverage through post -stratification, which seeks to adjust the weights of 

undersampled and oversampled groups. 

Even with correct weighting targets , voters could be excluded or included in the sample because of the parameters 

that weight the data. That is exactly what caused some of the polling error in 2016 . T he sample of respondents 

included in polls was unbalanced in terms of education because r espondents with higher education levels were 

more likely to participate in polls and vote for Democratic candidates. As a result, vote margins in the 2016 polls 

were more favorable for Democrats than the actual vote margin. 55 

Many such factors could have contributed to polling errors in 2020 either individually or collectively . A non -

exhaustive listing of plausible explanations related to nonresponse issues follows. 

• The record -breaking turnout in 2020 included many new voters. Perhaps the new voters who responded to 

polls in 2020 differed from the new voters who did not respond to polls. Perhaps the new voters mobilized by 

Trump were less likely to cooperate with polls than new voters mobilized by Biden. (See Section 11.) 

• Perhaps Republicans we re less likely than Democrats to respond to polls in 2020 (because of the politicization 

of polling by Republican leaders) in ways that conventional weighting methods missed (Gelman et al 2012). 

Between -group differences in survey participation related to differences in vote choice could produce the 

types of error documented in this report. 

• Even if the proportion of Republicans and Democrats who responded was correct and hence there was no 

between -group nonresponse, perhaps Republicans who responded were more likely than those who did not 

respond to support Democrats, i.e., perhaps there was within -group nonresponse. 

• Perhaps there was both between -group and within -group nonresponse. For example, perhaps Republicans 

were less likely than Democrats to respon d and those Republicans who did respond were more likely to 

support Democrats than those who did not respond. 

• Similarly, perhaps independents were less likely than others to respond and those independents who did 

respond were more likely to support Democra ts than those who did not respond. 

Unfortunately, the ability to determine the cause or causes of polling error in 2020 is limited by the available data. 

Unless the composition of the overall electorate is known, l ooking only at who responded says nothing about who 

did not respond. Not knowing if the Republicans (or unaffiliated voters, or new voters) who responded to polls 

were more supportive of Biden than those who did not respond , for example, it is impossible to identify the 

prim ary source of polling error. 

The number of p otential causes can be n arrow ed through a comparison of weighted poll results with the 

reweighting necessary to match the certified vote by geography and method of voting. The composition of the 

electorate impli ed by the poll results as originally weighted differ s from the composition of the electorate implied 

by poll results as reweighted to match the outcome of the election. Thus, reweighting provides clues to the factors 

that likely contributed to the poll err or. The comparison reveal s how sampl ing and weighting c an be adjusted to 

match the poll to the outcome and helps identify characteristics most correlated with polling error. 

Reweighting the poll results to match the 2020 election required increasing the percentage of self -identified 

Republicans and decreasing the percentage of Democrats , no matter whether RBS or RDD polls were examined at 

either the national or state level. While consistent with a polling error caused by an incorrect partisan distribution ,

it is important to note that correlations and causative factors are not identical. Causation should not be assumed 

because of correlation. Our work identified the characteristics most related to polling error, but there are many 

ways that the weights cou ld be adjusted to match the final 2020 outcome. More importantly, these correlation s

found with partisanship could result f rom many different sources of polling error. 

If the vote choice s of a particular group included in polls mirror the vote choices of voters from the same group not 

included in the polls, then the cause of error is narrowed to having too many or too few respondents sharing a 

demographic characteristic , and our analysis would reveal which groups were over - and underrepresented in the 

orig inally weighted sample. If the largest differences occur among variables that were already being used in the 

statistical adjustments to correct for missingness, then the original weighting targets were likely incorrect. 56 

For example, if the original weighting ha s 25% of the likely voters under the age of 24 and the outcome 

reweight ing ha s only 15% of the reweighted sample under the age of 24, then this difference suggests the original 

weights relied on incorrect assumptions about young respo ndents in 2020. On the other hand, i f the largest 

differences occur among demographics not used to weight poll results , the n results could highlight the effects of 

using those demographics to weight the results. Conditional on knowing the final outcome, ad justments based on 

those variables would improve the accuracy of the poll. 43 

Within the same demographic group , i f the opinions of th ose who responded differ from the opinions those who 

did not respond, then it is impossible to identify the cause or caus es of polling error based on correlations . Only 

the opinions of those who responded are known. R eweighting cannot account for differences in the opinions 

between those who were and were not included in polls ! (Perhaps the differences are what motivate some to 

respond .)

A hypothetical example helps illustrate the problem. Suppose the polling error was entirely caused by unaffiliated 

voters. In particular, suppose unaffiliated voters who supported Biden were eager to participate in polls so they 

could expres s their support for Biden over Trump , and suppose unaffiliated voters who supported Trump did not 

trust the media or polls and were unwilling to participate in polls when asked. This pattern of nonresponse would 

produce a pro -Biden polling error because the unaffiliated voters included in polls were more supportive of Biden 

than the unaffiliated voters in overall electo rate. Even if the true source of polling error was not having enough 

Trump -supporting unaffiliated voters in the sample, reweighting the responses to match the 2020 outcome would 

show the largest changes in terms of the percentage of Republican and Democra tic respondents even if they were 

correctly sized in the weighted poll results. 

Our strategy of reweighting the originally weighted poll to match the 2020 certified outcome only identif ies 

characteristics most associated with polling error among those inc luded in the poll . Without knowing the opinions 

and size of unaffiliated voters who chose not to participate , it is impossible to rule out this possible explanation. 

Information about nonparticipants by definition does not exist . Our analysis identified th e characteristics most 

correlated with the polling error among those included in the polls . Still, it is vital to note this important caveat: a 

correlation with polling error does not necessarily identify the cause of polling error .

The ways polls that polls are reweight ed to change the electorate and match the 2020 outcome are examined in 

the following subsections, beginning with RBS polls in Section 13.1 and RDD polls in Section 13.2) . Reweighting 

changes the implied electorate in t erms of standard demographics and partisanship. 44 The reweightings that were 

performed always had the largest effect on the partisan composition of respondents. 

Section 13.3 considers how the distribution of self -reported 2016 vote changes . Reweighting to match the 2020 

outcome requires a much larger implied Trump -Clinton margin than actually occurred. Either 2016 Trump voters 

were much more likely to vote in 2020 than 2016 Clinton voters , or the 2016 Trump voters included in polls were 

more likely than th ose not included in the polls to vote for Democrats .     

> 43 Whether or not those variables should be used in the weighting is less clear. Even if a variable is closely related to the
> missingness in 2020, it does not necessarily follow that the variable should be used to account for missingness in circumstances
> where the truth is unknown. The usefulness of the variable for accounting for missingness prior to an election depends on
> defining the correct weighting targets, which may be a very difficult task.
> 44 These analyses were conducted using 12 RBS polls and seven RDD polls. The Task Force is grateful to the pollsters who made
> these data available. These polls are only a subset of all of the polls conducted in 2020 and may not be representative of no n-
> telephone polling or other telephone polls.

57 

Finally, Section 13.4 demonstrat es that the polls weighted using partisanship and 2016 voting behavior were no 

more accurate than polls not weighted in this manner. 

To determine the effects of reweighting the polls to the actual 2020 election results, weighting targets were 

defined using the county -level certified vote totals for Trump and Biden , including the votes cast via absentee 

voting, in -person early voting, and in -person Election Day voting according to the voter files. 45 County -level counts 

were aggregated to county strata based o n whether the county’s past voting behavior was categorized as Strong 

Republican, Moderate Republican, Toss -Up, Moderate Democratic, or Strong Democratic. 46 Appendix D describes 

the reweighting process in more detail, but the important point is that the da ta was reweight ed to match the 

certified outcome in terms of both geography and method of voting. 

Strata -level targets for method of voting and candidate vote share were used to reweight polls. AAPOR 

Transparency Initiative members shared their i ndividual -level poll results with the Task Force. One member 

organization shared RBS polls from AZ, FL, GA, IA, KS, MI, MT, NC, NV, PA, TX , and WI. Another member 

organization shared RDD polls from AZ, FL, MI, NC, PA, WI , and a national poll. Both sets of polls use d live human 

interviewers but the re were differences as follows: method of sample selection (RBS vs. RDD), likely -voter screen 

(the RBS poll treated every respondent as a likely voter and the RDD survey used an explicit screen based on poll 

questions), wei ghting adjustments, and question wording. Reweighting the RDD and RBS polls produced similar 

patterns , so the differences between RDD and RBS polls are unlikely to be primarily responsible for polling error. 

# 13.1 Reweighting RBS Polls to Match the 2020 Outcome 

Reweighting the weighted results of RBS polls to match the 2020 outcome suggests that the largest 

changes occurred in terms of partisanship and 2016 self -reported vote choice. To match the certified 2020 

outcome, the samples were rew eighted by increasing the percentage of self -reported 2016 Trump voters 

by two points and decreasing the percentage of self -reported 2016 Clinton voters by two points. The 

composition of the implied electorate in terms of the demographics used to weight th e sample were 

largely unchanged. 

The results for every state are graphed in Appendix E, but it is useful to focus on a single state to describe the 

results and general pattern. Pennsylvania was chosen because it is about average in terms of signed polli ng error 

(3.6 percentage points too Democratic). The outcome in Pennsylvania was used to project Biden as the winner of 

the 2020 election. 

Figure 16 graphs how reweighting affects the response categories listed along the left -hand -side of the plot. 

Positi ve values indicate a greater proportion of respondents in the outcome -reweighted data compared to the 

originally weighted data, and negative values indicate the original sample had too many with that response or the 

statistical adjustment overrepresented t he size of that group. 47 Horizontal lines distinguish the questions.     

> 45 The Task Force thanks Rezwana Uddin for extracting this information.
> 46 Arizona is handled differently given the small number of counties. In Arizona, the strata are based on Maricopa County,
> Moderate Democratic, and Moderate Republican.
> 47 This is not the only interpretation; as previously emphasized, increasing or decreasing the size of a group to match the
> election outcome does not prove that the support of the group is responsible for the polling error, especially if within -group
> missingness occurs among any group of voters. The effects of adjustments may establish the corr elation of the size of that
> group with the polling error, but correlation cannot establish causation.

58 

Starting from the top of Figure 16, the proportion of respondents who indicate that they do not know whether 

they would self -identify as a Democrat or a Republican is largely unchanged ( a fractional decrease) after 

reweighting the poll to match the 2020 outcome. The same applies too for “other” in response to partisanship. The 

change in the proportion who self -identify as an independent is slightly negative but close to zero, indicating 

fractionally fewer self -identified independents after reweighting the data to match the 2020 outcome. Much larger 

changes occurred among self -identified Republicans and Democrats. To make the weighted poll results match the 

2020 outcome requires increasing the proportion of Republicans and decreasing the percentage of Democratic 

respondents by nearly two percentage points. 

Table 12 shows the relationship between partisanship and polling error. It lists the percentages of respondents 

who self -identify with each party in the unweighted data and under the two poll weightings. Relative to the 

unweighted data, the original weight s decreased self -identified Democrats by one percentage point and increased 

self -identified Republicans by one percentage point. Reweighting those weighted results to match the 2020 

certified vote in Pennsylvania decreased self -identified Democrats by anot her two percentage points and 

increased self -identified Republicans by the same amount. Overall, a three percentage point shift relative to the 

unweighted sample and a six percentage point shift in the net partisan margin (from Democrat +5 to Republican 

+1 ) is required to match the poll responses to the 2020 outcome. 

Unweighted  Original Weight  Outcome Reweighted 

Democrat  41%  40%  38% 

Republican  36%  37%  39% 

Independent  19%  19%  19% 

Other  2%  2%  2% 

Table 12. Partisan Composition of Pennsylvania RBS Poll. Because this was a RBS poll, the unweighted partisan 

composition may reflect partisan targets in sample selection .

Substantial changes result from adjustments for partisanship and self -reported 2016 presidential vote choice .

Changes to other variables commonly used to adjust poll error are also worth noting; however, t he composition of 

the electorate in terms of age, race, gender, and education are relatively unchanged after reweigh ting the poll to 

match the 2020 outcome. For example, the p olling error would decrease if the proportion of respondents with no 

more than a high school education were increased by as little as one half of a percentage point ( offset by a 

decreased proportio n with a graduate degree) but the difference would be small relative to the polling error and 

relative to the changes implied in the partisan composition. 59 

Figure 16. Comparing the Composition of the Pennsylvania Electorate Using the Original Weights and the 2020 

Outcome Weights. The outcome -adjusted weight is a result of reweighting the likely voters in the original poll to 

match the method of voting and the proportion of votes for each candidate by county party stratum. 

Stepping back, reweighting the Pennsylvania RBS poll reveals two important patterns. First, there were only minor 

changes in the proportion of respondents belonging to each response category among standard demographic 

questions. This suggests, but does not prove, that th e polling error is not easily corrected using standard 

demo graphic adjustments. Second, large differences exist in terms of partisanship and self -reported 2016 vote . As 

previously noted, such differences could be caused by many potential sources of polling error. 60 

The pattern found in Pennsylvania was true for every poll examined. In general, the weights fr standard 

demographics were largely unchanged after reweighting the weighted poll to match the 2020 outcome. Figure 17 

illustrates this finding by graphin g the change in the percentage of respondents of varying education levels that 

results from reweighting each poll to match the 2020 outcome. In general, most differences are smaller than one 

percentage point and the larger differences (e.g., in Montana, th e proportion of those with bachelor’s degrees 

would have to be decreased by two percentage points and the percentage of those with some college and high 

school or less would have to be increased by a percentage point each) are small relative to the magnitu de of the 

signed error (e.g., the average signed error in Montana was 10.7 points). Overall, the polling error was only weakly 

related to standard demographics. 

Figure 17. The Change in Electoral Composition for Education. This plot shows how the esti mated proportion of the 

electorate at each education level differs between the original weights and the outcome -adjusted weights. The 

polls analyzed are RBS telephone polls. 61 

Much larger differences emerge for partisanship and self -reported 2016 vote. Compa red to the original survey 

weights , r eweighting the 2020 survey data to match the 2020 outcome produced an implied electorate with more 

Republicans and fewer Democrats , as well as more 2016 Trump voters and fewer 2016 Clinton voters. Figure 18 

shows that o n average , in every state except for Georgia (which also was among the states with the smallest 

polling error) , the percentage of self -reported 2016 Trump voters would have to be increased by nearly two 

percentage points (and the percentage of 2016 Clinton voters would have to be decreased by a similar amount) for 

the weighted survey data match the 2020 outcome. 

Figure 18. The Change in Electoral Composition for 2016 Vote. This shows how the estimated proportion of the 

electorate giving each response di ffers between the original weights and the outcome -adjusted weights. The polls 

analyzed are RBS telephone polls. 62 

# 13.2 Reweighting RDD Polls to Match the 2020 Outcome 

Reweighting the weighted results of RDD polls to match the 2020 election outcome produc ed the largest 

changes in the distribution of partisanship for both state and national polls. To match the certified 2020 

outcome required increasing the total percentage of self -reported Republicans by around four points and 

decreasing the total percentag e of self -reported Democrats in the reweighted sample by around four 

points relative to the percentage in the originally weighted sample. Other demographics remained 

unchanged. 

Reweighting the RDD phone polls revealed a similar pattern as reweighting the RBS polls . After the survey results 

were reweighted to match the 2020 outcome , t here were minimal differences in the percentage of respondents 

belonging to the various response categories for demographics traditionally used to post -stratify. The largest and 

most consequential differences occurred in the distribution of self -reported partisanship. Figure 19 summarizes 

the effect for partisanship . T o match the poll with the outcome , t he combined proportion of strong and leaning 

Republican respondents would have to be increased by roughly four percentage points in the sample , and the 

combined proportion of strong and leaning Democrats would have to be decreased by a similar amount .63 

Figure 19. The Change in Electoral Composition for Self -Reported Partisanship. This shows how the estimated 

proportion of the electorate giving each response differs between the original weights and the outcome adjusted 

weights. The polls analyzed are RD D telephone polls. 

A similar analysis using a national RDD survey yields a similar conclusion. The national RDD poll by size and 

candidate vote were reweighted within county quintiles. County -level vote results provided by the National 

Election Pool were sorted based on the margin between Biden and Trump within each county to determine 

quintiles representing roughly 20% of the total nationwide vote. 48 The original poll weights were adjusted so 

results among likely voters within each quintile matched the correct size and distribution of vote.  

> 48 Election results are not available by county in Alaska or Washington, D.C. The jurisdiction -wide results were treated as
> county -level results in creatin g the quintiles for those places.

64 

Table 13 shows that the original poll results were relatively close to the correct sizes of the five quintiles . T he 

largest diffe rence is a slight overstatement of the most pro -Trump counties where the original weighting results in 

a likely vote size of 23% of the electorate compared to the 20% actual vote . However, the unreported estimated 

vote shares was significantly off within t hese quintiles, particularly in the most pro -Trump quintile . C onsistent with 

the patterns of part one , these effects of differential nonresponse were deepest in the most Republican counties 

nationwide, even as those counties appeared well -represented in te rms of size. 

Size in Actual Vote  LV Size Using Original Weights 

Quintile 1 – Strongest Trump  20%  23% 

Quintile 2  21%  20% 

Quintile 3  20%  18% 

Quintile 4  20%  19% 

Quintile 5 – Strongest Biden  20%  20% 

Table 13. Comparing the Size of County Quintiles Using the Original and Outcome -Reweighting. Results are from a 

national RDD poll. 

As in the state -level reweighting analysis, reweighting the national RDD poll to match the outcome found little or 

no movement in measures not related to partisan ship or candidate support. Table 14 shows that none of the 

standard demographics changed in size by more than a single point, and only partisanship and ideology were 

affected by the reweighting. To make the weighted poll results match the final outcome req uired increasing the 

percentage of Republicans in the sample by 3.1 percentage points and the percentage of Republican leaners by 0.9 

percentage points while also reducing the percentage of Democratic respondents by 2.3 percentage points and the 

percentage of Democratic leaners by 1.2 percentage points. 65 

Original Weight  Outcome 

Adjusted Weight 

Change in % After 

Weighting 

Republican  30.7  33.7  +3.1 

Lean Republican  12.5  13.4  +0.9 

Independent (no lean)  4.1  3.6  -0.5 

Lean Democratic  17.0  15.8  -1.2 

Democratic  35.7  33.5  -2.3 

Don’t Know  3.2  2.5  -0.6 

Conservative  32.4  34.7  +2.3 

Moderate  41.2  40.6  -0.5 

Liberal  23.3  22.2  -1.2 

Don’t Know/Refused  0.7  0.6  -0.1 

65+  24.4  24.6  +0.2 

50 -64  27.3  27.5  +0.3 

30 -49  31.4  31.2  -0.2 

18 -29  16.3  16.1  -0.2 

Female  52.6  52.2  -0.5 

Male  47.4  47.8  +0.5 

Don’t Know/Refused  8.6  8.5  -0.1 

$100K+  30.6  31.0  +0.4 

$50K -<$100K  29.9  30.3  +0.4 

<$50K  30.9  30.3  -0.6 

Don’t Know/Refused  1.0  0.8  -0.1 

College grad  39.1  39.1  -0.02 

Some college  28.9  28.9  +0.1 

HS Grad  27.9  27.9  +0.1 

No HS  3.2  3.2  -0.02 

Don’t Know/Refused  1.4  1.3  -0.1 

NET People of color  31.4  30.7  -0.7 

Latino  11.3  11.2  -0.01 

Black  11.7  10.9  -0.7 

White  67.2  68.0  +0.8 

Table 14. T he Change in the Size of Demographic Groups Using Original Weights and Reweighting to the Outcome. 

The results are for a national RDD poll. 66 

# 13.3 Within -Group Differences in Who Responded to Polls 

Reweighting polls to match the 2020 outcome required that the Clinton -Trump margin among self -

reported 2016 voters be far more favorable to Trump than the actual 2016 margin. As a result, using the 

self -reported 2016 vote to weight to the past vote does no t fix the polling error. If the 2016 voters who 

voted in 2020 were representative of the 2016 electorate , then 2016 Trump voters who participated in 

polls would be more likely to vote for Biden than those who did not participate. However, if the 2016 

vote rs who voted in 2020 were not representative of the 2016 electorate , then it would be impossible to 

draw conclusions : it would be unclear what the implied 2016 margin should be among the 2016 voters 

who voted in 2020 . That is another complication of weight ing the results using 2016 past vote. 

The results of Sections 13.1 and 13.2 are consistent with polling error caused by having too many Democrats and 

not enough Republicans in the sample. However, this interpretation depends critically on the assumption t hat the 

individuals who responded were representative of those who did not ( i.e., it is conditional on the measured 

characteristics). 

As previously noted, it difficult to interpret the findings of Sections 13.1 and 13.2 as identifying the source of the 

polling error if the voters who responded to polls in 2020 may have differed from those who did not even within a 

demographic category. The importance of this subtle point is perhaps best illustrated by considering the results of 

the new voter analysis in Section 12 alongside the results of Section 13.1. Section 12 showed that perhaps too few 

new voters were included in the polls and those new voters may also have been too supportive of Biden compared 

to new voters overall. But the analysis of those same po lls in Section 13.1 showed that the percentage of 2020 

voters who reported not voting in 2016 did not change after reweighting to match the 2020 certified outcome. 

Does this mean that new voters were not responsible for the polling error? 

Within -group dif ferences in who responds to polls make it impossible to interpret the results of Sections 13.1 and 

13.2 as revealing the cause of polling error. The analysis determines the characteristic most related to the polling 

error among those who respond ; if the ne w voters who responded to the polls were more supportive of Biden 

than those who did not respond to polls, and if this differential nonresponse was the true cause of the Biden -

Trump overstatement in the polls, then reweighting the polls to match the 2020 o utcome would produce the exact 

pattern found in Sections 13.1 and 13.2. Even if the polling error was caused by new voters, the outcome -based 

reweighting would up -weight Republicans and down -weight Democrats because the characteristic most related to 

the p olling error among those who responded is partisanship. 

A similar argument can be made for unaffiliated voters, Republican voters, or any group in which vote choice and 

willingness to participate could be related. Only if we are willing to assume that t he individuals who responded 

were representative of those who do not (conditional on the characteristics being used to account for 

nonresponse) can we interpret the findings of Sections 13.1 and 13.2 as evidence of the source of the polling error 

being too heavily Democratic. If there are differences in who responds to polls within a group, as in the 

hypothetical case of new voters just discussed, then it becomes far more difficult to identify the cause (and 

potential correction). But without information on the opinions of those missing from polls, it is impossible to 

conclusively answer whether those who responded to polls differed from those who did not. 

Suggestive hints are possible if we are willing to assume 2016 voters were equally likely to vote in 2020 regardless 

of who they voted for in 2016 . If this assumption is true, then the margin of self -reported 2016 vote among the 67 

2016 voters who voted in 2020 should closely match the 2016 vote certified margin. (Polls that used self -reported 

2016 voting be havior must make this assumption to weight their results to match the 2016 certified vote.) 

Consequently, the margin of the 2016 self -reported vote among the outcome -reweighted polls can be used to 

evaluate whether the 2016 margin matches the implied margi n in the reweighted data. If it doesn’t match, then 

the 2016 voters who responded to polls in 2020 may have differed from those who did not. 

If the assum ption is not allowed that the 2016 voters who voted in 2020 were representative of the 2016 

electorate , then the margin of self -reported 2016 vote would not be expected to match the 2016 certified margin 

and nothing could be learned from the comparisons . If the 2016 voters who voted in 2020 are not representative of 

the actual 2016 outcome, the n the distri bution of their self -reported vote would match the actual 2016 vote . N o

benchmark would be available for comparing the respondents in 2020. Attempts to weight poll results in 2020 to 

match the 2016 vote using self -reported past vote would also be erroneous because there would be no reason to 

expect the distribution of self -reported past vote to match the actual 2016 certified vote. 

Table 15 lists for 11 states the 2016 certified vote margin , the margin estimated by the 2016 self -reported vote 

question in the original unweighted poll data , the margin after using the original survey weights , and the margin 

when using the outcome adjusted reweighting. 49 The final column compares how much the margin between 

Trump and Clinton differs between the unwei ghted an d the outcome -reweighted results. Several patterns emerge. 

2016 

Certified 

Margin 

Unweighted 

2016 Margin 

Original Weighted 

2016 Margin 

Outcome 

Reweighted 2016 

Margin 

Total Shift 

Arizona  Trump +4  Trump +5  Trump +7  Trump +13  Trump +8 

Florida  Trump +1  Clinton +1  Trump +4  Trump +10  Trump +11 

Georgia  Trump +6  Clinton +1  Trump +3  Trump +3  Trump +4 

Iowa  Trump +10  Trump +7  Trump +11  Trump +22  Trump +15 

Kansas  Trump + 21  Trump +12  Trump +20  Trump +25  Trump +13 

Michigan  Trump +0.3  Clinton +4  Trump +2  Trump +6  Trump +10 

Montana  Trump +21  Clinton +8  Trump +3  Trump +13  Trump +21 

Nevada  Clinton +2  Clinton +3  Trump +2  Trump +5  Trump +8 

North Carolina  Trump +4  Clinton +1  Trump +6  Trump +10  Trump +11 

Pennsylvania  Trump +1  Clinton +1  Trump +4  Trump +8  Trump +9 

Wisconsin  Trump +1  Clinton +5  Trump +3  Trump +12  Trump +17 

Table 15 . Comparing the Effects of Reweighting 2020 Polls to Match 2020 Actual Vote on the Estimated 2016 

Presidential Vote Share in the Polls. Total Shift is the difference between the unweighted 2016 margin among self -

reported votes and the outcome re -weighted r esults.  

> 49 We exclude respondents who refused to answer or who indicated that they did not vote.

68 

First, although the 2016 margins in the unweighted data are generally too Democratic (except for Arizona and 

Nevada), the original poll weights produced margins that closely matched the 2016 certified margin in every state 

except Montana. This means that t he originally weighted sample used to estimate the 2020 election closely 

matched what happened in 2016. This point highlights that weighting to the 2016 past vote in 2020 does not 

eliminate the polling error. The polling error occurs even though the self -reported Clinton -Trump margin among 

2016 voters closely matched the 2016 certified margin. 

Second, reweighting the weighted results to match the 2020 outcome requires an electorate that supported 

Trump far more than the actual 2016 margin. In Wisconsin, fo r example, applying the outcome -adjusted weights 

produces a 12 -point Trump margin among those who reported voting in 2016, a margin 11 points larger than the 

actual one -point 2016 Trump margin , and less accurate than the margin in either the unweighted dat a (Clinton +5) 

or originally weighted data (Trump +3). 

The last column emphasizes just how much the implied 2016 vote share among those who reported voting in 2016 

would have to change to make the 2020 poll results match the actual 2020 outcome. Except f or Georgia, the 

adjustments required to match the 2020 vote outcome would increase the 2016 margin by double digits in favor of 

Trump. In Wisconsin, for example, reweighting the results to match the 2020 outcome required a 17 -point margin 

for Trump among t hose who report voting in 2016. 

Assuming the vote choice of 2016 voters in 2020 should match the 2016 certified outcome requires that the 

outcome -reweighted polls have a much larger margin for Trump than the actual 2016 outcome . That larger margin 

could b e interpreted in several ways. It could mean that the 2016 Trump voters who responded were more likely 

to support Biden than the those who did not respond, or it could mean that the 2016 Trump voters included in 

polls were more likely to support Biden than those who were not included in the polls. In either case , reweighting 

the poll to match the 2020 outcome would require upweighting self -reported 2016 Trump voters to produce a 

margin for Trump far greater than the actual 2016 margin. 

Assuming that the 20 16 certified margin should be observed among 2016 voters voting in 202 0 does not prove 

that the error was caused by 2016 Trump voters. Correlation does not prove causation : t he same pattern could 

occur if the polling error were caused by differences in who respond ed among any group of respondent s, e.g., 

among those who did not vote in 2016. The polling error is most related to 2016 vote choice , but it could emerge 

in many other ways that would produce the same pattern in the reweighted dat a. Without knowing how those 

included compare to those not included in the polls, it is impossible to identify the cause of the polling error .

If the self -reported past vote of 2016 voters cannot be expected to match the 2016 certified vote , then little c ould 

be infer red from Table 15 because there would be no benchmarks for compar ing the opinions of the respondents. 

The implied 2016 margin for Trump may simply reflect that 2016 Trump voters were more likely to vote in 2020 

than 2016 Clinton voters. 

Witho ut information on the size and opinions of those voters who were not polled, it is difficult to reach definitive 

conclusions about how issues of missingness may have affected polling in 2020. 69 

# 13.4 Implications for Weighting by Partisanship and Past V ote 

Polls weighted by partisanship and 2016 past vote were not more accurate, on average, th an those 

weighted using only standard demographics. Weighting on partisanship and past vote may have reduced 

polling error, but it did not solve the issue. 

If polling error in 2020 was caused by the unwillingness of Republicans or Trump -supporters to participate in polls, 

then did polls that used partisanship and 2016 vote share to adjust their responses produce more accurate 

estimates? 

As part of its data c ollection effort, the Task Force attempted to obtain information on the variables used to 

statistically adjust every public poll available. T his information was used to compare the average polling error of 

these polls , depending on whether polls were adjus ted using partisanship or 2016 past vote. Among the 438 state -

level presidential polls conducted in the last two weeks, 46 reported weighting on partisanship, 22 reported 

weighting on past 2016 vote, 249 reported a weighting scheme that used neither, and i t was unclear as to how the 

sample was weighted for 121 polls. 70 

Figure 20 reports the distribution of signed and absolute error depending on the parameters that used in the 

statistical adjustment. There are no obvious differences. 

Figure 20. Average Error by Weighting Method. The number at the bottom is the median error for each set of polls. 

Among the 438 state -level presidential polls conducted in the last two weeks, 46 used Party ID , 22 used 2016 Vote ,

249 used Neither , and 121 were unclear a bout sample adjust ment (Missing ). 

Even if polls were affected by nonresponse related to partisanship or 2016 Trump vote, polls using partisanship 

and past vote in their weighting were no more accurate. The similar level of average error may be due to incorrect 

assumptions about the pr oportion of partisans voting ; 2016 voters who voted in 2020 not being representative of 

the 2016 electorate , which means weighting to the 2016 vote share being in correct or partisans polled vot ing 

differently from partisans not polled. I f the Republicans w ho participated in polls were more likely to support 

Biden than those who did not participate in polls , for example, weighting on partisanship would not eliminate the 

problem that is caused by the views of Republicans missing from the sample. While it is p ossible that the polls that 

chose to weight using partisanship and past vote would have performed worse had they not done so, weighting on 

partisanship and past vote clearly does not provide an easy solution. 71 

# 14. Conclusions 

Considering that whether Trump or Biden won the Electoral College in 2020 was decided by fewer than 50,000 

voters in three states , p re -election polling faces many challenges . In close races , small changes in accuracy can 

have large consequences on predicti ons of winners, especially when voting is closely related to partisanship. If a 

poll overstates the percentage of Democrats by two percentage points , then a four -point Biden margin (say 50% -

46%) appears in what would otherwise be a tied race (48 -48). Error s can develop from statistical adjustments or 

issues related to noncoverage or nonresponse . One error can have a large effect and many small errors can add up 

to even larger errors , especially when margins are close. 

Polls are often mis interpreted as prec ise predictions . It is important in pre -election polling to emphasize the 

uncertainty by c ontextualizing poll results relative to their precision . Considering that the average margin of error 

among the state -level presidential polls in 2020 was 3.9 points, that means candidate margins smaller than 7.8 

points would be difficult to statistically distinguish from zero using conventional levels of statistical significance. 

Furthermore, account ing for uncertainty of statistical adjustments and other factors , the total survey error would 

be even larger. 

The temp ta ti on to interpret polls as precise prediction s arose in part because polls did so well predicting outcomes 

in 2008 and 2012 . Nonetheless, put ting poll results in their proper context is essential; whether or not the margins 

are large enough to distinguish betw een different outcomes, they should be reported along with the poll results. 

Most pre -election polls lack the precision necessary to predict t he outcome of semi -close contests. Despite the 

desire to use polls to determine results in a close race, the precision of polls is often far less than the precision that 

is assumed by poll consumers. The polls themselves could exacerbate problems of scient ific legitimacy when they 

are unable to live up to unrealistic expectations. 

Our data collection and analyses provide a comprehensive characterization of polling error across races and states 

in the 2020 election. Our investigation reveals a systemic over statement of the Democratic -Republican margin in 

nearly every contest , regardless of mode or proximity to the election. This overstatement is largest in states with 

more Republican supporters. Comparing the topline poll results to the certified vote share suggests that polls 

understated Trump support and overstated Biden support . T he magnitude of those effects is depend ent up on 

whether the reported candidate marginals or the two -candidate support was used. 

Admittedly, this report is unsatisfyingly inconclu sive as to why the polling error in 2020 was the largest in at least 

20 years . Although s ome explanations can be rule d out , knowing what really happened is impeded by not know ing 

how those who participated in the polls compare to those who did not. Nothing can be learn ed about those who 

did not respond by examining those who did respond . Multiple explanations can be proposed for every pattern 

found, yet it cannot be conclusively determine d which are valid. 

Conclusions that can be drawn from our investigati on are as follows .

It seems plausible that many issues were caused by nonresponse . Nevertheless, it is so far impossible to know 

the primary issue. Among the possibilities are : too many Democrats and too few Republicans responding to the 

polls (between -party nonresponse) ; the Democrats/Republicans who responded had different opinions than 

those who did not (within -party nonresponse) ; and new voters and independents unpredictable in terms of both 

size (too many or too few) and representativeness (i.e., were the new voters who responded similar to those 

who did not?). Any one of these , and possibl y more than one , could produce the polling error . T he primary source 

of polling error cannot be identified conclusively without knowing how nonrespondents and respondents compare .72 

It is unclear whether the problems polls faced in 2020 will persist in 2022 or 2024, and what happens in 2022 

may be uninformative for knowing if there are longer -term issues. Because both the electorate and the set of 

responden ts could change in 2022 relative to 2020 for multiple reasons, it is impossible to predict how the polls in 

2022 might perform based on 2020 results. 

There are at least three scenarios as follows. 

Perhaps future pre -election polling will continue to be a ffected by the issues that affected the 2020 polls. 50 If the 

issues that affected the voters and respondents in 2020 persist without being corrected, the issues that affected 

polling in 2020 will also affect future polls. One plausible way that this would occur is if Republican -supporting 

voters have come to believe that p olling is “fake news” and a tool of “voter suppression” so that the decision to 

not participate in a poll becomes a political act. Given the politicization of polling by Republican party leaders, it 

may be that the people who choose to respond or not diffe r in their opinions even conditional on observable 

demographics. This problem would be a difficult for poll sters to overcome. 

Perhaps the problems of 2020 were unique to presidential elections because the polling error was caused by voters 

who vote in pre sidential elections but not midterm elections. If so, polls would be fine in 2022, but not 2024. 

Presidential elections are more salient and generate larger (and different) turnout than midterm elections , hence 

the polling error may matter most in presiden tial election years. Presidential elections typically attract less 

engaged voters . If the polling error is caused by voters who only vote in presidential years , then how well the polls 

do in 2022 will not reveal if the problems have been solved. A good per formance by polls in the 2022 midterm will 

not provide evidence that the issue with polling error is “solved” if the problem in 2020 was brought about by 

voters more likely to vote only in presidential elections. To this point, recall that the 2018 midterm polls had an 

average signed error of only 0.1 and an average absolute error that was half a percentage point better than the 

2016 state -level presidential polls. 51 

Perhaps the problems of 2020 were unique to the politics of Trump or the pandemic so the polls could be fine in 

2022 and 2024. If voters who were normally unmotivated to vote and participate in polls were motivated to vote 

specifically for Trump (but not participate in polls) , then this could have created the polling error . If so, Trump’s 

abse nce in future elections may lessen the polling error caused by these voters , assuming another candidate does 

not mobilize the same constituency. The fact that we did not see similar error in the 2018 midterm elections is 

consistent with a Trump -caused poll ing error. Alternatively, perhaps the poor performance of polls in 2020 relative 

to 2018 reflects the effects of the pandemic . Factors relating to the pandemic include uncertainty associated with 

voting and differences in how likely individuals were to res pond to polls given partisan -related differences in how 

likely individuals were to be reachable at home (e.g., Clinton et al. 2021). If the polling error is due to Trump or the 

pandemic, then polls may perform better once those forces are no longer relevan t.      

> 50 As an example, the statewide polls in 2016 also overstated the Democratic -Republican margin. It was thought that this gap
> was related to education and that weighing by education would solve the issue. In analyses conducted by the 2016 Task Force,
> educatio n weighting did reduce poll error but did not fully solve the issue; the 2016 Task Force report makes clear that the 14 -
> point error in a Michigan poll was decreased to a seven point error, which is similar in size to the error observed in 2020.
> 51 The foll owing excerpt is from the 2018 AAPOR Task Force report (unpublished): “Looking at signed error , the 2018 state polls
> averaged an error of .09 percentage point, the lowest error by this measure compared to the NCPP measure in 2014 and to the
> AAPOR measure f or state presidential polls in 2000, 2004, 2012, and 2016. The AAPOR measure for 2008 was very close, -0.10.
> Looking at absolute error, the 2018 polls had an average error of 4.64 percentage points, somewhat better than the 5.1 in the
> AAPOR analysis of 201 6 state presidential polls, but worse than the numbers found by AAPOR for state presidential polls in
> 2004, 2008, and 2012. The 2018 finding was a bit worse than the 4.06 average found for state U.S. Senate and governors polls
> in 2014.”

73 

Despite this ambiguity, several more points are worth highlighting for those who conduct and cover pre -election 

polls. These points are not unique to polling in 2020, but the performance of polls in 2020 reveals their continued 

importance for understan ding what polls can and cannot do. 

Polling results depend heavily on statistical adjustments and it is often unclear what is assumed and how 

sensitive the reported results are to the assumptions. The results of pre -election polling are increasingly a s much 

a function of statistical adjustments , such as assumptions about likely voter s, as they are a function of actual data. 

In many cases , how the results are adjusted and how sensitive the results are to particular choices and decisions is 

unclear (e.g., Cohn 2016). Poll consumers may be misled by false confidence in results unless they understand how 

alternative adjustments could change the results. Considering the consequences of these decisions, it is vital to 

describe them better and qu antify their effects on poll results. 

Weighting by partisanship or past vote does not obviously solve the problem. Adjustments based on partisanship 

and past vote m ight not solve the errors . The weighting targets for partisanship are often unclear , and th e close 

connection between partisanship and vote choice in the contemporary political environment means that incorrect 

targets can greatly affect the accuracy of polls. Using past election results also cannot solve this issue because it is 

impossible to co mpare c urrent voters with past -election vote rs who may have different opinions . Similarly, 

partisans voters who respond to surveys have the same opinions as partisans voters who do not respond (i.e., 

within -group missingness) , which p resents another challenge for polling. 

The margin of error is not the same as polling error. Sampling variability is only one source of error . M any have 

emphasized this important point (e.g., Mercer 2016; Rothschild and Goel 2016) . Focusing only on the margin of 

error of a proportion runs the risk of overstating the precision . Setting a side the statistical details of the 

computation of the margin of error on an estimated difference, even in the best circumstances , poll results often 

are discussed in a way that provide s a misleading characterization of polling performance and accura cy. 

It is difficult to interpret the accuracy of individual polls : individual polls may have low error for arbitrary 

reasons and their current good performance may not necessarily indicate futur e success. In 2020, for example, 

poll s that simply increased the percentage who supported Republican candidates and polls weighted by spurious 

factors that increas ed the implied Republican support may indeed have been more accurate in 2020 , despite such 

ar bitrary adjustments. Both the accuracy of a poll and justifications for th ose adjustments are important to 

consider. Procedures that are not grounded in statistical theory or theories about the data generating process may 

employ arbitrary adjustments . Such procedures may produce seemingly “accurate” results that fail to generalize to 

other elections. Absent transparency on the adjustments being done, it is difficult to evaluate the performance of 

individual pollsters. 74 

# WORKS CITED 

Ansolabehere, Stephen and Eitan Hersh. 2014. “Voter Registration: The Process and Quality of Lists." In The 

Measure of American Elections , eds. Barry C. Burden and Charles Stewart III. Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press. 

Barber, Michael, and Jeremy C. Pope. 2018. “Does Party Trump Ideology? Disentangling Party and Ideology in 

America” American Political Science Review 113(1): 38 -54. 

Broockman, David E, and Daniel M Butler. 2017. “The Causal Effects of Elite Position Taking on Voter Attitudes: 

Field Exp eriments with Elite Communication,” American Journal of Political Science , 61(1): 208 – 221. 

Bullock, John G. 2011. “Elite Influence on Public Opinion in an Informed Electorate,” American Political Science 

Review , 105(3): 496 – 515. 

Clinton, Joshua D., J on Cohen, John Lapinski, and Mark Trussler. 2021. “Partisan Pandemic: How Partisanship and 

Public Health Concerns Affect Individuals’ Social Mobility During COVID -19,” Science Advances 7(2): DOI: 

10.1126/sciadv.abd7204 

Cramer, Katherine J. 2016. The Polit ics of Resentment: Rural Consciousness in Wisconsin and 

the Rise of Scott Walker . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Byler, D. 2020. ``Did `Shy Trump Voters' throw off the polls? Maybe not. The Washington Post . Accessed at: 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/11/09/ \did -shy -trump -voters -throw -off -polls -maybe -not/ .

Cohn, N. (2016), “We Gave Four Good Pollsters the Same Raw Data. They Had Four Different Results.” New York 

Times , September 20, 2016. Accessed at:  https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/09/20/upshot/the -error -

the -polling -world -rarely -talks -about.html?_r=0 .

Cohn, N. (2020). “Are the Polls Missing Republican Voters?” The New York Times . Accessed at: 

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/29/ \upshot/polls -political -party -republicans.html .

Crespi, I. (1988), Sources of Accuracy and Error in Pre -Election Polling . New York: Sage. 

Franklin, Charles H. 2007. “The ‘Margin of Error’ for Differences in Polls,” University of Wisconsin Working Paper. 

Gelman, A., S. Goel, D. Rivers and D. Rothschild . 2016. “The Mythical Swing Voter,” Quarterly Journal of Political 

Science , 11(1) 103 -130. 

Habberman, Maggie. 2020. “ To Trump, ‘the Polls That Matter’ Point to Victory. The Rest Are ‘Fake.’” New York 

Times. November 1. Accessed at:  https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/01/us/politics/trump -polls.html 75 

Kennedy, C., N. Hatley, S, Keeter, A. Mercer, R. Igielnik, and F. Traylor. 2018. “Comparing Survey Sampling 

Strategies: Random -Digit Dial vs. Voter Files.” Accessed at: 

https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2018/10/09/comparing -survey -sampling -strategies -random -digit -dial -vs -

voter -files/ 

Kennedy, C., and H. Hartig. 2019. “Response rates in telephone surveys have resumed their decline.” Accessed at: 

https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2019/02/27/response -rates -in -telephone -surveys -have -resumed -their -

decline/ 

Keeter, S. (2018). The impact of survey nonresponse on survey accuracy. In 

The Palgrave Handbook of Survey Re search , pages 373 -381. Springer. 

Keeter, S., Kennedy, C., and Deane, C. 2020. “Understanding how 2020 election polls performed and what it might 

mean for other kinds of survey work.” Pew Research Center. Accessed at : https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -

tank/2020/11/13/understanding -how -2020s -election -polls -performed -and -what -it -might -mean -for -other -kinds -of -

survey -work/ .

Kish, Leslie. 1965. Survey Sampling . New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Lenz, Gabriel S. 2012. Follow the Leader? How Voters Respond to Politicians’ Policies and Performance . Chicago, IL: 

University of Chicago Press. 

Matthews, D. 2020. “Election results: Why the polls got it wrong.” Vox . Accessed at:  https://www.vox.com/policy -

and -politics/2020/11/10/21551766/election -polls -results -wrong -david -shor .

Mercer, Andrew. 2016. “5 Key Things to know about the margin of error in election polls,” Pew Re search Center. 

Accessed at:  https://www.pewresearch.org/fact -tank/2016/09/08/understanding -the -margin -of -error -in -election -

polls/ 

Mitofsky , Warren J. 1998. “Review: Was 1996 a Worse Year for Polls Than 1948?,” The Public Opinion Quarterly ,

62:2 (230 -249). 

Page, L. 2020. “US election polls miss shy Trump voters and failed to predict the way votes were cast,” Polls missed 

Trump voter s and were worse than 2016”. Australian Broadcast Corporation. Accessed at: 

https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020 -11 -09/ \us -election -polls -misjudged -\voter -behaviour -trump -

biden/12862288 .

Rothschild, D. and S. Goel. 2016. “When You Hear the Margin of Error Is Plus or Minus 3 Percent, Think 7 Instead,” 

New York Times , October 5, 2016. Retrieved from  https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/06/upshot/when -you -hear -

the -margin -of -error -is -plus -or -minus -3-percent -think -7-instead .html .

Scot Schraufnagel, Michael J. Pomante II, and Quan Li. 2021.  “Cost of Voting in the American States,” in Election 

Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy . Dec:503 -509.  http://doi.org/10.1089/elj .2020.0666 

Scott, Alastair J. and George A. F. Seber. 1983. “Difference of Proportions from the Same 

Survey.” The American Statistician 37:319 -320. 76 

Silver, Nate. 2017. “The Invisible Undecided Voter,” FiveThirtyEight . Accessed at: 

https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the -invisible -undecided -voter/ 

Silver, Nate. 2021. “The Death of Polling is Greatly Exaggerated,” FiveThirtyEight . Accessed at: 

https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the -death -of -polling -is -greatly -exaggerated/ 

Smith -Schoenwalder, C. (2020). “Trump Attacks 'Suppression Polls' That Show Biden Ahead,” U.S. News & World 

Report.  https://www.usnews.com/news/elections \/articles/2020 -10 -28/ \trump -attacks -suppression -polls -that -

show -biden -ahead .

Traugott, M.W. and C. Wlezien. 2009. “The Dynamics of Poll Performance during the 2008 Presidential 

Nomination Contest,” Public Opinion Quarterly 73:866 -894. 

# Appendix A: Notes on Data Collection 

A tremendous thanks goes to Sarah Lentz at the University of Pennsylvani a who did an amazing job collecting, 

organizing, and managing the data collection efforts. Sarah was assisted by University of Pennsylvania 

undergraduates Ami Ikuenobe and Grayson Peters. Mellissa Meisels and Sara Kirshbaum at Vanderbilt University 

also pr ovided invaluable assistance in some of the data collection and analysis as did Rezwana Uddin at NBC News. 

Our work would not be possible without the dedication and assistance of these amazing individuals. 

All of the analyses were done using R so that eve rything could be replicated. Although we focus mainly on polls 

with a field period ending in the last two weeks prior to Election Day, for completeness, we collected information 

on every public poll we were able to find. 

For some of the analyses in part two we were fortunate to have several organizations share their individual -level 

data with us. Our work relies heavily on their generosity. 77 

# Appendix B: Other Figures and Tables 

Figure B1. Distribution of Signed Error for Polls with a Larger (>5%) and Smaller (<=5%) Proportion of Respondents 

Choosing a Response Other Than Biden or Trump. Means are reported by the vertical line. 78 

Type of Poll  Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: Strict 

Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: 

Poll Margin > MoE 

Percent Identified 

Winning Candidate: 

Vote Margin > MoE 

National Presidential Popular Vote  100 

(N=66) 

100 

(N=66) 

100 

(N=66) 

State -Level Presidential Vote  76.3 

(N=438) 

90.9 

(N=312) 

84.5 

(N=264) 

State -Level Presidential Vote in a 

State with a Gubernatorial or 

Senatorial Contest 

79.3 

(N=261) 

95.6 

(N=136) 

91.7 

(120) 

Gubernatorial and Senatorial Polls  69.1 

(N=181) 

84.6 

(N=123) 

80.2 

(96) 

Senatorial Polls  65.6 

(N=157) 

82.2 

(N=101) 

75.7 

(N=74) 

Gubernatorial Polls  91.7 

(N=24) 

95.5 

(N=22) 

95.7 

(N=23) 

Table B1 . Percent of Polls that Correctly Identified Election Winner from Identified Polls Conducted in the Last Two 

Weeks by Contest Type. 79 

Table B2 . Predicting Average Signed Error and Average Absolute Error in State Presidential Polls by State. Full set of 

covariates. 80 

Figure B2 -1. Polling Error on Trump by State Using the Two -Party Vote. All polls with a field period ending between 

10/21/20 and 1 1/3/20 are included. Circles denote the average polling error on Trump’s vote share for each state 

(reported within each circle). This analysis calculates the candidate percentages taking out respondents who gave a 

response other than Trump or Biden. Trump error is computed as Trump’s percentage in the poll minus Trump’s 

percentage in the certified vote. Results are sorted by the average Trump error in the state. Individual polls are 

plotted in grey points. 81 

Figure B2 -2. Polling Error on Biden by State U sing the Two -Party Vote. All polls with a field period ending between 

10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are included. Circles denote the average polling error on Biden’s vote share for each state 

(reported within each circle). This analysis calculates the candidate per centages taking out respondents who gave a 

response other than Trump or Biden. Biden error is computed as Biden’s percentage in the poll minus Biden’s 

percentage in the certified vote. Results are sorted by the average Biden error in the state. Individual polls are 

plotted in grey points. 82 

# Appendix C. Effects of Excluding Undecideds, Focusing 

# on Competitive States , and Using “ Mixed” Modes 

The c onclusion about polling modes is not change d by the following: exclud ing undecideds (i.e., those 

respondents who don’t select a candidate in the vote question) to remove question -wording differences ,

focus ing only on polls conducted in competitive states, and using mixed -mode surveys versus single 

method s of interviewing. 

One way the mode of interviewing matter s is in how easily respondents indicate uncertainty about their vote. For 

example, unlike phone polls that have a human interviewer to record a “don’t know” response, online polls may 

record a “don’t know” response if the respondent skip s the question. While the overall percentage of respondents 

who give an answer other than a major -party candidate was relatively low in 2020 (Table 2), we replicated the 

analysis using the two -candidate vote share to remove respondents who did not provide a candidate preference. 52 

Table C1 shows that this did not affect the conclusions of Figure 8. 

Signed Error  Absolute Error  Pct Correct Winner 

(Simple) 

Number 

of Polls 

Live Phone - RDD  6.0  6.2  67  27 

Live Phone - RBS  5.4  5.4  70  31 

Online  4.7  5.3  82  262 

IVR/Online  3.6  4.6  71  42 

Phone/Online  2.8  4.9  56  32 

Other Mixed/Misc.  3.5  5.6  68  44 

Table C1 . Comparing Mode Effects for State -Level Presidential Polls Conducted in Last Two Weeks after Removing 

Don’t Knows. 53 Individual poll results are renormalized so that support for Biden and Trump is a percentage 

relative to the percentage of respondents sup porting either Biden or Trump in the poll before computing the 

polling error and taking the average by mode. All po lls with a field period ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 

are included. Only modes with at least 10 polls are included. 

Previously Figure 2 showed that th e phone polls were more likely to be undertaken in competitive states. To 

ensure that mode effects are not driven by differences at the state level, Table C2 shows that similar conclusions 

emerge when only analyz ing compet itive states ( i.e., states where the final margin was five percentage points or 

less).  

> 52

Thus, if 49% su pported Biden and 43% supported Trump, marginals could be renormalized to remove the 8% who didn’t give 

a response as follows: 49% / 92% = 53.3% for Biden and 43% / 92% = 46.7% for Trump.  

> 53

The renormalization can also produce misleading results. For exam ple, if 50% of the electorate declines to state a preference 

and the remaining 50% is split equally between the candidates, how should we interpret the results? The conventional 

interpretation would suggest that 25% support each candidate. The normalizati on used to create Table C1 would suggest 50% 

support for each candidate. The normalization is useful for comparing across modes with varying levels of “don’t knows” due t o

the interviewing mode, but it seems hard to justify it as a general practice. 83 

Signed Error  Absolute Error  Pct Correct Winner 

(Naïve) 

Number 

of Polls 

Live Phone - RDD  5.3  5.6  67  21 

Live Phone - RBS  5.0  5.0  74  23 

Online  4.6  4.8  71  120 

IVR/Online  3.5  4.3  77  26 

Phone/Online  1.2  3.9  52  25 

Other Mixed/Misc.  4.0  5.1  63  24 

Table C2 . Comparing Mode Effects for State -Level Presidential Polls Conducted in Last Two Weeks in States with 

2016 Vote Margins of Five Points or Less. Competitive states are those where the margin between Trump and 

Clinton in 2016 was less than or equal to five percentage points. All polls with a field period ending between 

10/21/20 and 11/3/20 are included. Only modes with at least 10 polls are included. 

Pollsters were more likely to use multiple modes of interviewing in 2020 compared to prior elections. The 

pe rformance , on average, of s urveys via telephone (either RBS or RDD) and online surveys were compared to the 

performance of polls that used multiple interviewing modes. We are hesitant to make strong claims since it is 

impossible to identify how important t he mode of interview is for polling performance , considering all of the other 

potential confounding differences. Hence, t his analysis is presented for descriptive purposes only .

To perform this evaluation, all of the multi -mode polls were collapsed into a single “mixed” category then 

compare d to polls conducted via phone (both RDD and RBS) and online using state -level presidential polls 

according to the metrics used in the report .

Number of 

Polls 

Average 

Signed Error 

Average 

Absolute Error 

Percen t Correct Winner 

(Naïve) 

“Mixed” mode  74  3.0  4.4  65 

Online only  262  4.5  5.2  82 

Phone only (RBS or RDD)  58  5.4  5.5  69 

All  438  4.3  5.1  76 

Table C3. Comparing Mixed and Pure Interview Modes for State -Level Presidential Polls . All polls with a field period 

ending between 10/21/20 and 11/3/20 for which the interview mode could be determined are included. 

Table C3 confirm s the pattern that was document ed earlier in th is report. Polls using mixed interviewing methods 

have lower signed error than polls conducted exclusively online or exclusively using human telephone interviewer .

Furthermore , the absolute error across the modes is even more similar , and the “mixed” polls p erformed the worst 

in terms of naïve prediction s (which ignore the margin of error ). Mixed polls have lower signed error and lower 

naïve classification rate . Nine of the 74 mixed polls (i.e., 12% of the polls) estimated Trump would win ; i n contrast, 

only three Online polls (1%) and one Phone poll (2%) estimated that Trump would win. 

These differences are difficult to assess. The y could reflect more types being reached by mixed mode polls than 

single mode polls, the effects of the statistical adjustments an d assumptions , or differences in the types of races. 84 

# Appendix D: Outcome Reweighting 

To perform the reweighting to the 2020 vote outcome, the composition county -level votes was computed using 

the TargetSmart voter file, and the county level vote for each candidate also was collected from state sources. The 

past vote of the counties within each state was used to classify all counties into five strata as follows: Very 

Republica n, Lean Republican, Toss -Up, Lean Democratic, Strong Democratic. 

Thus, f or each state , the reweighting was performed as follows .

1) Use the original weights to calculate the proportion of respondents in each category of potential interest. 

2) Calculate the proportion of respondents who indicat ed voting via absentee, early in -person or in -person on 

Election Day , using the original poll weights in each of the five strata. 

3) Using the voter file, calculate the proportion of overall votes cast , using each voting method in each stratum. 

4) Generate a new weight using the inverse of the ratio of steps 2 and 3 and create a new weight by multiplying 

the original weight by this new adjustment. 

5) Using this new weight, calculate the proportion of respondents who support Biden and Trump in each 

stratum. Calculate the proportion of votes cast for Biden and Trump in each stratum and create the 

adjustment using the inverse ratio of the proportions. 

6) Create the final weight by multiplying the method -adjusted weight by the outcome -adjusted ratio and use this 

weight to calculate the proportion of respondents in each category of potential interest. 

7) Calculate the difference in the category proportions in step 6 relative to the category proportions in step 1. 

# Appendix E: Lo cation of Republican Understatement in 

# Outcome Reweighted Polls 

Reweighting the available individual -level data to match the actual vote allows us to compare how the 

original proportion of Trump support in a county -based party stratum compares to the proportion 

estimated after reweighting the data to match the true proportion of vote (and method of voting) in that 

stratum. This approach can help identify whether the understatement of Trump support was more likely to 

occur in Democrat -leaning counties, Republican -leaning counties, or counties that were closely contested. 

Results weighted to county -level partisan strata allow for the adjustments to error s to be examined in terms 

respondents living in more Republican or more D emocratic counties. Although in conclusive because Biden 

supporters live in Republican counties and Trump supporters live in Democratic counties, such analysis help s

describe the nature of the polling error in 2020. 

To do this analysis, originally weighted electorate in each of the party strata in each state is compared to the 

electorate implied after reweighting the data to match the outcome. The proportion of votes cast in each stratum 

in the outcome reweighting can be compared with the original survey weights . W hether the original survey 

weights overrepresented or underrepresented voters in particular counties can be estimated from this 

comparison . For example, if the originally weighted data understated the proportion of voters in the most -

Republican counties , because of nonresponse or weighting adjustments , the n proportion of respondents living in 

those counties would appear to increase after the reweighting. 85 

For the proportion of Trump votes cast in each stratum, Figure E1 plots by st ate the difference between the 

original poll weights and the outcome -adjusted reweighting. 54 To explain Figure E1, consider the case of 

Wisconsin. The results suggest that the percentage of respondents living in High Republican counties is roughly 

unchanged after the reweighting (in fact it slightly decreases) . Hence, the original weights had roughly the correct 

percentage of voters from those counties. In contrast, the difference is around three percentage points for Lean 

Republican counties , mean ing that the originally weighted poll had too few respondents from counties that leaned 

Republican relative to the number required to make the poll results match the election results. 

The relationship varies somewhat across states . The largest understatem ent often occurs in toss -up or Republican -

leaning counties . In particular, the states with the largest understatement in Republican -leaning counties includ e

WI, MT, KS, IA, and NC. The states with the largest understatement in Toss -up counties include MI, PA, and FL. It is 

generally not the case that the largest understatement occurs in the most Republican or most Democratic 

counties.  

> 54 Beca use the strata sizes vary across states, the differences sum to one only after weighting by strata size.

86 

Figure E1. The Change in Electoral Composition for County Party Strata. Plotted data points represent the 

difference s between the original weights and outcome -adjusted weights as applied to estimate the proportion of 

the electorate in each party stratum at the county level. Positive values indicate that the outcome -adjusted 

weights estimate more Trump votes than the orig inal weighting. The polls analyzed are RBS telephone polls. 87 

# Appendix F: 

# Results of Reweighting Individual State RBS Polls 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 

# Appendix G: 

# Results of Reweighting Individual State RDD Polls 99 100 101 102 103 104 

# Appendix H: The Charge to the Task Force on 2020 

# Pre -Election Polling 

Charge to Task Force on 2020 Pre -Election Polling 

Evans Witt / Dan Merkle 

June 27, 2019 

AAPOR is committed to a fair and data -based evaluation of how the pre -election polls perform in the 2020 

elections in the United States. This analysis will build on the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on 2016 Election 

Polling, An Evaluation of 2016 Election Polls in the United States. 

Election years present particularly high profile moments for survey research. This is a time when polls dominate 

the media and the accuracy of polls can be confirmed or refuted by the actual election outcome. Sometimes, 

electi ons are followed by a chorus of concerns about “a crisis in polling” because when polls are “off” it makes for 

better headlines than when they are on -target. 

Pre -election polling is critical to our industry. Such polling can support the democratic process and it offers a very 

public opportunity to showcase the benefits, and weaknesses, of survey research. Therefore, understanding and 

being able to articulate the overall performance of pre -election polling, the changing methodologies being used, 

and the pot ential for variation in the accuracy of polls is vital for our industry. 

To support the collection and dissemination of such information, AAPOR will convene a panel of survey research 

and election polling experts to conduct a review of the 2020 pre -elect ion polls. The goals of the task force will be 

to: 

1. Evaluate the accuracy of 2020 pre -election polling for both the primaries and the general election on the 

presidential race and other races. To facilitate this analysis, the task force should attempt to g ather the 

necessary information for each poll on an on -going basis during the election season. 

2. Where necessary, examine why specific polls and/or methodologies failed to correctly estimate support for 

major party candidates, whether at the national level o r state level 

3. Review variation by different survey methodologies 

4. Identify significant differences between pre -election polls in 2020 and polling in prior election years including 

2018, 2016 and 2014. 

5. Create an archive of the data collected for the analysis for 2020 and for prior years, to enable AAPOR to 

continue this work in future years. 105 

An appropriately sized task force will be formed by Oct. 1, 2019, to begin work on the project. 

The task force will gather information on all publicly released p olls as follows: 

Required: All polls on presidential state primaries and state caucuses 

All polls on the general election for president at the national and state levels 

Should be included: All general election polls on races for U.S. Senate 

All general election polls on races for governor 

Data on pre -election polls conducted with field dates from Jan. 1, 2020, to Nov. 3, 2020, will be eligible for 

inclusion in the analysis. 

The task force should plan for a brief interim report on the performan ce of the polls in the presidential primaries 

by the end of July 2020. In addition, the task force will work with the Communications Committee and the 

Executive Committee on AAPOR statements about the polls during the 2020 campaign, as needed. 

The draft r eport of the task force should be ready for review by Council at its January 2021 meeting. The final 

report should be ready for review by Council at its February 2021 meeting. 

Once constituted, the task force will identify the steps needed to achieve the goals outlined here, including 

committee structure, data acquisition, planned analyses, report writing procedures, and any supplemental 

analyses, partnerships, or needed support. 

###
