Title: Japan-Philippines Summit Meeting (Summary) | Prime Minister's Office of Japan

URL Source: https://japan.kantei.go.jp/104/diplomatic/202510/26philippines.html

Markdown Content:
[Provisional Translation]

On October 26, commencing at 13:09 local time (14:09 JST) for approximately 20 min, Ms. TAKAICHI Sanae, Prime Minister of Japan, who is visiting Malaysia to attend the ASEAN-related Summit meetings, held a Japan-Philippines Summit Meeting with H.E. Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr., President of the Republic of the Philippines. The overview of the meeting is as follows.

(1) At the outset, Prime Minister Takaichi expressed her pleasure to hold a meeting with President Marcos soon after assuming office. She stated her desire to further strengthen relations with the Philippines, as a strategic partner, toward realizing a Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP). President Marcos congratulations to Prime Minister Takaichi on her appointment and stated his desire to strengthen relations between the two countries on the occasion of the 70th anniversary of the normalization of diplomatic relations.

(2) Regarding security cooperation, both leaders welcomed that Japan and the Philippines reached an agreement in principle on an Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA). They also welcomed the entry into force of the Japan-Philippines Reciprocal Access Agreement (RAA) in September this year, its first application this month to the joint exercise and the transport of support goods following the Cebu earthquake, and the progress of cooperation through the Official Security Assistance (OSA). Both leaders concurred on continuing working to strengthen the foundation for security cooperation that contributes to the peace and stability of the Philippines and the region.

(3) Regarding the economic sector, Prime Minister Takaichi conveyed Japan's desire to leverage its strengths to promote the resilience of the Philippine's economy and infrastructure. She also stated Japan's intention to contribute to the Philippine’s food security through the provision of equipment for post-harvest rice processing. President Marcos expressed his gratitude for Japan’s cooperation through ODA and stated his desire to further strengthen cooperation not only in ODA but also across a wide range of fields.

 Furthermore, Prime Minister Takaichi mentioned the signing of the MOC on comprehensive energy cooperation between Japan and the Philippines at the AZEC Ministerial Meeting in this October. Prime Minister Takaichi conveyed Japan’s intention to advance civil nuclear cooperation and to cooperate toward the success of AZEC next year.

(4) Next year marks the 70th anniversary of the normalization of diplomatic relations and the Philippines will assure the ASEAN Chairmanship. Taking this into account, both leaders concurred on continuing close coordination in addressing various international challenges, including the situation in the South China Sea, responses to North Korea encompassing nuclear and missile issues and the abduction issue, the situations in Myanmar, and the situations in the Cambodia-Thailand border areas.
