Title: 

URL Source: https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/2025.09.16-Letter-to-Epstein-Estate-Re.-In-Camera-Review.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 16 Sep 2025 17:47:50 GMT

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 3

September 16, 2025 

The Estate of Jeffrey Epstein 

Mr. Darren Indyke and Mr. Richard Kahn 

Co-Executors 

C/O Mr. Daniel Weiner, Esq. 

Partner 

Hughes Hubbard & Reed 

One Battery Park Plaza 

New York, NY 10004 

Dear Mr. Weiner: 

As you know, on August 25, 2025, the Committee issued a subpoena to the Estate of Jeffrey Epstein (Estate) for numerous categories of documents and information. 1 On September 8, the Estate made its first production of 358 pages. 2 Subsequently, on September 10 and 11, Committee staff conducted an in camera review of the following document categories in unredacted form: 

1. Cash Ledgers: These included six separate cash ledgers containing tens of thousands of 

individual payments. Some payments raise serious questions including those with the message line “massage” or “gift.” Many of those payments went to known survivors. There are also examples of Mr. Epstein paying thousands of dollars for multiple foreign visas and then women—seemingly of those nationalities—appearing in the ledger mere weeks later and receiving hundreds of dollars of payments for “gifts.” 

2. Message Logs: These included about 200 pages and a digital spreadsheet of Mr. 

Epstein’s missed messages. Some messages clearly indicated criminal behavior such as notes stating—“She is wondering if 2:30 is ok cuz she needs to stay in school,” “She doesn’t want to come to the movies, but call her if you want a massage before or after the movie,” “[Named Co-Conspirator] hasn’t confirmed [Female 1] for 11:00 yet, so she is keeping [Female 2] on hold in case [Female 1] doesn’t call back,” “I have a female for him,” and “has girl for tonight.” 

In addition to these messages, there are others that go directly to the failures of the U.S. Government in this case. As an example, on October 2, 2005, Sandy Berger—former    

> 1See Subpoena to the Estate of Jeffrey Epstein (Aug. 25, 2025).
> 2Letter from Daniel H. Weiner and Daniel Ruzumna, Counsel for the Co-Executors of the Estate of Jeffery Epstein, Hughes, Hubbard & Reed LLP, to James Comer, Chairman, H. Comm. on Oversight & Gov’t Reform (Sept. 8, 2025).

The Estate of Jeffrey Epstein September 16, 2025 Page 2 of 3 

National Security Advisor for President Bill Clinton—called Mr. Epstein and requested a call back. On October 20, the Palm Beach Police Department executed a search warrant on Mr. Epstein’s house, but it was described as “cleaned up.” 3 Mr. Berger also traveled on Mr. Epstein’s jet on September 24, 2005. Considering President Clinton’s known ties to Mr. Epstein, this raises serious questions of whether Mr. Berger warned Mr. Epstein of the impending raid. 

3. Calendars: These included about 1,500 pages of communications that detailed Mr. 

Epstein’s activities, including meetings, phone calls, and travel. These meetings included but are not limited to Tom Pritzker, Larry Summers, Noam Chomsky, Woody Allen, and Michael Wolff. It also included redactions for unspecified “privileged information” with no accompanying explanation as to what privilege was asserted. 

4. Flight Logs: These included about 3,500 pages of logs that detailed departure, arrival, 

time, and manifest information of thousands of flights taken by Mr. Epstein, Ms. Ghislaine Maxwell, associates, survivors, and others. 

While the Committee appreciates the ability to review these documents in camera , it is necessary for the Estate to produce full, unredacted copies. The language of the subpoena is clear and instructs the Estate to produce responsive records in “unredacted form.” 4 We are certainly aware, respect, and agree with the desire to protect the identities of survivors. Understanding that, the Committee will work with the Estate—in accordance with H. Res. 668—to ensure identifying information of any survivors is properly redacted prior to release. Receiving the documents in unredacted form is necessary for the Committee’s investigative and legislative needs. 

The Committee may use the results of this investigation to inform legislative solutions to improve federal efforts to combat sex trafficking and reform the use of non-prosecution agreements and/or plea agreements in sex-crime investigations. Additionally, the Committee is assessing possible legislation aimed at bolstering or otherwise amending laws aimed at ethics disclosures for elected officials. 

The Committee on Oversight and Government Reform is the principal oversight committee of the U.S. House of Representatives and has broad authority to investigate “any matter” at “any time” under House Rule X. 5 If you have any questions, please contact Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Majority staff at (202) 225-5074.          

> 3Sarah Fitzpatrick and Rich Schapiro, Ex-Florida police chief: Epstein case ‘the worst failure of the criminal justice system’ in modern times , NBC NEWS (Sept. 20, 2019).
> 4Estate Subpoena, supra n.1.
> 5Rule X, cl. 4(c)(2), Rules of the U.S. House of Representatives, 119th Cong. (Jan. 16, 2025).

The Estate of Jeffrey Epstein September 16, 2025 Page 3 of 3 

Sincerely, 

James Comer Chairman 

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform 

cc: The Honorable Robert Garcia, Ranking Member Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
