Title: CPY Document

URL Source: https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/commission_decision_volumes/volume-67/ftcd-vol67january-june1965pages430-534.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 04 Jun 2021 04:58:15 GMT

Markdown Content:
430 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint  

> IK THE

L'\TI' En OF  

> (;7 F.

A;\IERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORPORATIOX 

Docket X o. 8318 

BRISTOL- !YERS CmIP AXY , Docket 1'0. 8319 

PLOl:GH , IXC. , Docket No. 8320 

STERLIKG DRUG , INC. , Docket No. 8321  

> ORDERS

, OPINION , ETC. , IX REGARD '10 THE ALLEGED VIOLATION 

OF THE FEDERAL TRADE COl\BIISSION ACT   

> Dockets 8318,

8819/8320 8321. Comp aint8 . Mar. 14, 1961-

Deels-ions , Apr. , 1965 

Order \vithdl'awing complaints against four major drug manufacturers which 

charged them witb false and misleading advertising of their analgesic 

preparations , rescinding earlier orders to submit special reports , and 

denying one respondent' s motion for prehearing discovery on grounds of 

ruootness. 

COMPLAINT 2 

Pursnant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , having reason to be1ieve that American Home 

Products Corporation , he.reinafter referred to LS respondent , has vio-

lated the provisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commission 

that a proceeding by it in respect thereof would be in the public 

interest , hereby issues its complaint stating its charges in that respect 

as follows: 

PAHAGRAPH 1. R.espondent American Home Products Corporation 

is a corporation organized , existing and doing business under and by 

virtue of the laws of the State of Delaware , with its principal offce 

and place of business located at 20 East 40th Street in the city of 

New York , State of New York. 

PAn. 2. Respondent is now , and for some time last past has been 

engaged in the sale and distribution of a preparation which comes 

within the classification of drugs as t.he term " drug " is defined in 

the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

The designation used by respondent for said preparation , the 

formlllfL thereof and directions for use are as follows: 

1 Amended and Supplemental Complaint In the Matter oj Bristol-Myers Go. Docl,et  

> 8319 . dated July 25, 196!.
> 21n the Matte,. oj .Amen

can Home Prod1ICts Corporation Docket 1\0. 8318. AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 431 

430 Complaint   

> Designa tiOD: "

Auaein. 

Formula: Acetopbenetidin three (3) grains per tablet , aspirin , caffeine. 

Directions: One (1) to two (2) tablets with water. Repeat if necessary,   

> one (1) tablet every three (3) hOUfS.

PAR. 3. Respondent caused the said preparation , when sold , to be 

transported from its place of business in the State of New York to 

purchasers thereof located.in various other States of the United States 

and in the District of Columbia. Respondent maintains , and at all 

times mentioned herein has mainta.ined , a course of trade in said 

preparation in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. The volume of business in such comme, rce 

has been and is sllbstantia1.   

> PAR. 4. In

the course and conduct of its said business , respondent 

has disseminated , a.nd caused the dissemination of , certain advertise-

ments concerning the said Anacin by the United States mails and by 

various means in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act , including, but not limited to , advertisements 

inserted in newspapers , maga.zines , and other advertising media , and 

by means of television and radio continuities broadcast oyer networks 

through stations located in various States of the United States , and 

in the District of Columbia , and by means of other radio and tele-

vision continuities broadcast over stations having suffcient power to 

carry snch broadcasts across State lines , for the purpose of inducing 

and which were likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase 

of said Anacin; and has disseminated , and caused the dissemination 

, advertisements concerning said Anacin by various means , includ-

ing but not limited to the aforesaid media , for the purpose of induc-

ing and which were likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the pllr-

ehase of said preparation in commerce , as " commerce ': is defined in 

the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 5. Among and typieal , but not all-inclusive , of the statements 

and representations contained in said advertisements and television 

and radio broadcasts disseminated as hereinabove set forth are the 

following: 

Mere aspirin or even aspirin with buffering contains * '" Ii no special   

> medication to relax nervous tension. But .Anaciu is a

combi, nation 

medically proven ingredients , including special medication , which reJien's 

pain incredibly fast , also relaxes nervous tension and releases painfuJ    

> pressure on nerves.
> Better than aspirin or aspirin with buffering tor

TENSION HEADACHES 

Most headaches are caused by tension that presses on nerves.    

> Anacin contains special medicatIon that'" '" * relaxes tension * *

This        

> special medication is not obtainable in aspirin or any

'buffercd aspirin. 

Ladies Home Journal , February 1961. 432 FEDERAL TnADE CO L\fISSIO:\ DECISIONS 

G7 F, 

Video: 

Open profile 

headache. 

Complaint 

.Audio: 

of woman with Announcer: What causes a headache? 

> Start grering down to black

silhouette. 

Pop on large jagged word: 

Tension 

The word " Tension " zooms 

down to neck. Muscle fibers 

form. 

Muscles continue to twist. 

Pop on word " Tension 

'Vard " Tension " zooms down 

> to mid-

head area. Nerves   

> gTO\V and vibrate.

Announcer: (v. ) Doctors 

aches are caused by '" .. . know most head-

(Echo) * :I '" tension! 

Tension   

> ... *

* * ;; Tightens muscles 

# .. . 

Tension    

> '" '" '"
> puts nenes on edge.

Pop on: " Tension , Word Tension 

'" .. .. 

zooms down to front head 

area. 

Pain lines grow and flash. 

::luscles twisting nerves. Vi-

brating pain flashing. Word 

Pain " zooms out.     

> Block wipe to package, with
> titles: " Relax the Tension,

Relieve the Pain. 

Cut to profile of head. Title: 

Aspirin. Single line of     

> bu)jbles go to "

Pain. " Pain  

> lines reduce flashing.

erves 

and muscles continue action. 

Tite: " Add Buffering. " Single 

hne of bubbles go to " Pain. 

Pain lines relluce flashing.   

> ::ervesand muscles continue

action.  

> co. uses

pain'" '" . 

Announcer: (v. headache pain! 

Anaciu * * :; has special ingredients to relax 

the tension * '" .. as it relieves the pain fast! 

Look * * "' aspirin has only .one pain reliever-

> no special ingredient to relax tension.

Add buffering, stil nothing special for that cause 

of headache pain. 433 

430 

AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 

Complaint 

Video:  

> Title: "

Anacin. 

Pop on three lines of bubbles. 

Pain, nerves and muscles 

gradually stop acton. 

Pain lines out. 

Xerves out. 

)'Iuscles out. 

Match di.s. to live woma 

Wipe to split screen. Title:   

> Aspirin with Buffering

" on      

> left One stream of bubbles
> to pain area in head. Title:

Anacin " on right. Three 

streams of bubbles. Nothing  

> in head.

Block wipe to package, with    

> titles: " Relax the Tension
> Relieve the Pain.

Audio: 

But * '" '" 

'" .. '" Anacin has a combination of ingredients. 

To .. , .. relieve pain fast * '" .. 

> ,,'" .;

calm jittery nerves'" . . fast. 

> " '" * relax tension fast!

Woman: (sigh of complete relief) What relief! 

Announcer: Remember , aspirin even with buffer-

ing has no special ingredient to relax the 

tenson. 

Anacin '" * .. to relax tension as it relieves the 

pain. 

Lose titles. Zoom " Fast" out Anacin for fast'" '" '" fast.. * * fast relief! 

of pkg. Three times.  

> Truth or Consequences

" Show, National Broadcasting Company 

television network , August 26, 1960. 

Pop on title 

> , "

Anacin " with     

> three streams of bubbles to

three panels (panels are  

> titled "

Pain 

> " "

Depression 

and " Tension ). Action in 

## each immediateJy slows 

down.    

> Pain panel greys down.

IV ord " Fast" pops   

> of pain panel.

on in place fast. 

Anacin of the fonr leading beadache 

has special ingredients to .. '" * 

remedies 

relieve pain   

> "" * "'
> Depression panel greys down. Help oyercome depression

Word " Fast" grows and pops fast. 

off depression panel. 

> '" '" "'

434 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint 71'''T. 

Video: 

Te-nsi.on panel greys down. Audio: 

Relax tension" .. il 

Word " ast" grows and pops fast.   

> off tension panel.

Cut to include read (sic) pro-  

> jection screen

, on which is      

> split screen of two outline
> heads. Tite on left:

As-  

> pirin with buffering. "Single

stream of bubbles to first 

panel which is greyed down. 

Title on right: " Anacln"        

> \vith three streams of bub-
> bles to three panels

all 

> grayed down.

Remember-aspirin even with buffering 

has" .. *      

> out left half of screen.

no special ingredient for tension. Take 

Anacin. .. .. . 

Cut to pkg. pop on word " Fast" Anacin for fast.. .. .. 

in sync with audio. 

Pop on second word " Fast" 

nearer camera than first. 

fast" .. 

Zoom both words " Fast" onto incredibly fast relief. 

pkg. 

Sugar Bowl Football Game , National Broadcasting Company 

television network , January 2 , 1961. 

PAR. 6. Throllg-h t.he llse of said advertisement.s , and other similar 

thereto not specifically set out herein , respondent has represented , a.nd 

is now representing, directly and by implication: 

1. That Anacin acts with such incredible speed as to provide relief  

> of pain faster than any other analgesic preparation

available and 

offered for sale to consnmers. 

2. That Anacin relaxes tension. 

3. That Anacin helps overcome depression. 

\R. 7. The said advertisements were and are misleading in material 

respects and constituted , and now constitute , "false advertisements 

as that term is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act. In 

trnth and in fact : 

1. There is no significa, nt difference between the rate of speed 1"Vith 

"chich Anacin provides relief of pain and the rate of speed with which          

> other analgesic preparations available and offered for sale to con-

smners provide relief of pain. 

2. Anacin win not relax tension. Ao\1ERICAN HOME PROD1:CTS CORP. ET AL. 435  

> 430

Complaint 

3, Anacin will be of no benefit in the treatment of depression. 

PAR. 8. The dissemination by the respondent of the false advertise-

ments , as aforesaid , constituted , and now constitutes , unfair and de-

ecptive acts and practices , in commerce , within the intent and mean-

ing of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

A)IENDED AND SuPPLEl\IEKTAI COMPLAINT 3 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , having-reason to believe that Bristol-l\1yers Com-        

> pany, acorporation ,hereinafter referred to as respondent

, has vio-

lated the provisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commission 

that a proceeding by it in respect thereof would be in the public in-

terest , hereby issues its amended and supplemental complaint sta6ng 

its charges in that respect as follo-ws: 

PARAGRAPH 1. Respondent Bristol-l\fyers Company is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the 

Jaws of the State of Delaware , with its principal offce and place of 

business located at 630 Fifth Avenue , in the city of ew York , State 

of )i ew York. 

PAR. 2. Respondent is now , and for some time last past has been    

> enga.ged in the sale and distribution of two

preparations which come 

within the c1assjfication of drugs as the term " drug " is defined in the 

Federal Trade Commission Act. 

The designations used by respondent for said preparations , the 

formulas thereof and directions for nse are. as follows:    

> (1) Designation: "

Bufferln  

> Formula :-

Each Bufferin tablet contains five (5) grains of aspirin and 

Bristol-Myers ' brand aluminum glycinate and magnesium carbonate 

known as " Di-Alminate.   

> Directions ;-

Fol' simple headaches, discomforts of colds, neuralgias,    

> menstrual pain and minor muscular aches

, one (1) or two (2) tablets 

taken one (1) to six (6) times daily as neecl('d. For temporary relief                

> of minor arthritic pain two (2) tablets six (6) times daily as needed.
> (2) Designation: "

Excedrin  

> Formula :-

Each tablet contains: 

Acetophenetidin -

----- ------ ---- -------------  

> ----2111 grs.

Salicylamide -

--- -----

## ------ 2 grs. 

> Aspirin --------------------

----------- --------- ---   

> -21,4 grs.
> Caffeine ---------------------------------

---

# --- 1 gl's.  

> Directions :-

Adults take two (2) tablets with water. Repeat every three     

> (3) bours with one

01' two (1 or 2) tablets as needed or follow direc-

tions of your pbysician. Dosage should not exceed eight (8) tablets             

> per day. Children six to twelve (6-12) one balf (%) the adult

dose. 

In the Matter oj Bristol-Myers Company, Docket No. 8319. 436 FEDERAL TRADE COM:MISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint 67 11          

> PAR. 3. Respondent causes the said preparations when sold

, to be 

transported from its place of business in the State of N ew York to 

purchasers thereof located in yarious other Statcs of the United        

> States and in the District of Columbia.

Respondent maintains , and 

at all times mentioned herein has maintained , a course of trade in 

said preparations in commerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Fed-

eral Trade Commission Act. The volume of business in snch commerce 

has been and is substantial. 

PAll. 4. In the conrse and conduct of its said business , respondent   

> has disseminated

, and caused the dissemination of , certain ad, crtise-

ments concerning the said Buff' crin and Excedrin by the "Cuited 

States mails and by various means in commerce , as " commerce " is 

defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act , including, but not     

> limited to ,advertisements inserted in newspapers

, magazines , and 

other advertising media , and by means of television and I'a, dio con-

tinuities broadcast over networks through stations located in ntriOHs 

States of the United States , and in the District of Columbia , and by 

means of other radio and television continuities broadcast oyer sta-         

> tions having suffcient power to carry such broadcasts across State

1ines , for the purpose of inducing, and which were 1ikely to induce 

directly or indirectly, the purchase of said preparations; and has dis-

seminated , and eauscd the dissemination of , advertisements concerning 

said preparations by various means , including but not limited the 

aforesaid media , for the purpose of inducing and which were 1ikely 

to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase of said preparations in 

COlnmerce , as " commerce " is defined in the Federal Trade Commission 

Act. 

PAR. 5. Among and typical , but Hot all-inc1usive , of the statements        

> and representations containeu in said advertisements disseminated as

hereinabove set forth are the following:  

> (1) Bufferin

And to relieve headache , body ache and to lower fever , take Bufferin. Buf-

ferin adds special ingredients to its aspirin that rush the pain reliever into  

> our system. For milions Bufferin acts twi.e as last as o&p'irin.

Take Bufferin. The fR.st one. Good Housekeeping :.lagazine , February 1961. 

Yideo: Audio:    

> Scene of night

.street. Shot AnnCl": Tonight' s episode of Peter Gunn is 

from re r of lloving cnr. broug' bt to Ol1 by Bristol- ::Uyers , makers of 

Super: " Eristo1-::1 ers 

EnfIel'in bottle , pac'kf1ge. Bufferin. For faster re1ief of beadaches , Hell-

ralgifl , painful cold llj eries , t8ke Bufterin. 437 

430 

AMERICA1\ HO~E PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 

Complaint 

Video: 

Super on cue: " Twice as fast." Audio: 

Bufferin works twice as fast as aspirin for mil-

lions, thanks to its exclush' e Speed Ingredient 

Di-Alminate. 

Peter Gunn " Show , American Broadcasting Company 

television network , September 12 , 1960.       

> 1. (Open on) Dark screen with
> title: "

What' s the Greatest     

> Cause of Headache?"
> 2. (Wipe to) Reveal WOilan

feeding baby in high chair. 

Child spils milk. Super 

ension " up from zero. 

3. (Out to) Child fallng off 

tric;yclc. Super " Tension " up 

again. 

(Cut to) Woman in kitchen 

burning clotbes on ironing 

board. Super " Tension 

zooms up again. 

0). (Cut to angle shot of) Same 

,voman in bed , tossing, turn. 

ing. Clock in foreground. 

On \yord 

, " 

Suddenly, " .she put! 

hand to head. 

(Diss to angle shot of) 

IVoman on edge of bed, hold.  

> ing neck.

(Diss to angle shot of) 

Woman standing beside bed,  

> holding stomach.

8. (J)i s to) Dark gray back. 

ground. Bufferin bottle in 

center of screen. It moves to      

> left of screen ,reducing in

size as it goes. SnaIl in first: 

Relieves. " Thpn in order: 

Headache, Tig-ht ;\ervcs,  

> Jittery Stomarh.

AmICI': (VO) What' s the greatest cause of 

headache? '" . . 

It' s 'I' ension Sound: Ticking R!' of clock. It starts          

> 1m\' and builds til we reach the clock shot in

scene #3. 

Tension! Tension! 

When things go wrong, Tensioll can build up and    

> up! ...

Sudllenly '" * 'I you ve got a miserable headache! 

Nerves and muscle" tighten! 

Stomach feels uneasy'" '" . queasy!  

> Sound: Ticking

out. 

You need Bufferin! Bufferin relieves headache,  

> tight nerves , jittery stornach-,

fast! Look 

## . . . 438 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

67 F. T. 

Video: 

9. (Diss to) ' l'hree acid con-

tainers against med. gray 

wall. As each of first two 

tablets drop, super name 

under tube, but take it off       

> as SOOD as it has been read.

On " As You See, " pop on 

> arrow pointing to competi-

tive tubes where tablets are 

lying inactive. Then remove 

arrow atter " Happening. 

Bufferin tablet falls into 

righthand glass. It starts to 

disintegrate at once. Super: 

Bufferin " and leave it on. 

Super on cue over Bufferin 

container: " Fights head-

ache. " Then replace with 

Twice as Fast." 

10. (Zoom to) Close shot of 

Bufferin container, after 

dropping " Bufferin " super. 

Tablet now disintegrating 

very profusely. Put " Bufer-

in" super back again at end 

of zoom. Then super on cue: 

> Calms Stomach.

11. (Zoom back) We glimpse 

> the three tubes again mo-

mentarily.    

> 12. (Diss to)

Woman in bed, 

now relaxed and sleeping 

happily. Super: " Headache 

Relieved, 

> " "

Stomach 

Calmed/, " Nerves Relaxed. 

13. (Di8s to) Bufferin bottle, 

package and two tablets. 

Suggestion of bathroom tile 

background. 

Complaint 

Audio: 

Here s the most expensive aspirin '" '" '" and this 

combination-of-ingredients product, in ordinary        

> stomach acid. As you see , Dot much is

hap-

pening !    

> But instantly you see Bufferin spain-

reliever         

> start into solution to fight your tension head-
> ache! For milions, Bufferin works twice as
> fast a/! aspirIn.

And spreading 

stomach-are 

Di-Alminate. 

quickly-to calm your jittery 

tiny particles of Buferin with 

> Only Bufferin adds these stomach-

soothing anti-       

> acids to aspirin J
> Headache relieved -.

. stomach calmed. . -

and nerve/! relaxed! 

When stress and strain cause headache pain      

> ...take two Bu1lerin!

Candid Camera " Show , Columbia Broadcasting System 

television network .:arch 19, 1961. AMERICAN HOME PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 439 

430 Complaint 

> (2) Excedrin:

For headache, arthritis, sinus , cramps:  

> Ea:cedrin

combats cause of pain. 

New extra-strength pain reliever 

The symptom: Pain 

Microscopic tissue cells surround nerves, joints , passages. Swellng of tissue 

is the immediate cause of most pain. 

The immediate cause: Swellng 

When tissues swell and nerves are squeezed you feel pain. Swellng may 

occur anywhere. Pain is only its symptom. 

> The treatment: Excedrin

Excedrin is a multi-action compound to simultaneously reduce swellng-

relieve pain-make you feel " good all over, 

> Detroit (:Michigan) Free Press Rota,

October 11 and November 8 1959. 

> Swellng: the immediate cause.

\Vhen tissue swells the nerve is squeezed and stretched-you feel pain. This 

swelling may occur in the head, at joints , around passages , anywhere, 

Swellng is the immediate cause of most pain. 

Excedrin: combats the cause. 

Doesn t just dull senses , give pain special treatment (see nerve diagram). 

Reduces tissue sweIHng, relieves pain. 

Detroit (Michigan) Free Press Rota 

February 21, 1960. 

Video: 

Head shot of statue 

Audio: 

> Pain stries

# .. . 

Cut in on angle Man recoils'" .. . 

Cut closer more angle Agonized .. . .. 

CU of hand on head Demoralized. . . 

ECU cut to other statues bead Why?    

> .. ..
> Dolly back slowly

What. . . is the cause of pain. 

Zoom to full length statue Your body'" * . 

Animate nervous system has a network 

pain. 

of nerves. And only nerves feel 

Nerves spread out around body each nerve cell is surrounded by tissue 

Moye into statue dissolve to And when tissues swell 

tissues 

Show swellng, 

stretching 

squeezing, nerves are squeezed'" .. " stretched .. . 

* * * 'l' his is tl1e immediate cause of most pain. 

Pop on lab dots animate up From Bristol-Myers. .. .. 

then pop on Bristol-Myers 440 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint (:7 P. 

Video: 

Lab changes to 

with " Excedrin 

Strength PaiD 

zoom up. 

white bar 

and Extra 

Reliever 

> Pkg. forms around shape

Dissolve out pkg. to black pop 

on two tablets equaling 

three tablets.  

> Reyerse pain sequence above
> super Excedrin

as tissues 

reduce logo zooms back. 

Tissue cells back to normal 

Excedrin fades out.     

> Cut to statue bolding head.

ECU of statue eyes and nose. 

CD of cramps situations 

(and muscular acbes). 

Audio: 

comes Excedrin , the new extra-strength pain-

reliever to combat the cause of pain * . .. 

Excedrin * .. * combines more kinds of pain. 

relievers * li .. contains more quantity of ac-

tive ingredient. 

In fact two Excedrin equal three 

> pain tablets. * .. yet so safe you

prescription. 

ordinary          

> need no
> Excedrin simultaneously reduces swelling. **
> relieves pain **.

makes you feel " good allover 

## " . . . 

Now for relief of headache, pain       

> sinus, cramps *..
> Package and tite dissolve to * * * take Excedrin

" '" "The new Extra-

pkg. Zoom extra strength Strength pain reliever to combat the cause of 

pain reliever off box. :pain. 

Station WT:::1- , Milwaukee , 'Visconsin; Station WXYZ-TV , De-

troit , ),lichigan; Station WTOL-TV , Toledo , Ohio; Station 

WAKE- , Ft. Wayne , Indiana , on or about May 14, 1960. 

Bring on 3rd quarter , title: A tension relieYer to relax you 

> . . .

Tension Reliever. 

> Quickly animate

in to full pie 

depressant. 

4th quarter An anti. depressant to restore you. 

> title: Anti-

Pop on: 50% stronger. In fact, E:xcedrin tablets are 50% stronger than 

aspirin 

PAR. 6. Through the 11se of said advertisements , and others similar 

thereto not specifically set out herein , respondent has represented and 

is now representing directly and by implication: 

1. That Buffel'in provides relief from pain twice as fast as aspirin. 

2. That Bufferin wil relieve tension. A~ERICAX HO~E PRODPCTS CORP. ET AL. 441  

> 430 COWIJlaitlt

3. That Excedrin:     

> a. Is an extra-

strength pain relieyer , is fifty per cent (30%) 

stronger than aspirin , (l, ud that t\'"O (2) Exccdl'in tablets eqnal three 

(3) ordinary pain tablets. 

b. \Vill combat the CHuse of pain by reducing the swelling of tissue.    

> c. \Vill relicve tension.

d. " Will act as an anti- depressant. 

PAR. 7. The said advertisements , were and are misleading in mate-    

> rial respects and constituted

, and now constitute  

> , "
> false advertise-

ments " as that term is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

In truth and in fact: 

1. There is no significant differenc.8 between the rate of speed with 

which Buflerin prO\-ides relief of pain and the rate of specd with 

which aspirin provides relief of pain. 

. Bllffel'in ,\"ill not relieve tcnsioll.      

> 3. Excec1rin:
> a. Is not an extra-

strength pain reliever , is not ' fifty per cent. 

(50%) stronger than aspirin , and two (2) Excec1rin tablets do not  

> equal three

ordinary pain tablet.s in analgesic effect. 

b. 'Vill not recInce the swelling of tissue or otherwise conll:mt the   

> cause. of pain.
> c. 'Villllot relieyc tension.

d. ,Yil1not. act as flll flnti- dcpressant. 

\H. S. The elis.seminatioll by the respondent of the false adyertise-

Inents , as aforesaid, constituted, and now constitutes, unfair and rle- 

> ceptive acts and practices

, in commerce    

> , "\.,-
> ithin the intent anc1melln-

ing of the Federal Trade Commission .Act.  

> CO)IPL.\IXT 4

Plll'SlUlnt to the J1rO\'isions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by virt.ue of the authority yestec1 in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade Commission , haTing reason to believe that Plough , Inc. , a 

corporation , hereinafter reiened to as respondent , has violated the 

provisions of said Act , and it appearing to the Commissjon that a 

proceeding by it in respect thereof ,,ould be in the public interest 

hereby issues its complaint stating its charges 111 that respect as 

follows: 

PARAGBAPll 1. l espollc1ent Plongh , Inc. , is it corporation organized 

existing and doing business ullder all(l by virtue of the laws of the 

State of Deb" ware , \vith its principal offce and place of bnsiness   

> 4 In the Matter II

Plough , Inc. Docket No. 8320. 

379-702--71----442 FEDERAL TRADE CO),lMISSIOK DECISIONS 

Complaint li7 F,  

> located at 8022

Jackson Ayenne in the city of )Icmphis , State of 

Tennessee. 

PAH. 2. HespOlldent is nmy , and for some tilne last PllSt has been      

> engllgecl in the sale and distribution of a preparation ,yhich comes

within the classification of drugs as the term " drug " is defined in the 

Fedem1 Trade Commission Act. 

The designation used by respondent for said preparation , the for-

mula thereof and directions for use are as 1011ows: 

Designation: " St. Joseph Aspirin 

Formula: Each tablet contains five (5) gl'niIlS of aspirin. 

Directions: (Tal;:e) one (1) or two (2) tablets \\ itll ,yuter. ::Iay 1)( re-

peated eyery four (4) hOllrs. If pains persist , or arc ullllsnally severe 

physician. 

UL 3. Respondent canses t.he said prepnmtion \\-hen sold , to be 

transported from its place or business in the State of Te, nnesscc to 

> purchasers thereof located in various other States of the United

States and in the Dist.rict of Columbia,. Hespondent maintains , and  

> at all tiTnes

mentioned herein has maint.ained .l course of trade in 

> said prepa.ration in C011merce

, as " commerce " is (lefinecl in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. The \'olume of business in such commerce lws 

been and is substantial. 

\R. 4. In the course and conduct of- its said lmsiness , respondent   

> bas disseminated

, fmd caused the dissemination of , certain advertise-

ments concerning the said St. . Joseph Aspirin by the rnited States 

mails and by vrtriolls means in commerce , as " commerce " is defjnerl in 

the Federal Trade Commission Act , including, lmt not limited to 

> advert.isements inserted in ne'

i,spapers andmagazincs , and other ad-

yertising media and by meallS of television and radio continuities   

> broadcast over

netl\o1'1\8 t.hrough stations located in ynrious States 

of the LJllitecl Statps and in the District of Col1\mbia , anduy means of 

other radio and televIsion continuities broadcfl t O\- er stations hal-

sllflicient power to carry suc.h broadcasts across State lines , for the 

pnrpose of inducing, and )\-hic11 I,ere likely to induce , directly or in-

directly, the pllrchase of said S1: . Joseph A. spirin: and has dissemi-

nated , and cfll1sec1 the dissemination of , advertisements concerning 

said St. . Joseph Aspirin l)y nnious means , including but not limited 

to the aforesaid media , for the purpose of inducing tlnd Iyhich wpre 

likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase of said prep;1l,l-  

> tion in t:Ollllerce , as "

com1leree ' is defined in the Fe(1cral Trade 

Cornllission Act. 

-Ut. 5. Among and typical , but not all- inclnsiye of the staJ.pments 

and representations contained in said advertisements and teledsion AMERICAN HOME PRODVCTS CORP. ET AL. 443 

430 COllpln.int 

disseminated as hereinabove set forth are the and radio broadcasts 

following:  

> Heady to go to \York

taster than other 7c(l(ling paIn relief tablets.' , * Ii St. 

.Joseph Af'pirill "' , " is ready to go to work faster than an three other 

leading pain relief taolets. 

Ladies Home .Journal , February JOGI. 

For the * .:' ,:, fastest relief from headaches. pains and fiches of cohls flnd 

flu '" " * milions have fonnel ':' '" All thp)' need is Ii '" , St. Josl'1)11 

Aspirin " 

St. Joseph Aspirin 

> ';' .,

rclic' ver tested. 

is readl! to go to work faster tlwn any other !win 

La(1ie Home Journal , March 10;;$). 

Scientific Disintegration Test Proves "" llich Pain Relief ' l'ablet is the Fastest 

hl'n yon ha,e a headache , cold , feyer OJ" muscle pain , you want relief-  

> fast. St. Joseph Aspirin is

ready to go to work fastcr to ease your paiu and 

distress-faster than all three other leading l)(dn rcliet tablets.' 

The Birmingham (Alabama) Kews, January 18 , 1960. 

Scientific tests prove that St. J osepl1 Aspirin * Ii * actually starts to work 

faster than all three other leading pain relief tablets.  

> Radio StatIon

KXUZ Houston rexas , ':larcb 7 , 1960. 

PAR. 6. Through the use of said advertisements , and other similar 

thereto not specificially set out herein , respondent has represented and 

is now representing, directly and by impEcation , that St. Joseph 

Aspirin provides relief of pain faster than any other analgesic prepa-

ration a.vailable and offered for sale to consumers. 

PAR. 7. The said advertisements were and are misleading, in ma-

terial respects and constituted , and now constitute 

, " 

> false advertise-

ments " as that tenn is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

In truth and in fact , there is no significant difference between the 

rate of speed with which St. . Joseph Aspirin provides relief of pain 

and the rate of speed with which other analgesic preparations avail-

able and offered for sale to consumers provide relief of pain.      

> PAR. 8. The dissemination by the respondent of the false

advertise-

ments , as a.foresaid , constituted , and now constitutes , unfajr and de 

ceptive acts and practices , in c011n1eroe , within the intent and mean-

ing of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

COllPL.UXT ;) 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and by virtue of the authority vested in it by said Act , the Federal 

Trade COffllission , having reason to believe that StBrling Drug, Inc. 

In the MatteI. of Sterling Drll(), Inc. Docket Ko. 8321. 444 FEDERAL ' l'RADE COl\1MISSIOK DBCISIO 

Complaint 67 F. 

a corpomtion , hereinafter referred to as respondent , has violated the 

provisions of said Act , and it appea.ring to the COlnmission that 

proceeding by it in respect thereof would be in the public interest    

> hereby issues its complaint stating its charges in that respect as

foJJows: 

\RAGRAPH 1. H, espondent Sterling Drug, Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business uuder and by virtue of the      

> laws of the State of De1aware

, with its principal offce and place of  

> business located at 1450 Broadway in the city of

ew York , State of 

New York. 

PAR. 2. Respondent is now , and ror some time last past has been 

engaged in the sale and distribution or two preparations which come 

within the classification or drugs as the term " drug " is defined in the 

Federal Trade Commission Act. 

The designations used by respondent for said preparations , the 

formulas thereof and directions for use are as follows: 

(1) Designation: '; Bayer Aspirin 

Formula: Each tablet contains five (5) grains of aspirin. 

Directions: ':l'nke one (1) or two (2) tablets with water three (3) or 

fom' (4) times daily as required.    

> (2) Desig-nation: "

Bayer , \spirin for Cbildren     

> Formula: Each tablet contains one-anc1-one-quartcl' (ni) grains of

aspirin. 

Directions: 'Cndf'r three (3) years , as prescribed by pbysician; three        

> (3) to six (6) years , two (2) .to four (4) tablets; six (G) to twelve
> (12) yenrs

, four (4) talJlets. Dose may be repeated every three (3) 

hours but not more than three (3) times in one (1) day. 

PAR 3. Respondent causes the said preparations , when sold , to be 

transported from its place of business in the State of ew York to 

pnrehasers thereof located in various other States of the United States  

> and in the District of Columbia.

Respondent maintains , and at all 

times ment.ioned herein has maintained , a course of trade in said prep 

firations in commerce , as " commerce " is defllled in the Federal Trade 

Commission Act. The volume of business in such comInerec has been 

and is substantial 

PAIL 4. In the course and conduct of its said business , respondent   

> has disseminated

, and cansed the dissemination of , certain ad \ ertise-

ments concerning the said Ba.yer Aspirin and Bayer Aspirin for Chil-    

> dren by the united State mails and by various means in C01nmerce , as

commerce :' is defined in the Federal Trade COlnmission Act , includ-

ing, but not limited to , advertisements inserted in newspapers , maga 

zines, and other advertising media , and by means of television and 

radio continuities broadcast over networks through stations located IERICAK HOME PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 445 

430 Complaint 

in various States of the United States , and in the District of Colum-

bia" and by means of other radio and television continuities broad-

cast over stations having suffcient power to carry snch broadcasts 

across State lines , for the purpose of indueing and which were likely 

to induce , directly or indirectly, the purcl1ase of said Bayer Aspirin 

and Bayer Aspirin for Children; and has disseminated , and caused 

the dissemination of , advertisements concerning said Bayer Aspirin 

and Bayer Aspirin for Children by various means , including but not 

limited to the aforesaid media , for the purpose of inducing and which 

\'ere likely to induce , directly or indirectly, the purchase of said 

preparations in commerce , as ': cOInmcrce ' is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 5. Among and typical , but not a1l- inclusive , of the statements 

and representations contained in said advertisements and television 

and radio broadcasts disseminated as hereinabove set forth are the 

# following: (Bayer Aspirin) 

* * :   

> Bayer is ready to go to work -instantly, for the fastest pain relief you

can get. 

NaHonal Broadcasting Company, 

elevision Network , December 3 , lOGO,    

> (Bayer Aspirin for Children)

Bayer Aspirin enters the stomach as thousands of tiny flakes, to bring the 

fastest, gentlest relief your child can get from a headache or the pains and 

fewr of a cold. 

Good Ilousekf'eping magazine , Februal' y 1961, 

(Bayer Aspirin and Bayer Aspirin for Children) 

DA YER 

BRT:\TGS Ii'ASTES'l RELIEF:  

> . the fastest

, most gentle .to the stomach relief yDU can get from the 

aches , pai1Js and feyer of a cold 01' fin! 

Look magazine , February 14 , 1961, 

PAR. 6. Through the use of said advertisements , and other similar 

thereto not specifically set out herein , respondent has represented , and 

is now representing, directly and by implication: 

(1) That Bayer Aspirin proYic1es relief of pain faster than any 

other amdgcslc preparation available and offel'e, d for sale to con 

smners. 

(2) That Bayer Aspirin for Chi1c1ren jJroYic1es relief of pain faster 

t.han any other children s nna.lgesic preparation ayailnble and offered 

for sale to consumers. 

PAR. 7. The said advertisements "ere and arc misleading in material 

respects and constituted , and now constitute 

, " 

false advertisements 446 FEDERAL ' rRADE Co rMISSION DECISIONS 

Opinion 67 F. 

as that term is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act. In 

t1'n1:h and in fact: 

(1) There is no significant c1iflel'ence between the rate of speed 

",ith ,y\rich Bayer Aspirin provides relief of pain and the rate of  

> 8pe8(1 ,dtll

which other analgesic preparations ava.ilnble and offered 

for sale to consumers provide relief of pain. 

(2) There is no sig11ificant difference between the rate of speed 

with which Bayer Aspirin for Children provides relief of pain and 

> the rate of speed '

with \\'11ich other children s analgesic preparations 

ailable, and offered for sale to C01181111e1'8 provide relief of pain. 

\R. 8. The. dissemination by the respondent of the false advertise-

mcnts , as aforcsaid , const.ituted , and now constitutes , unfair and 

decepti, c acts and prnctices \ in commerce , within tbe intent and 

meaning of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

OPINTO:: OF TIlE CO:iDnSSIOK 

On ::Jarch 14 , 19G1 , the Commission issued four complnints charg-

ing rcsponllents therein \rith dissemination of false and misleading        

> advert.ising in connection\,jth their sale of analgesic products.

June 25 , 1962 , t.he Commission , being of the view that an investiga-    

> tion should be conducted to determine "hether other firms in the

in-

dustry were Lllscly Hch-ertising their analgesic prepa.rations and 

fU1ther , that the proceedings ' with respect to these fonr complaints 

should be suspended dl1l'ing such invest.igation , direc.ted thllt the fonr 

cases be placed npon the Sllspense calendar until further notice. 

On December 22 , 10G4 , Bristol-::ryers CompallY\ respondcnt in    

> Docket o. 8

, filed n motion ;' to dismiss the \\ithin proceeding 

with prejudice dne to faiJl1re of the Comrnission to proceed with          

> reasonable dispatch to conclude said proceeding, as required by

Sec,.  

> tion G(a) of the Adrninistra.tiye

Proccdure Act." In the altenwtive 

respondent Bristol- Iyers has moved that the Commission grant it 

leave to engage in ee, rtain discovery, by deposjtjon and JntmTogatory,  

> rLnd to suspend its duty to respond to a recent

Commission " Order to 

Submit Special HeporC nntil afte.r the cOlnpletion of such discovery. 

Complaint counsel oppose the motion to dismiss the proceeding " with 

prcjudice : and lnon in the alternatin-. that the complaint be dis-

mis ecl '; \\ithout prejudice. :: At the same t:lll( : complaint c.0l11sel have 

filed substantially identic tl motions to dismiss the compla.ints in the 

other three proceedings that have been suspended. Hespondents  

> In the Matters oj A,

merican Home l'rodllets COrl)" Docket :Ko. s:ns. istol-Jiyel.      

> Oompany, Docket No. S319 PIOIlJh

, Inc. Docket :Ko. S::;20, Sterli11!J DJ"lg, Inc. Docket 

> No. 8321.

AMERICAN H01JE PRODUCTS CORP. RT AL. 447  

> 431)

Opinion 

Bristol-:Myers , American Home Products , and Sterling Drug haye 

fied answers to the stafr motions , all objecting to a dismissal without 

prejndice.     

> During the period in "hich these fonr matters haTe been held in

snspense , the Commission has llndertakf'1 the general , industry-wide 

in,-estigation of analgesic acl\-ertising pre\- iously announced. Pursu-

nnt to a resolntion anthorizing ft general investigation of the advertis-    

> ing of analgesic products

, the Commission has ordered the filing of 

special reports by a number of companies who do not themselves sell 

any oyer-the-connter mutlgesic pl'odnct , but who are belim-ed to have 

conclucted tests ,yith reg1trd to the safety or eHicacy of such products        

> or their constituent drugs. Pnrsuant to the saHie resolution , the C0111-
> mission has also served ndc1itional orders to fie special reports

upon 

these four respondents and seyeral ot.her companies that are currently 

engaged in the advertising of over-the-counter analgesic products.       

> As aconsequence of acontinuing sU1Tey of the advertising of

anal-

ge.sic products , the Commission has become a ware of the prevalence 

of many aclyertising claims "\,hic.h may be sub.iect to question nnder 

Sections 5 and 12 of the Federal Trade Commission Act , but which 

are not fa.irly put in issue by the complaints in the foul' suspended 

proceedings. Thus , e,y cn if the Commission ,yere to determine that 

the, purposes specified in its . J nne 2:3 19(-;2 , order ,,-onld be best served 

by individual complaint proceedings under Section 5 (lJ) of the 

Federal Trade Commission . , it would not be in the public. interest 

to adjndicate the issnes raised by these f01ll' complaints as they no,,-

stand. 

,Vhile the Commission could onler amendment of the C'omp1aints 

in order to incll1de additional or (1iiFe.l'ent charge, , it seems more ap- 

> propriate in this instance

, in yie"\y of the lapse of time since the com-

plaints were issned and the relatiyely earJy stage to ,yhich the pro-   

> ceedings haye ac1yanced

: to "ithclra.w the complaints and institute 

any fnt-nre Section fj (b) proc.eedings by means of cntirely new com- 

> plaints. See

DI'uygist8 Sen. 'ice Cou1Jcil 117C. Doe-ket No. 8511 (order       

> issued :Yovember 1" 19(j.) fGG F.

C. 1124J. The Commission has 

eonclncle, c1 that the complaints heretofore placed upon the suspense 

calendar should now be withdrawn ,yithont an :Hljndic.atiol1 of the 

issues raised therein. 

Several of the respondents haye insisted that llny s11ch action of 

withdrawal or dismissal of the complaint should be made " with 

pre.illdice " whereas compJaint counsel hns strenuonsly nrged that 

be '; without prejlldiee. ' "lYe think this is a me, aningless controversy 

over labels which haye JittJe applicability here. The Commission 448 FEDERAL TRADE CO 1:MISSION DEClSIONS 

Order 67 \T. 

statutory duty in the investigation of analgesic advertising is to 

bring about a general compliance with the sta.ndards of the Federal 

Trade Commission Act for truthful and non- deceptive advertising,  

> should there be reason to believe that practices in the industry

depart  

> from those standards. If any of ihe

representations challenged by 

the Commission s 1961 compht.ints 1ul.ve been abandoned with the 

intention not to resume them , little , if any, pm' pose would be served 

by subjecting snch representations to chaI1ellge in some future Sec-

tion 5 (b) proceeding; and the Commission does not intend to do so.            

> Bnt if any of the advertising practices challenged by the 1961 COll1-

plaints have been continued without substantial modification , the                      

> mere lapse of time and the withdrawal of these complaints without
> an adjudication of the merits could in no event afford any vested

rights to engage in practices in violation of the law or preclude the 

Commission from taking whatever enforcement action under the 

Federal Trade Commission Act may be required by the law and the 

public interest. 

n is finally necessary to consider the effect of withdrawal of the 

compbints upon the Orders to Snbmit Special Reports , which were    

> servec1l1pon the respondents

flnc1 which have not yet , been returned. 

Althollgh the Orders bore the caption of the pa.rticular proceeding 

in which each of these four companies is named as a respondent , they  

> were issued pursuant to the

resolution whereby the Commission 

entered upon a general investigation of analgesic advertising and 

they were plainly not Inerely discovery orders incident to the eventual  

> litigation of those cases.

Consequently, it cloes not appear that with-   

> draw,tl of the complaints impairs the validity of the Orders unrler

Section 6(b) of the Federal Trade Commission Act. Nevertheless , in 

order to avoid any possible doubt about the continuing vaJiclity of 

the orders and , in addition , to provide an opportunity to consider the 

clarification or simplification of a number of the questions , the Com-

mission is now rescinding the Orders to Submit Specia.l Reports. 

OnDER \YITIIDR.\'VI )!PLAIXT AS TO RnrsToL-lIf x--:ns 

DOCKET No. 831 9 

CO)IPAXY 

APR1L 7 , 1065 

The Commission h:tving" issued its amended and supplemental C0111-

plaint in this matter and the proceedings with respect to the C01ll-

plaint having becn placed upon the suspense ca.1enc1ar until further 

notice by order of . Tune 25 , 1062; and NANCY GREER , INC. 449 

430 Syllabus 

The Commission haYing determined for the reasons stated in the 

accompanying opinion that the com plaint in the aboyc-eaptioned 

matter should now be withdrawn:    

> It is o/'duul

That (1) the complaint be , and it hereby is , with-

drawn; (2) the Order to Snbmit Special Report , issned to the above-

named respondent pnrsnant to the Resolution of SepteJnber 9 , ID64 

, and it hereby is rescinded; and (3) respondent s motion for pre-

hearing ' discovery and depositions be , and it hereby is , denied on the     

> gl'onnd of mootness.
> OnDEn 'V

ITHDRA WING C03IPL, Ui' TS AS TO A:HERICAX HO.:IE PnODUC'l'S 

C01:P. , DOCI\:ET Xo. 8318; PLOUGH , INC. , DOCKET Xo. 8320; STERI, ING 

DReG , INC. , DOCKET )fa. 8321 

APlUL 7 , 19G:' 

The Commission having issued its amended and supplemental com-

plaints in these matters and the proceedings with respect to the COll-

plaints having been placed upon the suspense calendar un61 further 

notice by order of June 23 , 1962; and 

The Commission lmving determined for the reasons stated in the 

accompanying opinion that the complaint in eaeh of the above-

captioned matters should now be withclra,Yll:    

> It i8 ol'le,.ed

That (1) the complaints be , and they hereby are 

withclrawn; and (2) the Orders to Submit Special Report , issued 

to the above-named respondents pursuant to the Resolution of 

September D , 19G-: , be , and they hereby are , rescinded.  

> Ix THE L-\TTER OF

NA)fCY GREER , I)fC. 

COXSE)JT ORDER ETC. , IX REGARD TO THE ALLEGED YIOL\.TlOS OF SEC. 2 (d) 

OF THE CL. \ YTOX ACT   

> Dockrt SGJO.

COnilJ/aint , June 30 , IDG, Decision , Apr. , 1965 l 

Consent order requiring a :\T ew York Cit - manufacturer of wearing apparel 

products , to cease making discriminatory payments for advertising, pro-

motional services , and other facilities and scrvkes to certain favored 

customers as compensation for promoting the sale of its wearing apparel 

products, by paying promotional allo"-ances of $4 499 during 1!)61 and  

> 951

during 1!)G2 to a favored customer in Philadelphia , ,Ybile not Ilakin  

> I 'i'

bis order was malIe effective on , Aug. D , 19G5 , see Abu!! Kel1t Co, ) Inc" et al. Docket 

No. ('- 325, et aI., AUg. 9 , 1DG5 , OS F. C. 39 450 FEDERAL TRADE CO LvIISSION DECISIOXS 

Complaint 67 E'. 

suell payments a Yailablf au proportionally eqnal tcrllS to n 11 cnstomers 

competing '1'ith faTOl'ed customer in the l':snJe of sucll 111'Odl1Cts of respond-

ent , a111 lJOstponing efIccti,f' date of the order until further onler ()f the 

Commission. 

C03IPL-I,IXT 

The :Federal Trade Commission , llfl\ ing reason to belicyc that the 

party respondent mllned in the Cllption hereof , and hereinafter more  

> rmrticuJarly described

, has yio1ated and is now violating the pl'od-

sions of subsection (c1) of Section :2 of the Clayton Act , as amended 

(li , TiUe 15 , Sec. 13), hereby issues its complaint , stating its 

charges \yit.h respect thereto as follmys: 

\R.-GR. -\PH 1. Bespondent , Xancy Greer , Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing lmsiness under and by " drtne of the 

la\ys of the State of Xe\y York 

> , ,,-

ith its offce and prineipal place of    

> business located at

1"1:00 Broadway, Xew York 18 , 1\ e\\ V York. 

PAR. 2. Hespondent is now and has been engaged in thc manu-

facture , sale and distribution of \yomell s dresses. Hesponc1ent sells 

its products to a large number of l'et:lil specinJty and clepartment 

stores located throughout the United St.ates. Hesponc1ent s sales of 

its products are substantial , l1fn ing exceeded $4 000 000 for t1lC fiscal 

year ending Angnst 31 , 1960. 

\R. 3. In the conrse and conduct of its business , respondent has 

engaged a, nd is now engngillg in commerce , as " commerce " is defined 

in the Clayton Act , as amended , in that respondent sells and causes           

> its products to be transported 1'rom its principal place of business

loeated in the State of jXe\'I York to custOlners located in other States 

of the United States an(l in the, District of Cohllnbia. There has been    

> at all time,

s mentioned herein a continuous course of trade in com-

merce in said products across State lines bet,,-een saidl'esponc1ent clllc1    

> its customers.
> -\1L 4. In

the course and conduct of it.s business in commerce , rc-

spondent paid 01' contracted for the payment 01 something of yall1e  

> to OJ" for the benefIt of

some of its customers as compensation or in 

consideration for seryices or faci1ities furnished by or through snch       

> cnstomo1'S in connection "ith their ofiering for s:tle or

:mle of products 

solel to t11en1 by respondent , nnd such payments were not. mal1e nYflll-       

> able on proportionrtlly equnl terms 10 all other c11stomers

competing 

> in the sale and (listribl1tion of respondent:

s prodncts. 

-\R. 5. Inc1lllec1 among t.he p:lyments alleged in Paragraph FOllr 

"ere credits, or sums of money, pai(1 either directly or indirectly by 

'Yll)T of dis(,ollnts ano" ances , rebates or c1ednctions , as compe, nsation 

or in consideration for promotional services , or faci1ities :furnished by XAXCY GREER , INC. 451  

> 449 Decision and Order

customers in connection with the offering for sale , or sale of respond-  

> cues products

, including ad \' ertising in va.rious forms , such as news-

papers , sometimes herei11ft fter referred to as promotional al1mvances. 

For example , during the yeaTs 19G1 and 1962 , respondent made         

> paynlents and allmYfl1ces to nlriolls customers in various trading

areas , inc.llding Boston Iassachllsetts lnd Philadelphia , PenIlsyl-

vania. , lor advert.ising its products in newspapers. During the years  

> 1D61 and

IDG2 respondent paid the . Jordan idarsh Company of 

Boston Jlassachnsetts promotional allowances in the amounts or 

8J)375. 64 and 82 753. , respectively. In Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 

during lU61 , respondent paid promotional aJlmnmces to Bonwit 

Teller and . John ,Va.namaker in the amounts of $400 and $-4 4UO , re-

spectiycl)' . During 1962 , the respondent paid $1 700 and $3 961 to  

> Bonwit Teller and

Tohn ",Vanamaker , respectively. 

Hesponc1ent did not make , or oner to lnake , or otherwise make 

available such allowances 011 proportionally equa.l , or anT, terms to 

all other cnstomers in Boston and Philndelphia. competing with those 

who reee.ived snch allowances.        

> PAR. 6. The acts and practices of respondent as alleged above are in

violation of subsection (d) of Section 2 of the Clayton Act , as 

amended by the Hobinson- Patman Act (l7. , Title 15 , Section 13). 

DECISION AND ORDER 

The Connnission issned its complaint. in this proceeding on . June 

, 1964 , charging respoJl(lent with vio1ations of Section 2 (d) of the 

Clayton A' as amended. The matter is presently before the Com-

mission upon certification by the hearing examiner of an agreement 

c.onbining a cOTlsentorder to ce.ase a.nd desist duly executed by respond-

ent. Complaint counsellHtye interposed no objeetion to acceptance of 

the agrcement containing the consent order to cease and desist. 

At the present tirne O\' e1' tv, O ll111dred members of this im111st.ry 

ha. ve exe. cuted agreements containing consent orders whidl are 

identical in all respects ,,,ith the purposed consent order tendered 

herein. The Commission lws accepted the conspnt orders from t.hese  

> other 1ne11bers of the industry

and has postponed the effectiyc dates 

of sa.id orders nnt.il 1nrthel' order. 

The order agreed to by the respondent. conforms in all respects to 

the order which t.he COlTrmission incllHled in the complaint as the            

> form of order it had reason to believe should issue a.fter a10rma.l

hen.ring upon the charges set forth in the compln.int.. Thus , acceptance 

of the proffered agreernent would obviate the expenditure of sllb-452 FEDERAL TRADE CQ:YD,nSSIOX DECISIONS 

Syllabus G. 1". 1', 

stantial time and 1l0lle3' in further bearillgs and would place. the 

respondent in the same position as other members of the industry 

charged with similar Ylo1ntions. In these circumstances , the Com-

mission concludes that. it is in the pnblic. interest to wain' . the pro- 

> visions 01

2.4 (d) of the TIldes of Praetice. 

Accordingly, the agreement is hereby accepted , the fol1owillg jnris-

dictional findings arc nwdc , and the follcrwing order is ente.red: 

1. Hesponclent K alley Greer , Inc. , is a corporation organized and 

existing uncler the b,ys of the St' ate of York , ""1th its ofIice and 

principal phce of business located at 1400 Broadway, XCI"\ York 

Ne"\ York. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the sllbject     

> matter of this proceclling and of respondent

, and the proceeding is 

in the public interest. 

> OHDEH

It , is ()i'le1'cd That l'espollch:mt Kaney 8reer Inc. , a corpOl'atio1l its 

OfICel'S 1 directors agents , rcpl'esentatjTes nud employees directly or 

through any corporate or other dcyicc , in the course of its business in 

commercc as " cOl1merce ' is defined in the Clayton Act , as amended 

do forthwith cease, and desist from: 

Paying or contracting for the payruent of anything of yalue 

, or for the benefit of any customer of the responde, nt as com 

pensation or in consideration for advertising or promotional 

services , or any other sen-ice or facilitY1 furnished by or tl1rough      

> sHch C1lstomer in connection with the lmndlillg, sale or offering

for sale of wearing appn. l'el products llflnl1factured sold or 

oflered for sale by respondent 11111e3s sneh payment or cOllsiclera-

ti011 is mode available on pl'oportional1y equal terms to all other 

C'ustomers competing with snch f LYOred custOlner in the distri-     

> bution or resale of such products.
> It 'i8

fwrthei' ordered Tlw.t t.he effective date of the order to cease 

and desist be , flnc1 it hereby is , postponed until further order of the 

Commission. 

Ix THE 1\L:\TTEIl OF 

CYK LES SPORTSWEAR IKC. ET AL. 

COXSEXT OnImH , ETC. , IX REGc \HD TO THE c \LLEGED VIOLATIOX OF THE     

> FEDERAL TR 'lE CCDDIISSIOX

..:) D THE . WOOL PRODUCTS L;\BELlXG . \CTS 

Docket 0-891. COlnp/a.i.nt , A1JT. 1965 Df'ci8ion , ApT. 1905  

> Consent order J'equiring a

ew York City impo:cter of wool prorlucts to cease 

violating the . Wool Products Labeling Act lJY misbranding the tiber content CYN LES SPORTSWEAR , INC. , ET AL. 453 

452 Complaint  

> of wool products, such as labeling

ertain sweaters as " 70% Mohair , 30% 

'Vaal " when said sweaters contained substantially different fibers and 

am01mts than represented , and using the terll ;' lohi1ir " ill lieu of the word 

'Vaal" on labels to describe certain fibers that were not entitled to such 

designation. 

IPLAIXT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act 

and the ' W 001 Products Labeling Act of 1939 , and by virtue of the 

authority vested in it by said Acts , the Federal Trade Commission 

having reason to believe that Cyn Les Sportswear , Inc. , a corporation 

and . Jack lIabel' and Samuel Haber individually and as offcers of 

sa.id corporation , hereinafter referred to as respondents , have violated    

> the proyisions of said Acts and the Rule,

s and Regulations pro-

mulgated under the ' \Vool Products Labeling Act of 1939 , and it. ap-

pearing to the Commission that a proceeding by it in respect thereof 

would be in the public interest , hereby issnes its complaint stating its 

charges in that respect as follm-n3:    

> PARAGRll.PH 1.

R-espondent Cyn Les Sportswear , Inc. , is a corpora-  

> tion organized

, existing and doing business under and by virtue of 

the laws of the State of Xcw York.  

> Individual respondents

Tack Haber and Samuel Haber are offcers           

> of said corporation and cooperate in formulating, directing, and con-
> trolling the acts

, policies and practices of the corporate respondent 

including the acts a, nd practices hereinafter referred 

Respondents are importers of wool products with their offce and 

principal place of business located at 989 Sixth Avenue , Xew York 

Xew York. 

PAJL 2. Subsequent to the effecti, e elate of the 1Vool Products      

> Labeling Act of 1939 , respondents have introduced into commerce

sold , transported , distributed , deJivered for shipment , shipped and 

oUered for sale in commerce as " commerce " is defined in said Act 

wool products as " wool product" is defined therein. 

PAR. 3. Certain of said wool products were misbranded ,yithin the 

intent and meaning of Section 4(a) (1) of the Wool Products Label-      

> ing Act of 1939 ancl the

1-ules and Hegulations promulgated there-

under , in that they ,vere falsely and deceptively stamped , tagged 

labeled or otherwise identified with respect to the character and 

amount of the constituent fibers contained therein. 

Among such misbranded wool prodncts , but not limited thereto 

were sweaters stmnped , tagged , labeled or otherwise identified as  

> containing 70%

Iohajr , 309d "\Vool , whereas in truth and in fact 

such sweaters contained substantially difIerent amounts of fibers than 

represented. 454 FEDERAL TRADE COMYISSION DECISIONS    

> Del'sion and Orc1er 67 F.
> P -,

'!R. 4. Certain of said wool products were misbranded in viola-  

> tion of the Wool Products Labehng

-\ct of 1939 in that they were not 

labeled in accordance with the Rules and Regulations promulgated 

thereunder , in that the tBrm " Jlohair " was used in lieu of the ,YOI'd 

IYool" setting forth the required fiber content information on labels 

affxed to wool products when certain of the fibers described as " Jlo-

lUlir :: ,vere not entitled to such designation in violation of Rule 19 of 

the Hules and Regulations uncleI' the 'V 001 Products Labeling Act of 

J939. 

> PAR. 5. The acts and practices of the respondents as set forth above

were , and are in violation of the ,Yool Products Labeling Act of     

> 1939 and the Rules and Regulations promulgated thereunder

, and 

constituted , and now constitute , unfair and deceptive acts Rnd 

practices and unfair methods of competition in commerce , within the 

intent and meaning of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

DECISION ).)JD OnDER 

The Commission having heretofore determined to issue its com-    

> plaint charging the respondents

named in the caption hereof "\vjth 

violation of the Federa.l Trade Commission Ad and the ,y 001 Prod-     

> ucts Labeling Act of 1939 nd the respondents having been served

with notice of said determination and with a copy of the complaint 

the Commission intended t.o iss11e , together with a, proposed fonll of 

> order; and

The respondents and counsel for the Commission having thereafter 

executed an agreement containing a consent order , an admission by 

respondents of an the jurisdictional facts set forth in the complaint 

to issue herein a statement that the sihr:ling of said agreement is for 

settlement purposes only and does not. constitute an admission by    

> respondents that. the Jaw has been violated as set forth in such com-

plaint , and waivers and provisions as required by the Commission 

rules; and 

The COllllnission , having considered the agreement , hereby accepts  

> sa,

, issues its complaint in the form contemplated by said agree. 

rnput. makes the following jurisdictiona.l findings and ent.ers the 

following order: 

1. Respondent Cyn Les Sportswear , Inc. , is a corporation organized 

existing and doing b118iness unde, r and by virtue of the laws of the 

State of New York with its offce and principal place of business 

located at 989 Sixth Avenue , in the city of :Yew York , State of New 

York ALASKA1\ FeR CO. , INC. ) ET AL. 455 

Syllabus 

Respondents . Jack IIaber and Samnel Haber are offcers of said 

corporation and their fl(lclress 1S the same as that of said corporation. 

2. The Federal Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the subject 

matter of t.his proceeding and of the respondents , and the proceeding 

is in the public interest.  

> OTIDER
> It i8 o'lylel'ed

That respondents Cyn Les Sportswear , Inc. , a cor-

poration and its offcers , and Jack I-Iaber and Samuel HaDer , indi-

vidual1y and as offcers of said corporation , and respondents ' repre-

sentatives , agents and employees , directly or through a, ny corporate    

> or other deyice

, do forthwith cease and clesist from introducing into 

commerce , or ofrering for saJe , selling, transporting, distributing, or  

> delivering for shipmcnt in C011lnerce

, ',001 s,yeaters or any other wool 

products , as " C0l11nerCC " and " ,yool prodlld" are defined in the ,Vaal         

> Products Labeling Act of 1939.
> 1. ,Vhich arc falsely or deceptively stamped

, tagged , labeled 

or otherwise identified as to thc character or amount of the con-

stituent fibcrs contained therein. 

2. To "hieh is affxed a label \"herein the term " ::Uohair " is 

used in lieu of the ,yard " 'YooF in setting forth the required 

information on hlbels affxed to sllch \"001 products unless the 

fibe1' s described as " ::Tohail' h arc entitled to such designation and 

arc present. in at least the amount stated,     

> It is furtltei' o)"lei'N/

Tlwt tIle respondents herein shall , within 

5ixt v (GO) days after selTice npon them of this order , file ,vith the     

> COJnmission areport in

'Yl'iting setting- forth in det.nil the' milnner 

and form in which they have complied with this order. 

I X THE ::L\.TTER OF 

AL. \SKAX Fun CO IPAXY , IXC. , ET AL. 

CONSEXT onDER , ETC. , IX REGJ. RD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATION OF THE 

> FFDEHAL TH.

\DE COJDITSSTOX . \.XD THE F-en rRODTJCTS LI.BELIXG ACTS   

> Docket C-8.9'2.

Complaint , Apr. lDC5- Decision , Apr 1,905 

C())sent order requiring KanSflS City. ?l10. , J'etni!ers and wllOlesaJers of fur 

products to cease mislnbeling, falsel . iu\'oiring, nnd deceptively advertising      

> fur products in violation of the Fl1 Prollucts Labeling Act

, lJy failing to 

disclose on labels the country of origin of importerl fnrs , failing t.o use the 

term " atural" on laiJels , illi"oices , and in ne\vspaper advertisements to              

> describe furs which are not blPrlched ,df'l ,or artificially colored

, failng 456 FEDERAL ' fRADE CO:\L\lISSIQX DECISIO 

CompJaint 67 F. 

to show the true animal name of furs on invoices an(1 in ;1clH' tispments   

> misreprescnting saYings in

nC'YSl'apel' ads and window signs throngh 

fictitious prices , and failing to llwintain rulEquatl' records to :'11PPOl't "nel1  

> pricing claims.

COJIPLAIXT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Felleral Trade Commission Act 

and the Fl1 Products Labeling Act and by virtue of the authority 

vested in it by said Acts, the. J, cclernl Trade Commission haying rea-

son to bclie'iT e that Alaskan Fur Company, Inc. , a corporation , :iUeyer 

Finkel Iyron W' flng and L Leonard )larkcl , inc1i'i- iclually and as 

offcers of the said corporation , hereinafter referred to gS respondents 

have violated the pl'oYisjons of sajc1 Acts and the Rllles flncl Regula-

tions prolTlllgrded uncleI' the Fur Products Labeling Act , and it ap-

pearing to the Commission that. fl proceeding by it. in respect thereof 

\fonld be in the pnbJicilltel'est , hereby issues its complaint stating its 

charges in that respect as follo\fs: 

\R-\.r;n, APH 1. Ahslmn Fur Company, Inc. , is a corpol'ation orga-

nized , existing and doing bnsiness under and by virtue of t.he laws of 

the State of JIissonri.  

> Respondents

feyer Finkel , Myron ,Yang and M. Leonard :'farkel 

are oficers of the c.orporate respondent and formulate , d1rect flnd con- 

> trol the acts

, practices flnd polic.ies of the sflic1 corporate. respondent    

> inc.luding those hereina iter set forth.

nespondent.s are retailers and \flwlesalel's or fur products \Vith 

their offce and principal place of business lomted at 1107 ,VaJnnt 

Street , l\.ansas City, ::lis80111'i. 

\T. 2. Snbseqnent to the effective date of the Fur Products Label-       

> ing Aet on J\ngust D,1932

, respondents have been and arc nm'; en-

gaged in the introduction into commerce , and in the sale adY81't.ising,       

> and ofrering for sale in commerce

, find hI the transportation and 

distribution in commerce , of fur products; and llfl e sold , advertised  

> oftered for srde

, transported and distributed inr products which haTe 

bee. n made in hole or in part of fnrs which haTe been shipped and 

receiyed in eommerce as the terms " commerce. 

:: " 

fur :' and " fur prod-

ucC fire define(l in the FlU' Prodnds LabeJing Act. 

PAIL 3. Certain of sHid fur products were misbranded in that they        

> \Yere not labe1ecl as regnired nnder the provisions of Section 4(2) of

the Fur Products Labeling Act and in the manner and form pre-

scribed by the Rnles an(l Regulations promulgated therennder. 

tmong snch misbranded fur prodncts : but not limited t.hereto , were 

fur products Iyith labeJs which failed to show the country of origin     

> of the imported furs contained in the fur product. AIJ

ASKA FUR CO, ) INC. , ET AL. 457 

455 Complaint 

\R. 4. Certain of said fur products "ere misbranded , in viobtion 

of the Fur Products Labeling Act in that they were not labeled in 

aec.ordance wit.h the Rules and Regn1ntions promulgated therennder 

inasmuc.h as the term " naturar' "as not used on labels to describe fur 

prodncts which "- ere not pointed , bleached , dyed , tip-dyed , or other-

,,1se artificia.l1y colored , in violation of Unlo 19(9) of said Rules and 

Reglllations. 

\T. 5. Cert.ain of said fur products "ere falseJy and decepti,-ely 

iu\' oiced bv the resoondents in that they \\e1'e not invoiced as re-

# -' 

qllired by Section D(b) (1) of the Fur Products Labeling ,,\.ct and the 

Rules and Regulations promulgatednnder s11ch Act. 

Among such faJsely and c1ecepti rely invoiced fur prodncts , but not  

> limited thereto

, were fur products covered by invoices which faDed: 

1. To show the trnc animal name of the fur nsed in the fur procInct. 

2. ' To disclose that the fur contained in the fur proc1nct. was 

bleached , dyed , or otherwise artificially colored , \\11en snch was the 

fact. 

3. To s11mv the conntry of origin of inlported fill's nsecl in fnr 

products. 

\R. G. Certain of srdd fur prodncts were falsely and deceptively 

invoiced in violation of the Fur Products Lahe1ing Act in that they  

> \',
> ere not inyoiced in accordance

ith the Hules and Reg-lllations 

prollulgated thereunder inasmuch as the term " Xatl1ral' was not 

used on invoices to describe fur products which "Were not pointed 

bleached , dyed , tip- dyed or otherwise art1fieially colored in \-ioJation 

of Rule 19(9) of' said Rules anc111eg111ations. 

\R. 7. Cert.ain of saiel fllr products \yere :falsely and clecepti,- ely 

flcl\ertised in violation of the Fur Proc1ncts Labeling Act in that 

certain advertisements intended to aiel , promote and assist , directly 

> or indirectly, in the sale and offering for sale of sllch ful' products

\\ere not ill accordance with the provisions of Section :5 (a) of said 

ct. 

\.mong: and included in the aforesaid adyertiseme, nts : but not 

limited thereto , "ere advertisements of respondents "h1('11 appeared 

in 1ssnes of the I(nnsas City Times , a. newspaper published in the  

> city of Kansas City, State of

Iissouri. 

.Among snch false and deceptive nc1yel't.isements , but not limited 

thereto , ",yere advert1sements which failed: 

1. To show the trne animal name of the fur llsed in the fur product. 

2. To show that the fnr contained in the fur product, TIas bleached 

dyed , or otherwise artificially coJored when sl1eh "as the fact. 

379-702--71--458 FEDERAL TRADE COM1HSSIO:\ DECISIO::,m 

Complaint 67 F. 'l. 

PAR. 8. Respondent.s falsely and deeept, ively ac1\Certisecl fur prod 

ucts , in vio1ation of Section 5 (a) (5) of the Fur Products Labeling          

> Act and Rule 44 (a) of the Rules and Reg-

l1Jations promulgated there-

under by representing, directly or by implication , through oral state-

me. nts , statements appearing in newspapers such as " A:-.,TXUAL AFTER 

> TI-

L\XKSGIYING FUR OLE.-\IL-\XCE SA, 

> " "

U:NBELIEYAI3LE FASHIOXS AT 

PR1:-CHRTSTl\L\S SALE PRICES 

> " "

AFTER Cl-I1USTlIL-\S SALE ycn CLEARAXCE 

\X"GARY Fun CLEAR. \XCE SALE.    

> ""
> 'V:E l\IDST HAYE XO C.. \RRY

n8; 

Dun EXTIRE STOCK IS OFFEllED AT DDIEDlATE CLEARANCE rIllCES 

> " "

JA".-

L\RY FFR CLL\lL-\XCE j TO I 01"1" " and window display signs con-

taining such stat.ements as ' :'L\XE\RY FL'R CLEAR. \XCE " and " EXTlRE 

!'TOCK DRASTICALLY REDUCED: )IAXY ' CP TO -1 OFF OTHERS BELOW COST 

that the prices or sueh fur products ' were reduced rrOln the actual 

bona fide prices at "hich the rcspondents ofj'ered the products to the  

> public on a regular basis for

fl, reasonauly snbstantial period or timc 

in the l'rcent regular course or business and the al1l0unt of snch pnr-

ported rednc60n constitnted saTings to pnrc.hasers of respondents        

> rUI' products. Tn truth and in rnet

the purported reductions "ere 

l'cclllC'tions rrom the respondents ' ticketed prices which were fict.-

tious in that they "\yere inflated prices set forth on tbe labels affxed 

to such fur products and wpre not actwd bona fide prices at which 

respondents had sold the pl' odl1cts intended to sell the products , or 

had ofl'ered the products to the pnbI ic on a regular basis fm' a rea-   

> sonably substantial period of time in the recent

regulaI' course of 

business an(l the said flll' prodllcts "\\ere not reduced in price, s as  

> re,presented fl1d

st1ying:s y, ere not atforded purchasers of respond-

ents : fnr products as l'eprescntccl.  

> \n.

8. D T means of the n-roresaid adn rtisements a,nd others of 

similar import and meaninp' not. specifically referred to herein 

re, sponc1ents falsely and c1ecepiiyeIy ach' ertisecl fur products in yio-

lation of the Fur Products I", abelin : Act in that said fllr products 

were not. acln'rtisecl in ,l('Col'clance with the H, ules and Regulations 

promulgated thel'cuhde.r i11asmuc11 as the term " Natural' 

> : '

was not 

used to describe fnr proc111cts which "\yere, not pointeel , bleached 

dyed , tip-dyed or othel'yisc artificially colored in violation of Eule     

> 19(9) of said Bules and Regulations.

PAl:, 10, In adn l'tising fllr products for sale , as a,fol'esaic1 , re-

spondents made pricing chims anc1l'cpl'eselltntions of the types cov-        

> ered by snbsections (a), (iJ), (c) and (d)

of Rule '11 of the Rcgnla-

tions lIndeI' the Fnr Products Ltlbeling Act. Hespondents in l1mking  

> s11eh claims nlld representations fniIed to

maintain fnn an(l ade,quate 

records disclosing the. facts upon "\\"hic11 snch pricing claims and ALASKAN FeR co. , INC. , ET AL. 459  

> 455

Decision and Order            

> representations were based ,in violat.ion of R.nle 44 (e) of the said

Rules and Regulations.      

> PAR. 11. The aforesaid acts and practices of respondents

, as herein 

alleged , arc in violation of the Fur Products Labeling Act and the 

Hules and Regulations promulgated thereunder and eonstitnte un-     

> fair and deceptiye acts and practices and

unfa.ir methods of e01l1- 

> petition in

eommerce 1mder the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

DEcrsIOx AND OmJfn 

The Conunission haying heretofore determined to issue its com-    

> plaint eharging the respondents

named in the enptioll hereof i\ith 

violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Fur Prod-

ucts Labeling Ad , and the respondents having been served with 

notice of said determination and ,yith a copy of the complaint the 

Commission intended to issue , together i\ith a proposed forul 

order; and 

The respondents and counsel for the Commission lmving there-

after executed an agreement conto,ining a consent order , an admis-

sion by respondents of all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the 

complaint to issue herein , a statement that the signing of said agree-

ment is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an 

"dmission by respondents that the law has been violated as set forth  

> in such eOlnp1a-int

, aull "aivers and provisions as required by the 

COl1mission s rules; and 

The CommissLoll , halTing considered the agreement , hereby ac-

> cepts same

, issues its compJaint in the :form contemplate(l by sa.id 

agreement , makes the folloi\ing jllrisdictional findings , and enters   

> the following order:

1. Respondent Alaskan Fur Company, Inc. , is a corporation 

organized , existing and doing business under nnd by ,irtHe of the 

laws of the State of ::Iissouri w ith its offce and principnl place of   

> business located at 1107 ,Yn.Jnut Street

, Kansas City, :Missouri. 

l1esponden!s Meyer Finkel , Myron ,Yang and ;II. Leonflrd hrlml 

are offcers of the. corporate respondent and their address is the same      

> as that of the corporate respondent.

2. The Federal Trade C0l11nission has jllrisd iction of the subject         

> matter of this proceeding and of the respondents , and the proceed-

ing is in the public interest. 

> onDER

# It ,;s O1ylered That respondents Alaskan Fur Company, Inc. , a 

corporation and its offcers , and :\Ieycr Finkel lyron ,Yang and 460 

Decision and Onlel' 

FEDERAL TRADE C01L\IISSION DECISIONS 

67 F.  

> Leonard

Iarkel , individually and as offcers of snicl corporation and 

respondents ' representatiycs , agents EUld employees , directly 01' incli-

rectly, or through any corporate or other (lEwice in connection "itll    

> the introduction into cornmercc or the sale

, ad ,-ertising or offering     

> for sale in commerce

, or the transportation or distribut.ion in com- 

> merce of any fur product;

01' in connection ,,-jtll the sale , ad ye1'ti8-

ing, offering fol' sale , transportation or clistl'ilmtion , of any fur 

product '\,hi('h is made in \yhole or in part of fur which has been 

shipped -and l'eCeii' ec1 in commerce as the terms " cOlnmerce  

> ""

fur 

and " fnr product" are defined in the Fur Proclucts Labeling Act do 

forthwith cease and desist. from: 

. :\IislmuHling fur products hy:  

> 1. F'

ailing to affx J(1)(ls to f1lr products showing in 

,yards and in figHl':S plainly legible all of the infonnfttioll           

> reqnired to be disclosed by eftch of the subsections of Sec-

tion 4 (2) of the Fur Produds Labeling Act. 

2. Failing to set forth the terJn " atul'aP as part of the  

> information required to be

disclosed 011 labels uncleI' the        

> Fnr Products Labeling Act and the Hnles and Regulations

promnlgated thereunder to describe fnr products whic.h are       

> not pointed ,bleacheel ,dyed , tip-

dyed or otherwise. arti-

ficially colored. 

13. Falsely or deceptiyely invoicing fllr products by: 

1. Failing to furnish jn'i oices as the term '; ill'i oi('e : is 

defined in the Fur Products Labeling Act showing in '''' ord8 

and figures , plainly legible all the information required to 

be disclosed in each of the subsections of Section 3(b) (1)      

> of the Fur Products Labeling Act.

2. Failing to set forth the term " llatnrar as part of the 

information required to be disclosed 011 invoices nnder the 

Fur Products Labeling Act and Rn1es and Regn1ations 

promulgated thereunder to describe fur products which      

> ere not pointed , lJleached ,dyed , tip-

dyed or othen,ise 

artificially colored.     

> C. Fa.lseJy or deceptively advertising fnr

prodnct.s throngh 

> t.he use of any ach-

ertisement , representation , public announce-

ment or notice \\ hich is intended to aid , promote or assist 

directly or indirectly in the sale or offer1ng for sale of any fill' 

product , and which: 

1. Represents , directly or by 

or ot henyisc , that a purchase of 

> imp1ica.tion in ad,"

ertising 

responc1ents : product made HAND:vACI-ER CO. , INC. , ET AL. 461  

> 'lG:J

Syllabus 

t less than the ticketed price or purported regular or 

fonner price , is a reduction from or savings on such price 

11nle. ss the. respondents are able to establish that such price  

> , in fact

, the regulnr bona fide price at ,dlich the said 

respondents hayc sold or expect to make substantial sales. 

2. Fails to set forth in ,yords and figures plainly legible 

all the information l'e()uirec1 to be disclosed by each of the  

> subsections of Seetion

(a) ot the Fur Products Labeling 

Act. 

3. Fails to set forth the tenn " XaturaF as part of the in-

formation reqnired to be disclosed in advertisements lUlcler 

the Fur Products Lt\'beling Act and Rules and Hegnlations 

pro111ulgatecl thereunder to describe fur prodncts which are 

not pointed , bleacl1ed , dyed , tip- dyed or otherwise arti-  

> ficially colored.
> D.

Ia.ldng c1fljms and representations of the types covered 

by subsections (0), (b), (c) and ((1) of Ru1e '14 of the Rules 

and TIegu1ations promulgated under the Fur Products Labeling 

Act unless there are mainta.ined by respondents fulJ and adefIuate 

records disclosing the facts upon whic.h sueh claims nnd repre-

sentations arc based.      

> Itis fw,thei' oTde1'

That the respondents herein shall , within   

> sixty (GO)

days after service npon them of this order , file with the 

Commission a report in writing setting forth in detail the manner 

and form in which they have complie, d ",ith this order.  

> 1::\ TI-IE

L'lTTEn OF 

HAXDMACHER CO. , IXC. , ET AL. 

COXSEXT ORDER : ETC. : IX nEG. o'l. RD TO THE ALLEGED YIOL. \ TIOX OF THE 

J.EDEnAL TRADE COJBIISSIO:X . \:XD THE FUR FRODrCTS LABELIXG ACTS 

Docket C-893. ComplaInt , A1Jr. , 1965 Decision , .API' , 1965     

> Consent order requiring CJ1icago

, Il1" retailers of fur products , to cease mis-

branding, falsely flIHl deceptively invoicing and adTertising their fur prod-

ucts by misrepn:sPllting prices of fur prodncts on lnlJels , all invoices , find 

in adTcrtiSCllcnb; flS redlH-'ed from preTailng retail prices   

> , ",-
> hen the 80-

callcd retail prices ,,.ere fictitious , failng to llaintain adequate records to          

> Sl1bstantiate pricing and percentage claim:" failng to use the

term ;; ?\atul'al" 

on inToices to describe fnr products ,,.hich 'lE'l'e not bleached or clyed, and 

failng to sho,,. on inTakes the true animal name of furs, 462 FEDF,RAL TRADE CO:\E\IISSIO DECISIONS 

Complaint G7 F. ' 

COl\IPLAIKT 

Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Tnlc1e C0111ni88ion Act 

and the Fur Products LabeJing Act and by virt.ue of t.he aut.hority     

> 'iv est.cel in it

by said Acts , the Federal Tea, de Commission ha.ving 

reason to ueJieTe that I-Iandmacher Co. , Inc. , a eorpOl'atioll , formerly   

> I-Ianc1macher Campau)'"

, n partnership and Abner T. l-Iarris and 

Philip Hanc1macher , formerly copartners trading as Hanc1macher 

Company and hand-moor , and Abner T. Harris and Philip IIand-

macher , individually and as officers of saiel corporation , :formerly    

> eopartners trading as

Hanc1mad1er Company and hanel-In DOl' , here-     

> inafter referred to as respondents

! hayc violated the provisions of 

said . cts and tlle I\ulcs and Hegllbtions prol1111gateclllucler the Fur 

Products Lrtbeling Act , and it appearing to the Commission that a. 

proceeding by it in respect thereof ,"ould be in the public interest 

hereby issues its corn plaint stating its charges in that respect as 

fo11ows: 

RAGInPH 1. Respondent Hanc1machel' Co. , I11e. , is a corporat.ion 

organized , existing and doing business under and by virtue of the 

> In-

ws of the State of IlIinois , formerly I-Ianc1machel' Company, a     

> partnership and Abner T. IIarris and Philip I-landmachcr

, formerly    

> copartners trading as

IIandma.che.l' Company and hand-moor and 

\bner T. Harris and Phi1ip Handmacher , indivichlllly and as off- 

> cers of said corporation

, fonner1y copartners hacling as Hand-

maeher Company and hand-moor. Indivic1nal respondents Abner    

> Ha.rris and Philip I-fandmachcl' arB offcers of the snjd corporation

and t.hey forl1lllate , direct nnd control the acts , practices and poli-

cies of the sflid corporation. 

liespollc1f'llts are retailers of flll' products " with their offce and     

> principal place of hn8jnes8 located at 216

"'Vcst . Jackson Boulevard 

Chicago , IlI-nois. 

\R. :2. Subsequcnt to tIle e:f' eetiye clate of the Fur Products Lflbel-

iug Act on Augnst D , 10;:;2 , respondents have been and are now 

engngecl in the introduction into commerce , and in the snJe , advertis-

ing, and oft' ering for sa.le in commerce , and in the transportation 

and distribution in commerce , of fur products , anc1lwTe sold , adver-

tised , otIcred for sale , transported and distributed fur products 

'Iyhich llf,- e been made in whole or in part of furs which llaye been      

> shipped and recci\'cd in commerce

, as the terms " commerce  

> ""

fur 

and " fur proc111c. a.re defined in the Fur Products Labeling Act. 

\H. 3. Ccrtflin of said f11r products were misbranded in that they 

were falsely and deeeptiyely labeled or otherwise falsely and cle-HAND:\IACHETI co.. INC. ET AL. 463  

> 161

Complaint 

cepti..' e.y identified , in violation of Section 4 (1) 01 the Fur Products 

Labeling Act.  

> Among

31ch falsely and dcce.pti,' ely labeled fnr prodncts but not   

> limite.d thereto was a. fur product ",ith

a. label affxed thereto which   

> cont.ained a stat.ement " Retail Price---

S175. 00 Discount Pricc-J\Iuch 

Less. :: By meallS 01 the aforesaid statement respondents represented 

eit.her directly or by implication , that sl1bstantiaJ sale.s of such fur 

product had been Inade in the respondents : trade area at the indi-

cated (; Hetail Price " of $175. , and that. savings were afforded t.he            

> purchasers of said fur prodnct. In truth and in fact the indicated

Retail Price : was fi( titions in that it 'i\"IS in excess of the prices 

lyhic11 substantial sales of such fur product 'irerc made in t, 11e re-

spondents ' trade area and the indicated sltvings were not anorded 

pnrchascl's of snell fur prodncts as represented. 

m. 4. Certain of said fur prodllets Iyere :falsely ancl deeepti,' ely     

> inyoice.d by the respondents in thnt

they were not invoiced as re-

quired by Scdion D(b) (1) of the Fnr Products Labeling Act and       

> the Rules awl Hegulations pronmlgatec111nder snch Act.

Among snch fa1scly and decq)ti rely illyoieed fur pro(lncts , but    

> not limited thereto

, were fur products con red by inyoices ,yhich        

> failed to sho-n' the true anil1nl mlIne of the illr

llsed in the fur 

product.  

> PAR.

5. Respondents falsely rmc1 deceptively iw:oicec1 fur products      

> in violation of Section D(b)

(:2) of the Fur Prodncts Labeling Act 

by setting forth on inyoices the statement " Prices AJ,yays Bclo\T 

Hetair' thereby representing that tIle prices of respondents ' fur 

products \'ere always belo,,' the retail prices charged for s11ell prod-    

> ncts in the respondents

' trade area 1\, 11en in t.ruth and in fact re-

spondents prices of fllr products ,yere not ah,ays belmy the prices      

> charged for ful' products in the respondents

: trade area. 

PAl:. 6. Certain of said inr prodncts 'irere fa.lsely and c1ec.eptiyely 

inyoiecd in \' iolat.ion of the Fur Proc1ncts Labe1ing Act in that they 

were not invoiced in aC'c.ol'c1ance 'i'lith the RnJes 8.nc1 I- eguJatiolls 

promulgated thereunder in the follO\ying respects: 

(a) Jnformation re uircd nndoj' Section D(b) (1) of the Fur 

Products Labeling Act and the Rules and Regulahons promn1gated 

thereunder was set forth on inyoices in ablJrm' irttec1 form , in yioh       

> tion of Rule 4of said Hules and Regu1alions.

(b) The term '; naluraJ' : was not used on il1yoices to describe fnr 

products which were not pointed , bleached , dyed , tip-dyed , or other-

wise artlficially colored , in violation of Rnle 19 (g) of said Rules and  

> Regula hans.

464 FEDERAL TRADE cO:.UnSSION DECISIONS 

Complaint G7 F.    

> PAR. I. Certain of said fnr products were falsely and deceptively

achert.ised in \'iol:tion of the Fnl' Products Labeling A. ct in that 

cCl'ta:in advertisements intended to aid , promote and assist , directly 

or inclil'ectly, in the sale and offering for saJe of such fur proclncts 

were not in accordance ,yjth the pl'01-isions of Section 5(a) of the 

said -i \ct. 

Amon and included ill the aforesaid ach ertisel1ents , but not  

> limited thereto

, \\'er8 adrcrtisements of respondents which appeared 

in issues of the Chicago Tl'ilmne , a newspaper published in the city   

> of Chicago

, State of l1linois. 

Among such false and deceptive nc1vertisements , bnt not limited 

thereto , \\ere :lch' crtisements wherein respondent.s falsely and de-

> ceptively nd,-

ertisecl 1nr products in that said advertisements rep-

resenteel that the prices of fur prodncts were reduced from respond-

ents ' fonner prices anel that the amount, of such price reductions        

> aflonled savings to the pUl'chnsers of respondents fur products. In

trut, h and in fact the alleged former pric.es were ficti60ns in that 

they 'Y€l'C not actual , bona fide prices at ,,' hich respondents offered 

the fur products to t, he public on it reg-nlar basis for a reasonably               

> substantial period of time in the recent regular course of business
> aw) the said fnr products ,yere not reduced in price as represented

and t.he represented savings were not thereby afforded to the pur-

chasers , in violation of Section ;:i(a) (5) of the FnI' Products Label-

ing Act ancl Hnlc Ll4-(a, ) of the Rulesandl egulatiolls promulgated 

under the sajd -, 

> '\_

ct. 

\TI. 8. In advertising fur products for sale as aforesaid, responcl- 

> ents represente,

d through such statement.s as " Guaranteed Savings of    

> 30% to 3or%

that prices of fur products were reduced in dire,     

> proportion to the percentages stated and that the

amount of said 

reduction afforded savings to the purchasers of respondenis product 

when in fact snch prjces were not reduced in direct proportion to 

the, percentages stated and represented sayings "ere not t.hercby 

af!'ol'led to the said j)nrchasers , in violation of Section 5(a) (0) of 

the FlU' Products Labeling Act. 

PATI. 9. Hesponclents falsely and clecepti' Fcly advert.ised fIll' prod-

ucts , in Yiolation of Section ;'(00) (3) of the Fur Products Labeling 

Act 'end Rule 44 (a) of the said RuJes and ReguJations in that labels 

affxed t.o fllr products misrepresented the retail prices of sneh fur 

products ill the respondents ' trade area and misrepresented the sav-

ings anliL-Lble, to purchasers of respondents : fur products.  

> Among such falsely and deceptively

Lclvertised fur products hut    

> not limited thereto

, was a. fnl' product with a label affxed thereto HAXDMACHER CO. , IJ\C. , ET AL. 465  

> 461

Decision fwd Order 

which contained a statement " Retail Price- -$173. 00 Discount Price 

:Much Less. " By means of the aforesaid statement , respondents 

rcpresented either directly or by implication that subst.antial sales 

of such fur product had been made in respondents ' trade fireo. at: the 

indicated " Retail Price ' of $173. 00 and that savings \\-e1'e, afforded      

> pnrchasers of snell fur product. In truth and

:in fact the indicated 

Retail Price " "as fictitious in that it was in excess of the prices at 

> ,,-

hieh substantial sales of such fur product were made in the re-

spondents ' trade area and the indicated savings \\" ere, not afforded         

> purchasers of said fur products as represented.
> PAR. 10. In ndvertising fur produets for sale , as a,foresaic1

re-

spondents made pricing dnims and representations of the types cov-     

> cred by subsections (n), (b), (e) and (d) of Hule 4' of the Hegll-

lations under the Fnr Prodncts Labeling Act. Hcsponc1ents in mak-

ing such claims and representations failed to ma.intain fnll and ade-

qnate records disclosing the faets npon \\-hich snch pricing e1aims     

> and representations werc based

, in vioJation of Rule 44(e) of the    

> said Rules and Hegn1ations.

PAR. 11. The aforesaid acts an(l practices of responden1:s as herein 

a.Jlegecl , arc in violation of the Fur Products Labeling Act and the 

Hu1es and Regulations promnlg:atecl therennc1er and constituted 111-  

> fair and decepti'ic

e acts and practices anclllnfair methods of competi-

tion in commerce nnder the Federal Trade Commission j\.ct. 

DECISIOX _ \xn Onm:n 

The Commission having heretofore determined to issne its com-    

> plaint charging the respondents

named in the caption hereof \yil:h 

violation of the Federal Trade Commission Act and the Fnr Prod-

ncts Labeling Act , and t.he respondents having been ser'i' ed ,,1t11 

notice of said determination and with a copy of the complaint the 

Commission intended to i8sne , together ith a proposed form of 

order; and 

The respondents and counsel for the Commission hnxing there-          

> after executed an agreement. containing" a consent order , an admis-
> sion by respondents of all the

iUl'is(lic.tional facts set fort.h in the 

complaint. to issue herein , fl. statement that the signing of sai(1 n !.Tee-

ment is for settlement pnrposes only and does not constitute an 

admission by respondents that the 1a" has been vjolnted as set forth  

> in such comp1aint

, and waiyers and provisions as reqnired by the 

Commission s 1'u)es; and 

The, Commission , haying consi(1erec1  

> cepts same

, issnes its complaint in the t.he agreement , hereby ac-

form contemplated by said 466 FEDERAL THADE CmI'MISSIO DECISIO:-S 

Decision nncl Order aT F. 

agrcement makes the follm\-ing jurisdictional finding' , and enters 

the following order: 

1. Hesponc1ent Hn. nc1mache.r Co. , Inc. , is a corporation organized 

jstillg flud doing business nnder and by yirtue of the laws of the 

State of Illinois , formerly I-Innc1macher Company, a partne, rship 

and Almer T. Harris and Philip I-Ia, nc1llftcher , fOl'merJy copartners 

trading as Ilandmflcher Company and hand-moor. Individual re-

spondents Abner T. Harris and Philip Handmacher are offccrs of      

> the said corporation , formerJy copa.rtners trading as

Hanc1macher 

Company and hand-moor. 

Responc1ellts offce and principal place of business is located at 

21 () "\Vest. Jackson Boulevard , Chicago , Illinois. 

2. The Fe.c1ernl Trade Commission has jurisdiction of the snb:iect 

matter of this proceeding and of the, respondents and the proceeding 

is in the public interest..  

> ORDER
> it is oi'deJ' ed.

That respondents IIandnwcher Co. Inc. : a corpora-

tion , formerl T Ilandmacher Company, a partnership and Abner T.     

> l-Ian'is and Philip Ilanc1macher

, formerly copartners trading as 

J-Inndmacher Company and hanc1-moor , and its offcers and Abner             

> T. FIarris and Philip IIandmftcher ,individually and as offcers of
> the said corporation

, formerl)' copa.rtners trading as l-Tanc1macher 

COlnpany and hand- moor , and respondents ' representatives , ftgents   

> and empJoyees, directJy or throngh any corporate or other device

c.onnection ,yith the introduction into commerce , or the sale" nc1," er-

tising or o.tfering for sale in commerce , or the transportation or    

> distribution in commerc.e , of any inr proc1nct: or in connection

ith  

> the sale

, ad\' ertising oflering for sale , transportation or dist.ribution  

> of flny fur product

hic.h is made in whole or in part of fur which 

has been shipped anc1 recei'i- ed in commerce as the terms " commerce 

fnr and " fnr product" fire def-ned in the FIll' Products Labeling 

Act , do forthwith cease and c1esist from:  

> A.. )'1isbmnding fur proch1Cts by:

1. Hepresenting, directly or by impJication on labels, that 

' price whether accompanied or not b descriptiyc 

terminology is the price of fL fur product in the respond-

ents ' trade area when it is in exeess of the price at whieh 

snbsbntial saJes of sncll fur pl'oc1ncts are made in t.he re-

spondents ' trade area. 

2. )'1isrepresenting in any manner the sfLvings available 

to pllrc)wse.rs of respondents ' lllr products. HA:;,W1Y.1ACHER co. ) IKC. ) ET AL. 467 

4Gl Decision and Order 

B. Falsely and deceptively in,. oicing fLlr products by: 

1. Failing to fnrnish in ,' oices as the term "invoice 

defined in the Fur Products Ll1beling Act sho\Ylng in 

,vords and figures pIa. inly legible an the information re-          

> quired to be disclosed in each of the subsections of Section

5 (b) (1) of the Fur Products Labeling Act. 

2. Representing, directly or by implication on invoices 

through such statement llS " Prices Alwa.ys Below Retail" 

or words of similar import and meaning that respondents 

prices of fur products are always below the retail prices 

charged for sneh products in the respondents ' trade area 

when respondents ' prices are not alwa. ys below the retail 

prices charged for such products in the respondents ' t.rade 

area. 

3. Setting forth information required under Section 

5(b) (1) of the Fur Products Labeling Act and Hules and 

Hegulations promulgated therenuder in abbrevint.ec1 form.  

> 4. Failing to set forth the ter11 "

naturaF ns pa.lt of the 

information required to be disclosed on in\'oiees under' the 

Fur Prodnds Labeling Act and I-ules and Hegulatiolls 

promulgated t.hereunder to describe fur products which are 

not pointea , IJlenehecl , dyed , tip- dyed , or other\fise a.rtifi-     

> daJly colored.
> C. Falsely or deceptivel

y advertising fur products through 

the use of any advertisement , representation , pubbc annonnce-

ment or notice. which is intended to aid , promote or nssist     

> directly or indirectly, in the. s

lle , or oifering for sRle of a fur 

product and " which:      

> J. Hepresents directly or b, implication that any price

whether accompanied or not by descriptive terminology is   

> the responc1ents

fonner price of fur prod nets \fheH sneh  

> a.mount is in excess of the actual

, bona. fide price at which       

> respondents oilcrec1 the :fur products to

t.he public on a 

regubr basis for :1 reasonably substantial period of time 

> in the recent regnlar eourse of business.

2. He.presents directly or by implication that any price 

whether accompanied or not by descriptive terminology is 

the price of a fur product in the. respondents ' trade area 

when -it is in excess of the price at which substantial sales 

of such fur products are made in the respondents ' trade 

area. 468 FEDERAL TRADE COMivlISSION DECISIONS 

Order 67 F. 'l' 

3. J epresents directly or by implication through per-

centage saTings claims that prices of fur products are re-

duced to aHord purch"sers of respondents ' fur products the 

percentage of savings stated when the prices of such fur 

products fire not reduced to a,fforcl to purchasers the per-

centage of savings stated. 

4. Jlisl'cpresents in any manner the savings available to 

purchasers of responc1ents fur products.  

> 5. ltalsely or deceptively represents in

tny manner that 

prices of rcsponc1ents fur products are reduced. 

D. JIaking claims and representations of the types coyel'ec1 

by subsections (a), (11), (c) "nd (d) of RuJe 44 of the RuJes 

and RegnIntions promulgated nuder the Fur Proc1ncts Label 

iug Act unless there are Hmintaincd by respondents fnl1 and 

adequate records disclosing the facts npol1 which snch claims 

and represcntations are based.     

> It is fU1'thet, 0I'del'

That the respondents herein shall , wit.hin 

sixty (60) doys after seryice upon them of this order , file with the 

Commission n report in writing setting forth in detail the manner 

and form in whjch they have complied with this order. 

I X THE :.1.-\ TTER OF 

CORa, IKC. , ET AL. 

:-IODIFIED ORDER , ETC. , IX nEGARD TO THE ALLEGED VIOLATIOX or THE 

FEDERAL ' TRADE CO:-DIISSION \CT 

Docket SB4G Complaint 

, .   

> 1W. , 1D01

))cc!.si()/I , ApI". , 196.        

> Ordcr mOl1ifying. in accordrtnce "ith a final decree of the Court of .App('als
> First Circuit. of Nov. 10

, 1964 , 338 1;' 2d 149 , 7 S. &D. 1022 , by deleting refer. 

cnre to Gerald E. Rosenberger individu!ll1;-T , from the Commission s cease      

> and desist order of ::ov. G

19G3 63 F. C. llG4 , in the absence of (',idence        

> of personal involvement in the corporation sparticipation in unl:lwful

conduct. 

:.IODIFIED ORDEn TO CEASE " \im DESIST 

Hespondcnts h", ing fiJed in the l:nited States Court of Appe"Js 

for the First Circuit fl. petit.ion to review and set aside the order to 

ceasc and ,1esist issued hcrein on Koyember G , 1963 (G3 F. C. 1164J; 

and the conrt on Kovember 10 , 1964. L7 S. &D. l022j, l1D. ving  

> Jlderec1 its decision

, and entered its final decree mo(liiying and 

as modified , afHrm-ing and enforcing snid order to cease and desist; 

and the rnitcc1 States Supreme Court having denied a petition filed CORD , lL'fC. ) ET AL. 469  

> 4GS

Order 

by respondent , Coro , Inc. , for writ of certiorari to the conrt of 

appeals for review of said decision and final decree; 

Now theTe!01' , it i8 hereby ordeTed That the aforesaid order to 

cease and desist be , and it hereby is , n10clified , in accordance with          

> the said final decree of the court of appeals

, to read as follows:    

> It is ordered

That respondent Cora , Inc. , a earp oration , and its 

oifcers , a.gents , representatives and employees , directly or through 

any corporate or other del/ice , in connection with the offering for 

sale , sale or distribution of costume jewelry, watches or any other 

merchandise , in commerce , as " commerce ' is defined in the Federal 

Trade Commission Act , do forthwith cease R. nd desist frOlll:       

> 1. Representing directly or by implication , on catalog insert

sheets , on color posithres for the printing of such catalog shp-8ts 

or on price lists , or in any other manner , that any amount is 

the usual and regular retail price of merchandise when such 

amount is in exeess of the price at which such merchandise is 

Ilsnally and customadly sold at retail in the trade area or areas 

where the representations are Inade.  

> 2. Supplying

or placing in the hands of , any distributoL 

dealer or other purchaser , catalog sheets or other materials 

which are displayed to the purchasing public and which con-

## tain an indicated retail price for respondents ' merchandise 

when the indieatedretail price is in excess of the ge. nerally pre-

vailing reta.il price for such merchandise in the trade area or 

when there is no generally prevailing retail price for snch mer-

chandise in the trade area. 

3. Furnishing to others any means or instrnment:ality by or 

through which the pllblic may be misled as to the generally pre-

vttiling retail prices of respondents ' merchandise. 

4. Putting into operation any plan whereby retailers 01' otllers 

may misrepresent the usnal and regular prices of sl1ch mer-

chandise. 

5. Hepresenting directly or by implication that any prodnct is       

> guaranteed unless the terms and conditions of snch guarantee

and the manner and form in which the gnarantor ,,,ill perform 

are clearly and conspicuously set forth. 

6. Hepl'escnting that any product is guaranteed when fl. sen-  

> ice or other charge is imposed

, unJess the amount thereof is 

clearly and conspicuously set forth. 

I t is . f1. lTtheT oTCZeTed That respondent Cora , Inc. , a corporation 

and its offcers , shaJl , within sixty (60) days after serriee upon them   

> of this order

, file with the Commission a report , in writing, setting 470 FEDEHAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

67 F. 

which they have compliecl :forth in detail the manner and form in 

\\-

ith the order to cease and desist. 

Ix THE )lATTER OF 

IAGXAFLO CmIPAKY , IXC. , ET AL. 

onm:H , ETC. , IX HEG. um TO ' n-IE ALLEGED VroLATION 01" THE FEDER.4..J 

TRADE GO::DIISSIOX ACT   

> nockcf 2:2.

Complaint , .TIme 1961-Decision , Apr. 1, 1965      

> PU1'snant to aremand of the case by the Court of Apveals. District of Colnmldn

Circuit , 343 F. 2cl 318 , 7 S. &D. 1112 , ,d1ich prohihited a manufacturer of a        

> hattery additive from using the trnrle name HLifetime Charge

" the Com-

mission adopted a suPVlementary initial decisioll which reaffrmed tlll  

> original onlp1' issued Dec. :26

, 1863. 63 F. 'l' C. 202- , the responde11t baYing 

iu(licatcd thM it did not ,"yish to continue the proceeding. 

.1/1 . John 1V. Bi' ooJ,field and Jh' Sheldon Feldman supporting 

the Complaint. 

Jii' Aloel't A. Oaj'retta of CWTcttu OOllnihan Attorney for 

respondent , J\Iagnaflo Company, Inc. 

Jl?' lVeostei' fJ. Hal'JYliwn pro se.  

> l'l)

LE::IEX' L\L IXITL\L DECI8IOX, ox REJL\Xn BY , JOSEPH 'V. KX,(;TJL\X  

> ::L-\RCH 17 : lDG:)

An order of the Comm1ssion dated February 18 

\" mail Friday, FeunmrT HI : 1963 states as follows: 

The Uniter1 States Court of Appeals for the District of Columuia Circuit. b

its judgment entered on Feuruary 4 , 1965 , haYing- remanded this ca3e for tlw 

further proceedings directed in its opinion of the same date:              

> It is orrl,cred That tile matter be, and it hereby is , reopened.
> It is further ordered.

That the matter be , and it hereby is. remalJ1ed to 

Berning Examiner Joseph 'Y Kaufman for such further proct'E'1ings , inclm1inf: 

hearings , as are necessary to comply fully with the directions contained in the 

ollinion and judgment of the Court that respondent be given an expet1itious and 

full opportnnity to show that its trade name can be limitrll by" tbe use of 

Qualifying ,yords so as to make unambiguous tlJe claim that its product ,,-

conserye battery" charge and prolong battery effl'ctiYenf'ss.   

> It i8 .further on7ererl" l'hat the hearing examiner

, upon comp1etioll of the 

further pJ'ol'eer1ings, shal1 tile a supplemental initial decision \J lsed upon tJw 

record made prior to the remand and any adtltional evidence tlwt may" he 

received. 

19G5 , and served 

Pursuant to the direction in s:tid order to eomply with the judg-

ment of the Conrt of Appca1s , that respondent i\Iagnaflo Company, MAGNAFLO CO, ) INC. ) ET AL. 471   

> 470 Initial Decision

Inc. , be given an " expeditious and full opportunity to show that its 

trade name eRn be properly qualified , the examiner on February 19 

ID65 , telephoned Albert A. Carretta , attorney for said respondent    

> and was advised that hc would call back on that day. Not.

hearing 

from him , the examiner wrote him by letter dated February 23 , 1965 

rcminding him of the telephone call and stating that the " purpose 

was to arrange a.t least an informal prehearing conference this week 

on the remand :' and also requesting him to ach- ise thc examiner or    

> to contact complaint counse1.

On the same day, February 23 , ID65 , Mr. Carretta telephoned the 

examiner. lIe stated that the reason he did not call ba.ck 800ne, r was 

that he had wished to talk to his elicnt iirst , that he had now done so 

and that the client \yished to drop thc case because of the cost and 

expcnse. The examiner assured him that he had flU open rnind on the 

issue involved jn the remand whether resolved by cyidence , proposed 

qualifications , or both-but suggested that , if there ,yas no change in 

the client: s desire , fl letter be sent to the examiner accordingly. 

By letter dated February 24 , 1960 , ::Ir. Carretta ach-1sed the ex-

aminer as follows:    

> )Jr. orllan Drailer

, President of Respondent l\Iagnnflo CompalJ:-, Inc., yes-

terday advised me that he does not desire to carry 011 this litigation any 

furtl1cr and that lle wil immediately comply with the provisions of the Order 

of the Commission. Consequently, tJlis is to advise you that no further hearing   

> wil be

J1ecessary. 

\ecorclingly: the examiner belieyes and finch;; that he hfls faithfuJly 

adhered and conformed to the Commission s order of remand cbted 

Febnmry 18 , 1D65 , as quoted abon. In particular he further fids as 

follows: 

1. ' The examiner has airorc1ed respondent ample opportuuity for      

> such further proceedings as are necessary to compl

. fully ,yith the 

directions of the Court of Appeals that respondent be given ex-

peditions and full opportunity to show how its trade nn.mc can be    

> fnlly qmtlifiec1.
> 2. '1'118

opportunit.y so afIorcled t.he respondent lor further proceed-    

> ings consisted ,in part.

, of the opportunity for ;; at least. an informal  

> preheaTing conference

: the \\. eek immediately fol1mying Friday, 

February 19 , H)(5 , the date of mailing of the COlnmission s remand 

order.        

> 3. The opportunity so aHordec1 the respondent

comprehended not 

merely furthcr proceedings of an informal nature , snch as preheaT-

ing-s and the like , but , by deal' imlJ1ication and understanding, 472 :FEDERAL THADE CO L\nSSION DECISIONS   

> Initial Decision

67 F.     

> further proceedings "including hearings

' necessary to comply with 

the directions of the Court of Appea1s that respondent be given a

"fun opportunity to show " that its trade name can he properly 

qualified. 

4. The opportunity for furt, her proceedings so afforded gave re 

sponclent " expeditions ': as we11 as full opportnnity, within the mean 

iug of the Commission s order of remanel.  

> 5. Said respondent

lagnaflo Company, Inc. , has elected not to 

avail itself of the opportunity for furt.her proceedings on t.his remand. 

It has , as shown above , declined even the opportunity for " at least an    

> informal prehearing conference.

" It has advised by letter that " 

furt.her hearing will be necessary ' nnd that it " does not desire to 

earry on this litigation any further " and that it " will immediately 

comply "ith the proyisions of the order of the Commission.  

> Pursuant to thc direction in the Commission

s order of remand that 

the " examiner , upon complet.ion of the furt.her proceedings , shall file 

a supplemental decision based npon the record made prior to the rc-

mand and any additional eyidence that may be received " the ex-

aminer declares and finds as follmys: 

I. There has been " compJction of the further proceedings " ordered 

by t110 Commission , alt.hongh these proceedings had not gone beyond  

> a highly informal st.age w

hen respondent declared it " does not desire 

to carryon this litigation any fnl'ther. Respondent has not snb-

mittec1 eyen informally, prol)Qsals for qnalificatiolls which might 

IWlke the trade name proper. 

II. Xo '; aclditional e,-jc1encc, e.. to that contained in the record 

prior t.o remand hns been receiyec1 , so that there is no additional 

eyic1ence. on which this supplemental decision can be based.   

> III. Accordingly, "

the record made prior to the remanc1 ' must 

selTe ns the record upon '\yhich this supplemental initial decision is 

based , snpplemented only b r the informal procedures , discussions 

nnd corresponclence l'cc-itec1 herein. 

IV. In conclusion , to the extent it ma.y be deemed pl'ocedurally 

ne, cessary, it is hereb)' rleclarecl that the exam-iner s initial decision    

> filed JIb)' 25

, 1062163 F. C. 2024. , 2027J, as supplemented by matters 

reeitecl herein , is to be deemed the supplemental initial decision 

here-in. 

V. Accordingly, also , and in yiew of the responclenfs adyice that            

> it "\"il1 immediately comply with the order of the COIT11ission

:: no 

renson exists for modification of the Commission s order to cease and 

desist. BEATRICE FOODS CO. 473 

470 NylliJbns 

OHDETI .i tUOl'TlXG S' L'-PPLE3IEl\" TAL 1:-ITIAL DECISIOX 

The Commission , by orc1erissucc1 Febrnary 18 , 1065 LP; 1351 hereinJ, 

having reopened this llU1Uer and remanded it to the heaTing examiner 

in eomplianc.e ,yith the dil'cdiolls cont,llned in the opinion and judg-

ment of the Cnitcd States Comt of Appeals for the District of 

Columbia Cirellit entered on February J , 1066 (, S. &D. 1112J; ,me! 

The hearing examiner , pllrsllmt, to the Commission s order of 

February 18 106'-) , ha \- ing filed a snpplemEmtn.l initial decision where-

in he states that npon remand , rcspondent l\Iagllaflo Company, Inc.   

> throng-it coullSel

, a(hised that it. did not desire to of reI' additional  

> evi(1ellc(' :lncl tbat it

intended to comply with the Commission s order   

> to cea

c and desist issned on December 2() , 1063 (fi3 F. C. 2024J; and 

The hearing eXHminer h,1ving conclndec1 tlmt no rcason exists for 

> Inouification of the order to cen,

se and desist; and  

> The l-:nited States COlll't of

'-\.ppeflJs fol' the District of Columbia 

Circuit having entel'e(1 its decree on Jnrch 2 , 190:\ ordering that 

respondent :il:;Dlaf-o Company, IllC. forthwith comply with the 

Commission s order to ccase and desist isslled on Dee-ember 26 , 1963 

(63 FTC. 202"J: and 

The Commission lnlyjng determined that the supplement-oj initial 

decision complies with the. directioll set forth in its order of February   

> , 1DG;):
> It 18

ci'del'ed Tlwt OIl April 24- , 1D65 , the hearing exa.miner s sup-

plemental initial decision afler remand be adopted by the Commis-

SIOn.     

> It i:-furthei' Ol'dei'

That respondent J\Iagnaflo Company, Inc. 

a. corporat.ion , shalJ , ,vithin sixty (GO) days after service upon it of 

this order , file with the Commission a report , in writing, setting forth 

in detail the mfmner and form in which it has cOlllplied with the 

Commis. '3ion s order to eease :1nd c1c ist issncd on Dr.cembpl' 2G , 19G3 

(63 F. C. 202Jj  

> Ix THE

L"TTER OF 

BEATHICE FOODS CO. 

ORDEr:. Ol'IXIOX , E1T. : IX REG" \HD TU TI-U: . \LLEGED YlOL, \TIO)\ OF SEC. j OF  

> TI-IE CLAYTOX

-\CT , \XD TI-IE FEDEHAL TlL\DE CO;\DIISSIOX ACT 

Docket 6(;';.). COillli!ailif . Oct. it! nJ.jlj - DC('isirm  

> , .
> lIJI". , .1Vrj",

Orucr adopting, ,yith some ( :xceptions aJH1 snpl1jpllelltHl',\ findings , the con-

clusions and findings of tile hearing examine)' that:! ma iol' l)1'OCrSsor and 

s('ll r of dair,\ prO(lnC1S lJeadquarten'c1 in Chicag' , Ill. , had yiolated the  

> 1 Tile lli1m€ of tbr. re;;!!(J!1rlpnt is incorrectl

Company. 

'Fin l1 l'nlpj" to cP::se ilJll desi 'c :ss\1pl! Dec.   

> lOGT. 71 F. T.C. 707.

t;jtptl ill the cOllpllli11t :s Dratrice Foods   

> , 1963, GS 1", '1. C. 10(1,

"., mo(1iiC'l June 7 

.sig-702 71-474 FEDERAL TRADE COl-Jl\IISSIOX DECISIO:\TS 

COllDlnint 67 F. 

antimerger provision of Sec. 7 of the Clayton Act. but defcrring the entry 

of a divestiture order until Commission counsel and 1'2spOJHlellt submit their 

> l'f'commenda tiOllS.

COJ.fPLAIXT : 

The Federal Trnc1e Commission , haying reason to believe that the 

party respondent named in the caption hereof and hereinafter more   

> pa.rticularly clesignatc, c1 f1nc1

described, has vioJatec1 Hnd is now viobt-

ing the provisions of Section is of the Federal Trade Comlnission 

Act (U.S. , Title 16 , Section ,15) and Section 7 of the Clayton Act 

(D. , Title 15 , Section 18) as amended and approyed December 

1950 , and it appearing to the Commission that a proceeding by it in 

respect thereof wonlc1 be jn the Pllblic interest , herehy issues its com-

plaint charging fiB follows:   

> P ARAGIUPH 1.

Hespondent , Beatrice Foo(ls Company, hereina.fter     

> referred to as "

J3entl'ice n is 11 corporation organized n.nd existing 

under the laws of the State of Deb-ware 

> , '

with its principal offce and 

place of bnsiness located at 120 South La Salle Street , Chicago 

Ilinois. 

PAR. 2. Bentrice is a holding and operating compa.ny. Beat.rice and   

> its snbsidiarie,

, which are either owned 01' controlled by Beatrice , Hl'G 

engaged principally in the purchase , manufacture , processing and 

distribution of Dairy prodncts throughout part of the Unit cd States 

and the Territory of IIawaii. Beatrice and it.s subsidiaries are en-

gaged in commerce , as ;; C01nmerce :: )s defined in the Cla.ytoll Act and 

Federal Trade Commission Act. 

PAIr. 3. A substantial port.ion of the growt.h of Beatrice has been 

tlllongh mergers and an111isitions. Beginning in 1028 , Beatrice, initi- 

> ated

t policy of e, xpansion b:v acqniring concerns engaged in the proe-

cssing and dist.ribut.ion of d Liry pro duets. By 1950 , prior to the time          

> that Section 7of the Clayton Act IYHS amended

, Beat.rice had aCCJuired 

over 70 concen1S engaged in the purchase , mannfacture , processing 

and distribution of fiujd milk , ice cream , lrntJ.er and other clair:- prod- 

> ucts. Primarily as a result of said acquisit.ions

! Bmttrice s net sales 

lucre, HEed fr01l1 857 380 H);j in 1928 to $205 257 498 in 1950. 

PAR. i t Beatrice and its subsidiaries ' operations are conducted 

through various product divisions such as creamery butter , ice cream 

milk , produce , cold storage and frozen food. Principal products in-

dude milk , butter ! lce cream , conclense. d mjlk , buttermilk , dried milk 

cheese , e, ggs , oleomargarine , prochlce , rmd other food products. Bea-

trjce nnd its subsi(liari('s operate 90 mam1facturing and processing 

plants locatec1 in '28 States , the District of Columbia and the ' Territory 

Pfll'agl'Rph;; Si" nnd Be,ell ". ere amenllC'tl on the record b \' the Heftring Examiner lit         

> the bench hl. adr1ing-HlditionnJ COl'porate! and noncol'porate l'e!;;!)Onclents (tr, pp, 1683--
> lORe! , 2052-2053 , 2057-

20(9). BEATRICE FOODS C01.1PA::Y 475  

> 4'13

Complaint 

of I-Ia,yaii. Sales brH, llche.s arc lTUtilltained at the mmlUfaetl1l'ing: 

plants and t.he company also ope.rates 200 other selling branches in 

thiJ,ty- on8 States. 

PAn. 5. Eeatrice s net sa-les for all products increased from a,pproxi-

mately $20;) million in 1950 to $323 million in 1055 , an increase of  

> ::n20 million or

589c' 

Beatrice s fluid milk sales inereasecl from approximately $63 

million in 1950 to approximately 8123 Inillion in 103:'5 an increase of 

$60 million 01' D5%. 

Beatrice s frozen dessert sales increased from approximate.1y 832   

> llillion in 1950 to a.pproximately $58 million in 1055

, an increase of 

$2() million or 81lj-c. Frozen desserts , as used 118rein , includes ice 

cream , ice milk , sherberts , ,vater ices 

, "      

> me.1lorinet and other simiJar
> frozen dairy products.

A substantial portion of the aforesaid inc.reases in sales resu1tecl    

> directly from the acqnisitions hereinafter described.

PAR. 6. In a, series of transactions beginning in , J anuary 1\151 , Bca.-

t.rice has acquired all or part of the stocks or assets of the following 

named corporations engaged in the pUTchase , manu f-ncture , process-    

> ing or distribution of da,

iry product.s. ",Yhen llsed herein the term 

dairy prodtl'ts " sha.D include 

> ' '

one or :any llllnUel' of t.he follO\, ing 

products: milk , cottage cheese , crearrJ , ice cream , cheese , buttel' 

powdered milk , ice cream mix , canned fresh 1111k , frozen desserts 

and evaporated roilk. j\Jl of the aeqllired corporations at t.he time of    

> the said acquisit.ons in the regular course of business

, either manu-

j'actured purchased , processed or distTibntecl dairy products in and 

throllghollt the variOlls States of the L-;nited States or purchased and 

1'8cci,- e(1 shipments of dairy products or eqllipl11Cnt related to the 

manufacture" processing or distribut.ion of dairy products from pro-

ducers , suppliers , manufacturers or processors located throughout the 

nit.ed States. All of the acquired corporations , prior to and at the  

> time of the ac.qnisitions

, were engaged ill commerce , as " commerce 

is definer! in the Clayton c ,ct and the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

Such acquisitions include the following: 

ID5l       

> (1) Fairfield lee and Coal Co.

, Fairfield, Illinois.     

> (2) A. L. Bl'umund Co. ,121-125 I'V. Lake Street, IVfl1kegaJl ,lIlnojs

1952 

> (3) Standish Cn'

amery Co" Standish , :\rich. 

(4) Norwalk Purc :\lik , 1m:. , Norwalk , Ohio  

> (5) Andalusia Dairy Company, 712 Fifth Avenue, Beaver Falls

Po. 

(6) 'YeHwl Dairy, Inc. , llG-118 South "\Vasl1ington Street , Enid , Okla.    

> (7) Lagomarcino-Grupe Compan;y of Iowa

, Burlington , Iowa. 476 FEDEHAL TRADE CO I1HSSION DECISIOXS 

omplaint 67 F. l'. 

(8) Farmer. -- Equity Cooperatiyf' Cl' CIlJH' J'Y As. 'm. , Inc. , 202 E. Algt' l' 

Sheridan , Wyo. 

(8) D:1Tton Ice Crellm COlllw. ny, 260 Proctor Rtl'Pct. Dayton . Ohio 

1953 

(10) ::liler-HansC'n Dairy, Inc. , Clarinda , Imni. 

(11) Coca- CoIn Bottling Company of CJiftcm FOl'g'l" . 11H:. , Clifton ForgE' , Ya. 

(121 Bnclmllnn Flll'lls , Inc. , La\Yl' pJ1C'f'Yillp , Illuoi:-, 

(13) Linton and Linton , Tnc. , "\Yi!llington , Ohio. 

(14) Dl1bnm Dairy Products , Iuc. , 510 :.lemorinl St. , Durham . X. 

(15) Tlw Grf:v and "\Vhitc Company, AdrlJns & 1"1'(1111.;1n Sts" Titlin , Ol1io 

(16) Creameries of AnH' l'ica , 324 lloosevelt Bldg. , Los Angel!':, 17. Cnlifonlia 

and its subsidiaries: 

Peacock Dairies. 22nd & Eye Sts. , Bakersfield. CnJif. 

:,Ii ;ion Creamel'ic:,, Inc. , 541 N. 13th St. , San . , Calif.  

> Y:111(' llUlid Cl'C'fllnel'iCs

, 2001 Fletcllll' Drj\'e , Los AIl, t'h' :,. California.  

> Cro\"nl City J)air

, 113;; E. Colorado St. , Pasaneua. Calif 

Anlen- Sunfreeze Crf'!1meries , 10:SO S. )Iain St. , Salt Lal,(' Cit . 12. l' tnl1 

Idaho Creamerips . 1301 BamlOcl;: St. , Dol.'E' , Idaho. 

Valley Gold Dairies. Inc. , Alhuquenl1H' , K. ::\1. 

Price Creameries , Inc. , GOO . Piedras St. . EI Pa, , T(-'xns. 

Dairymen s Association , Ltd. , H01101ulu. Ha,, :\ii. 

19,34 

(17) Superior ::Hlk Producers ' Assn. , 11709 FJ Artesia Blw1. , Artrsia , Calif. 

(IS) )L1tlwws Dairies , Iuc. , ::1atlle'''8,  

> (lD) The Gatewfly Creamery COmpfl1Y,

307-19 B. 7th St. , Joplin. :Mo. 

If)')0  

> (20)

Greenbriar Dairy Products Co. , 8. Tl'an.   

> ..-
> :\follntnin ::10tor8.

111('" BecJ:ler, 

'Yo Va. 

(21) Rose Lawn Dairies of Al'kans:ls , Inc. , Ii' t. Smith , Ark. 

(22) Kay s of Roanoke, Inc" Roanoke , Va. 

) High' s of asbYille , Inc. , 1522 Church St.. i\T ash,- , Tenn. 

(24) Dahl- Cro-l\fa , Ltd.. 661 Punallou St. , Hilo , Islaud of Hawaii. 'lpl'itor 

of Ha aji. 

(25) Louis Sherry, Inc. 30-30 Korthern Blvd. , Long Island City, . Y.     

> (2()) Sutter Dairy, Inc.

, J623 ::W ., Front St. , Grand Island , Nebr. 

(27) Redbud Dairy Products , Inc. , 702 N. Kickapoo St. , Shawnee , Okln. 

(28) Russell Creamery Company of Hrainerrl , 425 Frout St. , Bl'ainel'l , ::Iinn. 

(29) Brainerd Dairy, Inc. , 109 ,Ya.3bington Street . Bminerd, )Iinn. 

(30) Baker-Vnion CooperatiYe CrC'i1Ilcry, 1109 'Vasblngton AYe. , Box 478, 

La Grande , Orep;. 

(31) KamH\- ba lee Cream Co. , 619 Columbia A,e. , Chul'1lston , W. Yfl. 

(32) Eskay Dairy Co. , Inc. , 1501 Fairfield Ave. ) Ft. ' Wayne , Ind. 

(23) Clarksburg Dairy Co. 208 Hewes Ave. , Clarksburg, W. Va. 

(24) .Nnnce s Creamer.'.r Inc. , 115 . Depot Street, Brazil , Indiana. 

(35) Clinton Ice Cream Co. , Clinton , Iowa.  

> (36) Indi:lJfi let' & FJlll Co" 301 Circle

'lmYer Blvd.. Indianapolis , Ind. BEATRICE FOODS CO:\IPANY 477 

473 Complaiut     

> (37) Princet.on Creamery, IIopldnsvile & Cadiz Sts.

, Princeton , Ky.    

> (38) 1-V. J. Bratton

, Successor to Twin Vallpy Dairy Products 

mercial St. , F:mporia , Kansas.  

> (39) Grocer

s Dairy, Inc. , 1701 N. Webster St. , Dayton , Ohio. 

Inc. , COll-

1056   

> (40) Kentncky Ice Cream Co.

, Inc. , Richmond , Ky.     

> (41) Valley Creamery Co.

, Inc. , K Grand FOl'l , :.Hnn. 

(42) ':l'ro- Fe Dairy Co. , Inc. , 704 Walnut St. , Gadsden , Ala. 

(4H) 'l' ro- Fe Dai!' y Co. , Inc. , Lewis)nug, ' .renn. 

(44) ' rhe Ljndner Ic(' Cream Co. , Inc. , 2029 Hopkim, Ave" ol'fo1k . Ohio.   

> \R. 7.

In a series of transactions beginning in January 1951 , Bea-

trice has acquired ill! or part of the assets of eigl1ty-seyen clairy pl'Q(l-

net concerlls , located in hn ntT- fh-(' States which are individually 

owned and ,yere not. corporation . Such acquisitions include the 

fo11()win 

(1) " Wayne CJ'f'flllery. 112 ,, . Third St. , Wayne , NelJrnska.  

> (2) Linl;: Dairy, 313 S. 13th St.

, Chickai3lw , Okla. 

(3) Benton County Dairy, 102 'I". First St. , Fowl('r , Ind. 

('1) Claggett DnilT, Sharon Yalley Hd. , HFD Fa, l\ ewark , OlJio. 

(5) Jobnson Dairy, ::Inin & First Sts. , :.In!yane , Kansas. 

(6) The 1!-' anuf'l's Creamery. Le .:Iars. Iowa. 

(7) ::IoderIl Dairy, WaynetO\yn , Ind.  

> rs)

Dixie Dairy, 313 K Seminary St" FloJ'('!1ce , Ala.  

> (\) ()T(.rga'ard Dnin- Stores

, 1845 ;' R" St.. , Lin(;oln , Nebr. 

(0) The Superior Dah' .r, 411 W. 6th St. , Pueblo , Colorado.  

> (1.) Larry

s Dairy, 514 North ?Inin Street , Kingfisher , Okla. 

(12) Hanoel' s Dair , 823 Korth GnU , HOlc1euYile , Okla.     

> (13) ErnE'st B. & Iargaret E, KnlH'r

, \DO ::lullJerry Ayl'" ::Juscatinc , lo\yn. 

(14) ?\If'ado\ybrook Creamery, Emporia , Kansas. 

(15) Letm r Dairy, 220 Tenth An , CounciJ Bluffs , Jo\"a. 

(1G) Spl'ingbroo!; Dairy, De"\Vitt , Iowa.     

> (17) Caffey sGuel'11Sf'Y Dairy, 3-

100 W. 11tb St. , Pueh1o , CoJo.       

> (18) Del Rose Ice Cream Co.

, .:Iurray, Ky.  

> (ID) The Latta Ranch Dnin'

. Bl'ooJdie1d. :\10.  

> U())

CUJl('s\"lle Dairy. Couesdlle , Ohio.            

> (21) Re(l Oak Dairy, Hell Oak. JO\Y;1.
> (22) Bianucci Ice Cream Co.

, Bloomington , Illinois.   

> (23) O'

Neil Dniry, 1:. Prairie A,e. , Goodlflllc1 , Ind.  

> CZ'l)

l1ichan1 L. Franson , R. R. #2 , Gooc11anc1 , Ind. 

(2;5) Meredith Dair , \Yest of City Limits , Clteypnne , Wyoming. 

(2G) The Athens Creamery, Athens, Ala. 

(27) P8nlus Dairy, llensselner , Ind. 

1'28) Princeton Dairy, 327 K. Main St. , Princeton , Tnd. 

(2D) Welchel' Tce Cream Co" Sencca , Mo. 

(HO) :\IcAilster BrGf'. Creamery Co" ::I 1lcE'1inc lo.  

> (3J) Cambria Sales

, m. "j Ogle St. , I.JIJlnslmrg, Fa. 478 FEDERAL ' TRADE CO BnSSIO?\T DECISIONS 

Complaint G7 F.  

> ::2) Kewlancl Dairy,

eodesl1a , Kansas.    

> (33) Xeligh Cl'emnery, Nelig11

, KeLr.  

> (34) Callison Dairy, 115 "\Yasbing-ton St.

, Clinton , Illinois.  

> (35) Snni-

l'ure Dairy, 701 N. Pecan St. X01yata , Okla.  

> (36) P. Calistri &, Sons

, 32. 326 F'allowfield AYe. , Cl1al'lel'oi , 1'a. 

(37) Philp s lee Cream Co. , if) 'II'. 231'c1 Aye. , Gary, Ind.   

> (3S) Fisher

s lee Cream Shop, lID X "itl1 St., Beatrice, l\ebr 

(39) Hanson s Dairy, 501 N. Log-an AYe" Dallyi!e , Illinois. 

(40) Dail'yland Ice Cream ('o11pa11;\- , Twenty- SeH' ntl1 & "-Ugus Hoad , Sllluoy-

gan 

, "' 

isconsin. 

(41) Greeley Creamery, Greeley, Xebl'. 

1.:12) Smith Dflil'.Y, Colnmlrns , Nebr. 

(43) Seidel Creamery Company, Bay City, :.Uc11. 

(44) Pearman Dair , S. Plummer St. , Cllanl1te , Kansas. 

(45) Geo. C. Kruse Horne ::Uade IcE.' Cream , Dubuque , Iowa. 

(4li) Home D,=1iry, lt. Cannel , Ilinois.     

> (47) l'ettibon Dairy Co.

, 387 Connecticut ATe. , Rochester , Pa.   

> (48) Drinkmore Dairy Co.

, 7. 10 Sheffeld Road , Aliquivpa , Pa.    

> (49) Stransc1ale :Farws Products

, 5231\1ain St. , 8nvannn , Illnois. 

(30) Jolmson Tre Cream Co.. \Vinnpl' S.    

> (51) Patzner Dairy,

G1!ttenberg-, Iowa. 

(52) Ho:val Ice Creflll Co.. :'\faguol;:eta , Iowa.       

> (53) Durlwll Road Dairy, Dnrbmll Hel.

, CIHt!1el Hil , N. 

(54) Dunm:ver Dairy, RFD , Lindsey, Ohio. 

> (;1.

':) Elkhorn Farm Dairy, 14::4 Elkhorn R(l. , \Vat. onyiJe. Calif.       

> (56) Harris Dairy, 40th &J?rrclerick

, St. , Toseph , iUissolli. 

1;;71 Enstsiele Dairy, 101 i\le1Jtal An' , Santa Cruz . Ortlif.  

> jS"i Ie1lewHd Dairy, Scottsbluff

ehr.   

> (39) Butler

s Creamery, 100U BrOl1(h\-ay, Scottsbluff , ::e111'. 

(GO) Piedmont D 1iry, Vernal , Utal1. 

(Gl) Schuler Dairy, Sayamw , Illinois. 

I,(j:n Baywood Farm J)ain , 737 San Benito St. , Hollster , CaHf. 

(63) Bayard Sanitary Dairy, na anl , Nebr. 

(61) C. C. Armstrong, Hnnts\"ile , Ala. 

(65) I. ester s Ice Cream Co.. Hobbs , K 1\lexico. 

(GG) Yellowstone Dairy, 1048 E. Yellowstone , Casper , \Yyoming. 

(67) :\lidyale Dair;-' Farm , IGOO Thirty- Eighth Avenue , :\lo1ine , Illnois. 

(68) Sbomont Ice ('ream ('0. , 104 First AYc. , Xorthwpst, Cedar Rapics , Iowa. 

and Monticello , Iowa.   

> (60) Costello

s ::\1endota Creamery, :\lelldota , Illinois.  

> (70)

John H. Costello Co. , 415 Delmar St. , St. 1. 0nis , ?llo.     

> (71) Squire Ice Crpnm Co.

, 110 S. Blossom St. , S!1enaIHlonh , Iowa.   

> (72) Steele

s Ice Cream ('0.. " cst Plains , Mo. 

(7B) Rose Lawn Dair:-, ?lleAlester. Okla.  

> (i4) Blue Bonnet Ice Cream Co.

, Franldort , Ky.  

> (75) Delisle Distribnting Co.. 127 :\lorgnn St.

, :\1anchester , X, 

(76) W. II. Hammond , Seventh &. Kansas Sts. , Great Bend , Kansas. 

(77) Greenwood County Creamery, 200 S. :\Tain St. , Em' elm , Kansas 

(7S) The Harper Creamer:-, 824 Central Ave. , R\lrl!l, , Kansas. BEA"rRICE ," OODS CmlPAXY 479  

> 47.

Complaint  

> Welton Sullvan

, 102 K. l,ncolll St. , Odessn.. Tt.'xa, 

> ,;.

Lucas Dairy, Grafton , ,Yo Va.        

> Russell Creamery Co. ,Superior , '''is. ;Bemidji , :\Iinn. ; Fergus Falls
> ) )
> (SO)

(Sl)      

> MinD.
> (82) Spring Grove Dairy, Greenfield

, Ohio.   

> (83) Pul"ty lee

Cream Co. , Clal'kSYile , Tenn. 

(84) 'Vilsouice Cream Co., 107 Elm St. , Urbana , Illnois. 

(80) ' Walker Ice Cream Sales , 1000 E. Bl1nettc St. , LouisYille , Ky. 

(86) ::lorning Star Dairy, Cadiz , Ky.  

> (S7)

)lcPllel'SOn Dairy ' of 'V311n01'e , 320 S. 9th St. , \Ynnol'e 

, :\ 

> ebl'.

PAn. 8. Beatrice s grcflt size and financial resonrces , in relation to  

> that of it.s competitors

, together with its product and geographical 

diversification , may give and have given Beatrice the power , in the 

conrse and conduct of its business , to do flmong other things the 

following: 

(a.) Expend substant.ial sums to make interest or non-interest bear           

> ing loans to cllstomers and potential customers.
> (b) l',Iake loans of (',quip1nent and facilities in substantia.l

amounts  

> to its customers and potential custome.rs.

(c) Sen equipment and facilities to customers and potential 

customers at prices that are substantially less than the market value 

of said eqni pment and facilities. 

(d) Pay substantial sums in the form of rebates to custome.rs and 

potential customers in advance of being earned.  

> (e,

) :JIake substantial payments to customers and potential cus-

tomers in the form of gifts or gratuities. 

(f) Expend substantial sums for performing service of value for 

its customers; e. , repainting the cllstomers establishment. 

(g) Charge favored customers and potential customers discrimina-

> tory prices.

(11) Expend substauti,tl sums to promote its various brands through       

> advertising and other promotions.
> (i) lIirc key

employees of competitors eliminated through Bea-

trice s acquisitions. 

(j) Enter into express or implied agreements or understandings 

with cllstomers and potential cllstomers which may have and do have 

the eflect of e, xclncling competitors. 

-\n. 9. The acquisitions listed in Paragraphs Six and Seven herein 

either inc1ividnal1y or collec.ively, may have the effect of substantially  

> lessening compe.tit1011 or

tending to create a monopoly in the fo11o\'-

ing "ays , among others: 480 FEDERAL TRADE CQl..IMISSION DECISIONS 

Complaint 67 F. 

(a) Industry- wide concent.ration of the pnrclwsc : ma,nufa, cture 

processing or distribution of dairy products has been increased; 

(b) Actu l and potential competition between Bcatrice ane! the 

acquired corporations in the purchase , mmllfactnre , processing or 

distribution of dairy products may be or have been eliminated; 

(c) The acquisitions by Beatrice ma:y enhance Bea.trice s competi-

tive advantage in the pure1wse , manufacture , processing or distribu-

tion of dairy products to the detriment of actual or potential com-

petition; 

(d) The acquisitions pj'O\ idc Be trice with dditional facilities 

which Beab-ice, may utilize to extend practiees identical or similar 

to those hereinbefore described in Parngraph Eight to t.he detriment 

of actual or potentia 1 competition; 

(e) Competitive l1annfacturers purchasers , processors or distrib-

utors of dairy prodncts may be foreclosed from a, snbsta, ntial segment        

> of the ma.rket in that Beatrice has

eliminfltcc1 the acquired corpora- 

> tions as potential supp1iers

01' cllst.omers; 

(f) Independent business concerns hn \-e been eliminated from the 

Dairy Products I ncll1stT3'  

> (g) Actual and potential compe.titionin the PUl'ChHSe

, mGllufl1etllre 

processing or distribution of clairy pl'odncts may be substantially 

lessened. 

PAR. 10. The foregoing acqllisitions alleged ancl set forth in Para-

graph Six constitute a violation of Section '7 01 the Chlytcn . .:e1 (13 

> C. Sec. 18).

PAR. 11. The constant. and systemntic elimination of actual find 

potential competitors and othenyise le sening of competition by the 

means of the aC((1lisitiol1s dei-cribec1 ill Paragraphs Six rmc1 Seyen 

herein are rdl to the j)l'ejnc1ice and injury of the pl1b1ic flnet constitute 

unfair methods of competition ancllUlfail' acts tl uc1 pract.ices in C011-

n1C1'ce ,\ ithin the intent and meaning of Section 5 of the rederal 

Trade Commission Act. 

PAR. 12. The foregoing acquisitions , acts and practices , as herein-

> before, aJ1eged and set forth
> , ('

ol1stitute fl vjolntiOD of Sectjon ;) oJ the 

Federal Trade Commission Act. (1011" ('. Ser. .05).   

> JI'i. F. P. Faauella

and Jf)' Petei' If. Bleakley supporting the 

eompJaint. 

J/?'. Tlw1n(J8 A. . Reynolds Jh' Ed' lC(tl'd L. Foote and Jh' Edn' Ctnl   

> J. lVendT'ow. of

1Vi1J8ton , Strawn 8J1iith. Patlci' 80il and .lIp. .John 

r. Fox of Chicngo , Ill. , for re.spondent. BEATRICE FOODS COMPAKY 

473 Initial Decision 

IKITIAL DECISION BY JOUK LEWIS , HEARIXG EXAMIKER 

MARCH 2 , 1964 

INDEX 

SV. TE),lEKT OF PJWCEEDI:-GS--__-----

# - - -------- -----

FIXDIXGS OF FACT- - -- - - -

- - ---- -- - - - - - - - - --- -- - - - -- - - - - --

I. Respondrmt and the Indust, ry Setting____ 

Identity and Bminesf'_ 

__---- - - --- ---_ 

Gl'o\\" t-h-

---- - - ---

Total S::des Eight L:ngest Dairies_ 

___ ---- --------

Coneentratiol1_ 

# - - ------

RespondC'nt :" Area of Distl'ibution  

> Products- - - - - - - - -
> ---

- - - - - - - -- - - -

Postwar Chnnges in Dain' Indust.ry_ 

Changes ill Ice Cream Industry - - - - - -

II. The Acqujsition 

- - - - ------

A. III CcnC'J'l.-

- - - - - - ------

B. Creameries of America , Inc_ 

- -

The AequisitiolL 

## ---- - ---

)'lfll'ket. Conditions_ 

# -- -

H. C 11ifornia__ 

___- - -

San Jose DiyisiolL_ 

--- --.  

> Ice

Cream Market Shares in 1Jnrket" s Proposed by 

Complaint- C01I1Sel_ 

--- -

IC8 Cream Market Sh:nes in .iIarket Proposed by 

# HespondenL -

--- 

> .l\lilk :ilarkct Shares in

Iarket-s Propo. "ed by 

Compbint COl1lseL_ 

___ - -

\IjJk ::brket Shares in :\Inrket Proposed by 

RcspondenL_ 

# - -

Definition of l\Tarket Areas-- .. 

:iL.uket Sbln: nlld COl1c(' ntraUol1- - - - - - - - -

Bnkerdicld Djyi iolL_ 

____ 

- _"H 

The Relevant :\Iurb t Arefls_ 

:\Inrkct Shares imu Concentration 

- - - - -

Los Angeles Di\"i::iOlL - - - -- - - -

- - - - - - - - - - - -

?\Iflket Shnre 

___ - -

# ConecntratiOlL -

Othu Aequisitiol1s in Califomia- - - - -

- - - - - - - -

Decline in Kumbcr of Da.ir - Plnnts_ 

Her(mt Trends in :\'brket. Sbares ::nd Concentration 

in C::lHornii1 

.. - - - - - - - - - - - - -- -- - - - - - - - - - -

b. Intcmnountnin Area and \Vest Texas_ 

l\Iarkct Share and Concentratiol1- -.. - - - -

l7tab Divi. "jon_- -

ldaho Division__ 

# - - ----

El Paso Divif'iol1--

- - ----

Hf'cent Trend in l\Iarkct. Sh \l'cs- - - - -

Other Aeql1isitioll- - --

c. IIOIloIuh1 DivisiOlL_ 

---- ----

481 

Pa,' 

483 

48G 

486 

486 486 

488 

489 

491 

492 493 497 

500 

500 

501 

501 

507 

507 307 

511 

313 

;'113 

313 

5 \,5 

524 

52H 

5:31 

.)35 

538 

;'140 

541 342 

fj43 

550 

5::4 

;5.),1 

5GO 

5R2 

5(j6 

567 563 482 FEDERAL TRADE cO nUSSION DECISIONS  

> Initial Decision

FI=-DlKGS OF FACT- Continned 

n. THE ACQUISITIONs-Cootinued 

C. Boewell Dairies_____ 

-------------- ---   

> D. AE-fOociated Dairy

Products Company_____-------

E. Greenbrier Dairy Products Company -

- - - - -- - - - - -- -

F. Clarksburg Dairy Company_ 

-------------

G. Tro. Fe Dairy Compnny, 1nc_ 

---

H. Dothan Ice Cream Company_____ 

----

1. Dairyland Farms , Inc. , and Yaldair Creamery, Inc_ 

J. Lonis Sherry, Inc_ 

--- ---- -----

K. Arden Farms Co. (:\.fclvcrn-Fusscll Division) - -

.. - - - - - --

L. Durham Dairy Products , 1nc__--__---

--- --- ---

:\1. Westl"rvile Creamery Cornpany_ 

N. Lindner Ice Cream Company - --

O. CommL1nit r Creamery - - - - - -. -

- - - - - - - - --

P. Jame S. :\Jerritt Company_ 

_p_ -p --

Q.. Arden Farms Co. (Linwood Dh. ision)-

R. Gnte"" Y Creamery COmp UlY -

S. Yalky CrennH:ry Company, lnc_ 

___ -.-- ..- ----

T. A. L. Brumund Compml L_u_-- -

---p--- ---

U. Lagomarcino- Grnpe Company__ 

V. Clinton Ice Cream Compan 

--_----- -

W. Andalusia Dairy Company - - 

> - - -- - -- - -- - -- -

## - - -  

> X. COC:l-

COla ' Bottling Co. of Clifton Forge , Inc. (Peerless 

amej" v Division) - - - - - - --- --

> ----- -------- -

_n-

Y. Ritzmann Ice Cream Company, Ino_ 

--_-------_.._ 

Z. Farmers Equity Co- oporative Creamery Association , 1nc-

l. Rose Lawn Dairies of Arkansas , Ine. 

- - - - - - _. - - -

2. Dahl- Cro- ivIa , Ltd 

- - - - - - -- - - - - - - - -- -- - -- - -- - - - --  

> 3. Other Aequisitions_

__--_ ---- ----------     

> III. Other Alleged Ilegal Prnctice:;.__ _- u --

-----

A. Cu:;tomcr As. sistance--

- -

B. " ?\'f arket I.Jeverage 

" - -- - -- -- - - - - -- -

CO:\' CLL'SIOKS___. --

> I. As to the Acqllisitions_

- - - - ---   

> A. Applicable Legal Principles____

----------

Engagement in Commerce b - Acquiring Compan 

Engagement in Commerce by Acquired Comp:lny - - - - - -

The Product l\IarkeL--- -

------ ---- ---

The Geographic I' vIarkeL - -----_u 

Competitive EITecL - - - -- - -

B. Creameries of America , Inc- -

C. Boswell Dail'ies_ 

- -

D. Associated Dairy Prodllcts Comp1m 

' - - - --

E. GJ' enbri8r Dairy Products Compan 

# - - ---

F. Clarksbmg Dairy Company_ 

- - - -

G. Tro- Fe Dail' - Coml)fl.n , Inc__ 

___ 

H. Dothan Ice Cream Compan 

# - - - - - - -

1. Dnir vland Farms , Inc. , and Vo.lda.ir Creamery, 1nc_ 

__-

J. Louis Sherry, Inc_-- -

- - --- ---

K. Arden Farms Co. (?delve1'- Fussell Division)--

___------..- -------- ----

67 F. 

> Pa(Je

570 

> ;')74

37S 

')8: 

;387 39:3 

598 600 604 

608 

012 616 620 

623 

624 

> ()2Ei

629 632 

U:H 

> 6:3,

636 

638 

640 

64;j 

646 

(;47 

649 

> (j;')0
> E-:jO
> 'l1
> ();,)2

lLj:J 

> G6::J

G70 

671 

072 

> G7-J
> 01.

67;) 

> G7G

677 

GiS BEATRICE FOODS COMP A:,TY 

473 Initial Dech;ion 

CONCI. USlOKs- Continued 

1. As TO THE ACQUISITlONS-Continued 

1. Durham Dairy Products , Inc_ 

----- -----

1\1. Westervile Creamery Co. and Other Ohio Acquisitions---

N. Lindner Ice Cream Company_ 

---- -----

O. Community Cl'camery__ 

# - -

P. James S. 1Jerritt Company_ 

- -

> Q. Arden Farms Co. (Linwood DivisionL----

- -

H. Gatmyay Creamery Company___  

> ----

S. \ alle - Creamery Campan?, lnc 

---

T. A. L. Brnmund CompallY_  

> C. Lagomarcino-

Grupe Company__ 

- -

. Clinton Ice Cream Compnny--

--_ 

'V. Andalllsiu Dairy Company_ 

---- --- 

> X. Coca-Cola Bottling Co. of Clifton Forge , Inc. (Peerless

Creamery Division) ---- - - - -  

> - - -- - -

- - - - - -- - - - - - - - -

Y. Ritzmann lee Cream Company, 1ne-       

> Z. Farmers Equity Co-operative Cream cry Association

, Inc_ 

1. Rose Lawn Dail'i()s of Arkansas 111C_ 

-- -

2. Dahl- Cra- , Ltd_  

> ___

-- -

3 Other Acql1isitions_ 

# - -  

> II _

\.5 to the Other Pl'actices- - - - - - -

> - - - - -

FI:\_ \L CO:\CL"CSIO:\S OF L. \W_ 

- - -- 

> TILE RE"-IFDY_
> ORDER

- -

ST. \.TIDIEXT OF PHOCEEDIXGS 

The Federal Trade Commission issued its complaint against the 

above-named respondent on October 1(- , 1956 , charging it with haying 

violated Section 7 of the Clayton Act , as a, mended , and Section 5 of 

the Federrtl Trade Commission Act , by reason of the, acquisition of 

131 dairy product companies. Forty- four of the acquisitions are 

alleged , ill P,uagraph Six of the cOllphtint , to inyolve corporations 

engaged in commerce. Eighty-seyen of the acquisitions are al1eged 

in Paragraph Seven of t.he complaint. , to involve concerllS which were 

ind1vidually owned nnd ,,' ere not. corporations. On mot' ion of COllllSel 

supporting the complaint , n1ade upon the record at hearings held 

September 23 , 19;)8 ) :March 24 , 1960 , a.nd Septcmber 12 , 1961 , re-

spectin Jy, Paragraphs Six and Sm;en of the complaint ,,-crc amended  

> so as to include 33 adc1itionnJ corporflte acqnisitions a)1l 11 additional
> llollcorporatc acquisitions

, bringing thc total number of ac(plisit.1ons 

chal1enged by the complaint to H6. 

The corporate aCfluisitions , as set forth in Paragraph Six 01 the 

cOlnplaint , are alleged to constitute fl violation of Section'! of the 

Clayton Act. All of the acquisitions , hoth corporate and Jloncorporate 

as set forth in Paragraphs Six and Seven of the complaint , arc 

483 

> Pa.G
> G79

680 

681 681 

a83 

684 

684 

685 

> tl8.

686 686 

686 

687 

687 688 

> G88

a80 

689 692 

692 

693 

> (',

484 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS   

> lnitinl Ded.sion 67 If.
> lle.ged to constit.ute part of

the " constant and syst.emat.ic elimina-           

> tion of actual and potential competitors 'in violatjon of Section 5

of the Federal Trade Commission Act. It is alleged ill Paragraph 

Eight of the complaint that as a result. of respondent' s size , financial 

resources and diyel'sification , it has the power to enga.ge. ill various     

> types of business practices , including the making of loans to cus-

tomers anc1 the grant1ng of l'elmtes and discriminatory prices. Such 

practices , as well as the acquisitions , are allcged to constitute a viola-

tion of Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act. 

Respondent fi1ecl a combined answer and motions to dismiss and 

strike, portions of the comphint on . TflJllary 3 1057. In its flns'Wcr 

respondent admitted , in substance , the making of the acquisitions 

referred to in the complaint , and the fclct that certain of sa.id acquisi-

tions involved corporations engaged in commerce , bnt denied t.hat it. 

had violated Section 7 of the Clayton Act or Section :J of the Fedeml   

> Trade Cummission Act. It 11m-

eel to dismiss t.he cOlnp1aint and to 

strike those portions thereof that c.harged the il1egalit, y of activities 

ot.her t.han the acquisition of corporations engaged in commerce. 

Pursuant to notice duly gin:'n, a pre-trial conference was convened 

in this proceeding on . Jannary 15, 10;)7. Follo -ing said conference a 

pre-trial order ,,-as issnecl hy the undersigne.d on Febl'llnry 8 , 1957 

reciting the variolls stipn1ations and agreements that had been reached 

by the parties , including, among other things , agreements that (1) 

counsel supporting the complaint \yould not seek any order requir-

ing respondent to cease ancl desist. from engaging in any of the acts 

and practices set forth ill Paragraph Eight of the. complaint or any 

order reqniring respondent to (livest itself of the stock 01' assets of 

any company acquired priol' to H);")l , an(l (2) respondent s motion to 

dismiss the complaint or strike Ya1'1011S allep:at.ons thereof ,,- onl(l be 

helclill abeyance until at. least. t.he close of the cnse- in- ehief. 

IIearings for the reception of e\" iclence ill support of the complaint 

e.re commenced on -:ral'ch7 , 19;)7 , and continued at inten- als until   

> Se.ptember 12

, 1061. At the conclusioll of the case-ln-chief respondent 

agreed to proceed \yith the of1ering of testimony and otheT evidence      

> in opposition to the complaint , and that ruling on the motions to

dismiss and strike filecl with its ans'n r could be withheld nutil the 

close of all the evidence. :Hearings for the, reception of defense evi-     

> dence were thereafter held on

Y:1liOliS elates between October 23 , 19G1   

> ancl )Iay

8, 1062. Helmttal and slll'- rebuttal evidence were thereafter 

receiyecl at heRrings held behyeen , T uly 31 , 1062 , and October 1 , 1962. 

A considerflble portion of the pyidence in support or the complaint 

eonsists of docl1nentary eyidence , obtained largely from l'esponchmt. BEATHICE FOODS CO:\iPA)Jy 485    

> 473 lnirin.j Ih' l'j. ..iol1

ineluding basic descripti,'-e and statistical informaJioll concerning 

each of the ar, cpisitions inn)h-ed in tLe proceeding. Complaint c.ounsel 

also callcd );j ,yitlle: .':es to testify, (Jf whom 11 were respondent's 

offcials , hyo wel'e (' r!l1l1l1:-sion ('conoJl lists , one was an offcial of t.he 

llited States l)ep,uTment of .Agl'icr:tnre. and one was it trade asso-

ciation oHicial. Hesrondent called 7 :1 witnesses , of whom 28 \', ere, its 

own ofIcinls 01' Wen.: i'ol'mt'l' mnlcrs 01' employeps of aC(luirccl com-

panies , allli the LJ;1bJll'D '''ere mainly independent expert ",yit.nesses 

including professors of il J'icl1ltll)'1 ecollOlnics and industr ' person-

nel familial' ,yi:ll technological trends in production and packaging. Bespondent abo .introduced a considerable amount of statistical and 

economic doc1lw:ntary evidence. The record here.in consists of 4 750 

pa.g(' S of !estimony and approximately G 10 llunhered exhiLits. ?\rost 

of thc laUer consist of multi- paged clocmnents , ,yhich are compiled  

> iu over 35 Y011l11eS ilnd

aggn-:gitte many tho!1sand:; of page,:. 

Except for one l1enring in Chicago , all he. arings were held in 

\Voi:hington , "D. C. This ",Ya ; nwde- possilJle in large mensure by the 

eoopenltion 01' cOllllsel for respondent 

> , ,,-

ho agreed to bring to \rash-

ington at nc expense to tbe Coyernnwnt , n1liOllS of rcspond- 

> ent's ofucials CtlUed

llS ,,' jtnes es in llpUOl't of the complaint , and 

arranged to produce in \Yashington , D. C. all 01' the ,,- itnesses in snp-    

> port of the defe,

llse case, As n result of the cooperation of both connsel 

a substantial i1ilHHmt of c\-idence in documentary form was oflcl'ed     

> pl1Ji:Uant to stipulntion ancl agrf'eJlwut ,tll1S a\'

oiding the calling of         

> n consider(1)le llllmucr of witnesses.
> All testimony taken in this proceeding "-as duly recorded

, and     

> s11ch t.estilllOny and all

other e," idellCe hnye been fiJed in the offcc of   

> the (1

0mmissioll. All parties "' ere represented by cOlllsel , participated  

> in the he,lrings

, and were afJorded full opportunity to be heard , to 

eXfunine and cross- examinc \yitnesses , and to introdl1ce evidence bear-

ing on the issues. . At. the close of all the evidence , and pursuant to  

> leayc granted by thp unde.rsignecl

, proposed findings of fact , conclu-

sions of Jaw ,lncl an order , together ,vith supporting briefs or legal 

memoranda , werc tiled by compbil1t counsel on December 19 , 1962 

and LJy responclent on Decr,lnbrl' :20 , ID() , an(l replies thereto were   

> filed by both sides on .Tanllary 31

, If)()3. On motion of connsel sup-    

> porting the complaint : and pnl'mant to order of the nndersigned

m amended proposed order "- as filed on :Jlay 2 , 1063. A memorandum 

ill opposition to said (lmpnde.d order was fiJecl by respondent on :.Iay     

> , IDC:J ,011h1 a

reply to such l1elloranclmll "' as fiJecl by compIaint 

COll l.se 1 on 1I1ny ;-J , 19G:j, The proposecl findings , replies , briefs and 

mp'IlOl',llcla filedb,r the plnties aggregate O\-er 1200 pages. 486 FEDEHAL TRADE COj\fMISSIO DECISIOXS 

Findings 67 F. 

Afte.r having revie,,' ecl the entire record in this proceeding, and the 

proposed findings l conclusions and order , including the motioll t.o 

dismiss and sr.ike contained in respondent's proposed filldillgS Hnd 

based on his obsen-ation of the ,,-itne-sses , the undersigned nwkes the 

fo11mying: 

FINDIXGS OF F 

J. TIESPOXDEXT 1\1\D TIlE IXnCSTnY SE'lTIXG 

Ide.ntity ancl En8ines8  

> 1. Jiesponc1ent

, Beatrice Foods Co. / he.reinafter referred to as 

Beatrice " is a corporation organized and existing under the laws 

of the State of Deh,, "re , with its principal oflce and place of bnsi  

> ness located at 120

S0l11:11 I.' aSa11e Street , Chicrtgo , Illinois. 

2. Beatrice is a holding and opcrating company. It and its sub-

sidiaries (which are either owned or controlled hy it) are engaged 

principally in the purchase , Inal1ufaetul'e , processing and distribution  

> of (1111'Y

products throughout yariol1s parts of the eontinentall nited 

Stab)!; and Hnwnii , as wilJ hereafter be more specifically describeel. 

Beatriee and c.ertain of its subsidiaries nre also engaged in the manu-

facture , processing and c1ish'ibntion of other food products in yarious 

> parts of the Cnitec1 States.

Grmvth 

3. Beatrice is an outgrowth of the partnership of I-Il1skell & Bos-

worth , \Vl101esa1e pl'oc11\ce dealers , \vhich was founded ln 1891 in 

Beatrice , Nebraskn , nnd began to churn butter in 1804. The company 

was incorporated in the State of Nebraska :in 1897 under the name 

Beatrice Creamery Company, and was re-incorporated under the laws   

> of Imva in 1905 and lmdel' the laws of Delaware in 19Q4-

re.taining the 

Bfune 11ame (eX IGl). The present name. , Beatriee Foods Co. , was 

a,lopted on , ) nne 1 , J 9J6 (CX J 8J) 

1. Up to 1928 Beat.rice ,,,as principal1y in the butter , egg and 

poultry business. Subsequent to that time It began to c1iycrsify its 

product lines in the dairy field , particularly in fluid milk and ice 

cream (eX 11)6 B). This involved , Hl110ng other things , the, acquisi-

tion of a number of other dairy concerns. Bctween 1928 nud 1930 it 

acquircd oycr 70 concerns engaged in the purchase" manufacture 

processing and distrilmtion of flnid m:ilk ice cream , butter and other            

> 1 Proposed findillgs not herein doptec1 ,either in the fOl'JJ IJrOIJosed 01' in snbf'tance, are
> l'ejecter1 !IS not l1ppor(e(1 by the €vi(1ence ('1' a inl'oh-

jng immaterial matters. 

'11H' name of the respondent is ineonccrJy . tnt('c1 in the C'omplnint :1S Beatrice Foods 

> C(1!Jpi1n:,

BEATHICE FOODS COMPA.-"Y 487 

473 Findings 

dairy products. Its net sales increased from 557 389 195 in 1928 to 

$20,),257,498 in 1950.  

> is.

Fr0111 1031 to 1961 Beatrice aC(luired 1T5 dairy concerns. Its 

saJes of dairy prodnets increased from $19J 732 000 in the fiscal year 

ending February 28 , ID;:Jl : to $311 G42 OOO in t.he fiscal year ending 

February 28 , 1961 , rep1' esenting an incrcase of approximately $117 

000 000 in the 10- yea1" period (CX 28, and ex 306). The sales of the 

aC(lllil'ed companies in the last fnll year prior to their acquisition 

amonntec1 to $14:7 4;")9 201. 1 ::iaking clue allowance for the fa, ct that 

respondent llay have lost SOHIe of the, YOhllne which it acquired , it 

seems reasonable to infer that. the bulk of respondenfs $117 000 000 

sales .increase uet"ee.n 1031 and 1961 came from \'olmno which it 

acqnired. Of 1"espondent"s total dairy soles of S311 542 000 in 1951 

$113, 077 000 , or 3G;i came from the plants of concerns which it 

acquired hetween 10,,1 and 1061 (eX 306). Since the latter figure 

does not include the yolmne of acquired c.oncerns " which respondent 

transferred to its exist.ing plants , it. seems evident that over one-third 

of respondent's 10(;1 clait' - sales is nttributable to the acquisitions   

> which it made between 1Djl

anc1 10Gl. It 11ay be noted , in this con 

nection , that the $113 000 000 :fgure , I'e,prescnt, ing the volume of sales 

from acquired pbnts still operating in IDGl , 1S substantially identical 

,,,inl the om0111t or l' espolldenfs sales increase behn en 1031 and 1961 

yiz Sl17 OO(\UOU. Of tlw 8113 000 000 in snles from flcquired plants as 

of 19G1 , appl'oxirnatcly 80G 000 000 represents sale.s from plants of 

compimics vi" hich compla1nt cOlllspl c.aim were in commerce at the 

time lhey lrcre. acquired. 

G. In addition to da, iry products , respondent is engaged in the 

Inanur,lctl1re anel/or , sale of other food products. In 1039 it began the 

distribntion of frozen foods , primal'iJy the Birds Eye brand. It also 

operates a Jll1moer of Pllblic cold storage lrarehonses. In 1943 it 

acquired La Choy Food Products CompalJY, a large nUUlufnctul'e.r of            

> 3RhPondent contenr1s that it only acqnired IGS concerns, c1nimi!1g tbnt complaint
> connsel lJave hnpropedy connted as separate COllcerns

, certtlin related companies which 

were simultaneously aC(juirecl 

! The nbovp n;cl1l'c cloes llot il)cJm1e tlle "nJps of 2S of the sl1Hdlc!' l'Ollp,lnirs , for wl1icb 

(lol1ar sales figures are not available jrJ the reconl, 

5 The above figure for plants claimed to be in commerce includes sales from pl:1nts of 

> tIle folJo'\'

ing aC(juired companies: Dothau Ice Cream Co, . Durham Dilil'Y Products Co"  

> Tl'

Fe Dairjps , .Bos' \-rll Dairies 

> , .

\ssodated Dairy I' WCltlCtS, ;\IeJH' rn-FusselJ, Clarksburg 

Di1iry, Creameries of America , Comm11nity CrelllJery, Greenbrier Dairy Products , and 

-\, L. Brnmund Co. It does not include s "lles of Dairylaud Filrms and Valdair Creamer,\,   

> or WE'

1cnme Crca1ien., which were acquired after the close of the fiscal :rei'l' 1961. the      

> l'il!' for wJdeh there (Ire nJes figures of Bentrice

s pl:1nts in evidence. The sl"lles of      

> these cODlpnnies ill .1DGO ,,-cre: DniJ'yJRnr1 and Yaldair 83';WO, OOO,

(lIH1 We ten'ilc 

$l:j, OOO, 488 FEDERAL TRADE CO.iJMISSIQN DECISIONS 

Findings 6'1 F. T. 

Chinese fOOlls. It has since acqn.in'd a llUlllhe1.' of ot:,e.:' mHnl1.t \;:tn C'l''' 

of food and related products including D. L. CJark Caudy Co.  

> Richnnlson Co. (mints),

fario s Food Products (oJil es and oil),  

> Hand Pickle Company,

qnire Dingee C'ompaltY (pickles r,ad pre-  

> serves), L,ntz & Schramm (pickles :1wl

pl'eSeTYES), Browll- Iillcl'  

> (pjd::le.s and pl'eSelTes),

hccld- Bnl"tush (mnl' !'Ear ne), Tasty Foods 

Inc. (potato chips), Gebhardt Chili POInter Co. (:Jexict1ll :rooc1s), 

Mitehell SYl'llp & Presel'n Co. I. . r. 1:Iallm., ny & Co. (cundy), 

l\osnrita l\Iexiean Facch. nlld /\.cbms Corp. (snack foods). ?\01l(" of   

> t.hese nOllchil'y-

pl'odnct. p. c(1\lisitiol1s is c.hallenged by the complaint. 

'Iota) S,des E, ight Lal'ge-st Dai.ries      

> 7". 1- e;,ponc1enfs total illes in In;) H)(in \Y(,1'P -i.

(j, 

IJ)U(J. Tbi in-

cludes both (birT pl'oc11lcts Hnd nondairy pl'Ocl11CtS. The total sales of 

the eight dairy companies ,,-jth the Jnrge:'t sf1Jes Onclnding nil prod-

ucts sold) were S :)7S 183 OOO (CX -nG). Hespondent.s sales volume   

> in H);,)D-

IOGO made it. the third among the eight large t cbiry ' om- 

> panies. The totni

nles oJ ench of these e1ght (1air - ('ompanies , in 

order of rank 

, "-

ei' e as follows; 

COmpall!):  

> ational Dniry Products Co.

--- _._------

Borden Co. -    

> -------- -- -

- - - -

Beatrice Foods Co. --

--- --_ _--_. - -

FOl'Pilost Dairies Co. -

------- ---- -- -- - . 

CamEl tion Co. --

-------- ---------- ----

\.rden Farms Co. --------------

Pet ::ilk Co. --------

---- 

> FaiJ'ilont Foods Co.

__n_ __n_ 

_----_._ ----

Sale8 

($000) 

Sl. Gu7 17U 

n;jG. 

> -+-+:
> O;jf)
> j,3G.

411. ()2!J  

> :364

806 

lWi  

> D7.

203 

Totnl - -----_u_-----

------ ------ - - ---  

> -.1

578. 183 

The sales of these eight companies , as it group, have increased by  

> Blo/

sinee 1950 , with respondent haying the third largest pereent, age 

increase (CX 350). The, chnnges in sa1es have varied among the e.ight 

companies as foJlows: 

> COmp(l11!J:

Xatlollal Dairy Products Co. -

___ ___ 

Borden Co. --

--- _.- - ---- ---

Beatrice Foods Co. --

----- ___ _--

_u_ 

---

Foremost D8iJ'ies Co. ---

---- --- --- ----_ 

u_-

---   

> Cn rnatioll Co. ------

---- ---- ---- ---- --------- -----

Arden Farms Co. -

------ ----_ 

_--__nn_u__--

-----

Pet :\lil Co. ---

-----__ 

u----_n___--_n--_ 

_--__ ---

Fairmont Food Co. --

Pen::c1It clwnge in sales 

(1950-1960) 

+8.' 

+51 

+116 +807 

+63 

+262 

+42 BEATllICl: FOODS CO:\IPAXY 4:-9 

473 Fi: 

> )) ,

Concentr,ttiol1 

8. Bottle\l fluid llilk and :rc' ozen dessc:rts a('connt 1'01' the largest  

> perce.nLlge of the

)alei' of mOSl tb iI'.\ comvnnies , othe.r than the 

elatiyely f, w cOlllw, nics speci: t!izillg in p,lrti(:lllal' products sHch as 

Lmttc- , cheeses or conc1en:-P(llllilk. In H);il , 0\11' of clairy sales of i ;31l 

lJ.:2 UOO , res )Qnd('nt.s SellE'S of bottjed J-heiel milJ, ,mcl (:1'2,111 ,,- ere. $l 

LG2 uon and it sn Ips of frozen (les ;t'rts \';e1'e :)i3 it:l i1Ui) (ex JUG).   

> \.Jl nnaJy:-i.'

j cr tile m \l'ket :31wl'E's of the Jeadillg c()llpHnies ill term 

of these t\yO Fl'incip,d pi'uducts d-fords ,i lneaningfnl mensnrenH2nt of 

the extent of (,01H' E'n\:r, t:oll in the dairy inctlst.l'Y. The record (lis-

doses that. in lL1;i, '; (tile latest :2:U for \\"bich tlw l' ccorc1 contains sneh 

dat,l) the ndl1C' of sLit:llH'llts lJY l:liJlllT:lcturillg c8tah!ishmen1sin the 

Cnitecl Stnt-(.! . of lJottJecl 111ilk llnd cre, llJ (inclllclillg Imttcl'miJk 

choeolatc mil k (\lHl at hex lnil k dl'lnl,:s) \ c1llollui' ed to J , ;ji (\ ;j18 UOn.  

> In the sallie yenl' the. "aIlle of

bjpmeJ1ts of frozen drsserts (including 

ice ('re , jct's , rl'OZerl de s(,l'ts COlJLlining fats other than bl1tter fats 

CLnd other frOZPH clairy products) auwl1nted to 1)3T iO-t, n()o (CX 

n nlld F) : 

In 10;'8 respondent. ranked fonrth among tlle large compani("s in 

the value of shiplnents of fluid mil1 and forzen de8serts , l'espeetiyely. 

Eight companie3 nc-counted :for ;:n % of the \ allle of shipments of 

fluid milk , and nine companies nccOlwtec1 for 1" 1." 1% of the yalne of 

shipments of frozen desserts, The incliyjc1l1nl companies ' respechye 

shares of shipments o:f each of these proc111cts "" e.re as follows (CX 

'126- D and F) : 

o The jigures abo'- e l Rf'd nrp tnken from the off('inl ng-l1!e of the 1:. 8. De!J lftment of 

Commerce, Buren.n of the Cen . Hes!Jonrlrnt conten(1 t!Jat l1ch flg11rcs c10 not nfford  

> proper basis for

determinin,,\ concentration in the clair " indl1str " because the:," e:;c!ude 

shipments by small processors ,,1"10 (10 not Jile reports with Censn , nno hence tbe re-

ported figures understate tl1C " uniye!' " ng1.1res and oyer. lte the market shnre of tlle 

large companies, Respondent e tillat!'s tlJit th!' Bl1n an of CI'IJS\;S Bbl1l1' reflect only 78%   

> of tbe act\l::l yalu€ of shipments of fluid mi,k. Ko estimate is

mnde cOIlcerning the frozen 

dessert shipments , except that rcspOllr1en( con(enr1s the - :1!'e " u1Jclel'statcll- probnlJly 

nI1J1rrdably. Tlle c:l:1miner is of tlle opinion that. ,,"!:ll' tllPre is j1rol),!lJl (\n,e l\\(lpr-

statemeut in the total fip;ures of ,-allJ!' of hipllcnts h \ !'e lS(ln of tlle noni!lcJu ioll of thr 

shipments of tbe nonrepol'ting sllaJlcr proccssors, ne\ertheles , the offcial Burenu of 

Census flgi\!''s . i\ tl!C lJod complete S(,t of fig;lles whidJ enl! l"' nli ticnll - iH' c()mp lf'(l. nre 

a hel!Jf!11 indicator of tJ1C )!eneml orr1f'l' of m:LgnitlJ1e of concentr.ltion ill t11e dniry 

industJ'" 

Ihe a!J(lve percentages fire bn;erj 011 the total value of shipments of thrse product\; , as  

> appearing in tlle offC'al reports of the Burf'nu of the Census

, and the jigllres of the       

> ino.ivi(1unl cornpn.nies ,as seJ1Hrntel . fPjJol'pd

11,1 them to tbe C()JJT!is ion . Hespondent  

> does not (jueRtion the accuracy of

t11l' lig-\JI'r. of the ilJ(1i,ichHl.l COJ)p l)Jies. Ho,y('\ el' , n   

> indicnted in the pl'evious footnote, responr1ent contpnc1s that the

tnt.HI or " uni,-erse    

> figures are underst3teo.

, and beneI' that tlle jJj(jjvi(Jjlnl t:.lrket R1J:res of tlle e ght Dr nine 

compnnies nrr. 0,-erstntu1  

> ;'79 70::-

# 71-490 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIO 

Finding 57 F.   

> Fluid lilk:

Perce' llt 

Borden --

------- ---

- 9. 

1\Htiomtl - --- 8. 

Foremost ---- - 4. 

Beatrice ------ -.--- 3.4 

Carnation -- -- 2. 

Arden --

---.------

--- 1.4 

Fairmont --

-------

-- 0. 

> Pet

---  

> -------------0.
> Frozen Desserts:

Percent 

National ---- - 13. 

Borden -- -- 10. 

Foremost - - 6.4 

> Beatrice ---
> -- ,

- 4 

Swift n_._u_--. ---- 2. 

Carnation --- ----- 2. 

Arden -------- n 2. 

Fairmont u_-- - 1. 

Pet ---------------- 0. 

31.0 

44. 

9. The datfl on ,,-hich the fOl'e, going percentages are based do not 

pl'm- ic1e a busis for determining whether there has beell any increase 

in concentratioll ill terms of the yu1ne of shipments of the eight or 

nille ' large companies. B owever , there is other evidence ill tl16 record 

purporting to compa.re, the e, xtellt of concentration ill the industry in 

1\);)8 , with that in 10;")4 and 1947 , in terms of the nllue of shipments 

of the eight largest companies (the identity of which is not revealed). 

This evidence is not precisely comparable to that discussed above 

since it is based on the ndue of shipments or companies classified as 

being in the dairy industry, whereas the evidence previously discussed 

includes all shipments of dairy products , irrespective or whether the 

producer is classified as a dairy concern. According to this study, the 

percentage of the "aIne of shipments or ice cream and iees by the   

> eight largest companies was i18%

in 1947 45% in 1054 , and 48% in 

ID58. On this bflSis the eight largest companies accounted for the 

same percentagc of shipments in 1958 as the,y did in 1947 , after 

having expcrieneecl a deeline in position betwcell 1047 and H);34. In 

the case of fluid milk (including all fluid rnilk products a, nd not 

mel'e, ly bottled milk), the eight largest companies accounted for 28%   

> of the value of shipments in 1054

and 20% in 1938. There is no evi-

dence of the position of these companies in 1$H-7. Considering the fact 

that then is some understatement in the universe figures and that 

there is no flssnrn.nce the extent of understatement was the same in 

1954 and 1058 , it is not possible to conch1clc that there has been any 

. significant increase in concentration in the fluid milk indllstr - merely  

> lJecl111se of

the 17 ) c1ifl' cl'ential ren aled by the abOl-e figures.       

> SThe figures cited ill this

P::Hi1grnplJ are taken from ex 424 , which is a report pre- 

> 1),11('1 u

the Bl1rerl1 of the CenSlIS for the Sllbcommittee on Antitrust and 1\Ionopoly of 

the r. s. Senate. Sf'e Tnble 2 of the report , PI), 10-. 11 (inclllc1ing explanation of tfLble) 

and footnotes 11 an(l 12, p. 74: ct. Table 4 , pp. 106 and 108 (indnding explalltion of 

tnLle). It wm be noted that the nniverse figures in Table 4 are sl1b"tantialiy identlca1   

> with those in ex 42. , on which the conccntration fignres in the

pl'CyiOl1S paragraph are 

h:1Secl. nowc,"c!' , sincc Table 4 contains no 1855 figures for bottied milk find other mill;  

> 11l'odllCts, the eXfllllner

has used Tablc 2 :lS the bn.sls for the alJoY( comparison. BEATRICE FOODS CO),IPA?\Y 491 

Findings 

10. The record contains further evidence of the extent of concentra-

tion in the froze,n dessert e, nd of the dairy industry, and the trend in 

concent.ration since 19.10. SUC11 eTidence is in terms of the production 

of frozen desserts , rather than ill terms of ,-a.1ue of shipments as 

Pl'BYlously discnssed. Set forth below is a table reflecting the produc-

t.ion shares of respondent and se' en other large produccrs of frozen 

deeserts in 1%0 and 19", (CX J66). 

Compan, It)5Q lG57 

::tjonal Dair  

> BOJ'

den 

Foremost Dniril':=-

Bl' ltl'ice Foods-

Arden F:lrms--

Cal"wtiOlL - - - -

Fnirmont Food 

Pd, :\:IilL_. 

> Percent

14,  

> 1. ;)
> Percent
> 12, 7
> ,J.

---

1. 9 

> 1. ;)

1. 7 

. 9 

2. a 

> 1. 6

, , ' -

TotaL_  

> .----

33, 30. 

While the abm-e table reH'nls that the prodnction shares of the 

eight c0111panies , as a gl'OUp, ha \" C increased by 4. 2% between 1050 

anc11937 , it seems apparent that most of the increase is accounted for 

by the change in fortunes of 011e company, Foremost Da.1rjes. lie-

spondenVs production share increased b ' 1.2%, but its relatiye posi-

tion dropped from third to fonrth. Jt JllHY be noted , howeyer , tlult 

respondent s proclnetioll ha.re of -d. T% in ID57 i fairly comparable to 

> its pe,

l'centage of \- alne of shipments ill 1038 , pl'wionsly discussed 

viz , 4. 9%. Similarly, the production shares of all eight. cornpl1nies in 

1937 , yiz , 39. 2% is fairly c.omparable to their share of "alne of ship-

ments in 1$)58 , as prCyiOllsIy discussed YlZ 41. 7%. Therefore 

> , ,,-

hile 

the above study lHv3 lilnitations as an iJH1icator of an ' trend in con-

centration in the frozen dessert indnstry between 1D50 and 1937 10 it 

is of ,-nIne as reflecting respondent s relat.iye position and the general 

order of magnitude of conccntr,ltioll aJlong the eight lnrge. companies. 

Respondent. s Area of Distribution 

II, Up t.o 19;)0 respondent's principal area of flllid milk distribntion 

consisted of an area extending from the Appahchifln J\Jonntains to  

> D T1H

total or " universe " figl1rpf' , on which ex 456 is hase(l . are tnken from figures     

> reported to DIe U. S. DejJartment of Agri uItl1re (1\, 1(;1.j)

TI:e figures of tllP. indivhlnill 

> comj111;ies '

were suhmitted by tbem to the eOllmis ioc 

> 10 .

\s inclicatecl in the study (li cussed in the iJrecf'ding lJrll'flgTfllJh , the percent of value 

of shipments of ice crcam Dnd ices DCCOl1l1tecl fot' b v the eight laJ'g"est companies in the 

> ice Cl'ea1l irl(ll1Q,

1" c\eciinul from 48% in 19-17 to 45% il1 1954 , and then returned to 

> 45'%, i11 1fJ3,

492 FEDJ::HAL TRADE COJ\1\fISSIOX DECISIOXS  

> Fill(1illg:3

07 F. 

the Continent, d Di\-ic1e. This :\lichyestern area was considered by 

respondent as its irnc1itiuw1 :Li:ea of fluid milk c1istrilmtion. It in-          

> c.nc1ec1 the. eight state ; of OlJio ,lndiann , Illinois ,ImYfl , )'Iissouri

Xebraskn , K(1l1 aS and Oklahollw aneL ill :lclclition , inclnc1e.cl pOl'tiOllS  

> of western PCll11syh-

;llli 1 and (',lstern Colomc1o, ll Hesponclent clist.ib-

nied ice CH'mll l llcl otLer :fozen IH' llcts in a SOI1H ,ylJat similar , but 

slight! \- ",ide)' area , than that ill ,,- lJich it c1istl'iblfi' ec1 flnic1 milk. Its 

area of frozen product distribution HlJ to IntJO 1nclndec1 the traditional 

eight-state flllid milk al'r,1. plw; \Yest Yirginia and ce1't8.iu ('(mnHes 

ill Pellnsylnlnia , Virginia , Tenllcssee , Kentllcky, Sonth Dakota , 'Vis-

eOl1sill , )'Iinnesota and Arkcllls(1S. Of the 175 l1cqnisitions llste, d in 

the cOllplnillt , as i11le, mlec1 , ():j were fluid mil!\ facilities locatecl in 

respondent's so-calJed trnclitional 01' pre- 1D51 di tl'il)ltion arpa , and 

GD WE'.lB ice CTt'llJll concerllS loeal-pd in its so- called traditional ice 

cream area , as HbO\- e described. 

1:2. As of August ;' , 1D; , Beatrice and its sllhsidiflries opcl'nted 

one or more dairy plcllts in the District of Colmnbifl and :20 stftes of 

the United States , including .Alabama , Californin , Colorado , Georgia 

awaii , Idaho , Illjnois In::liana , ImYfl , l\"nnsas , Kentucky, :\Llrylancl 

:\Iichigan linnesotn , :\lissOllri , :JIontana , Xebraska , Xew :Iexico 

Xe,\ - York , Xorth Carolina , Ohio , Oklahoma , l enns.vl\ allia , Tennes-

> -'('('

, Tex,ls , rtah , ,Yisconsill , ,Yest Yirginia and ,)'yoming. 111 addi-

tiOll , it. and its sllbsjdiarie operated sales branches in fI nmnbE'r of 

these states and 1n eight additionnl statefj incllH1ing Arknn :ms , :'lassa, 

clmsetts e"" Ilampshil'e , i\e Y , Jersey, Oregon , Hhode Islfnd , South 

Dakota , find Virginia (CX 1:35 A- ). Since ''-ugl1st 31 , 10:')6 , rc-

spondent has aC(lllired the p1nnt of n company in ", \l'iZOnll (CX 308). 

1:3. For pllrposcs of superyision and control , l eatl'ice s plants and 

sales branches are gl'ouped into yariOllS districts , eac, h lw,ulecl by a 

district manager. There are 1.") districts 

## , '  

> .-iz: (a) Et1 tel'll. l.b)

)Jorthcl'n Ohio and :\IicLignn , (c) 111diana :1nd ()l1thern Ohio , (cl) 

;onthern , (e) Illinois , (f) oI'tl1ern , (g) lowa-:Jlissonri , (h) KlllS:lS-

Xebl'aslm find Oklahoma , (i) Texas "ne! " ,rizona , (j) Colorado , (k) 

Ftah , (I) (ont"n" , (m) Idaho , (n) California , and (0) Ham1ii"n 

Islands (H.. 3; )D- :1n:2-). 

Prodllcts 

1- Hespondent mnJ1nl'actul'l's , processes , (1istl'ibntes nnc1 sells a full       

> Jinc of c1a, iry nnd related pl'odncts

, inelnding lmt.er , eggs, poultry, 

i.:;e cream , ice cream rnix , ice miJk , sherbet , mellorine , water lCPs , milk  

> Jl The area i

physically delineated in RX 3. 

The area ubole described is de1ineated in RX 46 and 74. BEATRICE FOODS CO:\IPAN 493  

> 473

Findings 

cl'eam buttermilk , skim milk : chocolate milk , bulk surplus Inilk 

chee , cottage chEese , condensed milk : pmn1eredmilk , fl'uit, ac1e , oleo-

llarg:arine frozen Toads and specialties. Its proc111cts and s tles ach, 

itiE's are organized along department lines , including the following 

depnl't.mellb: Butter and Butter By- Products : Eggs and Poultry:  

> Ice Cream and

Iix , Fluid lilk , Other Manufactmed Dairy Products 

and Other Sales and Services (CX 1M A-B). 

15. Respondcnt manufnctnl'cs , processes , distribute, s and se.lls its 

products under a. yariety of brand nanIes. Its principal bra.nd is  

> :Ue:c

dow Gold;' ,yhich is used on lmtter , ice cream products , and 

fluid milk. This brand is used in 36 st.ates and the District of Colum-  

> bia (eX 136 C).

Respondent also manufactmes and distributes ice 

cream department prodnets nnder 44 ac1ditiona.l brandna.mes in one 

or more states. These brands represent principally those of acquired      

> corn panics. It also Inlllnfc1ctnre

flld distributes fluid milk products 

uuder 2E' additional brand names in olle or l110rc states. These. brands  

> like,yise represe,

llt pl'illcipllily those of acquired companies. 

Post" ar Changes in Dairy Industry  

> 16. The rhiry industry has unrlergonc a considerable

metamorphosis 

during the postwar period. This has included substant.ial cha.nges in 

procll1ctioll and distriblltion technology: a Sllbsl' i1ntial decline ill the 

nn: lbC'l' of plant:: and processor (,dth an accompanying trend 

to\Yfll'llal'gcr plants nnd companies flncl fl consolidntioil of plants nlld         

> eomjJnniC's): and snbstantial changes in its traditional types oJ

customers and distrilmtional patterns. 

17. Prior to ,Yorld ,Val' IT the flni,l mill, industry consisted of a

\' lnrge llumber of small p1'odnccl's sen- ing separate. isohh, 'd tmYH 

markets. Each locality had its local processors supplying the necds of   

> Un' , comm11nity.

Iany of the processors were prolillce.r-distribntors 

> (;..

farmers who produced the ra" milk and bottled it for home sale 

flFl clcJiycl'Y. TllOse companies ,,-llic.l did not proclnce their oWlll1ilk 

pl1' c.hasE'cl it from 10raJ farmers all t' he basis of incliyiclnally nego-

tiated contracts. The nny milk was halldlecl mannally on the farms in   

> 1U-gallon cans
> , ,,

ith no atTempt to maintain the temperature so as to 

void bacteria g1'0' th, A. t. the milk plant the 10-gallon cans \\- ere  

> h"ndled mallwlly,

be.ing dmnpecl into open tanks for storage. The 

pipes and other equipment used in handJing and pasteurizing the 

mi1k at. the p1ant ,,-ere, c.leaned daily by hand. Pasteuri",illg waS ac-    

> c.omplished in open "

ntts :' by simply boilillg the milk. ' i1;hich ''IllS  

> usually cooled b

- open snrface coolers nnd thcn bottle.d in glass con-494 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIOKS 

Findings GT :E' .'l'. 

tainers. Home delivered milk constituted over 60% of sales , and the 

prices frolll the stores \,ere usual1y the same as those of home-   

> deJjycred milk. Because of the perishabiJjty of the product

and be-

cause many towns had ordina.nces requiring that the product be proc- 

> e;;sec1 in

the tOi\n in which it \ras sold , the typical milk market \vas 

relatively small and local in nature. l\filk companies operating 

manual plants and selling ungraded milk in glass-filled containers on 

local home-delivcry routes could operate profitably on 500 gallons a 

day (R. 21H-2120 , 2287-2288).     

> 18. By the middle 1960'

s the fluid milk industry had undergone a 

radical transformation. JHany COll1l11unities fLUe! states had adopted 

the Grade A Model Code of the U. S. Pub1ir Health Service. Grade 

A milk has a prescribed bactBl'ia count , and is processed with Triple   

> A Standard equipment (It 2321-

2326 , 2114 , 2120-31). The sanitary 

process begins at the farm where the milk is hanc11eclmore carefully 

and in many instances is pumped directly into stainless steel refriger-

ated tanks. It is delivered in refrigerated trucks and pumped through           

> stainless steel lines at the plant into stRinless steel holding vats (R.
> 2289). Pasteurization

-is accomplished with high temperature , short-

time processing equipment (referred to in the industry as HTST), 

which insures not only perfect pasteurization but reduces the cost 

pel' gallon if a given vollUne -is steadily available for processing. The     

> need for daily lUUld-

deaning of pipes and equipment is e1il11inatecl 

(R.. 2116 , 2132.- , 2203-V5). In front of each tank is a large packag-     

> ing or filling )),lcb1ne. Toda,

y the pacJmging is principally into paper 

containel's. The milk is then taken by eonyeyor to refrigerated storage  

> r0O111S or directly to

e1ectricrtlly re.frigerated trucks. .As a result of 

the improvement in processing and in delivery equipment , the prod-

uct is less perishable and can be delivered greater distances , in some 

instnnces up to 100 or 1:iO miles (JL 2136). This extension of markets 

has been facilitated by the repeal of many of the local community 

ordinances which required that the processor be located \\Tithin the 

connnnnit.y limits.      

> IV. Although the unit cost of production in modern ,automatic
> processing plants has tended to decline

, the cost of raw milk has 

tended to inerease. l\Iilk is now pnrchased from large coopel'ati,-

that se1l milk on behalf of thousands of indiviclnal prorlucers. The 

prodncer-eooperati\-es haye also benefited from the Fe.del'al \rilk 

:LIarket Orders , ,,'hi('h haY(: been ynslly extendc(l in area, dnring t.he 

post.war pel'iod. These orclers establish nniform prices for milk sold 

by farmers within the order area. A plant desiring to sell within It  

> particular Feeler"J ,rilk ,Iarketin

. Onler (F,BIO) area mllst pay BEATRICE FOODS COMPAXY 495  

> 473

Findings 

the i1xed federally established price for all milk purchased (R. 2110-

2121 2176). The extension of the F1DIO areas has resulted in in-

creasing the costs of many small producers which ,,-ere formerly not 

subject to such orders (R 2260-2210). 

20. The growth of the la.rge supermarkets during the postwar 

period has had a marked inflnellce on the dairy industry. Such mar-

kets have replaced home delivery as t.he nlajor channel of milk dist.ri-

bution. The merchandlsing of milk in supermarkets has broken the 

traditional price parity which had previously existed behyeell out- of-  

> store milk and home-delivered milk.

lany supermarkets now sell          

> their milk cheaper than asmall plant can sell home-

delivel'ed milk   

> (R. 2135-

, 2169-2110). 

> 21. ..

Accompanying the change in milk dist.ribution through supcr-

markets has heen the change in milk packaging. During the 10JCi"s 

automatic paper packaging equipment was perfected to take the place          

> of the traditional glass ('ontainers. In the early 1050' sthe larger

automatic half-gallon packaging machine was developed , and sales 

of that product incl'eased rapidly. ::frmy supermarkets insist on paper 

containers , particularly those of half-gallon size (R 2143 , 2166 

2169-70). One of the principal manufacturers of automatic paper 

packaging equipment is the Ex- Cell- Q Corporation. Its machines are 

Jeased on the basis of a flat fee per month , plus a per unit dHLrge for   

> each package processed (H. 2296

, RX 162). . While the size of the 

machines leased by it yary, a milk company must have a volume of  

> at least 1500 gallons a day in order to bc able to utilize the smal1est
> machine economically (H. 2207 , 2467). There are other compa,

nies 

which sell pre- formed paper cartous , but the cost of such containers 

is higher than those produced by automatic paper-packaging equip-

ment (H. 2616-10). 

> 22. The industry changes which have occurred in the posbn1r

period , inclnding the almost universal establishment of a. requirement 

for Grade A milk , the rise or the supermarkets as a major retail 

ontlet , the necessit.y for installing HTST equipment , paper packag-     

> ing a.nd other flltomatic eCIni

pment ill order to meet the higher Grade 

A standards , reduce labor costs : and serve the snpenlJarkets , the in-

crease in the cost of raw milk , the pressure on selling prices resulting 

frOlll cOlnpetition for supermarket business , have all resulted in in-       

> creased economic pressnre on the smaller producers

, many of whom 

hn.ve not been able to afford the more expensive processing equipmcnt 

and have not had the volume to justify the leflsing of automatic paper  

> packaging equipment,

. The resnlt has been it decline in the number    

> of sma.ller producers

, many of these having been acquired by the 496 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIOXS 

FindiJJgs G7 F, 'l. 

larger companies. As f1 result of the various technological changes 

discussed above , there has bee, n 11 consolidation of processing pla, nts 

even among the larger producers , in order to be able to utilize the 

expensi\ e typc of aut.omatic equipment. more effectiveJy. Iany of the 

smallel' processing plants Jmve been cOlll- m'tec1 into distribnt.ion or 

slles branches. 

23. Set forth below is 11 table comparing t.he nnmber of ilnirl Tnilk 

plants in the United States in 1060-1%1 with those, in10(i1- 1D(i (CX 

400 and J1 

# - ' - - - -

:\umlwr of flnid milk plant" 

---

Year ;"0 

volume 

listed 

t:l1(jerl 

> JTDUol1

quarts 

Ito5 

> mjJjQJl

quarts 

!jto10 

mjljon 

quarts 

> O\'l'

milion 

> qLl:Jr1S

Total 

## _.. --

10. '10- ;)1. -

19(il- L . 

Pcercrmt ch lnge- 

> ,")3. 2D,

.,, -,. 

080 

,)/" 

S;jS (J.S ):3\) 36. ;i6G 17(j  

> 7()

--2/1 +57 

# - - - ' - -

As is ineliclle() in the, abm- e table" the llllnber of milk plants in 

the Uniteel States has declined from 1(i OS9 1n 1051 to l liG in 1DfH-

1962 , or a dedine at i5;3?f. IIo,, eycl' , ,lS the ahove figures reH , this 

decline lla oC'cll'led almo t entirely in h'\o categories , viz , pJflnts  

> vi-

ith no yolmne listed and plants ," 'ith a \" olmne of uncleI' 1 000 000 

quarts. The " o ,' o11lne Listed" category consists prin('i pa 11y 

snwlJ pl,11ts whose volmne is so small that t.he trade association which 

c.ompiled the abon.' data was unable to nsceJ'tain t1 :,~'i, '. rJhL, 

lJlt3 ,,-it!l ,1 yolll1le lmdel' .1000 000 quarts ill'e those ,yhos(' produc-

tion is lc s th,ll S()l) gn110ns a day. The third category of plants. r:. 

tll( e with ,1 yolnme, of 1-;) million qnarts. inclllc1es p1nnts whose 

!Jl'()(lllnioJl yolt1ll(, is behyeen f-(J() g,111ons and 4000 gallons a clay. It 

seems probable tJJ 1t ilJe 2:1: decline. in t.he, number of plnnts in t.his   

> catep:ol'Y in'iJh-

es mainly plants at. the lun-er end of the production 

speC'nml. It, is , therefore , apparent that. the dec1ine in the number  

> 01 milk p1nnts in the Fnitecl

t:Hes (luring the 10- ,\ea,-' period in     

> voJn'cl in the. ,jbm-

e statistics inyoln' s almost e11tircly p1nnts \'ith a 

volmnc n.nc1eJ' l, nOn gnlJ(ms a day. These are the plants which , gen-

era1Jy spenkjng do not lwve HTST eqllipment , or automatic paper 

packaging equipment , a11(l ,yhich do not sen-e supermarkets to any     

> J:aDY of the pJants

Jisted under the " No \'o1nme " cntegor \- wcre operated by 

produ('er- dj8trHJ1tOJ'. flrmers , who are not reljl1ireu to be Jicensed by state Jaws und 

who do not report their prodllction statisties. For example. ont of 126 pJrmts listed in 

the " o Vohlme " category for Inn.inna. SO were not Jicen;:ed hy the State of Inn.i ma.    

> (Compare Jicenser1 companies in

ex 32(J with comJ)llnies listed in ex 409, Indiana  

> :-i'; i ,,11
> , )

BEATRICE FOODS CO fPANY 497 

473 Findings 

considel'able extent. The aboye table also reveals that the.re has been 

an increase ill the number of plants producing over 1 000 000 quarts. 

The number of snch plants has increased from 2 101 in 1950-1951 to 

270 in 1961-1962. This represents an inerease of 169 plants or 8%. 

2,1. The record also establishes that there has been a substantial in-

crease in the number of larger independent companies , as well as in 

the number or larger plants. Thus it appears that the number of 

independent companies producing 1 600 or more gallons of fluid milk 

a day has increased from P05 in 1063- 195'1 to 1 098 in 1061-1962 

representing an increase of 3(\% in the nmnber or such companies 

(RX lo1-G). 

Clwllges in Ice Cream lndnstry 

2;). Changes similar to those :dJOV8 desc6lJed in the fluid milk in-

dustry have also OC'C1llTCd among producers of ice cream and other 

frozen desserts during the p08hnn period. The ice cream industry has 

like,,- ise ,,- itnessec1 major changes in proc1llctioll and packaging tech-  

> nology, and in methods oi

c1istrilmtion. Prior to ",Yorld "'Val' II ice 

cream 'vas a confection mnnllfarr.nl'ec1 in l'elati, ely small plants ,mcl 

solL1 ,,- ithin a few mill's of the Elanll-f'tdnr ng f,lcilit:y. Ice creaIH 'Y,18  

> sold in bulk containers to so-

c:1Jied (; et stops such as drug stores 

reSlaurants anc1 confectiollery stores. Only 1'21nti\" ely small qnnntities 

ere sold in package form : nwiHly to srn,d1 so- c;lllecl ;; :\1011 and Pop 

grocery stores. Ic.e ('reD.ll 'n1S prod1lced in bntch freezers and packed 

in 1mlk. .. -\ lnJ'ge p lrt of the oP\:l':ltionw,l s pedol'l1pcl b : hand. Ice-

cream t1'H(,).S lUld t1 capacity of iOO to cJOO gallo11s \lHl many iYPl'e   

> refriger,lte(1 b

" dry ice. TilE' trucks c1istri1Jutec1 on ,1 !oCfll bfl is an(1   

> into adj:n'

ent l'ollnll, nitiC's. JlOt more 11l:11 :)(1 1.07;) miles frOTn tlle     

> freezing pbnt. 1n ,1(lditioll 1" '1H(t1l ice Cl'

eam HllllllTnctUl'ers ) there 

,yere many counter- frcezC'r l"f:tablls111nents 

> , ,,-

hich produced ice c.cam 

from plll'ch,lSf'd mi-,; and ohl it at retail on thpil' premjses. Some of 

the sma11t"l' wholes1tle ice neam 1l,Ullractl1J'E'rs also sold part of their     

> pl'Oc1UctiCll (1t retai1 for

consmnpticn on the premises (R. 32r1;J-

3J1-1-1iJ S;3- Rn). 

:2G. The HLjlrs hayc \yjtlH: ss('(1 :1 m uked tre.nd ill the direction of 

rtlltomntioll in the manl1f,lctnl'l' and packaging of ice cream and 

frozen desserts, The trend \\" F.; gin ll consielerable 1mpetlls by the need 

"The figllre" above citef! are tal.en from fl statistical anal \'"is pl'epued on belwIf of 

respondent from e,idence offered by complaint counsel. The comparison i" made ' with 

> ID5:1-

Jfjii4. rather Own J950-1951 (n.s was done b . complaint conni'd). b(,l IH1", " the r1aL\ in\" 

1950- 1951 do not permit a separ ltio!l of plant" on the ha"i;; of It mini:nnm ,o1nme of    

> OO gallon;; pel' dny,

498 FEDERAL TRADE CO:YI IISSIO),T DECISIONS 

Findings 67 F.T. 

to reduce production costs , particularly Jabor costs. Indicative of the 

extent to which labor costs had increased is that of one of respond 

ent' s l\:1idVl 8stern plants , in which hourly ,vage rates rose from 63 

ham to $2.46 an ham between 10JO and J 960. If respondent' s ice 

cream plants werc operating in 1960 with the same number of em          

> ployees as they did in 1938 or even 1048

, they would be operating at 

a. loss on the basis of paying the 1960 ' wage rates (I::X 38- H. 3275). 

Because the supermarkets , "ith their strong bargaining power , 11;1.-   

> bec.ome the most important single type of cnstomer in the ice cream

business , it would have been difIcult for respondent or other manu- 

> factnrel's to pass on the increased costs to their customers. I-Ienee

, the 

trend toward mechanization as the flns,,-el' to rising production costs. 

27. The process of mechanization has resnltecl in the semi- flntoma-

hOll of the plants of a. great many wholesale ice cream manufacturers 

and some plants have become fully antomatic. In a semi- flUtomatic    

> plant mechanization has been introdnced into the

sepa.rate stages of 

ice cream manufflctul'lng and packaging, ''lith some use of labor 

> be,

byee, n the ya.rious st.ages , whereas in a fu1ly automatic plant as few 

as two employees can operate an entire plant by pushing a series        

> bnttons on a central control board. In asemi-automat.ic plant the ice

cream nlix is automaticany prepared throngh valves and dials that 

control the \'olu11e or ingredients pnmpec1 into the mixing tanks. The 

freezing operation is performed with mnltiple tube , continnons free          

> iug units ,as cOlnpared ,vith the old batch-

type freezers. The new 

type contirmolls free, zer has a capacity of 400 to 1 000 gallons an hour 

compared to 120 to 2;')0 gallons in the old type. The semi- frozen prod-  

> uct is automat.ica,

11y packaged by machinery which forms , fills , seals 

and parHa.lly stncks t.he containers. They are then transported 

hardening rooms by belt conveyors or multi-shelf carts. The large 

electrically refrigerflted transports or distribution trucks 11mv in use 

permit deliveries to be made over distances of several hundred miles    

> to c1ist, rilmtion brflnch s or to the warehouses of large

supermarket 

customers (R. 3268-3271 , 33J5 , 3367- , 3383-86). 

28. As in tIl€, case of the newer types of flllid milk processing and 

paclmging equipment , the new semi- n,utomatic and automatic ice 

cream equipment is expensive and , requires that a manllfacturer have 

a certain minimum yol11me in order to be able to make Bffcient and 

economic use of SUd1 equipment. Inrli('a.tin of this situation is that 

jn\ olying automatic packaging equipmeJlt. The half-gallon ftuto-

mat-ie packaging machine was developed in the early 1950' s by Ander-

son Bros. l\Iannffetul'ing Company: in response to the need to eff-

ciently package ice cream to satisfy t.he (lemf\Jds of the snpermarkets. BEATRICE FOODS CO JPA 499  

> 473

Fillclings 

In order to make effcient use of such a machine a plant must first 

haye continuous freezing equipment with a minimum capacity of 350  

> to 4,

00 gallons pel' hour , which is equiva.le, nt to an annual gallonage   

> of 200 000 to 300

000 gallons. There have been yery few sales of sneh 

equipment to plants with a. volume of under 25() OOO gallons (E. 

4(178- J681) .  

> 20.

The.rc has been a snbstantia.l declinB in the nmnber of ice cream  

> plants sillce 1950 , a1t,

hough the decline has not been as great as that 

of milk phmts. Set forth below is a table comparing the number of       

> ice cream plants ill the l

l1itecl States )11 1961- 1962 , with those in 

1060-1061 (CX '109 and J12) : 

## ._,     

> Yenr
> Number of pJallts
> ::0 volume
> reported Volumelo,
> than 250 000
> gallons
> Volumeovel'
> 24\J, 9ml
> gtlllOllS
> Total

# --- - -

1950- 3L--- -

> 1Y61-

_--__ 

> Pm'Cent change-

-----  

> 020 520
> - 49. 02
> 772
> 176
> 21. 31
> 411
> 530
> +28. 95

202 226 

-------- --- ---, 

As indicated in the table , the nnmber of ice c.rf'. am plants has de-

cljned from 4, 202 to . 226 , or 23. 3Ijc oyer a. period of approximately  

> ten years. IIo\

ever , as in the case of fluid milk plants , this decline 

has occurred principally among the smalJer plants , viz , those with an 

annua.l volume under 250 000 gallons and those with 110 volume re  

> ported (which

, for the most part , includes pla, nts whose volume is so 

smnn that it cannot be ascertained by usual industry data collecting 

organizat.ons). Slwh plants , genel'alJy speaking, do not have a. suffi-

cient volume to support automatic. packaging equipment and , in many 

instances , do not have some automatic continuous freezing equipment.  

> In

the case of plants ,,'ith an annual vohm1e of 250 000 gallons and 

oyer , the number of plants has increased from 411 to 530 , or an in- 

> crease of

28. D5j/o. This increase is also reflected in the number of 

indqw, ndent companies (as distinguished from plants) manufactur- 

> ing- :250

000 gallons or more. Tlw nnmber of such companies has in-

crl' ;1sed from :146 in 1D50to 388in lOCH , 01' an increase of 12. 1% ill the, 

JllJllbel' of such inclependcut comp,llies (TIX 161- D). 

30. Some diffel'enec of opinion exists concerning t.he minimum 

volnme which is required in order for an ice crcam or milk plant to  

> be

viable " and compe.tit.h-e. A_ ccording to respondent , an ice cream 

plant must now Jlflye a minimmn yolmne of 250 000 gallons annually 

and a milk pJant must haye a daiJy yolume of at Jeast 1 600 gallons 500 FEDERAL TRADE C011MISSIUN DECISIONS 

Fiwlings r;j F. T.C. 

ill order to be considel' ecl \- 1ab10. Complaint connsel dispute this con-

tention , citing the fact that plants ,,-jth lesser yolmnes are able to 

operate profitably, and the fact that as of 1060 the!"e were still at   

> least 2

116 lce cream plants processing less than 2;')0 000 gallons nn-  

> nnally, and 3 04R Jnilk pbnts processing less than 1

600 gallons daily. 

The examiner considers it llmccessar:y to clete.nnine what is the 

precise c1iyiding line. rolmne-wise , bet"een yiclble and marginal iee  

> cream and milk plants.

-IoweYer , based on the substantial and nn-

contradicted evidenee presented by respondent , it js c1ear that plants 

haying \ olnmes snbstantially below those. above indicated , operate 

under a considerable disarln11tage. Sneh plants , generally speaking, 

fire unable to afford the type of equipment neCeSSfll'Y to overeome in- 

> creased labor and material costs

, and to compete for the high-yo1mne 

lol'- er profit.- mn, rgin supermarket lmsiness. \Vhile it 11ft)' be that there 

are, smal1er plants which are still able to operate profitably, the :fact        

> remains that l yery snbstantia 1llllnber of such plants luu'

e ceased 

operating in the last ten years. The record is c1ear that their inability 

to snpport the requisite types of antomatic and semi-antomat.ic equip-

ment was a significflllt factor jn the demise of 1111l)' of them. 

II. THE . \CQ"LfJSITlOXS   

> \. iI Cr'

cru!l'al 

1. During the. periocl behyccn 10:")0 and H)(-) there ha\ce been GOo 

acquisitions of (lair:, ' concerns by eight large so- calle.d llnt.ional clairy 

()lll)nni(', . i)le l"\ding responc1( nt. Htional Dairy Products Corp.. The 

Borden Co" Foremost Dairics Tnc. Carnation Co. : Arden Farms Co. 

Fairmont Foods Co. , and Pet )'filk Co. These same eight companies 

have milde oyer 1 )Q0 dairy acquisitions in the Cniteel States since 

190;3 (CX J2li). 

2. The comphlint , as amended , chal1ellges the making of 175 acqui-

sition!:; by respondent. Of the 7, aIT nllegecl (in Paragraph Six) 

to be corporations engagp(1 in commerce , flnd OS :11'8 alleged (in Para-

graph SC\-eu) to be inc1iyi(hwlly o1\' nec1 nOllCOrpOl'atc clairy CUJ1CPl'lS. 

Of the 77 C'orporilie ncqnls itions complaint connsel concede in tJleir 

proposed findings that the e' ic1('ncp f:liJs to e.stnbli h that . )0 of sllc, 

companies Vi-ere engaged in interstate COl1Jllp.rce ,yithin the meaning 

of the Cb:,:ton , Act , Jellying a babncp of 37 ncqlli itions inyoh- ing 

COl'pol'1t, ions claimec1 t.o bc engage(1in intcTstate ('Ollunerce. Respond-

ent. contends t1Ult the record e ;t8.lJEshps the existence of intershte              

> 1;; See , for example, R. 2516-, 25:=4 ,2556 , 4629. Of npproximntel,' 120 mi,k p1nnts
> 1\hif'h discontinued processing in Indiana bct1\een 1950 and 1960 ,all but ::b01lt fOllr were

mannaJ , non- a!ltomatlc plants (RX . R. 27!JS et selj. '!S'.2- 2:i). BEATHICE FOODS COMPANY 501 

-i\" Finding::. 

commerce -with respect to onl V lD of the corporate dairy acqnlsitiolls.              

> 'Vith respect to the noncorpon\.te acquisitions ,complaint counsel
> concede that the great bnlk of

tlH'Jll inyolYe concerns fiS to ,yhich the 

record is lackinf!' in substantial e," idence of engage.nl'llf in interstate 

commerce at the time of the nCfluisition. 

3. The great preponderance of the acquired concerns , both corporate 

and noncorporate , ill"oh-e l'('.ltin l.r iJmdl companies. Only 28 of the   

> entire Iii)

companies acqnircd had sales of over $1 000 000 annuaHy, 

and 32 had sales of $500 000 and oyer. The total sftles of the 32 con-

cerns ,,- i1'h sales of iJOO OO() and 0\-('1' amounted to approximate1y 

$129 000 000 , as of their la t year of operation. The lal'gest concern 

acquired "' as Creameries of America , Inc. , "hose sales were approxi-  

> mately $4IJ O()(), (I()().
> .,,
> . In

lccol'dan('e \\"1th the motions tiled ,,'ith its answer and the    

> right reserved to it in the pre-trial order

, respondent. has moved to 

dismiss the complaint 01' to strike any reference the.rein as to all 98  

> concerllS not in\

oh-ing corpor:1tion5. Hesponc1ent has also moved to       

> dismiss the cowplnint as to 48 corporate

acquisit.ions inv01ving cor-    

> porations concerning "hich it

contelHls the record fails to establish    

> the existenance of

, or snflcient engagement in , interstate commerce  

> and as to eight conce,

rns which it contends ,yere not engaged in the 

sale of fluid milk or j' rozen products. These motions win be herein-

after disposed of. 

5. Complaint c0l111selllHye submitted proposed findings of over GOO 

pages with respect. to each of the 175 concerns flcqltirc(l 1))" l'espond-

> (',

, irrespech\'e of whether they were corporations or "ere engaged  

> in interstate

commerce. The examiner considers it sl1Hicient :for pur-

poses of this decision to make detailed findings as to only the 37 

acquisitions innJl\-ing cOl'porntions claimed to be engaged in inter-

state commerce. At, the conclusion of s11ch finding.s , additional SU111-

mar)' findings ,,- ill be made as to the remaining ncqllisitions. The 

examiner , accordingly, turns to a consideration of the evillence in 

the record pertaining to each 01 the flcqnisitions jnvolving a corpora, 

t.ion claimed to be engaged ill interstate commerce. Snch acquisitions        

> will be considered in order of the size of 8ftch compftuy nCCluil'ed , as

ref1ectedin its sales volume.  

> B.

iBanU3l'ies of Am, BTicCI : Inc. 

The Acquisition 

1. Respondent acquired Creameries of America : Inc. (hereinrtfter     

> referred to as "

Creameries ), pursuant to an a.greement of merger 502 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIO!'S 

Findings ()7 F, 

dated Junc 1 , 1963 (eX 16 l\-U). As a result of the agreement 

Creameries -was merged into Beatrice on Allgnst 1 , 1863 (eX 101 

, p. 

20). The merger involved the issuance by Beatricc to Creameries 

stockholders , of 81 260 shares of a new 4 % preferred stock and 

250 shares of common stock , on the basis of one sharB of each type 

of stock for each eight shares of Creameries ' common stock. The stock 

thus received by Creameries ' stockholders had an aggregate \ alllC of 

approximately $11 000 000. At the time of the acquisition Creameries    

> assets totalled $17

753 76;1, compared to Beatrice s total assets of 

$J8 J37 320 (eX 16-2 212). Its net depreciated book "aluc was ap-

proximately $11 300 000 and its ,vorking eapital was approximately  

> $'1

500 000 (eX 16-2 12). 

2. Creameries ' head offce was located 111 Los Angeles , California.  

> It

was an outgrowth of a predecessor of like name organized on 

October 4, 1920 , which functioned Jargely as a holding company for 

seven subsidiaries engaged in the dairy business. The Creameries 

corporation acquired by respondent was incorporat.ed in Delaware on   

> Februal'Y 29

, 1936 , as a result of its consolidation with its c.onstitl1ent 

eompany of the same name and a number of the latter s snbsidial'ies.         

> Atthe time of the lncrger Creameries

was one of the three largest  

> dajry product c.oncerns operating exclusively in the territory west of
> the H:ocky

Iountains. Its area of operation included California 

Colorado , Idaho ew l\Jexico , Texas , Gta, , ",Vyoming andllawaii. 

In addition to processing and distributing dairy pl'Odllcts , including 

fluid milk , cream , milk pmvcler , butter , cheese and ice cream , the com-

pany distributed frozen foods , operaJed c1a)l'Y farms and , through its    

> lIa:waiian subsidiary, operated a brewery, ice plant. lnd public cold

'lorage ,,arehouse (CX 16-2 22), Its consoJidated net sales of all 

products in 1952 -\Yere 840 040 000. During the five years ending 

December 31 , 1952 , the proportion of its sales in the quiolls product 

lines hancUec1 by it "' as as fo11O\ys (eX 143 , p. 6) :  

> Product: PcrCCilflf!/e

lilk and cream ---

--- -------- ----

-- G. 

Ice crealn and other frozen confectiolJs ---

# - . 

Butt.er --

--------- -.---- ----- - , 

> Ot.her dairy products --

--- - -..--

rQzen foods --------

---- --- --

> Other products ----

--- ----

3. Creameries : opcTatiolls we, re conc1nctec1 on a geographic divisional 

basis , in the name of the original company in e, a.ch territory (CX 

16--% QQ p. 2; CX 16-2 22" pp. 1;,-16). The varions divisions. the BEATRICE FOODS COMPA:'Y 503 

473 Findings 

terrHory included in each division , t.he sales of sneh divisions in 1052 

and the percentage of the, tot-a.! represented thereuy were as follmys 

(CX IJ3 , p. 6) : 

Divis O:l Tenitory 

> :\'

etsales1952 Percent of 

total 

# Honolulu Hawaiian Islands- - - -

# - - - - -

UtalL-- - - - - Utah , Colorado and vVyo1ning- - --

El Paso- - Tp-xaEi and N P.W :\lcxico-

# Idaho-- Idaho-- --

Bakersfield 

______  

> -Caljfornia

__- -- -

San JosP. 

_------ 

> -California

___   

> Los Angele. -- - Californi:l

_- - - - --. - - - -- ~~~~~~ 

813, 275 000 

, 782 , 000 

4:38, 000 

, 034, 000 

511 , 000 

J. During the five-year pcriodl1p to December 31 1052 , Creameries 

had an a\"erage annual profit before t nxes of $1 608 942 , and an average 

net profit after taxes of $88"H:J (CX 16-2 213). In the year ending 

December 3L 1052 , its last full year of operations before the merger , its 

net profit before taxes was $1 888 666 , and its net profit after taxes 

was $879 255. The breakdown of t.he earnings of the various divisions 

beforc taxes , during the year 1852 was as follmys (CX 16-2 2IJ) :  

> Division:

Earnings before trlJ.C8 

Honolulu --

-------- --------- _._ --- --- - - - -- 

> $3::W ;JOG

Utah --

--- ------ ---- ------ - - - - - --- - - - - --- : 

, 381 

El Paso__ 

--------- ---- --- - . - .._  

> - 324.

873 

Bakersfield -- 

> - --

--- --- ---- ---- -- --- 

> -- 2710.

70-: 

Sail Jose-

---- ---- ---- - -

---.- -:8. 07H 

Los Angeles_------- - u_ 

--- --- --- --- ---

u-- -- 1C 82 , 2;i1 

Id' aho - 

> -- -

- - - - - - ----- - -

> - 19:3, .

')30 

Honolulu brewery --

--- - - - - ---

> - m3G. cS42

H.a,Ylry frozen fOI)(ls-- 

> -- -

----------

-- - 13 , -:2.'     

> UI'wllocatecl general offce expense (ex11e11ses)--

___ --------

- 34 3:::       

> "" The nboYe figure (loss) inclll(les a $32 000 writeoff on the goor1 wil of an acquired
> COllPi1Il

5. Although , as above inc1icf1teel , Creameries ' operation was f1 profit-

able one at the time of its merger with respondent , the record disclo2es 

thaL it had experienced a significant decline, ill its rate of profit during 

the postwar periocl. Set. fort.h belo,,- is a table reflecting CreHl1el'ies 

profit picture during the period of 18J6-1952 (CX 16-2 210). 

rDollar in thousands)          

> 1946 194.7 1945 1:J4(1 150 19, :'5
> , j5G :-30 !)S ;;. fi 1.1

fH, 36\J      

> 635 8747 t'SiJ3 , DOh :;f'Ol :;837
> 3;) Sa

' - - --

)iclprofiL-- _.u - 

> Pl'rCt

\lt of prol'it to sales_. -- - 

> - -."
> $4' j(1
> :;8,(1
> 1.7'

504 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION" DECISIONS 

Findings G7 F. 

As the above table reveals , Creameries ' sales remained fairly static 

duri(lg the period 10H-1960. Despite the het that its sales during 

this period '\:Cl'C more than $3 000 000 greater than those achieved   

> during 1940

, its rate of profit ,,'as approximately half. Although its 

sales incre, ased substantially in 1951 and 1932 , its rate of profit con-

tiuued to c1ec.ine. Thus , ,,'hile its sales in 1952 ,,- ere oyer $13 000 000 

gl'el1Ler than in 19-46 , or an inerease of 37% its rate of profit on such 

sales declined from 4. 6% to 1.79)-(. 

G. During the postvmr period Cremneries expended over $11 000 000 

for plant impron mellts , bnildings , eql1jpment a.nd other capita.! items 

(CX 16-Z 13: CX 16-Z SS , pp. 23 and 41). Since it ,,' as nnable to 

finance t.hese improyements out of current earnings , it did so in part 

through a. stoek offering of common stock ill H). , which yielded 

SS,300 OOO , and partly by a loan of $J, OOO OOO from Eqnitable Life       

> Assurance Society in 10J, (R. J6J1

, J666). The terms of the laiter 

lOcll required that. Creameries set up a sinking fund of $250 000 a year 

to repay the loan (1\. 4G-i:2). In 19i5:2 Creameries fOllnd itself in need 

of additional fnnc1s to finnnce furthcr cnpit;d expenditures. It gave 

conside, r8tion to financ.ing these through u" further stock issue , but    

> l'1l1ed out this

approaeh due to a decline in its stock from approxi-

mlltely ,,22. IJIJ a share in 10J6 to Sl1.00 in 1062 , which WltS below the 

stock s book Ycllue of apPl'oximately $17. 00 a share (R. 4649 , 4672- 

> 4Ci13

, HX 15;3-C). ConseqlLently, Cre lJnel'ies tnl'necl to the insurance 

eompany which had loaned it $-:pOO OOU in 1947 for addit.ional 

financial aid. It "-,lS ab1e to obtain a comm1trnent of $1 000 000 , which 

,yas less than t.he amount it sOl1ght. Due to the mergel' ,,'ith respond-

ent , this loan commitment was neyer taken up (H. 4647 , 4G71).     

> I. During the period from 1046 to ID3

, Creameries : cash require-

ments exceeded the funds aYililable to it from its Cl1rrent operations 

by 88 024 000 (HX 1;)o-A). During the same period its working 

eapital , as a perL'ent of sales , cleelined from 14. 1% in 1046 to 9.          

> in 1952 (R, X1;)0). Further indicatiyc of Creameries ' capital posi-
> tion ,yas its current ratio

(i. e. ratio or cnrrent assets to current lia-

bilities), in compnl'ison with that of respondent. ,Vhile respondent' 

current rat.io between 10JP nnd 10,)1 ,,- ns between 6. 49 and 5. 

Creameries : C11rrent ratio ,,-as between 3. 29 and 2. 34 (eX 16-2 22 

11). 

8. The initiati\-e for the rnerger between the two companies eame 

from Creameries 

> , ,,'

hich npproac.hed Beatrice in December of 1951 

thl'ough its investment broker , K.ic1der , Peabody & Co. of New York. 

There "' ere (,YO principal reasons for Creameries ' interest in merg-    

> ing \rith alargBl'

company. One was the fact that the founder , presi-BEATRICE FOODS COMPANY 505 

,,' 

Finding,, 

dent. and " spark plug :' of the c.ompany, who was then about 65 :years 

of age , vishecl to retire becanse of health and thcre w" as 110 one within 

t.he organization who ,,' as interested in taking his place. The second 

was the, fact that. the company felt it eOllJclllot grow in acconlance 

,yjth its potential bceanse of its lirnitec1 financia.l resources (R. 1141-

11:15) Y Creameries "as interested in entering i11to a merger with 

BeatI.jee , in particular , because although the latter \\ as a larger com-

pany Sel'Vi11g greater areas than Creameries ) it competed 1\ith 

Creameries in only a small portion of CJ'cnmel'ies ' territory. Cream-

eries expected that the " ,-ld(1itioJl of Creameries : markets to Beatrice 

;e1'- i('e area should enable Beatrice to capitalize , in these markets , on 

its ll,ltjollal advcrtising program \yithont increasing a(lIertislng 

ro::ts ':' ':' . . ((lndJ that varions other eco11om1es will 'accrue from 

combined operations oj' the 1\\0 companieo " (HX HO-A). 

9. The principal reasons for respondent's interest in proceeding 

with the merger were (CX 16-Z 12; ex 16-2 22 , PI', J1 12; ex 16-

2221) : 

l.) It ,yould permit Bentrice s expfllsioll into areas in vi' hich , with 

two exceptions , it was not then doing business. The heartland of Be.fl-

trin s r, xist.ing operation ,,' as in the area behyeen theeastcrn slope 

of the Rocky j)Iountain, j fWcl the Apptdachinn Iount.ain , wlwreas 

Creameries operated west of the Cont.inental Diyicle. Except for t,,-

areas of CaJifornia , Beatrice did not. compete ,,- jtb. Creamc;ries. 

(b) 'Vit.h the exception of the 1-IrnY,liian Ts1nnds , the exp,lJlsion 

,,-

ould be into areus in \yhich the grmyth of popubtion and cOlnmerc1al 

actiyity was above flyerage. 

(c) Creameries "- as a, lending dist.ributor of dnjry pl'odllcts in the 

are,lS ,,-here it did business , with the exception of California. Its 

operation in California was considered to ;; snpplement and fit in ''IelF' 

,,-

ith Beatrice s operations there.  

> 17 As Creameries advised its stockholders

when the merger agreement was entered Into              

> in June 1953: ":b' o:r sometime past it has been increasingly e,icent to your Directors

that additional capital would be required in order for Creameries to maintain , and effect  

> normal expansion of its position in the territories served, Salcs in 1952 ,vere

$10 2,'W, OOO 

(2G%) in c:-cess of 1948 sales , but during this period working capitnJ was liOt increased. 

Ibm , unless the problem of raising alJditional capital "ere met by substantially rc-

ducing lli,idends, additional outside. capital would be required. Halsing capital through  

> additional long-

term debt or ne.w preferred stock '\ould undoubtedly be accompanied by 

the imposition of restrictive provisions wllleh migh t wen be burdensome to the holders  

> of Creameries

' common stocl;:, Obtnining more cCLpiti11 tJJrougb iSSl1IlD' Ce of additional 

common stock under current cODditions would dllute the stocl,bolders ' present book value      

> since in rf'cent cars the ilA.rket price of Creflmeries

' common stock bas been only around 

two-thirds of its hook value " (RX 149-A) , 

379-702--71--.'Of) FEDERAL TRADE CO).1MISSION DECISIONS 

Findings 67 F. 

(d) As a result of Creameries ' capital cxpenditmes of around 

$12 000 000 since 1946 , its plants , equipment and buildings were in 

good condition , except for the Los Angeles arCR and several loca.-  

> 60n8 in Utah.
> (e) Creameries

' method of operation ,vas very similar to that of    

> Beatrice in that

, (1) it operated on a decentralized basis and (2) it 

did business in the same type of comnwllities , viz , medium- sized and 

snHlll cities and towns. Its operations could therefore Ge integrated   

> into Beatrice

s with a minimum of change. 

e f) Creameries could be acquired at a price 'which "-as considered 

to be advantageous. The cost to Beatrice of 811 200 000 ,, H's less than        

> the book vaJue of Creameries 'stock (approximately 811 8011 111(11),
> and less than the amount Creameries

had invest eel in its business  

> since 194-6.

10. \Vhile respondent considered the ac(pisitioll to be a desirable 

onC j it also recogl1izec1 thf1t there ,vere certa.in disadvantageous aspects 

to it (eX IG-Z 22 , pp. 42--B). , For example , it had some reservations 

about acquiring the I-Inwaiinn Islands portion of Creameries ' operfl 

t10n8 due to the then cleelining population and the downward trend 

in its economy (CX IG-Z 22 , Pl'. 33- , 42-4:1; d. CX 1 G-Z 226 , p. 6). 

Consideration was also gi,' ell to trying to induce Creameries to 

dispose of its brewery operation in H awaii and its (bil'Y farm in 

Bakersfield , California , so that these ,,' ould not llfYC to be taken into    

> aC('Ollnt in the

consideration to be paid by respondent (CX 16-2 22   

> pp. 16

24-). flowe,yer , Creameries insisted t.hat if the merger were to         

> take place ,al1 of the assets ,wI11c1 have to be inc111c1cd (R. lH8-

11:l). 

\.nother factor which Beatrke considered to be disac1nlntageous "-

the additional concentration ,,- hich "ould result in the dairy products 

portion of its business. It was estimated that the acquisition ,,' ould 

increase its milk and ice cream sales from 48% to 52% of its clollar 

sales. ,Vhile the geographic. dJversification aspect of the acquisition 

was considered a phlS .factor , tJ1e further concentration of respond-

ent' s business in milk find ice cream ",ns considercd to be unclesirabJe. 

Beatrice was also dnbious about the advantages to be obtained from    

> the California portion of Creameries

' operation " dne to the highly 

competitive situat.ion and smal)er margins on both milk and iee 

> cream ill Ca)iforni,t * , ':'

, (CX 1()-Z :2:2 , p. 42). Jlowever , it con-

sidered that the yalllc of Creameries ' California properties would be 

increased by the consolidation ' with Beatrice s mnl operations in the 

area. , thus giving respondent " an opportunity to possibl;v improve onr 

profits in those flreas. Veighingthe advantages and djsndyantnges BEATRICE FOODS COl\IPANY 507  

> 473

Findings    

> it considered the

a.cquisition to be to its own overall advantage be-

cause: " (TJhis is an opportunity for our company to go into ne'", 

areas , which are growing areas with major operations , at a price 

lower than we could ever develop the business in these areas. 'Vith the 

possible exception of IIawa.ii , I think they are areas where we should 

be in. This is particula.rly true of Texas , NC\\ lexico , Utah and 

Idaho " (CX 16-Z 22 , p. J3). 

Market Conditions  

> a.

California 

11. As mentioned above , Creameries had three operating divisions 

doing bnsiness in California. They were: Sa.n Jose , Bakersfield and 

Los Angeles. Thc San . Jose division did bnsiness in an area of north 

central California just south of San Francisco; the Bakersfield di-

vision sold in an area of south central California around Bakersfield; 

and the Los Angeles division operated in the Los Angeles area of 

southern California, . The three divisions accounted for approximately 

26% of Creameries ' sales in 1052. Respondent was in competition 

only with the San Jose and Los Angeles divisions. It competed with 

the San Jose division only in the saJe of ice cream , while in Los 

.Angeles it competed in the fullline of dairy products. The operations 

of each of Creameries ' di visions , thc extent of their competition with 

respondent and a discussion of gcneral market and competitive COll-

ditions in each area where Creameries did lmsiness will be discllssed  

> separately below.

San Jose Divis-ion 

12. Creameries ' divisional headqnal'ters wa.s located in San . Jose 

Ca, lifornin , ,dlCre it opel' atecl both a milk and an lee crenrn plant. Its 

opcrations in t.his part of California were condnc ted under the name 

of :l\ission Creameries. In addition tl) pro('essing plants in San . J ose 

it had a, branch milk processing pla.nt at 'Vat-sonville and distl'ibntion 

branches at Santa Cruz , :Monterey, Sa.1illas and Los Banos. The San 

J ose di vision marketed its ice crean1 under the brand names of l\fission 

and American IIostess. Its milk and other dairy products were mar-

ketcd under the name of fllission. 

13. The main Inilk plant in San Jose was a. modern plant , in good 

condition , and ,yas cap lble of being expanded. It had HTST eqnip-     

> 11' There is some reference in tbe rf'corrJ to Los BRno being a In. (tncb manufacturing
> plant (CX IG-Z 21S). Howcver, jf there was such a plant, It was Dot in operation at the
> time of the acqlli ition

, snch branch being principally 11 receiving stllion (CX 16-Z 22      

> pp. 31-32; CX IG-Z252 , pp. 1-2; ex 16-

Z 28). 508 FEDERAL TRADE COMJ\IISSION DECISIONS 

Finclings ()T 

ment , rmc1 machinery Jor paclmging milk in both glass and paper con-   

> tainers. It processed about 8

000 galions a day (eX 16-Z 22 , p. 31; 

ex 16- 2 26). The ice cream plant W(15 JQ( ated in an oltl-garage-type. 

building, which ,,-as ljeing leased , and ,",as in poor condition. Its 

pastenrizing and p1'ocessing equ1 pment was , however , in good con-

dition. It had all flllllllfll ga, llonage of about 2;50 000 grdJons (CX 16-

> , p. 31; CX 1 G-

Z 27). The brnnch milk plant at \Vatsonyile was  

> located in an old run

clm"\ll store- type building; which was ueing 

leased. Its daily ontput. was about 6 000 gallons. It used nTST equip-

ment , and had equipment fol' fi1Jing both glass and paper containers 

(CX 1G-Z 2:2 , p. ::2; ex 16-Z 28). In :lCcluiring the San t Tose iee 

cream p1ant respondent conLemplated that the plant ,,-0111d be c10sed 

and its ice cream J1Hllllfaetllring operations consolidated with re-

sponclent: s own plant at Los Gatos , 12 miles away. This was , in fact       

> done shortly after the merger took place (H. 1077-,8). In the case

of the ,Vatsonville milk plant , while it was regn, rc1ed as a profitable 

nnd e, fiicient operation , re.spondent. considered combining it " with the 

San Jose milk plant. This , howe' , ,vas not done (R. 10(8). 

14. The San , Jose c1i\cjsion ,vas one of Creameries ' smaller divisions. 

Its 1961 sales of approximate1). S3. 600 000 , represented 8. 18% of total 

company sales of 0\- 81' $H OOO OOO (CX 16 Z 1H). The only division 

selling dairy products ,,' hich accounted for a smaJ1er percentage oJ 

Creameries ' sales 'YflS the Los Angeles diyision , \'lit.h G. G9:; . In the 

four months enc1ing April 3() 1D53 the San Tose division s net sales   

> were $1

247 519 ant of total company sales of $14 8\)(,'113 (CX 16-              

> 122), This ,again ,accounted for the sma) Jest proportion of sales
> except for the Los Angeles division. As previously mentioned

, the 

net. earnings of the San Jose diyision , before tnxes , were $48 073 in 

106 (CX 16-1: 214). The onJy dairy division wit.h lmver earnings 

Tfas Los Angeles. During the four-month period ending A. pril 30 

1953 , the Sflll . Jose djvision lJac1 n net loss of 57 961. 1-\.11 other divi-

sions selling da.iry products shmrec1 fl profit , except for Los Angeles 

(CX 16-Z 122). 

Hi. As in the case of the other c1iyisions selling' chiry prodncts , the 

largest proportion of the snles of t.he San , Jose c1iYision consisted of 

milk nnd ice cream , a.nd of these , milk accounted for the greater part. 

# In the, 12-month pedoc1 ending ( July 31 1952 , the diyisioll sold 

060 G82 gallons of Inilk and 2GG 332 gallons of ice cream (CX IG-

112 , 113). The record docs not disclose the relative profit abi Ii ty of 

81/('h sales during this period. I-10wever , c1nring the last 10 mont.hs of 

1950 (the latest period for which s\lch figures are ,wailable in the BEATRICE FOODS COMPANY 509 

473 Findings 

record) the San Jose di\-ision I1fld an operating profit of 853 207 on 

milk alld $10 305 on ice Cr8GIl , out of it tota.l profit of $74 clGQ on 

dairy rn' C(111d sales (CX 1G-Z 118). In t.he year 101-0 it.s operating 

profit. on milk was $lnO 351 and t-wt on ice cream 'yas $03 382 , out of  

> a toLd profit of ;3182

210 on clairy product sales.   

> lC. C'l'came,

i'ies ' San . Jose division (1istributec1 milk , ice cream and 

other dairy product::: in nn ,lrell at the southern end of the San Fran-

cisco Bay area bHnYll ns t1J€, " Jowel' bay nncl coastal arca (R, 3800). 

This area C'onsistc(l of the Iollmying: principal cOlnl1umities (includ-

ing the COlllt.ir.s ill ",lJi('h snch comlllmities were located) : San . Jose 

in Snub, Clane. Count)" , 'Y,lts01wil1e and Snub Crnz in S:1uta Cl'm 

mmty, J\IOllterey and S llin(ls in :JIonten' .y Comity and Los Ba110s  

> in

lel'C'pd County. The ice C'l'enm distributed in this area. ,yas 1lii.nn-

i':1crm' ed in CJ'enJlel'ie ' plant: locntec1 in San Tose. The milk (11s-  

> trilJltul in

8:(1)1::l Clara Cmmty was processed in t11e S: n , Jose plant 

,,-

hile tlJat . oJc1 in the other thre.e connties \yas processed at the 'Yat.- 

> sonyille plant (n. 10'17

, ex IG-Z 28). 

11. Hesponclent pJ'xlllcecl and c1istl'ilmtec1 only ice cream and other 

frrncll desserts in the area in y,-hich Crmunerics -),11 J asp cli \"sion  

> operntc(:. It (lid

1101' process OJ' c1istl'ilmte fLuid l1l.ilk pl'oc1ncts. Its 

pbnt was located at Los Gatos in Snntn Clara CormtY1 approximately  

> In 1

1iles SOiltlnyest of ';'l,ll . Tose. "Yrl1ere, Hs the distribution ,1rea of  

> Cl'Cii.Jlll'1'1eS :\1l1 ,

To::e c1i\'12ion ,ya confined to the 1o' \\e1' 1m:r awl ad-

jacent constnl ,u' e:1 , respondeat distributed frozen products in the 

entire bay area , inelnding San Francisco and Oakland (E. 3758 , 3'189). 

l1cspOllclellt also dif:tl' lmted frozen products ns Li.r north as Sncra-

mCl1to (npp:;:oxiln 1tely lun miles from Lo G::ltOS), and as far ",est 

Fresllo , YI hel' c it had ;1. c113tlilmtion branch (l- 38lJ\ 8:20 : :1879; 

ex 1G- lC,). A1thongh respondent. sold fl'ozea prodncts in San 

Jose , Salin,ls , 2\lonlerey, Sant l Crnz i11.1l ot.her tOWllS \yherc Cream-

eries distributed , it sold to a ditrerent type of Cll .tome.l. Cl'e llnel'ip5      

> cllstomers 'yore mainly Sllwll rebil

and serY1ep establishments : such 

ns fount.ains , l'estaJjnllt and ;; mom- f!ll(l- pop ': groce,' y stores (n, rj1 

:1'1:))). IJ:espollc1ent , on the other lWlld specialized in sen- iug snper-

mfll'ket , its principal cllstomer in Cl'Plnlleries : distribution area being 

n grocery chain kuc,yn as the Purit.y Stores (l-L :j758 , 3809 , 3872). 

18. Tn addition to respondent , there were fOLlr other major com-    

> panies ,rhich sold ice creaIn rmc1 other frozen dairy

products in some 

## or 8.11 of the comnmnitie, ': ,\hel , ::Uission Creameries did business. 

These ,,' pre: The Borden Co, ! Cnl'll"tion CO' Golden State Co. I and 510 FEDERAL TRADE CO:MMISSIOK DECISIO:NS 

Fjnclings 67 F. 

Arden F rms Co. ,Yith the exception of Golden State , these were 

so- called national com pan ips , distributing dairy products in a num-

ber of States ot, hel' than Ca1ifornia. \VhiJe Golden State s OpCl'EltiollS  

> ,yere confined principally to California

, it was it major company in 

the State and lwc1 a substa.ntial number of plants and distribution 

brallches throughout. the State. In February 1954 it was ac.quired by 

Foremost Da.iries , Inc. , a large so-called national dairy company. In     

> addition to these major companies

, there ",- ere at least cigl1t other 

companies distl'ilmting frozen dniry products in portions of :t\ission 

Creameries : dist.ribution area. For the most part , they were small 

companies which c1istribnted in only aIle or n\'o comnnmities. Flow-

ever , several were sommdult JargeT in size. In this category were:    

> Sprecke1s RnsseJl Dairy Co. of San Franciseo

, ,,,hieh dist.ributed In 

both San . Jose and ,Vatsollvil1e: Dreyers Grand Ice Cream Co. of 

Ookbnd , which distribnted in San Jose; and Swift" Co. , the meat 

packing company, which had fln ic.e c.real1 plant in Sa.n Francisco 

and distributed in San . Jose.  

> 10.

Although , as previonsly indieated , respondent did not process 

and dist.ribute min in nort.hern California , )'Iission Creameries had 

n number of other competitors in t.his product line. Of the laTge 

companies prcviously mentioned , Borden , Carnation and Golden 

State were also major competitors in the sale of fluid miJk. In addi-

tion , there were at least 24 other companies distributing fluid milk in 

l\Iission Creameries territory. For the most part tl1esc were smalJ 

Joc.al companies ,dJich distributed in a single community. I-Iowever 

seyeral distributed on:l' fl wide, r a.rea. -, tmong the larger local COJ11 

panies were Challenge Creanl & Butter , Association Inc. and Crystal 

Creamery CO. 

20. Complaint ('onn8e) and respondent are in sharp disagree, ment as 

to "' hat constitute t.he ge, ogra.phic market areas , in terms of "hich 

t.o me, asure the probable competitive inlpac. of respondenfs ncquisi-   

> tion of Cremneries : San

ose Division , operated under the name of              

> Iission Creameries. In their proposed findings comp1nillt counsel
> appear to contend that each of the comml1nities where respondent

and )Iission Creameries did business is a. -separate marketitrea. The 

market share figures and concentration ratios cited by complaint    

> 1Q The above findim;s as to Creameries

' competitors Ilrc based principally on CX 10-            

> 252 , pp. 29-45, which not onl 'lists such competitors ,but gives an approximation of

their volume. For fi further jisting of cDmpetitors sec ex 409 , which contains tiJe DallPS 

of a fr.w other sllall companies in corulll1Jities Dot co;-red b ' ex 1(i-Z 252. BEATRICE FOODS COMPANY 511  

> 473

Fin(ling  

> c01lnsel axe based principally

on these market areas. The figures pro-

posed by respondent are based on much brortder geographic areas. 

Hespondenfs difference with complaint conllsel jnvolves not merely        

> the area where ::lission Creameries did lmsiness

, but the other two 

areas in California "here the acquired company had operating di-

,'isions. :Respondent also proposes different geographic areas for the 

hyo principa1 product 1i1188. For the fluid milk product line , respond-

ent contends that tl1cl'e are fOllr principal geographic areas of effec-

ti\" e competition. Creameries ' San . Tose Division vi'ulcl fall ,yjthin 

whnt respondent describes as the " Bay Area " extending' from the 

:ll'ea just north of San Francisco and Oakland , south to :Monterey.       

> For the frozen dairy products line

, respondent contends that there 

are hyo brand arens of effcctiYE competition 

## , , 

, Northern Cali-

fornia and Sonthern California with t11e l\Iission Creamel'ies op-

eration fnlling in the Xortherll California market ftrea.       

> 21. As is l1sunl1y the case where the parties differ so

,,'idely as to     

> the geographic boundaries of the market areas involved

, the picture  

> one receives of the structure of the market wi11 differ widely depend-

ing on which \ ersion of the mnrket one accepts. On the basis oJ the 

narrow market areas proposed by complaint connsel , both respondent  

> and

Iission Creameries had substantial market shal'es in most of the 

market areas, and there was n high degree of concentration among the 

maior companies. On the basis of the broad market areas proposed by 

respondent , both the acquired and acquiring companies had relat1vely 

small shares of the markets and concentrat.ion \\ as somewhat less 

pronounced. For t.he reasons which win hel'ca.fter be discussed , the 

examiner does not agree with either part-is definition of the geo-

graphic markets. However , to provide a inl1 record for purposes of   

> appellate reyimy

, and ns It, basis for eomparison with the findings 

he.rerdter made , the examiner will briefly discHss the market share     

> data in the record

, in terms of the different market ltrens proposed 

by the parties.  

> Ice, Cl'ca,

m l\Iarket Shares in :Markets Proposed by Complaint Counsel  

> 22,

. Set forth below is a table "hieh reflects the, respecti,- e, market  

> sllftres of

rission Crelt11cries and respondent , in fbe ice cream prod 

nct line , in each of the cOlnmllnities in the lOYfer bay and adjacent 

region , which ('omp1nint connsel contend aTC the appropriate geo-

gntphic market arens in which to determine the probable c.ompE;t.itiye  

> impact of the acquisition

, insofar as it il1Yolves the :.Iission 

Creameries operation. 512 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Findiugs 67 

Creameries 

11 arket share8 (ice cream) -in markets pmposNZ by compl(dnt counsel , loweI' Bay, 9.2 2

Beatrice  

> ;\1'('3 Total Sf!Js 2!

Sales Market 

share 

San .Jose-

Vlatsonvile 

Santa Cl'llZ 

___ 

Salinas_ 

_-- -

Monterey -- 

> - - -

- - - - - - - --

Los Bnnos_ 

___- ---

Percent 

10. 

Zs, 0

25. S

2,") 3 

29. -: 

> , 193, 14,')

220 969 

103. 725 277 , 649 

HJ3 , 507 

111 721 

:3122 96'1 

, SlS 

)4' 171 

527 

, 884 

, SD4 

Sales ),Iark 

shnrc 

82:')8 , 540 

94:3 

;:\1, 211 

611 

29, 745 8, 104 

Percwt 

21. 7

14. 9

IG. 1

15. 

> L5, -1

o The flgUlCS in the above tabl lite based all ex 16- , pp. 28-:6 , whidl WflS prepared by respondent 

(end sl1bn itted to the COJ:llission ill tJ e caur o of serking to obtain cpprovaJ of its aCljuisition of Cl'enr.leries 

n 10.53, RespOlluent ,JOW cont.ends t!wt t.he figurcs which it supplied are unreliable. The exl1ilJit We," origin-

aUy received in evidence without any objection being raised on t.his ,core CR. 456). However , dUling tho 

presentotion of its d8iense, re5pondent offered the testimon)' ofseveml of its ofikiais (formerly in Cr€:!merirs 

employ), to the effect II12.t tho figm€s of the Olhl r comp::ndes were based on pcrccntm;e C5t.im1itcs in reL1(jon 

to theil' OWll compuny s ullsiness CR. 3SS. 3864 , 38(5). Tllere l1lny ue some question "\vlwtiler responch' llt is   

> not :lO\V

estoppp(\ from (jUc,;tioiling tlJGrelbl) Ety of thG figures on t.he basi;; of wilieb it f\,;kcd tl1e Commi;;s:on 

> to ilpprOVG tI

le mergcr . Aoide fron this . ho"\\-e",er , (Ie exc,miner is sati flecl that whilr they mur not 1)13 

pi' eci eiy aeCl!n:n0 ::ncl l:lay contain a cI'rtain margin of el'() , t.lwy afe suffcicntly l"cli"bIe to pr0ride an 

> aIJproprbt8 lJ:.si

ior ganging the general order oi magnitude of rf'.opondcllt s a:lj Cream"ri, '.' 1l3rkret po;;i-

tions, and the, l'erative standing of tJllir CO:llpetitoJ". Other st ltiotie:ll ()yiden c in the record, which \". m bo 

l1ereaitel' referred to , tends to COl'olJo,' ate their gcnen1i accuracy.    

> 21 Altliougb rx 1G-

Z :252 cllntCl:ns a brcCtkdmnl of so.ks into " Kllolesal " I. nd " ('ail" c;ltego , (he ex 

aminer has coll'.l)in8d thcse :Jgc:rcs in tile above t2.bJn and in the ot!wr tnhles lJased au tll;s eXllilJit. :\lost of tbe   

> eompinlies wllO

e sales figu,-.' s r.n1 giv!'n , sell at iJotlJ w:' wJe, "a;1' ;md ntaiJ . with \', 11O;(' 3ale S11Il'5 !!I' nl' r'lliy 

flceountin/Z for the greater p;nt of i, heir sail's. The n:arkc: , position of nspondcl:t, Ct' c'\D l'k ami till' other 

r.lajOl' co:npanJl' S wonle! not be ma1:t 'ria:ly dirl renl if )l'oken down h to o l)tl),HIe retail ilr,d wh(l:ro'1Ie 

Ct1tegories. 

As the abO\' 8 t.able indicates Crcamel'jes : m l'ket shrue in the above 

commnnit-ies rnnged from 10% to 29%, and respondent' s sha,re nllged 

from 7% t.o 21%. Between them they aCCoH11ted for between a. third 

to 40% or the sales in these. commll1ities. 

23. The estimated market slulre5 or the ot.her major comp.-mies 

opeTnting in tJ1E\Se nn:ns 15 rei1ectecl in thp following tab1e: 

Esli!io!crl ice crewn market shares of othe! large (;mpwLie,  

> complaint counsel, 100ua bay,

19.5923 

1111 pCJce 1(J 

markets propo.:ed by 

\:' 

Goldcn Statc B()rden 

# -"-

CUfnlltio1l 

# - ' --- -----

ll Josc-

Vi' c-bonville-- ---

Santa Cruz- n-

Salinils-

.i\fontercy -

Los Banos_ 

20 G 

> ). :s

2S. 0

> 13. i'J

2;) 3

11.2 

23. S2,s, 

27. S

:W. 29. 

1.3. ;) 

J 1. :2 

;:J. 1 -

-----

> 2. 1

1. 3 

-\rd"l1 

> J. :2

1. 0 

L(i 

1. 0 

> 1. 5

:, TjjC IJ"larket S!1:n' s !1l'C computed from the i\Jl' ogu:' cs appearing in ex 16-7, 252. As indici1tN! i1 fool. 

> note 20

. the figurcs for (,Ol lJlal1i('s ot.iwl" than l"c pOl'.clent and Crl alll'ries i1:e pstimated. T:le market share  

> reflected

JJove do :lOt purport to be eXlld, but are rougll app:' o\im. "!t.ions of t.he relative ;;t 1l1(!i:;; of tl1e 

> com jJa

l: e" BEATRICE FOODS COMPACI 513 

473 Findings 

As indicated by both of the abm. e tables , respondent' s acquisition of 

Creameries resulted in a high degree of eonccut-ration in the ice 

cream product line in a number of the above communities. Thus , in 

San . J ose the market shares of respondent and Creameries , combined 

1"ith the shares of Borden , Carnation and Arden , accounted for ap-

proximately 68% of the ice cream sold in that community. If the 

shal'c of Golden State (which joined the ranks of the national com 

prmies six months after the Beatrice Creameries merger) were added 

the five so- called national companies "ould aCc01wt for approxi-

mately 88% of the area s salcs (assnming all companie, s maintained 

their relative market posit, ions during the period following these 

acquisitions) .  

> lee, Cream Market Shares in

Iarket I'roposed by Hespondent 

24. The Northern Culifornia market area proposed by respondent 

for the frozen dairy product line inclnc1es all of northern California 

north of the Tehach,lpi )fountain range (located approximately 25 

miles south of Bakersfield). This are" includes not only the opera-

t.ions of Creamerles San .Jose, Di\-ision , but also that, of its Bakers-

field DiYision , in ,,' hose territory respondent did not sell. Set forth 

belm\ ' is a table reflee-Hng CreameTles and responc1enVs respective 

ma.rket positions in the Sorthern Caljfornin market , as proposed by 

respondent" , for the frozen dfliry product line. 

JJarkd shal"cs (frozen dairy pl"odllcts) in northern California market pi'oposed by 

respondcnt 1.952 n    

> To: l p 'O!UctjOll
> (f!a1!o01s)
> Creamerie:;

Beatrice 

-.. -'- - - .._- ----

> Pro:iu.ctjon

(pllous) I'crcel:tofare2. Productioll  

> (ga;lotls) Percent of area

, 724, 000 646 42:) 580 917     

> 1 TIlt, fi;!u,' C5 mct! i:11be table are taken from RX 115-\\:1;C\1 ;s based on figures obtained fr0:11 t.he
> rcconJs of the State of CfJUfornifJ. Creame i('s
> ' p,'

orl:lctioll figures include both its San Jose anu Bakersfield 

p;all!5. l e,1trjce s :1gurcs arc tbose of it:; Los Gatoo pl 1lt" Crcameries ' 5ill Josc plant sa es repreoent 0, 65%   

> of the winket, and its lJakersflcld plallt s lr:; reprcscnt I.GS% of tilc r

lirket. 

As the nboye t.able indicates , respondent and Creameries , together 

accounted for 8. 03% of the fro; ell dairy products produced and , pre-

smnably sold , in the Xorthern California market proposed by re 

spollclent. Xo evidence was otlered by respondent as to the extent 

concent.ration ill the frozen cbiry product Ene ill Korthern California. 

aJtbongh it did oiler snch evidence for fluid rn11k. 

IiE;: :JIarket Shares in jIarkets Proposed by Complaint Counsel 

23. As previously mentloncd Creameries distributed fluid milk in 

a llmnber of commll1ities iIl t.he lO\H'r b;t)- area aIld adjacent region 514 FEDERAL TRADE CO:1nnSSIOK DECISIO 

Findings 07 F.    

> from its phnts in SaIl ose and ,Yatsonvil1e.

Hespondent did not 

process or distribute flnid milk in this part of California. Se.t forth 

below is a table reflecting Crearnel'ies mal'ket share , in the fluid milk 

product line , in the various communities ,,-hich complaint. counsel 

contend are tbe appropriate market areas. 

Creameries ' market share (fluid milk) in markets proposed by complaint cO'lnsel  

> Iowa bay,

1952 

Area Total sales Creameries 

sales Cre:JlJ l'rks 

luk t sl:ar 

San Josc_  

> -_. ----

- - ----

Watsonvile_- -

Santa Cruz 

- - - -

salinas- - - -- - --

IVIonterey- -

Los Banos_ 

---- - . 

, 887 , 107 

640 , 130 

126 250 

----

285 , lOt) 

243 , 448 

247 789 

$756 106 

250 , 8, 

302 , 468 

472 921 

403 , 344 

92. 

Prrceli  

> 11. 0
> ::H1
> 2G.

3(1. 8 

32. ,) 

---

;:;8. :3 

j The figures used in the above ta1Jle are based on ex 10- 7. 252 

> , pp.

1\-(j. S(' footnote 2l) fo)' di "C\l sjol! 

> of these figures.

As indicated in the above table , Creameries ' sales in each of the above 

comrnunities exceeded 25%' of the market , with the exception of San 

Jose whel'e its sales accounted for 11 % of those made in that C011-

munity. It was the top ranking company in each of these markets 

except for Sa.n . Jose and Sa.linas , where it was the third lncl second 

ranking company, respeLtively. 

2G. The estimated market shares of the other large companies sell-

ing milk jn the above communities is reflected in the following table: 

Estimated lI'ilk market shares of other lal"ge companies in markets proposed by compt( int 

counsel , lower bay, 1952 

IIn percel;t 

San . Josc_-

\Vatsonvjlh 

## - - - - - - - - - - -

Santa CrU:L 

> Salinas- - - - - -- - - -- - - -

- - - - - -

## Montel'ey- -

---

Los Banos- -

---- ------- - - - - - - - -

Golden Stutl Bordel; CanlilUon 

27. 22. 

14. 12. 

21. 

41. 6. '1. 

30.  

> 23. :3

10. 36. 

Area 

----

:5 Tile above market shares are co:nputerl from ex J6-- Z 2,,2. The explanation in footnote:'2;s also ap-

p1icalJ1e to Jluid milk shares. 

As the above tnbJe indicates , the so-called lw.tioll111 companies 

(Borden and Cflrllation , together ,,'ith respondenUs ne, ly l1cquil'ecl BEATRICE FOODS COMP AKY 515 

47: Findings 

company, Creameries) accounted for approximately 42% of San 

Tose area sales. If the market share of Golden Stab, , which became  

> part of a na.tlona1

company in Febnmry 1954 , were added , these four 

companies would acconnt for approximately 70% of San Jose area 

sales. 

Milk Market Shal' cs in 1arket l' roposecl by Respondent 

27. As previously rnentioned , respondent eontends that the appro-

priate market area , insofar as the fluid milk part of :Misslon Cream-

eries ' operation is concerned , is the so-called " Bay Area. " This is an 

area of 13 counties contiguous to San Francisco Bay. Set forth belmv 

is a table reflecting Creameries ' market share in the area proposed by 

respondent as the appropriate market area. 

Creamaies ' r/m'ket share (fluid milk) in market proposed by respondent , bay area,   

> 1952
> Creameries
> Total area sales (gallons) Sales (gallol1s) Percentofrnarket

# ---

, 785, 699 27 2 , 615, 768     

> 26 TIle ahove tabJe is based on RX lOB-C. fhe figures there used were compiled from St, ate (bta.
> 21 The above figures do not include 113 893 gallons sold in , Merced County, which is not in the bay area

As is mrjclent fron1 the above table , Creameries ' market share in the 

above area 650/0, is c.onsiderably smaller than that in the areas 

claimed to be the n.ppropria.te market areas by complaint counsel , as 

revealed by a, previous table.  

> 28. The extent of c.oncentration

, in tenns of the, market area pro-

posed by respondent. , is also lower than tlmt in the areas proposed 

by corn plaint counsel , although it is stl11 substantial. The top four 

companies in the Bay Area accounted for 58. 14% of the fluid milk 

solel in the area in HJ52 (RX 109-A). unlike its position in the Rreas 

proposed by complaint cOllnsel , Creameries was not in the ranks of      

> the top four companies hl

t.he Bay Area. These con1panies , in order 

of rank , "ere Golden State , Borden , Carnation and Chn. llenge (RX 

112). 

Definition of Market Areas 

29. Before seeking to resolve the difl' erenres concerning what arc     

> the appropriate market areas in "b1

h to gauge the probable com-      

> petitive impact of the acquisition of Creameries

' San Jose Division 

reference should be made to the marketing areas recognized by the 

State of California , since the positions of the part.ies revolve to some 

extent about these a,reas. In California, the price of milk is Tt\gulated 516 FEDERAL ' fRADE CO:VIMISSIO DECISIONS 

Findings G7 F. 

by the State at both the pl'dncer and resale leyels. The State estab-

lishes minlmlun prices ,,'hic.h the ;' c1istribntors " (cbiry companies) 

are required to pay to the " pl'oc1ncers " (farmers), and minimum 

pricps ,yhich the distributors and the ret.ail stores may charge in the 

resale of fluid mille The minimmn priees are established 011 the bflsis 

> of so-cnJled "

marketing areast the boundaries of which arc fixed by 

the State Director of Agricl1ltme (after" hearing) on the basis of "      

> finding: that in agi\T

en area " the conditions affecting the production  

> distribution and sRIe of fluid milk

, fluid crearn or both are reasonably 

unifol'm. 28 :.fal'keting al'eas , once established , may ue later con 

so1ic1f1tec1 npon fl finding thn.t. " conditions of prodnction and distri-

lmtion are reasonably nnifol'm in tTm 01' more snch market.ng areas 

unless more than 35% of t.he producers supplying the area object. 

The marketing areas established by the State for the purpose of        

> regulating fluid milk prices are generally cotel'minons \vith the geo
> graphic lines of the connties

, and may c.onsist of a single connty or 

a combination of sp,-eral counties. In 1D52 therB were 35 specific 

marketing areas; by 1960 the number of sneh HreflS had been reduced 

by consolidation , to 2T. For statistical pnrposes , the State groups 

the connty and lluHi- connty marketing areas into broader regional 

groupings. There are lour pl'incipaJ regional areas , viz , San Francisco 

Bay Area , Sflcl'amento Valley, San Joaquin Valley and Southern 

Ca1ifornia. These regional areflS are- referred to , YHrionsly: as " J\Iajor 

Al'eas ' or " Iajol' J\Iarkets:: 

There al'e no offcial marketing arerts , as snch , in the frozen product 

hne , since the price of these products is not directly regulated. 1\lrtllu-

fa.enrers arc required to me copies of their price lists and to adhere 

to such prices nnless they file an amended schedule (R. J2l4). They 

are also required to file monthly reports of their production. The-se 

reports are the basis of statistical reports by the State , in whieh 

figures of frozen dairy procluct prodnction is pnblished by " connty  

> s c

ri('\1Jturnl Co(le of Statr (1f Ca1ifornia , Section .!27(1 (CX -J1!l).  

> 29 '1' 111' above findings

are based on t1lc p:lblJshed reports of the State of Caljfornifl 

entitled " California Dairy Tncll1stry Statistics, " for lfj52 aDd 1900, upon which the 

parties lwve relierl in prf'paring a nllmber of siatistical exhibits, and of which offcial 

notice is l1CTein taken by the e;,nminer. There Is testimony that there were at one time 

38 areas. 1Jnt this alJparently jnvolves a period prior to 1952 (R- 40S0), 

a Tn the Hnnual California Dain' Industry statistical reports the sales figures arc 

reported by the county or multi-county arens, \\-bicb are l'eferreu to ns " marketing- areas. 

However , these marketing area statistics fUP grouped on a regional basis in flecorrlallce 

'With the above-mentioned regional groupings. The monthly " Dairy Information Bnlleiin       

> pnblisJ1ed by the State contains f1 similar compilation of data ,and refers to the regional

grollpings as " :'Jajor Areas " (CX 392). A rejJ0rt of the State legi Jatl1l'e OD fil1id milk 

prices refers to the regional nreaf! as " ::Jajol' Arf'flS " ar. rl as " :Uajor ::rn.rk('t " (CX 461,   

> pp. 7i ,S5).

BEATRICE FOODS COMPA1'Y 517 

113 Filldings 

and district;: but t.hese areas do not purport to be Inal'keting area in 

an economic- sense. :-\1 

3U. As previously indicated , much of the argument of cOlnplaint 

cOllllsel concerning the m,llket structure of the area in which Cream-

eries ' San . Jose Division operated is predicated all the assumption 

that the individual communities are the appropriate Ina.rket areas. 

Counsel's posit.on ill this regard appears to haxe been influenced by 

the fact that the statistical e\ idence in the record concerning this area 

is mainly in terms of the individual cOlnmunities. However , in their 

reply to respondent s proposed findings complaint connsel , \rhile still contending that the " fmJarket areas in the dairy industry are sma-l1 

local ones snch as those clescribc(l by respondent in ex 16-Z 252 

assert (p. 13) that the relevant markets ill California are " the market 

cll'ea(s.J delineated by the State. :: 33 As previously noted , the area 

delineated by the State as milk Tnal'keting areas are not the indiyiclual 

communities , but are at least eounty-\yide in scope. The indi'i-idual 

communities in ,vhieh Creameries : San Jose Division operated fan 

principally with ill two milk marketing areas recognized by the State 

viz , Santa Clara County (in ,yhich San J oso is located) and 1\10n-

torey-Santa Critz Counties (in which ,Yatsollville , Sanb\ Cruz  

> Salinas and )'lonterey

e located). The only community not falling 

in these two 111'eas , concerning , d1ich complaint counsel offered evi-

cle, nce. , is Los Banos 

> , ,,-

hi('h is locatecl ill 1\Ierced County and is part 

of the ::ladenL- :Ilel'('ecl milk marketing area. Except for San J ose 

,\"1ich had a lDi53- H);3-d population of approximately 05 000 , the in-

dividual communities were l'clatiyely sma.ll in size. 

i11. As prm-jonsly mentioned , respondent proposes two set.s of mar-  

> ket al'eas

, one for fluid milk flnd one for frozen dairy proclnc.s. The 

Jt California Dairy IndustI'J' Statistlcs , 1960 , p. GS- The 1052 report contains figures 

for the State as 11 ",- llOle, but no brellkdowll by county uno r1i trict (p. 52). 

"AH pl'evionsl ' mentioned (footnote 20), the market share fig-ure;; aud cOllcentration 

rali() dtcd DJ. compl.lint counsel are based m ti!ll - on ex 1G- Z 252 , which ,vns pl'epnred           

> by respondent at the request of the Commission. Hespondent ,vas requested to submit
> '0;\11'

;' (latn lor '. eaclJ town or COUllt!":\' " in which Cre:lmerie of _ 1lle1"ic , Inc. ,;(I()' , 

(CX Hi-Z 251). In rcsIJonrling- to this reql1e t respondent rcferrf'd to the communities U

sale Ilrens " find stated that it "las submitting- the figures '. by marli:etlng are:ls " (CX 

IG-Z 25 , p. 1). It is not cle Ll' whetber C0J1l11llint counsel contend that tbls constitutes 

an admission or ficknowJedgment by respoudent that the iD(lividual communities are 

marketing: areas in fiD economic or lpg-al sense. However, the e); lminer Is satbfied from  

> the circnmHllllces of the request

, flJll the respont;e, thflt no such ndmisslon or ncknow1-

eclgmcnt was intended 1Jy respondent.               

> 33 In support of the position tIJat the State marketing areas are tbe appropriate
> JlHukets for California

, complaint counsel refer to CX 16-Z 245, which contains sales  

> !lflta for rc;;ponc1ent

Lnd Creameries on a connty basis. TJlis exhibit was likewise pre-

pared by respOlllent but, \mJikc ex IG- Z 252, contains no data for competitors , nor (loes     

> it reflect CreamerieH ' milk sales in Dorthern C

l1i.fornia. 

"I' be appl'O:1imate 1\153 populations of the other cDmmunities ,vere: Santa Cruz-

21, 000; Salimu;- lS, DOO; .:fontere.r- 16, OOO; and Los Banos- ODO. 518 FEDERAL THADE COM:MISSIOX DECISIO 

Findings GT       

> Inarket aTeas proposed for the fluid

lTIilk product line are based 

essentially on the St.fte marketing areas. However , respondent con 

tends that the 35 or so State marketing al'eas should be consolidated 

into :fOUl' major marketing areas and one miscellaneous area (the 

latter consisting of cCl'ta, in spal'scly populated counties ill the    

> northern and eastern part of the State). The Inarketing arcas pro-

posed by respondent actmdJy correspond to the broad , regional group-

ings previously mentioned 

> , -

which are recognized by the State for 

statistical and reporting purposes (R.. 4089), viz , San Francisco Bay 

Area , Sacramento Valley, San . Joaquin Valley, and Southern Cali-     

> fornia. ,Vith respect to Creameries

' San . r ose Division , respondent 

contends that the appropriate m Lrket area, is the San Francisco Bay 

Area , which is essentially a, combination of nine marketing areas     

> recognized by the State

, including Santa Clara and )Ionterey-Santa 

Cruz , but not including )'Iadera- J.Iercec1 in which Los Banos is located 

(the lattel' area being included in the Sa.n Joaquin Valley regional 

area). For the frozen da.iry product line respondent proposes n 

further consolidation of marketing areas , with only b,o areas in the 

State , viz , Northern California and Southern California. The frozen     

> product operations of Creameries

: San Jose and Bakersfield divisions 

wOlllcl both fall within the Xorthel'll California market : as proposed  

> by respondcnt.

E2a. Respondent's position as to what are, the propel' market areas   

> in California

: in which to JIeasure the probable competiti\' c illpnl't.  

> of the Crc

nl1eries acqnisitioll , is bnsedlargely all the testimon:y oj' Dl' 

Da, vid A. Clarke 

> , .

JI' , Professor of ),. gricultul'al 1;:conomics at the 

Lni\-ersity of California and a recognized expert in his fiPld. 3cj It "' 

the burden of Dr. Clarke s testimony that wJ1i1e the marketing areas 

recognized by the State may at one timc have had a meaningful rela-

tionship to the c1istrilmtion patterns of JIilk processors , this is no longer     

> trne because in cstabEshing such areas the State is

l'efll1ired to take 

into consideration not only the relationship behyeen competing proc-

essors , but a.lso that between producers (dairy farmers). ,Yhile recog-

nizing that the huy permits (l eonsolichtion of marketing areas and 

that. the nnmber of such nre,lS has been reduced from :18 to :27. it wns 

Dr. C1arke s position that the rema, ining areas still do not refleet  

> 35 In addition to teaching at the University of California

, Dr, Clarke is associated with 

tile Ginnnini Foundation , wJ1jel1 i 11, n'seal'eh (Jrg:'lniwtiOll eonnectpcl with the SeJlO(J1 

of . -\grieulrurnl Economks of the Cuiyel' !Hi c' ol1duers rcsearch :for the ;tatt ' Dr.     

> CJ,. !'I;,. !J s COJ)iuct':'ll llrile nlll! marl'i.,t o:tUIJj"S fCl)' the' Statc lcgislntm'

e, lws jp,'tif.f'cl i1S     

> a ,,' itnC'o:s for the

Strite nt milk pJ'ce hearings , hils conrll1cter1 milk pricing studies for  

> the U,

S, Dcpartment of Agriculture and has sCl' yed on Il committee € talJlished by the 

Secretan' of Agriculture to study the Fe(leral )oIilk )larket O1'0er program (R, 4065-

4(70), BEATRICB FOODS COMPANY 519  

> 4TH

Findings 

meaningful areas of distributor competition because of the opposition 

of both producer and distrilmtor organizations which desire to nutill-

tain their autonomy, and because of the law s requiremcnt that pro-

duccr as vi-ell as distriLJutor compet.iti\'- e conditions be taken into 

account (R. 'J080- lOS(j). 

According to Dr. Clarke , improvernents in technology and 

the elimination of Jocal health ordinances lun-e resulted in a

,videning of distribution areas o that at present the above-

me11tionecl regional or major areas are " pretty much ltheJ areas 

within which ft pattern of companies operate " (R. 40SS-40S9), and 

aTe relatively homogeneous ,,-jth respect to marketing conditions 

of fluid milk (R. :l07()). He like''Iise was of the opinion that the 

maeket for frozen dairy products was di Yisible in two , with one 

market " centered around the Los Angeles area," and ;' the relImining 

part of the State forming the ot.her market.ing area, :: (11. 4118). It is the position of respondent that since the testimony of Dr. Clarke 

(which was corroborated by several of its offcials) stands " unim-

peached and uncontradictecP' by any countervailing testimony on 

belm1f of complaint. cCJl1lsel , the market areas proposed by respondent 

should be accepted. 

32b. ,Vhile not questioning Dr. Clarke s credibility or his high 

degree of professional competence , the undersigned does not feel 

oLhged to accept the market areas proposed 'by respondent , for 

seycrnlrensons. In the lirst place , it is clear :from the testimony of Dr. 

Clarke , and that of respondent s oflcials who te-stifiec1 regarding 

marketing arens , that they \yel'e speaking primarily of the cnl'rent 

situation and not th,lt which existed in 1933 , "hen the Creameries 

acquisition occllrred/" Tn the opinion of the examiner the probable 

competitive impact of the Creamcries acquisition must be considered   

> initially nt

least , in terms of the market as it existed ,yhen the acquisi-

tiOll occurred , uninflllenced by changes or distoli.ions in market 5t.ruc-

tnre to ,,-hich this and other aC(luisitions in thc area. may have con-

tributed. ,Vhile it may be , as respondent urges in another conllcction  

> that post-

acquisition conditions are l'elenlnt under some circumstances 

the.y a.re not relevant in deterrnining market shares an(l eOllcentratioll 

as of the time the acqnisition occurred.     

> ''' As previol1sl;v JleJJtion('cl ,acon

olidati()n of marketing- areas ma v be blocked if more   

> 1Jlfln 35':'0

of the proll\lcel's sllpplying the area object (Sec. 4270, State Agricultural 

Code, CX 410). 

; Dr. Clarke s neg'flbv(' re J1()n e. with resllect to wheLher tbe Stltte mf!l'l,eting areas        

> :illY I011g'f'r 11ar1 an, -l'ela1iollship with milk llistriuutlon plLtterDH,

was in llDs"'. el' to the 

ql1f'Hio!1 whether sueh areas " have ar.   

> '.
> \1(;h relationship todn.!J

(11, 4080). It should  

> he Doted tllat his tef'lim0ny was gi"len in . 1962, His teHtimony concerning the two

marketing" flreas iJl frozen des erts ,\"f!. in response to the quesbon of " how many ice 

e!'eflm or frozen l1ef'sel'ts mn1' kets are there " (R. , H1S). (Emphasis supplied. 520 FEDERAI TRADE C011MISSIO DECISIOKS 

Fimlings GT F. 

Secondly, the market areas delineated by Dr. Clarke are based 

principally on the distribution patterns of the lal'ge , national com-

panies. The mnrket areas proposed fol' frozen products are based 

exc1nsiyely on the distribution patterns of sneh companies , exce,pt for 

t118 p1nnts ,,-11ich arc controlled by the large grocery c.hains (RX DG). 

The market fll'ea5 proposed for fluid milk arc based on the distribu-

tion pattern of the iin' , nnti01wl ('omprU1, ies , plus those of the three 

large Cnlifol'niil compnnies ,lncl the '" captiye creameries " (eX D3!. 

Eyen on the lmsis of the distribution patterns of such comlmnies , the 

record lnc1icatps that the arens of distribution are smaller than those 

proposed by respondent. '1J11. , in the rase of the frozen dttil'Y prod-

uct Jine ) in ,yhich rCHponclent c181ms thilt the companies ill\ oh-ecl 

c1istrilmte in all of northern California , respondent's map of the, area 

(H, X 0G) discloses tlwt some of the companies hm-e mnltiple distribu-

tion points ill nmt\ll'l'n (',\hfol'ni,, : y:ith one or more plants or (listri-

bution branches in ihe Ihy Area , the Sacramento Yalley and the San 

Joaquin Yaney. Similarly: jn the ('a e of flnic1 milk prmluct line , in 

> ,,;-

11ic11 respondent c1ailns that dlC entire Ba:,' Area, is one market area 

respondent's Inap (HX 05) discloses at least t"TO patterns of dish'i-

bution , one jll\ olYing plants or distribution branches in the \lpper 

Bay and another in the lower Bay. 

'The evidence of phnt. and branch 10('atioJl , "Thich will be hereafter 

discllssed , conJinns the facts \\"hich are, visnally inc1icntec1 by l'esponc1-

enfs diagrammatic pl'esentntion. 

,Yhile it is true , ns Dr. Clarke testified , that due to changes in 

teehnology, plant consolidations , elimination of 10cal ordinances and 

other fadm' , there has been a ,yjdening of fluid miJk distribution 

arens , the record establishes thai: Ule milk marketing areas recognized 

hy the State still hnye conslderalJle va1icbt.y. This is clear from n report \rhich T)r. Clarke himself prepared for a joint cOlnmittec of 

the California legislntnre. all agricultl1rfll problems. The report con-

sidered , among otheT things , the, extcmt of int.el'Hl'ea shipments to rmcl 

from the State-recognized marketing areas , ns a factor in the estnu-

lishment. of arefl miJk prices,' O:s Dr. Clarke s report indicates that 

despite significant interarea shipments of fluid milk in 18i)4-1955 

the bulk of the milk sold ,,-ithin the various State n1ilk marketing         

> SS The portioD of tbe report dealing with interrnp.!!

h\r)juents was introduced in 

evidence by respondent, as RX 162 A-Q. The entire report W(1-S introduced in e"ldenc 

by complaint counsel, during rebuttal , as ex 4(;1. It lJa;y be noted that the map of milk 

marketing areas, on which re fJoDdent relies (HX 93), was ba ed on a map prepared by               

> Dr. Clarke , in connection with his report (RX 1G3: R. 4728).
> 89 The repoi. tis dated .TUDC

1\);'5. Howe\er , most of the statisticnl dtlta is for Februarv 

# 1954. BEATRICE FOODS CQ1\1PANY 521  

> 473

Finding" 

flreas was processed ,yithin snch areas. ' rlms , for the Stftt.e as a whole   

> the report indicates tlmt shipments of strlldard milk proc1llced in one

area and sold in another area amounted io only 12% of gross sales 

for the ' entire State (RX, 162-I\:). o To the extent there we.re inter-

area shipments , the bulk of snch shipments (80%) werc made to the 

adjacent marketing nreas (EX 16:2-0). Only se\'-C11 areas , out of a   

> total of i)6

areas, had ont-of-area shipments aboyc 20% of their intrn-

area sales (HX 162- 0). --\mong these seyen areas ,yas Santn. Clara 

Count.y, ,,-ith shipments out of the area, f11110l11ting to 233 384: gallons,        

> or ;31.;"% 01 atot.al of 74:1

33D grt.lolls of milk processed and mId in 

the area (RS l(j F). All of the ont- of- area shipments were to 

adjacent areas (RX 162-P). Of IGG :?05 gallons shipped into Santn 

Clara frmH other arens , all came from adjac.ent. areas (EX 16:?-P), 

Sneh out-of- area receipts amounted to 21. 9% of the milk processed 

nd sold ill the area. The Santa Crnz-:Uonterey marketing area had 

a mnch smaller pel'centtge of ont- ol- nrell shipments , but. r('cein 

a larger percentage 01 shipments .fro11 other areas, Thus , it processed 

329 20-4 gallons of sUmdard 111Jl:- and sold only 5 87cJ gallons , or      

> srfi, out of the nrea

but received ont-of- area shipments of 118 213  

> gallons (all from

Hljacent Hreas), representing 8:3. 8% of the gallon-

age processed within the area. At least half of the ont-or- area milk         

> sold in Sant2- Cl'uz-l\Iontel'PY C:1me from the, Sanle)' Clara area.

These 

figures demonstrate that the bulk of the milk sold ,,"ithill e L('h market-

ing area is processed ,,' ithin the an a. and that to the C'xtent. tlwl'o ,H' 

interarea, shipments they n:;:e gE'nerall r to and from ad.iacent aTe-as. 

In the cnse of the frozen clairy prodnct: line , in ,,,hich the State 

milk marketing areas are not necessnl'ily apl)1icable , Dr. Clarke 

position that there ,,- ere only two broad marketing areas -was based 

on the :fact that all companies \\ hich did business ill both northern 

Ca.li' fornia and southern California had a sepnrate plant in each area 

(n. 4118--118). 'Vhile this may incl1cate that there are at least two 

marketing areas , since no company distributes thronghout the State 

from a single plant. , it does not preclude a. further sllbdi' 'ision of t.hese 

two broad areas. The recorcl discloses that. eve, ll some 01 the large     

> companies had multiple p1anl:3 within the nbO\'-

e areas at 01' flbollt the      

> time of the Creameries acqnisition

, ll1c1 that. those that. had ol1ly a 

single plant found it necessary to b\\-e a dist.rilmtioll branch or 

branches within the ,ll'ea ill order to sern:, it effectiyely. In the ' case 

of the smaller companjes , ,,,hose distribution patterns cannot. be 

> '0 '

Illis figure includes only direct shipments of mil, for res:1le in nnother are.\. It 

does not include intcrplnllt shipments between plants ill different m:1rkets , where tile 

receiving plant processes or otherwise !lnnr1es tile milk before It is resold. 

379-702--71--522 FE DERAL TRADE CO:'L'vIISSIOX DECISIO 

Findings GI F. 

ignol'ed none of them distributed oycr the )''ide. areas proposed by 

respondent. 

i3. The examiner now turns to a delineation of what he considers      

> to be the market. arens

, in terms of \"hich the market shares of the 

acquired and acquiring cOlnpallies the extc11t of cOllce, lltration , and 

othel' appropriate market statistics may be determined , insofal' as 

Cl'eallerjes San . Jose Di vision is concerned.       

> l a) Fl-uid 111 ilk. As pre\'-iously 111clltionecl ,Cl'eamcl'ies

San . J osc 

Division operated t,,-o milk processing plants , one at San . Jose in 

Santa Clara County, and the other at ,Vatsonville in Santa Cruz 

County. The milk processed in San , Jose was distributed in Santa 

Clara County, ,, hile that processed at ,Yatsonville was distributed 

ill both Santfl Cruz and )Ionterey Counties and , to a small extent , in  

> a portion of

rel'cec1 County around Los Banos. Creameries ' major 

competitors in the area \ypre Golden State , Borden and Carnation 

all three of which distriblltecl thronghout the three-county firea in 

,,- 

> hich Crearnel'ies

' San Jose Diyision sold , viz , Santa Chra , Santa 

Cruz and ::Ionterey Conn ties. The recorcl-is not entirely clear as to 

what the distribution areas of these three large companies "-ere. 

l-Imyeyer , it eloes appeal' t!wt in 1031 Golden State had miJk process-

ing plants or distribution branches jn Oakland and/or Snn Francisco 

San Jose , Salinas and Santa Cruz (CX 40D). H Presumably the distri 

bution lJlanches selTed ditfercnt portions of the Bay )\rea. In all 

In' lbi1ity Smlta Clara COlllJty \YflS selTed from San . rose , and 

j'fontcl'e.y- Santa Cruz "-ere ser\-ed from Salinas and Santa Crl1z. 

Borden had pbnts at San Jose , Bl1rlingiune (San Jateo County) anel 

Oakland , and had clistrjbution branches at Gilroy (Santa Clara  

> Connty) ,l1d in ,Yntson,'ille and

lolltere.yY Presumably these plants 

and bnllches se),H d separate portions of the Bay Axca. C,-trnat.ion 

had a processing: plnnt at O lldnnd and distribution bnmches at Sa, nta 

Clan\. t)nd San . Tose. Presuma1J!y its distribution in the lmyel' Bay           

> A:i'ea \,as from its distribution branches located there. In addition to

the major companies , there \\e1'e ni least 2-4 other milk companies   

> tribut.ng in portions of

tlJC three- county 1l1'ea. Approximately half 

of t.hese had plants in San . Jose, 01' elsewhere in Santa Clara County. 

Exc.ept for Challenge Cream 8: Hutter Association , none of t.he latter 

cornpanies did bllsiness in any of the principal communities of  

> n E'-

cn ill 1D62 Golden SHlte (Foremo t) had JJlant" or branches in thesc comil\1nitiei' 

(CX 412).   

> J2 In 1DG2

Borden s ouly milk processing plant in tbe Eft,. _ "'rea was in San Fmnci       

> bl1t it mailltninecl di tl' ilmtiIl

' lJrancl\es in all of the nboyc COllD1l1Dities except Oakland. BEATRICE FOODS COMPAAr 523  

> 473

Findings 

;\lonterey- Santa Crnz Counties (CX 16-Z 262 , pp. 29-43). None of 

the independent companies ,vith plants in ::Uonterey or Santa Cruz 

Counties sold in the San Jose Area. 

Based on the record as a whole , the examiner concludes and finds 

that each of the milk uwrketing Rrens recognized by the State in the 

10\"81' Bay Area , viz , Santa C1ara County and ronterey-Santa, Cruz 

COlUlties , constitutes HJl lrelL of etfective competition in ,,-hich to 

mensnre the probable cOlnpetitive impact of the Creameries acquisi-

bon , insofar as the llilk operations of its San Jose Division a, re con- 

> cerned. These two areas were separately served by

Iission Cream-

eries ' b"\o milk plants; they "- ere separately served from di:ferent 

plants or brancl1es by the major companies; and the smaller in-

dependent companies selTed only portions of each area , but not both  

> areas. Ea,

ch of the areas was recognized as a, separate marketing area 

by the State of California, in lD52 and , despite a reduction and con-

solidation of marketing ,lrcas from 36 to 21 in the State as a, whole 

and frOln 0 to 1 in the Bay Area , these two a.reas \\T.re still recog-

nized as separate marketing areas in ID60. As late as 195-1-1953 the. 

greater part of the milk sold in eaeh 0f the two areas ,,,as processed 

within the area, . A JtJlOugh Crealneries ' San Jose DL \- i510n made a 

small amount of sales in Los Banos , the examiner considers this area, 

as falling within the i\Iaclera-l\Ierced ma.rketing area recognized by   

> the State.
> (b) Frozen Dah" v P.rod /lcts.

As pre,-iously mentioned , Creameries  

> operated a, frozen pl'oclucts plant in

San Jose from ,yhich it distrib-

uted ice cream and other frozen da, jry products in Santa Clam , Santa 

Cruz and I\lonterey Counties , and ill a small portion of )'Iel'ced 

County around Los Danos. Its major competitors in this area ,yere 

Beatrice , Borden , Carnation and Golden State. There \,ere at le, ast 

nine other companies selling in portions of its territory, including 

Arden , Slfift and approximately seTen loeaJ , independent companies.       

> R.esponclent distributed orer a \Yic1el' a.ren thall did Creameries ,its

distribution area extending to the upper Bay Area north of Santa 

Clara County, and into portions of the San Joaquin Valley. Exce,pt 

for the area around Los Banos respon(lent's distribution in the San   

> oRquin \r

alley ,vas from its Fresno dist.ributing branch and not 

directly :from its plant at Los Gatos in Santa Clara County. Of the  

> large eompa,

nies , several had multiple plants or branches in the Bay 

and adjacent areas. Borclen had nmnllfaeturing plants in Oakland 

and San Jose (in the npper and lmyer Bay Area) and in Sacramento. 

It. also had a plant. or distrilmtion braneh at Fresno in the San 524 FEDERAL TRADE CO:\HdISSlO:\ DECISIOXS  

> Fi1H.1ings G"I F.

Joaquin Yalley (CX -tOP) , n Carnation Imcl a mallUfnctlll'ing plant at 

Oa.ldand rmc1 distribution branches at San . Jose in the lmyer Bay 

rea , at Sacramonto in the Sacramento YaJley, find at Stockton and 

Bakersfield in the San Joaquin \:' rtlley. Golden State operated n1anll 

fac.tnrillg plants at San FrancisC'o and Santa Cruz (in the upper and 

lmycr Bay l\.ren), and at Sacramento and the Saeramento Ya1ley and 

Fresno 111 the San ToaCJnin Valley: l! It also had distributing branches 

in the Imycr Bay Areil at San . Jose and in the San . Toaquin Valley 

at Stockton. Arden had llftllLlInctul'ing plants at Oakland and. 

Fresno , and distributing bl'nnches at Sncnlmcnto and Stockton" 

Spreckels- TIl1ssell , a San Francisco manufacturer , had a distributing 

bra, neh at Burlingame on the peninsula south of San Francisco. 

DreTer s which h(1(l a plant only at Ollk!mFl in 1031 \ had also estab-

lished a H1flnnfactllring branch in SanL. Clara by HH52. Dreyer        

> distribnt.lon into the lower Bny rea in 10;'):2 'inlS limited to San J05,

while Spreckeh-nlls e!J sold in both San J ose, and \Yatson,'ille. The         

> other 10caJ independents sold only in portions oJ

Santa Clara , Santa, 

Crllz or Iontel'ey Counties. 

It is the conc.nsion and i1nding of the examiner t!wt the ap-

propriate market area in Ylhich to determine the pl'obaLJle com-

pet.itire impact of the Creameries ' acquisition , insofar as it in,. oh- 

> its San

Tose Did )ion s :hozcn clairy products operation is the thrce-

connty area in which Creameries principally distributed , yiz , Santa 

Clara , Santa C rnz and l\lontcrey Connties. The examiner does not 

consider all of northerll California fin a.ppropriate market area since 

even the major eompllnies operated on a multi-plant basis ,yithin this 

area. :2los1. of them had :11-, least a tri- partite (1ist.rilmtion pattern   

> ,yith c1el1'i'

crics lWlng made from separate loeal points in the Bay 

Area , the Sacramento Valley and the San , Joaquin Valley. I,Vithin 

the Day Area itse1f , there ,y,lS a tendency for distrilmtlon to be  

> c1iyic1ec1

betT\een the npper and lmyer Bay countie, s. Giving due rega.rd  

> to Crcalleries

distriblltion pattern , and that of both the larger and 

smaller companies , a combination of t.he three above-mentioned 

cOllnties in the 1myel' Bay Area impresses the examiner as the most 

meaningfllJ economie market for purposes of this proceeding. 

l\Iarket Shares and Concentration  

> (a)

Fluid jJlik  

> 3-:. It 11:1s

been (1etennille(1 a1.O\. e t.wt the a.ppropriate geographic 

market areas in ,,-hich to weigh the probabJe competitive impact of 

43 By 1962 Borden bad an ice cream processing plant only at Sacramento in northern 

California , but it had one or more distributing branches in eaelJ of the three major       

> regional areas in northern California (CX 412).
> HBy 1962 ,Golden State (Foremost) bad convcrted Santa Cru

and Fresno into 

> distributing branches.

BEATRICE FOODS COMPANY 525 

473 Findings 

the acquisition of Cl'eamerles San . Jose Division , insofar as it in-

volves the fluid milk pl'odnct line , are: Santa Clara Connty and 

fonteTey- Santa, Crnz Counties. Creameries sales were 111ade prin-

cipaJly in these three eOl1nties in the lower Bay Area. Hespondent 

did not pl'oeess or distribute milk in this area. Set forth below is a 

table reflecting Creameries ' mnrket shares in the two market areas in 

(J!LCStiOll. In the illte.J'est of completcness , the table also reflects 

Crpamrrics shalT: of sales in the entire lower Ba.y Area where 

OIW1'1ted , exccpt for the slnal1 amount of bnsincss it did around 1.' 

RflJlO in JIe.rced ConntyY 

Creameries ' market shares (fluid nd!k) in lower bay markets 1952 4

Count.yarea Toto.; aleo 

(gano 1s) 

> Creamel'JCs

Salcs (Gallons) l'ercelltofarea 

Santn Claw--

-----

J\Jont('rey- 11tfl Crnz 

, ;i14 , OO 

, 62(-; , 92. 

947 385 

1, 895 , 530 

9- 2 

28. 

Total bot.h flrcas_ - 16 !:J.0 929 , 842 , 92, 16. S        

> "The alJOve bble is based on ex 421 , which WrJ'i fJl'epllrec! 1Jy complDint. cOlm

el frOIT Ow sa ne State 

(!fl!:l wJdcl: \\' l"' used by re. 'ijJondent j" prepiuing RX lOS- B (R. 4. 'j25). Altl1ou IJ purpor:illg to reflect  

> gales

, the figures actuall ' are tilO"e of shipments made l) ' pla:1ts in the area and, to this extent, would not 

i:clucle SalC51\- itl1ill tll! area by P:(l);to :ocat.ec\ ont of 1he nrea (H. 4. '13, ,). IIowenr, t.lle reliability of t.l, a:)ove  

> fig:mes

, as reflecting fI reasonaiJk appro"irnat ()l of Creameries ' marii:et position , 1wcome'i app rent from a  

> eO)

lJ.1Tison with tl1e figures of Crcl1n:eries ' sales in the principal communities ill t' 1ese two areas , whkh     

> appear in ex 16-% 2.

';2 pl'PfJarerl hy re. 'ipOllc)(' llt. (Spp parflgmph 25, snpra). Tile,e tigu:' es disclose that 

Cre"mnk ' 1052 m"rket share in San Jose (elle pril)cip l cit.v ;) nta Cb:' a Coul1y) WQo 11.0%, and its 

eon,l)i)wd rntd;:et "bare in t.he four principal communities oi :\fot;terey- Sallta Cruz Counti s, "\\"as 33. 

Irs s!lnn' uf sales iu all !lve cit.ies i'1lJutb arens \\OS 1'1 

> ;:;'

It is not possible to determine , precisely, the extent of concentra-

t.0!1 in the t,yO milk mflrket1ng areas discl1sse(l abon: , since the record 

contajn J10 dntn as to t.he total sales of the other 1argc cornpallies in 

t.1lC (, t\Yo C11''tlS. HOWeTel' , as pl'cyiol1s1y noted (paragraph 26 find 

foctnoto :2;j) the record cloes contnill estimated sales figtlJ'es for these 

companies illhYC of the principal comnmnities in these market fircas 

from which a reasorwlJle npproximfltioll of the general order of 

lgnltude of concentration in the 100yer Bay Area may be obtained. 

s aJl'eady indicated , Golden Stntc , Borde.n , and Cal'nation accounted 

for npproximate.ly ;jSj" o of lnilk sales in San Jose. Adding Cremn-eries ' share , foul' companies acconnted for approximately 700/0 of the 

San . Jose area. Set forth uelow is llll additional table reflecting the 

extent of concentration in the fiyc-cit:;- area as a. whole , illcluding San 

Jose (the principnl communit.y in Santa Clara County) and \Vatson-

45 Creameries sDld 121 S,'H) gallons flf fl11id milk in :-Jerccd County from its \Vatson-

vjJ!(. j.'lan:; in ill;):. , :Jl1ol1uting to r.'(o of tbe j';:1It. "nlr X 1\1S-D). 526 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSIOK DECISIONS 

Findings 67 If. 

ville , Sanbt Crn" , Salinas and )Ionterey (four of the principal 

munities in Santa Cruz and :Mollterey Counties). 

COHl-

Concentration (j(:lU:d mnk) among major companies , 5- city area , lower bay, 1952 n 

Company Sales j\Iarket, shares 

(penent) 

Golden St.ntc__ 

- -- -----

-- S3 , 141 , :')15 

Crea.merics____ 

-- -- ------ -. -

-- 2 , IS. , S9G 

Borden 

_--_--_ - -- ----

# - 1 , 811 

Ca.rnatioll- - - - - - - -- - -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - -

986, . 559 

2S. J 

19. .)  

> 16. S

TotaL_ 

----

> , 19;-;

, 7S1 7;3. Z 

Tot81 area sales- -

---

, 182 , 529 

# - -

41 As i:1 tlJe case of the figures in paragraph 25 supra the above table is based on ex 16-7. 252. 

As the above table indicates , with l'esponclenfs acquisition of Cream-

eries and FOrE'llost: S acquisition of Golden State , four national com-

panies accounted for somewhere around 70% of the fluid milk sold 

in the lower Bay Area. (assu11-ing, of eourse , that no substantial 

clec.ine occurred in the market shares of the above companies between 

1062 Rnd lU64).  

> (b)

Fi'zen DaiTY p,' O(z,tets 

35. As the examiner has found , the appropriate market area, for 

determining the probable competitive impact OT the acquisition of 

Creameries ' San Jose Division , insofar as it involves the frozen clairy 

product line , is a three-county area in the lower Bay, consisting of 

Santa Clara , Santa Cruz and lonterey Counties. Both Creameries 

and respondent competed in this al'ea in the sale aT frozen dairy 

products. Set forth belm-v is a table reflecting Creameries ' and re-

spondent' s respective market shares in the three-county market area.    

> Jlarkei shares (ice cream), 3.

counly area , Iowa bay, 1952 

Creamerie5 J3eatric\' 

Tot l salcs (gallons) Sales (galJons) Percent of market Salcs(gallons) cJ'ceIlL ofn:arkl' 

878 726 661 13. :3 ;,U8 391 31. S

, The above tal)le is based on CX 16-Z 215 , whjcb was prel)arcd by respondent and submitte(l to t1Ho  

> COJ

lInission in conncctio l wit11 seeking app,' oval of the Crcamcdns acquisition. Thl table submitted WCiS   

> prepared in tel'":IlS of " ;ce c:'

cam, " rather thWI for all frozen dairy product:". The elata in CX Hi- Z 24, ), purport     

> to be based all reported data of the Statf' of CaJifomia r !l(! " COl 1IJal Y li:1aucial statement:". '

BEATRICE FOODS CO IPAXY 527 

473 Findings 

As previously noted , the market, share cited by complaint counsel 

are in terms of the individual communities in the lower Bay Area. 

'Vhile the indi\-ic1ual eomlllmities themselves are not appropriate 

market divisions , a combination of the fh-e principal commnnities in 

the lower Bay Area does constitnte a reasonable approximation or 

the three-county area which has been fOlmcl to be the appropriate 

market area for the frozen product 1ine. Set forth below , for purposes 

of comparison with the preceding table , is a table reflecting the 

market shares of Creameries and respondent in a five- city area in 

the lower Bay. 

M arktt shares (ice cream) in pn:ncipal cOIIlIw" ni6rs where crcarnen:es ' San Jose   

> div1 sion sold

1952 

- - - . 

Community Total sales Creameries' sales Beatrice ,; salt's  

> San Jose_

\Vabonvilc- -

- - - - -

> Santa Cruz_

# Salinas- -?vIontcrey - - - - - - - - - - - --

----"--

, 193 , 145 

220 , 969 

193 , 72J 

277 649 

193 507 

$122 964  

> ')0

, HIH 

171 

527 

, 884 $258, 549  

> ;)2 94:'

211 

611 

> 74,:)

# - --

Tot.aL_ , 078 , 99, 348 , 364 394 , 0;')9 

.. - - -, ---

?\'arket share (pprcent) - - - - - - -- - - 100 16. 18. 9

## --- 

> Ji The ahove table is based on ex IfJ-Z 252 , pp. 28-

43. It wjl be noted that while the marht share Dt!Ule 

for creamcries is fairly comparable with that in the preceding tilble (based on ex 16-Z 245). there js a Kirle  

> diverge1'!ce in the market share figurc!; for Beatrice

in both tilbles. TIJe record contains no cxplal:atioll for 

tllis. One possible explanation is t!Jat respmJdent' s sail's in the other communities in the tlnce-county 

> market were proportionately larger than they were ill the above five cities.

The extent of concentration in the three-connty frozen dairy prod-

ucts market cl1nnot be determined precisely since the rec.ord does not 

contain data as to the total sales of the other large companies in this 

area. However , from the data as to the estimated s des by all com-

panies in the five principal communities in the area it is possible to 

obtain a reasonable approximation of the extent of such concentra-

tion. Set Jorth belmv is a table reflecting the sales and market shares 

or the principal companies ill a combined area consisting of San . Jose 

\Yatsonville , Santa Cruz , Salinas and :\lonterey. 528 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Findings 67 F. 

Market shares and concentralion Uce cream) among major companies , principal 

communities , lower bay area 1952 5G 

Company Sales Market share 

(percent) 

Golden State- - - - - -

Beat-ricc_--

# - - ----

Creamcries- - - - --

# - -- - - -- --

Bordcl1  

> - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Carnatioll- - - - - - - -

- - - - -

ArdcD_____ 

-----

S488 , 449 

394 , 059 

348 , 364 

345 761  

> 2::

, 380 

884 

23. 

18. 

16. 

16. 

11.1 

> :1.

TotaL____ 

----

, 878 , 006 90.  

> "._

# --"-

Total area sales- - - - - -

------

, 078, 005      

> ,0 TIll above tab!c is bf)wd on ex 16-Z 252 , pp. 2:3-43. See paragraph 3 B."tl foot lote 22 8lipra

for discus- 

> sion O!tilcsefigul"co.
> A..

s the above tau1e indicates 

, ,,-

itlt Crenmeries : aeqllisition by respond-

ent , four companies necount-eel for ahnost 90% of ice crenm sales in 

the fiye princ.ipal cities of the lo wer Ba.y Area. ,Yitl1in six months 

nfter the Cl'emneri2s acquisition , all four of these companies were so-

ca1led nntiollal companies as a result of Forcmosfs acquisition of 

Golden Stote. 

llaA' el' sfi.eld Dii'i'iion 

::6. The divisiollll.l headquarters of Creameries ' Bakcrsfield Diyision 

,yas located ill Bakersfield (Kern County), wherc the company oper-

ated a plant ,,-hich bottled milk , manufactured ice cream , iee cream 

mix and novelties , ,1nd produce d cottage cbeese. The plnnt ,,,as in 

excellent condition. It had an IITST pnsteurizer , stainless steel proc-

essing equipment , nncl antomatic. bottling equipment for both gla.ss 

and paper containers. The p1nnt had a large YOlllme (lnc1 ,yas capable 

of being expanded (eX IG-Z 2:2 , p. 31 : ex 16-Z 25). The operations 

of the Bakersfield Division ,,-ere conductecl uncleI' the llame of Pea-

cock Dairies , Inc. (CX 16- :6 218). Its products were marketecl l1ncler 

the brand names of ;; Pencock" and " Americ.an IIostess. " In addition 

to the manufcH' .tlll'ing. plant at Bakersfield , the Division operfltecl a 

dairy fann in OIC arCfl of Bakersfield and distributing branches at 

TflTt , Delano and Hidgecrest in I\:ern COllnty and at Tulare in Tulare 

COllllt)" (eX lC-Z 218).c             

> :" Creameries also bad a bl'onch at Wasco in r';ern County, bnt this was closed at

the 

> time the COilp:ln
> ' '

was acquired b \. reslJondent (R. 1077). BEATRICE FOODS COMPA-'I 529 

473 Findings 

37. The Bakersfield Division was the largest and most profitable    

> division of Creameries

' three divisions operating in California. Its   

> total sales of $4 8:JO

06:3 in 1%1 , represented 10. 0% of Creameries  

> over-a.n sales (CX

1(j- 114). Its net earnings before taxes in 1052 

\\- 

> 81'8 $2,

764 , compared to enl'nlllgs or 8. 073 for the San .Jose  

> Division and an

$8Q 000 loss for the Los Angeles Division (CX 16-

214). In the fom months . period ending . \pril 20 , 1063 , the net sales   

> of the

BnJrersfle.1d Didsion -were Sl 7i6 30U , or 11.9% of tota, l com-

pany sales of $14- +Vi (eX IG-Z 122). Dnl'ing the same period its       

> net income before taxes was $80

416 , compared to a. loss of approsi-

111ately €,s OOO by the San Jose Division and a loss of approximately 

000 by the Los . Angeles Diyision.  

> 38. As in the case 01 the other dairy divisions

, the largest propor-      

> tion of the sales of the Bakersfield Division consisted of flnid milk

and cream pl'odllcts. For the 12 months Pllding December 31 , ID        

> its sales of flujd Inilk ,ycre g

D32 4LJ ganons , comparcd to ice cream    

> sales of 60:3

77"7 gal1011s (CX IG-Z 206 , pp. 1-2). Its operating" profit 

on sales of milk during the first ten months 01 1930 (the hiest period  

> for

yhich snch fignres appeflr in the record) ,,- as S52 OiS0 , compared      

> to aprofit of S:2(-

O;jJ on snles oJ ice cream ancl an 0'- 6r-a11 operating  

> profit of $01

020 (eX 10 Z 11,). 

39. The Bakersfield Division clistrlbntecl clairy proclllds through-

out most. of Kern and Tulare Counties , which are located at the 

southern end of tbe San .Joaquin VillJey, ,yith Tulare County being 

located directly north of Kern County. There "ere 2-: dairies clist.rib-

Ht.ing fluid miJL in Yflriolls pOl'tiOllf, of , Kcrll !:md Tnhre Connties , of 

whom 16 wcre regarded as Creamel'cs princip81 competitors :) (CX 

16-Z 2;'5:2 , pp. :22 , 2-1- :2:5; ex H)-I: 1T). There "ere also seyen 

princ.1pal competitor3 " engi.1gec1 in distrilmting ice crenl1 and othcr   

> frozen dairy

proclllc.ts in Kern fll(l 1'11lare C01lnties (CX 16- Z 25:2 

, p. 

23). A11 of the 1arge companies ,, hieh rlistrilmtptl frozen (lairy prod-  

> ucts a180 distl'ilmtec1 fluid milk in

the territory, ,,-ith one exception. 

Among the, larger distrilmtors in the area ,yerc Carnation 

> , ..

:\.rdcn 

Golden State , Borden , Challenge Creamery &, Bniter Association 

ilse, s Creamery, and S,, ift. The latter ,\ as the only one oJ these 

competitors w1J1c.h ,yas not in both product lines. Other llJ.fl:jor C-0111-

petitors engaged only in the fluid milk line were I\nnds8n Creamery  

> Co.

nd Wayne s Dairy (CX 16- Q6Q p. QJ). Somc of the com-

petitors distributed ill portiollS of the territory, while some distrib-

uted throughollt the territory. jIost had thcir plants in either Ke.rIl 

or Tulare Comdjes. I-Ioweyer : some of the competitors distrilmted 530 FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION DECISIONS 

Findings G7 F. 1'. l'. 

from plants in Fresno , Ivhich is 10c.atec1 immediately north of Tnh1rc 

County in the San J oa'1uin Valley (eX 16-2 262 , Pl'. 22- 23). Re-

spOnde-11t dicInot process dairy products in I(ern or Tn1are Connties. 

owevel' , as already mentioned , it had a distribution hLTl1ch at 

Fresno , from ",hi('11 it distributed frozen dairy proc1ncts manufac-

tured in its Los Gaios plant located in Santa Clara Connty. So far 

as appears from tIJe record , its distribution in Fresno Connty did not 

extend sonill into either Tulare or I\:ern Counties.  

> 1:. As in the case of the San

Tose Division , t.he parties are in dis-

agreement concerning the re.leTnnt market areas. Complaint cOllnsel 

contend that the, market area ill both the flniclmilk and frOZC11 dairy 

product linE's is it combinntion of Kerll and 1'U)111' e Counties. R\'-

tipondcnt proposes a. different market de1ineation for each of these 

product lines. For fll1ic1milk , respondent contends that the relcYrmt 

market is t.he entire San . Toaqnin Valley. This is in line \yith lts posi-

tion , discnssed auO\- , that the major regional areas are the ap-

propriate, markets in fluid milk. ,Vith respect to the frozen dairy 

product line , its position , as already mentione(l , is tlmt t.he, are only 

hyo lnarkets in the State orthpl'n and Southern California, with 

t.he Bakersfield Diyision (along " with the San . Tose Di\- ision) falling 

,yithin the Xorthern California market. 

1-1. As in the case of the SaIl . Tose operation , one receives a. con-

siderably difl' erent pictnre of the structnre of the ma.rket. , depending 

on which geographic delineation one accepts. Based on the market 

proposed by compla, int counsel , Creameries ,yas a substantial factor 

in both the fluid milk and the frozen dairy product lines. In the fluid 

milk prodnct line it.s sales in Kern and Tnlare COllnties represented 

26. 8% of the total milk sales made in this area. In terms of the 

broader market area proposed by respondent , viz , the entire San 

Joaquin Valley, Crcamel'ies ' milk market share wonld be D. 3 In 

the ice, cream and frozen dairy product line , Creameries ' market 

shares in the Kern-Tnlare market arca proposed by complaint counsel 

> 12 The aho'!,' nHlI'

I,et- hare percentflg'e is taken from CX Hi- Z 2:12 , p, 26 which , like the 

l)ol'tion of this exhibit citeel in cOIJneetion with the San Jose operation , was iIbmitted      

> to the Commission h" respondent in

eeking- fll1proyal of the aCQuisition. linlike tlJe  

> portions pre

dO!lsly cHerJ, which were preparc(1 lJy respondent , tbe portion dealing with 

thc Bakersfiele1 ol1erntioI! was prepflred lJy a firm of agricultural economists at 

Creameries ' request. The figl1res of total area sales , from which Crellmeries ' market share       

> is comput.erl. purport to hayc lJCCD

deyeloped from sales and prorlnctiou figures published 

by the State (pp. 20-21 of exhibit). 

" The aboye market- shflle percentage i taken from RX lOS-C. The total market- sales     

> figurc in this exhibit purports to JJa,e been deyeloped from published State data.

Creameries ' snles purport to hll,e been computed from records submitted by the company. 

The above !wrcentage does not include it silHlll amount of sales made in the San Joaquin     

> Yall fro!1I ("reaJJprjpH ' 'Yn1"SOIIYille plilJlt.

nl\" from tlJi )l1ilnt I'epre!,pnt 0, :32 '1( of 

totQl ;;ales mnde ill the San Jonquin Yalle" ' market are,l proposed h;; respondent. BEATRICE FOODS CmJPA 531 

473 Findings         

> were: 22. 0%, in the narrow ice cream product line; anc129.

3% in the 

somewhat broader frozen dairy pl'odnct line (including ice llilk and 

she-rbct , as we11 as jce cl'eam). .\ Since the market area proposed by 

respondent ) 1'iz , aJJ of northern California , includes respondenfs Los 

Gatos plant. and Cl'enmeI'jes San . lose plant , as ,yell as Cremneries 

Ba, kersfield plant , both companies ,,-ould be considered to he com- 

> petitors in this broac1l1rea. As

already mentioned in eonnection with 

the San t T ose Division s operations , their respective frozen dairy 

product market shares in this broad area ,, ere: Cremneries , 2. 33%; 

f1nd respondent , 5. 7%.  

> The Relevant

hrket Areas 

42. The market area in fillid milk proposed by complaint cOllnsel 

, essentially, n comhination of r.'1'o milk l1nrketillg areas recognized 

by the State , viz , Kerll COl1nty and Tulare County. There is no 

exp1anation by comphlnt counsel as to ,yhy they consider the 

inc1ivichml communities or the separate State milk marketing areas 

to he the appropriate market units for det.ermining market shares 

allc1 concentration .in the San . Jose aren , whereas in the Bakersfield 

area they propose a eOlnlJination of two milk market areas as the 

appropriate, nniL The only apparent reason for a. different approach 

ill the case of the Bakersfield operation is the fact that the statistieaI 

c\-.idence pertaining to this HrC,l (,," hich \'- as prepared by respondent 

for the Commission) is in terms of the bi-eollnty area.. 

43. The market arca in Huid milk proposed by respondent reflects 

its previously mentioned l)Qsition that the appropriate markets arc 

the regiona.l groupings oJ the State 1nilk marketing areas. T11e opera-

tions of Creameries ' Bake, rsfield Di\Vision fall within the regional 

grouping of marketing areas rcferred to ill State published reports 

as the San . Toaflnln ,ralJey Area. This is a combination of sm-

nmrketing nreas recog'nir.ed by thB State , of ,,' hjc11 Kern a.nd Tulare 

are two separate are, ns. Hespondent's position in this regard is based 

principa,11y on Dr. Clarke s testimony 

,,-

hich has been preyionsly 

discussed. As the examiner has already noted , despite substantial 

shipments be, Lween State marketing areas , the bulk of the milk sold 

ill t.he yuriolls marketing areas consists of milk which ha.s been proc-  

> essed ill snell arcm;. This is as trllc of the t,yO areas 11ere

under con-

sideration as it is of the areas preyiously discussed. TIHts during the 

"The nhoy€ 111al'kf't- hnl'e j1cl'centng-es are tal,en from ex 16-Z 252, IJ. 20. \.s ex-     

> plained in footnote 5 , the total univcrse flgnres 11\1IjJOl't to lW'Ie been devcloped from
> IJublished State data.
> 05 See paragraph 24 snprn.

As indicated in foot:!wte ;2,: the J11itrket-sJHlre !Jercenti1gci;  

> fd'

e taken from RX 11:J-532 FEDERAl.. TRADE COM:\nSSION DECISIONS 

Findings 67 F. 

period covered by Dr. Clarke s l'CpOl't,"G c1ireet shipments of proc 

essed standard milk from Kerll Connty rtJllOlmted to only 7. 0% of 

that processecl and sold ,,- ithin t.he area , and ship1nents of llilk re-

ceived from outs1cle the area mnolllltec1 to 2,':. 8% of that processed 

and sold within the area (HX 16Q-H mld P). Direct shipments of 

standard milk from Tnlare Connty werf', sOlne"hat higher ) amonnt- 

> ing to 32.

;'5%, while shipment's into that flrea of stall(hl'd milk proc-

essed outside were almost the same as in l\:el'n ComIty, yiz , 2G..%.  

> Approximately

75( ;X of the milk shipped into Tulare Connty from 

other nreas came from the adjoining connties of Kern and Fresno 

while approximately GSr; of that shipped into l\:e, 1'11 Connty fl'Oll1 

the outside came fl'om adjar.ent TularG COllnty nucl nearby Fresno  

> County (RX

16Q- and P). 

'Vith respect to Dr. Chrke s position concerning the frozen prod- 

> ucts marke.t

, th:\t there are. only t,ro market areas in California , the 

examiner has previously noted that even t.he larger companies had 

multiple pbnts or brunc.hes in northern Ca1ifornbin 1\)52, . Thus 

respondent had a, processing plant -in the lower Bay .. Area , but ecrn 

t.he San , Joaquin Valley from its Fresno bl'anell. Borden had p1nnts or 

distributing branches in both the Bay ATea anrl the Sfll , loarluin 

Vnlle.y Aren , as well as in the, S:HTnlncnto '\7alley. The same, was true 

of Arden , Carnation and C ohlen State" \,"' hile some of these C'Oll-

ponies may now haye only one p1nn1. in northern California , they      

> operate one or 1I01'C clistrilJlting

branches jJl variolls portions of the 

northe.rn part of the State in Dreier to ciTcctin:-ly serre cflch r rea. 

1. As previolls1 ' mentioned , Crpnmcl'il's had its p1cmt in Bnkers-

fiel(l and sClTed both Kern ,lnd Tulare, Counties. It servpcl Tulare 

County from a distributing branch in that COHnty. It, hacll(; principal 

competitors in f1nic1 mill;: , of "\\111('h most lwd pLllt or distributing 

branc.hes in Kern or Tnbre Conntie:: , although se\' el':1l11lcl their place 

of business in Fl'' sno Connty (CX 1G-Z 2;"):2 , p. 2:2). It is the con-

clusion and finding of the examiner that II c.omlJilJHtiollof Kern ,l1d 

Tlllaro Count.ies may be considered nIl appropriate geognlphic market 

area for purposes of determining the. probalJ1e competitiye impuct of 

the Creameries ' aC(Juisition , ill the fJniel milk product Jine. It nw ' be 

that each of these cOlmties cOlllcll)e considered to be ,1 separate market 

area , as they ,yore for purposes of ef: Jnblishing minim11n milk prices  

> nncler State reguJatlon.

;" HmYl'ycr , since there is no 1'e,15011 to bc1ic\"c  

> S('(- p:1;:(' 320. 8illJru , ill!(1 footnoll' ;' 1S.

07 Kern aml Tulare Conn ties were sep:uate miJk Illlrketing- nrens when the CI' enmeries 

acquisition took place, i111(1 are stil Sepfll"fltc areas. 1-lowe,('r , Tulnrc ,,,.os comhi!lccl with 

Drljoining Kings COlmty in Sept.cmber 19GO. to fO!' ll the Kings- Tulare mil;: marketing 

> flJ'Cfl.

BEATHICE FOODS CO:\IPANY 533 

473 Fin(1iugs 

t.hat Creruneries ' market position in the individual counties is sub-   

> st.antiaIly helmy tlwt in the hyo c011ltie,

s as a. whole , a.nd since the 

statistical evidence in the record is in t.erms of the bi-county area. 

the examiner consic1e s it propel' to consider the impact of the acquisi-

tion in terms of the broader area. 

4r. In the frozen (h:iry pl'oc1nct line the evidence likewise discloses 

that. Creameries distributed in both Kern and Tulare Connties. In 

t.his area it had seven principal competitors (CX IG-Z 252 , p. 23). Of 

tllese , fan I' had plants or clistrilmting branches ill Fresno 

, \\ 

hich is the            

> connty spat. of Fresno Connty.'.8 There is reason to believe that the

compfllies 1101 dng a piant or Lranch in Fresno distributed in Tu1a.l'e 

ollnty immediately to the south. The, latter county appears to be an 

overlap C01llty, ,,-11ic11 is selTec1 "\vit1J frozen dairy prodncts from Kern       

> Connt)-to the SOl1t hflld

from Fresno COllnty to the north. In view 

of the fact. that respondent VnL'3 encroaching on Cremneries ' territory 

from Fresno (althongh it had not yet entered TlL1are COlllt:r), and 

a. number of companies we, re serving the area, from Fresno , the exam-

iner ('onsiders it. appropriate to eomhine, the tri-count.y area. of Fresno 

Tlllare and KeI'll Counties for pm' poses of ,,-eighing the probable, C011-

petit1ye impnct of t.he aCfJnisition in the :frozen dairy product line. 

::Jarket Shares and Concentration 

> (")

Fh;id Milk 

-d(\. It has been determined that a cornbinfltion of Kern and Tlllflre 

COl1lties t,,,- o cOllnties in the lmyer end of the San , Joaquin Valley,   

> is th(

appropriate rnnl'ket. arefl in ,,- hieh t.o weigh the probahle ('011-

petitiye impact of the acquisjtion of Creameries : Bakersfield Dh-ision 

insoJnr as it iln-oJyes the fluid milk proc1nc.t line. Creameries dist.rib-

nted fluid milk in this area bllt respondent (1i(1 not. Set forth below      

> is atable reflecting Cl'e,

Hmeries : market share in the market area. found   

> to be appropriate.

s Although ouly Borden , Challenge and Golden State are referred to in CX 10-;. 252 

p. 23, as having .' l"remo address , Arden Farms likewise hall a plant in Fresno (CX 409). 

Creamcl'ir8 marlcc/. share (fi' uid mJlk) in J" ower San Joaquin Yalley, 1952.\g 

# _..    

> Creameries
> Arp, Totrtllnca
> sales (gl!llons) l1eS (gurOES) Iarket share
> (percent)
> Kern and Tulare Countics__

----- 

> -- 13

325 , ;,:;93 , 435, 087 25.      

> 50 Based on ex 16-Z252 ,p. 26,

534 FEDERAL TRADE COMl\HSSIOX DECISIONS 

Findings G7 F.  

> (b)

Frozen Dairy Products 

47. It has been determined that a combination or Kern , Tnh11' 

and Fl'esno Counties in the la-wer end of the Sa.n . Toaql1ill Valle,y Inn 

be considered the appropriate gcographie market for purposes or 

determining the probable cOlnpetitive impact of the acqnisition , inso-

far as it in \-olves the frozen dairy prodnet line. Since Creameries 

sold only in Kern and TnJal'e Conntics , and respondent only in 

Fresno County, the table set forth belmy reflects their position in 

each of the areas where they distributed , as well ns in the tri-connty 

area, as a ,,- hole. 

R(spondrnt s and C!"N/lIH'i'ies ' marht shul':s (ice ci'cQ' m) in Lower San Joaquin  

> Valley, 1 952

# ,,--- --,  

> ..i. I'

ToralsaJps     

> (gc.lIol1s)
> Cn' di111'l'il' Befltl'kl'
> Sales
> (gaJlons) Prl'cent
> H1'ei)
> Sal!'.
> (galjons)

Prrrl'llt  

> :1 e.j

Kcrn and 1\11a1'e CO\1ntics- 1 5;)2 420  

> 1"1'(':"110

County - - - -- 853 

> , g;'

350 741 22. 

--- ---

284 . 139 "" 0 ,J,).  

> .lIarkct tot.aL_-

386 

, ;). 

3;)0 741 14. 6 284 , 139 11. 9

--- ---

(0 The Jigmes for Kem and Tulp. le Counties arc taken flo:n C'X H1-7. 253 , p. 26. The figures for Fl'CSllO  

> County art' taken froJ;.l CX 16-Z 215. TJ18 forme!' ex!1:lJit cOI'tains data for both ice crCilm and other frozen
> dairy prorjucts

, viz . ice mi1k and HherlH't. However , sincr ex In-z 215 s li1;lited to ice crcaU1, tile l:Oll-

parjsol1l\\)ove matle is so limited. Cl'famerks ' l l;jrket sharn in tbesl tKO counties inull Jrozen daily products 

> Wl'S 2U,

48. The, record does not rm-eaJ the extent of concentration in eitheT 

the flnid milk or the, frozen dairy product lines in terms of the 

market areas abm-e Immd to be the areas of effecti,-e compet.itloll. The 

evidence offered by complaint counsel discloses that a. nnmber of the 

1arge companies , inc1uding Carnation , Borden , Arden and Golden 

State , were n.mong Creameries 

' " 

principaJ competitors " in the Kcrn-

Tulare marketing area (CX 16- 2 2, pp. 22-2;: 3), but does not reveal 

the share of the market acc0111ted for by these companies. H owever 

the evidence offered by respondent does disclose the extent of con-

centration in the broader market area, proposed by it 

> , -

with respect to 

the fluid milk proclnct line. In the San Joaquin VaHey area. as a 

whole , which inc.ucIes seven State milk marketing areas (among 

which are ICeI'n and Tulare), four companies aceountecI for 4, 4-. 35% 

of the sales of flnid miJk in the "rea in 1052 (RX 100-A). These fom 

compa.nies , ill orde,r of rank : ,yerc : G01clcn State , 13Ol'dell. Cream( l'ics 

and Carnation (EX 112).
