Title: VBM Printables

URL Source: https://cadem.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/VBM-FAQs.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 10 Mar 2021 16:05:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 2

Markdown Content:
Mail in your ballot . Your ballot must be postmarked on or before Election Day . It is strongly recommended that every voter sign , date & mail their ballot EARLY to be sure there is plenty of time for their ballot to make its way through the postal system . As long as your ballot is received by your county elections office no later than 17 days after Election Day , it will be counted .

Drop your ballot in a secure drop box . Drop boxes are located at every vote center and polling place . They are designed to be tamper -proof and are carefully supervised by elections personnel . Check with your County Registrar of Voters for locations for drop boxes in your area .

Return your ballot to a vote center or polling place . It is recommended that all voters sign , date and mail their ballots as early as possible , but voters also have the option of dropping off ballots in person early or on Election Day at a vote center or polling place . Vote centers and polling places are open anywhere from 4-10 days prior to Election Day depending on what county you are in . Check with your County Registrar of Voters for further details .

All drop -off ballots must be received by 8 p.m. on Election Day . Visit https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /voting -

resources /county -elections -offices /

Sign , Date , and Mail in Your Ballot Early How do I vote -by -mail ? Is vote -by -mail easy ?

Yes , vote -by -mail is safe , easy & secure ! You will receive your ballot in the mail at least three weeks before the election . Ballot packets will be mailed to every voter in the State of California on or around October 5, 2020. All you have to do to vote -by -mail is complete your ballot , sign & date the envelope and drop it in the mail at any US Postal Service mailbox or post office . You don ’t even need a stamp – the return envelope provided is already prepaid . Learn more about the process by visiting : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /election -2020/. 

How do I get my vote -my -mail ballot ?

Every voter in the State of California will receive a mail -in ballot in the mail at their home address from their County 

Registrar of Voters .

Who will be counting my ballot ?

The County Registrar of Voters of each county collects and counts all the ballots for that county using secure and careful guidelines established by the California Secretary of State and that County ’s Registrar of Voters . To find out more about how your vote is counted , visit : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /election -2020/. 

Do I have to request a ballot ?

No . If you are registered to vote , you will automatically receive a ballot in the mail . Ballot packets will be mailed on or around October 5, 2020. 

I didn ’t receive my vote -by -mail ballot . What should I do ?

Contact your County Registrar of Voters before October 27 to request a replacement ballot . Find your County Registrar of Voters by visiting : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /election -2020/. 

I can ’t vote in person if I get a ballot mailed to me , right ?

Even if you receive your vote -by -mail ballot , you can change your mind and vote at a polling place on Election Day . For more information , visit : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /voting -resources /voting -california /if -you -applied /. 

Where and how do I submit my vote -by -mail ballot ?

You have three options to submit your ballot :

Do I need a stamp ?

No , the return envelope postage is prepaid .

# FAQ YOUR ESSENTIALS TO VOTING-BY-MAIL 

PAID FOR BY THE CALIFORNIA DEMOCRATIC PARTY. | WWW.CADEM.ORG FAQ YOUR ESSENTIALS TO VOTING-BY-MAIL 

PAID FOR BY THE CALIFORNIA DEMOCRATIC PARTY. | WWW.CADEM.ORG 

Sign , Date , and Mail in Your Ballot Early If I choose to mail in my ballot , how will the United States Postal Service (USPS ) handle it ?

The USPS sends all completed vote -by -mail ballots back to county elections offices as First Class Mail , postage paid ,

and has an estimated delivery window of 2-5 days . The County elections officials use the post service ’s Official Election Mail Logo that allows postal workers and carriers to recognize it as essential election mail . USPS process for handling vote -by -mail ballots is proven , tested , safe and effective in handling and delivering ballots in a timely manner .

To learn more about the process , visit : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /election -2020/. 

How can I be sure my ballot will get there ? Can I track it ?

California has made it easy for you to track your ballot in multiple languages . Through Where ’s My Ballot ?, also known as BallotTrax , you can track and receive notifications on the status of your vote -by -mail ballot . As long as you complete , sign , date and mail in your ballot early , BallotTrax lets you track your ballot every step of the way . Visit WheresMyBallot .sos .ca .gov for more information .

The following counties are offering Where ’s My Ballot in multiple languages :

Amador , El Dorado , Fresno , Glenn , Kern , Los Angeles , Marin , Mariposa , Merced ,

Monterey , Orange , Placer , Riverside , Sacramento , San Benito , San Joaquin , San Luis Obispo , Santa Clara , Shasta ,

Sutter , Santa Clara , Shasta , Sutter , Tehama , Tuolumne , Ventura , Yolo , Yuba .

Is my vote still confidential ?

Yes ! BallotTrax tracks your ballot envelope , not your vote . Your vote remains confidential through the entire ballot tracking process .

What if my signature is messed up ?

Very , very few ballots are rejected because of a “signature mismatch ”. However , if for some reason a voter ’s signature on their ballot envelope doesn ’t match their signature on file , California law requires that election officials notify the voter at least eight days before the certification of the election when they reject a signature – giving voters a chance to provide a valid one .

If I drop off my ballot , do I still need to wait in line ?

You might ! There is no guarantee that dropping off a vote -by -mail ballot at your polling place will allow you to avoid long lines and crowds .

A lot of people have the same names and even the same birthdays . How can the County Registrar of Voters ensure my individual vote is counted ?

Each vote -by -mail ballot comes with an identification envelope that is unique to that voter . The envelope has abarcode on it for the voter which includes the voter ’s address and additional information unique to that voter . To learn more about the process , visit : https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /election -2020/. 

What if my Vote -By -Mail ballot is lost or stolen ?

If your ballot was lost , stolen or destroyed before Election Day , you can request a second vote -by -mail ballot . Contact your county elections office to be sent another ballot .

If your ballot was lost , stolen , or destroyed on Election Day , you can go to your assigned polling place and vote aprovisional ballot . For more information on lost and provisional ballots in your county , visit :

https :// www .sos .ca .gov /elections /voter -registration /vote -mail /. 

For more information on the Vote By Mail Truth Squad , visit cadem .vote /votebymail or email truthsquad @cadem .org .
