Title: 

URL Source: http://southernvoice.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Final-Peru-Data-Test_April.pdf

Markdown Content:
1

# Measuring the Sustainable Development Agenda in Peru 

Martin Benavides 

Silvio Campana 

Selene Cueva 

Juan Leon 

Alejandro Wagenman 

April 2016 

Lima, Peru 2

# Contents 

Acknowledgements  3

Acronymns and Abbreviations  4

List of Tables and Figures  5

Report Highlights  6

Introduction  11 

Research Process  13 

Post -2015 Priorities for Peru  16 

End Poverty  19 

Ensure Quality Education for All  23 

Create Jobs, Sustainable Livelihoods and Inclusive Growth for All  27 

Ensure Sustainable Energy and Develop Infrastructure for All  31 

Establish a Sustainable, Healthy and Resilient Environment for All  38

Establish Open, Accountable, Inclusive and Effective Institutions, Rule of Law and a Peaceful and 

Inclusive Society 

43 

Establish a Global Partnership for Sustainable Development  55

Measuring Progress on Post -2015 in Peru  57

Political Economy of the Data Revolution  67

Conclusion  75

References  76

Annex 1. Targets and Indicators Examined for Peru  82 

Annex 2. Sources to Monitor Post -2015  92 

Annex 3. Data Quality Assessment Framework  953

# Acknowledgements 

The Post-2015 Data Test is an initiative developed and led by Bangladesh’s Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD) and Canada’s Norman Paterson School of International Affairs (NPSIA) at Carleton University in association with Southern Voice on Post-MDG International Development Goals. The Group for the Analysis of Development (GRADE) thanks the International Development Research Centr e’s (IDRC) Think Tank Initiative and the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation for their support of the Peru case study under the Post-2015 Data Test. The project coordinator for this study was Juan Leon. This report was written by Martin Benavides, Silvio Campana, Selene Cueva, Juan Leon and Alejandro Wagenman. 

The authors are grateful to Shannon Kindornay, Adjunct Research Professor, at NPSIA for comments on the report, as well as key informants who provided feedback throughout the research process. 

This study does not necessarily reflect the views or opinions of GRADE or anyone consulted  during  the 

research process.  Responsibility for the in formation and views expressed in the  report  lies entirely with the 

authors. 4

# Acronyms and Abbreviations 

CEPLAN 

CPD 

GDP 

GPS 

GRADE 

HIV /AIDS 

INEI 

MDG 

NPSIA 

PENDES 

PESEM 

PISA 

PPP 

SDG 

UN 

Centro Nacional de Planeami ento Estratégico 

Centre for Policy Dialogue 

gross domestic product 

Global Positioning System 

Grupo de Análisis para el Desarrollo 

human immunodeficiency virus /acqu ired immune deficiency syndrome 

National Institute of Statistics and Information Technology 

Millennium Development Goal 

Norman Paterson School of International Affairs 

Plan Estratégico Nacional para el Desarrollo Estadístico 

Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual 

Programme for Intern ational Student Assessment 

purchasing power parity 

Sustainable Development Goal 

United Nations 5

# List of Tables and Figures 

Table 1  Workshop , focus group and key informant interview p articipants  15

Figure 1  Post -2015 priorities for Peru  17

Table 2  End poverty: Targets and indicators  21

Table 3  Ensure quality education for all: Targets and indicators  24

Table 4  Create jobs, sustainable livelihoods and inclusive growth for all: Targets and 

indicators 

29 

Table 5  Ensure sustainable energy and develop infrastructure for all: Targets and indicators  36

Table 6  Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all: Targets and 

indicators 

40 

Figure 2  Main reforms undertaken by the government  48

Table 7  Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a 

peaceful and inclusive society : Targets and indicators 

52

Table 8  Establish a global partnership for sustainable development: Targets and indicators  56

Table 9  Data availability for measuring progress against global targets and indicators  60 

Table 10  Global targets and indicators for which data need to be collected  61 

Table 11  Key potential sources for monitoring the post -2015 agenda in Peru  61 

Table 12  Indicators for which data are not available for 2010  62 

Table 13  Data quality assessment framework of Peru  62

Table 14  Conclusions from PENDES 2008 –2012  63

Ta ble 15  Principal strateg ies for data quality assessment by criterion  64

Table 16  Results of the data quality assessment  66 

Figure 3 Strategic programmes designed under results -based budgeting  69

Table 1.1  End poverty: Targets and indicators  82

Table 1.2  Ensure quality education for all: Targets and indicators  83

Table 1 .3 Create jobs, sustainable livelihoods and inclusive growth for all: Targets and 

indicators 

84 

Table 1.4 Ensure sustainable energy and develop infrastructure for all: Targets and indicators  86

Table 1.5 Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all: Targets and 

indicators 

87

Table 1.6 Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a 

peaceful and inclusive society : Targets and indicators 

89 

Table 1.7 Establish a global partnership for sustainable development: Targets and indicators  91

Table 2.1  Potential sources for monitoring the Post -2015 agenda in Peru  92

Table 3.1  Quality assessment framework  94 95 6

# Report Highlights 

In 2012, the Rio+20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development pledged that governments will propose a set of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the post-2015 period. The SDGs – agreed to in September 2015 – replace the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which expire in the same year. The SDGs take into consideration positive experiences from the MDGs and aspects that were excluded from or not achieved with the MDGs. Unlike the MDGs, the SDGs are universal in nature, applying to all countries. To contribute to ongoing discussions on the post-2015 agenda, Bangladesh’s Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD) and Canada’s Norman Paterson School of International Affairs at Carleton University, in association with Southern Voice on Post-MDG International Development Goals, launched “The Post-2015 Data Test: Unpacking the Data Revolution at the Country Level, ” an initiative to examine how the SDGs can be applied and monitored across low-, middle- and high-income countries. The initiative includes the mapping of available data to measure post-2015 sustainable development indicators and the identification of challenges and opportunities that countries may face during the implementation of the SDGs. This report presents the key findings of the Peru case study under the initiative. 

The Group for the Analysis of Development (GRADE) is the multidisciplinary research institution responsible for the Peru case study. The study includes an examination of targets and indicators for roughly 12 of the 17 candidate SDGs, grouped into seven key areas: (i) poverty, (ii) education, (iii) employment and inclusive growth, (iv) energy and infrastructure, (v) environmental sustainability and disaster resilience, (vi) governance and (vii) global partnership for sustainable development. Furthermore, this report identifies the challenges for monitoring the SDGs and their respective policy implications and recommendations for the achievement of the SDGs in Peru. 

As the finalised SGD document points out, “poverty eradication is the greatest global challenge facing the world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development” (UN 2015). This statement is particularly relevant for the Latin American region, including Peru, since it is one of the worst-rated regions in the world in terms of inequality. Although poverty rates continue to decrease, the probability of falling back into poverty will persist if inequalities based on gender, ethnicity and territorial factors remain. 

To overcome these key challenges and produce real change in the lives of people, it is necessary to focus on 

the ones who have been “left behind” and have the least. In Peru, minorities (e.g., women, indigenous, Afro-Peruvians) are the people who need the most attention. There is a need for more disaggregated data to better understand how these groups live and what they have, think and feel. 

In this context, the report provides an analysis of SDG priorities for Peru and examines data availability for monitoring and following through on the SDGs at the country level. Furthermore, its comparative matrix of targets and indicators will be useful for policy-makers during their planning phase for implementing the SDGs at the national level. Additionally, the unpacking of the data revolution in Peru will be an excellent input that can help start the same process in other Latin American countries. 7

## Key findings 

Post-2015 Agenda in Peru 

Peru’ s development advocates urgently need to connect more meaningfully with key constituencies through discussions about policy priorities in order to raise awareness and increase levels of engagement with development policy issues regarding the SDGs and the data revolution, with the ultimate purpose being to influence policy-makers. 

Peru’ s achievements in terms of the MDGs have been satisfactory. Moving forward, the public sector, international organisations and academia in the country have engaged on the post-2015 agenda and associated indicators. The Peruvian government has held discussions with different sectors on the SDGs in advance of their establishment. Additionally, the United Nations System in Peru completed a national consultation process between November 2012 and March 2013. The consultations were centred on the question of what kind of future citizens want for Peru and traced an agenda for sustainable development after 2015. The consultation process was highly inclusive and included inputs from government, international organisations, non-governmental organisations, civil society organisations, the private sector and academia. As a result, a thematic agenda was proposed and key messages emerged on participatory monitoring for accountability in the post-2015 agenda. 1

Consultations demonstrated that Peruvians consider the country to have “progressed” in recent years , but 

“there is much to be done” to become a developed country. Civil society values social and economic issues (i.e., education, health, employment) as priorities and has interests in strengthening governance mechanisms (e.g., the decentralisation process, ending insecurity and corruption) and protecting the environment (e.g., regulation of water resources, land management, addressing natural disaster risks and climate change). It is important to highlight the participation of civil society because it allows a voice to people who usually have no access to debates or planning the national agenda and allows them to participate in the policy making that affects their lives. 

The Peru research team took into account the perspectives of stakeholders, including the government and private sector, voiced during focus group discussions and interviews as part of the research process. They viewed that policies need to be focused on: (i ) gender equality , (ii ) climate  change , (iii ) financial inclusion and 

(iv ) industr ial  technical inno vation for diversif ied  production  (GRADE 2014).  Also , the  research  team selected 

(i) women,  (ii) indigenous people s, (iii) early aged children  and  (iv)  yo ung people  as prio rity groups  that need 

special attention in the country.  The team developed specific  national  indicators for th ese themes and groups. 

Taking into account the points of view of all participants in the consultation and research processes, the research team agreed that Peru needs to act on several factors during the post-2015 period: (i) reduce poverty in all its forms, (ii) improve the quality of education at all levels and education infrastructure, (iii) maintain the balance between economic growth and environmental protection, (iv) improve air and water quality, (v) ensure full access to developed infrastructure, (vi) establish a strong state and fight against corruption, (vii) improve relationships between the government, companies and communities and (viii) improve security and reduce violence in all its forms. 

In this context, the SDGs emerge as particularly relevant for Peru. While the country is considered by the International Monetary Fund to be one of the most stables economies in Latin America ( Vera  and  Wong 

2013), it obtained the worst scores in international education al  assessments in  the last years  that  it  

> 1For more information, see UNDG (2015).

8

participated – 2012, 2009 and 2000 (OECD 2014). Recognising that Peru has a lot of work to do to become developed, policy-makers are working strongly on social areas such as education, poverty and employment. Some issues recognised as relevant for society require more efforts. For example, to achieve the goal on environmental protection, it is necessary to have clear and continuous indicators and real compromise among involved actors. Discussions about policy priorities would raise awareness, increase engagement with development policy issues linked to the SDGs and data revolution and influence policy-makers ’ decisions. 

It is important to highlight that the lack of proactive and strong leadership within government institutions makes building synergies for the post-2015 agenda difficult. Due to past experiences, it has been generally difficult for all political parties to engage in long-term policy making. Presidential elections are coming up in 2016 and the post-2015 agenda has not been mentioned in electoral platforms. Except within the National Center for Strategic Planning, a specialised technical body of the government, and civil society organisations, the SDGs have not inspired a widespread call for a data revolution in Peru. 

Monitoring the Post-2015 Agenda 

Peru has a trustworthy national statistical system that is generally prepared to measure progress on the post-2015 agenda. The National Institute of Statistics and Information Technology (INEI), which is Peru’s national 

statistics office, and other government entities produce relevant, accurate and timely information. The majority of databases can be accessed by the general public. The INEI provides quarterly and annual indicators, microdata archives and systems to cross-check variables in a user-friendly way, every ministry and other government entity has a “statistics ” section on its website. Therefore, data users do not have problems accessing available data. Nevertheless, data availability varies by SDG area and targets. 

The SDGs bring with them two major challenges for the INEI. First, deficiency in the decentralisation process affects data producers and the poorest government entities precariously use the provided statistical information. Second, due to changes in budgeting in recent years, the need for specialised information from all sectors has increased, but the law states that the sectors are not responsible for collecting data. For that reason, the INEI is responsible for managing too much data, conducting several surveys and serving many sectors. 

The indicators reported directly by the INEI generally do better in terms of data quality when compared to indicators reported by other government entities. For instance, the candidate targets and indicators under the goal areas on poverty, education and employment obtained high scores according to the data quality assessment framework used under the Post-2015 Data Test. This is because databases for these goal areas follow pre-defined quality standards, technical documents are available, a system for user consultation exists, time periods for data collection and release have been determined, data are credible and data are in agreement with user “demand ” so they are relevant. However, data availability and quality for the goal areas on environment, governance and global partnership require improvement. This is due to the fact that the candidate indicators under these goal areas are calculated with administrative data, specific technologies are needed for data collection and data come from ministries not directly directed by the INEI. Because resources, expertise and efforts to collect and produce data vary from ministry to ministry, the quality of data and indicators also changes. 2

According to a data-mapping exercise undertaken for the Peru case study, 68 percent of indicators examined in this study are calculated by the INEI or can be calculated using data that can be accessed relatively easily   

> 2For instance, the Ministry of Environment was created in 2008. In 2012, the unit of the ministry in charge of statistics only had eight
> workers and no quality controls for information sources and coding (INEI 2013b).

9

through an information request to the INEI. It is important to note that one source, the National Household Survey, collects much of the data needed for the goals areas on poverty, education and employment.  The 

situation s for  the rest of  the  indicators  are  mixed. Six percent can be calculated by custom tabulation of  data 

producers  because information  exists but  is not systematis ed . Ten  percent of indicators are  currently 

calculable, but  data are  not available for the  proposed  baseline year  of 2010 . This stu dy did  not  consider 

us ing  non -official  sources to measure  post -2015  progress  given that  they do not necessarily follow the same 

level of rigor and transparency as  the  INEI . However , identified  non -official  data  sources  could be used to 

monitor  8 percent of  indicators.  It is important to note  that  non -official sources  can only be used for the 

country’s  weaker  areas  – energy and infrastructure, environment and governance . Further , there are  three 

global  indicator s under the  goal  areas  on  energy, governance and environment  that cannot be measured 

because  data  are  not  collected  by  the  INEI , non -official  sources  or international sources. 

The low level of data disaggregation is a challenge that needs to be overcome. Most of the indicators can be disaggregated by place of residence (urban and rural), region (political organisation) and age, but data disaggregation by sex (important for indicators regarding financial inclusion) and minority group (e.g., Afro-Peruvians) is important and requires more efforts if no one is to be left behind during the post-2015 period. 

Political Economy Dimensions of Data in Peru 

Over time, the collection of data for social indicators in Peru has changed due to various factors, such as laws, political pressure, budgets, technical difficulties and methodological innovations, among others. Since 2000, two legal reforms were enacted because the government wanted to increase efficiency, meet citizens’ 

demands and improve accountability: the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information and Law of Public Sector Budget that prescribe results-based budgeting. The former obliges all public administration entities to publish information on their respective websites or in journals that are widely circulated and to provide information to citizens upon request, while the latter changed the administration of the public budget with the objective being to make state social projects and programmes more efficient and equal in reducing poverty and exclusion. 

In this context, some changes in INEI practices and methodologies for data collection have occurred in recent years. First, the INEI has been implementing a decentralisation plan since 2001 and its headquarters now works with decentralised offices to ensure the use of common methodologies and standardised processes. Second, the INEI began to receive support in 2007 from an external Adviser Committee to improve the methodology and collection of information in surveys that measure poverty. In 2011, the INEI started to use technologies for data collection and more data disaggregation. 

Regarding the financing side, results-based budgeting anticipates the Peruvian population ’s central problems and conceives likely results of interventions by government entities oriented towards development and research. Attention to specific central problems is prioritised over other secondary objectives. It is stipulated that every intervention should generate a product and every product should be oriented towards a goal. Indicators are generated for the conceived results in a way that the progress of the Peruvian population in all areas can be measured. The budget mainly depends on the capacity of each ministry. Entities such as the Ministry of Environment must enhance their capacity in order to measure progress on all the candidate SDGs. 

## Key Recommendations 

This study arrives at various recommendations that could be followed by different developing countries to generate indicators that answer to national and international demands for information. A key recommendation 10 

is to create a tool that enables all countries to systematise and map all available data and information as well as identify data gaps in different areas. For instance, the data quality assessment framework used in this study helped the research team to undertake the data-mapping exercise and identify the quality and availability of data and information for measuring progress on sustainable development. 

Although many indicators can be measured and monitored, greater efforts are required from the INEI and the broader national statistical system in a number of areas. First, the INEI should work together with various data producers at different levels to standardise data collection processes, including methodologies and digitalisation, across government entities. Second, the INEI should include some new questions in the National Household Survey (or specialised surveys) to measure the finalised SDG indicators. Regarding indicators on energy and environment, Peru can create synergies with international organisations to measure indicators that it by itself cannot. Synergies could also facilitate the transfer of technical knowledge and strengthen cooperation between government and international partners. Third, the INEI needs to build capacity in terms of personnel and infrastructure, since the demand for information from government entities is increasing and the development of a monitoring system for the SDGs will soon begin.  It is  thus  necessary 

to increase th e INEI’s  budget  to hire person ne l, improve infrastructure,  adopt  new technologies to collect data 

and  build  capacity in other  entities . Finally, all politic al parties  must  embrace the p ost -2015  agenda  since it 

will be part of the policy  frameworks  of  many  government s.

Moreover, ministries should make the following changes in order to improve data: (i) implement results-based budgeting, (ii) disseminate information and analysis on the processes and results of government interventions, (iii) improve human capital and standardise heterogeneous visions, (iv) build a culture of accountability that feeds back on management, (v) strengthen the development of indicators and improve the clarity of priorities, (vi) collaborate with the INEI to standardise data collection processes, (vii) improve coordination between current and capital expenditure and (viii) strengthen territorial articulation. 11 

# Introduction 

In September 2000, the heads of state and government of 189 countries gathered at the United Nations (UN) for the Millennium Summit. The Millennium Declaration was signed to reaffirm the principles and objectives found in the UN Charter and establish eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to be achieved by the end of 2015. Peru’s achievements in terms of the MDGs have been satisfactory. Many of the targets under the MDGs have been achieved before the deadline. As the world moves forward with the post-2015 development agenda, it is important to inspire countries to be ambitious to spur efforts and real change. 

At the UN Sustainable Development Summit in September 2015, the UN and member states defined and adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that succeed the MDGs (see UN 2015). They build on the Rio+20 Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012, where governments agreed on the fundamental elements of a post-2015 development agenda that incorporates economic, social and environmental well-being. The SDGs draw on lessons learned from the MDGs and incorporate aspects that were excluded or left unachieved, namely a greater number of goals and associated targets related to the environment and climate change, the economy, and peace and security. 

These ambitious goals, under which there are 169 targets, have a deadline of 2030. The SDGs are universal in nature, which means that they apply to all countries, take into account different realities in developing and developed countries, and respect national priorities. People are at the centre of sustainable development. The UN (2015) recognises that “eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development. ” The post-2015 agenda integrates the three dimensions of sustainable development – the economic, social and environmental. 

Unlike the MDGs, the SDGs permit countries to determine their own sustainable development targets and corresponding indicators by which they will measure progress. In this context, it is important to highlight the concept “leave no one behind ” in the post-2015 agenda. The concept implies that progress should be ensured within all sectors and for all people in society. Given this key concern, the challenges of obtaining good quality data, including disaggregated data, throughout the developing world and the fact that the SDGs cover more areas than the MDGs, a “data revolution ” is necessary to better track sustainable development progress. Furthermore, it is necessary to identify key data gaps for monitoring progress on the SDGs in specific countries. 

This report provides an analysis of important SDG priorities for Peru and examines data availability for monitoring progress on the SDGs at the country level. It contributes to understanding how global and national indicators could be measured and what the challenges and opportunities are for realising progress. The comparative matrix of targets and indicators will be useful for policy-makers during the planning phase for implementing the SDGs at the national level. Additionally, the unpacking of the data revolution in Peru will be an excellent input that can help start the same process in other Latin American countries. 

This report is part of the broader initiative – “T he Post-2015 Data Test: Unpacking the Data Revolution at the 

Country Level” – which aims to road-test how the candidate SDGs could be applied and measured across low-, middle- and high-income countries. The Peru case study includes an examination of goal areas which roughly capture 12 of the 17 SDGs that were adopted in September 2015, including poverty, education, employment and inclusive growth, energy and infrastructure, environmental sustainability and disaster resilience, governance and global partnership for sustainable development. Launched by Bangladesh’s 12 

Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD) and Canada’s Norman Paterson School of International Affairs (NPSIA), in association with Southern Voice on Post-MDG International Development Goals, the initiative also includes case studies on Bangladesh, Canada, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Tanzania and Turkey. 

This report is divided into six sections. Following the introduction, the second section provides an overview of the research process. The third section details Peru ’s priorities for post-2015, the fourth reviews data availability for selected goal areas, while the fifth examines the political economy dimensions of the data revolution in Peru. The final section presents the principal conclusions of this study. 13 

# Research Process 

## Research Team 

The Group for the Analysis of Development (Grupo de Análisis para el Desarrollo or GRADE) was responsible for conducting the Peru case study under the Post 2015 Data Test. GRADE is a private, non-profit research centre whose main objective is to develop applied research that helps to enrich the debate, design and implementation of public policies in Peru. The multidisciplinary research team benefitted from the cooperation of economists, sociologists and anthropologists throughout the research process. 

## Methodology 

The Methodology and Implementation Guide utilised for the Peru case study was developed by CPD and NPSIA in association with Southern Voice (see Bhattacharya, Higgins and Kindornay 2014). It details the various steps to determine the availability, quality and validity of data for the targets and indicators to measure progress on the post-2015 agenda. The guide outlines global targets and indicators to be examined in all countries and how teams should go about selecting national priorities. It also provides information for data quality assessment. 

Under the Post-2015 Data Test, each country is expected to conduct a literature review, host an inception workshop to launch the initiative at the country level, hold key informant interviews and focus group discussions with key stakeholders (as appropriate, depending on the country context) and conduct a data-mapping exercise and data quality assessment for measuring post-2015 progress. The research process included the identification of national-level targets and indicators for select candidate SDGs. 3 Reflecting a mix of MDG-like goal areas and new issues that are covered by the SDG framework, the initiative included the following goal areas: 

 poverty   energy and infrastructure 

 employment and inclusive growth   governance 

 education   environmental sustainability and disaster resilience 

 global partnership for sustainable development 

Based on the methodology for the initiative, researchers examined 5 –6 targets and approximately 8 –12 indicators for each candidate goal. CPD, NPSIA and Southern Voice pre-selected some targets and indicators to be examined in all countries under each selected goal area to allow for comparison on data availability across country case studies. Within this set of pre-selected targets and indicators, they also included one target reflecting a potential global minimum standard 4 for each goal area. These targets and indicators are referred to as “global ” throughout the study. All other targets and indicators were chosen in consultation with stakeholders. Further, to ensure consistency, global targets and indicators make use of international definitions, typically from UN agencies, where possible. Within the “national ” set of targets and     

> 3The methodology that informs this re port was developed prior to the release of the finalised post -2015 agenda (UN 2015). The seven
> areas examined capture 12 of the 17 candidate SDGs. See Bhattacharya, Higgins and Kindornay (2014) for further details on how
> candidate goals were selected and t he key priority areas included under each goal.
> 4Global minimum standards refer to potential targets and corresponding indicators that should be realised for all people regar dless of
> where they live. An example of a global minimum standard would be “Ensur e no person is living on less than US$1.25 (purchasing
> power parity [PPP]) per day by 2030.”

14 

indicators, research teams were instructed to ensure that at least one target (and corresponding indicator[s]) connects to another theme to support intersectionality between goals. 

## Key Activities 

Unlike other research teams participating in the initiative, the Peru research team did not hold an inception workshop to identify post-2015 priorities for Peru. This was partly because information related to Peru’s post-2015 priorities was already widely available owing to UN consultation processes and efforts by the Peruvian government to define the national agenda. As such, the research team was able to assess potential global targets and indicators against the priorities that Peru as a country embraced for the post-2015 period (see UNDP 2013e). It is important to point out that when this study was conducted, the Peruvian government was still engaged in the proposal phase and had not yet decided upon indicators for each goal area. For this reason, the study includes proposed indicators assigned to each goal area that do not perfectly coincide with 

the government’s agenda. 

In preparing this report, the research team engaged in a number of steps. The first step was to elaborate a list of indicators to measure targets under each goal area and share it with stakeholders from the public sector, academia, international organisations and civil society to gain feedback. A number of focus group discussions and key informant interviews were held to this effect. In order to establish the list of indicators, the research team mapped all official and non-official databases available in Peru for data and information that permit the measurement of different targets related to the goal areas examined under the Post-2015 Data Test. The team examined technical documents accessible through the databases to determine the levels targeted by the databases. It then elaborated the list of indicators to measure targets under each goal area, including those suggested in the Methodology and Implementation Guide , and identified possible sources for monitoring progress on the SDGs. Once the list was elaborated, a workshop was held to debate the priorities and sources identified and included participation by various stakeholders. 

The workshop allowed the research team to hear stakeholders’ opinions regarding the characteristics that indicators should have if they are to effectively measure targets. Stakeholders also offered recommendations regarding which indicators should be proposed for Peru, including the goals to which they should be assigned. 

Additionally, a key informant interview was held with the Executive Director of Surveys and Census of Peru’s 

National Institute of Statistics and Information Technology ( Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática  or 

INEI) . The objective of t his  in -depth  interview  was  to collect information about the evolution of the  national 

statistic s office  over time, its role in the national statistical system, and the changes that have occurred over 

time regarding  data  collection,  positive drivers of change with respect to improving  databases and public 

access and the politics behi nd the generation of information by the  government . This interview  allowed for  a

greater understanding of the national statisti cal system  as well as the rol e played  not only  by the  INEI , but 

also  the  various  ministries  that produce  economic and social data. 

Once the information from the workshop and other research activities was consolidated, the list of indicators was modified based on stakeholders’ recommendations. The team then proceeded with the elaboration of the indicators for targets under each goal area. During this process, managers of ministries’ statistics offices were consulted to assess the availability and quality of data. Table 1 presents the workshop, focus group and key informant interview participants. 15 

Table 1.  Workshop , focus group and  key informant  interview  participants 

Institution  Position of participant 

Ministry of Education  Secretary of Strategic Planning 

Ministry of Economy and Finance  Director of Quality of Public Spending 

Ministry of Economy and Finance  Coordinator of Social Programs 

Ministry of Economy and Finance  Coordinator of Reporting and Monitoring 

INEI  Executive Director of Surveys and Census 

UN Children’s Fund  Senior International O fficer 

UN Population Fund  Senior International O fficer 

Pontifical Catholic University of Peru  Coordinator of the Department of Economics 

Finally, a specialist in economic and social indicators and a government official reviewed the report in order to validate it and provide opinions from different perspectives on the proposed indicators in the study. 

## Lessons Learned through the Research Process 

Many lessons were learned during the research process. With regard to the Methodology and Implementation Guide , it was evident that the holding of inception workshops depended on country contexts. In the case of Peru, the government and academia had established knowledge on the indicators for the MDGs and post-2015 agenda. The government had previously held consultations with different sectors on the post-2015 agenda. Therefore, an inception workshop was skipped and the research team proceeded with discussions on goals, targets and indicators with stakeholders. 

With regard to the organisation of focus group discussions, the research team recognised how difficult it was to consolidate different stakeholders’ agendas. For this reason, after the first focus group discussion, the research team held consultations and meetings separately with each sector to discuss relevant indicators and receive feedback on what can and cannot be measured. In parallel, the government held discussion forums with different sectors on issues related to the post-2015 agenda, which reduced the time that officials had available to discuss issues related to this topic solely with the research team. 

With respect to the elaboration of indicators, the research team observed that data are available for various years for certain goal areas (e.g., poverty), but there are limited data for other goal areas (e.g., the environment). In some cases, the majority of data are not available to the general public. This demonstrated the need to develop data collection systems and suggested that Peru is going to encounter difficulties in monitoring the post-2015 agenda. 16 

# Post-2015 Priorities for Peru 

## Overview 

To inform the establishment of the post-2015 agenda, the UN System in Peru completed a national consultation process between November 2012 and March 2013 (UNDP 2013e). During this process, Peru’s 

Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion worked as the government counterpart to guarantee and coordinate the participation of other actors. The actors involved were the Peruvian Agency of International Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Relations, National Center of Strategic Planning ( Centro Nacional de 

Planeamiento Estratégico  or CEPLAN) , INEI, National Assembly of Regional Governments , National 

Agreement  Forum , Board of Agreement  for  the Fight against Poverty and C onfederation of Private Business 

Institutions . In addition , as associates of the  UN  System  in Peru , the  UN  Development Programme , UN 

Children’ s Fund,  Joint  UN  Programme on HIV/AIDS , P an  American Health Organization , World Health 

Organization , UN  Women,  UN  Population Fund  and I nternational  Labour  Organization  participated in the 

consultation s. The National Secretariat for Youth, National Council for the  Integration  of Persons with 

Disabilities and National Organization of  Indigenous Andean and  Amazonian Wom en of Peru  also provided 

inputs into the consultation s. Figure 1 (next page)  provides an overview of the key post -2015 priorities 

identified through consultations. 

One of the lessons learned from the MDGs was that goals should be the product of a broadly participatory process. For that reason, the consultation process in Peru included the voices of government officials as well 

as private sector and civil society representatives, “specifically those who have been traditionally excluded 

from the decisions on the development agenda ” (UNDP 2013e, 2) . More specifically, the “national consultations included various groups throughout the country, such as women of African descent and Indigenous women of the Amazon and High Andes; boys and girls; persons with disabilities; local leaders and representatives of grass-root organizations; persons living with HIV/AIDS; male and female youth; housekeepers; and several other groups ” (UNDP 2013e, 3). Additionally, r egional and local leaders of all departments in the country participated in the discussion on MDG progress and local and national priorities for post-2015. In total, more than 700 people participated in more than 60 national consultations. 5 In general, consultations are valuable because they support participatory planning practices and the national vision for the future (UNDP 2013e, 3). 

Consultations demonstrated that Peruvians consider the country to have “progress ed” in recent years, but 

emphasise “there is much to be done ” to become a developed country. Regarding priorities, civil society not only focused on basic services such as education, health and sanitation as well as economic aspects such as employment, but also an interest in environmental protection, the quality of governments and governance (including the decentralisation process), and ending the insecurity created by gendered violence, crime and corruption (UNDP 2013e). These findings were shared with government officials and reflect the three dimensions of sustainable development. It is important to highlight the links between the findings and existing national strategies (i.e., the national strategy titled “Include to Grow ”) and that the findings can serve as an 

input into planning processes of planning such as the realisation of CEPLAN’s Bicentennial Plan.  

> 5Workshops lasted an average of three to four hours. They were conducted in the regions of Loreto (Padre Cocha Iquitos), Junín (Satipo), Ayacucho (Ayacucho and Huamanguilla), Piura (Yapatera), Puno (Juliaca) and Lima (Metropolitan Lima, Ventanilla, and Vegueta) and included both urban and rural areas.

17 

Figure  1. Post -2015 p riorities for Peru 

## Selecting National Targets and Indicators 

The criteria for selecting national-level targets and indicators found in the  Methodology and Implementation 

Guide  were  followed by the  Peru research  team.  The guide  details the  various  steps to determine the  fit ,

quality and validity of indicators  for  measur ing  progress on the proposed  SDGs . It  also emphasis es  that  the 

list of proposed indicators should reflect the sustainable development challenges and priorities of each 

country rather than be based on data availability (Bhattacharya, Higgins and Kindornay 2014).  It  points  out 

that  targe ts should be  relevant throug h a clear connection to the goal area and priorities identified through 

consultations, likely to impact sustainable development, understandable and easy to communicate, ambitious 

yet realistic, measurable, consistent with international law, valuable in  rea li sing  other targets across goal 

areas, and focused on equity and equality where possible. 

In line with the timeline for the SDGs, all targets listed in this report assume a 2030 deadline. National-level targets and indicators were selected across goal areas based on a literature review of current government documents. Key documents include the National Strategic Plan for Statistical Development (Plan Estratégico Nacional para el Desarrollo Estadístico or PENDES) 2013 –2017, the Multi-Annual Strategic Sector Plan 18 

(Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual or PESEM) 6 of each ministry and ministries’ national  programmes, 

social projects and strategies.  Focus group discussions and  key informant interviews  also  informed the 

selection , with  conversations about  global indicators  and  the ir  limitations  helping as well . Of course,  the 

research team  consulted the proposal of the  Open Working Group on  SDGs  (see  OWG  2014 ) and the  full list 

of  proposed  goals, targets and indicators from selected  sources  presented in the  Methodology and 

Implementation Guide  (see  Bhattacharya, Higgins and Kindornay 2014) . As with  the global  targets and 

indicators, a data -mapping  exercise  helped  assess the availability and  quality of data. 

It is necessary to highlight that , like  other  country  research teams, the Peru  research  team did not include 

specific numerical targets across the goal areas.  Instead , the proposed  indicators  ha ve  been expressed in 

terms of  “reducing ” or  “increasing .” Specific numerical targets for Peru were  outside the scope of what could 

be accomplished within the timeline and resources for the  case study . The research team  hope s the 

establishment of numerical targets will be  done  in  the near future .

## Candidate SDGs and Feedback on the Potential Goal Areas for Peru 

The following sections present the key national priorities identified by this study. The national priorities are discussed and accompanied by tables presenting the associated global, national and cross-cutting targets and indicators that have been selected for the Peru case study. Annex 1 compiles tables for all targets and indicators selected for this study with corresponding definitions included. Some global targets and indicators are the same as those pre-selected by CPD, NPSIA and Southern Voice. 

Overall, most of the global targets and indicators reflect national priorities and relevant discussions on the SDGs within the Peruvian government. Since it is more of an international focus, involves relationships with other countries and depends on bilateral and multilateral agreements, the goal area “Establish a global partnership for sustainable development ” is not a national priority. In line with focus group discussions and key informant interviews, the research team decided to assess the global targets and indicators under this goal area because it is an international priority, but national ones were not proposed. According to consultations, most stakeholders preferred that the study just focus on national priorities. 

The government has embraced the priorities identified by the Open Working Group on SDGs, but it identified four main national priorities: (i) gender equality, (ii) climate change, (iii) financial inclusion and (iv) industrial technical innovation for diversified production (GRADE 2014). Furthermore, the government has developed key national strategies focused on early aged children 7 in recent years that were deemed worthy of consideration. Comments received throughout the research process also served as inputs to establish priorities. 

The research team selected (i) women, (ii) indigenous peoples, (iii) early aged children and (iv) young people as priority groups that need special attention in the country. For women and indigenous peoples, efforts are needed to address inequality and marginalisation across goal areas. Regarding early aged children and young people, there is widespread consensus on the importance of providing opportunities to improve lives in the future. For these reasons, the team developed specific indicators for these groups.      

> 6PESEM is a management instrument for guiding the objectives of all actors within a particular sector. It incorporates priorit ised policies,
> goals and strategies to achieve the objectives of public and privat e entities at the national, regional and local levels (MINEDU 2015).
> 7Examples of strategic programmes designed to enhance the life trajectories of children are the National Strategy on Development and
> Social Inclusion “Incluir para Crecer,” t he National School Feeding Programme “Qali Warma” and the National Child Care Programme
> “Cuna Más.”

19 

# End Poverty 

## Current Status 

MDG 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger has seen progress at the global level. Between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than US$1.25 a day has been halved. Halving the proportion of people who suffer from hunger during the same period has also seen progress, but some progress has been reversed by the recent economic crises and rise in food prices (UNDP 2013b). 

Peru has been successful in reducing poverty. The country has reduced by half the proportion of people who live below the international extreme poverty line and those who suffer from hunger. In addition, Peru has met the target on the percentage of children under five years of age who suffer from global malnutrition (weight for age) and chronic malnutrition (height for age). However, it has not sufficiently reduced the percentage of the population with caloric deficiency, which demonstrates an irregular tendency (which is the same at the global level) to experience food crises due to the rise in food prices (UNDP 2013d). 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

Peru has implemented a number of programmes to realise progress on poverty reduction. According to Paul Krugman, winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics, the reduction of extreme poverty in the country is due largely to the major role that the Peruvian government has assumed through its social programmes ( Andina 

2014).  To  eradicate extreme poverty and hunger,  the government  has implemented notable programmes 

such as  “Juntos ,”8 “FONCODES ,”9 “Pensión 65 ,”10  “Qali Warma ”11  and  “Cuna Más .”12  These  programme s

have contributed to poverty reduction  through  conditional cash incentives,  access to basic services ,

economic opportunities , adequate nutrition  and technical support . In addition, they have supported the 

realisation of other MDGs  such as achieving  universal primary education  and reducing infant mortality. 

Looking towards post-2015, Peru is well positioned to realise further gains in terms of poverty reduction. Rebecca Arias, who is the resident coordinator of the UN in Peru, is optimistic in her belief that Peru can go beyond achieving the goal of halving extreme poverty and reducing poverty rates to 20 percent, given that the country has seen an annual decrease of 2 –3 percent over the past 10 years and achieved a poverty rate of 23.9 percent in 2013 (INEI 2014c). Conversely, Arias emphasises that economic growth has benefitted the urban coastal population the most, while it has been less noteworthy in rural areas of the highlands and urban and rural areas of the jungle, where international cooperation continues to be needed to reduce inequality and development gaps ( RPP Noticias  2013 ).          

> 8“Juntos,” the National Programme of Direct Support to the Poorest, aims to contribute to human development and capacity
> development, especially for future generation s. It aims to break the intergenerational transfer of poverty through economic incentives that
> promote and support access to quality services in education, health, nutrition and identity using an approach based on the re stitution of
> these basic rights, wit h organised participation and monitoring by stakeholders in the community (MIDIS 2015c).
> 9“FONCODES,” a programme of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion, promotes the sustainable economic empowerment of
> rural households in extreme poverty by creating economic opportunities in alliance with actors involved in local development (MID IS
> 2015b).
> 10 “Pensión 65” provides protection to vulnerable people aged 65 years or older and gives them a financial grant of 125 soles pe r month
> (MIDIS 2015d).
> 11 The National School Feeding Programme “Qali Warma” aims to provide quality food services for children at the pre -primary and
> primary levels (MIDIS 2015e).
> 12 “Cuna Más,” a social programme of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion, aims to improve the development of childr en
> under three years of age in poor areas to bridge the gaps in their cognitive, social, physical and emotional development (MIDIS 2015a).

20 

A key milestone for the success of social programmes and reduction of existing gaps was the creation of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion in 2011, which is responsible for policy-making and interventions in social sectors. To develop a policy on social inclusion, the ministry has begun to define the target population for processes aimed at enhancing development and social inclusion. Members of the population meriting additional efforts are those who live in homes that have at least three of the following four characteristics: presence in a rural area, features associated with ethnic exclusion, low level of formal education of female adults, and poverty (UNDP 2013d). 

The introduction of the National Strategy on Development and Social Inclusion “Incluir para Crecer ” in April 2013 represented an important step in five strategic areas: (i) infant nutrition, (ii) early infant development, (iii) integral development in childhood and adolescence, (iv) economic inclusion and (v) protection for the elderly (MIDIS 2013). According to the Board of Agreement for the Fight against Poverty, 13 another important element is the implementation of results-based budgeting, which involves permanent processes for coordination and agreement and the promotion of greater efficiency and effectiveness in programmes and social projects (UNDP 2013d). 

A relevant effort in the measurement of poverty was the methodological update of the measurement of monetary poverty in 2010. 14 This update was the result of work begun in 2007 with the creation of the Specialized Advisory Committee on Poverty, which was sponsored by the World Bank and INEI, to ensure greater transparency and quality of information. In 2010, this committee became the Advisory Committee for Estimating Poverty and worked on related indicators in the country. 15 The committee’s main duties are to advise on all processes for measuring poverty, monitor adopted processes, assess and validate the results of periodic estimates, to hold reserve of information processes until they are published, and propose changes to methodologies where appropriate  (INEI 2014c ).

## National Priorities for Ending Poverty 

Peru has national poverty lines deflated by year and location. The proposed global indicators are relevant for the country and allow for international comparison. In 2012, the proportion of the Peruvian population below US$1.25 (PPP) 16 per day was 2.9 percent (World Bank 2014c) and the proportion below US$2 (PPP) per day was 8 percent (World Bank 2014d). Peru has high employment rates, but the majority of employment is informal. By 2013, similar proportions of the poor (73.2 percent) and non-poor (72.8 percent) participated in some economic activity, while 77 percent of the working poor participated in micro enterprises with one to five employees (INEI 2014c). 

The indicator “Chronic malnutrition in children under 3 years ” is a major objective for the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). There is a global indicator on the prevalence of child stunting in boys and girls under five years of age, but a workshop on poverty, education and labour 17 

highlighted the requirement of maintaining a specific indicator on chronic malnutrition in children under three      

> 13 Created in 2001, the Board of Agreement for the Fight against Poverty is an unprecedented space where representatives from
> government institutions and civil society adopt agreements and coordinate actions to effectively combat poverty in each re gion,
> department, province and district of Peru.
> 14 Changes made in 2010 include changes in: (i) the urban/rural population structure, (ii) consumption patterns, (iii) caloric r equirements,
> (iv) the estimation of household spending (imputation and changes i n the components of expenditure) and (v) the reference population.
> 15 The Advisory Committee for Estimating Poverty is composed of representatives from international organizations, national gover nment
> institutions, the academic community and research center s.
> 16 2005 prices.
> 17 As part of its National Strategy on Child Development, the Ministry of Social Inclusion developed several workshops on differ ent pillars
> for child development.

21 

years because these years are the most relevant in terms of nutrition and malnutrition associated with physical and cognitive damage that is difficult to reverse (MIDIS 2013). 

Slipping back into poverty remains a challenge. Although poverty rates continue to decrease, the probability of falling back into poverty will persist if inequalities based on gender, ethnicity and territorial factors remain. If Peru adopts a “zero target” on poverty, efforts would have to be stepped up at the national and local levels and poverty measures would have to focus on specific segments of the population. 

At the workshop on poverty, education and labour, stakeholders argued that there is a need for Peru to address the poverty of specific groups, specifically those who have historically lived in poverty  and others  for 

whom poverty  can affe ct their future opportunities.  Table 2 outlines the priorities  under the goal area on 

poverty  identified for Peru. While  the proposed  national  targets are similar to  the  global targets, the research 

team has focused on reduc ing  poverty for specific vulnerable  segments of the  population , namely  children 

under  three  years  of age , indigenous  people s and  the  rural population. 

Table 2. End poverty: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

End extreme income poverty  Proportion of population below US$1.25 (PPP) per day 

Reduce poverty  Proportion of population below US$2 (PPP) per day 

Proportion of population living below national poverty line 

Share of employed persons living below the nationally-defined poverty line 

Reduce the proportion of people who suffer from hunger 

Prevalence of child stunting in boys and girls under 5, % 18 

National 

Reduce poverty  Proportion of households with children under 3 years below national poverty line 

Proportion of indigenous population below national poverty line 

Proportion of rural poverty 

Reduce hunger  Percentage of the population with caloric deficiency 

Cross -cutting: Ensure quality education for all 

Increase development in early childhood 

Average level of development of girls and boys in motor dimension 

Average level of development of girls and boys in the dimension of language and cognitive development 

Average level of development of girls and boys in socio-emotional dimension 

Reduce Poverty 

The indicator “Children under 3 years below national poverty line ” was found in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). The incidence of poverty is high among children and young people, since the lack of resources in poor households is often associated with specific situations of risk for this segment of the population, such as malnutrition, school dropout or lack of access to medical services. These situations may affect the opportunities of children and young people to develop in the future, with the effects of poverty being considered irreversible in some cases. In 2013, poverty affected 35.5 percent of children under five years of age, 33.6 percent of those aged five to nine years, 33.9 percent aged 10 –14 years and 24.8 percent of young  

> 18 This will be disaggregated by years.

22 

people aged 15 –19 years. In other age groups, the incidence of poverty is lower than the national average (INEI 2014h). 

The indicator “Proportion of indigenous population below national poverty line ” was also found in the PENDES. Data are available in Evolution of Monetary Poverty 2009 –2013: Technical Report (INEI 2014c). Peru is a country characterised by its ethnic and racial diversity. When analysing the incidence of poverty according to mother tongue, poverty affects more people who speak a native language, such as the Quechua, Aymara or Amazonian languages. In 2013, poverty affected 35.9 percent of people who speak a native language (9 percent were considered extremely poor and 26.9 percent were considered poor), which was almost twice the incidence in the population who speak Spanish, 20.8 percent (3.7 percent were considered extremely poor and 17.1 percent were considered poor) (INEI 2014c). 

The indicator “Proportion of rural poverty ” was not found in the PENDES, but is a recurrent topic in annual reports on trends in poverty (see INEI 2013a; INEI 2014c). In 2013, 75 percent of the Peruvian population lived in urban areas and 25 percent resided in rural areas. The rural population represents a quarter of the total population and 49.3 percent of the country’ s poor. Notably, 83.3 percent of the extreme poor lived in rural areas. These figures reflect changes in the demographic composition and the urban-rural distribution of the population in poverty and extreme poverty. Furthermore, poverty affected a greater proportion of the rural population who spoke a native language (49.4 percent versus 20 percent in urban areas). The same applies to children and young people in rural areas, where over 50 percent of children under 15 years of age were poor in 2013 (INEI 2014c). Finally, the cross-cutting targets and indicators reflect the relationship between poverty and education. The proposed indicators are found in the PENDES (INEI 2013a) and particularly concern education objectives. Early interventions have been emphasised in recent years to improve children ’s life trajectories. The lack of opportunities for children might result in cognitive underdevelopment and poverty that affects them throughout their lives (MIDIS 2013) and poverty might be consequently transmitted across generations. 

Reduce Hunger 

The indicator on the percentage of the population with caloric deficiency was  found in the PENDES (INEI 

2013b) and deemed relevant during the workshop on poverty, education and labour. Over  the last decade, 

the  minimum caloric requirement  for  Peruvian families h as been growing , with  significant changes  occurring 

across regions  (the requirement in rural  areas  has been increasing in particular ). These dynamics  are the 

result of an increase in the average age of families , with which  per capita caloric requirements tend to 

increase  (Zegarra 2010) . In  33.7  percent of the country’ s households  there  exist s at least  one member with a 

caloric deficit, with corresponding figures being  45.3 percent  of hou seholds in rural areas, 31.5 percent  in 

urban areas  not including  Metropolitan  Lima  and 27.8 percent in Lima (INEI 2014a). 23 

# Ensure Quality Education for All 

## Current Status 

According to current global trends, it is unlikely that all children will complete a full cycle of primary education by the end of 2015. With respect to developing regions, the adjusted net enrolment rate increased from 83 percent in 2000 to 90 percent in 2011. Globally, the quantity of children not in school has decreased from 102 million to 57 million. However, the early school dropout rate remained at 25 percent between 2000 and 2011, which represents 34 million children, in 2011, who drop out of school before reaching the last grade of primary education. It is important to note that the literacy rate for young people aged 15 –24 years increased from 6 percent in 1990 to 89 percent in 2011 (UNDP 2013b). MDG 3 on eliminating gender inequality at all education levels (primary, secondary and tertiary) has also seen some progress. Gender parity at the primary level is within, or close to, the range of 0.97 to 1.03, which is considered acceptable. 

In Peru, there have been various advancements related to education. The net enrolment rate at the primary level rose from 92 percent in 2002 to 96 percent in 2012 in concurrence with advances at the global level. Furthermore, more children stay in school longer. The percentage of students who reach the sixth grade of primary school rose from 38.5 percent in 2011 to 69.4 percent in 2012. At the national level, Peru has reached a literacy rate of 98.7 percent among young people aged 15 –24 years, though a gap persists between urban and rural areas (UNDP 2013d). In terms of gender equality outcomes in education, Peru has reached the MDG target on eliminating gender disparity in access to education. The country obtained parity indexes of 1.00 at the primary level, 1.02 at the secondary level and 1.06 at the tertiary level (with the latter two levels being favourable to women), but in all of these cases the urban-rural difference was maintained. However, it is necessary to point out that the MDGs used 1990 as their baseline year and some countries, including Peru, had already reached or almost reached various development targets fixed for 2015 before the MDGs were introduced in 2000. For example, the net enrolment rate at the primary level was 95 percent in 1993 (World Bank 2015), indicating almost universal access to education at this level. 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

For universal primary education, the Peruvian government recently established a policy that promotes the enrolment of more students in a direct way: “Conditional cash transfer from ‘Juntos ’ programme to households living in extreme poverty […] ha s contributed to incentivizing the enrolment and attendance of children between the ages 6 and 14 at schools in rural zones, at the same time that it has augmented the available investment for equipment and infrastructure in primary education ” (UNDP 2013d, 70). 

Another education-oriented programme is “Qali Warma, ” the National School Feeding Programme that is implemented at pre-primary and primary schools located in poor and extremely poor districts of the country. Its main objective is to improve children ’s educational outcomes by improving attendance and nutritional status. With respect to achieving gender equality and female autonomy, there have been advances thanks to the expansion of pre-primary education centres and the conditions of the “Juntos ” programme. Despite this progress, challenges remain in terms of educational quality. National assessments such as the Student Census Evaluations from 2007 to 2014 showed that less than 50 percent of second grade students mastered the reading comprehension skills necessary to pass the grade, while less than 25 percent of children mastered in the necessary math skills (MINEDU 2014). Similar results can be observed in international evaluations. In the most recent results of the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), Peru 24 

came in last place in each of the three assessed areas (reading, mathematics and science), thus finding itself far from the average ( El Comercio  2013 ). 

In 2014, a new University Act was enacted, representing the first milestone in the reform of university education. The National Superintendence of University Education, a specialised technical agency attached to the Ministry of Education with technical, functional, economic, budgetary and administrative autonomy, was created. Its general functions are to (i) supervise the quality of university education services, (ii) authorise the operation of an institution, faculty or programme, (iii) monitor the use of public resources and (iv) ensure compliance with the University Act. 

## National Priorities for Ensuring Quality Education for All 

The PESEM for education contains national educational priorities for Peru (see MINEDU 2012). They are oriented to increase access to education and improve educational outcomes for Peruvian students. The priorities are: (i) quality learning for all, (ii) attention to early childhood, (iii) rural education quality, (iv) appropriate cultural attention, (v) development of professional teaching, (vi) decentralised management of education, (vii) inclusive and quality higher education, (viii) development of labour and professional skills in youth, (ix) promotion of physical activities and (x) promotion of high-performance sports. Table 3 outlines the priorities identified for Peru for ensuring quality education for all. 19 

Regarding the global targets, the indicator s associated with the target “E nsure all children have access to early childhood and quality primary and secondary education” are, overall, relevant for Peru. Since the 

country has reached satisfactory outcomes with regard to the completion of primary and secondary school, the national focus has shifted to early childhood and pre-primary programmes, as described in the second priority of the PESEM (MINEDU 2012) and the National  Strategy  on  Development and Social Inclusion 

“Incluir para Crecer ” (MIDIS 2013) . The indicator “P roportion of individuals enrolled in a Technical and 

Vocational Education an d Training institution ” is also relevant for Peru given that the second priority in the 

PESEM refers to it.      

> 19 Other documents related to future p riority guidelines include 2021 National Education Project (Consejo Nacional de Educación 2007)
> and Guidelines for the Intergovernmental Relations between the Ministry of Education and Regional and Local Governments (MINEDU
> 201 3).

Table  3. Ensure quality education for all: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Ensure all children have access to early 

childhood and quality primary and secondary 

education 

% of girls and boys receiving at least one year in pre -

primary programmes 

% of girls and boys who complete primary school 

% of girls and boys who complete secondary school 

% of girls and boys who achieve a passing grade in 

national learning assessments at the primary school 

level 

Increase the number of adults with skills, 

including technical and vocational skills 

Proportion of individuals enrolled in a Technical and 

Vocational Education and Training institution 25 

Ensure all children have access to early childhood and quality primary and secondary education 

The majority of the proposed national indicators were found in the PESEM and PENDES. An ongoing requirement in education, which is often discussed in the media and was mentioned in key informant interviews, is the enhancement of quality at all levels. In 2007, the Student Census Evaluation was created to test all children in second and fourth grades at the primary level in intercultural bilingual schools on mathematics and reading comprehension. However, there is no national evaluation for secondary school students, so it is necessary to use international evaluations such as the PISA to evaluate achievement at this level. There is no specific indicator for the secondary level, but the research team has proposed “% of  15 -

year -old  students who achieve proficie nt level s in reading, math ematics  and science  in the Programme for 

International Student Assessment  (PISA )” as a relevant indicator to  track the  quality  of  education  at  the 

secondary level .

For the target on ensuring access to education, the research team selected three national indicators and took into account vulnerable segments of the population (children with disabilities, indigenous children and rural girls). These indicators were found in the PESEM (MINEDU 2012) and validated in discussions with stakeholders. 

Increase development in early childhood 

The National  Strategy  on  Development and Social Inclusion  “Incluir para Crecer ” included a  discussion  on the 

growing interest  in  early childhood (MIDIS 2013). Peru does not have indicators related to this  issue , but the 

first  national  assessment  at  the  pre -primary level  was conducted  was  carried out by  the Ministry of Education 

in 2014. It included  two main indicators related  to  pr e-primary education , the  quality of the  classroom  climate 

(measured with  the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale -Revised ) and  a measure of child development 

National 

Ensure all children have access to early childhood and quality primary and secondary education 

% of girls and boys with disabilities who access a school programme 

% of indigenous girls and boys receiving intercultural bilingual education 

% of girls living in rural areas who complete secondary school 

Improve the quality of education at all levels  % of 15-year-old students who achieve proficient levels in reading, mathematics and science in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 

Increase development in early childhood  Average level of development of girls and boys in motor dimension 

Average level of development of girls and boys in the dimension of language and cognitive development 

Average level of development of girls and boys in socio-emotional dimension 

Ensure a safe, secure and effective learning environment in the classroom 

Proportion of public schools with classrooms in good condition 

Proportion of public schools with hygienic services in good condition 

Access to quality higher education  % of students living in poverty who have access to higher education 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions,  rule of law and 

a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve security and reduce violence  % of girls and boys affected by violence in school 26 

(measured with the Early Development Instrument) ( Perú21  2013 b).  The collected  data  are  not  readily 

available , but the se  are  prospective pre -primary development indicators. 

Ensure a safe, secure and effective learning environment in the classroom 

One of the priorities in education policy is school infrastructure, which includes physical infrastructure as well as computers, software and hardware, and internet access ( Perú21 2015). Indicators on this issue were also found in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). 

Access to quality higher education 

Among the Peruvian government’s social programmes is the National Programme of Scholarships and Educational Loans, which provides scholarships and student loans to talented students, with quality standards related to training and social inclusion (PRONABEC 2015a). One of the most popular scholarships is “Beca 18, ” which is provided to poor and extremely poor 20 talented students (PRONABEC 2015b). The research team included an indicator on the percentage of students living in poverty who have access to higher education, which was also found in the PESEM (MINEDU 2012).    

> 20 Following Peru’s Household Targeting System criteria, which consider poor families to be those who live in homes that have at least
> three of the following four characteristics: presence in a rural area, features associated with ethnic exclusion, low level of formal
> education of female adults, and poverty (UNDP 2013d).

27 

# Create Jobs, Sustainable Livelihoods and Inclusive Growth for All 

## Current Status 

In the context of the MDGs, a target on employment was included under MDG 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger. At the global level, achieving full and productive employment and decent work for all has been an uphill battle, particularly given that the global financial crisis widened the global employment deficit to 67 million people (UNDP 2013b). MDG 3 on promoting gender equality and empowering women also captured employment outcomes. Progress has been slow, however, with the proportion of employed and remunerated women in non-agriculture jobs only increasing from 35 percent in 1990 to 40 percent in 2011 (UNDP 2013b). 

In the case of Peru, advances have been made in generating full and productive employment, but these achievements do not guarantee that the country will meet the MDG target by the end of 2015. Furthermore, the proportion of employed and remunerated women outside of the agricultural sector increased to 38.7 percent in 2012, representing slow progress over the last decade given that the figure was at 33 percent in 2001. Gender parity in the labour market remains an important debate in Peru, as women continue to receive lower salaries and labour demands than men (Hurtado 2013). The barriers in this situation include the persistence of a sexual division of labour (child care programmes are based on this traditional division), the existence of gender violence and scarce supervision by labour authorities (UNDP 2013d). However, this situation is not only a concern in Peru. At the May 2013 meeting of the Andean Community, ministries of labour and w omen’s movements “advanced in the elaboration of a proposal with one that promoted equality and non-discriminatory practices in the labour market in Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru ” (Andina  2013). 

Overall, the unemployment rate has been falling in recent years. In 2011, it was 4 percent, which is 1.3 percentage points lower than it was in 2004. This decrease was much more evident in urban areas and affected a slightly higher proportion of women (1.5 percentage points) than men (1.1 percentage points). Thus, the gender gap has been steadily but slowly narrowing (MINTRA 2012b). The underemployment rate also decreased 20 percentage points to 34.2 percent between 2001 and 2011, but the gender gap widened. Notwithstanding, the biggest problem in Peru’s labour market is informal employment. Following the methodology of the International Labour Office’s Regional Employment Programme for Latin America and the 

Caribbean, which was adopted by the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion, informality was still at 71.5 percent in 2011 (MINTRA 2012b). 

Inequality is typically measured with the Gini coefficient, with a coefficient of 1 indicating maximal inequality. In 2013, the Gini coefficient associated with expenditure in Peru was 0.35 (0.32 for urban areas and 0.31 for rural areas) and that associated with income was 0.44. Both Gini coefficients (expenditure and income) were lower for 2013 than previous years. On the other hand, in terms of variation in average earnings, the first decile (the poorest) had a percentage change of 7.2 percent in monthly average per capita real income between 2012 and 2013. Meanwhile, the top decile (the richest) had a percentage change of -0.7 percent over the same period (INEI 2014g). Data appear to indicate that the country is becoming more equal, but there is still much room for improvement. 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 28 

The Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion has helped to end poverty, as mentioned, and reduce inequality. In addition, the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion is developing four strategic programmes: “Jóvenes a la Obra, ” “Vamos  Perú ,” “Trabaja Perú ” and  “Perú  Responsible. ” Notably , “Per ú

Responsible ” is oriented to firms and  promotes c orpo rate social r esponsibility in  employment, employability 

and entrepreneur ship (MINTRA 2015a) .

The other three programmes are designed to promote employment among different segments of the population. “Jóvenes a la Obra ” is the National Youth Employment Programme that facilitates the access of young people to the formal labour market through job training, technical assistance for entrepreneurship and an employment agency. It is focused on the country’ s poorest districts (MINTRA 2015b). “Vamos Perú ” is the National Programme for the Promotion of Work Opportunities that is responsible for promoting employment through job training required by the labour market, providing advice on sustainability, formally recognising acquired job skills and linking beneficiaries with potential employers who require skilled labour (MINTRA 2015d). Finally, “Trabaja Perú ” promotes inclusive social employment through the development of productive capacities. It is focused on segments of the population living in poverty and extreme poverty (MINTRA 2015c). 

## National Priorities for Creating Jobs, Sustainable Livelihoods and Inclusive Growth for All 

According the PESEM of the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion (see MINTRA 2012b), there are 11 priorities in generating inclusive and sustainable jobs: 

1. To strengthen services of employment promotion, employability and entrepreneurship provided mainly by labour programmes and offered in the Ventanilla Unica de Promocion de Empleo. 21 

2. To develop new policy instruments for employment promotion and employability of vulnerable groups 

3. To improve coordination and complementarity services related to employment promotion, employability and entrepreneurship between and within government institutions 

4. To develop a Labour Information System 

5. To participate in the process of legislative regulation of labour matters as well as approving and disseminating a consistent regulatory framework to promote decent work 

6. To strengthen institutionalised processes of participation and dialogue 

7. To strengthen and expand the coverage of the national system of labour inspection 

8. To encourage the promotion and protection of fundamental rights at work 

9. To promote prevention and management of labour disputes 

10. To promote corporate social responsibility 

11. To promote extension of social security coverage 

Although the majority of these priorities concern internal processes, they focus on the vulnerable segments of the population due to the ease of transitions between work and non-work as well as poverty and non-poverty (Rodríguez and Rodríguez 2012). Other priorities strengthen the information on the labour market, promotion of decent work and protection of fundamental rights. A major area of focus is to improve relations with companies and promote corporate social responsibility. The research team considered the proposed global indicators to reflect Peru ’s national priorities. The country needs to achieve full and productive employment for all, ensure equal pay for equal work and support inclusive growth. Global and national targets and indicators are compiled in Table 4.  

> 21 This is a social program offered by the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion.

29 

Table 4.  Create jobs, sustainable livelihoods and inclusive growth for all: Targets and 

indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Achieve full and productive employment for all, 

including women and young people 

Labour force participation rate 

Time -related underemployment (thousands) 

Ensure equal pay for equal work  Mean nominal monthly earnings of employees (local 

currency) 

Support inclusive growth and reduce inequality  Gini coefficient 

Palma ratio 

Growth rate of income of the bottom 40% 

Gross fixed capital formation (% of GDP) 

National 

Promote decent work  % of c hild labour 

% of informal workers 

Achieve full and productive employment work 

for all 

% of youth aged 18 –24 years who work at a formal 

firm 

Ensure equal pay for equal work  Wage gap between men and women 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and 

a peaceful and inclusive society 

Monitor and end discrimination and 

inequalities in economic life on the basis of 

social status 

Wage gap between indigenous and non -indigenous 

people s with comparable levels of education 

Promote decent work 

As mentioned, the promotion of decent work is a national priority. For that reason, the research team has proposed to track child labour with the indicator “% of child labour .” This indicator was found in the PENDES (INEI 2013b) and PESEM of the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion (MINTRA 2012b). Child labour was also discussed at the workshop on poverty, education and labour. However, although there have been prior efforts to track child labour, 22 the National Household Survey cannot provide a good estimate on this issue. In 2012, the ministry launched the National Strategy for Prevention and Eradication of Child Labour 2012-2021 (MINTRA 2012a) and expected that the INEI would conduct a specialised survey by 2015 (INEI 2013b). Another important issue in Peru is informal work, as figures have previously demonstrated. The proposed indicator “% of informal workers” was marked as a priority in the ministry’s PESEM. 

Productive employment work for all and vulnerable populations 

Regarding vulnerable segments of the population, the Ministry of Labour and Employment Promotion considers both poor people and poor young people to be vulnerable, with the latter being more able to break the cycle of poverty through decent and stable work. The ministry is trying to provide them with more opportunities through the programme “Jóvenes a la Obra. ” The research team included an indicator to measure the proportion of young people aged 18 –24 years who work at a formal firm, which is found in both 

the ministry’s PENDES and PESEM. For poor people, the goal area on poverty includes an indicator on employed persons living below the national poverty line (see Table 2). However, prioritised vulnerable groups do not include women despite the existence of gender gaps in the labour market. The Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations has established indicators on domestic violence and other women ’s topics, but there are no indicators related to labour issues (INEI 2013b). Therefore, the research team included an indicator on  

> 22 The National Survey of Child Labour was conducted in 2011 (see CPETI 2011).

30 

the wage gap between men and women. A cross-cutting indicator on the wage gap between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples, which is found under the goal area on institutions, has been included to measure ethnic discrimination in the labour market. 31 

# Ensure Sustainable Energy and Develop Infrastructure for All 

## Current Status 

Energy supply and demand 

From 2003 to 2013, electricity production increased by 92 percent, while the production of hydrocarbons increased by 260 percent. The growth of economic activity and energy demand in recent decades has been based on increased private investment in infrastructure and generally better social conditions (MINEM 2014b). The growth of domestic final consumption during the 2000 –12 period was 3.7 percent, which was higher than global final consumption, -2.04 percent (IEA 2014). In general, the share of hydrocarbons in the global energy mix has been growing —it grew from 67 percent in 2000 to 80 percent in 2013. The shares of traditional energy sources have decreased slightly mainly due to an increase in the production of natural gas. This situation, which includes delays in the implementation of investments in refining (MINEM 2014b), has resulted in increasing crude oil imports. Currently, Peru imports to meet its energy needs of 85 million barrels of oil and 48 million barrels of diesel per day, generating a negative trade balance of US$3 billion (MINEM 2014b). 

Natural gas, a non-renewable resource with competitive prices and low emissions, is enabling Peru to meet larger domestic energy demand and begin exports equivalent to domestic consumption. However, the country could experience a contraction in natural gas consumption given low investment in exploration activities, acquisition of seismic data and number of wells drilled due to three factors: (i) lack of incentives to explore for natural gas linked to limited transport capacity, (ii) delays in issuing the necessary permits for exploration activities and (iii) socio-environmental problems (MINEM 2014b). Meanwhile, Peru has been slowly increasing its use of renewable energy sources. Of total electric energy in 2013, 54.3 percent was produced from renewable energy sources, with 2.52 percent generated by non-conventional renewable energy sources comprising hydroelectric plants with capacity under 20 megawatts (1.45 percent), bagasse (0.49 percent), biogas (0.08 percent) and solar (0.50 percent) (MINEM 2014b). 

Energy competitiveness, coverage and intensity 

Peru ranked first in energy competitiveness over the past three years according to the World Economic Forum (MINEM 2014a), but energy is not equally available to all. National electricity coverage increased from 57 percent in 1993 to 91 percent in 2013 (MINEM 2014b). The remaining 9 percent comprises the more remote and poorest households. Energy intensity over the 2000 –13 period showed a consistent annual reduction of 1.9 percent due to more efficient energy use, greater involvement of commercial energy sources (particularly natural gas) and increased productivity in the country. In 2012, Peru had an intermediate level of energy intensity compared to other countries in the region (MINEM 2014b). 

Road infrastructure 

In 2013, the national highway system had a total length of 163,480 kilometres, with 133 routes in the national road network, 392 routes in the departmental road network 23  and 7 ,761 routes  in  the  neighbo urhood  road  

> 23 Includes routes of regio nal importance that connect departmental capitals with major cities in their region.

32 

network. Regarding the national road network, the 13 percent is paved and 87 percent is unpaved (MTC 2014). At departmental level, only 7.7 percent of roads are pave and 92.3 percent is unpaved while 16.1 percent of the departmental road network is in good condition (MTC 2012). Of the neighbourhood road network, only 2.5 percent is paved and 97.5 percent is unpaved and 7.3 percent is in good condition. 

Overall, the poor condition of the rural road network is exacerbated by Peru’s topography, especially the highlands, which see a lack of maintenance and are affected by climatic factors. Topography hinders the development of rural areas and contributes to the isolation of poor communities because poor infrastructure decreases access to public services and markets. Poor infrastructure is due in part to the decentralisation process. Many regional and local governments have low capacity to manage infrastructure and transport services. Resources for maintenance are insufficient because they are generally classified as current expenditure and there have been problems in the use of resources based on canon and sobrecanon (MTC 2012). 24 

Transport 

Ground transport service in the country is characterised by weak institutions in the public and private sectors, informality, breach of traffic rules and precarious security that affect quality and safety. The result is a high rate of traffic accidents in the national road network, with an average of 1,631 accidents, 5,011 injuries and 822 deaths per year over the 2004 –09 period (MEF 2009). Problems are more severe in areas with dirt/gravel roads. The liberalisation and deregulation of transport since the 1990s have contributed to these problems. While both motivated the growth of transport and generated competition, they also resulted in problems such as the oversupply of vehicles, 25  obsolescence of the  automotive  fleet,  business atomis ation 

and  informal transpo rt. Other factors include weak corporate structur es , broad  legislation,  inadequate 

supervision by  national, regional and local  authorities , little  culture of road safety and  the absence of a 

system of  passenger  terminals (MTC 2012) .26 

Telecommunications 

The telecommunications market in Peru has experienced significant growth in all services over time. However, there is a lack of country-wide telecommunications infrastructure, which had an estimated value of approximately US$5.5 million in 2008 (IPE 2009), meaning that several districts lack access to telecommunications services. In 2011, there were 447 districts (24.4 percent) without fixed telephone services, 149 districts (8.1 percent) without available internet services and 208 districts (11.3 percent) without mobile service coverage. In general, mobile services have experienced significant growth due to, among other things, the reduced cost of access given competition, introduction of digital technologies and entry of new service providers into the market (MTC 2012). 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

Energy 

Enacted in 2000, the Law for Promotion of Effective Use of Energy Act indicated the Peruvian government’s 

interest in promoting efficient energy use to ensure energy supply, reduce environmental impacts, protect consumers and boost national economic competitiveness. The act indicates that the Ministry of Energy and    

> 24 Canon and sobrecanon are income taxes of mining and oil companies paid for the exploitation of natural resources. Resources f rom
> the mining and gas canon will be used ex clusively to finance or co -finance projects or infrastructure works of regional and local impact.
> 25 The automotive fleet increased by approximately 58.75 percent over the 2000 –10 period (MTC 2012).
> 26 Instead companies have their own terminals, providing pa ssengers with minimum safety and comfort conditions.

33 

Mines is responsible for promoting the efficient use of energy. 27  However, the  government  did not become 

very  concerned about this issue  until recently . In 2014,  it  launched the National Energy Plan 2014 -2025 ,

which aims  to make  energy planning necessary and reformulate strategies  for the  long  term .28 

In the case of fuels, market volatility has been attenuated by a stabilisation fund for fuel prices and price bands. 29  In  2005, natural gas connections were initiated  in Lima  and b y 2013, there were already 270 ,000 

residential consumers nationwide. Furthermore,  there  is  a project  to increase gas reserves  being 

impleme nt ed  called  Improvement s of the  National  Energy Security and Development  of the  South  Peruvian 

Pipeline , which boost s exploration  activities  and exploitation of natural gas and allow s the  valu ation  of 

potential resources lots  (M IN EM 2014 b).  Other  initiatives include the  replacement  of  electric water heaters 

with  systems solar water heaters,  the  upgrading  of  traditional stoves  (MINEM 2014b ), the promotion of 

electric ity  investment in areas not connected to  the  network (M IN EM 2015), auctions of non -conventional 

renewable energy  (solar, wind and biomass)  and  the acquisition  of  more  solar panels 30  (MINEM 2014a ).

To strengthen Peru against unexpected changes, the National Energy Plan 2014-2025 proposes interconnections with neighbouring countries and the creation of a regional market that incorporates the benefits of climate complementarity, better energy conditions and the harnessing of reserves (see MINEM 2014b). Projects with Ecuador, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Bolivia will be strengthened. Progress has been made on the design of a 500-kilovolt electrical connection with Ecuador and a 220-kilovolt emergency link. The new connection will allow the permanent exchange of surplus electricity at market prices in each country. In the future, it is hoped that Peru’s energy sector – besides supplying domestic demand – will sustainably exchange energy. Studies on the subject were conducted in 2014 by the Inter-American Development Bank’s 

Andean Electrical Interconnection System for the Andean Community. 

Transport 

Between 2006 and 2007, the Ministry of Transport and Communications enacted small reforms to boost its performance. First, the Law on Organisation and Functions of the Ministry of Transport and Communications was approved, which simplified the organisational structure of the ministry, reduced paperwork, eliminated requirements and reduced time needed and costs. It also clarified the ministry’s steering role and exclusive and shared functions. In 2006, the Special Decentralised Transportation Infrastructure Project “Provías Descentralizado ” was created to support regional and local governments in the management, rehabilitation and maintenance of departmental and local roads. In addition, the Superintendency of Land Transport of People, Cargo and Freight was created to strengthen the investigation of transport services at the national level, with the ultimate aim of reducing the high rate of accidents in the country (MTC 2012). 

Regarding road maintenance activities, the Road Conservation Management System is being outsourced. Through the management of operation and maintenance contracts, this system aims to achieve an adequate and continuous level of traversability of the national road network that includes routine maintenance, periodic maintenance and the addressing of emergencies for periods of up to five years. Local governments have implemented road maintenance through rural organisations formed by the residents of communities surrounding roads. Therefore, maintenance serves a dual purpose: (i) maintaining standards of road     

> 27 Its responsibilities include conducting a permanent diagnosis of the problems of energy efficiency, developing and implementi ng
> energy efficiency programmes and promoting efficient energy consumption i n isolated and remote areas.
> 28 While there is no autonomous body responsible for energy planning, the National Energy Plan 2014 -2025 had the support of the
> Advisory Committee on Energy formed by specialists in the field.
> 29 Established in 2004 by Urgency De cree N° 010 -2004.
> 30 In November 2014, 500,000 new solar panels were acquired.

34 

traversability and (ii) generating permanent local employment and better incomes for rural families (MTC 2014). 31 

As part of the audit process for transport services for passengers and cargo, the “Tolerancia Cero ”

programme has been implemented in conjunction with regional governments, which has contributed to a reduction in the level of non-compliance. Additionally, speeding has been mitigated because vehicles must equip Global Positioning System (widely known as GPS) navigation devices. This requirement has reduced the number of accidents on roads. Moreover, the “Programa para la Renovación del Parque Automotor ”

established the maximum number of years that public transport vehicles can be in service at 15 (MTC 2012). In addition, local government or private initiatives have built ground terminals over the past four years (MTC 2014). 

Telecommunications 

Regarding telecommunications infrastructure, the Ministry of Transport and Communications has established an investment fund with the aim of providing universal access to telecommunications services. It is first focusing on rural communities with a social interest. There are plans to expand coverage by laying 690 kilometres of fibre optic cables in the highlands and jungle regions of the country (MTC 2014). 

## National Priorities for Ensuring Sustainable Energy and Developing Infrastructure for All 

According to its PESEM for 2012 –16 (see MINEM 2012), the Ministry of Energy and Mines has four specific objectives: 

1. Promote sustainable and competitive development of the energy sector, prioritising private investment and diversification of the energy matrix. This includes rural electrification, strengthening the oil and gas sector and increasing the use of natural gas. 

2. Promote mining as a contributor to sustainable development and social inclusion in the country. This includes the promotion of mining activities, formalisation of illegal mining activities and provision of efficient service in granting mining concessions. 

3. Promote the preservation and conservation of the environment within the energy and mining sectors by fostering social inclusion and harmonious relations between companies and civil society. This includes strengthening and facilitating relations between the government, companies and communities involved in mining, encouraging environmental protection during mining and promoting community environmental awareness. 

4. Promote these issues through a transparent, efficient, effective and modern decentralised organisation, allowing fulfilling its mission through systematized and computerized processes, with motivated and highly qualified personnel and a culture of planning oriented to a quality service for the user. For it is planned to strengthen the image of the institution and the decentralization of the mining sector. 

The National Energy Plan 2014-2025 outlines other priorities of the Ministry of Energy and Mines: (i) ensure a competitive energy supply, (ii) ensure security and universal access to energy supply and (iii) develop energy resources optimally with minimal environmental impact and low greenhouse gas emissions within a framework of sustainable development. In addition, the plan aims to boost energy efficiency through a  

> 31 In 2013, local governments through their respective Provincial Road Institutes engaged the services of 857 rural organisation s for
> routine maintenance of 16,866.6 kilometres of roads (MTC 2014).

35 

decrease in external dependency, an increase in competitiveness of the energy sector, fewer environmental impacts and improvement in access to energy. Diversifying the energy matrix by increasing the use of natural gas is considered essential for mitigating climate change and reducing emissions of greenhouse gases (MINEM 2014b). 

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Transport and Communications has its own priorities, which were established in its PESEM for 2012 –16 (see MTC 2012): 

1. Having transport infrastructure that contributes to strengthening internal and external integration, the development of logistics corridors, the process of territorial planning, environmental protection and the improvement of economic competitiveness. 

2. The availability of safe, efficient and quality transport services, incorporating the logistics of transport, environmental protection and social inclusion. 

3. Expanding the coverage of telecommunications services with efficiency, quality and a social interest. 

4. Increasing the participation of the private sector through public-private partnerships and direct investment in infrastructure, transport and telecommunications. 

5. Actively participating in the decentralisation process aimed at the development of capabilities to improve the management of transport by sub-national governments. 

6. Having organisational structures and modern standards, optimised internal processes and skilled human resources, using information and communications technologies and results-based management and improving management within government institutions. 

Table 5 presents the global and national targets and indicators for Peru. The proposed global indicators are largely relevant for the Peruvian context, except for the indicator “# of hours per day households have access to electricity on average, ” which is not adequate because access to electricity is not necessarily limited in time by hours. The research team has proposed a more adequate national indicator. 

Ensure access to energy and improve efficiency and sustainability of energy supply, including renewable energy 

The research team considered it relevant for Peru to measure adequate access to electricity. After discussions with stakeholders, adequate electrification was judged to be total – or quasi-total – service in a week. For that reason, the national indicator considers good service to be when the population has access to electricity all day for  six  to  seven  days  per  week. A similar indicator was proposed in the  PESEM  of the 

Ministry of Energy and M ining ( MINEM  2012) and the  PENDES  (INEI 2013b). The research team  has  also 

propos ed  indicators  on  access to other services  such  as potable water and sanitation services. Thes e

indicators were  found  in  the  PENDES  (INEI 2013b). 

Improve maintenance of public transport infrastructure 

According to the estimates of private institutions, the infrastructure gap was approximately US$37.8 million in 2008 (IPE 2009), which represents approximately 30 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). Despite economic progress, investment in infrastructure and access to basic services are still insufficient. This is evidenced by the low indexes in competitiveness and infrastructure. According to the World Economic Forum, 36 

Peru is below the world average. In addition, logistics costs are very high, reaching about 29 percent of the total value of the products, while the average being about 24 percent in Latin America and only 9 percent in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. Hence, the percentage of paved roads in the national road network and rehabilitated roads in the departmental road network have been proposed as national indicators. Both were found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC 2012). 

Ensure access to safe, efficient and affordable mobility 

Some of the factors responsible for greenhouse gas emissions are associated with human activity, such as the burning of fossil fuels in engines. For this reason, the team has proposed the national indicator “ Antiquity of vehicle fleet, ” which was also found in the PENDES (INEI 2013a). As mentioned above, Peru is a country with a high number of traffic accidents. The team has thus proposed the national indicator “N umber of deaths from traffic accidents .” This indicator was found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC 2012). 

Table 5.  Ensure sustainable energy and develop infrastructure for all: Targets and  indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Ensure full access to developed infrastructure and communication technology 

Internet users (per 1,000 people) 

Average bandwidth speed (megabits/second) 

% of the population with access to an all-season road 

% of adults with an account at a formal financial institution 

Ensure access to energy and improve efficiency and sustainability of energy supply, including renewable energy 

# of hours per day households have access to electricity on average 

Rate of improvement in energy intensity 

Share of the population with access to modern cooking solutions (%) 

Share of renewable energy to total energy consumption 

National 

Ensure access to energy and improve efficiency and sustainability of energy supply, including renewable energy 

Population with access to adequate electricity (all day, 6 –7 days per week) 

Population with access to adequate services for potable water 

Population with sanitation services 

Improve maintenance of public transport infrastructure 

% of paved roads in the national road network 

% of rehabilitated roads in the departmental road network 

Ensure access to safe, efficient and affordable mobility 

Antiquity of vehicle fleet 

Number of deaths from traffic accidents 

Ensure full access to developed infrastructure and communication technology 

Localities with access to mobile services 

Localities with access to internet services 

Cross -cutting: Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all 

Publish and use economic, social and environmental accounts in all governments and companies 

% of environmental impact assessments for mining projects approved at the provided time 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of  law and 

a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve relationships between the government, companies and communities 

Number of actions, programmes and projects to prevent socio-environmental conflicts 

Number of mechanisms for citizen participation 37 

Accreditations for small mining producers and artisanal min ing 

producers 

Promote rational, orderly and 

sustainable occupation of 

national territory 

Local governments with approved territorial management instruments 

Households with property titles 

Ensure full access to developed infrastructure and communication technology 

Communication can promote development and opportunities among the people with access to adequate infrastructure and communication technology. In Peru, not all districts have access to mobile and internet services. It is necessary to ensure access to such services, so the team has proposed national indicators on localities with access to mobile and internet services. Both were found in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). 38 

# Establish a Sustainable, Healthy and Resilient Environment for All 

## Current Status 

At the global level, one of the most difficult MDG targets to meet has been the integration of sustainable development principles into national policies and programmes and reversing the loss of environmental resources. The loss of environmental resources persists, characterised by a high rate of deforestation, an increase in carbon dioxide emissions (by 46 percent between 1990 and 2010) and overexploitation of marine fish populations. At the same time, protected areas have grown to reduce the loss of biodiversity and the rate of loss. Between 1990 and 2012, protected areas increased from 8.9 percent to 14.6 percent of the world’s 

land surface and from 4.6 percent to 9.7 percent of coastal waters (up to 12 nautical miles). The MDG on environmental sustainability also includes a target on halving the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. This target on safe drinking water has been reached, with the proportion being reduced from 24 percent to 11 percent between 1990 and 2011. Efforts to improve access to basic sanitation, however, will need to be redoubled. The proportion of people without access to basic sanitation only decreased from 51 percent to 36 percent between 1990 and 2011 (the target was 25 percent). Finally, the world has reached the target of considerably improving life for at least 100 million slum-dwellers. Between 2000 and 2010, more than 200 million people accessed better sources of water, sanitation installations, lasting shelters or sufficient space to live (UNDP 2013b). 

Peru is a country with much biodiversity. It has an area of 128.5 million hectares, of which 57 percent is forested. Of the total land area, about 72 million hectares are tropical forests in the Amazon basin, on the Pacific coast and in valleys. With this large expanse of forests, Peru ranks the ninth most forested country and has the fourth largest area of tropical forests. This expanse, however, has been declining in recent decades due to deforestation (MINAM 2012b). Overall, the country has not seen great progress in terms of integrating sustainable development principles into national policies and programmes and reversing the loss of environmental resources. GDP per unit of energy use remains low despite growth, while emissions of ozone-damaging substances are increasing and general trash management is inadequate, with trash rarely recycled and instead often thrown in the street or burned (UNDP 2013b). This situation is partly due to Peru not having specific authorities in charge of ensuring environmental sustainability until recently. 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

Peru’s creation of the Ministry of Environment in 2008 has been its biggest effort and key to progress on environmental sustainability. This institution is responsible for promoting environmental sustainability in the country and preserving, protecting, restoring and ensuring environmental conditions, ecosystems and natural resources (MINAM 2015). The creation of the National Service of Natural Protected Areas and National Authority of Water has also been very important. The National Service of Natural Protected Areas is responsible for establishing technical and administrative criteria for the conservation of protected areas and maintenance of biodiversity (SERNANP 2015). The National Authority of Water is responsible for carrying out actions for the multi-sectoral sustainable use of water resources from river basins within the framework of integrated natural resources management and the management of national environmental quality through strategic partnerships with regional governments (ANA 2015). More specific initiatives for the management of greenhouse gas emissions, solid combustibles, solid resources, water resources and air quality have also been launched (UNDP 2013b). 39 

Unlike with the other MDGs, there has been little progress on environmental issues. In terms of reducing the loss of biodiversity and seeking to achieve a significant reduction in the rate of loss by 2010 as stipulated in the MDG framework, there has been an annual loss of 150 thousand hectares of Amazonian forest since 1990, though the proportion of forest area loss only decreased by a little over 1 percent until 2010. Moreover, species in danger of extinction make up 3.3 percent of fauna and 3.8 percent of flora (UNDP 2013b). There is much room to improve in the future. 

In this context, the Ministry of Environment’s National Programme for Forest Conservation is central for the mitigation of climate change. This programme seeks to “conserve, order, and manage 54 million hectares of forest ” (MINAM  2014a).  Th is  strateg y involves  identif ying  forest ecosystems  where the program me  will take 

action , coordinating  efforts among  forest actors in the country, strengthen ing  the capacities of stakeholders 

and promot ing  sustainable production systems , with the objectives being  the generation of revenue  for the 

population and  the  reduc tion  of  deforestation . Res ults will be  assessed  in  the  future. 

Regarding disaster resilience, Peru is not prepared enough for the future. In 2008, the National Civil Defence Institute of Peru reported 4,545 emergencies, 84,410 victims, 1,368,056 affected, 34 missing, 273 injured, 165 dead, 15,543 houses destroyed, 151,794 houses damaged, 98 schools destroyed, 1,185 schools affected, 18,098 people with lost crops and 103,588 people with affected crops (INDECI 2009). Over the past decade, there have been recurring natural events such as heavy rains, floods, high winds, frosts and landslides, which have accounted for 48 percent of all emergencies. Flooding, especially in regions with hot climates, causes the most damage. Although it is well known that natural disasters will occur again, the government has not implemented necessary adaptation policies. For that reason, the jungle region of Loreto has the largest number of flood victims (MINAM 2012b). 

## National Priorities for Establishing a Sustainable, Healthy and Resilient Environment for All 

The priorities of the Ministry of Environment are based on consensus. They were discussed, renewed and approved by a multi-sectoral commission which included the ministers of agriculture, culture, energy and mines, economy and finance, health, production, development and social inclusion and environment and the president of the Council of Ministers. Consensus strengthen s citizens’ confidence in the role of government in environmental protection, the sustainable management of natural resources and the conservation of species and ecosystems. The commission approved four “strategic axes of environmental management ” that define the full though gradual incorporation of the environmental dimension into public policies (MINAM 2012b): 

 A sovereign state and guarantor of rights; 

 Improving life quality through a healthy environment; 

 Harmonious use of natural resources; and 

 Healthy natural heritage. 

The first axis refers to reducing socio-environmental conflicts, increasing environmental citizenship and the environmental performance of the audit function. The second refers to the abatement of pollution in drainage basins, air and soil. The third focuses on reducing the vulnerability of the population at risk of natural disasters through territorial ordering and maintenance of ecosystems. The fourth refers to the capacity to adapt to climate change, reduce deforestation, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, conserve biodiversity and preserve the integrity of fragile ecosystems (MINAM 2012b). 

Taking into account the priorities of the Ministry of Environment, the majority of the proposed global targets and indicators are very relevant for Peru. Due to the country’s diverse microclimates and high vulnerability to 40 

climate-related disasters, it is important to measure the number of disaster deaths. The proposed national indicators include another indicator on this issue. The indicators that measure net loss in forest area and trends in coverage of protected areas are also pertinent. Notably, Peru is making efforts to have national government publishing follow the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting in the near future (MINAM 2011). The share of large tax unit taxpayers using integrated reporting is not so relevant for Peru because the country does not have a culture of integrated reporting. Table 6 presents the proposed global and national targets and indicators. There are many national indicators proposed under this goal area because more efforts are needed to achieve sustainable development in Peru. 

Table  6. Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all: Targets and 

indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Build resilience and reduce deaths from natural hazards 

Disaster deaths per 1,000 inhabitants 

Safeguard ecosystems and biodiversity 

Net loss in forest area (% of land area) 

Trends in coverage of protected areas 

Publish and use economic, social and environmental accounts in all governments and companies 

Share of large tax unit taxpayers using integrated reporting 32 

Existence of national and sub-national government publishing according to the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 33 

National 

Improve air and water quality  Air quality 

Drainage basins that pass environmental quality assessment 

Address climate change  Rate of greenhouse gas emissions intensity 

Safeguard ecosystems and biodiversity 

Area reforested annually 

Mining environmental liabilities 

Investment in protected natural areas per hectare 

Implement integrated solid waste management 

Per capita spending on management of solid waste 

Build resilience and reduce vulnerability to natural hazards 

Economic losses in infrastructure due to natural disasters (% of GDP) 

Publish and use economic, social and environmental accounts in all governments and companies 

% of environmental impact assessments for mining projects approved at the provided time 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and 

a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve relationships between the government, companies and communities 

Number of socio-environmental conflicts       

> 32 Integrated reporting is a process founded on integrated thinking that results in a periodic integrated report by an organisat ion about
> value creation over time and related communications regarding aspects of value creation. An integrated report is a conci se
> communication about how an organisation’s strategy, governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external
> environment, lead to the creation of value in the short, medium and long term (IIRC 2013). Large taxpayers are very different from other
> categories of taxpayers and present certain significant risks to effective tax administration. Key characteristics of large t axpayers include
> concentration of revenues, complexity of business and tax dealings, withholding agent or intermediary role, use of professional tax
> advisors and possession of in -house tax organisation. Businesses may be publicly listed corporations, multinational companies or private
> groups (OECD 2009).
> 33 This is primarily a “yes -no” indicator and has binary variables that can only have two possible values.

41 

Improve air and water quality 

Air pollution is the presence of chemicals and particles in the atmosphere that alters its composition, leading to direct effects on human health, other living creatures and ecosystems. In addition, air pollution increases health-care spending and environmental degradation. In Lima, over 6,000 people die per year from causes related to particulate matter between 2.5 and 10 micrometres in size. This phenomenon occurs mainly in big cities, where vehicles and industrial activity emit pollutants. Lima and Callao are among the cities with the worst air quality levels in Latin America (MINAM 2012b). The national indicator that has been included was found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Environment and the environment section of the PENDES. 

The pollution of water resources alters ecological functions, reduces biodiversity and damages aquatic habitats, marine ecosystems and human health. Direct ingestion of contaminated water and indirect ingestion through food consumption have high risks of parasitic, viral and bacterial infection. Of the existing drainage basins in Peru, 52 are contaminated due to municipal waste and other industrial pollutants in coastal areas (MINAM 2012b). The National Authority of Water has established quality standards for drainage basins. The indicator that has been included was also found in the PESEM and PENDES. 

Address climate change 

Climate change is quite relevant due to its disastrous consequences, which include changes in sea surface temperature, salinity and elevation and increases in the frequency, intensity, duration and timing variation of extreme weather events such as flooding, drought, frost, hail, landslides, avalanches, deglaciation and desertification. The net effect of these changes is the greater vulnerability of the global population and decline of the global economy. Hydrometeorological phenomena increased more than six times from 1997 to 2006 and Peru has lost 22 percent of the surface of its glaciers over the last 25 years (MINAM 2012b). 

By 2030, an increase of 1°C in temperature and 10 percent greater variability in precipitation is expected, while by 2050, an increase of 2°C in temperature and 20 percent greater variability in precipitation is anticipated (Vargas 2009). Such changes are caused by the greenhouse effect, a phenomenon that occurs naturally in the atmosphere due to gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, nitric oxide and water vapour. Due to the increase of these gases in the atmosphere over decades, an increase in the global temperature level has been observed, which affects the balance of ecosystems. As mentioned, some of the factors responsible for increased greenhouse gas emissions are related to human activity. Thus, an indicator on greenhouse gas emissions has been included, with a similar indicator being found in the PESEM. 

Safeguard ecosystems and biodiversity 

The main source of greenhouse gas emissions at the national level is the deforestation of the Amazon rainforest to expand the agricultural frontier. On the other hand, the main source of greenhouse gas removal is changes in forest biomass and other wood stocks. It is therefore important to closely follow the issue of deforestation. The rate at which the rainforest was deforested between 1990 and 2000 is approximately 150,000 hectares per year, which resulted in the annual emission of 57 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MINAM 2012b). This problem is explained by the limited knowledge and commitment to the conservation of forests in Peru, the limited development of good practices and sustainable forest management, insufficient capacity in the management of forests threat various levels of government, limited capacity control system and limited control of the use of forest resources. For these reasons, the research team has included an indicator on area reforested annually. 

Furthermore, ecosystems within natural areas are affected when companies do not keep track of their impacts on the environment. Among the factors causing the decline of ecosystems are habitat loss, overuse 42 

of resources, pollution and displacement of native species by the introduction of exotic species (MINAM 2012b). An indicator on investment in protected natural areas has therefore been included. 

Moreover, mining has been an economic activity in Peru for centuries and exploiting various minerals and metals inevitably generates waste. Dated mining practices, inadequate management of waste and the lack of precise rules governing mine closure have resulted in the accumulation of mining environmental liabilities across large areas, particularly pollution that can put public health at risk. Mining environmental liabilities limit the use of soils, affect the quality of surface water and groundwater, degrade wildlife, and restrict the rights of local people to use these resources without health risks. That is why it is very important to include a national indicator on mining environmental liabilities. 

Implement integrated solid waste management 

Waste management is understood as the collection, transportation, processing, treatment, recycling or disposal of waste material, which is usually produced by human activity, in an effort to reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment. Although waste management is not currently a priority of the Ministry of Environment, indicators on the issue are found in the environment section of the PENDES (see INEI 2013b) due to the importance of waste management in urban areas. Of these indicators, the research team has chosen per capita spending on management of solid waste because in many cases a municipality may have designed a plan for managing solid waste but not necessarily fulfilled it (the indicator allows the aggregation of information on this issue). 

Build resilience and reduce vulnerability to natural hazards 

In Peru, more than 46 percent of the country (i.e., 36 percent of the total population) is highly or very highly vulnerable to natural disasters, the magnitude and frequency of which are determined by geographical location and the physical characteristics of territory (MINAM 2012b). The research team has included a national indicator on economic losses in infrastructure due to natural disasters to complement the global indicator on disaster deaths. 

Environmental accounts of mining companies 

Due to the extensive mining activity in Peru and harmful consequences of mining environmental liabilities, it is necessary for each mining company to report the environmental impacts of its operations. An environmental impact assessment is a technical administrative procedure used to identify, prevent and interpret environmental impacts. Mining companies can propose an environmental project and the Ministry of Environment can accept, reject or modify it. The assessment includes consultations with communities and the Agency for Assessment and Environmental Control of Peru. All mining companies operating in Peru must conduct such an assessment, but not all of them actually do or it takes longer than expected to submit. Therefore, the research team has included an indicator on this issue. This indicator was also found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Environment (MINAM 2012b). 43 

# Establish Open, Accountable, Inclusive and Effective Institutions, Rule of Law and a Peaceful and Inclusive Society 

## Current Status 

Governance and Institutions 

Peru experienced a period of sustained growth between 2002 and 2012, with GDP increasing by 6 percent annually on average. During the same period, the country ’s rank on the  UN Development Programme’s 

Human Development Index increa sed from 0.67 to 0.74 (UNDP  2013c ). However, economic growth has not 

been  uniform and  equitable  across regions  and urban and rural  areas ( Contraloría General de la República 

2014). Academics point out that  Peru’s major  problem is institutional weakness (Acemoglu and Robinson 

2012; Gh ezzi and Gallardo 2013 ).  Such weakness  is reflected in the figures of the World Economic Forum, 

which  ranks  Peru at number 61  in  the Global Competitiveness Index 2013 –2014  and at number 109  in the 

subcategory of institutions (WEF 2014). According to  Daron  Acemoglu  and James Robinson (2010) , Peru’s 

institutions are  “extractive ” and not  “inclusive ,” hence  Peru will grow, but  development  will not  be  sustainabl e.

The “Peruvian paradox ” refers to the fact that, despite almost a decade of economic growth and improvement in indicators such as poverty and unemployment, 34  citizens expre ssed a high degree of dissatisfaction  with 

political institutions and their representatives.  Despite  some improvement in 2012, the  levels of support for 

democracy, political tolerance, system support and trust in political institutions in Peru are among the lowest 

in Latin America.  Notably , much  distrust is observed towards d emocratic institutions. Only 32 percent  of 

Peruvians  have  trust in political parties, 36.6  percent  in Congress  and 39.4  percent  in the justice system and 

40.1  percent  in the National Police  of Peru  (Carrión,  Zárate and Seligson  2012) . The  presidency, meanwhile, 

tends to  see  a more variable level of confidence, usually linked t o the popularity of the  president  in office. 

Institutions that see relatively higher a pproval levels  include  the  Catholic Church (60.5  percent ), media (58.7 

percent ) and  Armed Forces (52  percent ).  Other  institutions , such as the  Office of the  Ombudsman  created in 

1993 35  and electoral organis ations  established after 2000,  have escaped  assessment .

Regarding support for the government, the average value of the index measuring support for the role of the state is 76.8 points in Peru, while values are 80 or higher in 14 countries in the region in 2012. 36 

Disaggregating the index in to  its five components , the lowest level of support , 41.6  percent , was  in relation to 

the question of whether the courts guarantee a fair  trial , while 46.6  percent  believe d that their basic rights are 

protected.  Trends in  political tolerance  have  been different.  Tolerance  levels have declined steadily,  falling 

from 53.6 percent  in 2006 to 43.8  percent  in 2012 , their lowest point . Regarding  support  for  demo cracy, Peru 

was  ranked 23 rd  out  of 26  countries  with  the support of  63.6 percent of citizens , a level of  support  that has 

largely remained the same since 2006 . Finally, the percentage of citizens who expressed suppo rt for the  legal 

order  was 57.7 percent ., up from 53.2 percent in 2006  (Carrión,  Zárate and Seligson  2012). To achieve 

sustainable development, it is necessary to end the  “Peruvian paradox .”        

> 34 Although the percentage of people who admit that their personal economic situation has improved quadrupled between 2006 and
> 2012, 64 percent described their economic situation as normal and 25 percent described theirs as “bad” or “very bad” in 2012 (Carrión,
> Zárate and Seligson 2012).
> 35 The Office of the Ombudsman is an independent body created by the Political Constitution of Peru of 1993. Its mandate is to p rotect
> the constitutional and fundamental rights of the individu al and the community, monitor compliance with the duties of public administration
> and provide public services to the population.
> 36 There is a relatively favourable attitude to the government’s participation in society and the economy, with the exception of the
> ownership of the most important companies in the country. However, the attitude in Peru is not as favourable as those in othe r countries
> in the region (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012).

44 

Decentralisation 

Minister of Production Piero Ghezzi and Minister of Transport and Communications José Gallardo identified institutional weakness, including “state absence ” in various parts of the country, as a serious constraint on development. Also, they argued that conceiving of a results-oriented government at the service of the population is not possible if it is not fully decentralised. The decentralisation process was initiated in 2002 and many powers have already been transferred to regional and local governments, but the process has garnered many criticisms. The problem is that transfers of powers have not been accompanied by enough resources, capabilities and controls for expenditure quality according to regional and local diversity. As a result, the performance of sectors as well as regional and local governments has been mixed (Contraloría General de la República 2014). 

Peru was ranked 25th out of 26 countries with 41.2 percent of citizens expressing trust of local governments, while 39.8 percent indicated that they trust regional authorities (excluding Metropolitan Lima) (Carrión, Zárate, and Seligson 2012). Notably, various local authorities were subject to public consultation processes (4,712 to be exact) between 1997 and 2013, with 279 mayors and 1,273 counselors having their positions revoked ( RPP Noticias 2014). 

Regarding public investment, there is still a long way to go to improve capabilities and expenditure quality at all levels of government. Regional governments executed 76 percent of the Modified Institutional Budget in 2012, while the average over the 2005 –12 period was less than 60 percent. The case was the same for local governments from 2007 to 2012. In general, regional and local governments have limited capabilities to provide effective, efficient and transparent public services according to the needs of citizens (Contraloría General de la República 2014). 37 

Four aspects of the decentralisation process in Peru deserve to be highlighted. First, the decentralisation process did not have an appropriate institutional arrangement when it was initiated. The process was accelerated and, despite various efforts, the government was unable to clarify responsibilities and redistribute the functions of public institutions for more efficient management at all levels of government. Second, the rules were developed without a diagnosis of what is happening inside the country and without prior public consultation. Moreover, the process was not designed to strengthen value chains. Consequently, their objectives did not fit with the strategic plans. 38  Third, ministries did not develop a comprehensive plan for 

capacity  building and the training plan that was established was not permanent.  As a  result, sub -national 

governments suddenly received  powers and  functions without the necessary inputs or adequate capacity for 

timely, effective and effi cient service provision . Finally, the institutional ar rangement to promote 

decentralis ation was further  weakened when the National Decentrali sation Council was dissolved and the 

Decentrali sation Secretariat was created.  The Decentralisation Secretariat  lacks technical, administrative, 

political and economic autonomy  (Contraloría General de la República  2014) .    

> 37 In response, the General Comptroller of the Republic proposes : (i) use results -based budgeting, (ii) identify value chains, (iii)
> determine the capacity for effective management of sub -national governments and (iv) allocate budget resources based on outputs and
> outcomes that people expect to receive to meet their un met needs and not according to inertial or historical requirements of institutions.
> If necessary, the government should temporarily assume the management of the powers transferred to entities that they are not able to
> exercise. All of this must be done by coordinating with ministries or agencies. Notably, the government faces the challenge of
> establishing a monitoring and evaluation system for all public entities at the national, regional and local levels of governm ent (Contraloría
> General de la República 2 014).
> 38 In addition, it should be noted that Peru does not yet have a system of indicators for monitoring and ongoing evaluation to m easure the
> performance of public institutions. Also, the accreditation system is more a formality than an efficient mechani sm, with real capacity gaps
> existing in the regions and municipalities (Contraloría General de la República 2014).

45 

Corruption 

According to Transparency International ’s most recent Corruption Perceptions Index (see Transparency International 2014), Peru ranked 85th out of 175 countries with a score of 38. Furthermore, according to the Global Corruption Barometer, Peru ranked seventh in perceptions of corruption with an average of 76.9, an improvement from being ranked third in 2010. This improvement was due to a small decrease in the average of perceptions that corruption is widespread among public officials in Peru between 2006 and 2012, with about 80 percent of the population believing that corruption is somewhat or very widespread in the country. The improvement may be in part due to the creation of supervisory mechanisms. However, the percentage the population who perceive that corruption is the country’s main problem increased from 6.5 percent in 2006 to 12.6 percent in 2012. 39  Interestingly, the institutions with which there is great est  discontent are, 

paradoxically, those charged with combating corruption in the public sector  – the judiciary and Congress 

(Carrión,  Zárate and Seligson  2012). 

Peru has had high levels of corruption at various times in its history. Since the 1980s, the Peruvian government was widely seen as inefficient and corrupt, in a context of economic crisis and crisis in public security (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012). The year 2000 was marked by events that uncovered a web of high-level corruption and precipitated the fall of the government of Alberto Fujimori (see El Comercio 2014a). These events undermined the government’s already precarious legitimacy. A vast, complex network of corruption, which was organised within the National Intelligence Service and reached all levels of government, included representatives of Congress, members of the judiciary, the National Elections Board, the armed and police forces and heads of media organisation as either in collusion or complicit (Degregori and Meléndez 2009). A transitional government was installed and launched institutional, legislative and criminal mechanisms were launched to prevent, control and eventually punish all forms of corruption. Regardless, the last three presidents have been accused of corruption after finishing their terms ( La República 2013). Moreover, some regions are plagued by serious corruption where various entities have been captured by certain interest groups, with the most remarkable cases being in Ancash, where the regional president was jailed (see Cabral 2014; Perú21 2014) and regional councillors have been accused of irregularities (see RPP Noticias 2015), and Cajamarca, where the regional president was also jailed (see El Comercio 2014c). Perhaps distrust in democratic institutions is relatively high for these reasons (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012). 

Social Conflicts and Citizen Participation 

Since 2004, the Office of the Ombudsman has been publishing monthly reports on social conflict. The term 

“social conflict” has come to indicate conflictual relations between the government, public and private sector. 

By January 2015, 210 social conflicts had been recorded, of which 159 were active and 51 were latent. Only one case related to the Youth Employment System had been resolved and six new cases were opened. The regional picture shows that Ancash remains the region with the most conflicts (24 cases), followed by Apurimac (22), Puno (19) and Cusco (16). The latter region has the distinction of having all cases active. Notably, environmental conflicts were the most numerous, with 140 cases (96 cases, or 68.6 percent, were related to mining and 21 cases, or 15 percent, were related to hydrocarbons (Defensoría del Pueblo 2015). 

Social conflicts are generally local and sporadic, but they have had more impact and been more coordinated in recent years as they have acquired a regional character and have focused on social and environmental issues (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012). In some cases where conflicts have lasted a long time, people have been injured and even killed. One conflict that should be highlighted is the “Baguazo, ” a military   

> 39 Increasing perceptions of corruption as well as violence and insecurity as problems may be due to the decline in the salience of
> economic p roblems.

46 

intervention related to indigenous opposition to oil development in the Amazon rainforest in which 33 people died in 2009 (see La República 2014). Despite economic growth, social dissatisfaction persists (see Grompone and Tanaka 2009). This may be due to: (i) perceptions of incompatibility between economic activities and lifestyles, (ii) access to private economic benefits and public resources and (iii) management of public resources, which includes sensitive issues such as privatisation of state-owned enterprises (Tanaka, Zárate and Huber 2011). Moreover, the population has a lack of confidence in the government’s ability to prevent contamination and degradation of living spaces (Defensoría del Pueblo 2007). 

Regarding citizens’ participation in protests, which have been increasing in recent years, Peru ranked third in Latin America in 2012, with 13.1 percent of Peruvians saying that they have participated in a protest or strike. However, citizen s’ support for direct actions is relatively low in the region at 21.6 percent, ranking Peru in 21st position . In the case of participation in municipal matters, the percentage of people who participated ranged between 12 and 14.7 percent in 2012, while 3.2 percent participated in the participatory municipal budget (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012). 

Access to Justice 

Peru is considered to be a country with a long legal tradition, but authorities and citizens do not always respect laws. As mentioned, the judicial system weak and one of the least trusted institutions in the country. Moreover, the Peruvian bureaucracy is considered to be too large and administrative processes take too long (SERVIR 2012). For example, criminal proceedings last about 959 days on average, according to a review of judiciary records by a private consulting firm (APOYO Consultoría 2012). Moreover, the process of getting a conviction is slow (APOYO Consultoría 2012) and it is widely agreed that prisons must be better equipped to reintegrate prisoners into society (INPE 2014) 

Political Violence 

Between 1980 and 2000, Peru experienced politically motivated violence and terrorism, which included armed conflict, by the Communist Party of Peru, widely known as the Shining Path. In 2001, the Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission was created and its main objective was to understand the political context during this period. The commission presented its final report in 2003, which described and analysed the context and made recommendations in order to avoid such events in the future. Armed conflict had major impacts and costs, both human and economic. The estimated cost in human lives was around 69,280 people dead or missing (CVR 2003). Unlike similar commissions established in other countries, the Peruvian commission was not unanimously accepted by society. Certain sectors have been rather critical in recent years, including the church, the military, political parties and supporters of the Shining Path ( Agence France-Presse 2008; Perú21 2012). 

Remnants of the Shining Path remain (see CVR 2003). Since 2003, “Proseguir ” a militant faction of the Shining Path, has continued armed conflict 40 in the Valley of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro Rivers (US Department of State 2006). The government says “Proseguir ” acts in alliance with drug traffickers. Further, there is a new group called the Movement for Amnesty and Fundamental Rights, the purpose of which is to press for a “political solution ” to overcome what it calls “the problems arising from the internal war ” by providing a “general amnesty to all political prisoners in the country. ” The movement, which has bases at several universities, has been seeking registration as a political party in Peru, but the National Elections Board denied it ( La República 2012). The movement’s spokesperson said that it is not part of the Shining    

> 40 See, for instance, Panamericana (2008) .

47 

Path (Sandoval 2012), while others, including the former president of the Peruvian Truth and Reconciliation Commission, have argued otherwise (see Andina 2012). 

Human Rights and Discrimination 

One worrisome aspect in Peru is discriminatory attitudes. With respect to poverty and marginalisation, 28.3 percent of recently surveyed respondents agreed that poverty is associated with skin colour or cultural aspects. There was also a moderately high percentage who agreed that people who receive social assistance are lazy. Support for affirmative action policies is among the lowest in Latin America at 46.9 percent. 41  On  the  other hand, 35.7 percent  of citizens  agreed that they would  support  homosexuals  running 

for public office , w hile 65.8 percent  would support the nomination of  people  with disabilities  (Carrión,  Zárate 

and Seligson  2012) . Additionally, the  First  National  Survey on  Human  Rights  conducted in 2013  revealed  81 

percent  of Peruvians  agreed  that  “discrimination happens all the time and nobody does anything ” and 11 

percent disagreed with the statement.  However, 45 percent  of respondents agree d that  “homosexual s should 

not be school teachers ,” while  59 percent  oppose d homosexuals  hav ing  the ri ght to civil marriage  and 29 

percent were in favour . Similarly, 52  percent  agreed  that  they would  not  “hire  a person with HIV -AIDS ” and 55 

percent would  not  “hire a person who has been in jail ” (MINJUS 2013) . These  figures  show  the scale of 

discriminat ory  attitudes  in the country. 

Notably , survey s indicate  61 percent  of Peruvians  think that  child rapists do not deserve human rights  and 

protections , while 31  percent  think  the opposite . In addition, 60 percent  think  that  the  country should institute 

the death penalty for committing terrorist acts , while  79  percent  think  that  child rapists deserve  the death 

penalty  (MINJUS 2013) . These  figures  show that  Peruvians’ attitudes  depend  on  the type of offense  and 

some  people  are  willing to  restrict or  withdraw human right s and protections .

Citizen Security 

Violence and insecurity are major problems in Peru. The percentage of the population who consider crime and insecurity to be the largest problem in the country increased from 10.7 percent in 2006 to 30.7 percent in 2012. Peru ranked first in the region regarding perceptions of insecurity, averaging 48.6 percent across the country. When the comparison is limited to national capitals, Lima ranked second in the region with 53.9 percent. However, there have been changes over time and perceptions of insecurity in 2012 were lower than in 2010 and significantly lower than in 2006. Considering personal crime reported by the respondent, including crime and victimisation by home staff, Peru ranked second in the region (Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012). 

Gender Equality 

Regarding MDG 3, women occupied 21 percent of chamber seats in national parliaments (lower house or single chamber) in 2013, in contrast with 14 percent in 2000, in line with support from country quota systems. In Peru, the proportion of seats occupied by women in Congress increased considerably between the elections of 1990 and 2006 from 5 percent to almost 30 percent. However, the proportion decreased to nearly 21 percent in the elections of 2011 (UNDP 2013d).  Regarding perceptions, 33.1 percent of  Peruvian s think 

that  men make better political leaders than women , while  60.8  percent support gender quotas in  lists of 

candidates, one of the lowest  levels of support  in Latin America  (Carrión,  Zárate and Seligson  2012) .  

> 41 Surveyed respondents were asked if they agreed or disagreed with the following statement: “Universities should reserve seats for
> darker skin students, even if it means excluding other students.”

48 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

Governance 

There have been attempts to establish medium- and long-term policies on governance in Peru. These include the National Accord and Bicentennial Plan: Peru towards 2021. Signed in 2002, the National Accord is a set of state policies developed and approved on the basis of dialogue and consensus, following workshops and consultations at the national level, in order to set the country on course for sustainable development and boost democratic governance. Policies are expected to be coordinated within government over the long run with the participation of all political parties (Acuerdo Nacional 2015a). The Bicentennial Plan outlines policies for the medium term. The year 2021 was chosen as the deadline for the achievement of objectives because it marks 200 years of independence (CEPLAN 2011). 

A series of reforms are currently being debated by Congress and the Presidency of the Council of Ministers. Among those being debated in Congress, highlights include the New Law on Political Parties. 42  Notably, t he 

government  has undertaken nine  reforms  (see figure 2)  through  the Presidency of the Council of Minister s

(see PCM 2015) .

Figure 2. Main reforms undertaken by the government    

> 42 There have already been some changes, such as reforms to the mechanism for the revocation of elected positions. The National
> Election Board has increased the requirements for starting the process. This may reduce the proportion of revoked mayors and incre ase
> governance ( La República 2015).

49 

Conflict Prevention 

Due to the aforementioned “Baguazo, ” the Prior Consultation Law was enacted in 2011 to create a legal obligation for the rights of indigenous peoples to be taken into account by government. 43 This legal instrument has been harshly criticised for technical shortcomings, such as only applying to events after its enactment and not being binding (Actualidad Ambiental 2012). 44  For th is  reason , the  Office for National Dialogue and 

Sustainability  was created . The office is responsible for directing, within the scope of its powers, the process 

of dialogue between the various stakeholders, such as representatives of private organisations and public 

officials, in order to prevent disputes, differences and social c onflicts. It also provides mediation and 

negotiation services to solve problems (ONDS 2015).  Als o, the Office of the Ombudsman  – one of the 

institutions with  the most  legitimacy in the country  – may intervene in social  conflicts . Provided that (i) people 

are at risk or the rights of individuals have been violated, (ii) there is a violent confrontation that affects local, 

regional and national governance, (iii) conditions are less favourable for development and (iv) the culture of      

> 43 Since 1995, when it signed International Labour Organization Convention 169, Peru has been obligated to comply with provision s
> guaranteeing the right of indigenous and tribal peoples to consultation and free, prior and informed consent about activities to be carried
> out on their territory, but in practice implementation has been non -existent (Veramendi 2012).
> 44 The president said that this law “should be taken as an instrument to legitimize investment and not seen as an obstacle” (Veramendi
> 2012).

50 

dialogue and peace is discouraged. It works to prevent and mediate to avoid situations that may threaten or violate fundamental rights and facilitate dialogue processes to help solve social conflicts. Moreover, the UN Development Programme has been implementing the project “Prevention of social conflicts in the use of natural resources ” since 2012 (see UNDP 2013a). The project aims to contribute to strengthening democratic governance and sustainable development by reducing social conflicts and conflict levels associated with the use of natural resources, working with prevention and dialogue as key tools (UNDP 2013a). Additionally, the Agency for Environmental Evaluation and Control was created in 2008. It ensures that economic activities in the country, specifically mining, fishing, energy and industry, are in balance with the right of the population to enjoy a healthy environment (OEFA 2015). 

Corruption 

During the transitional government period, a series of initiatives were introduced to comprehensively combat corruption. The first was the creation of the National Anti-Corruption Plan and National Anti-Corruption Initiative, the latter being a working group whose main objective was diagnosing the situation of corruption in the country and subsequently designing public policies to address the problem. In terms of prevention, anti-corruption efforts have relied on four pillars: the National Control System, modernisation of public administration and administrative simplification, reform of public employment and Conditions of Contracting. Specific actions to combat the culture of secrecy within the government include the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information and the new Law on Government Procurement, which regulates procurement procedures from preparations to contract execution (PCM 2012a). Currently, civil service reform aims to raise the quality of government services through the implementation of meritocracy. In addition, the incomes of most public employees will be raised and personal and professional growth will be encouraged in public administration (PCM 2015). 

Moreover, the National Public Investment System, which was created in 2000, has generally improved the quality of investment in Peru by outlining key steps for investment. The system states that all projects must follow a cycle comprising the steps of pre-investment, investment and post-investment. In addition, in line with the policy of modernisation and decentralisation of the government, the system has been decentralised, thus regional and local governments can declare projects to be viable (MEF 2015b). 45 Moreover, given that resources are scarce and insufficient to cover all needs, it is necessary to prioritise projects based on welfare. Transparency in reporting accounts is important in the processes of allocation, management and evaluation of resources. Currently, the Ministry of Economy and Finance allocates its budget according to results-based budgeting. 

According to the Public Ministry, there has been a substantial increase in legislation and control mechanisms, such as the law that empowers the Attorney General’ s Office to designate a team of prosecutors for anti-corruption efforts. In parallel, prosecutors, courts and procurators have been enlarged in an effort to establish a decentralised National Anti-Corruption Subsystem. Moreover, the National Police of Peru created the Anti-Corruption Directorate and then the High-Level Anti-Corruption Commission was created in 2010. The latter is a coordinated initiative between the executive, the judiciary, autonomous bodies, subnational governments, business associations and civil society, which together propose policies and actions for the medium to long term to prevent and punish corruption. The main objective of this committee is to monitor and update the National Plan to Combat Corruption, which aims to realise specific actions to eradicate corruption in the country. The current plan is for the 2012 –16 period.  

> 45 Only projects with debt or requiring endorsement or guarantee of the government are evaluated by the Ministry of Economy and
> Finance, which considers their implications for macroeconomic and fiscal discipline (MEF 2015b).

51 

Human Rights 

The Ministry of Justice and Human Rights includes a Vice-Ministry of Human Rights and Access to Justice. In 2005, the first National Human Rights Plan was launched for the 2005 –11 period. Many of its guidelines and activities were focused on the adoption of legal reforms and measures to strengthen democratic institutions. 

Notably, one of the government’s priorities is to mainstream human rights into public policies. Such mainstreaming is to be implemented at the national, regional and local levels as part of the decentralisation process in Peru. For this reason, the National Human Rights Plan 2014-2016 was launched (MINJUS 2014). Furthermore, as mentioned, the First National Survey on Human Rights was conducted in Peru in 2013. The survey was divided into four sections: (i) general view on human rights, (ii) review of equality, non-discrimination and vulnerable populations, (iii) general opinion on other rights and (iv) review of the role of government and human rights (see MINJUS 2013). It will serve as a baseline for the development of programmes and policies for special protection groups and various national plans. 

In another  re spect, one of the recommendations of the  Peruvian  Truth and  Reconciliation Commission  was 

the creation of a Museum of Memory. After a brief dispute ,46  the  Place of Memory, Tolerance and Social 

Inclusion  is expected to  be  finish ed  in 2015 . Th e museum  will  remember the victims of terro rism  in Peru from 

1980  onwards  (Lugar de la Memoria , la Tolerancia y la Inclusión Social  2015).  The  UN  Development 

Programme  is  supporting  the initiative  (see  UNDP 2015). 

## National Priorities for Establishing Open, Accountable, Inclusive and Effective Institutions, Rule of Law and a Peaceful and Inclusive Society 

Given this goal area ’s varied issue areas, including quality of governance, strength of institutions, combating corruption, access to justice and addressing violence, the priorities of different government institutions must be surveyed, with a particular focus on the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations. 

According to the PESEM of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (MINJUS 2012), national priorities include: 

 Improve the quality of services and access to justice, legal certainty and social reintegration 

 Expand the coverage of services and access to justice, legal certainty and social reintegration 

 Promote, protect, ensure and monitor the implementation of human rights and international humanitarian law 

 Develop and monitor the implementation of criminal policy and prison policy 

 Promote results-oriented management and budgeting 

 Develop more culture and identity 

According to the PESEM of the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations (MIMP 2013), policy guidelines are as follows: 

1. Establish a multi-sectoral national policy on equality between men and women by ensuring equal rights and reducing gender-based violence   

> 46 During the 2008 European Union, Latin America and the Caribbean Summit held in Peru, the German government announced a
> donation to the Peruvian government for the construction of a Museum of Memory. The Peruvian government initially refused, bu t later
> acc epted the donation in 2009 and announced the construction of a museum dedicated to the victims of terrorism in Peru ( Lugar de la
> Memoria, la Tolerancia y la Inclusión Social 2015).

52 

2. Ensure the protection of children and adolescents through the prevention of violations of their rights and the provision of comprehensive care 

3. Ensure the safety of youth and families through social equity, sustainable use of territory, the right to life and the integral development of the person, guaranteeing the rights of older people and strengthening families as fundamental institutions of society 

4. Contribute to the effective participation of people with disabilities in social, economic, political and cultural development and promote respect for the rights of people with disabilities and improvement of access for people with disabilities to physical and virtual spaces 

In addition, the priorities of the Ministry of Culture (Ministerio de Cultura 2012) are: 

1. Institutionalise the rights of indigenous peoples and the Afro-Peruvian population 

2. Build intercultural citizenship and avoid ethnic discrimination 

Finally, the National Anti-Corruption Plan has among its priorities (MINJUS 2012): 

1. Articulation and coordination in the fight against corruption 

2. Effective prevention of corruption 

3. Research and timely and effective punishment of corruption in administration and the judiciary 

4. Promotion and coordination of the active participation of citizens, civil society and the private sector in the fight against corruption 

5. Positioning Peru in international arenas for fighting corruption 

The proposed global targets and indicators encompass Peruvian priorities. All of the indicators under the goal area are relevant. Global and national targets and indicators are presented in Table 7. 

Table 7 . Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a 

peaceful and inclusive society : Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Provide free and universal legal 

identity, such as birth registrations 

Percentage of children under 5 who are registered with the 

civil authority 

Proportion of adults with a basic legal identity document 

Monitor and end discrimination and 

inequalities in public service delivery, 

the rule of law, access to justice and 

participation in political and economic 

life on the basis of social status 

Average time between filing a case and receiving a verdict 

Proportion of seats held by women and minorities in national -

or local -level government 

% of adults with an account at a formal financial institution, 

disaggregated by sex 

Improve personal safety  Prevalence of violence against women, including domestic 

violence 

Violent death per 100,000 people 

Reduce bribery and corruption in all 

forms 

Survey data regarding bribes or gifts for service from a 

government official – “In the past year, how often (if ever) 

have you had to pay a bribe, give a gift, or do a favour to 

government officials in order to get a document or receive a 

service ”

Improve transparency in the revenue 

system 

Share of eligible taxpayers who submit their taxes 53 

Improve security and reduce violence 

Since Peru is ranked first in perceived insecurity in Latin America, it is necessary to have indicators on this issue. Since the proposed global indicators cover security, the proposed national indicators cover vulnerable populations such as children and women. These indicators were found in the section on the Ministry of Women and Vulnerable Populations in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). Victimisation rate, an indicator found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, has also been included (MINJUS 2012). 

Increase social reintegration 

One of the main objectives of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights is to increase social reintegration. This is a difficult objective to achieve due to poor prison conditions and the time required for a conviction. In terms of the holding capacities of prisons, only 6 percent are considered to be “large correctional facilities ”

(i.e., able to hold more than 1,200 inmates). The majority – 44 percent – only hold up to 199 inmates, while 38 percent can hold up to 899 inmates. However, some prisons have recorded over 500 percent overpopulation, as in the case of Jaén District (INPE 2014). Therefore, three national indicators have been included on this subject. The percentage of re-entrants in the prison population was found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (MINJUS 2012). The ratio between sentenced and processed as inmate and prison overcrowding were found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (MINJUS 2012). 

National 

Improve security and reduce violence  Social tolerance of child maltreatment 

Women affected by domestic violence who make a

denouncement 

% of girls and boys affected by domestic violence 

% of girls and boys affected by violence in school 

Victimis ation rate 

Increase social reintegration  % of re -entrant s in prison population 

Ratio be tween sentenced and processed inmat es

Prison overcrowding 

Establish a strong state and fight 

against corruption 

Perceptions of corruption 

Monitor and end discrimination and 

inequalities in economic life on the 

basis of social status 

Wage gap between indigenous and non -indigenous people s

with comparable levels of education 

Improve relationships between the 

government , companies and 

communities 

Number of socio -environmental conflicts 

Number of actions, program me s and projects to prevent 

socio -environmental conflicts 

Number of mechanisms for citizen participation 

Accreditations for small mining producers and artisanal 

min ing producers 

Promote rational, orderly and 

sustainable occupation of national 

territory 

Local governments with approved territorial management 

instruments 

Households with property titles 

Land titles processed on time 54 

Establish a strong state and fight against cor ruption 

Especially in developing countries like Peru, corruption should be considered in all its forms, from petty corruption to corruption that implies the existence of a large informal network within government and involves administrative influence and corresponding knowledge of how to engage citizens effectively. Therefore, the monitoring of corruption according to citizens’ perceptions of it is essential. A national indicator on this issue has been included. 

Monitor and end discrimination and inequalities in economic life on the basis of social status 

Although an indicator on the wage gap between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples with comparable levels of education was not in the government’s documents, the research team has included it because indigenous peoples have always been vulnerable. Notably, they are recognised as a priority by the Ministry of Culture, but specific related indicators have not been designed. The team considers this to be something that cannot be postponed. 

Improve relationships between the government, companies and communities 

Throughout history, access to and control of natural resources, such as oil, gas, minerals and water, have led to wealth creation but also conflict. In Latin America, where natural resources are strategic resources, socio-environmental conflicts have emerged with increasing consequences. The potential for conflict is especially high when people rather than authorities manage a country’s strategic resources. However, conflicts are social constructs and may change depending on the attitudes and interests involved as well as how they are driven and addressed (UNDP 2013a). For Peru, including and tracking indicators on socio-environmental conflicts is quite relevant. 

Promote rational, orderly and sustainable occupation of national territory 

Peru is a country that has been growing in a disorderly manner. Ecological zones are not well defined, cities do not have spatial plans that enable orderly, sustainable development around citizens’ needs. There is no mass transit system in Lima, despite a population of almost 9 million. Other major cities face similar situations on a smaller scale, which are often aggravated by pollution from urban transport. The proliferation of taxis, the services of which are not regulated, contributes to increased pollution, congestion and insecurity. Indicators on approved territorial management instruments and households with property titles have therefore been proposed. They were found in the PENDES (INEI 2013b). An indicator on land titles processed on time, which was found in the PESEM of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights (MINJUS 2012), has also been included. 55 

# Establish a Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 

## Current Status 

The MDGs include one goal aimed at addressing systemic global challenges related to the achievement of the MDGs in developing countries. To this effect, MDG 8 on developing a global partnership for development includes a target on the development of a more open trading and financial system based on predictable, non-discriminatory rules. While the business climate continues to improve for developing countries, there has been less progress with respect to trade, particularly in terms of duty-free, quota-free market access for developing countr ies’ exports. Official development assistance flows – another measure of global partnership under MDG 8 – have increased substantially over the MDG period, reaching US$125.6 billion in 2012, though they saw a decline in 2013 owing to the fallout from the global financial crisis and problems in the euro zone. This was the first time foreign aid saw a decline since 1996 –97. MDG 8 also includes a target on addressing developing country debt. Debt service rates have been reduced by one quarter in terms of export earnings. Formally, debt declined from 11.9 percent in 2000 to 3.1 percent in 2011. MDG 8 also includes a target on improving access to new technologies (particularly information and communications technologies) in developing countries. With the cooperation of the private sector, an estimated 6.8 billion people had mobile phones in 2012, which represents 96 percent of the global population. Moreover, 2.7 billion people, or 39 percent of the global population, had access to the internet (MDG Gap Task Force 2014).  Many difficulties 

persist  in developing countries with respect to access ing  broadband ( UNDP  2013b ). 

## Previous and Ongoing Efforts 

Peru has advanced in terms of developing an open trading and financial system. The country’s trade grew from approximately US$18.2 billion in 2000 to about US$95.2 billion in 2011, which represents an increase of 423.8  percent . This  growth  was achieved thanks to  trade  agreements with  China ( the destination of  15 

percent  of Peru’s exports ) and the United States (13  percent ).  Foreign  aid  fell  from 584.6  million  to 335.6 

million  between 2005 and 2010 , a decrease of  42.6  percent . With respect to addressing debt problems, the re 

have  been achievements  in Peru . D ebt  represent ed  26.8  percent  of the  total public budget in 2005 and 

decreased  to 12.9  percent  in  2011,  which favo ured  the development of the country and  the  fig ht against 

poverty.  To facilitate access to medicine at reasonable prices, the  government , which channels  37.2  percent 

of medication s to  individual users, has  made efforts to  eliminate  duty and taxes on certain oncology 

medication s and treatment  for  HIV/AIDS . However,  these efforts  do not always  lead to  a reduction in  the  price 

of  medicine  due to the lack of  support  from  pharmaceutical  companies.  With respect to  providing  access to 

new technologies, the slow est  growth  was seen in home phone lines , wh ich  went from 7.42 to 10.15 for every 

100  people  between 2004 and 2011 , which contrasts with  the  increases in mobile  phone and internet users 

over  the same period from 14.81 to 108.32 and from 14.1 to 36.5, respectively ( UNDP  2013d ). 

A key development was the creation of the Peruvian Agency for International Cooperation in 2002. The agency manages and regulates the demand for and supply of foreign aid at different levels of government with a focus on Peru’s sustainable development. In terms of demand for aid, its main challenge is the transition of Peru from a low-income to a middle-income country, which will lead to a reduction in aid from various donors. In terms of South-South cooperation, Peru’s actions are few, but development partners include Colombia, Nicaragua and Paraguay (Xalma 2012). 56 

## National Priorities for Establishing a Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 

Regarding the proposed global targets and indicators, some issues are not relevant for Peru. The country does not trade or have debts with low-income countries, so the indicators “Low-income country debt forgiveness or reduction (% of GDP) ” and “Share of trade in goods and services from low-income countries under duty-free, quota-free market access ” are not pertinent. However, “Existence of laws for ensuring country-by-country reporting by multinational corporations, disclosure of beneficial ownership and the prevention of money laundering ” is pertinent. As a middle-income country, indicators for the target on increasing financing to productive capacity are relevant. The indicators “Share of aid to the productive sector, ” “Proportion of foreign direct investment to the productive sector ” and “Share of South-South cooperation to the productive sector ” can be measured in Peru. 

After discussions with stakeholders, the research team decided not to propose national targets and indicators under this goal area because Peru is only an emerging South-South donor. 47   

> 47 South -South cooperation is not presented in the National Agreement ( Acuer do Nacional 2015b), Bicentennial Plan: Peru towards 2021
> (CEPLAN 2011) or any of the ministries’ plans.

Table  8. Establish a global partnership for  sustainable development: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator 

Global 

Create an enabling environment for 

sustainable development 

Low -income country debt forgiveness or reduction (% of GDP) 

Share of trade in goods and services from low -income 

countries under duty -free, quota -free market access 

Existence of laws for ensuring country -by -country reporting by 

multinational corporations, disclosure of beneficial ownership 

and the prevention of money laundering 

Increase financing to productive 

capacity in low - and middle -income 

countries 

Share of aid to the productive sector 

Proportion of foreign direct investment to the productive sector 

Share of South -South cooperation to the productive sector 57 

# Measuring Progress on Post-2015 in Peru 

## Overview of the National Statistical System 

Organis ation 

The national statistical system in Peru is centralised with the objective of ensuring that all statistical activities carried out by central, regional and local governments occur in an integrated, coordinated and rationalised manner under common technical regulation (INEI 2014j). The central organisation in the national statistical system is the INEI, which is a specialised technical organisation that is dependent on the Presidency of the Council of Ministers. 48 It has juridical personnel and technical autonomy and an autonomous administration (INEI 2014f). The INEI was founded in 1975 through Decree-Law No. 21372 (INEI 2014d) and is responsible for planning, managing, coordinating, supervising and normalising official statistical activities in the country. For this reason, it has the rank of Functional System 49 and its chief has the highest authority over of the national statistical system (INEI 2014f). 

Official statistical activities are guided by the PENDES, which focuses on data demand. The plan was launched with financial support from the UN Population Fund, Inter-American Development Bank, Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century and Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union. The plan was formulated with participation from the INEI as well as other organisations pertinent to the national, regional and local levels of government. In this way, the INEI provides statistics that respond primarily to data demand from those responsible for designing, monitoring and evaluating programmes and public policies (INEI 2014i). 

Additionally, the Code of Good Statistical Practices of Peru was approved in 2012, 50 with the objective “to increment trust in the independence, integrity, and responsibility of the organisations that integrate the national statistical system on its national, regional, and local levels, as well as promote the application of better principles, methods, and practices to augment the quality of official statistics ” (INEI 2014g). With its approval, the Peruvian government intended to improve the production of statistical data in three areas, namely through commitment to data users ’ needs and improving efficiency and quality (INEI 2014a). 

The INEI website publishes quarterly and annual indicators as microdata archives and systems to cross variables in a user-friendly way. 51 Censuses, general surveys and specialised surveys can all be found on the publicly accessible website as microdata, while data from databases such as that for the National Census of Population and Household can be made available upon request. Databases are frequently updated and can be accessed free of charge. Every public institution has a “statistics ” section on its website. 

With respect to the financing of official statistical activities, the INEI has standard resources directly collected from taxes, donations and money transfers (INEI 2014h). While a large part of its budget comes from the government, some statistics are produced with the help of international organisations. For instance, there is the Map of Analysis of Coverage Change of Forest to Non-Forest for Deforestation of the Peruvian Amazon,       

> 48 Law No. 29158 indicates that “the Presidency of the Council of Ministers is the Ministry responsible for the coordination of national and
> sectoral pol icies of the executive. [It] [c]oordinates relations with the other branches of government, constitutional bodies, regional
> governments, local governments and civil society” ( Congress of the Republic of Peru 2007 ).
> 49 Functional Systems are designed to ensure compliance with public policies that require participation of all or several entities.
> 50 Through Supreme Decree No. 072 -2012 -PCM (PCM 2012 b).
> 51 The user -friendly software to use microdata files and cross variables is called REDATAM, which stands for Recovery of Data for Small
> Areas by Microcomputer.

58 

which was elaborated by the Ministry of Environment. For its elaboration, the use of the CLASlite system 52 

was necessary, which was possible thanks to an agreement between the Carnegie Institution for Science and Ministry of Environment (MINAM 2014b). 

Data Producers 

While the INEI is the central organisation in the national statistical system, a number of other organisations are involved in the production of data. These include the National Statistics Advisory Council, Inter-institutional Committee of Statistical Coordination, Sectoral Statistical Offices and other statistical offices in ministries, central government institutions, decentralised public institutions, state-owned enterprises, and statistical organisations of regional governments, municipalities and public institutions (INEI 2014j). 

Statistical data can come from three sources: censuses, surveys and administrative data. Generally, statistical data from censuses and surveys are produced by the INEI, while administrative data come from the registries of government institutions and decentralised public institutions. These institutions – ministries, local governments, the Central Reserve Bank of Peru and others – produce their own statistics by following the guidelines of the Code of Good Statistical Practices (INEI 2014g). Coordination between the INEI and different government institutions is accomplished through the Inter-institutional Committee of Statistical Coordination, Which ensures that official statistical activities satisfy data demand by following the PENDES. 

In addition to the entities that are formally part of the national statistical system, there are private organisations that collect information independently, such as Ipsos Perú 53 and Proética. 54 A number of other entities are responsible for the recompilation, elaboration and publication of data, including the Instituto Cuánto, 55 which publishes the annual statistical yearbook Peru in Numbers (Instituto Cuánto 2015). In the case of information collected independently, accessibility depends on the organisation that produces the information. Proética and Young Lives Study 56 permit users to download their databases for free, while other organisations have certain restrictions on access to their databases, such as paywalls. 

With regard to credibility, independent sources of data can have their own agendas, can be biased or may not have the expertise necessary for data collection. Although there are independent databases that are trustworthy, such as the Young Lives database, it is preferable to use official data. 

Users of Data 

Data published by the INEI are used by a diverse group of stakeholders including the government, private researchers, academics, businesses and civil society in general. Data users often have different objectives, but the principal use of statistical data is for the “design, monitoring, and evaluation of public policy, ”

especially by those sectors that are responsible for budgeting programmes (INEI 2013b). 

In line with the PENDES (INEI 2013b), the government has outlined that data collection should be geared towards meeting the following objectives: (i) greater social inclusion, including reduction of poverty and               

> 52 CLASlite is an automated system for converting satellite imagery from its original (raw) format –through calibration, pre -processing,
> atmospheric correction, cloud masking steps, Monte Carlo Spectral Mixture Analysis and expert classification –into high -resolution
> images. The power of CLASlite rests in its unique ability to convert seemingly green “carpets” of dense tropical forest cover found in
> basic satellite images into highly detailed maps that can be readily searched for deforestation, logging and other forest dis turbance
> events. Both deforestation and secondary forest regrowth can be tracked by a user of CLASlite (Carnegie Institution for Science 2015).
> 53 Ipsos Perú is a research organisation that aims to address the needs of the market and society. It operates through four busi ness
> units: marketing, advertising research, loyalty and public af fairs (Ipsos Perú 2015).
> 54 Proética is a non -profit organisation dedicated primarily to analysing, identifying and exposing corruption (Proética 2015).
> 55 The institute is a Peruvian non -profit private association that conducts research intended to educate the public on national issues, with
> emphasis on quantitative aspects (Instituto Cuánto 2015).
> 56 The Young Lives is a longitudinal study that allows for an understanding of the consequences of poverty for children from an early age.
> The study has been condu cted in Peru, India, Ethiopia and Vietnam .

59 

inequity, generation of equality of opportunities, and greater state presence and efficiency in rural areas, (ii) economic growth with stability, (iii) improvement of productivity and competitiveness of the economy and (iv) improvement in the quality of public spending through results-based budgeting. To achieve these objectives, the INEI has been identified as a key actor because it is necessary to have quality statistical data that align with the particular needs of the country. 

## Data Availability for Monitoring Post-2015 

General Availability of Data 

As mentioned, activities carried out under the national statistical system include the collection and analysis of data. The National Census of Population and Housing has not had a fixed interval, with its conduction varying at intervals between 11 and 18 years, though since the approval of the Code of Good Statistical Practices, it is planned for 10-year intervals (INEI 2014g). Surveys are conducted quarterly or annually on diverse issues, such as health, education, employment and strategies for public policy. Administrative data are collected from the registries of government institutions according to their own frequencies of data collection. 

In general, data collection and updating by different government institutions occurs at regular intervals. Also, the majority of databases are accessible by the general public. Therefore, data users do not experience problems related to data availability. However, depending on the issue, information can be more or less complete. For example, the National Household Survey provides trustworthy information on issues including income, education and employment, but for issues related to governance it is still necessary to consult external sources. 

Data Availability for Selected Targets and Indicators 

In general, the calculation of indicators related to sustainable development can be accomplished without any problem when using statistical data from official sources. In the specific case of the candidate post-2015 targets and indicators examined under this study, the sufficiency of data depends on the goal area. For example, data related to poverty, education and employment are easily obtained given that, for indicator calculation, data at the individual and household level are typically needed. The main source for data under these areas is the National Household Survey. The information is trustworthy and constantly updated, with data being published in quarterly and annual versions. The same level of data availability is not observed in calculating indicators related to energy, the environment or global partnership. This is due to the fact that such data need to be collected in aggregated form or specific resources are needed for additional data collection. 

According to the data-mapping exercise under this study, the national statistical system already calculates 18 of the 45 examined global indicators and 14 other indicators can be easily calculated from already available data. For the remaining indicators, some can be calculated by other means, such as through requesting information from the INEI (one indicator) or using non-official databases from international organisations (five indicators). Data exist for four other indicators, but the collection period or publication interval are not fixed. Finally, five indicators cannot be measured and new data will need to be collected. Table 9 presents a summary of the data availability for the calculation of candidate post-2015 global indicators examined under this study. Notably, two indicators are not particularly relevant for Peru, hence the lack of available data is not a problem. 60 

Table  9. Data availability for measuring  prog ress against global targets and  indicators 

Goal 

area 

Indicators  Indicator 

available 

Calculation 

using  existing 

data sources 

possible 57 

Custom 

tabulation 

by  INEI 58 

Available 

but not for 

the baseline 

year 59 

Available 

from non -

official data 

sources 

Data 

to be 

collected 

End  poverty 

Global  5 2 3

National  4 4

Ensure quality e ducation  for all 

Global  5 3 2

National  10  3 4 3

Create jobs, sustainable livelihoods and inc lusive growth  for all 

Global  7 5 2

National  4 1 2 1

Ensure sustainable e nergy and  develop  infrastructure  for all 

Global  8 2 2 1 2 1

National  9 8 1

Ensure a sustainable, health and resilient e nvironment  for all 

Global  5 3 1 1

National  9 3 2 1 1 1 1

Establish open, accountable, inclusive and  effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive 

society 

Global  9 2 3 2 1 1

National  17  5 3 4 3 2

Establish a g lobal  partnership for sustainable development 

Global  6 1 1 2 260 

National  0

Total 

Global  45  18  14 1 2 5 5

National  53 24 11 5 7 3 3

Table 10 shows the indicators for which data need to be collected. Data for the first indicator, the number of hours per day households have access to electricity on average, could be collected with the National Household Survey, which already contains information about  type s of lighting  and energy in household s. The 

second indicator,  the  share of large tax unit taxpa yers using integrated reporting, could be published in an 

annual report or updated in the statistics of the  National Superintendency of Public Registries . Data for t he 

third indicator, the  average time between filing a case and receiving a verdict , could be  collected by 

consult ing  lawyers in the country or  could be  registered in the administrative  data  of the Ministry of Justice 

and Human Rights. However , there is no national survey  with  which  such data  could be  collected  at this time. 

Although  data for  two of the indicators  under the goal area on  global partnership cannot  currently  be collected 

in Peru , these  indicators  do not seem relevant since  the country  does not trade or ha ve  debt  in  significant 

proportions with low -income countries .      

> 57 Refers to instances when public use microdata files or other data sources are publicly accessible but additional efforts are needed to
> calculate the indicator.
> 58 Refers to instances when data exist but a public use microdata file is not available and so a custom tabulation request to the INEI is
> required.
> 59 Refers to data being available but not for the baseline year; the indicator is either calculated occasionally or the time needed for publishing the database is more than two years (or publication is occasional).
> 60 Given that Peru does not trade or have debt in significant proportions with low -income countries, indicators relating to low -income
> countries are not included in this table.

61 

Data Sources 

Table 11 presents  key potential  data  sources  in 

Peru  identified  as relevant  across goal areas. 

Annex 2  elaborates on  all  potential sources in Peru, 

including  potential databases  that are  publicly 

accessible and deemed to be relevant . The 

principal  data  sources  used  to  calculate  indicators 

in  Peru  are the  National Household Survey ,

Demographic and Health  Survey  and  National 

Census of Population and  Housing . The  National 

Household Survey  is  conducted  quarterly  for certain 

modules and annually  provid es  data for  indicators 

on  poverty, education, employment,  governance 

and infrastructure. Give n its flexibility and coverage 

of  different  issues , it is the  most used  survey  for 

research and  monitoring  of public polic ies . The 

second most used data  source  is the  Demographic 

and Health Survey , which  gather s data  on an 

annual  basis  and focuses on  the  health of children 

under  five  years of age and women between the 

ages 15 and 49. Finally, the  National  Census  of 

Population and Housing  is 

useful for the calculation of poverty and education indicators for the whole population as well as at the district, province and regional levels. Notably, this data source is used as a sampling frame for the National Household Survey. Other sources that are relevant for some goal areas include: (i) the National School Census for education, (ii) the National Energy Balance report for energy and (iii) the Peruvian Agency of 

Table 10 . Global targets and indicators for which data need to be collected 

Target  Indicator 

Ensure sustainable  energy and develop infrastructure for a ll 

Ensure access to energy and improve efficiency and sustainability of energy supply, including renewable energy 

# of hours per day households have access to electricity on average 

Establish a sustainable, healthy  and resilient environment for a ll 

Publish and use economic, social and environmental accounts in all governments and companies 

Share of large tax unit taxpayers using integrated reporting 

Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions,  rule of law and a peaceful and 

inclusive society 

Monitor and end discrimination and inequalities in public service delivery, the rule of law, access to justice and participation in political and economic life on the basis of social status 

Average time between filing a case and receiving a verdict 

Establish a global partnership for sustainable development 

Create an enabling environment for sustainable development 

Low-income country debt forgiveness or reduction (% of GDP) 

Share of trade in goods and services from low-income countries under duty-free, quota-free market access 

Table 1 1. Key potential sources for monitoring 

the post -2015 agenda in Peru 

Source  Strategy 

National Census of Population and Housing – INEI 

 Education 

 Poverty 

 Environment 

National Household Survey – INEI 

 Poverty 

 Education 

 Employment and inclusive growth 

 Governance 

 Energy and infrastructure 

Demographic and Health Survey – INEI 

 Poverty 

 Governance 

National School Census – Ministry of Education 

 Education 

National Energy 

Balance – Ministry of Energy and Mining 

 Energy and infrastructure 

Peruvian Agency of International Cooperation 

 Global partnership 62 

International Cooperation for global partnership. These sources are quite relevant for indicators under these goal areas. 

Baseline for Post-2015 

As shown in Table 9, the majority of indicators can be calculated with 2010 as the baseline year because most data sources have information for that year. However, there are some exceptions. Table 12 shows the indicators for which data are available but not for 2010. 

Table  12 . Indicators  for which data are  not available for 2010 

Goal  Indicator  Reason 

Establish open, 

accountable, 

inclusive and 

effective 

institutions, rule 

of law and a 

peaceful and 

inclusive society 

Violent death per 100,000 

Data for the indicator are only available for the years 2011 and 2013. The INEI created a database in 2014 using surveys oriented towards the heads of police stations. It is undetermined whether there will be more data on this issue. 

Proportion of adults with a basic legal identity document 

The question if someone has a national identification card was added in 2012 in the National Household Surveys, which explains why the indicator can only be calculated since that year. 

## Quality of Data for Measuring Progress on Post-2015 in Peru 

Quality of Statistical Data in Peru 

Over the last few years in particular, quality and timely statistical data have been in demand in Peru. The INEI plays a strategic role in the formulation of public policies and decision making. For this reason, entities in the national statistical system have the responsibility to boost and maintain the credibility of their data. As mentioned, the Code of Good Statistical Practices was approved in 2012. It emphasises the importance of credibility of information, for which the following four characteristics are necessary: (i) quality, coverage and timeliness of adequate data, (ii) cost-effective statistical operations, (iii) adequately processed information for decision making and (iv) transparent statistical processes (INEI 2014g). Additionally, the code established the criteria presented in Table 13 to determine the quality of data. 

Table 13 . Data  quality  assessment framework  of  Peru 

Code of Good 

Statistical 

Practices 

Commitment to the user 

1. Relevance 

2. Impartiality and objectivity 

3. Professional independence 

4. Transparency, equity and opportunity 

Commitment to efficiency  1. Proper use of sources of information 

2. Coordination 

Commitment to quality 

1. Robust methodology 

2. Coherence and comparison 

3. Confidentiality 

> Source: INEI (2014g).

Another key step in the plan to increase trust in Peruvian statistics was the elaboration of the PENDES. In 2002, Peru began annually planning statistical production at the national level and the importance of such planning has become even more evident over time. The first PENDES was developed for the 2008 –12 63 

period. Table 14 synthesises conclusions about the strengths and weaknesses of national statistical system that were made when the plan ended in 2012. These conclusions were taken into account to elaborate the PENDES for the 2013 –17 period. 

Given lessons learned, the latest PENDES intends to strengthen the national statistical system by identifying 

a priori priority data demands, 61 reaching a consensus among relevant users and producers on statistical information to be collected and maintaining international commitments that have been made. 62 It recognises that the national statistical system should have: (i) consistency tests that guarantee standards between concepts and contents of the plan, (ii) an evaluation system that not only registers statistical activities but also provides feedback to all entities and (iii) a regime of incentives and correctives for good and bad practices. The plan was scheduled to be revised again in 2015 and by 2017 it is expected to have achieved its objectives, which will increase trust in the national statistical system. 

Table  14 . Conclusions  from  PENDES 2008 –2012 

Strengths  Weaknesses 

 Political decision to establish the PENDES was 

seen as a wise decision 

 The PENDES increased the effective ness of 

administration by identif ying data needs for 

strategic objectives and design ing instruments to 

collect statistical data 

 The PENDES increased the quantity of 

trustworthy, timely and quality data in many 

ministries 

 The national statistical system was strengthened 

 The System of Programming and Multiannual 

Evaluation became more flexible 

 Data quality did not improve at all political -

administrative levels 

 Insuf ficient assignment of economic resources 

linked to the lack of inter -sectoral consensus on 

statistical activit ies as a key input in decision 

making 

 Insu ffi cient differentia tion between strategies and 

activities 

 Lack of monitoring and auditing of 

accomplishments 

 Not all sectors were included in the evaluation 

and regional and local governments were missing 

> Source: INEI (2013b).

## Data Quality Assessment Framework 

The data quality assessment framework used by research teams under the Post-2015 Data Test is found in Annex 3. The framework was elaborated using as its basis the Generic National Quality Assurance Framework Template (Expert Group on NQAF 2012), the European Statistics Code of Practice (ESSC 2011), the  International Monetary Fund ’s D ata Quality Assessment Framework (IMF 2006) and the Code of Good Practice in Statistics for Latin America and the Caribbean (Working Group on Capacity Building 2011). Additionally, the Peru research team consulted the Code of Good Statistical Practices for Peru (INEI 2014g). The five main criteria for examining data quality are: 

1. Relevance 

2. Accuracy and reliability 

3. Timeliness and punctuality 

4. Accessibility and clarity   

> 61 Not all sectors have a PESEM or clear budget objectives, hence identifying statistical priorities is difficult in some cases.
> 62 International agreements include the global agreements of the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century, UN, Food
> and Agriculture Organization of the UN, UN Children’s Fund, UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, O rganización para la Excelencia de la Salud, and the Andean Community, among others. The PENDES promotes normalisation and standardisation activities for the improvement in data quality through the implementation of the Code of Good Statistical Practices (INEI 2013b).

64 

5. Coherence and comparability 

The quality of available data for the candidate targets and indicators under each goal area was assessed according to these criteria. Scores for every goal area were assigned, with the score for each criterion ranging from 1 to 5, where 5 indicates that data for the goal area meet all criteria sub-components, 3 indicates that the data meet more than half of the criteria sub-components, 2 indicates that at least some sub-components were met and 1 indicates that no data meet the criteria. 

Applying the Data Quality Assessment Framework 

For the assessment of data, two researchers of the Peru research team independently completed the same data quality assessment. Then they compared results and came to a consensus with a final score per criterion for each goal area. The assessment was completed in the following way: the researchers systematically examined every data source identified through the data-mapping exercise (see Table 11). Afterwards, they assigned a point for every sub-component of the five criteria for each goal area. The researchers made use of all available technical documents and followed the general framework outlined in Annex 3. Principal strategies to assess the quality of data for every indicator according to the sub-components of the five criteria are presented in Table 15. 

Table 15 . Principal strateg ies  for data quality assessment  by  criterion 

Criteri on  Strategy 

Relevance  Verify that each sub-component is a priority in the PENDES. 

Accuracy and reliability 

Use the methodological documents of every data source (if available) and examine whether data are systematically collected and representative. Estimate indicators when metadata are available and corroborate the values. 

Timeliness and punctuality 

Consult a diverse group of researchers about their experiences with data sources and consult the INEI for official data publication dates. Compare responses. 

Accessibility and clarity 

Verify availability of data and microdata. When necessary, request clarification from responsible entity (not all entities have established consultation systems). 

Coherence and comparability 

Compare official sources with international sources and national non-official sources when available. Classify any methodological changes (such as those to the sample, collection of data, parameters) and identify impact on data quality. 

Limitations of the Data Quality Assessment 

Despite being systematic, researchers encountered serious limitations for the assessment of data quality that made it impossible to comprehensively assess all data sources. Researchers made use of publicly available methodological documents, but not all data sources have such documents. While the INEI publishes data in documents complete with information about sampling, data collection, statistical production, error estimation and other details, other entities’ documents are not so clear on these points, particularly when data are coming from administrative registries. 

Regarding the data quality assessment framework, criteria could not be appropriately scored in some cases. For instance, some sub-components could have obtained a score of 3.5 or 4.4, but either way a score of 4 had to be registered. Also, due to the fact that the maximum score obtainable, 5, could only be acquired if the data source meets all of the sub-components, a source that meets all but one can only obtain a 4. 

Finally, there were data that did not adjust well to the criteria, mostly those that were administrative in nature. Also, some data concerned different aspects of the same issue and the following generally occurred: if the 65 

data source met one sub-component, almost all criteria gained scores of 1, but if the data source did not meet the criteria, it obtained scores of 0 given that data quality assessment was not possible. Notably, if a data source had an associated methodological document that backed it up, many criteria received scores of 1. If the source did not have an associated technical document, all criteria received scores of 0. Therefore, many of the sub-components did not have different functions. 

Results of the Data Quality Assessment 

As mentioned, data for indicators under the goal areas on poverty, education and employment are collected and produced by the INEI, so they follow quality standards defined in the Code of Good Statistical Practices of Peru (INEI 2014g). The INEI has methodological documents, set collection periods and fixed publication intervals. Also, the National Household Survey and Demographic and Health Survey collect data in line with data demand (INE 2013b). In general, these data sources obtain high scores according to the data quality assessment framework. 

Still, Peru faces great challenges and needs to improve data quality, particularly for the goals areas of environment, governance and global partnership. This is due to the fact that most of the indicators under these goal areas can only be tracked with administrative data from ministries with statistics offices other than the INEI. As mentioned, it has been difficult to standardise data quality at all government levels. Data producers with relatively greater experience with data have larger budgets allocated for data collection, while others – mostly new ministries such as the Ministry of Environment – do not have sufficient budgets or understand the importance of statistics in decision-making processes and public life in general. 

In other cases, such as the goal area on energy, relevant data are obtained from international sources, such as the Latin American Energy Organization, the information of which is not publicly accessible, making data quality difficult to evaluate. In the case of the goal area on global partnership, data are available but disaggregated at the project level, making indicators difficult to calculate and data complicated to evaluate. 

Table 16 provides the overall results of the data quality assessment for Peru. 66 

Table  16. Results  of the data quality assessment 

Goal  area  Relevance  Accuracy and 

reliability 

Timeliness and 

punctuality 

Accessibility 

and clarity 

Coherence and 

comparability 

End p overty 

5 4 4 4 4

Ensure quality e ducation  for all 

5 4 4 4 4

Create jobs,  sustainable livelihoods and inclusive growth for all 

5 5 4 3 3

Ensure sustainable e nergy and  develop i nfrastructure  for all 

3 4 2 2 4

Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient e nvironment  for all 

4 3 3 2 2

Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive society 

3 2 3 2 2

Establish a g lobal  partnership  for sustainable development 

3 2 4 2 2

Notably, the criterion with the highest scores is relevance. This result is due to the development of the PENDES, in which many of the proposed post-2015 indicators are considered priorities or relevant for decision making in certain sectors (INEI 2013b). Accessibility and clarity received the lowest scores due to the lack of access to metadata for reported information by entities other than the INEI. 63  

> 63 If metadata were not available, indicators could not be directly calculated. If additionally there were no associated methodological documents, the data source obtained a score of 0.

67 

# Political Economy of the Data Revolution 

## Legal Reforms 

Over time, the collection of data for social indicators in Peru has changed due to various factors including laws, political pressure, budgets, technical difficulties and limitations, and methodological innovations. The INEI has a rich history of formulating strategies to collect data and produce statistics for social indicators. Its strategies and practices have improved particularly since 2000, a period marked by two legal reforms, the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information (Law No. 27806) ( Congress  of the Republic  of Peru 

2003 ) and Law of  Public Sector  Budget  (N° 28411)  that  led  to the adoption of  result s-based  budgeting 

(Congress of the Republic of Peru  2004). 

Transparency and Access to Information 

The antecedents of the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information are Supreme Decree No. 018-2001-PCM from the Council of Ministers and Emergency Decree No. 035-2001. These two decrees promulgated during the transitional government period in 2001 demonstrate the government’s intentions on 

transparency and public access to information and provide guidelines for procedures to follow in order to access information. The basis of these two decrees is the Political Constitution of Peru of 1993, which alludes to the right to “request the information that one requires (without stating the motive), and receive it from whichever public entity, within the legal time period, with the cost of the request. This is with exception to information that violates privacy and information that is explicitly excluded by the law or for reasons of national security ” (Article 2, Incise 5, Political Constitution of Peru [Congress of the Republic of Peru 1993], cited by Fernández 2013, 1). 

In 2002, the government of Alejandro Toledo, which succeeded the transitional government, promulgated the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information, which entered into force in January 2003. According to Article 1, the law “has as its purpose to promote the transparency of State acts and regulate the fundamental right of access to information ” (Congress  of the Republic  of Peru  2003 ).  It  presumes that 

information administered by the  government  is of public  nature . Therefore, the law in question oblige s all 

entities of public administration to publish information  on  their respective websites or in  widely circulated 

journals . Public  entities  are  also  obliged to provide information to every citizen  who  requests it. 

According to Article 6, the public entities responsible for complying with the law are the central government (executive, legislative and judicial branches), regional governments, local governments (provinces and districts) and “private entities that provide public services or exercise administrative functions ” (Congress  of 

the Repu blic  of Peru  2003 ). I nformation  that is  published or requested  includes  general information,  budget s,

investments in public projects,  general information about  staff, contracts and acquisitions, and fiscal 

information. The only type of information that  cannot be requested is that which upon publication 

compromises a government decision ( such as  confidential information of public, bank, fiscal, commercial, 

industrial, technological or  stock -market character)  and  that which is  related to national security  or personal 

privacy of a public employee  (e.g.,  personal health) .

The process to access information is very simple with minimal costs related to the reproduction costs of information. The time period within which the public entity must provide the requested information is seven 68 

business days. If the entity has not responded, the requester may appeal. After 10 more business days, if the information has not been provided, a lawsuit may be filed. 

Different critiques have arisen about information-related practices within the government. Apparently many employees still do not share information for fear of being sanctioned by their superiors (Fernández 2013) and secrecy continues to be the norm, with access to information being the exception (Castro Leyva n.d., cited by Torres  Manrique  2013). In 2010, the  Peruvian Press Council  accused the Congress of not respecting the  Law 

of Transparency and Access to Public Information , having omitted since 2007 important information on its 

website  “that would permit an  adequate fiscalization of spending and actions ” (Perú21  2010). Additionally, 

when a public entity does not provide  information  requested  by a citizen, the judicial process is long, 

expensive and tedious,  there is a  need  for  an autonomous  specialise d authority  that  effectively  resolves 

conflicts between entities and requesters  (Alva 2012) . According to  the  Office of the  Ombudsman , 66  percent 

of regional governments used the standard transparency portal  in 2012  (IPYS 2012) . More than  10  years 

after  its promulgation, Cecilia Blondet summed up the impact  of the Law of Transparency and Access to 

Public Information by saying that  it has helped citizens  acquire  information for personal and particular benefit 

(with respect to topics of retirement and pens ions, for example ), but in terms of evaluation or political action ,

there are still problems and difficult ies  in access  (IPYS 2012) .

Results-Based Budgeting 

Since 2004, the adoption of results-based budgeting 64 in Peru meant a change with respect to the administration of the public budget, with the objective being to improve the efficiency and equity of social projects and programmes in reducing poverty and exclusion. This initiative stems from the principle that budget allocations are not only for government institutions and they should be directed to the citizens who require and value social projects and programmes. Put another way, results-based budgeting intends to improve the quality of public services that citizens receive by extending the government’s role past simply verifying whether or not public entities spent their budget allocations. Results-based budgeting anticipates the central problems that the Peruvian population will face and the results of public entiti es’ actions and interventions oriented towards development and research. It was stipulated that every action and intervention should generate a product and that every product should be oriented towards a goal with a final result. Indicators were established for the anticipated results to track the progress of the Peruvian population in all areas. Figure 3 provides an overview of the strategic programmes that were designed.  

> 64 The information about results-based budgeting was found on the website of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. For more information about the topic, see MEF (2015a; n.d.).

69 

Figure 3. Strategic programmes designed under results-based budgeting 

At the same time, specific targets were established for every result (e.g., to reduce the prevalence of malnutrition in children under 5 from 25 percent in 2008 to 16 percent for 2011). Additionally, for each of the strategic programmes, proposals were designed to facilitate and standardise the actions and interventions oriented towards achieving the required products and results. Results-based budgeting prioritises addressing 70 

segments of the Peruvian population that are in the most urgent social conditions, such as rural populations and those located in dispersed areas (especially centres populated by less than 50 households), which have a greater tendency to experience the stagnation of poverty. 

The initial results of the initiative were a reduction in chronic infant malnutrition in children under five from 23.4% in 2007 to 20% in 2009. Outcomes have improved for the growth and development of children. Reading comprehension of children until Cycle II has also improved from 14% in 2007 to 21% in 2009 (Torres 2011, 13). Apart from such results, the initiative led to many changes and diverse opinions. Former minister of Economy and Finance Luis Miguel Castilla Rubio said that results-based budgeting is an important innovation in public administration and enables better allocation of government resources ( Andina  2012).  He 

also stated that the budget  for social programs  tripled  over the  last  decade  (2002  – 2012)  while the results  in 

social indicators  did not  improve , though  this tende ncy  is now  being reverted ( Perú21  2012). 

Cristhiam León (2011) suggested that results-based budgeting should be renamed “Budget System Oriented to Results. ” With this formality, the government would be opting for an orientation towards results that is not only related to the budget, but also “administrative, provision, human resources systems, etc. ” He argued that this budget system should be the subject of discussion in the public and private sectors and the results of discussions should be disseminated online so that information does not stay in meeting rooms and the exchange of information is not a closed dialogue between specialists. He critiqued the slowness with which results-based budgeting is being implemented, as there have been many efforts since the 1980s and advancements (definition of objectives, measurement of indicators, improvement in processes, information about results, etc.), but the capacity for evaluation remains insufficient (weakness of information systems, little utility of the control mechanisms, scarce use of evaluation reports, etc.). According to León, the weakness of results-based budgeting lies more in the evaluation process rather than the design of strategies and programmes. Before its adoption, there were warnings about the risk that the orientation towards results could be accompanied by a modification of data and hiding of budget quotes if strategies are not accompanied by an effective system of self-evaluation (Zapico and Mayne 1995). 

On the other hand, the Peruvian Foreign Trade Association, a private sector labour union, affirmed that results-based budgeting fails in corresponding between budget allocations and final results, a consequence of poor monitoring that measures allocated resources in the following fiscal year. According to the association: “Given that pertinent information about beneficiary necessities is not collected, there are people that, despite having overcome poverty, are not able to insert themselves in the market, and for that reason, continue participating in said programmes, which is the reason why t he “ leakage ” is not necessarily due to new beneficiaries that should not be there ” (Perú21  2013 a).

An article in El Comercio 65 on serious deceleration in the reduction of malnutrition since 2012 affirmed that there is poor administration of results-based budgeting and declared it to have “stopped giving results ” (El 

Comercio  2014b ).  The article critique d the methodology of  results -based budgeting , the  programme s of 

which  intend to  address  the  symptoms  of poverty ( e.g. , malnutrition) without  directly fighting  what causes 

poverty.  It  note d that  “maybe  it is  time to delve into the program me s that empower families to produce and 

pull themselves out of poverty by themselves, like the successful  ‘Sierra Empre ndedora  (Haku Wiñay )’66  from      

> 65 El Comercio is a Peruvian newspaper with an average daily circulation of 100,000 copies (KPMG 2014). Founded in 1839, it is the
> second olde st and most important newspaper in the country.
> 66 Since 2009, “Mi Chacra Emprendedora (Haku Wiñay)” has promoted the development of productive capacities and rural enterprises in
> rural households in extreme poverty that contribute to the generation of inco me and income diversification as well as improving food
> security. The programme involves the provision of training, technical assistance and assets for use and direct benefit of the population in
> the process of inclusion. Specifically, it provides technica l assistance to: (i) strengthen and consolidate family production systems, (ii)
> improve health and housing, (iii) promote inclusive rural businesses and (iv) promote financial capabilities (FONCODES 2014).

71 

Foncodes, instead of continuing to concentrate on the programs that simply try to combat the results of poverty ” (El Comercio  2014b ).

Furthermore, the largest budget allocations on education and health has not translated into better quality according to the indicators, although greater coverage measured by enrolment in education and expansion of health care has been achieved (Alvarado and Morón 2011). According to Vice Minister of Property of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance Carlos Oliva, Peru faces many social challenges, but the important part is that the country has advanced in the right direction since results-based budgeting was adopted: “There are increasingly more entities that define not only the costs they require for activities but also that clearly determine the products they will provide to the population, whether in number of improved schools, kilometres of constructed highways or number of children with completed vaccinations, among others ” (Oliva 2014). 

## Changes to Data Collection Processes 

While the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information and results-based budgeting are important processes that guide the government towards more transparency and efficiency, in order to understand the collection of data and production of statistics for social indicators, it is necessary to observe the evolution of INEI practices over many years, especially in the past few years. The Peru research team interviewed the Executive Director of Surveys and Census of the INEI, who provided the details for the narrative that follows. 

Since its inception, the INEI has always had a central headquarters with decentralised offices located in every department in Peru. The advantage of these departmental offices – being deconcentrated offices, not decentralised offices – is that they do not depend on the regional government, but rather the central headquarters in such a way that they all use the same methodology and standardised processes. With censuses and surveys, it is convenient to have all entities aligned with the same methodology, instructions and interpretations. 

In the 1990s, before the focus on decentralisation, there was already some talk about regional politics and the need to collect data at the regional level. Despite having certain deconcentrated offices, the INEI did not have a single survey that collected data at the regional or departmental level at that time, despite demand from data users. In 2001, the National Household Survey was designed to annually supply regional information (quarterly at the territorial level, monthly at the national urban-rural level). In 2007, the public sector and especially the health sector voiced the need for a Demographic and Health Survey at the departmental level that incorporated some of the standards of results-based budgeting. 

Over the last 10 or 15 years, many of the changes in the methodology and data collection for social indicators of the INEI have been incentivised by external institutions. In 2000, the World Bank evaluated the National Household Survey conducted by the INEI. At the time, the INEI only measured the conditions of life and poverty and the methodology was identical to that used by the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, the only difference being that the INEI measured the national poverty line by expenditure rather than earnings. This strategy, which has been in use since the 1980s, was recommended by the World Bank and it seems that differentiating itself from the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean in this respect was the correct decision. Another methodological principle followed by the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean that has generated inconsistencies is the establishment of the reference population from the percentile whose expenditure, when translated into calories, is the same as the minimum level of nutritional requirement. This principle caused problems for the measurement of poverty by the INEI until approximately 2000. In 2001, the problem was identified and corrected. 72 

At the end of the 1990s and beginning of the 2000s), under the framework of the Programme for the Improvement of Surveys and Measurement of Living Conditions in Latin America and the Caribbean, 67 the INEI received support from the best Latin American specialists to develop new questionnaires and improve the processes and measurement of the National Household Survey. Notably, specialists from the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean supervised the sample design. As part of these reforms, the decentralisation of activities towards regional offices was incentivised and quarterly surveys were stopped so that there would be enough funding for an annual survey on living conditions with data disaggregated by department (this was reversed by the succeeding administration in 2004). In 2001, additionally, charges to access databases were eliminated in line with conceiving statistics as a public good that should be under an open access arrangement that includes an online portal. In order for databases to be properly interpreted, training workshops on the management of National Household Survey database were organised. 

The INEI failed to publish annual statistics on poverty between 2004 and 2007, which caused a reduction of public confidence and trust in the institution. In 2007, the INEI, in agreement with a suggestion from the World Bank, began to receive support from an external Advisory Committee to improve the methodology and data collection in surveys that measure poverty (Vakis and Schmidt 2010). The Advisory Committee was comprised of “public organisation experts on poverty (like the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and the Central Bank), the Peruvian academia (Universidad Católica, Universidad del Pacífico, Grupo de Análisis para el Desarrollo, and the Universidad de San Martín), and international organisations (like the Institut de Recherché pour le Développement, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, and the World Bank) ” (Vakis and Schmidt 2010, 1). The principal objectives of the Advisory Committee included creating a census that would produce poverty estimations in Peru that were comparable across time, and supervising the work of a technical inter-institutional group (comprising the INEI, World Bank and others) responsible for implementing its recommendations (Vakis and Schmidt 2010). 

Based on the Advisory Committee’s experience over 2007-2009, certain lessons were learned. First of all, the committee worked with short- and long-term objectives. In the short term, an appropriate methodology to measure poverty was proposed so that estimations were comparable over time. In the long term, the committee intended to improve “the pending matters in a larger process to measure well-being (among others, an update of calorie requirements and demographic changes resulting from the new census) ” (Vakis and Schmidt 2010, 3). Importantly: 

They emphasised transparency from the beginning, not only with the public but also between the Committee and INEI. They advanced systematic efforts of diffusion about the Advisory Committee’s 

work, among others, through the dissemination of data, the presentation of programmes and methodological summaries on the INEI’s website. This permitted the interested part ies to replicate the processes and verify the results. With it, trust in the [Advisory Committee] and work of the INEI increased and strong interest was gained through the media and the acceptance of results. . . The relationship with the media was key to transcend the emphasis on the credibility of the numbers and focus on the discussion of the implications of policy, tendencies, and projections (Vakis and Schmidt 2010, 3). 

As a result of the Advisory Committee’s experience, more precise measurement of poverty was achieved. Estimations are more transparent and reliable (any data user can replicate the processes to verify the   

> 67 The programme has been implemented by the World Bank, Inter -American Development Bank and UN Economic Commission for Latin
> America and the Caribbean since 1996. In Peru, the INEI was provided with technical assistance and financial support.

73 

veracity of resulting statistics), the credibility of information provided by the INEI has improved and the INEI is more visible due to a new relationship with the media (Vakis and Schmidt 2010). In 2007, since most data users are researchers, the decision was made to listen to their recommendations in order to see what type of needs they had in terms of the data that the INEI produces. Their recommendations have contributed to the improvement of data quality. 

By 2011, advancements had led to the development of surveys with disaggregated data available at the provincial level. The household surveys conducted by the INEI no longer use paper – data are collected with tablets, which considerably shortens the time necessary to process data. The use of information and communications technologies allows for information collected in the field to be released in real time to a server that permits access to certain users, such as ministries. This improves measurement because users can report problems with information during the fieldwork phase of the data collection process and the INEI can correct them before publishing a definitive set of statistics. Therefore, there is currently a form of feedback between the INEI and data users during the statistical production process, with the finalised statistics being correct thanks to the shared work of the INEI and data users. Another technology that is currently used for data collection is GPS. Surveyors carry one with them when visiting households, which enables fieldwork supervision and mapping households using different social indicators. 

## Limitations on Data Collection in Peru 

In the 1980s and 1990s, the surveyed population did not recognise the INEI as a core government institution responsible for data collection and the production of national-level statistics. The Executive Director of Surveys and Census confirms the INEI’s invisibility during these decades. The visibility level of the institution is important for attaining legitimacy within households. Notably, it generally did not provide information to those surveyed. This was a major problem because it increased the number of no responses. For this reason, the INEI ran a communications campaign with the objective of increasing its recognition as the government institution in charge of the census in Peru. Another strategy that helped improve the visibility of the INEI was working since 2001 on increasing the transparency of databases in line with the Law of Transparency and Access to Public Information and training data users to work with databases. 

Currently, data collection and access to households is limited, not entirely due to the level of visibility of the INEI as citizen s’ insecurity (at least in poorer districts) plays a role. In some areas, mistrust of the government negatively affects the entities that collect statistical data. The INEI, recognised as a core government institution, is often regarded with disapproval, which negatively predisposes the population and increases the number of no responses. However, the Executive Director of Surveys and Census noted that this is a problem not only in Peru, but also other Latin American countries, with the emblematic case being Argentina. 

Furthermore, there are deficiencies in the decentralisation process with respect to statistical data. Relative to Lima, the poorest departments experience a comparative delay in the processing of such data. Regardless, statistical data should serve to further and better guide the policies of regional governments. In the words of the Executive Director of Surveys and Census: “If not, there would be new plazas, buildings or bridges not where they should be, but rather where the politicians think to install them on a whim. ”

Given the current situation of data collection and processing, the Peru research team believes that the INEI is responsible for managing too much data. As a consequence of the results-based budgeting approach, there was a considerable increase in the use of specialised surveys after 2008, all of which have been financed by the government. The government requires data from ministries for indicators on all sectors (education, health, labour, etc.), but the law states that the INEI is responsible for collecting sectoral data, which obliges the institution to undertake approximately 20 –25 surveys annually. Being the only government institution 74 

responsible for specialised data collection, the INEI has too many surveys and too many sectors to serve effectively. 

In order to address this situation, the INEI is working towards the standardisation of an information registry. For example, how are crimes in Peru registered? They are recorded in notebooks and papers at the country’s 

police stations in different ways. There is no standardised process for all police stations to follow to register crimes in a simple way. Moreover, there is no system that addresses corruption or the distortion of registration. The lack of such a process and system influences the veracity of national statistics because administrative data are the primary material with which authorities work to produce statistics in Peru. It is also important to digitalise the information registry, which would greatly simplify data collection and statistical production at the national, regional and province levels across public entities and thus alleviate the responsibilities of the INEI. 75 

# Conclusion 

This report applied a data quality assessment framework to test the state of data in Peru against candidate post-2015 targets and indicators. Following discussions with stakeholders, the Peru research team also developed national targets and indicators under selected goal areas that could measure progress on the post-2015 agenda in the country. The report’s conclusions are as follows. 

 The framework used in this study proved to be a great tool that can systematise procedures to generate a set of national targets and indicators under each of the selected goal areas. The steps detailed in the 

Methodology and Implementation Guide facilitated the identification and evaluation of datasets to measure each of the proposed indicators as well as the identification of adequate baseline years for these indicators. The framework also helped identify which indicators had data that could be disaggregated to inform specific public policies. In this study, only seven goal areas were evaluated, but the guide could be used to evaluate any goal, target or indicator proposed for post-2015. 

 In terms of the role that has to be played by a national statistical system in the post-2015 period, a decentralised national statistical system, like that in Peru, has deficiencies with regard to data quality. Poor regions experience significant difficulties in gathering and reporting data and information, given that they do not necessarily have skilled human resources. Therefore, it is necessary for the INEI to work together with decentralised offices at different levels of government – district and province in particular –

according to standardised procedures in order to generate good quality data. 

 The INEI did not have adequate capacity in terms of personnel and infrastructure for effective data collection and statistical production. The government’s demand for data posed a major challenge to the INEI. This has to be taken into account when designing the SDG monitoring system. It is necessary to increase the budget and build the capacity of the INEI to meet the demand for data and statistics in upcoming years. 

 With regard to the development of indicators for the post-2015 agenda, a challenge for national statistical systems is to first measure the MDG indicators, since it has not been possible to measure them using existing datasets in many cases. Subsequently, it is necessary to include new questions in censuses and surveys in order to be able to measure the indicators proposed in country studies and validated by stakeholders in each country. 

 Governments must develop SDG monitoring systems in order to track progress on the targets under each SDG. It is necessary for all government institutions to embrace the finalised indicators and incorporate them as part of their agendas. 

 With regard to regional interests, the post-2015 agenda provides a chance for the Latin American region to pay greater attention to inequality within each country. Although poverty rates have decreased in recent years in almost all countries in the region, gaps between different groups (e.g., indigenous and non-indigenous peoples) have worsened over time. Prioritising disaggregated data for SDG indicators at the national level will help reduce inequality within countries. 

 The post-2015 agenda’s timeline for achieving results is 2030. An agreement among all political parties in each country is required since the SDGs will be part of the national agenda for more than one government ’s term. 76 

# References 

Acemoglu, Daron , and James Robinson.  2010.  “The Role of 

Institutions in Growth and Development. ” Review of 

Economics and Institutions  1 (2): 1 –33. 

——— . 2012.  Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, 

Prosperity , and P overty . Vo l. 4. New York: Crown 

Business. 

Acuerdo  Nacional. 2015 a. “Definición. ” Accessed March 12, 

2015.  http://acuerdonacional.pe/politicas-de-estado-del-acuerdo-nacional/definicion .

——— . 2015b.  “Políticas de  Estado del Acuerdo Nacional. ”

Accessed March 12, 2015. 

http://acuerdonacional.pe/politicas-de-estado-del-acuerdo-nacional .

Agence France-Presse . 2008.  “Perú: críticas a  Comisión de la 

Verdad 5 años después por informe sobre FFAA. ” August 

25. 

http://web.archive.org/web/20140225080833/http://www.go ogle.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5goGCcZrrB7Kynx TzvvKbL0RVEdIQ?hl=es .

Alva, Kathy. 2012. “Diez años sin cumplirse: Ley de Transparencia y Acceso a la Información Pública. ” Spacio 

Libre , August 7 . http://www.spaciolibre.pe/diez-anos-sin-cumplirse-ley-de-transparencia-y-acceso-a-la-informacion-publica .

Alvarado, Betty, and Eduardo Morón.  2011.  Perú, hacia un 

presupuesto por resultados: afianzando la trans parencia y 

rendición de cuentas . DD/08/11.  Lima: Univer sidad del 

Pacífico .

ANA (Autoridad Nacional del Agua). 2015. “Quienes Somos. ”

Accessed March 12, 2015 . http://www.ana.gob.pe/quienes-somos.aspx .

Andina . 2012.  “Lerner Febres: Aparición de Movadef revela 

que nuestra memoria es aún frágil. ” July 15. 

http://www.andina.com.pe/ingles/noticia-lerner-febres-aparicion-movadef-revela-nuestra-memoria-es-aun-fragil-420451.aspx .

——— . 2013.  “CAN promueve igualdad y no discriminación a 

la mujer en el ámbito laboral. ” May 17. 

http://www.andina.com.pe/agencia/noticia-can-promueve-igualdad-y-no-discriminacion-a-mujer-el-ambito-laboral-458985.aspx .

——— . 2014.  “Krugman: Perú logró reducir pobreza extrema 

por programas gubernamentales. ” March 19. 

http://www.andina.com.pe/agencia/noticia-krugman-peru-logro-reducir-pobreza-extrema-programas-gubernamentales-498550.aspx .

APOYO Consultoría. 2012. Establecimiento de una línea de base para la segunda etapa del proyecto de mejoramiento de los servicios de justicia . Lima: APOYO Consultoría. 

Banerjee, Sudeshna Ghosh, Mikul Bhatia, Gabriela Elizondo Azuela, Ivan Jaques, Ashok Sarkar, Elisa Portale, Irina Bushueva, Nicolina Angelou, and Javier GustavoInon. 

2013.  Global Tracking Framework . Vol. 3. Sustainable 

Energy for All. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

Bhattacharya, Debapriya, Kate Higgins, and Shannon Kindornay. 2014. Methodology and Implementation Guide .Post-2015 Data Test. Dhaka and Ottawa: Centre for Policy Dialogue, The North-South Institute, and Southern Voice on Post-MDG International Development Goals. 

BIP (Biodiversity Indicators Partnership). 2014. “Coverage of Protected Areas. ” Accessed July 10,  2014. 

http://www.bipindicators.net/pacoverage .

Cabral, Ernesto. 2014.  “El régimen de terror de Áncash 

explicado en 3 pasos. ” Útero.Pe , March 24. 

http://utero.pe/2014/03/24/el-regimen-de-terror-de-ancash-explicado-en-3-pasos .

CAIMCP (Comité Asesor Interinstitucional sobre Metodologías para el Cálculo de la Pobreza).  2008.  Declaración . Lima: 

CAIMCP. 

http://censos.inei.gob.pe/DocumentosPublicos/Declara_Co mite_Asesor.pdf .

Carnegie Institution for Science. 2015. “CLASlite Software. ”

Accessed March 6, 2015. 

http://claslite.carnegiescience.edu/en/about/software.html .

Carrión, Julio  F. , Patricia Zárate , and Mitchel l A. 

Seligson . 2012 . Cultura política de la democracia en Perú, 

2012: Hacia la igualdad de oportunidades.  Lima:  Instituto 

de Estudios Peruanos. 

CEPLAN (Centro Nacional de Planeamiento Estratégico). 

2011.  Plan Bicentenario:  El Perú hacia el 2021 . Lima: 

CEPLAN. 

Congress of the Republic of Peru. 1993. Political Constitution of Peru . Lima: Congress of the Republic of Peru. 

——— . 2003.  Ley N° 27806. Ley de Transparencia y Acceso a 

la Información Pública . Lima: Congress of the Republic of 

Peru. 

http://www.peru.gob.pe/normas/docs/LEY_27806.pdf .

——— . 2004.  Ley General del Sistema Nacional de 

Presupuesto . Ley Nº 28411. Lima: Congress of the 

Repub lic of 

Peru.  http://transparencia.mtc.gob.pe/idm_docs/normas_le gales/1_0_31.pdf .

——— . 2007.  Ley Orgánica del Poder Ejecutivo . Ley Nº 29158. 

Lima: Congress of the Republic of  Peru. 

http://www.unsa.edu.pe/control_interno/docs/1_normasleg ales/l_29158.pdf .

Consejo Nacional de Educación. 2007. Proyecto Educativo Nacional Al 2021: La educación que queremos para el Perú . Lima: Consejo Nacional de Educación. 

Contraloría General de la República. 2014. Estudio del proceso de descentralización en el Perú . Contraloría General de la República. 

CPETI (Comité Directivo Nacional para la Prevención y Erradicación del Trabajo Infantil). 2011. Informe País sobre Trabajo Infantil: Julio 2009 – Junio 2010 . Lima: CPETI. 

CVR (Comisión de la Verdad y la Reconciliación) 2003. 

Informe Final . Lima: CVR. 

http://www.cverdad.org.pe/ifinal/index.php .

Defensoría del Pueblo. 2007. Los Conflictos Socioambientales por Actividades Extractivas en el Perú . Informe Extraordinario. Lima: Defensoría del Pueblo. 

——— . 2015. Reporte De Conflictos Sociales N.° 132 . Lima: Defensoría del Pueblo. 

Degregori, Carlos Iván, and Carlos Meléndez. 2009. El nacimiento de los otorongos: El Congreso de la República 77 

durante los gobiernos de Alberto Fujimori (1990-2000) .Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos. 

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Leora Klapper.  2012.  “Measuring 

Financial Inclusion: The Global Findex Database. ” Policy 

Research Working Paper 6025. Washington, DC: World 

Bank. 

El Comercio . 2013.  “Evaluación PISA: el ranking completo en 

el que el Perú quedó último. ” December 3. 

http://elcomercio.pe/lima/sucesos/evaluacion-pisa-ranking-completo-que-peru-quedo-ultimo-noticia-1667838 .

——— . 2014a.  “Alberto Fujimori  renunció a la Presidencia vía 

fax hace 14 años. ” November 19. 

http://elcomercio.pe/politica/actualidad/alberto-fujimori-renuncio-presidencia-via-fax-hace-14-anos-noticia-1772485 .

——— . 2014b.  “Editorial: Presupuestos sin resultados. ” April 

23.  http://elcomercio.pe/opinion/editorial/editorial-presupuestos-sin-resultados-noticia-1724513 .

——— . 2014c.  “Gregorio Santos es el virtual presidente 

regional de Cajamarca. ” October 5. 

http://elcomercio.pe/peru/cajamarca/gregorio-santos-virtual-presidente-regional-cajamarca-noticia-1761866 .

ESSC (European Statistical System Committee). 2011. 

European Statistics Code of Practice: For the National and Statistical Community Authorities (CoP) . Brussels: ESSC. 

Expert Group on NQAF. 2012. Guidelines for the Template for a Generic National Quality Assurance Framework (NQAF) .New York: United Nations. 

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2012. “FRA 2015: Terms and Definitions. ” Forest Resources Assessment Working Paper 180, FAO, Rome. 

Fernández, Lucía. 2013.  Transparencia y ac ceso a la 

información  pública . Lima:  Pontificia  Universidad Católica 

del Perú. 

FONCODES (Fondo de Cooperación para el Desarrollo Social). 2014. “Haku Wiñay. Mi Chacra Emprendedora. ”

Accessed  March  6, 2015. 

http://www.foncodes.gob.pe/portal/index.php/programas/pr ogramas-chacra .

Ghezzi, Piero, and José Gallardo. 2013. Qué se puede hacer con el Perú. Ideas para sostener el crecimiento económico en el largo plazo . Lima: Universidad del Pacífico, Fondo Editorial de la Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú. 

GRADE (Group for the Analysis of Development). 2014. Post-2015 Data Test: Initial Findings from Peru . In-Progress Note No. 9. Dhaka and Ottawa: Centre for Policy Dialogue, The North-South Institute, and Southern Voice on Post-MDG International Development Goals. 

Grompone, Romeo , and Martín Tanaka. 2009.  Las protestas 

sociales en el Perú actual. Entre el crecimiento económi co 

y la insatisfacción social . Lima:  Instituto de Estudios 

Peruanos. 

Ho, Esther Sui-chu. 2013. Student Learning Assessment . Asia-Pacific Education System Review Series No. 5. Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 

Hurtado, Juan Manuel.  2013.  “Los Objet ivos del Milenio: 

¿Cómo vamos? ” SEMANAe conómica , October 2. 

http://semanaeconomica.com/article/economia/126199-objetivos-del-milenio-como-vamos .

IEA (International Energy Agency). 2014. Key World Energy Statistics . Paris: IEA. 

IIRC ( International Integrated Reporting Council ).  2013.  The 

International <IR> Framework . London: IIRC. 

ILO (International Labour Organization). 2014. “Definitions. ”

Accessed July 10, 2014. 

http://laborsta.ilo.org/definition_E.html .

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2006 . Data Quality Assessment Framework . Washington, DC: IMF. 

INDECI (Instituto Nacional de Defensa Civil). 2009.  Compendio 

Estadístico  de Prevención y Atención d e Desastres  2008 .

Lima:  INDECI. 

——— . 2014.  “¿Qué es el SINPAD? ” Instituto Nacional de 

Defensa Civil.  Accessed November 24,  2014. 

http://sinpad.indeci.gob.pe/PortalSINPAD/Default.aspx?Ite mId=1 .

INEI (Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática). 2013a. 

Evolución de la Pobreza Monetaria 2007 - 2012: Informe Técnico . Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2013b.  Plan Estratégico Nacional para el Desarrollo 

Estadís tico (PENDES) 2013 -2017 . Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2014a . Condiciones de Vida en el Perú . Informe 

Técnico Nº 2. Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2014b.  “Encuesta Demográfica y de Salud Familiar: 

Historia. ” Accessed August 7, 2014. 

http://proyectos.inei.gob.pe/endes/anthist.asp 

——— . 2014 c. Evolución de la Pobreza Moneta ria 2009 -2013 :

Informe  Técnico . Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2014d. “Historia. ” Accessed November 1, 2014 .

http://www.inei.gob.pe/historia .

——— . 2014e . “INEI realizará estudio sobre las modalidades 

más frecuentes de delitos .” INEI Press,  April  21. 

http://www.inei.gob.pe/prensa/noticias/inei-realizara-estudio-sobre-las-modalidades-mas-frecuentes-de-delitos-7522 .

——— . 2014f . “Nosotros. ” Accessed November 1, 2014 .

http://www.inei.gob.pe/nosotros .

——— . 2014g . Perú:  Código de Buenas Prácticas 

Estadísticas . Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2014h . Perú. Encuesta Demográfica y de Salud 

Familiar 2014 . Lima: INEI. 

——— . 2014i. Resolución Jefatural Nº 237-2014-INEI .

September 9.  Lima: INEI. 

http://www.inei.gob.pe/media/buenas-practicas/RJ2014237.pdf .

——— . 2014j. “Sistema Estadístico Nacional. ” Accessed 

November  1, 2014 . http://www.inei.gob.pe/sistema-estadistico-nacional .

INPE (Instituto Nacional Penitenciario).  2014.  Informe 

Estadístico . Lima:  INPE. 

Instituto Cuánto. 2015. “Anuario Estadístico Perú en Números. ”

Accessed  March 6, 2015. 

http://www.cuanto.org/index.php?modulo=77 .

IPE (Instituto Peruano de Economía). 2009.  El Reto de la 

Infraestructura al 2018  “La Brecha de Inversión en 

Infraestructura en el Perú 2008 ”. Lima: IPE. 

Ipsos Perú. 2015. “Quienes somos. ” Accessed March 6, 2015. 

http://www.ipsos-apoyo.com.pe/quienes_somos .

IPYS (Instituto Prensa y Sociedad). 2012. “Balance a diez años de la promulgacion de la Ley de Transparencia en Perú. ” YouTube video, 13:22. Posted by  “IPYS Instituto 

Prensa y Sociedad ,” August 2. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BnGCjlq-9mw .78 

KPMG. 2014. “Auditoria de Circulación 2014-I Semestre. ”

Microsoft Excel file.  Accessed March  6, 2015 . sepp.pe/wp-content/uploads/Circulación-auditada-2014-I.xlsx .

La República . 2012.  “JNE: Movadef no podrá inscribirse como 

partido político aunque cambie de nombre. ” October 12. 

http://www.larepublica.pe/12-10-2012/jne-movadef-no-podra-inscribirse-como-partido-politico-aunque-cambie-de-nombre .

——— . 2013.  “La complicada tarea de demostrar la corrupción 

en los ex presidentes. ” May 12. 

http://www.larepublica.pe/12-05-2013/la-complicada-tarea-de-demostrar-la-corrupcion-en-los-ex-presidentes .

——— . 2014.  “A 5 años del  Baguazo, la justicia sigue oculta. ”

June 5.  http://www.larepublica.pe/05-06-2014/a-5-anos-del-baguazo-la-justicia-sigue-oculta .

——— . 2015.  “Reforma Electora l: Congreso aumenta 

requisitos para solicitar la revocatoria de autoridades. ”

March 5.  http://www.larepublica.pe/05-03-2015/reforma-electoral-congreso-aumenta-requisitos-para-solicitar-la-revocatoria-de-autoridades .

León, Cristhiam. 2011. “Presupuesto por resultados, mejora del gasto público en el contexto de la modernización de la gestión pública. ” Blog de Cristhiam León , September 27. 

http://blog.pucp.edu.pe/item/143706/presupuesto-por-resultados-mejora-del-gasto-publico-en-el-contexto-de-la-modernizacion-de-la-gestion-publica .

Lugar de la Memoria, la Tolerancia y la Inclusión Social.  2015. 

“¿Quiénes somos? ” Accessed March 16 , 2015 .

http://lugardelamemoria.org/?page_id=5301 .

MDG Gap Task Force. 2014. Millennium Development Goal 8: 

The State of the Global Partnership for Development . New 

York: United Nations. 

MEF (Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas). n.d. Presupuesto por Resultados . Lima: MEF. 

https://www.mef.gob.pe/contenidos/presu_publ/documenta c/generales/PRESUPUESTO_POR_RESULTADOS.pdf .

——— . 2009.  Presupuesto Público Evaluado: S istema  de 

Control en Garitas de Peaje  “Tolerancia C ero ”. Lima: MEF. 

——— . 2015 a. “¿Qué es Presupuesto por Resultados (PpR)? ”

Accessed  March 16 , 2015. 

http://www.mef.gob.pe/index.php?option=com_content&vie w=article&id=2122&Itemid=101162 .

——— . 2015 b. “Sistema Nacional  De Inversión Pública .”

Accessed  March 16 , 2015. 

http://www.mef.gob.pe/index.php?option=com_content&vie w=article&id=875&Itemid=100272 .

MIDIS (Ministerio de Desarrollo e Inclusión Social). 2013. 

Estrategia Nacional de Desarrollo e Inclusión Social: Incluir para Crecer . Lima: MIDIS. 

——— . 2015a. “Acerca de Cuna Más. ” Accessed March 11, 

2015.  http://www.cunamas.gob.pe/?page_id=12 .

——— . 2015b.  “FONCODES.  Misión y Visión. ” Accessed 

March 11, 2015. 

http://www.foncodes.gob.pe/portal/index.php/nosotros/nos otros-mision .

——— . 2015c . “JUNTOS. Misión y Visión .” Accessed March 

11, 2015.  http://www.juntos.gob.pe/index.php/quienes-somos/vision-y-mision .

——— . 2015d . “¿Qué es Pensión 65? ” Accessed March 11, 

2015.  http://www.pension65.gob.pe/quienes-somos/que-es-pension-65 .

——— . 201 5e . “¿Qué es Qali  Warma? ” Accessed March 11, 

2015.  http://www.qw.gob.pe/?page_id=2 .

MIMP (Ministerio de la Mujer y Poblaciones Vulnerables). 2013.  Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual  – PESEM 

2013 -2016 . Lima: MIMP. 

MINAM (Ministerio del Ambiente).  2011.  Una Primera 

Aproximación  de la Cuenta Satélite Ambiental . Borrador .

Lima: MINAM.  http://www.minam.gob.pe/patrimonio-natural/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2013/09/cuenta_satelite_ambiental .pdf .

——— . 2012a.  Glosario de  Términos para la Gestión 

Ambiental Peruana . Documento trabajado por procesos de 

consultoría. Lima: MINAM. 

——— . 2012b. Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual 2013 -2016 . Lima: MINAM. 

——— . 2014a. “El objetivo: conservar y gestionar 54 millones de hectáreas de bosques. ” Accessed July 9, 2014. 

http://www.minam.gob.pe/programa-bosques/el-objetivo-conservar-y-gestionar-54-millones-de-hectareas-de-bosques .

——— . 2014 b. “Mapa  de Análisis  de Cambio  de Cobertura  de

Bosques  a no Bosque por Deforestación de l a Amazonia 

Peruana Elaborado  por e l Ministerio  del Ambiente .”

Accessed July 9, 2014 .

http://geoservidor.minam.gob.pe/geoservidor/deforestacion .aspx .

——— . 2014c . Memoria Técnica: Cuantificación de la 

Cobertura de Bosque y Cambio de Bosque a no Bosque 

de la Amazonía  Peruana; Periodo 2009  - 2010  - 2011 .

Lima: MINAM. 

——— . 2015.  “Misión y v isión. ” Accessed March 12, 2015 .

http://www.minam.gob.pe/?el-ministerio=mision-y-vision .

MINEDU (Ministerio de Educación).  2010.  Censo Escolar 

2010 . Cédula 2 . Lima:  MINEDU. 

http://escale.minedu.gob.pe/documents/10156/10614/C%C 3%A9dula+02_2010.pdf .

——— . 2011 . “A. Censo Escolar .” Accessed November 24, 

2014.  http://escale.minedu.gob.pe/censo-escolar .

——— . 2012. Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual (PESEM) .Lima:  MINEDU. 

——— . 2013.  Lineamientos  para  la Relación 

Intergubernamental  entre  el Ministerio  de Educación,  los 

Gobiernos Regionales  y Gobiernos Locales . Lima: 

MINEDU .

http://www.minedu.gob.pe/minedu/archivos/lineamientos_r elacion_intergubernamental.pdf 

——— . 2014.  “Resultados de la Evaluación Censal de 

Estudiantes 2013: Más niños y niñas alcanzan el nivel 

satisfactorio de aprendizaje en comprensión lectora y 

matemática. ” March 3 .

http://www.minedu.gob.pe/noticias/index.php?id=26164 .

——— . 2015.  “Planeamiento Estratégico .” Accessed March 11, 

2015 . http://www.minedu.gob.pe/normatividad/pesem.php .

MINEM (Ministerio de Energía y Minas).  2012.  Plan  Estratégico 

Sectorial Multianual  – PESEM  2012  - 2016 . Lima:  MINEM. 

——— . 2014 a. “Perú es n° 1 en  el mundo en competitividad 

energética por tercer año consecutivo .” December 12. 

http://www.minem.gob.pe/_detallenoticia.php?idSector=12 &idTitular=6439 .79 

——— . 2014b. Plan Energético Nacional 2014-2025 . Resumen Ejecutivo.  Lima:  MINEM. 

http://www.minem.gob.pe/minem/archivos/2ResEje-2014-2025%20Vf.pdf .

——— . 2015.  “Promoción de la Inversión Eléct rica en Áreas 

No Conectadas a Red  - Data Room .” Accessed March 13, 

2015. 

http://www.minem.gob.pe/_area.php?idSector=10&idArea= 135&idTitular=5687&idMenu=sub5686&idCateg=950 .

Ministerio de Cultura. 2012. PlanEstratégico Sectorial Multianual 2012-2016 . Lima: Ministerio de Cultura. 

——— . 2015.  “Procesos de Consulta Previa .” Accessed March 

10, 2015.  http://consultaprevia.cultura.gob.pe/proceso .

MINJUS (Ministerio de Justicia).  2012.  Plan  Estratégico 

Sectorial Multianual 2012 -2016 . Lima: MINJUS. 

——— . 2013.  “Encuesta para medir la percepción de  la 

población peruana en relación a los derechos humanos. 

Resultados cuantitativos. ” Accessed March 16, 2015 .

http://observatorioderechoshumanos.pe/jmla25/publicacion es/cat_view/14-publicaciones/178-minjus/223-encuesta-nacional-en-materia-de-derechos-humanos .

——— . 2014.  Plan Nacional de Derechos Humanos 2014 -

2016 . Lima: MINJUS. 

MINTRA ( Ministerio de  Trabajo  y Promoción del Empleo ). 

2012a.  Estrategia Nacional para la Prevención y 

Erradicación del Trabajo Infantil 2012 -2021 . Lima: 

MINTRA. 

——— . 2012b.  Plan Estratégico Sectorial Multianual (PESEM) 

2012  - 2016 . Lima: MINTRA. 

——— . 2012c. “Terminología. ” Accessed July 7, 2014. 

http://www.mintra.gob.pe/mostrarContenido.php?id=165 .

——— . 2015a.  “Programa Nacional  de Promoción  de la

Responsabilidad Social Empresarial  - Perú  Responsable .”

Accessed March 12, 2015. 

http://www.mintra.gob.pe/PERU_RESPONSABLE/index.ht ml .

——— . 2015b.  “¿Qué es Jóvenes a la Obra? ” Accessed March 

12, 2015. 

http://www.jovenesalaobra.gob.pe/institucional/que-es .

——— . 2015c.  “Trabaja Perú. Sobre el Programa. ” Accessed 

March 12, 2015. 

http://www.trabajaperu.gob.pe/index.php?option=com_cont ent&view=article&id=68 .

——— . 2015 d. “Vamos Perú. Objetivos .” Accessed March 12, 

2015. 

http://www.vamosperu.gob.pe/inicio/index.php?value=b2Jq ZXRpdm9zLnBocA==&t=MA== 

MTC (Ministerio de Transportes y Comunicaciones).  2012. 

Plan  Estratégico  Sectorial  Multianual  Sector Transportes y 

Comunicaciones  2012  - 2016 . Lima: MTC. 

——— . 2014. Anuario Estadístico 2013 . Lima: MTC. 

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2009. Forum on Tax Administration: Compliance Management of Large Business Task Group .Guidance Note. Paris: OECD. 

——— . 2011. “Energy Intensity. ” In OECD Factbook 2011-2012: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics .Paris: OECD. 

——— . 2014.  PISA  2012  Results:  What  Students  Know  and 

Can  Do  – Student  Performance  in  Mathematics,  Reading 

and  Science  (Volume  I) . Revised  edition,  February.  Paris: 

OECD. 

OEFA (Organismo de Evaluación y Fiscalización Ambiental ). 

2015.  “Misión y Visión .” Accessed March 16 , 2015 .

http://www.oefa.gob.pe/que-es-el-oefa/vision-y-mision .

Oliva, Carlos. 2014. “Presupuesto público como herramienta para el desarrollo. ” Gestión , April 28. 

http://gestion.pe/opinion/presupuesto-publico-como-herramienta-desarrollo-2095697 .

ONDS (Oficina Nacional de Diálogo y Sostenibilidad).  2015. 

“¿Qué es la  Oficina Naciona l de Diálogo y Sostenibilidad? ”

Accessed March 16 , 2015 .

http://onds.pcm.gob.pe/objetivos-y-funciones .

OWG (Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals). 2014. Open Working Group Proposal for Sustainable Development Goals . New York: United 

Nations. 

Panamericana . 2008.  “19 muertos deja peor ataque de 

Sendero Luminoso en una década. ” October 10. 

http://panamericana.pe/politica/60822 .

PCM (Presidencia del Consejo de Ministros). 2012a. Plan Nacional de  Lucha Contra la Corrupción  2012 -2016 . Lima: 

PCM. 

——— . 2012b.  Decreto Supremo que aprueba el Código de 

Buenas Prácticas Estadísticas del Perú.  Supreme Decree 

Nº 072 -2012 -PCM. Accessed November 15, 2014. 

http://escale.minedu.gob.pe/documents/10156/1664912/D S.+072-2012-PCM .

——— . 2015.  “Reformas en Marcha .” Accessed  March 16 ,

2015 . http://www.pcm.gob.pe/reformas/?cat=14 .

Perú21 . 2010.  “La Ley de Transparencia no existe para el 

Congreso. ” January 25. 

http://peru21.pe/noticia/404160/ley-transparencia-no-existe-congreso .

——— . 2012 a. “Piden investigar trabajo de la Comisión de la 

Verdad. ” September 7.  http://peru21.pe/opinion/piden-investigar-trabajo-comision-verdad-2041037 .

——— . 2012b. “Mejora asignación de recursos.”  December 18. 

http://peru21.pe/opinion/mejora-asignacion-recursos-2108383 .

——— . 2013a.  “ComexPerú critica logros del Presupuesto por 

Resultados. ” February 16. 

http://peru21.pe/economia/critican-logros-presupuesto-resultados-2117673 .

——— . 2013b.  “Evaluarán calidad pedagógica de centros de 

educación inicial. ” June 30. 

http://peru21.pe/actualidad/evaluaran-calidad-pedagogica-centros-educacion-inicial-2138089 .

——— . 2014.  “César Álvarez en la mira de la Procuraduría tras 

graves  denuncias. ” March 25 

http://peru21.pe/politica/salas-procesos-ministerio-publico-region-ancash-seran-investigados-2175804 .

——— . 2015.  “Jaime  Saavedra:  ‘Revalorar  la  carrera  docente 

es  de  suma  urgencia’. ” March  8. 

http://peru21.pe/politica/jaime-saavedra-revalorar-carrera-docente-suma-urgencia-2213807 .

Proética.  2015 . “Objetivos .” Accessed March 6, 2015 .

http://www.proetica.org.pe/objetivos .

PRONABEC (Programa Nacional de Becas y Crédito Educativo).  2015a.  “Nosotros. ” Accessed March 12, 2015. 

http://www.pronabec.gob.pe/nosotros.php .80 

——— . 2015b.  “Beca 18. Requisitos .” Accessed March 12, 

2015.  http://www.pronabec.gob.pe/2015_beca18.php .

Rodr íguez , José , and  Gabriel Rodr íguez . 2012.  “Explaining the 

Transition Probabiliti es in the Peruvian Labor Market. ”

Documento de Trabajo  No. 334, Departmento de 

Econom ía,  Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú , Lima .

RPP Noticias . 2013.  “ONU considera que Perú puede reducir 

la pobreza a 20% en 2016. ” September 28. 

http://www.rpp.com.pe/2013-09-28-onu-considera-que-peru-puede-reducir-pobreza-a-20--en-2016-noticia_635007.html .

——— .2014.  “Onpe  pide al Congreso aprobar cambio en el 

mecanismo de revocatoria. ” August 3. 

http://www.rpp.com.pe/2014-08-03-onpe-pide-al-congreso-aprobar-cambio-en-el-mecanismo-de-revocatoria-noticia_713187.html .

——— . 2015.  “Julca: La ingobernabilidad ha llevado a Áncash 

a una situación delicada. ” February 2. 

http://www.rpp.com.pe/2015-02-02-julca-la-ingobernabilidad-ha-llevado-a-ancash-a-una-situacion-delicada-noticia_765483.html .

Sandoval, Pablo. 2012. “El genio y la botella: sobre MOVADEF y Sendero Luminoso en San Marcos. ” Revista Argumentos 

5: 30 –36. 

SERNANP (Servicio Natural de Áreas Naturales Protegidas por el Estado). 2015. “Quiénes Somos. ” Accessed March 

12, 2015 .

http://www.sernanp.gob.pe/sernanp/contenido.jsp?ID=5 .

SERVIR (Autoridad Nacional del Servicio Civil). 2012. Reforma del Servicio Civil Peruano . Lima: SERVIR. 

http://files.servir.gob.pe/WWW/files/normas%20legales/Ref ormaServicioCivil/ServicioCivil-AyudaMemoria-2013-01.pdf .

Tanaka, Martín, Patricia Zárate, and Ludwig Huber. 2011. 

Mapa de la conflictividad social en el Perú:  Análisis de sus 

principales causas . Lima: P revCon -PCM. 

Torres Manrique, Jorge Issac. 2013. “Una mirada crítica a los derechos a la transparencia, acceso a la información pública y rendición de cuentas. ” Derecho y Cambio Social 

34: 1 –20. 

Torres, Samuel. 2011. “El presupuesto por resultados en el Perú, avances y retos. ” Revista Parlante  106: 12 –14. 

Transparency International. 2014. “Corruption Perceptions Index 2014. ” Accessed March 13, 2015. 

http://www.transparency.org/cpi2014/results .

UN (United Nations). 1993. Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women . A/RES/48/104. New York: UN. 

——— . 2015.  Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for 

Sustainable Development . A/RES/70/1. New York: UN. 

UNDG (United Nations  Development Group).  2015. 

Participatory Monitoring for  Accountability: Critical Enablers 

for the Successful Implementation of the Sustainable 

Development Goals . UN Development Group Post -2015 

Consultation on Means of Implementation . New York: 

UNDG. 

UNDP  (United Nations Development Programme) . 2010a. 

Destrabando el progreso: aceleración de los ODM en la 

recta final hacia 2015.  New  York:  United Nations .

——— . 2010b . ¿Qué se necesita para alcanzar los 

Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio?  New  York:  United 

Nations .

——— . 2013a . Alianzas para el Diálogo:  Prevención de 

conflictos sociales en el uso de recursos naturales . New 

York: United Nations. 

——— . 2013b . Obje tivos de Desarrollo del Milenio: 

Informe 2013 . New  York:  United Nations .

——— . 2013c . Peru: HDI Values and Rank Changes in the 

2013 Human  Development Report . Explanatory note on 

2013 HDR composite índices.  New York: United Nations. 

——— . 2013d . Perú: Tercer Informe Nacional de 

Cumplimiento de los Objetivos de Desarrollo del Milenio .

Lima:  United Nations .

——— . 2013e . ¿Qué futuro queremos para el Perú? 

Proceso  nacional de consulta sobre la agenda para el 

desarrollo después de 2015 . Lima:  Sistema de Naciones 

Unidas en el Perú .

——— . 2015.  “Museo de la Memoria .” Accessed March 16 ,

2015 .

http://www.pe.undp.org/content/peru/es/home/operations/p rojects/democratic_governance/Apoyo-Comision-Gestion-Lugar-de-la-memoria.html .

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2012. International Standard Classification of Education: ISCED 2011 . Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 

UNEVOC (International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training). 2012. “TVETipedia Glossary. ”

Accessed July 7, 2014. 

http://www.unevoc.unesco.org/go.php?q=TVETipedia+Glos sary+A-Z&filt=all&id=474 .

UNICEF ( United Nations Children’ s Fund). 2014. “Malnutrition: Current Status + Progress. ” Accessed October 24, 2014. 

http://data.unicef.org/nutrition/malnutrition .

UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2007. “Terminology. ” Accessed August 12, 2014. 

http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/terminology .

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2014. 

Global Study on Homicide 2013 . New York: United Nations. 

UNStats (United Nations Statistics Division). 2014. System of Environmental-Economic Accounting (SEEA) —Central Framework . New York: United Nations. 

Vakis, Renos, and Schmidt, Matthias.  2010.  “Innovación en la 

medición de la pobreza: Siete lecciones de diseño sobre el 

uso de Comités Asesores para mejorar las cifras oficiales 

de pobreza en Perú .” En b reve , Número  155.  Washington, 

DC: World Bank. 

Vargas, Paola. 2009. “El Cambio Climático y Sus Efectos en el Perú. ” Documento de Trabajo N°2009-14, Banco Central de Reserva del Perú, Lima. 

Vera, Mercedes, and Yu Ching Wong.  2013.  “Peru: Latin 

America’s Economic Performer. ” February 22. 

http://www.imf.org/external//pubs/ft/survey/so//2013/CAR02 2213D.htm .

Veramendi, María José. 2013. “Perú y sus conflictos socioambientales. ” SPDA Actualidad Ambiental , August 5. 

http://www.actualidadambiental.pe/?p=19819 

WEF (World Economic Forum). 2014. The Global Competitiveness Report 2013-2014: Full Data Edition .Geneva: WEF. 

Working Group on Capacity Building. 2011. Code of Good Practice in Statistics for Latin America and the Caribbean .81 

Santiago de Chile: Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. 

http://www.dane.gov.co/files/noticias/BuenasPracticas_en. pdf .

World Bank. 2005. Connecting East Asia: A New Framework for Infrastructure . Washington, DC: Asian Development Bank, World Bank, and Japan Bank for International Cooperation. 

——— . 2011. One Goal, Two Paths: Achieving Universal Access to Modern Energy in East Asia and the Pacific .Washington, DC: World Bank. 

———. 2014X. “Debt Forgiveness or Reduction (Current US$).” Accessed July 10, 2014. 

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/DT.DFR.DPPG.CD .

——— . 2014b. “Gross Fixed Capital Formation (% of GDP). ”

Accessed July 10, 2014. 

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.GDI.FTOT.ZS .

——— . 2014c . “Poverty Headcount R atio a t $1.25 a D ay (PPP )

(% of P opulation). ” Accessed  June  27 , 2014. 

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.DDAY .

——— . 2014d . “Poverty Headcount R atio at $ 2 a Day (PPP) 

(% of P opulation). ” Accessed June  27,  2014. 

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.2DAY .

——— . 2015.  “Data. ” Accessed  March 6, 2015 .

http://data.worldbank.org .

Xalma, Cristina. 2012. Informe de la Cooperación Sur-Sur en Iberoamérica 2012 . Madrid. Madrid: Secretaría General Iberoamericana. 

Zapico, E., and J. Mayne. 1995. “Nuevas perspectivas para el control de gestión y medición de resultados. ” Gestión y Análisis de Políticas Públicas 3: 43 –53. 

Zegarra, Eduardo. 2010. “Seguridad alimentaria: una propuesta de política para el próximo gobierno. ” Opciones de política económica en el Perú: 2011-2015 , edited by José Rodríguez and Mario D. Tello, 71 –106. Lima: Fondo Editorial de la Pontifici 82 

# Annex 1. Targets and Indicators Examined for Peru 

Table 1 .1 End poverty: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

End extreme 

income poverty 

Proportion of population below 

US$1.25 (PPP) per day 

Refers to the percentage of the pop ulation living on less than US$ 1.25 at 2005 prices (World Bank 

2014c ). 

Reduce poverty  Proportion of population below US$2 

(PPP) per day 

Refers to the percentage of the pop ulation living on less than US$2 at 2005 prices (World Ban k

2014d ). 

Proportion of population living below 

national poverty line 

Refers to the percentage of the population living below the national poverty line. The poverty line is 

defined as the threshold below which individuals in the population are considered poor and above 

which they are considered non -poor. The threshold is defined as the per -capita monetary 

requirements an individual needs to afford the purchase of a bas ic bundle of goods and services 

(ILO 2014) . Because prices vary among sub -regions in Peru , poverty lines are differentiated by sub -

region and area . Calculation involves using expenditure before taxes .

Share of employed persons living 

below the nationally -defined poverty 

line 

The working poor or the number of employed persons living in households with incomes below the 

nationally -defined poverty line are b ased on real disposable income. The poverty line is defined as 

the threshold below which individuals in the population are c onsidered poor and above which they 

are considered non -poor. The threshold is defined as the per -capita monetary requirements an 

individual needs to afford the purchase of a bas ic bundle of goods and services (ILO 2014) .

Because prices vary among sub -regio ns in Peru , poverty lines are differentiated by sub -region and 

area .

Reduce the 

proportion of 

people who suffer 

from hunger 

Prevalence of child stunting in boys 

and girls under 5, % 

Stunting: Proportion of under -fives falling below minus 2 standard deviations (moderate and severe) 

and minus 3 standard deviations (severe) from the median height -for -age of the reference 

population (UNICEF 2014). This indicator will be disaggregated by age group (under and over three 

years of age ). 

National 

Reduce hunger  Percentage of the population with 

caloric deficiency 

The minimum daily caloric requirement is calculated for each person according to their age, region 

of residence and geographic area. 

Reduce poverty  Proportion of households with children 

under 3 years below national poverty 

line 

The threshold is defined as the per -capita monetary requirements an individual needs to afford the 

purchase of a basic bundle of goods and services. 

Proportion of indigenous population 

below national poverty line 

The threshold is defined as the per -capita monetary requirements an individual needs to afford the 

purchase of a basic bundle of goods and services. 

Proportion of rural poverty  The threshold is defined as the per -capita monetary requirements an individual needs to afford the 

purchase of a basic bundle of goods and services. 

Cross -cutting: Ensure quality education for all 

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in motor dimension 

Average score obtained from the dimension of Physical Health & Well -Being of the Early 

Development Instrument .83 

Increase 

development in 

early childhood 

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in the dimension of language 

and cognitive development 

Average score obtained from the subscale of Language & Cognitive Development of the Early 

Development Instrument .

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in socio -emotional dimension 

Average score obtained from the subscale of Social Competence of the Early Development 

Instrument .

Table 1 .2 Ensure quality education for all: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Ensure all children 

have access to 

early childhood and 

quality primary and 

secondary 

education 

% of girls and boys receiving at least 

one year in pre -primary program me s

Refers to the proportion of children (girls and boys) who receive at least one year of pre -primary 

program me s. In the Peru vian context, this includes children aged three , four and five years. 

% of girls and boys who complete 

primary school 

Refers to proportion of girls and boys who complete primary school. 

% of girls and boys who complete 

secondary school 

Refers to proportion of girls and boys who complete secondary school. 

% of girls and boys who achieve a 

passing grade in national learning 

assessments at the primary school 

level 

Assessment of learning outcomes: Evaluation of an individual’s achievement of learning objectives, 

using a variety of assessment methods (written, oral and practical tests/examinations, projects and 

portfolios) during or at the end of an education programme (UNESCO 2012). 

National (or sub -national ) assessment: Large -scale assessment surveys designed to describe the 

achievement of students in a curriculum area and to provide an estimate of the ach ievement level in 

the education system as a whole at a particular age or grade level. This normally involves 

administration of tests either to a sample or population of students (Ho 2013). 

Increase the 

number of adults 

with skills, 

including technical 

and vocational 

skills 

Proportion of individuals enrolled in a 

Technical and Vocational Education 

and Training institution 

Technical and Vocational Education and Training is concerned with the acquisition of knowledge 

and skills for the world of work. Various terms have been used to describe elements of the field that 

are now conceived as comprising Technical and Vocational Ed ucation and Training. These include: 

Apprenticeship Training, Vocational Education, Technical Education, Technical -Vocational 

Education, Occupational Education, Vocational Education and Training, Professional and Vocational 

Education, Career and Technical Education, Workforce Education, Workplace Education, etc. 

Several of these terms are commonly used in specific geographic areas (UNEVOC 201 2). In the 

Peruvian context, this includes Productive and Technical Training . The National Household S urvey 

includes a question about education in a Productive Technical Education Cent re (CETPRO , for its 

Spanish acronym ,) or Cent re for Employment Training (CENECAPE , for its Spanish acronym ).

National 

Ensure all children 

have access to 

early childhood and 

quality primary and 

secondary 

education 

% of girls and boys with disabilities 

who access a school program me 

Children with disabilities considered in this study are those who have a special educational need 

such as: (i) inte llectual or mental disabilities, (ii) difficulty in understanding or in using language 

(spoken or w ritten ), (iii) hearing impairment , (iv) language disability, (v) visual impair ment (not 

including impairments th at can be corrected with glasses), (vi) motor disabilities, (vii) autism, (viii ) a 

chronic disease or (ix) multiple disabilities (MINEDU 2010) .

% of indigenous girls and boys 

receiving intercultural bilingual 

education 

Intercultural bilingual education is a model of intercultural education that involves teach ing 

simultaneously in two languages in the context of two different cultures. Intercultural bilingual 

schools must meet a linguistic criterion: the majority of students should have as their native 

language the original language spoken in the community, distri ct, province or region; in addition, the 

native language should be the language that predominates among students and the community 

(MINEDU 2013) .84 

% of girls living in rural areas who 

complete secondary school 

Refer s to the proportion of girls living in rural areas who complete secondary school. 

Improve the quality 

of education at all 

levels 

% of 15 -year -old students who achieve 

proficient level s in reading, 

math ematics and science in the 

Programme for International Student 

Assessment (PISA) 

For PISA, the range of difficulty of the tasks is represented by six or se ven levels of proficiency 

(OECD 2014) . Pass ing level 3 and achiev ing level s 4, 5 or 6 will be considered as proficiency. 

Increase 

development in 

early childhood 

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in motor dimension 

Average score obtained from the subscale of Physical Health & Well -Being of the Early 

Development Instrument .

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in the dimension of language 

and cognitive development 

Average score obtained from the subscale of Language & Cognitive Development of the Early 

Development Instrument .

Average level of development of girls 

and boys in socio -emotional dimension 

Average score obtained from the subscale of Social Competence of the Early Development 

Instrument .

Ensure a safe, 

secure and 

effective learning 

environment in the 

classroom 

Proportion of public school s with 

classrooms in good condition 

Refers to the p ercentage of public schools with ceilings, walls and floors constructed with good 

material and in good condition. Also, materials (e.g., blackboards, chairs) are required to be in good 

condition .

Proportion of public school s with 

hygienic services in good condition 

Refers to the p ercentage of public school s with hygienic services that are connected to the public 

sewerage system or a septic tank (as declared by directors of reporting educational institutions ).

Access to quality 

higher education 

% of students living in poverty who 

have access to higher education 

Refers to the p ercentage of young people aged 16 to 22 who are in the bottom two quintiles of 

socio -economic status and have access to higher education .

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve security 

and reduce 

violence 

% of girls and boys affected by 

violence in school 

Refers to p roportion of children affected by violence in school. Violence might be physical or 

psychological .

Table 1 .3 Creat e jobs, sustainable livelihoods  and inclusive growth for all: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Achieve full and 

productive 

employment for all, 

including women 

and young people 

Labour force participation rate  The labour force participation rate is the labour force as a percent age of the working -age population 

(ILO 2014). This definition is consistent with that used by the Peruvian Ministry of Labour and 

Employment Promotion . The working -age p opulation is 14 years or older (MINTRA 2012 c).

Time -related underemployment 

(thousands) 

Persons in time -related underemployment comprise all persons in employment, who satisfy the 

following three criteri a during the reference period: (i ) are wil ling to work additional hours , (ii ) are 

available to work additional hours (i.e., are ready, within a specifie d subsequent period, to work 

additional hours, given opportun ities for additional work) and (iii ) worked less than a threshold 

relating to working time (i.e., persons whose hours actually worked in all jobs during the reference 

period were below a threshol d, to be chosen according to national circumstances ). For details, refer 

to the resolution concerning the measurement of underemployment and inadequate employment 

situations (ILO 2014). 

Ensure equal pay 

for equal work 

Mean nominal monthly earnings of 

employees (local currency) 

Data on earnings are presented, whenever possible, in nominal terms and on the basis of the mean 

of monthly earnings of all employees. The earnings of employees relate to the gross remuneration in 

cash and in kind paid to employees, as a rule at regular in tervals, for time worked or work done 85 

together with remuneration for time not worked, such as annual vacation, other type s of paid leave 

or holid ays. Earnings exclude employers’ contributions in respect of their employees paid to social 

security and pensio n schemes and also the benefits received by employees under these schemes. 

Earnings also exclude severance and termination pay. Statistics of earnings relate to the gross 

remuneration of employees (i.e. , the total before any deductions are made by the empl oyer ). Data 

are disaggregated by economic activity according to the latest version of the International Standard 

Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities available for that year. Economic activity refers to 

the main activity of the establishmen t in which a person worked during the reference period and 

does not depend on the specific du ties or functions of the person’ s job, but on the characteristics of 

the economic unit in which this person works. 

Support inclusive 

growth and reduce 

inequality 

Palma ratio  Refers to the ratio of the in come share of the top 10% to the bottom 40% . Calculation involves using 

after -tax figures. 

Gini coefficient  The Gini coefficient is a number between zero and one that measures the relative degree of 

inequality in the distribution of income. The coefficient would register zero (minimum inequality) for a 

population in which each family (or unattached individual) received exactly the same income and it 

would register a coefficient of one (maximum inequality) if one f amily (or unattached individual) 

received all the income and the rest received none . Calculation involves using after -tax figures. 

Growth rate of income of the bottom 

40% 

Income quintiles are used to measure t he grow th rate of the bottom 40% for all households .

Members of the population are ranked from lowest to highest by the value of their adjusted after -tax 

household income. The ranked population is then divided into five groups of equal numbers of units, 

called quintiles. The lowest in come qu intil e represents the 20% of the population whose income is 

lowest. By the same token, the hig hest qu intile represents the 20% of the population whose income 

is highest. Calculation involves us ing after -tax figures. 

Gross fixed capital formation (% of 

GDP) 

Gross fixed capital formation (formerly gross domestic fixed investment) includes land improvements 

(fences, ditches, drains, etc. ), plant, machinery and equipment purchases and the construction of 

roads, railways and the like, including schools, offices, hospitals, private residential dwellings and 

commercial and industrial buildings (World Bank 2014 b). 

National 

Promote decent 

work 

Child labour  Refers to the percentage of children under 14 years of age who work .

Proportion of informal workers  Refers to the percentage of the labour force that work s in the informal sector .

Achieve full and 

productive 

employment work 

for all 

% of youth aged 18 –24 who work at a 

formal firm 

Refers to proportion of youth aged 18 –24 who work in the formal sector .

Ensure equal pay 

for equal work 

Wage gap between men and women  Refers to women’ s median hourly wage as a percentage of men’s median hourly wage. 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and  inclusive society 

Monitor and end 

discrimination and 

inequalities in 

economic life on 

the basis of social 

status 

Wage gap between indigenous and 

non -indigenous people s with 

comparable levels of education 

Refers to the indigenous median hourly wage a s a percentage of the non -indigenous median hourly 

wage. 86 

Table 1 .4 Ensure sustainable energy and develop infrastructure for all: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Ensure full access 

to developed 

infrastructure and 

communication 

technology 

Internet users (per 1 ,000 people)  This indicator measures the number of people who use the internet for every 1,000 people. 

Average bandwidth speed 

(megabits/second) 

Measurement of the ability of an electronic communications device or system (such as a computer 

network) to send and receive information, measured in megabits per second (mbit/s). 

% of the population with access to an 

all -season road 

“With access ” means that the distance from a village or household to an all -season road is no more 

than 2 kilometers ; otherwise, a walk of no more than 20 minutes or so is required to reach an all -

season road. An “all -season road ” is a road that is motorable by the pre vailing means of rural 

transport (often a pick -up or a truck which does not have four -wheel drive) all year round. 

Predictable interruptions of short duration during inclement weather (e.g. , heavy rainfall) are 

permitted, particularly on low -volume roads ( World Bank 2005). 

% of adults with an account at a formal 

financial institution 

Denotes the percentage of the population with an account (self or together with someone else) at a 

bank, credit union, other financial institution (e.g. , cooperative, microfinance institution) or post office 

(if applicable) (modified slightly from World Bank Global Index Glossary). 

Ensure access to 

energy and 

improve efficiency 

and sustainability 

of energy supply, 

including 

renewable energy 

# of hours per day households have 

access to electricity on average 

This indicator measures the number of hours for which electricity is available in a household within a 

given day. It is n ot directly applicable to Peru ’s context , so a proxy indicator has been included 

below to capture the number of households that have access to electricity all day for six or seven 

days per week .

Rate of improvement in energy 

intensity 

Energy required per unit (currency) of GDP, measured in primary energy terms and GDP. Primary 

energy refers to energy sources as found in their natural state (as opposed to derived or secondary 

energy, which is the result of the transformation of primary or secondary sources) (OECD 2011). 

Share of the population with access to 

modern cooking solutions (%) 

Access to modern cooking solutions is defined as relying primarily on non -solid fuels for cooking. 

Non -solid fuels include: (i) liquid fuels ( e.g. , kerosene, ethanol or other biofuels) , (ii) gaseous fu els 

(e.g., natural ga s, liquefied petroleum gas and biogas) and (iii) electricity. Solid fuels include: (i) 

traditional biomass ( e.g. , wood, charcoal, agricultural residues and dung) , (ii) processed biomass 

(e.g., pellets and briquettes) and (iii) other solid fuels ( e.g., coa l and lignite) (World Bank 2011 ;

Banerjee et al. 2013). 

Share of renewable energy to total 

energy consumption 

Energy that is derived from natural processes (e.g. , sunlight and wind) that are replenished at a 

higher rate than they are consumed. Solar, wind, geothermal, hydro and biomass are common 

sources of renewable energy (IEA 2014). 

National 

Ensure access to 

energy and 

improve efficiency 

and sustainability 

of energy supply, 

including 

renewable energy 

Population with access to adequate 

electricity ( all day, 6–7 days per week) 

This indicator can serve as a proxy for measuring “# of hours per day households have a ccess to 

electricity on average .”

Population with access to adequate 

services for potable water 

Refers to the p ercentage of the population with access to potable water directly from the public 

water system inside the house or building .

Population with sanitation services  Refers to the p ercentage of the population who are connected to the public sewerage system or a 

septic tank .

Improve 

maintenance of 

public transport 

infrastructure 

% of paved road s in the national road 

network 

Refers to p roportion of paved roads in the national road network .

% of rehabilitated roads in the 

departmental road network 

Refers to p roportion of rehabilitated roads in the departmental road network .87 

Ensure access to 

safe, efficient and 

affordable mobility 

Antiquity of vehicle fleet  Refers to the a verage number of years of the vehicle fleet in operati on.

Number of deaths from traffic 

accidents 

Refers to the n umber of deaths from traffic accidents recorded by the National Police of Peru .

Ensure full access 

to developed 

infrastructure and 

communication 

technology 

Localities with access to mobile 

services 

Refers to the n umber of localities with access to mobile services (installed and operating ).

Localities with access to internet 

services 

Refers to the n umber of localities with access to internet services (installed and operating ).

Cross -cutting: Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all 

Publish and use 

economic, social 

and environmental 

accounts in all 

governments and 

companies 

% of environmental impact 

assessments for mining projects 

approved at the provided time 

Refers to p roportion of mining projects with environmental impact assessments approved timely by 

the General Directorate of Mining Envi ronmental Affairs 

Safeguard 

ecosystems and 

biodiversity 

Mining environmental liabilities  Environmental liabilities refer to environmental damage, in terms of water, soil and air pollution as 

well as deterioration of natural resources and ecosystems, caused by mining companies during 

regular operation s or unforeseen accidents. 

Cross -cutting: Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve 

relationships 

between the 

government ,

companies and 

communities 

Number of actions, program me s and 

projects to prevent socio -

environmental conflicts 

This indicator will consider the n umber of cases of conflict prevention attended to by the Office for 

National Dialogue and Sustainability .

Number of mechanisms for citizen 

participation 

This indicator will consider the n umber of processes of prior consultation. Enacted in 2011, the Prior 

Consultation Law ( Law No. 29785) formally recognis es the right of indigenous or native peoples to 

be consulted prior to legislative or administrative provisions that directly affect their collective rights, 

physical existence, identity , culture, quality of life or development (Ministerio de Cultura 2015) .

Accreditations for small mining 

producers and artisanal min ing 

producers 

This indicator will consider the n umber of small mining producers and artisanal min ing producers 

accredited by the Ministry of Energy and Mining .

Promote rational, 

orderly and 

sustainable 

occupation of 

national territory 

Local governments with approved 

territorial management instruments 

Refers to p roportion of local governments with territorial management instruments ( e.g., ecological -

economic zoni ng , territorial management) approved by the Ministry of Hous ing, Construction and 

Sanitation .

Households with property titles  Refers to p roportion of households with property titles registered in the National Superintendency of 

Public Registries .

Table 1 .5 Establish a sustainable, healthy and resilient environment for all: Targets and  indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Build resilience and 

reduce deaths from 

natural hazards 

Disaster deaths per 1,000 inhabitants  Hazard: A dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause loss of 

life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihoods and services, social and 

economic disruption, or environmental damage. Includes: Avalanche, Col d Wave, Cyclone, Drought, 88 

Earthquake, Epidemic and Pandemic , Flood, Heat Wave, Insect Infestation , Landslide; NBC –

Nuclear, Biological, Chemical , Storm Surge , Tornado , Tsunami , Volcano , Wildfire (UNISDR 2007). 

Disaster: A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread 

human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the 

affected community or society to cope using its own resources (UNISDR 2007). 

Safeguard 

ecosystems and 

biodiversity 

Net loss in forest area (% of land 

area) 

Forest: Land spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 met ers and a canopy cover 

of more than 10 percent, or trees able to reach these thresholds in situ. It does not include land that 

is predominantly under agricultural or urban land use (FAO 2012). 

Trends in coverage of protected 

areas 

The indicator measures the policy response to biodiversity loss. An increase in protected area 

coverage indicates increased efforts by governments and civil society to protect land and sea areas 

with a view to achieve the long -term conservation of biodiver sity with associated ecosystem services 

and cultural values (BIP 2014). Note: The data provided show how protected areas are managed 

based on International Union for the Conservation of Nature categor ies and include marine areas. 

Publish and use 

economic, social and 

environmental 

accounts in all 

governments and 

companies 

Share of large tax unit taxpayers 

using integrated reporting 

Integrated reporting is a process founded on integrated thinking that results in a periodic integrated 

report by an organisatio n about value creation over time and related communications regarding 

aspects of value creation. An integrated report is a concise communication about how an 

organisation’s strategy, governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external 

env ironment, lead to the creation of value in the short, medium and long term (IIRC 2013). Large 

taxpayers are very different from other categories of taxpayers and present certain significant risks 

to effective tax administration. Major characteristics of la rge taxpayers include: concentration of 

revenues, complexity of the business and tax dealing, withhold agent or intermediary role, uses of 

professional tax advisors and possession of in -house tax organisation. Businesses may be publicly 

listed corporations , multinational companies or private groups (OECD 2009). 

Existence of national and sub -

national government publishing 

according to the System of 

Environmental -Economic Accounting 

The System of Environmental -Economic Accounting contains the internationally agreed standard 

concepts, definitions, classifications, accounting rules and tables for producing internationally 

comparable statistics on the environment and its relationship wit h the economy. The system follows 

a similar accounting structure as the System of National Accounts and uses concepts, definitions 

and classifications consistent with it in order to facilitate the integration of environmental and 

economic statistics (UNSta ts 2014). 

National 

Improve air and 

water quality 

Air quality  This indicator will consider o utdoor concentrations of fine particulate matter (PM10) in 10 prioritis ed 

cities .

Drainage basins that pass 

environmental quality assessment 

Refers to the n umber of drainage basins that pass environmental quality assessment according to 

the criteria of the Ministry of Environment. Environmental quality standards regulate th e

concentration level s of elements, substances or parameters (physical, chemical or biological ) in the 

air, water or soil. Levels must not represent significant risk to the heal th of people or the environment 

(MINAM 2012 a).

Address climate 

change 

Rate of greenhouse gas emissions 

intensity 

Greenhouse gas emissions refer to gigagrams of carbon dioxide equivalent , carbon dioxide ,

methane or nitrous oxide .

Safeguard 

ecosystems and 

biodiversity 

Area r eforested annually  Refers to hectares of land that are reforested a nnually .

Mining environmental liabilities  Environmental liabilities refer to environmental damage, in terms of water, soil and air pollution as 

well as deterioration of natural resources and ecosystems, caused by mining companie s during 

regular operation s or unforeseen accidents .

Investment in protected natural areas 

per hectare 

Refers to t otal investment in protected natural areas by protected hectares, in local currency (soles) .89 

Implement 

integrated solid 

waste management 

Per capita spending on management 

of solid waste      

> Refers to total real per capita spending on solid waste management in the country .

Build resilience and 

reduce vulnerability 

to natural hazards 

Economic losses in infrastructure due 

to natural disasters (% of GDP)    

> Refers to economic loss es in infrastructure that an individual, person or institution may incur as a
> result of a natural disaster. The indicator is expressed as a percentage of the countr y’s GDP .

Publish and use 

economic, social and 

environmental 

accounts in all 

governments and 

companies 

% of environmental impact 

assessments for mining projects 

approved at the provided time        

> Proportion of mining projects with environmental impact assessments approved timely by the
> General Directorate of Mining Environmental Affairs .

Cross -cutting:  Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive society 

Improve 

relationships 

between the 

government ,

companies and 

communities 

Number of socio -environmental 

conflicts  

> Refers to the a verage monthly number of socio -environmental conflicts during the year.

Table 1 .6 Establish open, accountable, inclusive and effective institutions, rule of law and a peaceful and inclusive society : Targets 

and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Provide free and 

universal legal 

identity, such as 

birth registrations 

Percentage of children under 5 who 

are registered with the civil authority  

> Refers to the number of children under five registered with the civil authority as a percentage of the
> total population of children under five.

Proportion of adults with a basic legal 

identity document 

> Refers to the number of adults (individuals over 18 years of age) with a basic legal identity document
> as a percentage of the total adult population.

Monitor and end 

discrimination and 

inequalities in public 

service delivery, the 

rule of law, access to 

justice and 

participation in 

political and 

economic life on the 

basis of social status 

Average time between filing a case 

and receiving a verdict  

> Refers to the average number of days that elapse from the time of filing a case and receiving a
> verdict.

Proportion of seats held by women 

and minorities in national or local 

level government  

> Refers to the proportion of women and minorities in the Peruvian Congress.

% of adults with an account at a 

formal financial institution, 

disaggregated by sex  

> Denotes the percentage of population with an account (self or together with someone else) at a
> bank, credit union, other financial institution (e.g. ,cooperative, microfinance institution) or post office
> (if applicable) including individuals who have a debit card (Demirguc -Kunt and Klapper 2012). Note:
> This is the same indicator as used under energy and infrastructure, disaggregated by sex.

90 

Improve personal 

safety 

Prevalence of violence against 

women, including domestic violence 

Violence against women is “any act of gender -based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, 

physical, sexual or mental harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or 

arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life ” (UN 1993). Would likely 

be based on self -reporting (survey data). 

Violent death per 100,000 people  Classification of violent death includes killings in war or conflicts, non -conflict deaths and self -

inflicted deaths (suicides), while non -conflict deaths include intentional homicide, killings in self -

defense , killings in legal interventions and non -intentional homicide (UNODC 2014). 

Reduce bribery and 

corruption in all 

forms 

Survey data regarding bribes or gifts 

for service from a government official 

– “In the past year, how often (if ever) 

have you had to pay a bribe, give a 

gift, or do a favour to government 

officials in order to get a document or 

receive a service ”

Refers to the proportion of people who have paid a bribe in the past year at time of being surveyed. 

Improve 

transparency in the 

revenue system 

Share of eligible taxpayers who 

submit their taxes 

Refers to the proportion of eligible taxpayers who submit their taxes for a given tax year as a 

percentage of eligible taxpayers. 

National 

Improve security and 

reduce violence 

Social tolerance of child 

maltreatment 

This indicator will consider p arents who consider physical (and psychological) maltreatment to be 

valid for educating children .

Women affected by domestic 

violence who make a denouncement 

Refers to p roportion of women affected by violence who make a denouncement. Violence is defined 

as “any act of gender -based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or mental 

harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of 

liberty, wheth er occurring in public or in private life ” (UN 1993). 

% of girls and boys affected by 

domestic violence 

Refers to p ro portion of children affected by violence in home. Violence might be physical or 

psychological .

% of girls and boys affected by 

violence in school 

Refers to p roportion of children affected by violence in school. Violence might be physical or 

psychological .

Victimis ation rate  Refers to p roportion of people who have been victims of crime .

Increase social 

reintegration 

% of re -entrant s in prison population  Refers to p roportion of re -entrant s in the total prison population. A “re -entrant ” is a person who 

registers two or more entrance s to a prison, without discriminating if at the time of admission the 

person was sentenced or process ed .

Ratio between sente nced and 

processed as inmate 

Refers to the ratio of sentenced inmates to processed inmates. Inmates are people in prison. 

Prison overcrowding  Refers to the p rison population over holding capacity .

Establish a strong 

state and fight 

against corruption 

Perceptions of corruption  Will use an i ndex of perceptions of corruption . Perception s of corruption are measured by a single 

question, the answers to which are recoded on a scale of 0 –100, where 0 represents the perception 

that corruption is not widespread among public officials and 100 represents the perception that 

corruption is very widespread (see Carrión, Zárate and Seligson 2012) .

Monitor and end 

discrimination and 

inequalities in 

Wage gap between indigenous and 

non -indigenous people s with 

comparable levels of education 

Refers to the indigenous median hourly wage as a percentage of the non -indigenous median hourly 

wage. 91 

economic life on the 

basis of social status 

Improve 

relationships 

between the 

government ,

companies and 

communities 

Number of socio -environmental 

conflicts 

Refers to the a verage monthly number of socio -environmental conflicts during the year. 

Number of actions, program me s and 

projects to prevent socio -

environmental conflicts 

This indicator will consider the n umber of cases of conflict prevention attended to by the Office for 

National Dialogue and Sustainability .

Number of mechanisms for citizen 

participation 

This indicator will consider the n umber of processes of prior consultation. Enacted in 2011, the Prior 

Consultation Law ( Law No. 29785) formally recognis es the right of indigenous or native peoples to 

be consulted prior to legislative or administrative pro visions that directly affect their collective rights, 

physical existence, identity , culture, quality of life or development (Ministerio de Cultura 2015) .

Accreditations for small mining 

producers and artisanal min ing 

producers 

This indicator will consider the n umber of small mining producers and artisanal min ing producers 

accredited by the Ministry of Energy and Mining .

Promote rational, 

orderly and 

sustainable 

occupation of 

national territory 

Local governments with approved 

territorial management instruments 

Refers to p roportion of local governments with territorial management instruments ( e.g., ecological -

economic zoni ng. Territorial Management) approved by the Ministry of Hous ing, Construction and 

Sanitation .

Households with property titles  Refers to p roportion of households with property titles registered in the National Superintendence of 

Public Registries .

Land titles processed on time  Refers to p roportion of land titles processed timely .

Table 1 .7 Establish a global partnership for  sustainable development: Targets and indicators 

Target  Indicator  Definition/Note 

Global 

Create an enabling 

environment for 

sustainable 

development 

Low -income country debt forgiveness 

or reduction (% of GDP) 

Debt forgiveness or reduction shows the change in debt stock due to debt forgiveness. It is derived by 

subtracting debt forgiven and debt stock reduction from debt buyback ( World Bank 2014a ). 

Share of trade in goods and services 

from low -income countries under duty -

free, quota -free market access 

This indicator tracks the proportion of goods and services from low -income countries that enter Peru 

under preferential market access. 

Existence of laws for ensuring 

country -by -country reporting by 

multinational corporations, disclosure 

of beneficial ownership and the 

prevention of money laundering 

Meant to pro vide an indication of countries’ efforts to address tax evasion and prevent money 

laundering. 

Increase financing to 

productive capacity 

in low - and middle -

income countries 

Share of aid to the productive sector  Aid defined as official development assistance and other official flows . Productive sector defined as 

infrastructure, agriculture and manufacturing. 

Proportion of foreign direct investment 

to the productive sector 

Productive sector defined as infrastructure, agriculture and manufacturing. 

Share of South -South cooperation to 

the productive sector 

Productive sector defined as infrastructure, agriculture and manufacturing. 92 

# Annex 2. Sources to Monitor Post-2015 

Table  2.1 Potential sources for monitoring the  Post -2015 agenda in Peru 

Sources  Description  Major Changes  Implication of Changes  Goal Area 

National Census 

of Population and 

Housing – INEI 

The National Census of Population and Housing 

is designed to provide information about the 

demographic and social characteristics of the 

population and households in Peru. It is a 

mandatory survey that has been conducted every 

decade . Data are available online for 1981, 1993 

and 2007. 

Fixed period: In accordance with INEI 

(2013b), the National Census of Population 

and Hous ing is conducted every 10 years 

approximately , as is stated in the Law on 

the Census (Law No. 13248 ). The next 

census will be conducted in 2017. 

Reliability: A smaller (and fixed) 

interval for the collection of census 

data would enable more precise 

population projections as they could be 

updated with greater frequency. 

 Education 

 Poverty 

 Environment 

National 

Household 

Survey – INEI 

The  National Household Survey  is the primary 

source for statistics about poverty, health, 

education, employment, governance, income and 

expenditure. It is a voluntary survey that  has 

collect ed  data every year (and quarterly since 

2011).  Information is  available  online from 1997 

to  2014. 

Methodology: In 2007, the sampling frame 

for the survey was changed (CAIMCP 

2008). In 2012 , the methodology was 

changed to update poverty lines and 

weights. They were previously based on the 

methodology in the National Household 

Survey of 1997 and it was updated with the 

2007 Census information (INEI 2014 c). 

Comparability: The new methodology 

complicate s long -term compar ison s.

Data are available for the new 

methodology from 2004 , so the years 

between 2004 and 2014 are 

comparable. 

 Poverty 

 Education 

 Employment 

and inclusive 

growth 

 Governance 

 Energy and 

infrastructure 

Demographic and 

Health Survey –

INEI 

The Demographic and Health Survey gather s

information about the health issues of children 

under 5 and women between 15 and 49 years of 

age. It is a voluntary survey that collects data 

every year. Information is available for 1996, 

2000 and 2004 –13. 

Representativeness: Since 2009, the 

survey increased its sample s in 430 clusters 

which enables better sub -regi onal 

inference s (INEI 2014b) .

Reliability: Since 2009, reliable 

indicators have been available by 

region. 

 Poverty 

 Governance 

National School 

Census – Ministry 

of Education 

The National School Census is the primary 

source of information about students, teachers 

and school infrastructure. It collects data on 

public and private educational institutions at all 

levels and modalities, except university 

education. It is a mandatory annual survey. 

Information is available online from 2004 to 2014. 

There have been no major changes in 

terms of data collection methodology. 

Information sources for filling out the survey 

include school administrative records and 

inventor ies of furniture a nd equipment. 

Since 2010, the National Census of 

Population and Housing has also collect ed 

information about non -academic early 

education and alt ernative basic education 

(MINEDU  2011) .

Since more information has been 

collected since 2010, more specific 

indicators can be calculated .

 Education 

Census 

Evaluation of 

Students –

Ministry of 

Education 

The Census Evaluation of Students assesses 

reading comprehension and math. It is directed to 

children in the second grade at the primary s chool 

level or fourth grade of intercultural bilingual 

education . It is a mandatory annual evaluation. 

Information is available online from 2009 to 2013. 

There have been no major changes in 

terms of data collection methodology. 

 Education 

Financial 

Inclusion 

Indicators of 

Financial 

Systems, 

The Financial Inclusion Indicators of Financial 

Systems, Insurance and Pension contains 

information about the financial system’s ability to 

make financial services available to the entire 

population. The report compiles administrative 

There have been no major changes.   Governance 

 Energy and 

infrastructure 93 

Insurance and 

Pension –

Superintendence 

of Banking and 

Insurance 

banking and insurance data and is published 

twice per year in June and December. Information 

is available online from December 2010 to June 

2014 

National Energy 

Balance –

Ministry of Energy 

and Mining 

National Energy Balance is a report that 

summaris es information about the use of energy 

in Peru. One of its most important data sources is 

the Economic -Energetic Information System of 

the Latin America n Energy Organization, the 

information of which is not public ly access ible. 

The Ministry of Energy and Mining publishes the 

report every three years. Reports were published 

in 2009 and 2012. 

There have been no major changes in 

terms of data collection methodology. The 

Ministry of Energy and Mining does not 

collect its own data. National Energy 

Balance 2009 and National Energy Balance 

2012 were published two years after their 

re ference years. National Energy Balance 

2014 was published in January 2014. 

Indicators cannot be calculated by 

year. Also, indicators are calculated 

two years after their reference years .

 Energy and 

infrastructure 

Statistics on 

emergencies and 

damages –

National Civil 

Defen ce Institute 

Statistics available through the National Civil 

Defence Institute include those on personal 

damages ( deaths and affected, missing or injured 

people) and property damage (housing and crops 

affecte d) caused by natural disasters. Information 

is available online from 2003 to 2013. 

There have been no major changes in 

terms of data collection methodology. The 

institute ’s Centre for National Operations is 

responsible for statistical calculations . Data 

ar e registered per day. Every natural 

disaster that the institute is informed of 

appears online ( INDECI  2014). 

Deaths are only registered if the 

institute is informed of the disaster , so 

deaths can be underreported . The 

institute tr ies to update its web site 

every day. 

 Environment 

Map of Analysis 

of Coverage 

Change of Forest 

to Non-Forest for 

Deforestation in 

the Peruvian 

Amazon –

Ministry of 

Environment 

The Ministry of Environment provides a 

geographic information system for monitoring 

changes in forest cover and land use, 

deforestation and forest degradation in Peru. 

Information is only available for eight sub -regions: 

San Mart ín, Loreto, Ucayali, Hu ánuco, Pasco, 

Amazonas, Cuzco and Jun ín. Data are 

occasionally collected with Landsat software. 

Informatio n is available online for 2000 , 2005 and 

2009 and 2009 –11 ( there were two major 

projects). 

In the first project, data were aggregated to 

show the average change in forest cover for 

the years 2000 , 2005 and 2009 (MINAM 

2014 c). In the second project , data showed 

change between 2009 and 2010 and then 

between 2010 and 2011 (MINAM 2014b). 

Information is only available online for 

these two projects. Though inter -

institutional collaboration, the Ministry 

of Environment and Carnegie 

Institution for Science ha ve continued 

measuring deforestation, but data have 

not been updated since 2011. There is 

no information about the frequency of 

data collection. 

 Environment 

National Service 

of Natural Areas 

Protected by the 

State – Ministry of 

Environment 

The National Service of Natural Areas Protected 

by the State is a specialised technical body that 

provides data on natural protected areas in 

hectares. It offers administrative information 

about national and private protected areas. 

Information is available online from 2006 to 2013. 

In accorda nce with the PENDES (INEI 

2013 b), an a dequate , standardis ed 

methodology for calculation s on the control 

and surveillance of protected natural areas 

has been in place since 2014 . Also, 2014 

now serve s as the base year for annual 

update s of situational diagnostic s on 

infrastructure, control and surveillance, 

granted rights and reforested territory in 

protected natural areas. 

Since 2014, information has been 

disaggregated by year. Previously ,

information was only available on 

currently protected areas. 

 Environment 

Peruvian 

Congress 

(Statistical office) 

Administrative data are available on members of 

Congress, mayor s and regional presidents. 

Congressional elections are held every five years .

Before 2011, there were 120 member s of 

Congress. Currently the re are 130. 

Indicators expressed in terms of 

percentages are comparable across 

years. 

 Governance 

National 

Superintendenc y

of Tax 

Administration 

(Statistical Office) 

Data are available on taxes, taxpayers and the 

tax base by year and sub -region of Peru. 

Administrative data are updated online monthly 

and currently available from 1998 to 2013. 

Given that information is in the form of 

administrative data , there have not been 

major changes in terms of data collection 

methodology. 

 Governance 94 

Crime records of 

police stations in 

Peru – INEI 

Crime records are sources of administrative data 

on types of crimes and where they occurred. Data 

are available online for 2011 and 2013. 

In 2014, the INEI for the first time collected 

information from eve ry police station in Peru 

(INEI 2014e ). Before 2014, criminality 

indicators were calculated by the Ministry of 

the Interior , but there were problems with 

the registr ies of some stations. 

Before 2014, the only crime statistic 

available was intentional homicide. 

Now various indicators can be 

calculated . Data can be disaggregated 

by type of crime and sub -region. Data 

only exist for 2011 and 2013. There is 

no information about dates for future 

data collection. 

 Governance 

Grants and 

projects of the 

Peruvian Agency 

of International 

Cooperation 

The Peruvian Agency of International 

Cooperation provides information on public and 

private international cooperation grant s managed 

by the government . Data have been updated 

since 2004 every time there is a new project. 

Data are not aggregated. 

Given that information is in the form of 

administrative data , there have not been 

major changes in terms of data collection 

methodology. Free access is provided to a 

matrix of information about international 

cooperation activities .

 Global 

partnership 95 

# Annex 3. Data Quality Assessment Framework 

Table 3.1  Data quality assessment framework 

Criteria  Components 

(scale) 

Sub -components (scale) 

Relevance  Completeness 

Main Question: How 

complete are the data? 

Policy requirements for data collection 

Guidelines for data collection 

Procedures to coordinate statistical information 

Procedures to perform regular programme reviews 

Advisory council to advise on statistical priorities 

Availability of metadata 

User needs 

Main Question: Do the 

data correspond with 

user needs? 

Agreements with user about the data content and priorities 

Procedures to track user needs and uses of the statistics 

Information about the survey objectives 

Legislative requirement to consult with the user on data collection 

User satisfaction 

Main Question: Do the 

data satisfy user needs? 

Regular follow -ups with users to ensure user satisfaction 

Periodic consultations with users to check for their feedback 

Post -collection evaluations to compare data outcomes with user needs 

Accuracy and 

reliability 

Sampling and non -

sampling errors 

Main Question: What 

procedures are in place 

to reduce sampling and 

non -sampling errors? 

Measurement, evaluation and systematic documentation of sampling and non -

sampling errors 

Mechanisms to ensure survey samples closely represent the population under study 

Quality assurance plan to prevent, monitor and evaluate non -sampling errors 

Compilation of user feedback to assess the relevance of the statistical study for user 

purposes 

Systematic and random 

errors 

Main Question: What 

procedures are in place 

to reduce systematic 

and random errors? 

Systems to assess source data, intermediate results and statistical outputs 

Procedures to measure and reduce errors 

Regular assessment of data sources 

Systematic comparison of data and results with data and results from other existing 

sources to ensure validity 

Assessment report of statistical discrepancies in intermediate data 

Revisions analysed to improve statistical process 

Revision measures 

Main Question: What 

measures are in place to 

revise the data? 

Policies for documenting principles and procedures for data revision 

Transparent and standard procedures for revising data 

Periodic quality reporting on the accuracy of data collected 

Public access to revision policies 

Information that clearly identifies preliminary and revised data 

Information that shows timely correction of errors found in published statistics 

Timeliness and 

punctuality 

Timeliness 

Main Question: How 

quickly are the data 

released for 

dissemination or further 

processing? 

Release policy distinguishing between statistical outputs and the corresponding 

release procedures and timeliness targets 

Compliance with timeliness targets like the International Monetary F und data 

dissemination standards 

Official calendar to announce advance release dates of major statistics 

Attainable schedule for the production process 

Maximum time allowed to elapse between the end of the reference period and the 

availability of the data 

Procedures to ensure timely and effective flow of data from providers 

Procedures to consult with users about the periodicity of the statistics 

Punctuality 

Main Question: Whether 

the data are delivered 

according to the official 

due date? 

Action or contingency plans to address delays in data release date 

Procedures to regularly monitor the punctuality of every release as per the release 

calendar 

Notifications provided for any divergences from the advanced release time and 

publication of new release dates 

Formal explanations provided in the event of a delay 

Accessibility and 

clarity 

Accessibility 

Main Question: How 

easily are the data 

accessible? 

Data dissemination strategy and policy, including clear pricing policy for governing 

the dissemination 

Policy or guideline to ensure that the data are made available to all users (including 

any restrictions that may apply) 

Strategies to release data, metadata and microdata 

Availability of publication catalogues for users 

Application of information and communication technology to disseminate data (in 

addition to hard copy publications) 96 

Navigable website that allows users to access data and metadata and facilitates self -

tabulation in a variety of formats 

Periodic consultation with users to ensure dissemination formats satisfy user needs 

Procedures to request data that are not readily available to the public 

Clarity 

Main Question: How 

clearly are the data 

presented to all users? 

Guidelines describing the appropriate content and preferred formats and style of the 

agency's outputs 

Presentation of statistics that facilitate proper interpretation and meaningful 

comparisons 

Regular production of up -to -date methodological documents and quality reports 

Staff training and development programmes for writing about statistics 

User support or information services for handling questions related to the data 

Procedure to annotate differences between international standards, guidelines or 

good practices 

Statistics presented in a clear and understandable manner 

Explanatory texts accompany the data 

Meaningful comparisons included in the publication 

Metadata and microdata 

Main Question: How 

accessible and readable 

are the metadata and 

microdata? 

Policies to provide documentation on concepts, scope, classifications, data sources, 

basis of recording, compilation methods, etc. with the re lease of statistical results 

Procedures to ensure metadata are documented according to standardised metadata 

systems 

Procedures to ensure metadata are updated regularly 

Availability of microdata 

Rules and protocols for accessing microdata 

Coherence and 

comparability 

Consistency 

Main Question: How 

consistent are the data 

internally or cross -

sectorally? 

Policy promoting cooperation and exchange of knowledge between individual 

statistical programmes/domains 

Specific guidelines for individual statistical programmes/domains to ensure outputs 

obtained from complementary sources are properly combined 

Process -specific procedures to ensure outputs are internally coherent 

Information provided to users on the effects of changes in methodologies on final 

estimates 

Comparability 

Main Question: How 

comparably are the data 

over time? 

Extent to which statistics derived from different sources or different periodicities are 

comparable 

Clear explanation and reconciliation provided for any methodological changes or 

differences 

Analysis of the major related statistics before designing a new individual statistical 

programme/domain 

Comparison provided with other statistical sources that contain the same or similar 

information (including identification of divergences with explanations) 

Standardisation 

Main Question: Are the 

data produced using 

common standards with 

respect to scope, 

definitions, 

classifications and 

units? 

Com mon standards for concepts, definitions, units and classifications to promote 

coherence, consistency and comparability of the statistics 

Periodic assessment of compliance with international and national standards for 

statistical production 

Explanation provided for any deviations from international and national standards to 

users 

Reference made to common repository of concepts, definitions and classifications 

when designing a new individual statistical programme/domain 

Quality reporting includes assessment of internal consistency and comparability over 

time 97 

Published on 28 April 2016 

## Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD) 

House 40/C, Road 32, Dhanmondi R/A 

Dhaka 1209, Bangladesh 

Telephone: (+88 02) 8124770, 9141734, 9141703 

Fax: (+88 02) 8130951 

E-mail:  info@cpd.org.bd 

Web:  http://cpd.org.bd/ 

## The N orman Paterson School of International Affairs 

5306 River Building 

1125 Colonel By Drive 

Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6 Canada 

Telephone: 613 -520 -6655 

Fax: 613 -520 -2889 

E-mail: international.affairs@carleton.ca 

Web: https://carleton.ca/npsia/ 

## Southern Voice on Post -MDG International Development Goal s

House 40/C, Road 32, Dhanmondi R/A 

Dhaka 1209, Bangladesh 

Telephone: (+88 02) 8124770, 9141734, 9141703 

Fax: (+88 02) 8130951 

E-mail:  southernvoice2015@gmail.com 

Web:  http://southernvoice -postmdg.org
