Title: "The Aftermath of Terrorism: The Islamophobic Rhetoric of Donald Trump and Narendra Modi"

URL Source: https://research.library.fordham.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1052&context=international_senior

Published Time: Fri, 28 May 2021 20:37:27 GMT

Markdown Content:
Fordham University Fordham University 

# Fordham Research Commons Fordham Research Commons 

Senior Theses  International Studies 

Spring 5-16-2020 

# "The Aftermath of Terrorism: The Islamophobic Rhetoric of "The Aftermath of Terrorism: The Islamophobic Rhetoric of 

# Donald Trump and Narendra Modi" Donald Trump and Narendra Modi" 

Joshua Jonathan Somrah   

> Follow this and additional works at: https://research.library.fordham.edu/international_senior
> Part of the International Relations Commons

Somrah 1

# The Aftermath of Terrorism: 

# The Islamophobic Rhetoric of 

# Donald Trump and Narendra Modi 

By: Joshua Jonathan Somrah 

Thesis for B.A. in International Studies 

Thesis Advisor: Aseel Sawalha 

Thesis Class Advisor: Caley Johnson Somrah 2

Table of Contents 

I. Abstract ……………………………………………………………………………Page 4

II. Introduction ………………………………………………………………………..Page 4

III. Methodology ………………………………………………………………………Page 5

IV. Theoretical Framework of the Causes of Terrorism ………………………………Page 5

A. The Permissive Causes of Terrorism According to Martha Crenshaw ……Page 6

B. The Enabling Causes of Terrorism According to Martha Crenshaw ……...Page 7

C. My Contribution to Martha Crenshaw’s Theoretical Framework ……… …Page 9

V. In Terms of “Jihad”: Literature Review Abo ut Terrorist Attacks ………………... .Page 10 

A. Jihad in the United States Through the Actions of Lone Wolves ………....Page 12 

B. Jihad in India Through the Actions of Jaish -e-Muhammad ……………….Page 13 

VI. Case Study of The United States of America ……………………………………...Page 15 

A. The S eptember 11, 2001 Attacks: The Trigger of Major United States 

Initiatives Against Terrorism ………………………………………………Page 16 

B. The 2015 San Bernardino Attack ………………………………………….Page 17 

1. Donald Trump’s Response to the San Bernardino Attack ………Page 18 

C. The 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting ……………………………………Page 19 

1. Dona ld Trump’s Response to the Orlando Nightclub Shooting ...Page 21 

VII. The Outcome of Donald Trump’s Anti -Muslim Rhetoric: Executive Orders and 

The Muslim Ban …………………………………………………………………..Page 21 

VIII. Case Study of India ……………………………………………………………….Page 24 

A. The 1947 Partition of India: Historical Context with Regards to 

Kashmir …………………………………………………………………...Page 25Somrah 3

B. The 2016 Uri Attack ………………………………………………………Page 26 

1. Naren dra Modi’s Response to the Uri Attack …………………..Page 27 

C. The 2019 Pulwama Attack ………………………………………………..Page 29 

1. Narendra Modi’ s Response to the Pulwama Attack …………….Page 30 

IX. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Hindu Nationalism …………………………Page 31 

A. The Outcome of Narendra Modi’s Anti -Muslim Rhetoric: Revocation 

of Article 370 and Article 35A of the Indian Constitution ………………..Page 35  

> X.

Analysis Tying Martha Crenshaw’s Theoretical Framework to the 

Lone Wolves and Jaish -e-Mohammed …………… ………………………………Page 38 

A. Analysis Pertaining to the Lone Wolves ………………………………….Page 40 

B. Analysis Pertaining to Jaish -e-Mohammed ……………………………….Page 41 

XI. Conclusion ………………………………………………………………………...Page 42 

XII. Works Cited ……………………………………………………………………….Page 44 Somrah 4

Abstract 

The purpose of this thesis is to compare the Islamophobic rhetoric of Trump after the 

2015 San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclu b Shooting with the Islamophobic 

rhetoric of Modi after the 2016 Uri Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack and to analyze how the 

Anti -Muslim rhetoric of Trump and Modi affected the lives of Muslims within their countries 

and abroad . I argue that Trump and Mo di used Anti -Muslim language in the wake of the four 

terrorist attacks mentioned above for their own political agendas, which resulted in Anti -Muslim 

political decisions that affected the lives of many Muslims within their countries and abroad .

Introduction 

Terrorism is not an inherently new phenomenon. The terms “terrorist” and “terrorism” 

actually originated during the French Revolution in the late 18 th century (Rapin 165) . However, 

in recent years, the terms “terrorist” and “terrorism” have become conflated with Islam. This is 

inherently problematic because Islam cannot simply be reduced to a single idea. Islam has 

existed as a religion for centuries and there are multiple branches and multiple schools of thought 

of Islam. Nevertheless, there continues to be an increase in links being drawn between terrorism 

and Islam in the speeches and statements of political leaders and commentators. President 

Donald Trump of the United Stat es of America and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India are 

two such political leaders that have linked terrorism and Islam together numerous times. This 

thesis will explore the Islamophobic rhetoric of Trump after the 2015 San Bernardino Attack and 

the 20 16 Orlando Nightclub Shooting and the Islamophobic rhetoric of Modi after the 2016 Uri 

Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack and analyze how the Anti -Muslim rhetoric of Trump and 

Modi affected the lives of Muslims within their countries and abroad . I argue that Trump and 

Modi used Anti -Muslim language in the wake of the four terrorist attacks mentioned above for Somrah 5

their own political agendas, which resulted in Anti -Muslim political decisions that affected the 

lives of many Muslims within their countries and a broad .

Methodology 

Throughout this thesis, I will use quotes from newspapers based in the United States of 

America and India as well as from speeches and statements given by Donald Trump and 

Narendra Modi in which they refer to Islam and/or Muslims in the wake of the 2015 San 

Bernardino Attack, the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting, the 2016 Uri Attack , and the 2019 

Pulwama Attack in order to analyze how their Anti -Muslim rhetoric affected the lives of 

Muslims within their countries and abroad. 

Theoretical F ramework of the Causes of Terrorism 

Martha Crenshaw is an expert in terrorism studies and a senior fellow at the Center for 

International Security and Cooperation, which is a center of the Freeman Spogli Institute for 

International Studies, a research and education institution at Stanford University ( Crenshaw, 

“Martha”). Crenshaw was one of the pioneers in terrorism studies, and she contributed writings 

about the various aspects of terrorism ( Crenshaw, “Martha”). As a pioneer in terrorism studi es, 

her writing on the causes of terrorism specifically ha s been cited over a thousand times since it 

was written in 1981, and I will be citing her ideas here as contributing to the theoretical 

framework of my thesis. Crenshaw believes that there is no fu ndamental difference between 

‘old’ terrorism and ‘new’ terrorism, so even though her writing about the causes of terrorism was 

first published in 1981, it continues to be applicable today (Crenshaw, “The Debate” 136). 

Crenshaw described four permissive cau ses of terrorism, which means that these causes 

provide opportunities for terrorism to happen, and four enabling causes of terrorism, which 

means that these causes directly inspire and motivate terrorism (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 381). Somrah 6

The Permissive Causes of Terrorism According to Martha Crenshaw 

In terms of permissive causes of terrorism, there are four key aspects: modernization, 

urbanization, social facilitation, and the inability or unwillingness of a government to prevent 

terrorism. 

Modernization , the first permissive cause of terrorism, involves an increased complexity 

in a society and in an economy, which creates strengths and weaknesses, and networks of 

transportation and communication, which allow attackers to be mobile and public beings 

(Crenshaw, “The Causes” 381). Attackers have used trains and planes on multiple occasions to 

carry out their attacks. 

Secondly, urbanization , another permissive cause of terrorism, increases the amount and 

the availability of targets and methods of terrorist attack s (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 382). 

Terrorism as an “urban guerrilla warfare” propagated in Latin America in the late 1960s, but as 

Eric Hobsbawm, a British historian, mentioned, terrorism in cities came about after the urban 

renewal projects of the late 1850s and 1860s (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 382). P.N. Grabosky, a 

political scientist, argued that cities cause terrorism because they provide opportunities for 

potential targets to gather, for audiences to form, for people to maintain some degree of 

anonymity, an d for politicized and unstable inhabitants to meet and be recruited (Crenshaw, 

“The Causes” 382). Most notable attacks do in fact occur in urban spaces because of the large 

number of people that could be affected. 

Thirdly, social ‘facilitation ,’ another pe rmissive cause of terrorism, brings about civil 

strife because it involves “social habits and historical traditions” that encourage “the use of 

violence against the government” through protests, coups, or terrorism (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 

382). This is Cre nshaw’s argument, but I am critical of this view because protests and Somrah 7

demonstrations are viewed by many as a means of participating in democracies. Terrorism 

became a recognized political practice through myths and traditions (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 

382). Attitudes that bring about terrorism are disseminated internationally, and beliefs from one 

side of the world are able to influence attackers on another side of the world (Crenshaw, “The 

Causes” 382). Media also plays a part in this because of the way that certain attackers and 

terrorist organizations are talked about around the world. Information from one side of the world 

can reach the other side of the world within seconds. 

Fourthly, the inability or unwillingness of a government to prevent terrorism is the last 

permissive cause of terrorism that Crenshaw explains (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 382). The 

nonexistence of satisfactory police and intelligence teams allow for terrorist ideas to spread 

unchecked (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 382). This sometim es occurs because the cost of preventing 

terrorism is often too high for many governments (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 383). Per year, the 

United States spent about $25 billion in 2010 dollars before the September 11, 2001 attacks 

(Mueller 238). Per year, in th e decade after the September 11, 2001 attacks, the United States 

spent about $75 billion in 2010 dollars (Mueller 238). Even though the United States spends this 

much, it still cannot prevent all attacks, and other countries do not even have as much money as 

the United States to spend on counterterrorism. When the government is unable or unwilling to 

prevent terrorism, attackers have the upper hand and can use any type of attack to their 

advantage. 

The Enabling Causes of Terrorism According to Martha Crensh aw 

In terms of enabling causes of terrorism, there are four key aspects: the existence of 

concrete grievances among an identifiable subgroup of a larger population, the lack of Somrah 8

opportunity for political participation, context, and the concept of a precipit ating event that 

immediately precedes outbreaks of terrorism. 

The existence of concrete grievances among an identifiable subgroup of a larger 

population is the first enabling cause of terrorism that Crenshaw explains (Crenshaw, “The 

Causes” 383). Social mo vements are born to address complaints, gain equal rights, or create a 

separate state, and terrorism is a result of an extremist group of the larger social movement 

(Crenshaw, “The Causes” 383). The existence of concrete grievances among an identifiable 

su bgroup of a larger population is neither necessary nor sufficient for terrorism, but terrorism is a 

tool that is often chosen when the government is solely blamed for the grief of the subgroup of 

the larger population (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 383). Attacker s often claim allegiance to a larger 

group, and they often blame the government for the actions that they themselves have taken. 

Secondly, the lack of opportun ity for political participation is another enabling cause of 

terrorism because regimes that refus e to provide basic rights and oppress those who oppose them 

create discontent (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 383). If people are not allowed to speak freely 

against the government, those people will resort to other measures, such as terrorism. 

Thirdly, context is another enabling cause of terrorism when it affects the elite 

(Crenshaw, “The Causes” 384). Many attackers are young, well educated, and middle class 

people, but they are often disenchanted with the idea of a changing society and believe that they 

will no t have access to a changing system when they are more privileged than most in the society 

(Crenshaw, “The Causes” 384). This means that the people who should feel the most connected 

to society and have the greatest opportunities to better themselves, their livelihoods, and their 

societies often feel the most disconnected. The attackers that are part of the elite often have 

political experience and they may act on behalf of the larger populace even when the larger Somrah 9

populace has neither been consulted nor appr oved of the attackers ’ actions (Crenshaw, “The 

Causes” 384). As stated above, a ttackers often feel disconnected to the society that they are in 

and as a result they will attack it. The attackers that will be mentioned in the case studies are 

examples of th is. 

Fourthly, the concept of a precipitating event that immediately precedes outbreaks of 

terrorism is the last enabling cause of terrorism that Crenshaw explains (Crenshaw, “The 

Causes” 384). “Although it is generally thought that precipitants are the mos t unpredictable of 

causes, there does seem to be a common pattern of government actions that act as catalysts for 

terrorism” (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 384). When governments use unanticipated or uncommon 

means of force in response to protests, attackers ofte n feel compelled to react (Crenshaw, “The 

Causes” 384). This cause shows that there is a direct chain between a previous event or action 

mainly undertaken by a government and a subsequent event or action undertaken by attackers .

Analyses of these causes of terrorism are important because they allow people to 

understand why attackers did what they did and how they took advantage of certain opportunities 

and breeding grounds that they were provided in order to carry out their actions. The specific 

settings fo r terrorism allow different types of terrorist actions to be taken. Not all of the causes 

mentioned above are prevalent in each terrorist attack, and sometimes a terrorist attack may even 

be a combination of multiple causes mentioned above. 

My Contribution to Martha Crenshaw’s Theoretical Framework 

Martha Crenshaw believes that “terrorism is the result of an organization’s decision that 

it is a politically useful means to oppose a government” (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 384). Even 

though attackers do sometimes work through organizations, there are also attackers who work 

outside of organizations, something that Crenshaw does not address. This thesis will show some Somrah 10 

instances of terrorism through an organization with regards to the examples of the 2016 Uri 

Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack in Kashmir, whic h were both committed by the Jaish -e-

Mohammed, a Pakistan -based terrorist group, but this thesis will also show some instances of 

terrorism through lone wolves with regards to the examples of the 2015 San Bernardino Attack 

and the 2016 Orland o Nightclub Sh ooting, which were both committed by people who prepared 

and committed the terrorist attacks alone without specific help from any outside organization. 

Crenshaw also states “[g]overnment reactions that are inconsistent, wavering between 

tolerance and repr ession, seem most likely to encourage terrorism” (Crenshaw, “The Causes” 

396 ). In this thesis, I will show how the Trump government and the Modi government discussed 

these specific terrorist attacks with Anti -Muslim rhetoric in order to further their own p olitical 

agendas , which aligns with Crenshaw’s statement that the governments were inconsistent and 

wavered between tolerance and repression. Trump and Modi needed to show forth strength and 

condemn the terrorist attacks, which can be seen as repression, b ut they also used the terrorist 

attacks for their own political agendas , which can be seen as tolerance. 

In Terms of “Jihad”: Literature Review About Terrorist Attacks 

In the past twenty years, t he majority of literature about terrorist attacks include th e wor d

“jihad”. According to Shaykh Muhammad Hisham Kabbani, the Chairman of the Islamic 

Supreme Council of America, and Shaykh Seraj Hendricks, the Head Mufti (a Muslim legal 

expert who can give rulings on religious matters) in Cape Town, South Africa, t he Arabic word 

“jihad” is frequently translated to “holy war”, but linguistically the word “jihad” means 

struggling or striving, whereas the Arabic word for war is “al -harb” (Kabbani). In the Quran and 

in the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad, “jihad” has many meanings, such as internal and Somrah 11 

external attempts to be a good Muslim or believer, and working to tell people about Islam 

(Kabbani). 

If military jihad must occur in order to protect Islam from others then it can occur 

through legal, diplomatic, econom ic, and political means (Kabbani). Peaceful alternatives should 

always be used first, but if there is no peaceful alternative, then Islam permits the use of force, 

but there are strict rules that must be applied, such as the rules that innocents (women, ch ildren, 

or invalids) must never be harmed, and any peaceful propositions from the opposition must be 

accepted (Kabbani). Military action is only one means of jihad and it is highly infrequent, which 

can be seen from the quote, “This day we have returned fr om the minor jihad to the major jihad ,”

which the Prophet Muhammad said to his followers upon their returning from a battle (Kabbani). 

The quote means that they were returning from the armed battle (the minor jihad) to the peaceful 

battle for self -control ( the major jihad) (Kabbani). 

When military action is the only means necessary, it is important to note that not 

everyone is allowed to declare jihad (Kabbani). A proper authority figure, wh o is advised by 

scholars who say that Islam and Muslims are being threatened and violence is the only way to 

defend them, is t he only person who can declare jihad (Kabbani). Many political and religious 

groups have appropriated the notion of jihad over the centuries to justify violence, and in most 

cases Islamic factions have used jihad t o fight against established tenets of Islam, which means 

that the misuse of jihad goes against Islam (Kabbani). 

Jihad is not meant to be a violent concept, and it is not a pronouncement of war against 

other religions (Kabbani). The Quran refers to Jews an d Christians as “People of the Book” who 

should be protected and respected because according to the Quran, Muslims, Jews, and Somrah 12 

Christians worship the same God (Kabbani). Islam does not endorse most demands for violent 

jihad (Kabbani). 

Mahmood Mamdani, a Uga ndan author and political commentator , has written numerous 

scholarly articles on jihad and Muslims. One of his articles, Good Muslim, Bad Muslim: A 

Political Perspective on Culture and Terrorism , goes into detail about jihad. Mamdani says that 

jihad is rou ghly translated as “struggle,” and that there are two different traditions of jihad: jihad 

Akbar (the greater jihad) and jihad Asgar (the lesser jihad) (Mamdani 768). The greater jihad is a 

struggle against self -weaknesses, and it is about living and attai ning piousness in an unclean 

world (Mamdani 768). The lesser jihad is about self -preservation and self -defense, and it is this 

lesser jihad that has become so politically enveloped today (Mamdani 768). Until the 1980s, the 

Islamic World had not seen armed jihad in over 400 years (Mamdani 770). The United States 

helped to revive armed jihad, and the CIA did not just fund the jihad, but it also played a key role 

in training the mujahideen by turning religious madrasas into political schools for training troop s

(Mamdani 770). The United States reshaped jihad in order to have the people living in the 

Middle East fight against the Soviet Union (Mamdani 772). “[T]he United States did not accept 

responsibility for the militarization of civilian and state life in re gions where the Cold War was 

waged with devastating consequences, such as Southeast Asia, southern Africa, Central America 

and Central Asia; instead, it just walked away” (Mamdani 773). It is in this context that jihad 

became a big part of the current poli tical situation in the Middle East, the broader continent of 

Asia, the United States, and other parts of the world (Mamdani 773). 

Jihad in the United States Through the Actions of Lone Wolves 

The 2015 San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting in the United 

States have been discussed in terms of jihad and lone wolves. Before the 2017 Las Vegas Somrah 13 

Shooting, the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting was the “deadliest mass shooting” in t he history 

of the United States (Beydoun 1216). Both Stephen Paddock, the shooter involved in the 2017 

Las Vegas Shooting, and Omar Mateen, the shooter involved in the 2016 Orlando Nightclub 

Shooting, took their own lives after opening fire (Beydoun 1216). Both Paddock and Mateen 

were considered lone wolves by law enforcement and the media, but Paddock was dissociated 

from terrorism and just called a “lone wolf”, whereas Mateen was called a “lone wolf” of the 

“radicalized” variety, which associated him with terrorism because Mateen was Afghan -

American and Muslim (Beydoun 1215 -1216). 

Furthermore, the word “local” is used in situations to refute the likelihood of a

connection to terrorism and is not used to describe Muslim suspects or perpetrators, whereas the 

word “homegrown”, a synonym of “local”, is used to describe Muslims suspected of 

radicalization (Beydoun 1238). If Paddock were Muslim, “the motive of ‘Islamic terrorism’ or 

‘jihad’ would likely be immediately assumed, even without any evidence” (Beydoun 1238). 

The double standard of lone wolf terrorism affects all Muslim Americans, and 

“[e]ssentially, “[t]he burden of collateral and collective guilt has become a central component of 

the modern Muslim American experience,” while the broader white populatio n is never tied to 

the misdeeds and violence of culprits like Paddock ” (Beydoun 1242). The idea that all Muslims 

are affected by the actions of lone wolves was seen immediately after the 2015 San Bernardino 

Attack , whe n Donald Trump, then just a presidential candidate, campaigned for “a complete and 

total shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” (Beydoun 1242). 

Jihad in India Through the Actions of Jaish -e-Muhammad 

The 2016 Uri Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack in Kashmir have been discussed in 

terms of jihad and Jaish -e-Muhammad. “Formed in 2000, Jaish -e-Muhammad (JeM or Army of Somrah 14 

Muhammad) is a Pakistan -based armed group that aims to undermine and overthrow Indian 

control over Indian -administered Kashmir through attacks on security and government targets” 

(Hashim). Masood Azhar, who previously fought under the militant organization of Harkat -ul -

Mujahideen and was linked to al -Qaeda, founded Jaish -e-Muhammad after his release from 

Indian custody in 1999, which occurred in exchange for over 150 hostages from an Indian 

Airlines flight that was hijacked and rerouted to Kandahar, Afghanistan (Hashim, Zahid 1). 

Azhar has been considered a “jihadi ideologue, propagandist and mentor who has 

authored several books on extremist ideology and ji had” (Zahid 1 -2). Azhar’s jihadist ideology 

involves Qital fi Sabeel Allah , which is fighting for the sake of Allah, which encompasses the 

killing of kufar , who are disbelievers, and munafiqeen , who are hypocrites , during jihad (Zahid 

2). “In Azhar’s 850 -page b ook, Fazail -e-Jihad (Attributes of Jihad), Azhar compares jihad with 

other forms of worship in Islam” (Zahid 2). In Fazail -e-Jihad , Azhar uses many Qur’anic verses 

and Ahadith that discuss jihad to show that it is a core component of Islam that is favored by 

Allah based on the “vigour of the mujahid (martyr), risks involved, physical and mental fatigue, 

[and] rewards in this world and the hereafter” (Zahid 2). Azhar declares that jihad is the “First 

Line of Defense” to protect Islam (Zahid 2). 

In 20 01, Jaish -e-Muhammad was linked with attacks on the legislative assembly building 

in Indian -administered Kashmir and on the Indian parliament in New Delhi (Hashim). Pakistani 

authorities arrested Azhar after these attacks, but he was released after a year due to insufficient 

evidence (Hashim). In 2002, Pakistan proscribed Jaish -e-Muhammad as a “terrorist 

organisation,” which incited the group to target Pakistan and try, unsuccessfully, to assassinate 

then -President Pervez Musharraf on two separate occasions in 2003 (Hashim, Zahid 1). Somrah 15 

Within the past five years, Jaish -e-Muhammad has been held responsible for the 2016 

Pathankot Attack, which killed at least six people, the 2016 Uri Attack , which killed 19 people, 

and the 2019 Pulwama Attack , which killed 40 pe ople (Hashim, Zahid 1). A senior police 

officer, who chose to remain anonymous said, “JeM is not only on a revival mode by carrying 

out such high -value attacks, but it also nurtures pan India Islamist goals” (Hashim). On May 1, 

2019, the United Nations add ed Masood Azhar to its list of “global terrorists” (Hashim, Zahid 4). 

The beliefs surrounding jihad of Masood Azhar and Jaish -e-Muhammad are clearly 

different and more extreme from those of the Islamic Supreme Council of America and 

Mahmood Mamdani . Most terrorist groups take jihad to an extreme that is not supported by most 

Muslims, but nevertheless they have real world repercussions, which can be seen by the fact that 

Jaish -e-Muhammad’s acts of terrorism have, numerous times, brought India and Pakistan to the 

edge of war (Zahid 5). 

Islamophobic rhetoric is not uncommon after terrorist attacks are connected to Muslims 

and jihad, and this will be further explored in the next section of this thesis where I further 

describe the 2015 San Bernardino Attack, the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shoo ting , the 2016 Uri 

Attack , and the 2019 Pulwama Attack and discuss the Anti -Muslim rhetoric of Trump and Modi 

after these terrorist attacks. 

Case Study of T he United States of America 

The United States of America is a normal case study for my argument bec ause President 

Donald Trump employed the use of anti -Muslim rhetoric on multiple occasions after the 2015 

San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting. Somrah 16 

The September 11 , 2001 Attacks : The Trigger of Major United States Initiatives Against 

Terrorism 

On September 11 th , 2001, 19 militants associated with al Qaeda, an Islamic terrorist 

group, hijacked four airplanes in order to carry out attacks in the United States ( Gillon ). Two of 

the planes crashed into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, New York, 

one plane crashed into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., and one plane crashed into a field in 

Shanksville, Pennsylvania ( Gillon ). Almost 3,000 people were killed during the terrorist attacks 

on that day, which resulted in many plans to fight against terrorism by President George W. Bush 

and others ( Gillon ). 

The 19 hijackers were from Saudi Arabia (15) , the United Arab Emirates (2) , Egypt (1), 

and Lebanon (1) (Gillon ). They were reported to have been bankrolled by Osama bin Laden and 

al Qaeda in response to the United States’ continuous military presence in the Middle East after 

the Persian Gulf War ( Gillon ). Some of the hijackers lived in the United States for more than a 

year before the terroris t attacks occurred, and they took flying lessons at American flight schools, 

while others came into the United States months before the terrorist attacks occurred ( Gillon ). 

The hijackers brought box -cutters and knives onto the planes and took control of th e planes 

shortly after takeoff, steering them away from their designated destination in California ( Gillon ). 

That night, President George W. Bush delivered a televised address to the nation from the 

Oval Office. President Bush said, “ Terrorist attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest 

buildings, but they cannot touch the foundation of America ” (Bush). He also hinted at the 

eventual military response when he said, “ We will make no distinction between the terrorists 

who committed these acts and those who harbor them ” (Bush). Somrah 17 

Less than a month later, on October 7 th , Operation Enduring Freedom, the American -led 

international effort to remove the Taliban from governing Afghanistan and crush Osama bin 

Laden, began ( Gillon ). The Taliban were removed from p ower within two months, but Osama 

bin Laden remained free until May 2, 2011, when United States forces killed him in Pakistan 

(Gillon ). 

The 2015 San Bernardino Attack 

On December 2 nd , 2015, 14 people were killed, and 21 people were injured in a mass 

shooting and attempted bombing terrorist attack at the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino, 

California (Hagen). There were approximately 80 people in the room when the shooting began, 

and they were mostly employee s who were there for a holiday party (Hagen). The suspects 

attended the holiday party, left, and then came back (Hagen). The suspects carried long guns and 

handguns and fired many rounds of bullets (Hagen). They also wore vests and had three 

ex plosive devices on them when they entered the room (Hagen). Furthermore, three pipe bombs 

were found at the Inland Regional Center, but they did not work (Hagen). The guns were 

purchased legally, and their SUV was a rental with plates from Utah (Hagen). 

Police identified the shooters as Syed Farook, who was 28 years old, and his wife, 

Tashfeen Malik, who was 27 years old (Hagen). Farook worked as an environmental health 

specialist in San Bernardino for five years , and he did not have a criminal record (Hage n). 

Farook was a citizen of the United States, but Malik was in the United States on a K -1 visa 

(Hagen). A K -1 visa is issued to the fiancé or fiancée of a United States citizen for the fiancé or 

fiancée to enter the United States (“Nonimmigrant”). The cou ple must then be married within 90 

days of the foreigner’s entry into the United States or the foreigner will be required to leave the 

United States (“Nonimmigrant”). Farook and Mateen were married in the United States (Hagen). Somrah 18 

After the mass shooting and attempted bombing terrorist attack at the Inland Regional 

Center in San Bernardino, the suspects fled in the SUV and were chased by police until a 

shootout occurred which killed both Farook and Malik (Hagen). The police fired 380 rounds and 

the suspects f ired 76 rounds (Hagen). At the suspects’ home in Redlands, in San Bernardino 

County, police ended up finding 12 pipe bombs, bomb making tools, and 5,000 rounds of 

ammunition (Hagen). 

FBI Director James Comey said that the investigation had “developed indic ations of 

radicalization by the killers and of potential inspiration by foreign terrorist organizations,” but 

authorities had “no indication that these killers are part of an organized larger group” (Goldman). 

The investigation eventually discovered a Face book post by Malik from just after the shooting 

where she pledged her allegiance to Abu -Bakr al -Baghdadi, the leader of the Islamic State of 

Iraq and Syria (ISIS) (Goldman). ISIS has used propaganda to recruit supporters from other 

countries, and it has ca lled for lone -wolf attacks in countries around the world, which United 

States officials consider an immediate danger (Goldman). Farook’s family lawyer, Mohammad 

Abuershaid even said, “The family was not that close to him. He was kind of like the lone wolf” 

(Goldman). 

Donald Trump ’s Response to the San Bernardino Attack 

After the San Bernardino Attack, then Republican Presidential frontrunner Donald Trump 

spoke about the attack (Santucci). He said, “It looks like another case. We’ve got a lot of bad 

things g oing on. Radical Islamic terrorism” (Santucci). He immediately linked the attack to Islam 

and terrorism and told people “Take a look. I mean, you look at the names, you look at what’s 

happened. You tell me” (Santucci). Somrah 19 

Trump also connected the rise in mas s shootings to mental health when he said, “It’s 

mental health, and it’s also really strength. We need strength. We have a weak government” 

(Santucci). After the November 2015 Paris Attacks, Trump said that attacks could be prevented 

if more people had gun s (Santucci). He said, “[I]f our people had guns, if they were allowed to 

carry it would have been a much much different situation” (Santucci). 

On December 7 th , 2015, Trump called for “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims 

entering the United States unt il our country’s representatives can figure out what is going on” 

(Taylor). At a rally in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina, Trump claimed that Muslims all around 

the world believe that violence against Americans is justified and that American Muslims should 

live under sharia law, and he mentioned how people can be radicalized online (Taylor). Trump 

mentioned “closing that Internet up in some way” (Taylor). Trump also called for surveillance on 

mosques throughout the United States “[b]ecause something is happe ning in there. Man, there’s 

anger, and we have to know about it” (Taylor). 

The 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting 

On June 12 th , 2016, 49 people were killed, and 53 people were injured in a mass shooting 

inside Pulse, a gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida (Ellis). The 2016 Orlando Nightclub shooting 

was the deadliest mass shooting in the history of the United States and the nation’s worst terror 

attack since the September 11, 2001 attacks (Ellis). The gunman, Omar Mateen, was 29 years old 

from Fort Pierce, Florida (Ellis). Mateen, a lone wolf, carried out the attack with an assault rifle 

and a pistol at 2 a.m., and after a three -hour standoff with people trapped inside the club, 

Orlando police eventually barged in with an armored vehicle and stun grenades, and they shot 

and killed Mateen (Ellis). Somrah 20 

Mateen was born in New York in 1986 (Ellis). His parents, who were from Afghanistan, 

mentioned that Mateen was irritat ed when he saw two men kiss in Miami, but they did not 

consider him to be religious and they did not know of any link between him and ISIS (Ellis). 

Mateen was married in 2009 but filed documents to end his marriage in 2011 (Ellis). Mateen’s 

ex -wife, Sitora Yusufiy from Uzbekistan, believed that he was mentally ill even though he was 

never formally diagnosed (Ellis). According to Yusufiy, Mateen started abusing her after a few 

months into their marriage (Ellis). Also, according to Yusufiy, Mateen was religio us, but 

Yusufiy did not believe that his religion was a part of his motivation for the attack (Ellis). 

The FBI had interviewed Mateen in 2013 and 2014 but did not label him as a threat 

(Ellis). During the shooting, Mateen called 911, swore allegiance to IS IS, and mentioned the 

Boston Marathon bombers (Ellis). ISIS sympathizers praised Mateen and the attack on pro -

Islamic State forums (Ellis). A message was posted in Arabic on a dark web site linked to the 

ISIS news agency Amaq, which said, “the armed attack that targeted a gay night club in the city 

of Orlando in the American state of Florida and that bore more than a 100 killed and wounded 

was carried out by an Islamic state fighter” (Ellis). However, Salma Abdelaziz from CNN, who 

translated the message and monitors many ISIS messages, said that the language was 

inconsistent with past ISIS messages because it did not use the words “ luti,” the Arabic word for 

“sodomite,” or “ lewat ,” the Arabic word for “sodomy” (Ellis; Stern) ISIS normally uses either of 

the two words because they consider sodomy to be acts of the people of Lot (Lut in Arabic )

(Stern). “According to the Quran, Lot is a prophet whose people were destroyed for transgressing 

moral norms. Today, same sex relations among men are often associated wi th the people of 

Prophet Lot” (Stern) . Furthermore, there was also no assertion that ISIS coordinated the attack, 

just an after -the -fact call involving Mateen swearing allegiance to ISIS (Ellis). Somrah 21 

Donald Trump ’s Response to the Orlando Nightclub Shooting 

After the Orlando Nightclub Shooting, Trump tweeted on his Twitter account 

“Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism, I don’t want congrats, I 

want toughness & vigilance. We must be smart!” and “What has happened in Orlando is ju st the 

beginning. Our leadership is weak and ineffective. I called it and asked for the ban. Must be 

tough” (Trump). Trump praised himself in the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in the history 

of the United States and continued calling for the Muslim B an that he had mentioned after the 

San Bernardino Attack. In New Hampshire, Trump, talking about the Orlando Nightclub 

Shooting in terms of immigration, said, “Although the pause [ban] is temporary, we must find 

out what is going on” (Berenson). Trump cont inued by saying “We have to do it. It will be lifted, 

this ban, when as a nation we’re in a position to properly and perfectly screen these people 

coming into our country. They’re pouring in and we don’t know what we’re doing” and “The 

bottom line is that the only reason the killer was in America in the first place was because we 

allowed his family to come here” (Berenson). 

The Outcome of Donald Trump’s Anti -Muslim Rhetoric: Executive Orders and T he 

Muslim Ban 

On January 27 th , 2017, President Donald Trump signed Executive Order 13769, which was 

titled “Executive Order Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United 

States” (Executive Order 13769). Executive Order 13769 suspended the entry of people from 

Iran , Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen into the United States for 90 days 

(Executive Order 13769). This executive order became known as a “Muslim ban” because 

Trump had called for the banning of Muslims from the United States of America after the 2015 

San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting and because Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somrah 22 

Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen were all countries with a majority Muslim population. 

Executive Order 13769 was challenged in federal district court, and th e judge placed a 

temporary restraining order on the enforcement of several provisions, which was upheld by a 

panel of the Ninth Circuit (“Trump v. Hawaii”). Instead of continuing to litigate on the matter of 

Executive Order 13769, the government decided to revoke the Executive Order and issue a new 

one in its place (“Trump v. Hawaii”). 

On March 6 th , 2017, President Donald Trump signed Executive Order 13780, which was 

titled “Executive Order Protecting The Nation From Foreign Terrorist Entry Into The United 

States” (Executive Order 13780). Executive Order 13780 suspended the entry of people from six 

of the seven countries that were designated in Executive Order 13769 into the United States for 

90 days (Executive Order 13780) The six countries were Iran, Liby a, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and 

Yemen (Executive Order 13780). Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen were all 

countries with a majority Muslim population. 

Executive Order 13780 provided brief descriptions taken from the Department of State’s 

Country Reports on Terrorism 2015 (June 2016) of some of the circumstances that would cause 

nationals from Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen to be viewed as risks to the 

security of the United States of America (Executive Order 13780). 

Executive Orde r 13780 mentioned the different terrorist groups that were involved in 

Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen . Because of various terrorist groups like 

Hizballah, Hamas, and al -Qa’ida, limits were put in place for all people traveling from Iran to t he 

United States (Executive Order 13780) . Because of various terrorist groups like ISIS, limits were 

put in place for all people traveling from Libya to the United States (Executive Order 13780) .

Because of various terrorist groups like al -Shabaab, limits were put in place for all people Somrah 23 

traveling from Somalia to the United States (Executive Order 13780) . Because of various 

terrorist groups like Hizballah, Hamas, al -Qa’ida, and ISIS, limits were put in place for all 

people traveling from Sudan to the United States (Executive Order 13780) . Because of various 

terrorist groups like ISIS, limits were put in place for all people traveling from Syria to the 

United States (Executive Order 13780) . Lastly, b ecause of various terrorist groups like ISIS, and 

al -Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula, limits were put in place for all people traveling from Sudan 

to the United States (Executive Order 13780) . Executive Order 13780 became the subject of 

litigation just like Executive Order 13769 (“Trump v. Hawaii”). 

On September 24 th , 2017, the day that Executive Order 13780 was expiring, Trump 

issued Proclamation 9645, which restricted the entry of people from eight countries; not all eight 

countries were part of the original list (“Trump v. Hawaii”). Chad, North Korea, and Venezuela 

were newly added to the list, and Sudan was removed from the list (Proclamation 9645). 

Proclamation 9645 was also challenged in federal court for exercising a power that neither the 

United States Congress nor the Constitution of the United States of America had ever conferred 

upon the President of the United States of America (“Trump v. Hawaii”). The Ninth Circuit ruled 

to stop the enforcement of Proclamation 9645, and the Supreme Court decided to review 

Proclamation 9645 (“Trump v. Hawaii”). 

Trum p’s rhetoric worked on some of the Justices of the Supreme Court of the United 

States. In a 5 -4 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that Proclamation 9645 was “a lawful exercise 

of the president’s statutory authority” and did “not violate the Establishment C lause” (“Trump v. 

Hawaii”). Roberts, Kennedy, Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch, five Justices, decided in favor of 

Trump , and Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, four Justices, decided against Trump 

(“Trump v. Hawaii”). The majority found that Proclamation 96 45 did not favor or disfavor any Somrah 24 

specific religion (“Trump v. Hawaii”). Because many predominantly Muslim countries were not 

affected by the restrictions of Proclamation 9645, and some non -predominantly Muslim 

countries were affected by the restrictions of Proclamation 9645, the majority of the Justices of 

the Supreme Court decided that Proclamation 9645 was “based on “a sufficient national security 

justification” and “not based on anti -Muslim animus” (“Trump v. Hawaii”). Justice Sotomayor 

filed a dissentin g opinion in which she stated that Proclamation 9645 should have been ruled 

against because in Trump’s own terms it was originally and continued to be for a “total and 

complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” (“Trump v. Hawaii”). 

Executive Order 13769, Executive Order 13780, and Proclamation 9645 were all 

attempts by Trump to prevent terrorism in the United States, but he was met with opposition 

because of the divisive nature of these three decisions. 

Case Study of India 

India is a harder case study than the United States of America for my argument because 

Prime Minister Narendra Modi employed mostly anti -Pakistan rhetoric on multiple occasions 

after the 2016 Uri Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack, which became interpreted as anti -

Muslim rh etoric , especially since he subscribes to Hindu nationalism. Whereas President Donald 

Trump directly employed the use of anti -Muslim rhetoric on multiple occasions after the 2015 

San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting, Modi’s rhetoric was at times 

more anti -Pakistan than anti -Muslim, but because Pakistan is a majority Muslim country and 

because of Modi ’s beliefs about Hindu nationalism, any negative rhetoric pertaining to either 

Pakistan or Islam can be understood as anti -Muslim .Somrah 25 

The 1947 Partition of India : Historical Context with Regar ds to Kashmir 

Since 1947, India and Pakistan have been involved in a conflict over Kashmir, the 

majority -Muslim region in the north of India (Blakemore). Kashmir used to be a princely state, 

but now it is claimed by both India and Pakistan (Blakemore). Fo r three centuries, from the 17 th 

century to the 20 th century, Britain ruled most of the Indian subcontinent through the British East 

India Company and then from 1858 to 1947 through the British crown (Blakemore). As the 

centuries went on, Britain’s colonial power weakened and a nationalist movement strength ened 

in the area, which threatened British rule over colonial India (Blakemore). 

Britain was afraid of a civil war between India’s Hindu majority and India’s Muslim 

minority, but after World War II, Parliament decided that Britain should grant India its 

independence (Blakemore). Muslims held a minority status in politics under British rule, which 

caused a Muslim separatist movement to grow in India (Blakemore). Mohammed Ali Jinnah, a 

politician who led India’s Muslim League, called for a separate nation fo r the Muslims in India 

in 1945 when he said, “It is high time that the British Government applied their mind definitely 

to the division of India and the establishment of Pakistan and Hindustan, which means freedom 

for both” (Blakemore). Fatal religious rio ts occurred across the Indian subcontinent, which 

resulted in the formation of the independent Muslim majority nation of Pakistan on August 14 th ,

1947 and the independent Hindu majority nation of India on August 15 th , 1947 (Blakemore). 

The Partition occur red rather quickly and over 550 princely states in colonial India that 

were not directly administered by Britain had to decide whether they would join India, join 

Pakistan, or remain independent (Blakemore). In 1947, the majority Muslim princely state of 

Jammu and Kashmir was governed Hindu maharaja Hari Singh (Blakemore). Singh saw other 

princely states aligning with either India or Pakistan , and he decided that he wanted Kashmir to Somrah 26 

remain independent (Blakemore). In an attempt to avoid pressure to join eit her India or Pakistan, 

Singh signed an agreement with Pakistan that allowed citizens of Kashmir to continue trading 

with and travelling to Pakistan, but Singh did not sign a similar agreement with India 

(Blakemore). 

Religious riots continued to plague Ind ia and Pakistan, and the government of Pakistan 

put pressure on Kashmir to join the independent Muslim majority nation , since Kashmir has a 

majority Muslim population (Blakemore). Pakistan funded Pro -Pakistani insurgents who went 

into western Kashmir, and Pashtun tribesmen eventually followed the Pro -Pakistani insurgents 

into western Kashmir (Blakemore). Singh asked India for help with regards to Pakistan’s attempt 

to take control of Kashmir, but India would only provide military assistance if Kashmir becam e a 

part of India (Blakemore). Singh agreed to this and signed the Instrument of Accession, which 

caused Kashmir to become a part of India in October of 1947 (Blakemore). Kashmir was 

eventually given a special status within the Indian constitution that all owed it to have 

independence over most of its affairs except for communications, foreign affairs, and defense, 

but the government of India rescinded this special status in August of 2019 (Blakemore). The 

decision to make Kashmir a part of India continues t o result in years of conflict that even 

included two wars (Blakemore). 

The 2016 Uri Attack 

On September 18 th , 2016, 13 jawans (soldiers) were burned alive instantaneously and 

more than 20 were injured in an armed attack of the 12 th Brigade of the Indian army in the Uri 

sector of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir (Negi). The attack occurred around 5:15 am 

while unarmed soldiers were refilling barrels of diesel (Negi). The four attackers threw 17 

grenades in a span of three minute s, which resulted in a huge fire in barracks and tents within a Somrah 27 

150 -meter radius (Negi). After a six -hour gun battle all of the attackers were killed. This was the 

largest terrorist attack in 26 years on an army camp (Negi). 

The Indian army salvaged a map from the dead attackers that revealed their plans (Negi). 

The map had markings written in the Pashtun language, which is one of the tribal languages 

spoken in Pakistan, so the Indian army concluded that the attackers were from Pakistan (Negi). 

The Indian a rmy also found fo ur AK -47 rifles and four under barrel grenade launchers along 

with other ammunitions (Negi). Early reports from the Director General of Military Operations 

Lieutenant General Ranbir Singh said that the attackers and their items belonged to the Jaish -e-

Mohammed terrorist group (Negi). Lieutenant General Singh spoke to Pakistan’s Director 

General of Military Operations and conveyed his “serious concerns” about the situation, however 

Pakistan’s Director General of Military Operations said that Lieutenant General Singh’s 

statement was “unfounded and pre -mature” (Negi). 

Narendra Modi ’s Response to the Uri Attack 

On September 24 th , 2016, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his first public appearance 

since the Uri Attack, gave a speech about the attack at the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) National 

Council Meeting in Kozhikode, Kerala, a state in the south of India. The sp eech was not given in 

English, but the quotes will be provided in English since this paper is written in English. During 

the sp eech, Modi said, “18 Indian soldiers were killed by terrorists who belonged to Pakistan. 

India will neither forget nor forgive Uri” and “The country is outraged. 110 terrorists have been 

killed in the last 17 attempts to spread terror in India” (Modi, “10” ). 

Modi directly criticized Pakistan throughout the entire speech, but it was specifically 

noteworthy when he said, “There is one country in Asia that does not want the 21 st century to 

belong to us. This country wants bloodshed and is conspiring to kill i nnocent people” and “Any Somrah 28 

attack in the world is followed by the news that the terrorist had either come from or has gone 

back to Pakistan. India will not be broken by these terrorists” and “India is exporting software, 

while Pakistan is exporting terror ac ross the world” (Modi, “10”). Modi placed blame directly on 

Pakistan instead of just on the attackers .

Modi had a lot to say to and about the people of Pakistan. He said, “I want to speak 

directly to the people of Pakistan. I want to remind them that this was their home before 1947” 

and “The people of Pakistan should question their government that can’t handle PoK (Pakistan -

occupied Kashmir), Gilgit or Balochistan, but wants to talk about Kashmir” (Modi, “10”). 

Modi showed his strength through words when he said, “India is ready for war with 

Pakistan. But let’s fight against poverty, unemployment and illiteracy. Let’s see who wins” and 

“Let Pakistan’s leaders know this – the sacrifice of our 18 jawans will not go in vain” (Modi, 

“10”). Modi also said, “Ind ia has been successful in isolating Pakistan. And we will intensify our 

efforts to isolate you globally” (Modi, “10”). 

Modi backed up his words with actions on September 28 th , 2016 when he sent soldiers 

from the Indian Army Special Forces across the Line of Control (LoC), the line between the 

Indian and Pakistani controlled parts of Jammu and Kashmir, to carry out surgical strikes on 

terrorist camps in Pakistan -occupied Kashmir (Barry). Nevertheless, Pakistan denied claims that 

the Indian Army Special Forc es crossed the Line of Control , and instead said that Indian troops 

had fired small arms across the LoC, which ended up killing two soldiers and injuring nine 

soldiers (Barry) .Somrah 29 

Map by The New York Times 

The 2019 Pulwama Attack 

On February 14 th , 2019, 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed 

on the Jammu Srinagar National Highway at Lethpora in the Pulwama district of the Indian state 

of Jammu and Kashmir (“Pulwama” ). In the last five years, Jammu and Kashmir has had a 93 

percent rise in attacks that have resulted in the deaths of security personnel, with a majority of 

these attacks occurring in the Pulwama district (“Pulwama”). 1,700 terrorist acts in total have 

occurred in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir d uring the last five years (“Pulwama”). The 

February 14 th , 2019 Pulwama Attack was the deadliest terror attack in the Kashmir Valley in the 

last three decades (“Pulwama”). 

The attack occurred around 3:30 pm when a Mahindra Scorpio SUV filled with 350 

kilogr ams of explosives hit into one of the buses in a 78 -vehicle procession that was escorting 

over 2,500 CRPF personnel from Jammu to Srinagar (“Pulwama”). Adil Ahmed Dar, who was 

20 years old, carried out the attack (“Pulwama”). According to Dar’s parents, he was supposed to Somrah 30 

be taking exams but went missing (“Pulwama”). The Jaish -e-Mohammed terrorist group claimed 

responsibility for the attack, and they released a video of Dar who joined the group one year 

before the attack took place (“Pulwama”). Pakistan denied any responsibility for the attack, but 

India sent Pakistan a harsh warning and the United States commanded Pakistan to remove any 

and all safe havens for “terrorists ” (“Pulwama”). 

Narendra Modi ’s Response to the Pulwama Attack 

On February 26 th , 2019, Modi ordered India to carry out retaliatory airstrikes near 

Balakot, Pakistan in response to the February 14 th , 2019 Pulwama Attack (Poonam). Modi said 

that the Balakot airstrike brought Pakistan to its knees because New Delhi took a tough stand 

against terrorism (Pandit). 

On May 23 rd , 2019, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won India’s general elections, and 

Narendra Modi was reelected as Prime Minister (Poonam). As the BJP’s campaign continued, it 

became more divisive along religious lines (Poonam). In April of 2019 , Modi said the word 

“Hindu” 13 times in one speech, notably saying Hindus have “woken up” and have never 

engaged in terrorism (Poonam). The week after, the BJP put forward a female candidate who 

was charged with organizing a terrorist attack that resulted in the deaths of 10 Muslims in 2008 

(Poonam). 

Hindus make up 80% of India’s constituency, so if they can put aside all differences and 

vote as Hindus alone then a party that caters to Hindus can stay in pow er for as long as it desires 

(Poonam). The BJP has become that party, and it has made nationalism synonymous with 

Hinduism and has sought to link the country’s largest religious minority, Muslims, who make up 

14% of India’s constituency, with India’s natio nal enemy, Pakistan (Poonam). Somrah 31 

The news media helped the BJP win because of how they discussed Modi in relation to 

the February 14 th Pulwama Attack and India’s retaliatory airstrikes near Balakot, Pakistan on 

February 26 th (Poonam). Modi insisted that young voters dedicate their first vote to the Air Force 

team that carried out India’s retaliatory airstrikes near Balakot, Pakistan (Poonam). At another 

rally, another prominent BJP leader, Ram Madhav, said, “Your vote on the lotus [the symbol of 

the BJP] will mean dropping 1,000 -kilogram bombs on terrorist camps” (Poonam). Hindus 

around the nation were mobilized and voted (Poonam). 

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Hindu Nationalism 

Before discussing the outcome of Modi’s anti -Muslim rhetoric, which was the revocation 

of Article 370 and Article 35A, some context surrounding the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is 

needed. The BJP is the political party that revoked Article 370 and Article 35A, and the Hindu 

nationalist position of the BJP can be seen as reasoning for the Revocation of Article 370 and 

Article 35A, since Jammu and Kashmir is the only Muslim majority state in India. 

Before independence, there were differences amongst the Hind u nationalists, Muslims, and 

liberal Hindus within the Indian National Congress over the subjects of secularism and minority 

rights (Berglund 1064). 

Secularism was nevertheless established because “The national movement was from its early 

days, fully comm itted to secularism. Its leadership fought hard to inculcate secular values among 

the people and opposed the growth of communalism. And, despite the partition of India and the 

accompanying communal holocaust, it did succeed in enshrining secularism in the Constitution 

of free India” (Chandra 16). 

The disagreement over the Constitution was mainly between the liberals, led by Prime 

Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, and Hindu nationalists, led by Home Minister Vallabhbhai Patel 

(Berglund 1064). Because Pakistan was created as an Islamic state, some Hindus claimed that the 

Indian Constitution should be rooted in Hindu culture. Nevertheless, secularism was adopted 

because of the gradual acceptance of liberal ideas and the deaths of Mahatma Gandhi and Somrah 32 

Vallabhbhai Patel (Berglund 1064). 

India gained independence in 1947, but the Constitution became the law of India in 1950 

(Berglund 1064). The term ‘secular’ was not mentioned in the original text of the Constitution 

but was later added, without any definition, in 1976 in relation to amendments (Berglund 1064). 

Even though the term ‘secular’ was not defined, it was understandable that the Constitution was 

secular with regards to separation of politics and religion and with regards to equal respect for all 

religions (Berglu nd 1064). Indian secularism could thus be defined as “a practice where the state 

lacks connections to any particular faith but has the responsibility for protection of all religions” 

(Berglund 1064). 

Hindu nationalists have challenged secularism since th e formation of the Indian state, and 

an obvious instance has been with regards to the special status given to Jammu and Kashmir, the 

only Muslim majority state in India (Berglund 1065). The belief of Hind u nationalists, 

“Hindutva” (“Hinduness”), is a call for Hindu unity and argues that the Indian subcontinent is the 

homeland of the Hindus and that Hindu culture should be protected against any foreign ,

including Muslim and Christian, influences (Berglund 1065). Furthermore, the belief of 

“Hindutva” declares that there is a common culture shared by all Indians, which is not a 

combination of Hindu, Muslim, or Christian ideas, but rather a sole Hindu culture (Berglund 

1065). 

With regards to a Hindu state, the fear of the Muslim minority is that Hindu values and 

traditions would pervade their way s of li fe (Berglund 1068). For decades, the Ayodhya Ram 

Mandir -Babri Masjid dispute has stirred up strife between Hindu nationalists and Muslims 

(Berglund 1067). The Hindu nationalists believe that a temple for Ram should be on the site that 

the Babri Masjid was built on since Hindus believe that Ram was born on that very site in Somrah 33 

Ayodhya (Berglund 1067). On December 6 th , 1992, the BJP arranged a demonstration in 

Ayodhya that resulted in the demolition of the Babri Masjid ( Berglund 1068). The leaders of the 

BJP denied any responsibility for the destruction of the Babri Masjid, but “the issue was 

carefully selected to symbolize the unification of the Hindu nation” (Berglund 1068). “To the 

Hindu nationalist Ram is a national and u nifying symbol; to the Muslims he is a Hindu god in 

whose name scores of Muslims have been killed” (Berglund 1068). 

The BJP claimed that the Babri Masjid was a reminder of atrocities committed by Muslim 

rulers (Berglund 1068). In the “BJP’s White Paper on Ayodhya and The Rama Temple 

Movement,” it was stated that the “historical background of the Mohamedan [Muslim] invasion 

and the provocative ocular reminders of that violent and barbaric invasion were completely 

ignored even after the partition of India . This neglect resulted in the failure to evolve a sound 

basis for Indian nationalism and durable relationships between Hindu s and Muslims” (Berglund 

106 9). In the above quote and in other texts written by the BJP, “Islam” and “Muslim” were 

paired with nega tive adjectives such as “violent” and “barbaric” (Berglund 106 9). The BJP often 

connected violence and Hindu suffering with Islam, and the fate of the Muslim communities in 

India today can be viewed in connection to the historical injustices that were purp ortedly done to 

the Hindus under Muslim rule in previous centuries (Berglund 106 9). 

The BJP won the 2019 Indian general election, and Modi was reelected as the Prime 

Minister of India. On May 26 th , 2019, Modi claimed that he wanted to protect India’s mino rities 

in his acceptance speech, but his track record shows quite the opposite because in the five years 

of Modi’s first term in power hate crimes against Muslims increased (Ayyub “What”). 

On June 22 nd , 2019, less than a month after the election results w ere published, a viral 

video circulated on social media in India (Ayyub “What”). In the video, a young Muslim man, Somrah 34 

24 -year -old Tabrez Ansari, was seen tied up with his hands folded and blood all over his body 

(“Jharkhand”). Ansari was seen being lynched b y a mob that forced him to chant ‘Jai Shri Ram’ 

(Glory to Lord Ram) and ‘Jai Hanuman’ (Glory to Hanuman) (“Jharkhand”). Ansari was seen 

crying and begging for mercy (“Jharkhand”). Ansari’s family said that they were threatened a 

similar fate by police when they begged to have him treated while he was in police custody 

(Ayyub “What”). Ansari was beaten for hours and died at the hands of the Hindu mob in 

Jharkhand (Ayyub “What”). 

On June 24 th , 2019, another young Muslim man, 26 -year -old teacher Hafeez Moham med 

Haldar, was thrown out of a train in West Bengal (Ayyub “What”). A mob chanted ‘Jai Shri 

Ram’ and pushed him out of the train, but he survived with only minor injuries (Ayyub “What”). 

On June 27 th , 2019, yet another young Muslim man, 25 -year -old cab d river Faizal Usman 

Khan , was beaten up at night by a group of men outside Mumbai (Ayyub “What”). He begged 

for mercy and the men asked him to chant ‘Jai Shri Ram,’ which has become “a rallying cry for 

Hindu nationalists in the country” (Ayyub “What”). 

Indi an liberals have witnessed Modi’s misleading political statements and actions in the 

past. He was silent during the anti -Muslim riots that resulted in the deaths of a thousand Muslims 

in Gujarat in 2002 because, according to Rana Ayyub who has been reporti ng on Modi for over a 

decade and went undercover for eight months in 2010 to talk to bureaucrats working under Modi 

in order to investigate the responsibility of the state in the 2002 anti -Muslim riots, Modi wanted 

to be seen as a Hindu leader under attack from Muslims (Ayyub “I’ve”). 

After Ansari died, Modi said he was “pained” and called for the “strictest possible 

punishment to the accused,” but a week before Indian legislators chanted ‘Jai Shri Ram’ and 

‘Vande Mataram’ as each Muslim Member of Parliame nt was sworn in all in the presence of Somrah 35 

Modi who remained silent (Ayyub, Siddiqui). 

The Outcome of Narendra Modi’s Anti -Muslim Rhetoric: Revocation of Article 370 and 

Article 35A of the Indian Constitution 

On August 5 th , 2019, the Government of India revoked special statuses given to Jammu 

and Kashmir under Article 370 and Article 35A of the Indian Constitution. Modi was not the 

only person involved in the act, but since he was serving as Prime Minister during the process, 

most of the responsibility, p raise, and criticism fell on him. Just as Modi’s political statements 

and actions in the past were misleading, the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A can also 

be seen as misleading actions. 

Article 370 was an article that acknowledged the special s tatus of the state of Jammu and 

Kashmir in terms of its autonomy and its ability to make its own laws for the “permanent 

residents” of the state (The Constitution). This was agreed upon when Maharaja Hari Singh 

agreed to have Jammu and Kashmir join India d ecades ago, but that all changed when Article 

370 was revoked. 

Article 35A was an article that gave the Jammu and Kashmir state’s legislature the power 

to define who “permanent residents” of the state were and what special rights and privileges the 

perman ent residents of the state were allowed to have (The Constitution). The rights and 

privileges that the permanent residents of the state were allowed to have included the ability to 

purchase land and permanent properties, the ability to vote in and contest elections, the ability to 

seek government employment, and the ability to receive other state benefits such as education 

and health care (The Constitution). Non -permanent residents of the state were not entitled to the 

rights and privileges that the permane nt residents of the state were allowed to have, even if they 

were Indian citizens, but that all changed when Article 35A was revoked (The Constitution). Somrah 36 

On August 15 th , 2019, Modi gave a speech to mark the 73 rd Independence Day of India. 

In his speech, h e discussed the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A. He said, “To revoke 

Article 370 and 35A within 10 weeks [was] a significant step towards fulfilling the dream of 

Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel,” the Hindu nationalist home minister who played a role in shaping the 

Constitution of India (Modi “One”) .

Modi rhetorically asked listeners of his speech, “What was the reason behind revocation 

of Article 370 and 35A” (Modi “One”) ?

He then answered by saying, “This is the hallmark of this government. We do not avoid 

problems, nor do we let them fester. There is no time to delay or neglect problems. The work that 

was not done in the last 70 years has been accomplished within 70 days after this new 

government came to power. The abrogation of Article 370 and 35A h as been carried out in both 

Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha by two -thirds majority. This means that everyone wanted this 

decision, but perhaps they were waiting for somebody to initiate the same and carry it forward. I 

have come to accomplish the task assigned t o me by m y countrymen. I work selflessly” (Modi 

“One”). 

Modi believed that everyone wanted Article 370 and Article 35A to be revoked, and he also 

believed that he was selfless in working towards the revocation of the Articles. 

Modi continued his speech by saying, “We are moving forward with re -organization of 

Jammu and Kashmir. For 70 years every government made efforts to do something. But the 

desired results were not achieved, and when desired results are not achieved, there is a need to 

think afresh and take new steps. It is our responsibility to see that the aspirations of the people of 

Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh get fulfilled. It is our collective responsibility to give new wings to 

their dreams. This responsibility has to be shouldered by all 130 cror e of my countrymen. To 

meet this commitment we have made endeavours to remove whateve r hurdles were there in the 

way ” (Modi “One”). 

Modi wanted all Indians to share in the responsibility of the reorganization of Jammu and 

Kashmir, and Ladakh. 

Modi then continued by saying, “ The system that prevailed over the past seventy years 

had aggravated separatism and given birth to terrorism. It had encouraged dynastic rule and in a 

way strengthened the foundations of corruption and discrimination. We have to make efforts so 

that the women of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh get their rights. We have to make efforts so 

that my dalit brothers and sisters living there, get the rights which they have been deprived of so 

far. The rights enjoyed by the tribal people of Ind ia must also be available to my tribal brothers 

and sisters of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. There are several such communities, like Gujjars, 

Bakarwals, Gaddis, Sippies or Balties - all such communities must be empowered with political Somrah 37 

rights. It is surpri sing that in Jammu & Kashmir there were legal restrictions on Safai 

Karamchari brothers and sisters. Their dreams were trampled upon. Now, we have freed them 

from such shackles ” (Modi “One”). 

Modi’s rhetoric basically blamed the way that Jammu and Kashmir were functioning under 

Article 370 and Article 35A for being breeding grounds for separatism and terrorism. He claimed 

that now everyone would be empowered and that everyone’s lives would be changed for the 

better. 

Modi stated, “ peace and prosperity of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh can be an 

inspiration for India[, and that t]hey can greatly contribute to India’s development” (Modi 

“One”) . He said that, “We [Indians] need to make efforts to bring back their glorious past ” (Modi 

“One” ). This statement was very interesting since Article 370 and Article 35A actually helped 

preserve some of Kashmir’s past in terms of the way it was ruled. 

Modi continued talking about Article 3 70 and Article 35A by saying, “ Concerns about 

political future kept coming up. For me, the country’s future is everything, political future has no 

meaning … The exercise towards national integration was a successful one, but some difficulties 

have been faced because of Article 370 and 35A” (Modi “One”) . Modi claimed t hat he was very 

concerned about India’s future, and he was very proud to say that “ every Indian today can speak 

of One Nation, One Constitution ” now that Article 370 and 35A have been revoked (Modi 

“One”) .

Modi tried to spin the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A in a positive manner for 

everyone, but the revocation of the Articles can also be seen as misleading actions to make India 

more authoritarian , by having the central Indian government take full control of decisions 

pertaining to Jammu and K ashmir, and more of a Hindu nation, by allowing Hindus from other 

areas in India to now have the ability to purchase and live on land in Jammu and Kashmir. 

There has also been collective punishment towards the people already living in Jammu and Somrah 38 

Kashmir. I ndia sent tens of thousands of troops into Jammu and Kashmir and cut off all internet 

and phone services there before the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A (Griffiths) .

Broadband, mobile internet, text messaging, and phone service were all affected in a

communications blackout that has forced residents to use old radio sets just to listen to the news 

(Griffiths) . The Indian government can choose when to restore service and it can do so in partial 

waves, so that not all platforms and not all people regain access at the same time (Griffiths). Not 

all services have been restored as of December 8 th , 2019 (Ashiq). 

Analysis Tying Martha Crenshaw’s Theoretical Framework to the Lone Wolves and Jaish -

e-Mohammed 

According to the research done, there were permissive and enabling causes involved in 

the four terrorist attacks that I have mentioned throughout this paper. 

In terms of permissiv e causes of terrorism, there were four key aspects mentioned :

modernization, urbanization, social facilitation, and the inability or unwillingness of a

government to prevent terrorism. With regards to modernization, attackers were able to move 

around with ease in the places that they carried out the terrorist attacks. With regards to 

urbanization, attackers attacked cities because they provide d opportunities for potential targets to 

gather and for audiences to form and for the attackers to maintain some degree of anonymity .

With regards to social facilitation, beliefs from one side of the world we re able to inf luence 

attackers on another side of the world . Finally, with regards to the inability or unwillingness of a 

government to prevent terrorism , the nonexistence of satisfactory police and intelligence teams 

allow ed for terrorist ideas to spread unchecked .

In terms of enabl ing causes of terrorism, there we re four key aspects mentioned : the 

existence of concrete grievances among an identifiable subgroup of a larger population, the lack Somrah 39 

of opportunity for political participation, context, and the concept of a pre cipitating event that 

immediately precedes outbreaks of terrorism. With regards to the existence of concrete 

grievances among an identifiable subgroup of a larger population , attackers claim ed allegiance to 

a larger group, and they often blame d the governm ent for the actions that they themselves took. 

With regards to the lack of opportunity for political participation , some people we re not allowed 

to speak freely against the government . With regards to context, the attackers we re young, well 

educated, and middle -class people, but they we re often disenchanted with the idea of a changing 

society . Finally, with regards to the concept of a precipitating event that immediately precedes 

outbreaks of terrorism , government actions acted as catalysts for terrorism .

The lone wolves and Jaish -e-Mohammed took advantage of the permissive and enabling 

causes to carry out their respective terrorist attacks. As a result, Trump and Modi took a stand 

with the goal of stopping terrorism in their re spective countries. Trump decided closing borders 

would be the best decision, and that is why he released Executive Order 13769, Executive Order 

13780, and Proclamation 9645. Modi decided consolidating state authority would be the best 

decision, and that i s why he decided to support the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A. 

Nevertheless, even with closing borders as in the case of the United States, lone wolves 

can still carry out terrorist attacks in the United States because anyone already within the borders 

could become a lone wolf as seen with the case of Farook and Mateen who were born in the 

United States and had no familiar connection to any of the countries listed in Executive Order 

13769, Executive Order 13780, or Proclamation 9645. Additionall y, even with consolidating 

state authority as in the case of India, Jaish -e-Mohammed can still carry out terrorist attacks in 

India because there are members of Jaish -e-Mohammed living in Kashmir and Jaish -e-Somrah 40 

Mohammed has been able to instigate violence in Kashmir from Pakistan through social media 

even after the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A (Swami) .

Analysis Pertaining to the Lone Wolves 

The predominantly Muslim countries mentioned in the Executive Orders all had terrorist 

activities occurring within their borders, but for the security of the United States, even people 

with no connection to terrorists except for the fact that they were fleeing from the named terrorist 

groups were denied entry into the United States. It is interesting to note that Faroo k, Malik, and 

Mateen, the perpetrators of the 2015 San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub 

Shooting were not born in any of the countries listed in the Executive Orders or the 

Proclamation. Farook, the male perpetrator of the 2015 San Bernardi no Attack was born in 

Chicago, Illinois. Malik, the female perpetrator of the 2015 San Bernardino Attack was born in 

Pakistan but lived in both Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. Mateen, the perpetrator of the 2016 

Orlando Nightclub Shooting was born in New Hyde Park, New York. 

The countries listed in the Executive Orders and the Proclamation did not have direct 

influences on Farook, Malik , and Mateen, but instead they could all be considered a part of 

domestic terrorism, which is often linked to lone wolf terrorism. They may have pledged an 

allegiance to terrorist organizations involved in the predominantly Muslim countries mentioned 

in th e Executive Orders and the Proclamation, but they never had direct contact with the terrorist 

organizations because they had no connections to any of the countries that were listed as having 

the terrorist organizations within their borders. 

People who coul d eventually become “terrorists” can be stopped from entering the United 

States from the countries listed in the Executive Orders and the Proclamation, but people who 

have already come into the United States from abroad or people who were born and raised i n the Somrah 41 

United States could also commit terrorist attacks. The Executive Orders and the Proclamation do 

not fully tackle the problem of homegrown extremism and lone wolf attacks. The fact that the 

FBI had interviewed Mateen in 2013 and 2014 but did not label him as a threat even when he 

turned out to be one shows that there needs to be more insight into the lives of people who could 

become lone wolves (Ellis). More policies and more reconnaissance could be beneficial, but they 

need to be written and conducted in non -problematic ways. Safety and security are important, but 

racism and Islamophobia should never be reasons for policies and reconnaissance. 

Analysis Pertaining to Jaish -e-Mohammed 

Pakistan took steps against the Jaish -e-Mohammed in April of 2019, but t he terrorist group 

reappeared on social media platforms in August of 2019 (Swami). On August 22 nd , 2019, the 

message “There are people who are silent, but doing a great deal” was written in Urdu over an 

image of Jaish -e-Mohammed terrorists in uniform and w as credited to Masood Azhar, the 

founder and leader of Jaish -e-Mohammed (Swami). Indian intelligence officials said that the 

reappearance of Jaish -e-Mohammed after four months meant that Pakistan was easing its 

restraints upon the terrorist group in respon se to everything that had been going on in Jammu and 

Kashmir (Swami). 

A week before the message stated above, another message that said “Kashmiris need to get 

out [on the streets]” so that “[t]hen the enemy will beg for peace and negotiation” appeared on 

jihadist social media feeds in Pakistan (Swami). The message was also credited to Masood 

Azhar, but unlike the message stated above from August 22 nd , 2019, it did not have the emblem 

of Jaish -e-Mohammed nor of its official publication, al -Qalam. The messag es were believed to 

be targeting Islamists in Kashmir (Swami). 

In Srinagar’s Soura area, Islamist -led youth barricaded streets with trees and barbed wire Somrah 42 

and protestors have flown the Jaish -e-Mohammed flag (Swami). Soura is one of the areas with 

fervent s upport for the secession of Kashmir from India (Swami). During the same week that the 

statement “Kashmiris need to get out [on the streets]” so that “[t]hen the enemy will beg for 

peace and negotiation” appeared on jihadist social media feeds in Pakistan, multiple Pakistani 

muftis called for jihad against India (Swami). Mufti Abdul Qavi, a member of the ruling Pakistan 

Tehreek -e-Insaf “Pakistan Movement for Justice” Party said that it was “moral and shari’a -based 

obligation on Muslims living in India that t hey support the oppressed Kashmiri Muslims in their 

jihad” (Swami). 

Even with the BJP trying to further consolidate Jammu and Kashmir with the rest of India 

through the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A, Jaish -e-Mohammed still has a way of 

being i nvolved in the area, so the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A does not do much to 

tackle the problem of Jaish -e-Mohammed. 

Conclusion 

Throughout this thesis I have explored the Islamophobic rhetoric of Trump after the 2015 

San Bernardino Attack and the 2016 Orlando Nightclub Shooting and the Islamophobic rhetoric 

of Modi after the 2016 Uri Attack and the 2019 Pulwama Attack in order to analyze how the 

Anti -Muslim rhetoric of Trump and Modi affected the lives of Muslims within their countries 

and abroad . I argue d that Trump and Modi used Anti -Muslim language in the wake of the four 

terrorist attacks mentioned above for their own political agendas, which resulted in Anti -Muslim 

political deci sions that affected the lives of many Muslims within their countries and abroad .

More research can be added to this thesis since the case studies, especially the case 

studies pertaining to India, are so current. Trump and Modi are both still leading their respective 

countries , and a lot continues to happen in the United States and Indi a with regards to Somrah 43 

legislations pertaining to and conversations about Muslims. The current situation in Kashmir has 

not ended yet, and it will be very interesting to see exactly how it does end. Sadly, I do not doubt 

that there will be more examples of anti -Muslim rhetoric from Trump and Modi in the future. Somrah 44 

Works Cited 

Ashiq, Peerzada. "Tight Curbs on Internet in J&K Offices." The Hindu , 8 Dec. 2019, 

www.thehindu.com/news/national/tight -curbs -on -internet -in -jk -

offices/article30236746.ece . Accessed 9 Dec. 2019. 

Ayyub, Rana. "I've Reported on Modi for Over a Decade. His Hindu Nationalist Ideas Will Be 

Even More Dangerous Now." TIME , 24 May 2019, time.com/5595576/modi -victory -

hindu -nationalism/. Accessed 22 Oct. 2019. 

---. "What a Rising Tide of Violence Against Mu slims in India Says About Modi's Second 

Term." TIME , 28 June 2019, time.com/5617161/india -religious -hate -crimes -modi/. 

Accessed 21 Oct. 2019. 

Barry, Ellen, and Salman Masood. "India Claims 'Surgical Strikes' Across Line of Control in 

Kashmir." The New York Times , 29 Sept. 2016, 

www.nytimes.com/2016/09/30/world/asia/kashmir -india -pakistan.html. Accessed 8 Oct. 

2019. 

Berenson, Tessa. "Donald Trump Pushes for Muslim Ban After Orlando Shooting." TIME , 13 

June 2016, time.com/4366912/donald -trump -orlando -shooting -muslim -ban/. Accessed 7 

Oct. 2019. 

Berglund, Henrik. "Religion and Nationalism: Politics of BJP." Economic and Political Weekly ,

vol. 39, no. 10, 6 Mar. 2004, pp. 1064 -70, 

www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/4414737.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A2c9b90bb965ea414 05c5e7 

2a82563eae. Accessed 21 Oct. 2019. 

Beydoun, Khaled A. "Lone Wolf Terrorism: Types Stripes, and Double Standards." 

Northwestern University Law Review Online , vol. 112, no. 5, 22 Feb. 2018, pp. 1213 -44, Somrah 45 

scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcon tent.cgi?article=1333&context=nulr 

. Accessed 23 Sept. 2019. 

Blakemore, Erin. "The Kashmir Conflict: How Did It Start?" National Geographic , 2 Mar. 2019, 

www.nationalgeographic.com/culture/2019/03/kashmir -conflict -how -did -it -start/. 

Accessed 6 Oct. 2019. 

Bu sh, George W. 9/11 Address to the Nation . 11 Sept. 2001. Address. 

---. "9/11 Address to the Nation." American Rhetoric , 11 Sept. 2001, 

americanrhetoric.com/speeches/gwbush911addresstothenation.htm. Accessed 7 Dec. 

2019. 

Chandra, Bipan, et al. India's Strug gle for Independence . New Delhi, Penguin Books India, 

1989. 

The Constitution of India . Accessed 19 Oct. 2019. 

Crenshaw, Martha. "The Causes of Terrorism." Comparative Politics , vol. 13, no. 4, July 1981, 

pp. 379 -99, www.jstor.org/stable/421717. Accessed 16 Sept. 2019. 

---. "The Debate over 'New' vs. 'Old' Terrorism." Values and Violence: Intangible Aspects of 

Terrorism , by Deen K. Chatterjee et al., Dordrecht, Springer Netherlands, 2009, pp. 117 -

36. 

---. "Martha Crenshaw, Pioneer in Terrorism Studies, Joins CISAC." Center for International 

Security and Cooperation , Stanford University, 15 Oct. 2007, 

cisac.fsi.stanford.edu/people/martha_crenshaw. Accessed 16 Sept. 2019. 

Ellis, Ralph, et al. "Orlando Shooting: 49 Killed, Shooter Pledged ISIS Allegiance." Cable News 

Network , 13 June 2016, www.cnn.com/2016/06/12/us/orlando -nightclub -

shooting/index.html. Accessed 5 Oct. 2019. Somrah 46 

Gillon, Steven M., et al. "September 11 Attacks." History , 11 Sept. 2019, 

www.history.com/topics/21st -century/9 -11 -attacks. Accessed 5 Oct. 2019. 

Goldman, Adam, et al. "FBI Says San Bernardino Attacks Considered Act of Terrorism; Shooter 

Pledged Allegiance to Islamic State Leader." The Washington Post , 4 Dec. 2015, 

www.washingtonpost.com/news/post -nation/wp/2015/12/04/san -bernardino -attackers -

tried -to -cover -their -tracks -official -says/. Accessed 7 Oct. 2019. 

Griffiths, James. "You Can Read This Article. An Internet Blackout Means No -One in Indian -

Controlled Kashmir Can." Cable News Network , 9 Aug. 2019, 

www.cnn.com/2019/08/08/tech/kashmir -intern et -blackout -india -pakistan -intl -

hnk/index.html. Accessed 9 Dec. 2019. 

Hagen, Ryan, et al. "Details of San Bernardino Mass Shooting Emerge Days After Shooting." 

The Sun , 3 Dec. 2015, www.sbsun.com/2015/12/03/details -of -san -bernardino -mass -

shooting -emerge -da ys -after -shooting/. Accessed 5 Oct. 2019. 

Hashim, Asad. "Profile: What Is Jaish -e-Muhammad?" Al Jazeera , 1 May 2019, 

www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/02/profile -jaish -muhammad -190215061851082.html. 

Accessed 23 Sept. 2019. 

"Jharkhand में Mob Lynching, Tabrez Ans ari को Jai Shree Ram और जय हनुमान के नारे लगवाकर 

मारा ." YouTube , uploaded by The Lallantop, 24 June 2019, 

www.youtube.com/watch?v=VuJNmWHWUN4. Accessed 21 Oct. 2019. 

Kabbani, Muhammad Hisham, and Seraj Hendricks. "Jihad: A Misunderstood Concept from 

Islam - What Jihad Is, and Is Not." The Islamic Supreme Council of America ,

islamicsupremecouncil.org/understanding -islam/legal -rulings/5 -jihad -a-misunderstood -

concept -from -islam.html?start=9. Accessed 23 Sept. 2019. Somrah 47 

Mamdani, Mahmood. "Good Muslim, Bad Muslim: A Political Perspective on Culture and 

Terrorism." American Anthropologist , vol. 104, no. 3, Sept. 2002, pp. 766 -75, 

www.jstor.org/stable/3567254. Accessed 9 Dec. 2019 .

Modi, Narendra. "One Nation, One Constitution Spirit Has Become a Reality Now: PM Modi." 

Narendra Modi , 15 Aug. 2019, www.narendramodi.in/text -of -prime -minister -shri -

narendra -modi -s-address -to -the -nation -from -the -ramparts -of -the -red -fort -on -the -73rd -

inde pendence -day -546008. Accessed 23 Oct. 2019. 

---. "PM Modi's Speech at a Public Meeting in Kozhikode, Kerala." 24 Sept. 2016. YouTube ,

uploaded by Narendra Modi, 24 Sept. 2016, 

www.youtube.com/watch?v=8u1ATUAmrl8. Accessed 8 Oct. 2019. Speech. 

Mueller, John , and Mark G. Stewart. "Evaluating Counterterrorism Spending." The Journal of 

Economic Perspectives , vol. 28, no. 3, Summer 2014, pp. 237 -47, 

www.jstor.org/stable/23800585. Accessed 9 Dec. 2019. 

Negi, Manjeet Singh. "Uri Attack: An Inside Story of How It H appened." India Today , 18 Sept. 

2016, www.indiatoday.in/india/story/uri -attack -inside -story -pashtun -map -pakistani -

ammunition -jash -e-mohammed -341761 -2016 -09 -18. Accessed 6 Oct. 2019. 

"Nonimmigrant Visa for a Fianc(é)e (K -1)." U.S. Department of State ,

travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/us -visas/immigrate/family -immigration/nonimmigrant -

visa -for -a-fiance -k-1.html. Accessed 7 Dec. 2019. 

Pandit, Virendra. "Balakot Air Strike Brought Pakistan to Its Knees: Modi Tells Voters in 

Gujarat." Business Line , 18 Ap r. 2019, 

www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/elections/balakot -air -strike -brought -pakistan -to -its -

knees -modi -tells -voters -in -gujarat/article26878711.ece#. Accessed 9 Oct. 2019. Somrah 48 

Pandya, Abhinav. "The Future of Indo -Pak Relations after the Pulwama Attack." Per spectives on 

Terrorism , vol. 3, no. 2, Apr. 2019, pp. 65 -68, www.jstor.org/stable/26626866. Accessed 

11 Sept. 2019. 

Poonam, Snigdha. "Modi's Message Was Simple: Hindus First." Foreign Policy , 24 May 2019, 

foreignpolicy.com/2019/05/24/modis -message -was -simp le -hindus -first/. Accessed 9 Oct. 

2019. 

"Pulwama Attack 2019, Everything About J&K Terror Attack on CRPF by Terrorist Adil 

Ahmed Dar, Jaish -e-Mohammad." India Today , 16 Feb. 2019, 

www.indiatoday.in/india/story/pulwama -attack -2019 -everything -about -jammu -and -

kashmir -terror -attack -on -crpf -by -terrorist -adil -ahmed -dar -jaish -e-mohammad -1457530 -

2019 -02 -16. Accessed 7 Oct. 2019. 

Rapin, Ami -Jacques. "Does Terrorism Create Terror?" Critical Studies on Terrorism , vol. 2, no. 

2, 10 Sept. 2009, pp. 165 -79, doi:10.1080/1 7539150903010251. Accessed 7 Dec. 2019. 

Santucci, John. "Trump Says San Bernardino Shooting Appears Tied to Terrorism: 'Look at the 

Names.'" ABC News , 3 Dec. 2015, abcnews.go.com/Politics/donald -trump -san -

bernardino -shooting -appears -tied -terrorism/story?id =35561319. Accessed 7 Oct. 2019. 

Siddiqui, Zeba. "Protests in Indian Cities after Muslim Man Is Lynched, Modi Says He Is 

'Pained.'" Reuters , 26 June 2019, uk.reuters.com/article/uk -india -protests -

lynching/protests -in -indian -cities -after -muslim -man -is -lynch ed -modi -says -he -is -pained -

idUKKCN1TR2BL. Accessed 22 Oct. 2019. 

Stern, Jessica, et al. "Timeline of Publicized Executions for Alleged Sodomy by the Islamic State 

Militias." OutRight Action International , 30 June 2016, Somrah 49 

outrightinternational.org/content/time line -publicized -executions -alleged -sodomy -islamic -

state -militias. Accessed 9 Dec. 2019. 

Swami, Praveen. "Despite Ban, Jaish -e-Mohammed Reappears on Social Media to Instigate 

Islamists in Kashmir to Heighten Protest Against India." Firstpost , 22 Aug. 2019, 

www.firstpost.com/india/despite -ban -jaish -e-muhammad -reappears -on -social -media -to -

instigate -islamists -in -kashmir -to -heighten -protest -against -india -7207861.html. Accessed 

22 Oct. 2019. 

Taylor, Jessica. "Trump Calls for 'Total and Complete Shutdown of Muslim s Entering' U.S." 

NPR , 7 Dec. 2015, www.npr.org/2015/12/07/458836388/trump -calls -for -total -and -

complete -shutdown -of -muslims -entering -u-s. Accessed 7 Oct. 2019. 

"10 Things Modi Said in His First Speech Post Uri." BloombergQuint , 24 Sept. 2016, 

www.bloombergquint.com/politics/narendra -modi -uri -air -base -attack -pakistan -prime -

minister -nawaz -sharif -ten -things -modi -said -at -bjp -council -meet. Accessed 8 Oct. 2019. 

Trump, Donald J. "Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism, I don't 

want congrats, I want toughness & vigilance. We must be smart!" Twitter , 12 June 2016, 

9:43 a.m., twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/742034549232766976. 

---. "What has happened in Orlando is just the beginning. Our leadership is weak and ineffective .

I called it and asked for the ban. Must be tough." Twitter , 12 June 2016, 1:47 p.m., 

twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/742096033207844864. 

"Trump v. Hawaii." Oyez , 26 June 2018, www.oyez.org/cases/2017/17 -965. Accessed 19 Oct. 

2019. 

United States, Execu tive Office of the President [Donald J. Trump]. Executive Order 13780: 

Executive Order Protecting The Nation From Foreign Terrorist Entry Into The United Somrah 50 

States. 6 Mar. 2017. Federal Register , www.whitehouse.gov/presidential -

actions/executive -order -protect ing -nation -foreign -terrorist -entry -united -states -2/. 

Accessed 19 Oct. 2019. 

---, ---. Executive Order 13769: Executive Order Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist 

Entry into the United States. 27 Jan. 2017. Federal Register ,

www.whitehouse.gov/presi dential -actions/executive -order -protecting -nation -foreign -

terrorist -entry -united -states/. Accessed 19 Oct. 2019. 

---, ---. Proclamation 9645: Presidential Proclamation Enhancing Vetting Capabilities and 

Processes for Detecting Attempted Entry Into the Unit ed States by Terrorists or Other 

Public -Safety Threats. 24 Sept. 2017. Federal Register ,

www.whitehouse.gov/presidential -actions/presidential -proclamation -enhancing -vetting -

capabilities -processes -detecting -attempted -entry -united -states -terrorists -public -sa fety -

threats/. Accessed 19 Oct. 2019. 

Zahid, Farhan. "Profile of Jaish -e-Muhammad and Leader Masood Azhar." Counter Terrorist 

Trends and Analyses , vol. 11, no. 4, Apr. 2019, pp. 1 -5, 

www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26631531. Accessed 23 Sept. 2019.
