Title: Feds: FL couple charged in Johnstown real estate scheme; husband jailed, wife on the run

URL Source: https://wjactv.com/news/local/feds-couple-charged-johnstown-real-estate-scheme-husband-jailed-wife-on-the-run-crime-investigation-florida-panama-pennsylvania-investors-victims-citrona-fraud-officials-indictment-properties

Published Time: 2024-07-04T16:22:12.000-04:00

Markdown Content:
JOHNSTOWN, Pa. (WJAC) — We have an update now on a 6 News investigation that began five years ago.

In 2019, we reported that several Johnstown real estate investors said they believed they were victims of a plan to take their money.

Now, the couple, who the investors say were responsible, are facing federal charges.

The exclusive investigative piece from 2019 focused on Citrona Homes, a Florida-based company that promised investors great returns on downtown Johnstown real estate.

**RELATED |Investor inquiry: Johnstown landlords say Florida-based company left them holding the bag**
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a federal indictment, Citrona took millions of dollars from dozens of investors. Now, one of the company’s owners sits in Cambia County Prison.

Students showcase welding skills in Cambria County competition for early recruitment

“You would own the property, they would manage the property, and you'd never touch it. I was lured by the false promises, so I said I got enough to cover at least three properties,” explained Citrona investor Marty Bitter.

Bitter is one of at least 70 people prosecutors say were defrauded, between 2017 and 2019, by the husband-wife duo of Paul Gulbronson and Kelly Bonilla.

The US Attorney’s Office says they ran a Ponzi-type scheme through their Florida-based company Citrona.

**MORE |Worker sentenced for setting vacant Johnstown building ablaze**
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Investigators say it focused on buying up rundown properties in Johnstown, promising to fix them up, and then selling them to out of state investors. A recent indictment says Citrona promised to manage the property and its tenants, giving the investors the rent money.

“Let me put something together for you, the program is simple, we're going to manage everything for $50 a door, we'll collect the rent, taxes, basically passive income,” explains Bitter.

In our original reporting, we spoke with John Bryan, who said he was being taken advantage of.

“They talked about how they would take care of the repairs for the first two years, they’d collect all your rent, pay your bills, they’d basically manage the property for you, so it sounded like a good deal.”

Marty and John were far from the only ones claiming to have problems with the company.

Comments flooded real estate forums of frustrated investors who say they were having issues of their own with Citrona. They said there was no communication, no refurbishment done to the homes as was promised, and the paperwork was full of discrepancies.

In some cases, victims say ownership of the properties was never transferred to them at all.

“They did the paperwork wrong, the wording has to be legally right, and my company called me and said, ‘this is garbage.’ Later on, it was discovered that they copied and pasted the notary that they used when they brought that property and cut and pasted it into my purchase. They cut and pasted out that company name, and put it in my closing documents, they never closed on the property.”

We reported at the time that local authorities confirmed they were looking into Gulbronson and Bonilla, but federal agencies wouldn’t comment.

Now, a sweeping 12-page indictment from the western district of Pennsylvania shows the scope of the investigation.

It says the couple hatched a plan, using Citrona as a means to enrich themselves by defrauding investors.

Court documents say when the couple knew they were being investigated, they fled the country. They say the couple was living in Panama for the last few years to escape capture.

The couple is now facing ten counts of fraud.

In total, prosecutors say the couple collected over $5 million in just over a two-year period.

Now, almost five years later, Paul Gulbronson is in custody.

Paul Gulbronson (CamCo Prison)

“I was shocked when you guys called, and now I got a letter from the Department of Justice letting me know that they have one of the defendants in custody.”

Bitter says he was in Johnstown last year and testified in a federal grand jury hearing.

“I doubt I will ever see any of that money returned to me, but if I did, I would be so blessed.”

Court documents say, in addition to jail time, prosecutors are seeking to recoup over four million dollars from the couple.

At last check, the US Attorney’s Office says Kelly Bonilla remains on the run, believed to be in Panama with the couple’s two young children.

Paul Gulbronson is jailed in Cambria County, awaiting his next court appearance scheduled for next week.
