Title: Historical and comparative overview of sponge campus construction and future challenges

URL Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0048969723061041

Markdown Content:
Highlights
----------

*   •
This paper analyzes the development of sponge campuses in different countries.

*   •
This paper summarizes the problems existing in the development of sponge campus.

*   •
This paper proposes the development direction of sponge campus in the future.

Abstract
--------

Frequent urban flooding has caused great economic losses and casualties worldwide. Sponge cities have attracted attention as an important means of flood control and disaster reduction. This paper systematically and comprehensively analyzes the development of sponge campuses in China and other countries and compares classic examples of sponge campus construction. We identify the following issues in sponge campus construction: lack of appropriate numerical simulation model, low public engagement and support of sponge campuses, and a lack of standardized guidance for sponge campus construction. Based on the in-depth analysis of successful examples of sponge campus construction in developed countries, and combined with consideration of China's economic development, geographical location, and urbanization level, we suggest the future development direction of sponge campus: the development of local sponge campus models; popularization of sponge theory; improvement to public participation and experience; improve the financial system of sponge campus; and standardization of guidance for sponge campus construction and maintenance. This paper expounds on the necessity of sponge campus construction and further improves the theoretical system of sponge campuses. These results can provide theoretical support and reference for the construction or transformation of sponge campuses in colleges and universities and then promote further development of sponge campuses.

Introduction
------------

With global sea level rise, rapid climate change, and rapid economic development, the frequency of disasters caused by flooding is increasing (Bloeschl et al., 2019; Vousdoukas et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2022). One-third of the world's land and 82% of the global population are now affected by floods (Alam et al., 2018). Flood disasters are particularly serious in China. From 1990 to 2017, economic losses due to floods in China accounted for approximately 10% of the global losses due to flooding (Liu et al., 2022; Kundzewicz et al., 2019). Therefore, urban flood needs to be addressed urgently.

Urban floods have always presented a major challenge to global cities. Current methods to mitigate the effects of urban floods include the centralized transportation system of the curb-drain-pipeline network and the construction of pumping stations to quickly reduce rainwater runoff (Brown, 2005; Winz et al., 2011). Maiolo et al. (2020) explored the transformation of the urban drainage system network, and used a real-time control system to redistribute the filling degree of drainage pipes and reduce rainwater runoff. Meng et al. (2023) used the Site Real-Time Adaptive Control model to delay the peak flow of the mainstream system by 8–10 min and reduce the total drainage flow by 50%. Their research is based on the transformation of urban drainage system pipe networks to reduce the rainwater runoff. However, due to the long history of urban drainage system construction, outdated facilities, and low design standards, drainage systems are often blocked, limiting their capacity to drain stormwater (Abebe et al., 2021; Ning et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2022). At the same time, it can causes environmental problems, such as the degradation of water quality and the destruction of river ecosystems (Sanders and Grant, 2020; Dhakal and Chevalier, 2016; Wang et al., 2023). Therefore, it is important to explore sustainable stormwater management.

Stormwater management technology developed earlier and achieved certain results in some countries (Dagenais et al., 2017; Silva et al., 2017; Roy et al., 2008). Moura et al. (2016) constructed rainwater management measures in São Paulo, such as rainwater gardens and biological wetlands. The results showed that green rainwater management measures can effectively intercept rainwater runoff, equivalent to 42% of local reservoir retention. The Unlimited Green Roof group at the University of Portland analyzed the Portland business district where they implemented green roofs across a third of the area, capturing 60% of the rainwater and recycling approximately 67 million gallons annually, thereby reducing runoff by 11–15% (Erickson and Gulliver, 2011).The green roofs plays an important role in alleviating urban floods (Thu Thuy et al., 2019). China has learned from foreign advanced stormwater management technology and proposed to build a sponge city (Wu et al., 2020a). Zhang et al. (2018) showed that at least 50% of the green space should be sunken green space to ensure the comprehensive benefits of sponge facilities. Tang et al. (2015) carried out long-term operation monitoring of different rainwater gardens in a city in Shaanxi Province. They found that the annual runoff reduction rate of rainwater gardens with undisturbed soil can reach as high as 99%. Colleges and universities are one of the areas most affected by heavy rainwater and urban waterlogging, causing great inconvenience to the daily study and life of teachers and students. With the implementation of sponge cities in Chinese planning, the construction of sponge campuses has become necessary for many university projects. Sponge campus is the application of sponge city on micro scale, enabling intuitive assessment of runoff reduction, which is conducive to promoting the construction of sponge city. Most existing research on sponge campuses in China is based on case study analysis (Barron, 2022; Liu and Zheng, 2021; Wu, 2020; Liu, 2020a; Ma, 2019; Liu, 2019), and there are few studies assessing overall sponge campus construction and directions for future development.

Based on the theory of sponge city, this study combined the development system and construction situation of sponge campuses in China and other countries; compared the classic cases of sponge campuses combined with the Best Management Practices (BMPs), Low Impact Development (LID), and other rainwater management theories; explored the construction of sponge campus that organically integrates the rainwater management with landscape effects; and summarized future directions of sponge campus construction. These findings can serve as a reference for the scientific implementation of sponge city strategies.

Section snippets
----------------

Overview of sponge campus development in China and other countries
------------------------------------------------------------------

Since ancient, the flood disaster has always existed. The research on global flood disasters has never stopped, and many measures for flood control and drainage have been put forward. As far back as 2000 BCE, China experienced a catastrophic flood along the Yellow River. Following extensive field investigations, Dayu introduced the concept that “water management involves dredging rather than obstruction” (Wang et al., 2020). In 256 BCE, the Dujiangyan irrigation system was constructed. During

Shengyinyuan of Tsinghua University
-----------------------------------

Shengyinyuan is situated southwest of the Tsinghua University campus and boasts a rich history. Due to the continuous expansion of the campus, increased building density, and high-rise structures in the vicinity, Shengyinyuan has evolved into a low-lying area prone to flooding during rainfall events. The Shengyinyuan site, which houses the scientific research office of the humanities and social sciences at Tsinghua University, serves not only as a historical tribute to the university and its

Future directions for sustainable sponge campus development
-----------------------------------------------------------

Through the systematic comparison and comprehensive analysis of typical examples of sponge campuses in China and other countries, we conclude that key issues in sponge campus construction includes: a lack of suitable models for simulating sponge campuses; insufficient public participation; non-standard construction of sponge campuses. In view of these issues, we propose that future development of China's sponge campuses should focus on: developing local sponge campus models; popularizing sponge

Conclusion
----------

Sponge campus construction will be a vital trend of domestic campus development in coming years. This article presents a historical review of sponge campus's construction and prospects the future sustainability. Based on the development process and theoretical system of rainwater management in China and other countries, this study compares classic examples of sponge campuses. Through comprehensive analysis, we conclude the following: (1) Due to differences in economic development, population

CRediT authorship contribution statement
----------------------------------------

Formal analysis, Yang Wu; Funding acquisition, Jiqiang Lyu; Methodology, Shuangtao Wang and Xianbao Zha; Project administration, Bin He; Validation, Xiaohui Wang and Weili Duan; Writing—original draft, Peiyao Yan; Writing—review & editing, Pingping Luo. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Declaration of competing interest
---------------------------------

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgement
---------------

The financial support is given by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (

2018YFE0103800

), China Scholarship Council (Grant No.:

Liujinmei [2022] No. 45

;

Liujinxuan [2022] No. 133

;

Liujinou [2023] No. 22

), International Education Research Program of Chang'a University (

300108221102

), Project of Ningxia Natural Science Foundation (

2022AAC03700

;

2022BEG03059

), 2022 Guangdong University Youth Innovation Talent Program (

2022KQNCX143

); Yinshanbeilu Grassland Eco-hydrology

Cited by (19)
-------------

*   ### A novel quantity assessment of landscape ecological risk using human-nature driving mechanism for sustainable society

2024, Science of the Total Environment

A broad consensus has been reached to pursue coordinated environmental, social, and economic development to achieve these development goals (Liu et al., 2023d; Ni et al., 2022). Anthropogenic factors can lead to ecological fragmentation, urban flooding, and the urban heat island effect, among other disasters that threaten the coordinated development of nature and society (Chen et al., 2023a; Duan et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022a; Luo et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022a). LER is an indicator of landscape and ecosystem health (Lin and Wang, 2023).  
*   ### Global systematical and comprehensive overview of mountainous flood risk under climate change and human activities

2024, Science of the Total Environment

Collaboration for Sustainable development and livelihoods; climate-resilient, low-carbon pathways would help for long-term economic, social, and environmental sustainability in mountainous areas. Integrated water resources management involves managing land use practices, such as afforestation, reforestation, and soil conservation measures, to enhance water retention and reduce downstream runoff (Luo et al., 2023, 2024; Wang et al., 2022b). To minimize individual losses, flood insurance programs are launched in many countries and are considered as one of the effective strategies to reduce flood risk.  

View all citing articles on Scopus

View full text
© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
