Title: 

URL Source: https://consciousness.arizona.edu/sites/default/files/2025-06/PROGRAM-ABSTRACTS-2025-june-23.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 23 Jun 2025 04:27:54 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

# THE SCIENCE OF 

# CONSCIOUSNESS 

# Barcelona July 6 -11, 2025 

In conjunction with 

The Festival of Consciousness July 11 -13 

Welcome to the 31 st annual ‘The Science of Consciousness’ (‘TSC’) Conference, the 

world’s largest, longest running, interdisciplinary and premier gathering addressing 

fundamental questions and rigorous approaches to all aspects of the study and 

understanding of consciousness, the brain, reality , its place in the universe and the 

nature of existence. Topical areas include neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, biology, 

quantum physics, cosmology, art, meditation , psychedelic and altered states ,

AI/machine consciousness, culture and exp eriential phenomenology. 

The 2025 TSC is organized and hosted by the Center for Consciousness Studies at the 

University of Arizona and hosted by The Festival of Consciousness and Fundac ió 

Humanitas Internacional. 

TSC Conference : July 6 – July 11 (AC Forum Marriott) 

FoC -Festival: July 11 – July 13 (Plaza Leonardo da Vinci) 

This year our live participation and broadcast will take place at the AC Forum Marriott 

Barcelona . TSC 2025 is a 6 -day gathering consisting of 7 Workshops, 14 Plenary Sessions, 

24 Concurrent Sessions, 3 Poster Sessions and Exhibitor presentations, social, wellness 

sessions, a Poetry Slam and other entertainment. We anticipate in person over 500 

scientists, philosophers, educators, academicians, students, meditators, artists, 

interested public and seekers from around the world. The Plenary sessions and 3 

workshops will be live streamed virtually and uploaded for on -demand review. We thank 2

our sponsors, program committee, support staff, hosts, presenters, attendees, exhibitors 

and volunteers and all the Plenary and Keynote speakers for making TSC possible. 

Special thanks and appreciation to Xavi Ganesta and staff including the excellent 

coordination of Diana Perea, Fundació Humanitas Internacional. 

We especially acknowledge the extraordinary efforts and many years of service of Abi 

Behar -Montefiore, Assistant Director of the Center for Consciousness Studies at the 

University of Arizona. Without Abi, The Center and TSC conferences would not be possibl e. 

Sincerely, 

Stuart Hameroff , Director , Center for Consciousness Studies 

Program Co -Chair, The Science of Consciousness 

Conference & Festival Website - 2025 Barcelona 

Center for Consciousness Studies Website UA -Tucson 

Have a great time ! 

Mark your calendars        

> April 6 -11, 2026, TSC 32 nd -Tucson AZ -Call for Abstracts in August , 2025
> Mailing List Sign Up Form
> To learn more, visit: consciousness.arizona.edu

3

# The Science of 

# Consciousness 

# Conference 

July 6 — 11, 2025 

Barcelona 

TSC 2025 PLENARY 

o Sir Roger Penrose 

o Avshalom Elitzur 

o William Brown 

o Deepak Chopra 

o Stuart Hameroff 

o Nassim Haramein 

o Giulio Ruffini 

o Jay Sanguinetti 

o Federico Faggin 

o Farhan Lakhany 

o Suzanne Gildert 

o Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

o Michael Wiest 

o Pär Halje 

o Jennifer Penberthy 

o David del Rosario 

o Laxmidhar Behera 

o Robert Lawrence Kuhn 

o Naotsugu Tsuchiya 

o Ivette Fuentes 

o Thomas Brophy 

o Santosh Helekar 

o Earl K. Miller 

o Matthew Larkum 

o Sabine Kastner 

o Philip Kurian 

o Dante Lauretta 

o Anita Goel 

o Dean Radin 

o Rupert Sheldrake 

o Marjorie Woollacott 

o Alex Gomez -Marin 

o Jimo Borjigin 

o Ross Coulthart 

o Brannon Wheeler 

# o Donald Hoffman 4

> ABOUT TSC

The Science of Consciousness (‘TSC’) conference is the world’s longest running inter -

disciplinary gathering on the study of consciousness, the nature of existence and our 

place in the universe. TSC has alternated yearly since 1994 between Tucson, Arizona 

USA and elsewhere including Italy, Denmark, Japan, Sweden, Czech Republic, Hunga ry, 

Hong Kong, India, California, Switzerland, Finland, and in 2023 Taormina, on the island 

of Sicily. In 2025 TSC will be in Barcelona, Spain preceding and in conjunction with The 

Festival of Consciousness. 

We are at a crossroads in the age -old study of consciousness. Over the past thirty 

years approaches to understanding consciousness have diverged along two distinct 

paths: 

1. ‘Neurocomputational’ views of the brain as a complex computer of simple 

neurons, a view compatible with AI systems becoming conscious. 

2. ‘Funda -mental’ views in which consciousness is intrinsic to the universe, 

connected to the brain through quantum biology. 

TSC considers both views rigorously. 

THE SCIENCE OF 

CONSCIOUSNESS 

Barcelona July 6 -11, 2025 

WHAT TO EXPECT  

> •

Sunday workshop day (7)  

> •

Early morning inspirational sessions  

> •

14 plenary sessions  

> •

+100 concurrent talks  

> •

posters, exhibits, and social events  

> •

+500 attendees 5

# Conference Program - Summary by Session  

> •

Workshops : Sun day July 6 

morning 9 am -1 pm ; afternoon 2 pm -6 pm ; evening session 7 -10 pm  

> •

Plenary: Mon day July 7 - Fri day July 11 

Mon day -Thur sday: 8:30 am -4:10 pm; Fri day 9:00 am -1:00 pm  

> •

Concurrents: Mon day July 7 - Thurs day July 10 - 5:00 pm -7:30 pm  

> •

Poster s: Mon day July 7 to Wed nesday July 9 ; 7:30 pm -10:00 pm  

> •

Exhibitors : Coffee/Refreshments: Daily tba  

> •

Morning Experiential Sessions Mon day July 7 - Fri day July 11 ; 7:00 am - 8:15 am  

> •

Meditation - Deepak Chopra Fri day July 11 - 7:30 am -8:30 am  

> •

Poetry Slam/End of Consciousness Party - Thurs day July 10 - 8:00 pm - xxx 

Early Morning Experiential Sessions 

Mon day July 7 - Thursday 7:00 am - 8:15 am 

Monday 

Suren Shrestha. Clouds of Sound Singing Bowls and Meditation. Join Atma Buti® creator and Master 

Teacher, Suren Shrestha, as he leads the sound bath relaxation, accompanied by Himalayan singing 

bowls, bells and more. 

Tuesday 

Christine Marie Maison. Awake and Expand, breath and movement 

Wednesday 

Katarina Baliova. Ceremony of the elements. Earth, Water, Air and Fire 

Join Katarina for a sound Journey with ancestral frequencies of Fujara flute (traditional Slovakian flute), 

guitar, drum and kora, presenting folkloric music and vibrations through melodies 

Thursday 

Jill Purce. Voice Healing and Inherited Family Patterns 

This experiential session will explore how sound and the voice have been understood and used in 

different traditions as one of the most effective ways to balance and bring order and form into the 

mind and body. 

Friday (7:30 -8:30 am) – Main Hall 

Deepak Chopra. Early morning meditation with Deepak Chopra 6

Workshops – Sunday , July 6, 2025 

9:00 am – 1:00 pm Morning Sessions (rooms TBA) 

WK -1

CONSCIOUSNESS IN INDIAN KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS AND MEGAHERTZ BRAIN WAVES 

Martin Fleming, Ricardo Silvestre, Omduth Coceal, Kunal Mooley, Hide Saegusa 

WK -2

WOMEN IN CONSCIOUSNESS STUDIES 

Marjorie Woollacott; Joan Walton; Marina Weiler; Mona Sobhani; Allison Paradise, 

Laurel Waterman 

WK -3 - Main Halal 

QUANTUM BIOLOGY 

Travis Craddock, Philip Kurian, Javier Martin -Torres, Mike Wiest, Marco Cavaglia , Tommaso 

Firaux, Gemma Loreti, Serena Canavero 

1:00 pm – 2:00 pm – Break 

2:00 pm -6:00 pm Afternoon Sessions 

WK -4

NONLOCAL CONSCIOUSNESS AND EXTRASENSORY PERCEPTION 

David del Rosario, Irene Vigué, Alex Escolá. Marina Weiler, Toper Taylor, Mike Zeleznick 

WK -5 – Main Hall 

Is Consciousness Funda -Mental? 

Nassim Haramein, William Brown, Suzanne Gildert, Nestor Mercado, Don Hoffman (R), Thomas Brophy. 

Sponsored by ISF, Nirvanic Technologies, IONS 

WK -6

Working Session on Taxonomy of Consciousness 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn (R), Brian Lord 

6:00 pm – 7:00 pm – Food, Drinks Evening Session 

WK -7 7:00 pm -10:00 pm – Main Hall 

- The Varieties of BCI - Brain Computer Interfaces - Ana Maiques, Giulio Ruffini, Tim Mullen, Jay 

Sanguinetti, Arnaud Delorme, Anirban Bandyopadhyay, Santosh Helekar, Brian Lord. Sponsored by 

Neuroelectrics, Starlab, PuzzleX, DDG, SEMA Lab, Sanmei) - Main Hall 7

# 2025 Abstract s and Program Outline 

PROGRAM OUTLINE ...........pp. 1 -6

Welcome, About TSC, Outline, Plenary Lineup, Workshop Sessions, Morning Experiential 

Index ........p.7 

PLENARY Sessions by Day .......... ... pp. 8-10 

PLENARY OUTLINE , Short Bios ..........pp. 10 -34

PLENARY Abstracts , Bios ......... ....... .pp. 3 4-83

PRESENTERS BY SESSION 

Summary of All Sessions..........p.5 

Pre -Conference Workshops... .p. 6 

Early Morning Experientials.....p. 5 

Concurrent Sessions ....pp. 8 4-92 

Poster Sessions..............pp. 92 -98 

Table Exhibitors.............p. 99 

Partners/Sponsors........p. 100 

Presenters and Affiliations Index.......pp. 101 -115 

TSC2026 Preview/Links.......pp. 115 -117 

ALL ACCEPTED ABSTRACTS – Full Text .....pp. 118 -369 8

The Science of Consciousness – Barcelona 2025 

# Plenary Sessions July 7 -11 

Monday July 7 PLENARY PL -1 - PL -3

PL -1 - 8:30 am - 10:40 am - 'AI, LLMs and Biomimetic Quantum Computing' 

Farhan Lakhany, Assessing the Delta: LLMs & Unified Agency 

Suzanne Gildert, Experimental Design and Testing of a Quantum Consciousness 

Algorithm for AI and Robotics Running on an Adiabatic Quantum Computer 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay, "Dodecanogram: A Novel Instrument for Detecting 

Microtubule Resonance in Anesthetic States" 

PL - 2 11:10 am – 12:35 pm - 'Brain Modulation' 

Giulio Ruffini, From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling of Structured 

Experience 

Jay Sanguinetti, From States to Traits: How Noninvasive Neuromodulation with 

Mindfulness Training Can Help Shift Consciousness Toward Lasting Wellbeing 

PL -3 2:00 pm - 4:10 pm -'Consciousness and Reality' 

Sir Roger Penrose (R) 

William Brown, Instantaneous Memory Accession via Quantum Geometrodynamic 

Networks 

Avshalom Elitzur, Qualia, Violation of Conservation Laws, and the Quanta of Pan -

Psychism 

Tuesday July 8 PLENARY PL -4 - PL -6

PL -4 8:30 am - 10:40 am - 'Anesthesia, Psychedelics and Consciousness' 

Michael Wiest, Old theory, new evidence: microtubules are the biological substrate of 

quantum consciousness 

Pär Halje, How consciousness may rely on brain cells acting collectively – evidence 

from psychedelic research on rats 

Jennifer Penberthy, Psilocybin and Prolonged Grief Disorder: Role of Subjective 

Experience on Outcomes 9

PL -5 11:10 am – 12:35 pm - 'Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception' 

David del Rosario, Evidence for Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory 

Perception 

Laxmidhar Behera, IKS Approaches for holistic understanding of Mind, Brain, and 

Consciousness 

PL -6 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm - 'Theories of Consciousness '

Sabine Kastner , A Rhythmic Theory of Selective Attention 2.0 

Naotsugu Tsuchiya, Establishing standards for (realist) theories of 

consciousness/qualia: structural constraints from relationships among qualia 

Stuart Hameroff, Correlates of qualia in microtubule ‘time crystal’ dynamics 

Wednesday July 9 PLENARY PL -7 - PL -9

PL -7 8:30 am - 10:40 am - 'Consciousness and Quantum Measurement' 

Ivette Fuentes, Can Gravity Collapse the Wavefunction? Bose -Einstein Condensates 

as a Testing Ground 

Thomas Brophy, Ontological Frameworks that Work 

Santosh Helekar, Sentiometry – Measuring Peri -somatic Modulation of Diffracted 

Light by Consciousness and Characterizing the Underlying Physicochemical 

Mechanisms 

PL -8 11:10 am – 12:35 pm - 'Consciousness and Vibrations in Spacetime Geometry' 

Nassim Haramein, Scaling from Quantum Vacuum Fluctuations to the Brain 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay, Self -operating mathematical universe, SOMU: Why do we 

need a non -physical reality to explain a physical system? 

PL -9 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm - 'Brain Oscillations, Waves and Attention' 

Earl K Miller (R) , Cognition emerges from neural dynamics 

Matthew Larkum, The dendritic decoupling hypothesis of anesthesia 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn (R), A Landscape of Consciousness: Toward a Taxonomy 

of Explanations and Implications 

Thursday July 10 PLENARY PL -10 - PL -12 

PL -10 8:30 am - 10:40 am - 'Quantum Biology and Superradiance '

Philip Kurian, Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe 

Dante Lauretta (R) The Science of Quantum Biology and Its Implications for 

Consciousness 

Anita Goel, Does Physics need a revolution to understand life, living systems and 

consciousness? What can Quantum NanoBioPhysics Teach us here? 10 

PL -11 11:10 am – 12:35 pm - 'Energy, Information and Consciousness in the Universe' 

Dean Radin (R) , Evidence for worldwide modulation of physical randomness 

correlated with coherent consciousness during New Year's Eve celebrations. 

Rupert Sheldrake, Morphic Resonance and the Memory of Nature 

PL -12 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm - 'End -of -Life Brain Activity' 

Marjorie Woollacott, New clues to Terminal Lucidity in mentally -impaired adults 

Alex Gomez -Marin, If consciousness survives, materialis m dies: re -appraising the 

“permissive brain” hypothesis at the edges of consciousness 

Jimo Borjigin, Potential neural signatures of near -death consciousness in humans 

Friday July 11 PLENARY PL -13 - PL -14 

PL -13 9:00 am - 11:10 am - 'Prospects for Extraterrestrial Consciousness' 

Ross Coulthart, Investigating the Psionic Interface: Alleged Non -Human Interactions 

with Human Consciousness in Covert UAP Programs. 

Brannon Wheeler, How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? 

PL -14 11:40 am – 13:00 pm - 'Quantum Fields and Consciousness '

Donald Hoffman (R), Physics of Spacetime from Traces of Consciousness 

Deepak Chopra, Consciousness is the Ontological Primitive of the Universe 

Federico Faggin, Consciousness and Free Will are Quantum Properties of Being 

# PLENARY Schedule & Short Bios 

Monday July 7 , 2025 

PL ENARY 1 - 8:30 am - 10:40 am 

'AI, LLMs and Biomimetic Quantum Computing' 

Farhan Lakhany, Assessing the Delta: LLMs & Unified Agency 

Suzanne Gildert, Experimental Design and Testing of a Quantum Consciousness 

Algorithm for AI and Robotics Running on an Adiabatic Quantum Computer 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay, "Dodecanogram: A Novel Instrument for Detecting 

Microtubule Resonance in Anesthetic States" 11 

Farhan Lakhany 

Farhan Lakhany is a philosopher of mind, artificial intelligence and cognitive science. In 2023, he 

received a PhD from the University of Iowa and is currently teaching at the University of Nebraska 

Omaha as a Visiting Assistant Professor. His main research interests l ay at the intersection of the 

philosophy of mind, philosophy of artificial intelligence, philosophy of psychology and cognitive 

science with an emphasis on consciousness, mental representation and artificial intelligence. In 

addition, I have interests in t he philosophy of science, metaphilosophy, epistemology, egalitarianism, 

neuroscience, psychology, evolutionary theory, biology and computer science. 

Suzanne Gildert 

Suzanne Gildert is Founder and CEO of Nirvanic, a company pioneering quantum consciousness 

technologies for artificial intelligence. Suzanne previously co -founded and was CTO of Sanctuary AI, a 

company building Human -Like Intelligence in General Purpose Robots. At Sanctu ary she helped design, 

build and launch the Phoenix humanoid robot and its novel Carbon AI control software, with a focus on 

work applications to address labor shortages. Prior to Sanctuary, Suzanne was co -founder and CTO of 

Kindred AI. She oversaw the des ign and engineering of the company's human -like robots and was 

responsible for the development of cognitive architectures that allow these robots to learn about 

themselves and their environments. Suzanne also has deep expertise in quantum computing from he r

time at D -Wave Systems, where she ported AI algorithms to D -Wave’s quantum annealing hardware. 

She also invented and implemented MAXCAT, the world’s first game ever played against a quantum 

computer, worked on the world’s first supervised classifier run on a quantum computer and was the first 

person to control the motion of a robot using a quantum computer. Suzanne received her Ph.D. in 

experimental physics from the University of Birmingham (UK) in 2008, specializing in quantum device 

physics, microfabric ation techniques, and low -temperature measurements of novel superconducting 

circuits. She likes science outreach, programming, retro tech, fantasy and gothic art, coffee, electronic 

music and lifelogging and is a published author of a book of art and poetr y. Suzanne is passionate about 

conscious robots and their role as a new form of symbiotic, friendly life in our society. 12 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay PH.D. Materials and Nano -architectronics, MANA, National Institute for 

Materials Science, NIMS, Tsukuba, Japan Anirban Bandyopadhyay is Principal Research Scientist (NIMS), 

Tsukuba. He earned his Ph.D. in Supramolecular Electronics at the Indian Associat ion for the Cultivation 

of Science (IACS), Kolkata, 2005. From 2005 to 2008 he was ICYS research fellow at the ICYS, NIMS, Japan, 

and worked on the brain -like bio -processor building. In 2008, Anirban joined as a permanent scientist 

at NIMS, working on the cavity resonator model of human brain and design -synthesis of brain -like 

organic jelly. From 2013 to 2014 he was a visiting scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

(MIT), USA. Awards include Hitachi Science and Technology award 2010, Inamori Foundation award 2011 –

2012, Kurata Foundation Award, Inamori Foundation Fellow (2011 –) and Sewa Society international 

member, Japan.  www.nanobraintech.com 

Monday July 7, 2025 

PL ENARY 2 11:10 am – 12:35 pm - 'Brain Modulation' 

Giulio Ruffini, From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling of Structured 

Experience 

Jay Sanguinetti, From States to Traits: How Noninvasive Neuromodulation with 

Mindfulness Training Can Help Shift Consciousness Toward Lasting Wellbeing 

Giulio Ruffini 

Giulio Ruffini, Co -founder and Chief Technology Officer (CTO) of Neuroelectrics. 

With a background in physics, founded Starlab in 2000, later founding Neuroelectrics in 2011. Giulio’s 

pioneering work includes brain stimulation technology and brain -to -brain communication research. In 

the past , Giulio has been a researcher at UC Davis and Los Alamos National Laboratory (both as a 

graduate research student), and a post -doc at the Catalan Institute for Space Studies (IEEC, 

Barcelona, Spain). Giulio Ruffini received a BA, Math and Physics, UC Berkeley (1988) ; and a PhD, 

Theoretical Physics, UC Davis (1995) CEO of  Starlab  (http://starlab.es ) and President 

of  Neuroelectrics  (http://neuroelectrics.com ). 13 

My current research stems from a physics and mathematics background, and my focus rests on the 

science (biophysical and physiological modeling), technology and clinical applications related to the 

“electrical brain”, including non -invasive brain stimulation technologies combined with EEG and other 

neuroimaging techniques. During the EU funded HIVE project (FET Open research program) I

coordinated a very capable team to develop a new class of hybrid EEG -transcranial stimulation devices 

capable of controllin g stimulation currents in numerous electrodes. Stemming from that work, I recently 

led the first demonstration of conscious non -invasive direct brain -to -brain communication. I am 

currently developing on clinical applications of multifocal transcranial current stimulation (including 

tDCS, tACS and tRNS), that is, the coordinated stimulation of several brain targets or brain targets or 

brain networks derived from neuroimaging, especially in epilepsy, as well as on the uses of EEG for 

diagnosis in Parkins on’s disease using machine learning techniques. 

Jay Sanguinetti 

Jay Sanguinetti is an Adjunct Professor at the University of Arizona and a Research Assistant Professor 

at the University of New Mexico. His training was in philosophy, neuroscience, and cognitive 

psychology, and his dissertation investigated the neural processes of cons cious and unconscious 

visual perception. Dr. Sanguinetti specializes in psychophysiological measures (EEG, fMRI, eye -tracking) 

of visual perception, emotion, and mindfulness meditation. His team investigates novel forms of brain 

stimulation, including the use of ultrasound and light -based stimulation to enhance memory, 

perception, and well -being. Dr. Sanguinetti has published widely, from topics on the neural basis of 

vision and the temporal dynamics of perception to understanding how the brain changes in 

Parkinson’s disease and schizophrenia. His current interests include using noninvasive brain 

stimulation to enhance cognition and well -being. Jay is presently investigating whether focused 

ultrasound neuromodulation can augment mindfulness practice in colla boration with Shinzen Young. 

They recently launched the Sonication Enhanced Mindful Awareness (SEMA) lab at the University of 

Arizona in collaboration with the Center for Consciousness Studies. The SEMA lab is developing 

accelerated mindfulness protocols f or therapeutic interventions to treat addiction, chronic pain, and 

depression. Dr. Sanguinetti is the Assistant Director for the Center for Consciousness Studies, which 

runs the largest international conference on consciousness studies. 14 

Monday July 7, 2025 

PL ENARY 3 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm 

'Consciousness and Reality' 

Sir Roger Penrose , Nobel Laureate in Physics, University of Oxford 

William Brown, Instantaneous Accession via Quantum Geometrodynamic 

Networks 

Avshalom Elitzur, Qualia, Violation of Conservation Laws, and the Quanta of Pan -

Psychism 

Sir Roger Penrose 

Roger Penrose was born, August 8, 1931, in Colchester Essex UK. He earned a 1st class mathematics 

degree at University College London; a Ph.D. at Cambridge UK, and became assistant lecturer, 

Bedford College London, Research Fellow St John’s College, Cambridge (now Hono rary Fellow), a 

post -doc at King’s College London, NATO Fellow at Princeton, Syracuse, and Cornell Universities, USA. 

He also served a 1 -year appointment at University of Texas, became a Reader then full Professor at 

Birkbeck College, London, and Rouse Ball Professor of Mathematics, Oxford University (during which 

he served several half -year periods as Mathematics Professor at Rice University, Houston, Texas). 

He is now Emeritus Rouse Ball Professor, Fellow, Wadham College, Oxford (now Emeritus Fellow). He 

has received many awards and honorary degrees, including knighthood, Fellow of the Royal Society 

and of the US National Academy of Sciences, the De Morgan Medal of London Mathematical Society, 

the Copley Medal of the Royal Society, the Wolf Pr ize in mathematics (shared with Stephen 

Hawking), the Pomeranchuk Prize (Moscow), and one half of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics, the 

other half shared by Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez. He has designed many non -periodic tiling 

patterns including a large paving at entrance of Andrew Wiles Mathematics Building, Oxford, and 

the Transbay Center, San Francisco, California. Sir Roger is widely acclaimed for fundamental 

advances in understanding the universe. His 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics was bestowed for sho wing 

that black holes are robust predictions of Einstein’s theory of general relativity. Roger has also 

proposed a solution to the measurement problem in quantum mechanics (‘objective reduction’, 

‘OR’), which he suggests is also the origin of consciousness, leading to a theory of brain function 

(‘orchestrated objective reduction’, ‘Orch OR’). And Roger’s concept of Conformal Cyclic Cosmology 

(‘CCC’) posits a serial, eternal universe, with the Big Bang preceded by a previous aeon which had 

its own Big Bang, that aeon preceded by another and so on. 15 

William Brown 

William Brown is a biophysicist investigating the physics operational at the cellular and molecular 

level of the biological system. He presents lectures, talks, and Q&A forums to teach the syncretic 

theories of unified science. He is a part of the research team at The International Space Federation : a 

research and development company generating novel technologies in geometrodynamic and 

quantum vacuum engineering for harnessing energy from the zero -point field and gravity control for 

propulsion. As well, William has app lied discoveries from his biophysics research to technologies that 

can be utilized for greater health and system coherence. William David Brown is a Molecular 

Biologist, Biophysicist, and Research Scientist with a diverse range of expertise and extensive 

experience in the field. He holds an M.S. in Biology with a specialization in Applied Recombinant 

DNA Technology from New Yor k University and a B.S. in Biology with a focus on Cellular and 

Molecular Biology from Northern Arizona University. Throughout his career, Brown has showcased 

his proficiency in various molecular biology techniques, including PCR, cloning, 

immunoprecipitat ion, and genotyping. He has conducted research on pathogenic bacteria, RNA -

protein interactions, epigenetic reprogramming, and neurodevelopment, among other areas. In 

addition to his scientific contributions, Brown is also an accomplished educator. He has taught 

genetics laboratory courses and delivered lectures on physics, unified physics, and biology as a 

faculty member and lecturer at different institutions and online platforms. His research and 

theoretical work have been published in reputable journals, and he has actively participated in 

peer review activities. Brown has collaborated with esteemed professionals, including Nassim 

Haramein, the Director of Research at The Resonance Science Foundation, where he has worked 

as a Biophysicist and Research Sci entist.  https://www.novosciences.org/about 

Avshalom Elitzur 

Avshalom Elitzur is a Professor in the Centre for Quantum Studies at Chapman University in the United 

States and is deemed by many to be an intellectual powerhouse in both the fields of physics and 

philosophy. Having left school at sixteen to work as a lab technician at t he Weizmann Institute he 

presented a paper on quantum mechanics at Temple University, after which he was invited to Tel Aviv 

University to complete his doctorate on the subject. Elitzur is best known for his work on the Elitzur –

Vaidman bomb -testing problem in quantum mechanics. 16 

Tuesday July 8 , 2025 

PL ENARY 4 8:30 am - 10:40 am 

'Anesthesia, Psychedelics and Consciousness' 

Michael Wiest, Old theory, new evidence: microtubules are the biological substrate 

of quantum consciousness 

Pär Halje, How consciousness may rely on brain cells acting collectively – evidence 

from psychedelic research on rats 

Jennifer Penberthy, Psilocybin and Prolonged Grief Disorder: Role of Subjective 

Experience on Outcomes 

Mi chael Wiest 

Mike Wiest graduated from high school in Kenya, East Africa, then returned to the United States to earn 

a BA in physics at Dartmouth College in 1991, and a PhD in high -energy theoretical physics at Michigan 

State University in 1998. Excited by the Orch OR quantum th eory of consciousness, he spent the next 10 

years learning neuroscience as a postdoc in computational neuroscience at Baylor College of Medicine 

and behavioral neurophysiology at Duke University. He is now an Associate Professor of Neuroscience at 

Wellesle y College in Massachusetts, where he has been teaching and conducting chronic multi -

electrode recording experiments in awake behaving rodents since 2008 .

Pär Halje 

Pär Halje studies electrophysiological correlates of spontaneous behaviour and disease states in freely 

moving rodents and primates. In particular, he is looking for common mechanisms behind the 

unexplained narrowband oscillations that appear in the local field potentials during levodopa -induced 

dyskinesia or psychedelic drug use. I am also engaged as the AI/ML coordinator of MultiPark and the 

technical manager of MoRe Lab. Halje has a background in both theoretical physics (MSc in Physics at 

Stockholm university, Sweden) an d cognitive neuroscience (PhD at the Laboratory of Cognitive 

Neuroscience, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland). The topic of his PhD thesis was neural correlates of 

embodied consciousness (multisensory integration, space perception, self -identification, agency). He 17 

specialized in data analysis of neurophysiological signals, including extracellular spikes, local field 

potentials and human ECoG, and quantification of animal behavior using video tracking and 

accelerometers. Pär Halje ha s developed several software tools for the interactive analysis of these large 

data sets. Outside the lab , I try to find time for music, for example as part of the improvisational rock 

group Øresund Space Collective. 

Jennifer Penberthy 

Jennifer ‘Kim ’ Penberthy is the Chester F. Carlson Professor of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioral Sciences 

in the Division of Perceptual Studies at the University of Virginia School of Medicine. She studies altered 

states of consciousness and the impact on mental health and wellbeing. She will discuss research 

exploring the impact of psilocybin -induced altered states including psychological flexibility, mystical 

experiences, self -transcendence, enhanced connectedness, and awe, on new pathways for healing 

prolonged grief. 

Tuesday July 8 , 2025 

PL ENARY 5 11:10 am – 12:35 pm 

'Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception' 

David del Rosario, Evidence for Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception 

Laxmidhar Behera, IKS Approaches for holistic understanding of Mind, Brain, and 

Consciousness 

David del Rosario 

Researcher in neuroscience and author 

Laxmidhar Behera 18 

Laxmidhar Behera joined as the Director of IIT Mandi on 19th January, 2022. Prior to this, he was working 

as the Poonam and Prabhu Goel Chair Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Kanpur, 

and simultaneously served as TCS affiliate faculty. 

Tuesday July 8 , 2025 

PL ENARY 6 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm 

'Theories of Consciousness '

Sabine Kastner, A Rhythmic Theory of Selective Attention 2.0 

Naotsugu Tsuchiya, Establishing standards for (realist) theories of 

consciousness/qualia: structural constraints from relationships among qualia 

Stuart Hameroff, Correlates of qualia in microtubule ‘time crystal’ dynamics 

Sabine Kastner 

Sabine Kastner studies the neural basis of visual perception, attention, and awareness using a 

translational approach that combines neuroimaging in humans and monkeys, intracranial 

electrophysiology and studies in patients with brain lesions. Dr. Kastner earned an M.D. degree from the 

Heinrich -Heine University of Düsseldorf (Germany) and received a Ph.D. degree in neurophysiology from 

the Georg -August University, Göttingen (Germany) under the mentorship of the late Otto Creutzfeldt. 

After a postdoc at the Max -Planck -Inst itute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen and a lectureship in 

psychiatry, Dr. Kastner joined Leslie Ungerleider’s and Robert Desimone’s lab at the NIMH in Bethesda 

(1996 -2000) before taking on a faculty position at Princeton, where she currently holds th e rank of full 

professor. Dr. Kastner has served as the Scientific Director of Princeton’s neuroimaging facility since 2005. 

Dr. Kastner has published more than 150 articles in journals and books and has edited the Handbook of 

Attention (Oxford University Press, 2014). She is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences, the 

Society for Experimental Psychology, and the American Psychological Society, and a member of the 

German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina. Her groundbreaking contributions to the field of 

cognitive neuroscience were recognized with the George A. Miller Award in Cognitive Neuroscience in 

2023 and the Young Investigator Award from the Cognitive Neuroscience Society in 2005. Dr. Kastner 

serves on several editorial boards and is Editor -in -Chief of The Journal of Neuroscience and Frontiers for 

Young minds/Understanding neuroscience. Dr. Kastner performs public outreach through her 

educational neuroscience for the 21st century program including teacher seminars, public school 

outreach, events at PNI, and for parent support grou ps for neurodevelopmental disability. Her outreach 

activities were recognized by the Society for Neuroscience’s 2019 Award for Education in Neuroscience. 

She was elected member of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences (2022), Professor Kastner 

received the Minerva Foundation Golden Brain Award 2024. In addition to research, Dr. Kastner is heavily 19 

involved in science outreach and education, and co -founded the journal  Frontiers for Young Minds (Link 

is external)  in 2013, which produces articles about the latest and most exciting findings in science for 8 -

to 15 -year -olds to boost their interest in STEM fields and topics. Since 2023, she has also served as the 

Editor -in -Chief of the Society for Neuroscience’s flag ship publication, the Journal of Neuroscience .

1985 B.A., History & Philosophy, Georg -August University, Göttingen, Germany 

1993 M.D., Heinrich -Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany 

1994 Ph.D., Neurophysiology, Georg -August University, Göttingen, Germany 

Kastner CV 

2012 -present Visiting Scientist, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley 

2009 -present Professor of Psychology & Neuroscience, Princeton University 

2005 -present Scientific Director, Scully Center for the Neuroscience of Mind & Behavior, Princeton 

University 

Research Areas: Systems & Circuits, Human Cognitive, Computation & Theory 

https://psychology.princeton.edu/people/sabine -kastner 

https://napl.scholar.princeton.edu/ 

https://pni.princeton.edu/news/2024/groundbreaking -studies -earn -kastner -2024 -golden -brain -

award 

Naotsugu Tsuchiya 

Nao Tsuchiya was awarded a PhD at California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in 2006. Upon 

postdoctoral training at Caltech until 2010, he received a PRESTO grant from Japan Science and 

Technology (JST) agency and returned to Japan in 2010. In Jan 2012, he joined t he School of 

Psychological Sciences at Monash University as an Associate Professor (Professor from 2020). From 

2013 to 2017, he was an ARC Future Fellow. His main research interest is to uncover the neuronal basis 

of consciousness. Recently, he focuses on the novel Qualia Structure approach on consciousness, 

which advocates to characterize the structure of qualia by measuring the similarity between qualia 

on a large scale, and to reveal their neural correlates and their causal information structure. The Qua lia 

Structure project will further employ various research methods, including phenomenology, 

development, and constructivism, in order to estimate structures of qualia from perceptual to 

emotional domains. The outcome of this field is the creation of a new interdisciplinary research 

program that will have impacts to the general society, such as understanding the consciousness of 

others and the consciousness of animals and artificial intelligence. 20 

Stuart Hameroff 

Stuart Hameroff MD is Professor at the Arizona Astrobiology Center, Anesthesiology & Psychology, and 

Director of the Center for Consciousness Studies at the University of Arizona in Tucson, Arizona. Retired 

from Anesthesiology where he researched how general anesthetic g ases act on quantum vibrations in 

microtubules to prevent consciousness. Hameroff is known for his collaboration with British physicist and 

Nobel Laureate Sir Roger Penrose on the ‘Orch OR’ quantum theory of consciousness, and also for 

managing ‘The Scienc e of Consciousness’ conferences for the past 30 years. Hameroff is also 

collaborating with Planetary Scientist Professor Dante Lauretta at Arizona AstroBiology Center (AABC) to 

study putative ‘signs of life’ and ‘roots of consciousness’ in extraterrestrial organic molecules from the 

early solar system retrieved by Dante’s NASA OSIRIS REx mission to asteroid Bennu. We will probe these 

molecules to answer the question: Which came first, life or consciousness? 

Wednesday July 9 , 2025 

PL ENARY 7 8:30 am - 10:40 am 

'Consciousness and Quantum Measurement' 

Ivette Fuentes, Can Gravity Collapse the Wavefunction? Bose -Einstein Condensates 

as a Testing Ground 

Thomas Brophy, Ontological Frameworks that Work 

Santosh Helekar, Sentiometry – Measuring Peri -somatic Modulation of Diffracted 

Light by Consciousness and Characterizing the Underlying Physicochemical 

Mechanisms 

Ivette Fuentes 

Ivette Fuentes is a Professor of Physics at the School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Southampton. 

She is Fellow of the Emmy Network and Fellow by Special Election of Keble College, Oxford. Ivette obtained 

her PhD at Imperial College London (advisors:  Peter L. Knight  and  Vlatko Vedral ). Her postdoctoral 

experience includes a Glasstone Fellowship and Junior Research Fellowship (Mansfield College) at the 

University of Oxford and a position at the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, 

Canada. Ivette was Assistant Pro fessor at UNAM México, Professor of Mathematical Physics at the School 

of Mathematical Sciences in Nottingham and Professor of Theoretical Quantum Optics at the University 21 

of Vienna. Other distinctions include an Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship (Experienced Researchers) 

at the Technical University of Berlin and EPSRC Career Acceleration Fellowship, New Directions Award 

and Inspire Award. Her main research interest is understanding physics at scales where quantum theory 

and general relativity interplay.  https://ivettefuentes.weebly.com/ 

Her work is mentioned in this  article  in Forbes about Roger Penrose's theories. 

Thomas G. Brophy 

Thomas G. Brophy, PhD, is President of the Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS). He previously served as 

president of California Institute for Human Science (CIHS). His tenure as president of CIHS oversaw a 

many -year effort to achieve regional accreditation in 2021, for CIHS as a unique mind, body, spirit 

centered university. E arning a BA in physics from Colorado College, and MS and PhD degrees in physics 

from the University of Colorado, Boulder, Thomas’ academic and scientific backgrounds include work on 

NASA’s Voyager and Cassini spacecraft projects, the CU Laboratory for Atmo spheric and Space Physics, 

and an appointment as a National Science Foundation Exchange Scientist at the University of Tokyo 

Department of Earth and Planetary Physics and ISAS robotic space program. Thomas explored the 

consciousness related aspects of UAP phenomena in his 1998 book The Mechanism Demands a 

Mysticism: An Exploration of Spirit, Matter, and Physics. His study of the archaeoastronomy of prehistoric 

Egypt, published in his books The Origin Map, and Black Genesis co -authored with Robert Bauval, ha s

been cited as relevant to the study of extraterrestrial, or transhuman, intelligence. 

Santosh Helekar 

Santosh Helekar is a neuroscientist at the Houston Methodist Research Institute (HMRI) in Houston, 

Texas, USA. He has a medical degree (M.B.B.S.) from the University of Bombay, India and a Ph.D. in 

Neuroscience from Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. Presen tly, he is the Scientific Director 

of Translational Biomagnetics and Neurometry Program at HMRI and a Professor of Neuroscience 

Research in Psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. His most recent scientific 

and technological contri butions include the invention of three noninvasive devices with wide -ranging 

neuroscience applications. The first device called Transcranial Rotating Permanent Magnet Stimulator 

(TRPMS) is a neuromodulation cap that has shown promise in a pilot phase I/IIa clinical trial for the 

treatment of chronic ischemic stroke and is being tested now for the treatment of drug -resistant 

depression. The second device called the Oncomagnetic helmet is being used under FDA’s expanded 

access program to treat end -stage recur rent glioblastoma patients and will shortly be investigated for 22 

safety and efficacy alongside standard of care treatment for the treatment of newly diagnosed 

glioblastoma in a pilot clinical trial. The third device called the Sentiometer was able to detect a 

previously unrecognized peri -somatic biophysical effect that is attenuated by general anesthesia and 

by unconsciousness due to brain damage or dysfunction. It is being tested in an ongoing pilot clinical 

study for safety and efficacy for continuously monitoring the level of consciousness of unresponsive 

unconscious or delirious patients in the intensive care unit. The Sentiometer appears to be sensitive to 

an electromagnetically modulated physicochemical process, possibly involving the interactions of 

delocalized electrons in aromatic organic polymers with water mole cules. Consequently, it could provide 

a window into the fundamental subcellular mechanism that generates consciousness. 

Wednesday July 9 , 2025 

PL ENARY 8 11:10 am – 12:35 pm 

'Consciousness and Vibrations in Spacetime Geometry' 

Nassim Haramein, Scaling from Quantum Vacuum Fluctuations to the Brain 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay, Self -operating mathematical universe, SOMU: Why do we 

need a non -physical reality to explain a physical system? 

Nassim Haramein 

Nassim Haramein is a Swiss born, 35 -year veteran physicist working on a complex problem in 

physics — Unification Theory (the unification of General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics). 

Haramein has researched fields of physics, mathematics, cosmology, quantum mechanics, 

bi ophysics, as well as cultural anthropology and archeology. These studies led to a unification 

theory published in scientific papers, and subsequent numerous patented inventions. Haramein 

has worked in collaborative efforts with some renown physicists and c urrently holds a director of 

research position at the International Space Federation organization which includes doctors in 

physics from some of the most reputable physics universities in the world. He has founded 

research organizations and successful corporations throughout the last two decades. 

https://spacefed.com/isf -research/ 23 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay PH.D. Materials and Nano -architectronics, MANA, National Institute for 

Materials Science, NIMS, Tsukuba, Japan Anirban Bandyopadhyay is Principal Research Scientist (NIMS), 

Tsukuba. He earned his Ph.D. in Supramolecular Electronics at the Indian Associat ion for the Cultivation 

of Science (IACS), Kolkata, 2005. From 2005 to 2008 he was ICYS research fellow at the ICYS, NIMS, Japan, 

and worked on the brain -like bio -processor building. In 2008, Anirban joined as a permanent scientist 

at NIMS, working on the cavity resonator model of human brain and design -synthesis of brain -like 

organic jelly. From 2013 to 2014 he was a visiting scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

(MIT), USA. Awards include Hitachi Science and Technology award 2010, Inamori Foundation award 2011 –

2012, Kurata Foundation Award, Inamori Foundation Fellow (2011 –) and Sewa Society international 

member, Japan.  www.nanobraintech.com 

Wednesday July 9 , 2025 

PL ENARY 9 2:00 pm – 4:10 pm 

'Brain Oscillations, Waves and Attention' 

Earl K Miller (R), Cognition emerges from neural dynamics 

Matthew Larkum, The dendritic decoupling hypothesis of anesthesia 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn (R), A Landscape of Consciousness: Toward a Taxonomy 

of Explanations and Implications 

Earl Keith Miller 

Earl Keith Miller is a cognitive neuroscientist whose research focuses on neural mechanisms of 

cognitive, or executive, control. Earl K. Miller is the Picower Professor of Neuroscience with the  Picower 

Institute for Learning and Memory  and the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences 

at  Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He is the Chief Scientist and co -founder of SplitSage. Earl 

Miller received a  Bachelor of Arts  degree (summa cum laude, with honors) in  psychology  from  Kent 

State University  in 1985,  Master of Arts  degree in psychology and  neuroscience  from  Princeton 

University  in 1987, and a  PhD  in psychology and neuroscience from Princeton University in 1990. In 2020, 

Earl Miller was awarded an honorary doctorate (Doctor of Science, honoris causa) from Kent State U. 24 

Matthew Larkum 

Matthew Larkum is a full professor in the Biology Institute of the Humboldt University of Berlin and in the 

Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience. This involves teaching many courses on neuroscience 

topics including (introductory neuroscience, cerebral cortex, methods in neuroscience research, etc.). He has 

a large laboratory (currently 28 people) including 5 PhD students and many Masters and Bachelor students. 

Several post -doctoral fellows have gone on to lead outstanding laboratories at top institutions around the 

world (e.g. RIKEN, Tokyo; Florey Institute, Melbourne; CNRS, Bordeaux; Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris; 

University of Surrey). Over the past 20 years he has supervised over 30 PhD students, and even more Masters 

and Bachelor students. As speake r for a Collaborative Research Center on memory consolidation (SFB1315), 

he is a co -coordinator of the PhD program within the center and is an active part of the International PhD 

Program of the Einstein Center for Neurosciences Berlin. He also participate s regularly in student schools 

including as a regular speaker for the Australasian Course in Advanced Neuroscience (ACAN) and the Cold 

Spring Harbor Imaging course. His group focuses on the processing of feedforward and feedback information 

in the cortex, and particularly, on the contribution of active dendritic properties to the computational power 

of neocortical pyramidal neurons. Matthew is a violinist and chamber music fanatic. Recent topics include: 

• Dendritic spikes in the tuft and basal dendrites of neocortical pyramidal neurons 

• Memory consolidation with active dendritic mechanisms 

• Mechanisms underlying perceptual processes 

• Development of behavioural methodologies for rodents 

• Inhibitory control of cortical microcircuits 

• •Cellular basis for interhemispheric inhibition in the cerebral cortex 

• •Effect of fetal alcohol syndrome on dendritic processing 

• •Effects of common anesthetics on single -cell computation in the cortex 

• •Development of state -of -the -art optical approaches for studying cortical dendritic activity 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn is an American  public intellectual  and  investment banker . He is also an author, 

TV -producer, columnist and commentator, especially on topics related to China. Kuhn is the creator of 

the  PBS  series  Closer to Truth . He has been called "one of the Western world's most prolific interpreters 

of Beijing's policies". [2]  Some of his work has been criticized as pro -China propaganda. Kuhn received a 

bachelor's degree in human biology from Johns Hopkins University (Phi Beta Kappa ) in 1964, a PhD 

in  anatomy  and brain research from the  University of California, Los Angeles ' Brain Research Institute in 

1968 and a  Master of Science  in  management  as a  Sloan fellow  from the  MIT Sloan School of 

Management  in 1980. 25 

Thursday July 10 , 2025 

PL ENARY 10 8:30 am - 10:40 am 

'Quantum Biology and Superradiance' 

Philip Kurian, Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe 

Dante Lauretta (R) The Science of Quantum Biology and Its Implications for 

Consciousness 

Anita Goel, Does Physics need a revolution to understand life, living systems and 

consciousness? What can Quantum NanoBioPhysics Teach us here? 

Philip Kurian 

Philip Kurian is a theoretical physicist, (re)search(ing) scientist, and essayist, serving as principal 

investigator and founding director of the Quantum Biology Laboratory ( https://quantumbiolab.com ) at 

Howard University. Beginning his career as a math teacher in North Philadelphia, he completed his 

doctorate in physics at Howard after a stint at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Kurian is now the 

recipient of fellowships, grants, and awards from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, U.S. -Italy Fulbright 

Commission, Whole Genome Science Foundation, National Science Foundation, and the National 

Institutes of Health. His laboratory studies how collective and cooperative quantum behaviors can 

explain biolo gical phenomena at the mesoscopic, organismal, and clinical scales, including in 

neurodegeneration, cancer, and human consciousness. The group's work has been featured 

in Science, The Quantum Insider, SPIE Photonics Focus, Optica, Laser Focus World, BioPhotonics, 

Howard Magazine , TEDx, and by prominent science channels including Science News with 

Sabine and PBS Space Time . In 2023 Dr. Kurian was selected as a Fellow of the UCSB Kavli Institute for 

Theoretical Physics. In 2022 he became a Simons Scholar and Senior Fellow at the UCLA Institute for 

Pure and Applied Mathematics. In 2021 Dr. Kurian was appointed to the chairing committee for the 

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine workshop on quantum -enabled sensing 

and imaging for biology. His Quantum Biology Laboratory was the first group in the U.S. to receive a 

scientific grant from the U.K. -based Guy F oundation, and the lab’s expertise is solicited regularly by 

federal agencies, private foundations, and the media. Dr. Kurian also serves as a scientific advisor to 

the “Science for Seminaries” program of the AAAS Dialogue on Science, Ethics, and Religion, which 

seeks to integrate frontier science questions into conversations among future theologians and clergy. 

His essays on science, human knowledge systems, and empire have appeared in various media 

outlets, including the Los Angeles Review of Books , Granta , and Plough. Research Specialty Quantum 

biology; Theoretical physics; Many -body entanglement; Quantum field theory; Protein photophysics 26 

Quantum Biology Laboratory at Howard University Receives Grant from Guy Foundation 

The QBL becomes first US lab to receive  UK foundation grant in quantum biology .

The Quantum Biology Laboratory Is Moving Forward by Reaching Back 

The QBL supports K-12 quantum science education by dedicating the  Quantum STEAM Lab  in 

Philadelphia. 

Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Awards Quantum Biology Laboratory at Howard University $1M for Matter -

to -Life Research 

This  Sloan Foundation award  will support the QBL in studying how self -organizing processes give rise to 

goal -oriented behaviors in the reassembly, agential decision -making, and computational capacity of 

the unicellular slime mold Physarum polycephalum .

Quantum fiber optics in the brain enhance processing, may protect against degenerative diseases 

Led by the QBL, a group of theoretical and experimental researchers has  discovered  a distinctly 

quantum effect in biology that survives warm, chaotic conditions and may also present a way for the 

brain to protect itself from degenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s. 

Quantum optical phenomenon in the brain challenges conventional view of amyloid in Alzheimer’s 

The QBL has  discovered  a unique quantum effect in biology that could be the key to understanding a 

common marker of Alzheimer’s, raising questions about current assumptions of the disease and 

informing the search for a cure. 

Dante Lauretta 

Dante Lauretta, CCS External Adviser, UArizona, Regents Professor, Planetary Science &

Cosmochemistry, University of Arizona Lunar & Planetary Laboratory. Dante Lauretta is principal 

investigator of the OSIRIS -REx mission and a regents professor of planetary science at t he University of 

Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. His research interests focus on the chemistry and mineralogy 

of asteroids and comets, and he is an expert in the analysis of extraterrestrial materials, including 

asteroid samples, mete -orites and comet particles. Dr. Lauretta fosters the advancement of the next 

generation of scientists, engineers, and other space leaders through mentorship and taught coursework 

which apply his expertise in planetary science and spacecraft mission design & implement ation. Dr. 

Lauretta heads the OSIRIS -REx research team at UArizona working on this mission, which has included 

more than 100 undergraduate and graduate students. This project will help ensure that the University of 

Arizona remains at the forefront of plan etary exploration for the next decade. The Alfie Norville Gem & 

Mineral Museum is now one of only three places in the world where the public can see a piece of the 

asteroid Bennu, collected during NASA's University of Arizona -led OSIRIS -REx mission. 27 

Anita Goel 

Anita Goel, MD Ph.D. is a world -renowned expert and pioneer in the emerging field of Nanobiophysics -

a new science at the convergence of physics, nanotechnology, and biomedicine. Whereas modern 

physics in the 20th century was developed primarily in the context of closed syst ems, Dr. Goel seeks to 

expand conventional theoretical and experimental physics frameworks and their mathematical 

machinery to describe non -equilibrium, open systems such as life and living systems that are strongly 

coupled with their environment. She has developed a new theoretical physics framework that elucidates 

the interplay of matter, energy, and information at a very fundamental physics level. Dr. Goel harnesses 

these insights to examine one of the most basic processes of living matter, the way nanom otors read 

and write information into DNA, how this process is influenced by the environment, and how quantum 

mechanics might play a “nontrivial” role in their dynamics. Dr. Goel was named by MIT’s Technology 

Review Magazine as one of the World’s “Top 35 s cience and technology innovators.”  View Dr. Goel’s 

Academic Profile 

As Chairman and CEO of Nanobiosym® and Nanobiosym® Diagnostics, Dr. Goel has harnessed these 

fundamental insights to invent, incubate, and start commercializing next -generation nanotechnology 

platforms like Gene -RADAR® for Mobile and Personalized Health, energy harvesting and quantum 

computing with molecular nanomachines that read and write information in DNA She has received 

awards including multiple awards from US Government agencies such as DARPA, DOD, DOE, AFOSR, NSF, 

USAID, HHS and most recently was awarded the XPRIZE by in the 2013 Nokia Sensing X Challenge. Dr. Goel 

holds a Ph.D. and M.A. in Physics from Harvard University, an MD from the Harvard -MIT Joint Division of 

Health Sciences and Technology (HST) at Harvard Medical School and a BS in Physics with Honors & 

Distinction from Stanford University. She has published several scholarly articles in leading scientific 

journals such as Nature Nanotechnology, Scientific American -India and the Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Science and contributed innovative book chapters such as in the pioneering work on 

Quantum Aspects of Life, with over 35 patents worldwide to her name. 

Thursday July 10 , 2025 

PL ENARY 11 11:10 am – 12:35 p m

'Energy, Information and Consciousness in the Universe' 

Dean Radin (R) , Evidence for worldwide modulation of physical randomness 

correlated with coherent consciousness during New Year's Eve celebrations. 

Rupert Sheldrake, Morphic Resonance and the Memory of Nature 28 

Dean Radin 

Dean Radin investigates phenomena in parapsychology. Following a bachelor and master's degree in 

electrical engineering and a PhD in educational psychology Radin worked at Bell Labs, as a researcher 

at Princeton University and the University of Edinburgh, and was a faculty member at University of 

Nevada, Las Vegas. He then became Chief Scientist at the Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS) in 

Petaluma, California, USA, later becoming the president of the Parapsychological Association. 

He is also co -editor -in -chief of the journal Explore: The Journal of Science and Healing. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Radin 

Rupert Sheldrake 

Rupert Sheldrake is a biologist and author of more than 100 scientific papers and 9 books, and the co -

author of 6 books. His books have been published in 28 languages. He was among the top 100 Global 

Thought Leaders for 2013, as ranked by the Duttweiler Institute, Zurich, Switzerland's leading think tank. 

On ResearchGate, the largest scientific and academic online network, his Research Interest Score puts 

him in the top 4% of scientists. On Google Scholar, the many citations of his work give him a high h -index 

of 45, and a n i10 index of 133. For ten years running he has been recognized as one of the 'most spiritually 

influential living people in the world' by Watkins Mind Body Spirit magazine. His work has been featured 

in many magazines, newspapers and broadcast media, inc luding New Scientist, The Guardian, Discover 

magazine, The Spectator, The Washington Post, Die Zeit and on BBC Radio and television. 

Thursday July 10 , 2025 

PL ENARY 12 2:00 pm – 4:10 p m

'End -of -Life Brain Activity' 

Marjorie Woollacott, New clues to Terminal Lucidity in mentally -impaired adults 

Alex Gomez -Marin, If consciousness survives, materialism dies: re -appraising the 

“permissive brain” hypothesis at the edges of consciousness 

Jimo Borjigin, Potential neural signatures of near -death consciousness in humans 29 

Marjorie Woollacott 

Marjorie Woollacott, Ph.D., is an Emeritus Professor of Human Physiology, and member of the Institute of 

Neuroscience, at the University of Oregon. She was chair of the Human Physiology Department for seven 

years. In addition to teaching courses on neuroscience and rehabilita tion, she taught courses on 

complementary and alternative medicine and meditation. She is Research Director for the International 

Association of Near -Death Studies (IANDS) and is President of the Academy for the Advancement of 

Postmaterialist Sciences (AAP S). Woollacott graduated magna cum laude from the University of 

Southern California and was elected to membership in Phi Beta Kappa. She received her Ph.D. in 

Neuroscience from the University of Southern California and her M.A. from the University of Orego n in 

Asian Studies. She was also a research professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of 

Umea in Umea, Sweden, and in the National Center for Scientific Research in Marseille, France. Woollacott 

has received over 7.2 million dollars in re search funding for her research in child development, aging, 

rehabilitation medicine and most recently, meditation. Her areas of expertise include: 1) changes in 

attentional performance skills and underlying neural networks associated with the mental train ing of 

meditation and tai chi; 2) the phenomenon of spiritually transformative experiences, including near -

death experiences, 3) the development of balance and attentional abilities in children and factors 

leading to loss of balance function in aging, and in patients with movement disorders, 4) the design of 

assessment and treatment strategies to improve balance and attentional abilities. These include testing 

the efficacy of alternative forms of therapy such as tai chi and meditation for improving both att ention 

and balance and gait abilities in patient populations; and 5) the development of musical performance 

skills in musicians. Woollacott has published more than 200 scientific articles and written or co -edited 

eight books. She is the co -author, with Dr. Anne Shumway -Cook of the textbook for health care 

professionals, titled: Motor Control: Translating Research into Clinical Practice, in its 6th edition (2021). 

Her latest book, Infinite Awareness (2015) (winner of eight awards, including the 2017 Parapsyc hological 

Association Book Award, Eric Hoffer Book Award and the Nautilus Book Award) pairs Woollacott's 

research as a neuroscientist with her self -revelations about the mind's spiritual power. Between the 

scientific and spiritual worlds, she breaks open t he definition of human consciousness to investigate the 

existence of a non -physical and infinitely powerful mind. 

Àlex Gómez -Marín 

Àlex Gómez -Marín is a Spanish physicist turned neuroscientist. He holds a PhD in theoretical physics 

and a Masters in biophysics from the University of Barcelona. He was a research fellow at the EMBL -30 

CRG Centre for Genomic Regulation and at the Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown in Lisbon. His 

research spans from the origins of the arrow of time in inert systems, to the neurobiology of action -

perception in living organisms such as flies, worms, mice, and humans. Since 2016 he is the head of the 

Behavior of Organisms Laboratory at the Instituto de Neurociencias in Alicante, where he is an 

Associate Professor of the Spanish Research Council. Combining experimental, computational and 

theoretical neuro -phy sics, his current research deals with human minds in the real world, 

concentrating on what he calls “the edges of consciousness”. As director of the Pari Center, Alex seeks 

to enact a kind of intellectual activism that brings a third leg to the “science stool”: apart from solid 

replicable data and deep imaginative theories, he sees the need to nurture the socio -

political milieu that makes science possible (or impossible), bringing together leading thinkers and 

laypeople in a context that relaxes the self -suffocating constraints of current academe, 

unapologetically integrating the sciences, the arts, and the sacred. Alex has recently received some 

notable mentions, including being on the list of OOOM Magazine’s 100 World’s Most Inspiring People. His 

research proposal “Seeing without Eyes” won the first Linda G O’Bryant Noetic Research Prize. 

Jimo Borjigin 

Jimo Borjigin, Ph.D. 

Michigan Neuroscience Institute Affiliate 

Associate Professor of Molecular & Integrative Physiology 

Associate Professor of Neurology 

Areas of Interest 

The main research interests of the Borjigin lab include: 

• Mechanisms of sudden cardiac arrest and the role of the brain during cardiac arrest 

(brain -heart coupling).  

> •

Neural basis of covert consciousness in normal and abnormal brain states in human 

subjects.  

> •

Mechanisms of endogenous DMT synthesis.  

> •

Visualizing covert brain (and heart) activities in patients with neurological, psychological, 

and psychiatric disorders, to assist with their clinical prognosis, diagnosis, and treatment. 

Honors & Awards  

> •

The John Merck Scholars Award – 1999  

> •

Michigan Bio logical Sciences Scholar Program Award – 2003 

Credentials 31 

Ph.D., Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institution, Baltimore, MD (1994) 

Published Articles or Reviews 

• Xu, G., Mihaylova, T., Li, D., Tian, F., Farrehi, P.M., Parent, J.M., Mashour, G.A., Wang, M.M., 

Borjigin*, J. Surge of neurophysiological coupling and connectivity of gamma oscillations in 

the dying human brain (2023). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,  2023 May 

9;120(19):e2216268120.(link is external)  

> •

Glynos, N.G., Carter, L., Lee, S.J., Kim, Y., Kennedy, R.T., Mashour, G.A., Wang, M.M., Borjigin*, J. 

Indolethylamine N -Methyltransferase (INMT) is not essential for endogenous tryptamine -

dependent methylation activity in rats (2023), Scientific Reports. 1 3(1):280. PMID: 36609666.  

> •

Li, D., Mabrouk, O.S., Liu, T., Tian, F., Xu, G., Rengifo, S., Choi, S.J., Mathur, A., Crooks, C.P., 

Kennedy, R.T., Wang, M.M., Ghanbari, H., Borjigin*, J. Asphyxia -activated corticocardiac 

signaling accelerates onset of cardiac arrest (2015). Proc Natl Ac ad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 6. pii: 

201423936.  

> •

Borjigin*, J., Lee, U., Liu, T., Pal, D., Huff, S., Klarr, D., Sloboda, J., Hernandez, J., Wang, M.M., 

Mashour, G.A. Surge of neurophysiological coherence and connectivity in the dying brain 

(2013). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 110(35):14432 -7. 

Web Sites 

Borjigin Lab(link is external) 

Michigan Experts 

Friday July 11 , 2025 

PL ENARY 13 9:00 am - 11:10 am 

'Prospects for Extraterrestrial Consciousness' 

Ross Coulthart, Investigating the Psionic Interface: Alleged Non -Human Interactions 

with Human Consciousness in Covert UAP Programs. 

Brannon Wheeler, How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? 

Ross Coulthart 

Ross Coulthart  is an Australian investigative journalist and author who has also worked in public 

relations. He is an advocate for the idea that governments are covering up knowledge of UFOs and 

alien visitations.  https://en.wikipedia.org › wiki › Ross Coulthart 32 

Brannon Wheeler 

Brannon Wheeler teaches history of religion, Middle East, and Bible at the United States Naval 

Academy in Annapolis. He has authored and edited a number of books including Mecca and Eden: 

Ritual, Relics, and territory in Islam (Chicago, 2016) and Animal Sacrifice and the Origins of Islam 

(Cambridge, 2022). Professor Wheeler received his PhD from the University of Chicago, has taught at a 

number of universities around the world, and held visiting positions throughout the Middle East and 

Europe. His current research focuses on objects that are supposed to be touched. 

Friday July 11 , 2025 

PL ENARY 14 11:40 am – 13:00 pm 

'Quantum Fields and Consciousness '

Donald Hoffman (R), Physics of Spacetime from Traces of Consciousness 

Deepak Chopra, Consciousness is the Ontological Primitive of the Universe 

Federico Faggin, Consciousness and Free Will are Quantum Properties of Being 

Donald Hoffman 

Donald Hoffman received his PhD from MIT, and joined the faculty of the University of California, Irvine 

in 1983, where he is a Professor Emeritus of Cognitive Sciences. He is an author of over 100 scientific 

papers and three books, including Visual Intelligence , and his new book, The Case Against Reality . He 

received a Distinguished Scientific Award of the American Psychological Association for early career 

research, the Rustum Roy Award of the Chopra Foundation, and the Troland Research Award of the US 

National Academy of Sciences. His writing has appeared in Edge , New Scientist , LA Review of Books ,

and Scientific American and his work has been featured in Wired , Quanta , The Atlantic , and Through 

the Wormhole with Morgan Freeman . He has a TED Talk titled “Do we see reality as it is?” and a podcast 

with Lex Fridman titled “Reality is an illusion.” 33 

Deepak Chopra 

Deepak Chopra is a Consciousness Explorer, and a world -renowned pioneer in integrative medicine and 

personal transformation. Chopra is co -founder of DeepakChopra.ai, his AI twin and well -being advisor. 

He also co -founded Cyberhuman, a transformative suite of personaliz ed health and well -being 

solutions. Chopra is a Clinical Professor of Family Medicine and Public Health at the University of 

California, San Diego, and serves as a senior scientist with Gallup Organization. He is also an Honorary 

Fellow in Medicine at the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. He is the author of over 

95 books, translated into over forty -three languages, including numerous New York Times bestsellers. 

For the last thirty years, Chopra has been at the forefront of the meditation revolution. His mission is to 

create a more balanced, peaceful, joyful and healthier world. Through his teachings, he guides 

individuals to embrace their inherent strength, wisdom, and potential for personal and societal 

transformation. In his latest book , *Digital Dharma* (Harmony/Rodale, 09/17/24), Chopra navigates the 

balance between technology and expanded awareness, explaining that while AI cannot duplicate 

human intelligence, it can vastly enhance personal and spiritual growth. TIME magazine has desc ribed 

Dr. Chopra as “one of their top 100 most influential people.”  www.deepakchopra.com 

Federico Faggin 

Federico Faggin is an Italian -American physicist, engineer, inventor and entrepreneur. He is best known 

for designing the first commercial microprocessor, the Intel 4004. He led the 4004 (MCS -4) project and 

the design group during the first five years of Intel's micropro cessor effort. Faggin also created, while 

working at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1968, the self -aligned MOS (metal –oxide –semiconductor) silicon -

gate technology (SGT), which made possible MOS semiconductor memory chips, CCD image sensors, 

and the microproces sor. After the 4004, he led development of the Intel 8008 and 8080, using his SGT 

methodology for random logic chip design, which was essential to the creation of early Intel 

microprocessors. He was co -founder (with Ralph Ungermann) and CEO of Zilog, the f irst company solely 

dedicated to microprocessors, and led the development of the Zilog Z80 and Z8 processors. He was later 

the co -founder and CEO of Cygnet Technologies, and then Synaptics. In 2010, he received the 2009 

National Medal of Technology and Inn ovation, the highest honor the United States confers for 34 

achievements related to technological progress. In 2011, Faggin founded the Federico and Elvia Faggin 

Foundation to support the scientific study of consciousness at US universities and research institutes. In 

2015, the Faggin Foundation helped to establish a $1 million endowment for the Faggin Family 

Presidential Chair in the Physics of Information at UC Santa Cruz to promote the study of "fundamental 

questions at the interface of physics and related fields including mathematics, complex systems, 

biophysics , and cognitive science, with the unifying theme of information in physics 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Federico_Faggin 

# Plenary Abstracts 

# Plenary Abstracts 

# PLENARY 1 

PL -1

Assessing the Delta: LLMs & Unified Agency 

Dr. Farhan Lakhany PhD 

University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.09]........AI /robotics 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Abstract 

Assessing the Delta – LLMs & Unified Agency In June 2022, Blake Lemoine, an engineer working on 

Google’s LaMDA project —a type of Large Language Model (LLM) developed specifically for 

conversation and dialogue —claimed that LaMDA was sentient. Lemoine was su bsequently fired, 

with Google asserting that his belief lacked evidence after consulting their internal team of 

ethicists and technologists. Nevertheless, the idea of sentient AI —a topic long explored in various 

TV shows and movies —has been gaining interes t due to the rise of increasingly sophisticated 

LLMs. In this paper, I discuss what LLMs are and why they are prompting such discussions. First, I 

explain how LLMs work, what they can currently do, the reasons behind the buzz surrounding them, 

and their im portance. Second, I articulate the notion of consciousness relevant to the current 

discussion. Third, I examine why many perceive LLMs as conscious or nearing consciousness by 

highlighting three features: (1) their generative capacity, (2) their conversati onal style, and (3) 

their flexibility in application. I discuss why these features give us the sense that they are 

conscious —namely, because they are abilities typically thought to be exclusive to humans and, in 

humans, are tied up with conscious states. I highlight the underlying premise – like effects have 35 

like causes qua consciousness – and explore various responses to this reasoning. I focus on one 

particular response: while this premise provides a prima facie reason for thinking that LLMs 

conscious, it is insufficient to conclude that they are, in fact, c onscious. I then explore what 

features are missing that, if present, would give us strong reasons to think LLMs are conscious. To 

do this, I turn to David Chalmers’s paper titled "Could a Large Language Model be Conscious?" 

Chalmers lays important groundwo rk for investigating whether LLMs are conscious, articulating 

reasons for and against this possibility. He considers six features that LLMs lack, which, if present, 

might confer consciousness. One such feature is unified agency; according to Chalmers, bein g

unified agents is arguably a necessary condition for LLMs to be conscious. My paper delves 

deeper into this feature by mapping out (1) what it means to be a unified agent, (2) the relevant 

aspects for the current discussion, (3) why unified agency should be understood as a necessary 

condition for consciousness, and (4) whether LLMs could become unified agents. I conclude by 

highlighting areas for further research and raising potential counterarguments. I believe that 

clarifying the nature of artificial in telligence and its potential for consciousness is an extremely 

important discussion. One view in ethics, and one that I am sympathetic to, is that a necessary 

condition for entrance into the moral community is sentience. Once in, we have duties towards 

tho se included. If LLMs are sentient, they would become part of this community, and our 

metaphysical discussions would have significant ethical implications. Thus, to better calibrate 

how we ought to act, we need to understand the nature of LLMs and whether t hey might one day 

be conscious. 

Keywords 

AI, Consciousness, LLMs, Qualia 

Links to Research 

https://www.athensjournals.gr/humanities/2023 -10 -1-4-Lakhany.pdf 

https://static1.squarespace.com/static/659c94332bafeb1cfad5f9ca/t/65a17cd7b3432e2f88f26f07 

/1705082071408/The+Meta -Problem+%26+Acquaintance+%28Draft%29.pdf 

My name is Farhan Lakhany and I am a philosopher of mind and philosopher of artificial 

intelligence at the University of Nebraska Omaha. My current work centers around introspection 

and how that intersects with difficulties surrounding the "Hard Problem of Consciousness" and 

wheth er LLMs can be conscious. I also have deep interests in the philosophy of psychology, 

philosophy of cognitive science, evolutionary biology and computer science more generally. 

Program Session - PL -136 

# PLENARY 1 

PL -1

Experimental Design and Testing of a Quantum Consciousness Algorithm for AI and 

Robotics Running on an Adiabatic Quantum Computer 

Suzanne Gildert, PhD 

Nirvanic AI, Vancouver, BC, Canada 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

We introduce and explore experimentally the idea of a quantum conscious agent (QCA) - a

decision -making system connected to a physical robot that receives perception information from 

sensors and takes actions via a motor system. Perception information and action options are put 

into a highly quantum mechanical state, which is then collapsed into classical information, 

resulting in an action choice informed via collapse of the wavefunction. The QCA is implemented 

as a multilayer quantum neural network on a q uantum annealing processor. By gradually 

updating the coupling values (weights) in the network based on Hebbian learning, the system is 

given multiple shots at embodying “quantum free will”, and converges to a stable action choice, 

which is then acted out by the robot. We perform experiments and present preliminary data 

rigorously testing whether the quantum decisions made by the system deviate from random, 

suggesting that the quantum decision encodes a purposeful behavior via connection to a deeper 

univers al process. If quantum consciousness theories are correct, we conjecture that even a small 

QCA demonstrating purposeful behavior in this way would be experiencing some amount of 

conscious awareness. 

Keywords 

Quantum Consciousness, Quantum Computing, AI, Decision Making, Quantum Agents, Quantum, 

Consciousness Technologies, Quantum Neural Networks, Universal Purpose, Quantum Agency, 

Panpsychism 

Links to Research 

https://www.suzannegildert.com/patents -publications 

https://www.nirvanic.ai/what -is -quantum -consciousness 

Suzanne Gildert is Founder and CEO of Nirvanic AI. Nirvanic’s mission is to understand 

consciousness so we can build it in machines and enhance it in people. The company is starting 37 

with an exploration of quantum consciousness and quantum agency in robotics and AI. Suzanne 

also co -founded Sanctuary AI, leading it as its first CEO and later CTO, designing the cognitive 

architecture for the company’s “Phoenix” general purpose humanoid r obot system. Earlier, she 

founded Kindred AI in 2014, which was acquired by Ocado in 2020 for one third of a billion dollars 

($339 million CAD). Suzanne also has deep expertise in quantum computing from her time at D -

Wave Systems and has a Ph.D. in experim ental physics from the University of Birmingham, UK. She 

holds 67 filed US patents in quantum technologies and AI. She is also a published digital artist and 

pioneered a technique for creating art using a quantum computer. More information is available 

at suzannegildert.com 

Program Session PL -1

# PLENARY 1

PL -1

"Dodecanogram: A Novel Instrument for Detecting Microtubule Resonance in 

Anesthetic States" 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

National Institute for Materials Science, Ibaraki, Tsukuba, Japan 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.12]........Quantum brain biology 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

The Dodecanogram (DDG) represents a novel advancement over traditional EEG technology by 

detecting megahertz frequency bursts from microtubule bundles within neurons. Experiments at 

BMHRC, Bhopal, showed these bursts correlate with unconscious states in an esthetized subjects 

and vanish upon regaining consciousness. Through experiments conducted on 40 

human subjects conducted at BMHRC, Bhopal, on human subjects under anesthesia, we observed 

unique megahertz burst patterns analogous to neuronal spike trains. Notably, these patterns 

correlated with microtubule activity deep inside a neuron and disappeared as subjects regained 

consciousness, following unique spatio -temporal dynamics on the scalp. We simulated the 

transmission of these signals through virtual bra in models in CST, encompassing skin, connective 

tissues, bone, bridging veins, cerebrospinal fluid, meninges, cortex layers, and microtubule 

bundles. Maxwell's equations revealed these signals pass one -way from the microtubule bundle 

to the skin, even thro ugh noise, but not in reverse. This discovery suggests a potential marker for 

unconsciousness, offering insights into subconscious layers of mind and coma states. 38 

Links to Research 

Principal Researcher , Functional Chromophores Group , Nanomaterials Field , Research Center for 

Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA) 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay is a Senior Scientist at the National Institute for Materials Science 

(NIMS), Tsukuba, Japan, in the advanced key technologies division, AKED. Ph.D. in Supramolecular 

Electronics worked in Kolkata, India, and Sheffield, UK. Post Ph.D. from 2005 to 2008 in dependent 

ICYS research fellow at the ICYS, NIMS, Japan, worked on the brain -like bio -processor building. He 

possesses a Master of Science in Condensed Matter Physics, Computer, Numerical Analysis, and 

Astrophysics from North Bengal University and a Docto r of Philosophy in Physics from Jadavpur 

University. Anirban received his PhD from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science 

(IACS), Kolkata 2004 -2005, where he worked on supramolecular electronics and multi -level 

switching. Bandyopadhyay has d eveloped a resonance chain based complete human brain 

model that is fundamentally different than Turing tape essentially developing an alternate human 

brain map where filling gaps in the resonance chain is the key. 

In 2008, he joined as a permanent scientist at NIMS, working on the cavity resonator model of the 

human brain and design -synthesis of brain -like organic jelly, microtubule inspired fourth circuit 

element and magnetic vortex, quantum cloaking and built dode canion, icosanion geometric 

algebra. From 2013 to 2014 he was a visiting scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

(MIT), USA. Received Hitachi Science and Technology award 2010, Inamori Foundation award 2011 -

2012, Kurata Foundation Award, Ina mori Foundation Fellow (2011 -), and Sewa Society international 

member, Japan, SSI gold medal etc. Anirban has developed a unique quantum music 

measurement machine and experiments on DNA proteins, microtubules, neurons, molecular 

machines, cancer. Anirban B andyopadhyay has also developed a new frequency fractal model. 

His group has designed and synthesized several forms of organic brain jelly that learns, programs 

and solves problems by itself for futuristic robots during as well as several software simulato rs 

that write complex codes by themselves. 

Website: www.anirbanlab.ga email anirban.bandyo@gmail.com Blog www.nanobraintech.com 

Program Session PL -139 

# PLENARY 2 

PL -2

From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling and Brain Stimulation 

Giulio Ruffini PhD 

CEO, StarLab, Barcelona, BCN, Spain. CSO, Neuroelectrics, Barcelona, BCN, Spain 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling and Brain Stimulation The next frontier in 

brain stimulation —and neuromodulation technologies like multichannel transcranial electrical 

stimulation (tES), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and focused ultrasound (FUS) —

demands robust computational models of th e brain. These models must address fundamental 

questions: Where do we stimulate? How? Which network dynamics can we harness for therapeutic 

or enhancement purposes? Such insights are critically important in neurological disorders (e.g., 

epilepsy) and are e specially pivotal in psychiatry, where many disorders can be understood as 

disruptions in “experience” itself. In this talk, I will first introduce the Kolmogorov Theory (KT) of 

consciousness, an algorithmic framework that describes how agents form compres sive, coarse -

grained models that capture the regularities shaping subjective experience and guiding behavior. 

Drawing on group -theoretic invariances and parallels with Noether’s theorem, KT reveals how 

hierarchical structures can naturally emerge in neural systems. It connects with the manifold 

hypothesis and suggests that biological (and artificial) neural networks compress data in ways 

that exploit the world's symmetries. On the road to computational neuropsychiatry, I will then 

illustrate how KT can help illuminate “first -person” disorders such as Major Depressive Disorder 

(MDD) by formalizing the notion of depression as "persistent low valence" and showing how 

dysfunctional valence, inaccurate world models, or suboptimal planning can emerge in the agent 

and affect one another. This agent -based perspective not only guides the search for potential 

etiological routes but also the development of computationally designed interventions —ranging 

from brain stimulation to psychedelics —to repair or recalibrate neur al circuits. To translate this 

framework into a computational model, I will present our Laminar Neural Mass Model (LaNMM), 

which can represent interlocked fast and slow oscillations and capture intrinsic cross -frequency 

coupling (CFC) phenomena like Signal –Envelope (related to PAC) and Envelope –Envelope (or 

AAC) interactions, as well as the effects of brain stimulation. These coupling mechanisms realize a 

hierarchical “Comparator” function at the level of cortical columns, evaluating prediction errors 

and w eighting uncertainties. Perturbations of this Comparator function can account for altered 

gamma oscillations in Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, and ASD, as well as the diminished top -40 

down control observed under psychedelics, linking them to both cognition and subjective 

experience. Altogether, this synthesis of theoretical foundations and computational 

models provides a scaffold for advancing our understanding of neuropsychiatric disor ders and 

their connections to neurophenomenology and the development of stimulation -based therapies. 

By pinpointing how neural circuits encode and compress key symmetries, we can design targeted 

interventions —via tES, TMS, FUS, or other modalities —that ali gn with each individual’s functional 

architecture, opening new avenues for personalized therapy and neurophenomenology. 

Keywords 

Algorithmic information theory, computational neuroscience, whole brain modeling 

References 

Ruffini 2017. An algorithmic information theory of consciousness 

Ruffini et al. 2022. AIT foundations of structured experience. 

Sanchez Todo et al. (2023). A physical neural mass model framework for the analysis of 

oscillatory generators from laminar electrophysiological recordings. 

Ruffini et al. (2024). The Algorithmic Agent Perspective and Computational Neuropsychiatry: From 

Etiology to Advanced Therapy in Major Depressive Disorder. 

Ruffini et al. (2025a). Structured Dynamics in the Algorithmic Agent. 

Ruffini et al. (2025b). Cross -Frequency Coupling as a Neural Substrate for Prediction Error 

Evaluation: A Laminar Neural Mass Modeling Approach (in prep) 

Dr. Giulio Ruffini , with a background in physics, founded Starlab in 2000, later founding 

Neuroelectrics in 2011. His pioneering work includes brain stimulation technology and brain -to -

brain communication research. He is currently developing whole -brain modeling methods for 

brain stimulation in the ERC Galvani project and the FET Pathfinder Neurotwin project. 

CEO of  Starlab  (http://starlab.es ) and President of  Neuroelectrics  (http://neuroelectrics.com ). 

Previously, he has been a researcher at UC Davis and Los Alamos National Laboratory (both as a 

graduate research student), and a post -doc at the Catalan Institute for Space Studies (IEEC, 

Barcelona, Spain). 

Program Session - PL -2

# PLENARY 2 

PL -2

From States to Traits: How Noninvasive Neuromodulation with Mindfulness Training 

Can Help Shift Consciousness Toward Lasting Wellbeing 

Joseph Sanguinetti PhD 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 41 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.03]........Other sensory modalities 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

For over a decade, our group has explored how transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS) can be 

used to map and modulate the neural substrates of consciousness and wellbeing. TUS is a 

powerful, noninvasive tool that enables safe, reversible modulation of deep brain structures with 

millimeter precision. At the SEMA Lab, we’ve investigated how targeting the Default Mo de Network 

(DMN) with TUS can induce transient states of equanimity —a fundamental quality cultivated in 

contemplative practice. In this talk, I will describe our developing paradigm for using TUS to 

accelerate the acquisition of mindfulness -related skills and traits. By coupling TUS -induced 

equanimity states with structured mindfulness training, we aim to cultivate acceptance -based 

emotion regulation capacities that support the transition from short -term state changes to 

lasting, trait -level wellbeing. I wi ll present findings from our DMN -focused studies, integration of 

TUS with mobile meditation platforms, and results from the world’s first TUS -enhanced meditation 

retreat. Together, these efforts outline a novel approach for understanding and cultivating 

co mprehensive wellbeing through the intersection of precision neuromodulation and 

contemplative practice. 

Links to Research 

Joseph L. Sanguinetti, John JB Allen, Erica Nicole, Brian Lord, Shinzen Young, SEMA Lab 

https://semalab.arizona.edu/ 

https://www.jaysanguinetti.com/sema -lab 

Program Session - PL -2

# PLENARY 3 

PL -3

Instantaneous Memory Accession via Quantum Geometrodynamic Networks 

Mr. William D Brown MSc 

The International Space Federation, Marnaz, Haute -Savoie, France 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 42 

Abstract 

The biological basis of memory storage and retrieval has conventionally been understood 

through computational frameworks based on binary encoding. Here we present a novel 

mechanism for memory processes based on quantum geometrodynamics in biomolecular 

electrodynamics, where the discrete structure of spacetime as a quantum entangled network 

underlies physical processes of temporal -spatial coupling in biological systems. This coupling 

occurs thro ugh collective quantum coherence of interacting dipole resonators, which has a 

geometrodynamic network architecture of spacetime coordinates connected via Einstein -Rosen 

bridge topologies, where information is superficially encoded in the quantum entangled network 

of voxel oscillators but is fundamentally accessible acausally via the continuous multiply 

connected spacetime geometry. The mechanism is demonstrated through theoretical modeling 

of dipole oscillator coupling in benzene ring structures throughout subcellular systems, including 

microtubules and DNA polymers. We find this characteristic coupling accurately predicts 

observed quantum coherent states in biological macromolecules and enables hybrid analog -

digital information processing. These findings d escribe a fundamentally new paradigm for 

biological memory storage and retrieval that does not rely on classical computational encoding 

but rather on direct spacetime geometric information accession, which is effectively quasi -

instantaneous or acausal and hence fundamentally non -computational. This suggests that 

biological memory systems may be more sophisticated and fundamentally different than 

previously understood, with significant implications for our understanding of consciousness, 

memory, time and the development of novel computing architectures. The proposed mechanism 

is supported by existing empirical observations and offers testable predictions for future 

experimental verification. 

Keywords 

Quantum Biology, Quantum Coherence, Quantum Entanglement, Quantum Geometrodynamics, 

Quantum Electrodynamics, Microtubules, Memory, Quantum Computation, Retrocausality, 

Nonlocality 

Links to Research 

https://www.novosciences.org/research 

https://spacefed.com/author/williambrown/ 

William Brown is a biophysicist with a background in molecular biology, molecular genetics, and 

physics. He obtained his Master's degree in applied recombinant DNA technology from New York 

University and performed graduate research at the University of Hawaii on epigen etics, 

neurogenesis, and brain cytoarchitectonics. He currently holds the position of biophysicist at the 

International Space Federation, where he performs research to elucidate foundational principles 

in the biophysics of the living system, w ith applications from life -extension technologies to 

consciousness. He presents lectures, talks, and Q&A forums to teach his syncretic approach of a 

comprehensive unified understanding of nature. Program Session PL -343 

# PLENARY 3 

PL -3

Qualia, Violation of Conservation Laws, and the Quanta of Pan -Psychism 

Avshalom C Elitzur 

Chapman University, Professor, Orange, CA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

> Abstract

Qualia, the fundamental elements of subjective experience, cannot be inferred from brain 

dynamics, just as they are unrelated to any physical process. Consequently, they must be devoid 

of any causal effect, as such involvement is bound to violate energy an d momentum 

conservation laws. Qualia can therefore exist only as mere epiphenomena or parallel aspects of 

the physical world. Why, then, do many humans express bafflement about the apparently non -

physical nature of their qualia? I show that all attempts to explain away this bafflement fail 

miserably. Ergo, it is qualia per se, by their very non -physical essence, that interfere with the 

brain's operation. Violation of conservation laws is therefore inevitable. I then speculate that every 

quantum of matter/en ergy and spacetime has a hidden "individual" property which is unique to 

that quantum alone, hence cannot be abstracted. This is in contrast to physical properties like 

size, charge, spin, etc., which are generic. In ordinary inanimate interactions, the in dividual 

properties give rise to mere quantum randomness. But in a stable system that operating on itself, 

a collective individuality can emerge and grow in magnitude to the level of coherent causal 

efficacy. The organism then asserts that there is a uniqu e quality to each percept within it, which 

cannot be communicated or abstracted. These are the qualia. I conclude with some novel 

developments in the Two State -Vector Formalism of QM that may illuminate these questions. 

> Keywords
> the hard problem, qualia, conservation laws, pan -psychism, quantum mechanics

Program Session PL -344 

# PLENARY 4 

PL -4

Old theory, new evidence: microtubules are the biological substrate of quantum 

consciousness 

Mike Wiest PhD 

Wellesley College, Associate Professor Wellesley, MA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.10]........Anesthesia 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

I review my recent experimental result strongly suggesting that the anesthetic gas isoflurane acts 

on microtubules to cause unconsciousness in rats. When combined with other old and new 

evidence —including direct biophysical evidence in living neurons and c onscious humans —my 

result supports the hypothesis that the physical substrate of consciousness is a quantum state of 

neuronal microtubules that is disrupted by inhalational anesthetics. After discussing future 

directions in anesthetic mechanism research, I turn to consider potential practical (behavioral, 

evolutionary) advantages of a quantum brain, and enormous theoretical advantages of a 

quantum consciousness model. In particular, I explain how the quantum model makes 

panpsychism viable as a solution to C halmers’ Hard Problem, by solving the phenomenal Binding 

(or Combination) Problem. Solving the Hard Problem in this way appears to leave us with an 

Epiphenomenalism Problem, meaning we cannot account for the evolution of useful conscious 

states if the cons cious property of matter has no physical effects. Contrary to this “zombie” 

intuition, I propose a non -trivial solution to the Epiphenomenalism Problem, by recognizing a 

necessary connection between an essential property of conscious experiences and an obj ective 

property of their physical substrates. Finally, I point out that the Orchestrated Objective Reduction 

theory of Penrose and Hameroff embodies these advantages of a quantum model; and also 

accounts for non -algorithmic human understanding and the psyc hological arrow of time —which 

no other theory of consciousness does. 

Keywords 

anesthesia, quantum consciousness, quantum associative memory, Orch OR, microtubules, hard 

problem, binding problem, panpsychism, epiphenomenalism, active inference 

Links to Research  https://www.eneuro.org/content/11/8/eneuro.0291 -24.2024 

Mike Wiest graduated from high school in Kenya, East Africa, then returned to the United States to 

earn a BA in physics at Dartmouth College in 1991, and a PhD in high -energy theoretical physics at 45 

Michigan State University in 1998. Excited by the Orch OR quantum theory of consciousness, he 

spent the next 10 years learning neuroscience as a postdoc in computational neuroscience at 

Baylor College of Medicine and behavioral neurophysiology at Duke Univ ersity. He is now an 

Associate Professor of Neuroscience at Wellesley College in Massachusetts, where he has been 

teaching and conducting chronic multi -electrode recording experiments in awake behaving 

rodents since 2008. 

Program Session PL -4

# PLENARY 4 

PL -4

How consciousness may rely on brain cells acting collectively – evidence from 

psychedelic research on rats 

Pär Halje PhD 1, Ivani Brys PhD 2,3 , Sebastian Barrientos PhD 1, Per Petersson PhD 1

> 1

Lund University, Lund, -, Sweden. 2Federal University of Vale do São Francisco, Petrolina, 

Pernambuco, Brazil. 3Lund University, Lund, -, Brazil 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

Psychedelic drugs are known for their ability to induce profound altered states of consciousness. 

Unlike other psychopharmacological compounds, such as stimulants or sedatives, which primarily 

modulate arousal and emotional valance, psychedelics fundamenta lly reshape perception, 

cognition and emotion. Since the function and distribution of the serotonin 2A receptor – the 

primary site of action of classic psychedelics – is well preserved across mammalian species, 

psychedelics offer a still largely unexplored opportunity to study consciousness in experimental 

animals using methodologies not feasible in human research. Downstream from the serotonin 

receptor, psychedelic drugs have been observed to affect the brain on several levels, including 

increased glutamat ergic activity, altered functional connectivity and an aberrant increase in 

electrical high -frequency oscillations. To bridge these different levels of observation, we 

performed multi -structural, invasive electrophysiological recordings in freely behaving rats 

treated with psychedelics. Importantly, we compared the effects of classic, serotonergic 

psychedelics, such as LSD, with those of dissociative anesthetics like ketamine, which, despite 

acting on different receptors, also produce strong psychedelic eff ects at certain doses. Our 

findings revealed disparate modulations of neuronal firing rates for these two drug classes, 46 

suggesting that the general psychedelic state is not directly linked to changes in firing rates. 

However, local field potentials exhibited a shared pattern of synchronized high -frequency 

oscillations across multiple frontal brain structures. These oscillat ions were highly phase -locked 

across regions, with interregional delays of less than 1 ms. This hypersynchrony likely has major 

effects on the integration of information across neuronal systems, and we propose that it is a key 

contributor to changes in per ception and cognition during psychedelic drug use. 

Keywords 

Psychedelics, Oscillations, Electrophysiology 

Pär Halje holds an M.Sc. in Physics from Stockholm University and a Ph.D. in Cognitive 

Neuroscience from EPFL, Switzerland. Since 2010, he has been a researcher at Lund University, 

Sweden, in the Group of Integrative Neurophysiology. His lab specializes in chronic 

electrophysiological recordings in awake animals using multi -structure microwire electrodes. His 

research focuses on neural oscillations, particularly those induced by psychedelics, as well as 

their role in pathological states such as Parkinson’s disease and psychosis. 

Program Session PL -4

# PLENARY 4 

PL -4

Psilocybin and Prolonged Grief Disorder: Role of Subjective Experience on Outcomes 

Dr Jennifer K Penberthy PhD 

University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

Prolonged Grief Disorder (PGD) is a newly recognized mental health condition classified in the 

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM -5-TR). It is characterized by persistent 

and pervasive grief -related symptoms that continue for 12 mon ths or more following the death of 

a loved one. Unlike normal grief, PGD is associated with profound emotional pain, identity 

disruption, loss of meaning, and functional impairment. Individuals with PGD experience persistent 

yearning and longing for the de ceased, along with difficulty accepting the loss. PGD affects 

approximately 10% of bereaved individuals, with higher rates reported among those exposed to 

sudden or traumatic loss, such as deaths caused by COVID -19, mass -casualty events, and natural 

disast ers. Vulnerable populations, including older adults and those with limited social support, are 47 

disproportionately affected. PGD is linked to a range of adverse health outcomes, including 

increased risk of depression, anxiety, cardiovascular disease, substance misuse, and suicidal 

ideation. These outcomes underscore the urgent need for effective inte rventions for PGD, 

especially in the context of rising global grief due to the COVID -19 pandemic and other large -

scale crises. This single -arm, open -label pilot study evaluated the feasibility, safety, and 

preliminary efficacy of psilocybin -assisted therap y for PGD. Participants underwent preparation 

sessions, a monitored administration of a 25 mg oral dose of psilocybin, and post -session 

integration support. Changes in grief, depression, and trauma -related symptoms were assessed 

using the Inventory of Comp licated Grief (ICG), Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9), and 

Davidson Trauma Scale (DTS), respectively. Measures of subjective experience, including 

openness (IPIP NEO) and mystical experience (Mystical Experience Questionnaire; MEQ), were also 

collect ed. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was employed to explore neural 

correlates of psilocybin’s effects on grief processing, focusing on changes in connectivity and 

activity in brain regions associated with emotion regulation and self -referentia l processing, 

including the default mode network (DMN), amygdala, insula, and medial prefrontal cortex 

(mPFC). Results demonstrated that psilocybin -assisted therapy was feasible and well -tolerated, 

with no serious adverse events reported. Clinically meanin gful reductions in grief, depression, and 

trauma symptoms were observed at 1, 3, and 6 -month follow -ups. Subjective reports revealed 

profound experiences of awe, connectedness, and a renewed sense of meaning, which were 

associated with increases in opennes s and psychological flexibility. Neuroimaging analyses 

exploring the impact in DMN connectivity and functional connectivity between the mPFC, 

amygdala, and insula are provided and discussed regarding the impact of psilocybin on grief -

related cognition and emotional processing. These findings provide preliminary evidence for the 

efficacy of psilocybin -assisted therapy as a treatment for PGD. The observed changes in 

subjective experience and neurobiological markers underscore the potential role of altered sta tes 

of consciousness in facilitating grief resolution. This study offers critical data to support the design 

of larger randomized controlled trials and suggests novel pathways for developing treatments for 

PGD and related mental health conditions. 

Keywords 

Psilocybin, Prolonged Grief Disorder, altered states of consciousness, fMRI, psychological flexibility, 

default mode network (DMN), awe, connectedness, mental health, neuroplasticity 

Links to Research 

https://med.virginia.edu/perceptual -studies/ 

Jennifer “Kim” Penberthy, Ph.D., ABPP is the Chester F. Carlson Professor of Psychiatry and 

Neurobehavioral Sciences at the University of Virginia School of Medicine. She also has a faculty 

appointment at the UVA Cancer Center. She is the immediate past president of the Society of 

Clinical Psychology. She has published extensively on psychotherapy, mindfulness, and resilience, 

and lectures internationally regarding her research. She also studies the mind -body relationship, 

exploring human consciousness as w ell as extraordinary human experiences, including the 48 

impact of such on human abilities and wellness. She is a founding member of the UVA 

Contemplative Sciences Center and is a Fellow of Humanism in Medicine at the University of 

Virginia. She is involved on an international level conducting research and consu lting with the 

Center for Consciousness Research and the Scientific & Medical Network. Kim is also dedicated to 

promoting diversity and inclusion and exploring and honoring psychotherapeutic and 

contemplative practices from indigenous and native cultures. Her most recent book is co -

authored with her daughter, Morgan, and is called “ Living Mindfully Across the Lifespan: An 

Intergenerational Guide,” published by Routledge Taylor & Francis. 

Program Session PL 4 

# PL ENARY 5

PL -5

Evidence for Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception 

David del Rosario 

Instituto de Neurociencia Avanzada de Barcelona (INAB), Barcelona, -, Spain 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

Life is an intelligent, self -organizing process characterized by a continuous sequence of 

interdependent reactions, where each event is intrinsically linked to preceding and subsequent 

occurrences. Within this framework, human consciousness emerges as a co mplex and dynamic 

phenomenon, manifesting in people through perceptions, thoughts, and emotions. These 

phenomena contribute to an ongoing flux of conscious and unconscious interactions that define 

human experience. Scientific inquiry has allowed us to obse rve and quantify these interactions, 

offering novel insights into phenomena that extend beyond direct sensory perception. Advances 

in cellular and wave mechanical interactions, communication between human and non -

corporeal intelligences, and cognitive visi on phenomena are measurable examples within 

contemporary neuroscience. This plenary session will critically analyze recent experiments 

performed at the Instituto de Neurociencia Avanzada de Barcelona (Spain), integrating 

interdisciplinary research to asses s the feasibility of non -local information transfer and its 

implications for broadening our understanding of human cognition beyond established 

paradigms. 

Keywords 

thoughts, emotions, sonobiology, cognitive vision, non -corporeal intelligences 49 

Links to Research 

https://www.mdpi.com/2076 -3417/14/20/9400 

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39848119/ 

David del Rosario is a researcher, science communicator, and director of the Institute of 

Advanced Neuroscience of Barcelona (INAB). He holds a Master’s in Biomedical Engineering from 

the University of Barcelona and a PhD in Neurosciences from the University of Alicante. H e

combines a solid academic background with a passion for bridging science and everyday life. 

David’s work focuses on research in cognitive neuroscience, particularly exploring human thought, 

emotions, and consciousness. He has published t he best seller El libro que tu cerebro no quiere 

leer , which remained on Spain’s top 10 non -fiction books list for weeks. His contributions to 

research and dissemination have earned him several prestigious awards, such as the National 

Telecommunications Award and the Extraordinary Award in Biomedical Engineering. David has 

shared his insights at conferences across Europe, North America, and South America, making 

complex scientific ideas accessible to diverse audiences. As the director of INAB, he continues to 

advance innovative approaches in neuroscience research and education. 

Program Session PL -5

# PLENARY 5 

PL -5

IKS Approaches for holistic understanding of Mind, Brain, and Consciousness 

Prof. Prof. Laxmidhar Behera 

Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

The Indian Knowledge System (IKS) conceptualizes our existence as a superposition of three 

fundamental energies: pure semantic (consciousness), semantic (mind), and physical (brain). In 

other words, this framework provides a holistic understanding of cogni tion, perception, and 

neurophysiological processes. There is not much clarity as to how the perceptual world and 

physical world work in tandem. By introducing quantum -like entanglement in perception, we 

propose that self -propelled agents align based on the quantum expectation value of a 

perception operator, driving collective motion. We shall also reflect on human olfactory 

perception through the interplay of molecular vibration patterns of odorants and underlying EEG 

dynamics. Additionally, we explore how high -frequency probes in the megahertz range reveal 

intricate neural dynamics, particularly in children trained to exhibit near -normal visual perception 50 

despite being blindfolded. Building on these foundations, the discussion will conclude with IKS -

based interventions designed to enhance cognitive function. In summary, we propose innovative 

approaches for improving perception, attention, and memory by inte grating ancient wisdom with 

contemporary neuroscience and quantum -inspired models. This synthesis opens new possibilities 

for mental health, education, multi -agent coordination, and contemplative sciences through the 

lens of IKS. 

Keywords - IKS, Models of Perception, Cognitive Enhancement 

Prof Laxmidhar Behera joined as the Director of IIT Mandi on 19th January, 2022. Prior to this, he was 

working as the Poonam and Prabhu Goel Chair Professor in the Department of Electrical 

Engineering, IIT Kanpur, and simultaneously served as TCS affiliate faculty. 

Program Session PL -5

# PLENARY 6 

PL -6

A Rhythmic Theory of Selective Attention 2.0 

Sabine Kastner MD, PhD 

Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.01]........Attention 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

The selection of information from our cluttered sensory environments, often referred to as 

‘attention’, is one of the most fundamental cognitive operations performed by the primate brain. 

In the visual domain, the selection process is thought to be mediate d by a spatial mechanism – a

‘spotlight’ that can be flexibly shifted around the visual scene. In my lecture, I will provide an 

overview on its neural basis by discussing neuroimaging and intracranial electrophysiology 

studies in the human and monkey brain . Neuroimaging studies have shown that the spatial 

selection mechanism engages a large -scale network that consists of multiple nodes distributed 

across all major cortical lobes and includes also subcortical regions in the midbrain and 

thalamus. Electrophys iology studies have provided a rich understanding of the specific functions 

of each network node and their functional interactions. Key findings reveal that (i) the cortical 

network is coordinated by a thalamic timekeeper in the pulvinar and (ii) processin g in sensory 

cortex is modulated by feedback signals from a fronto -parietal control network. The fronto -

parieto -pulvinar network is characterized by complex temporal dynamics that set up alternating 

attentional states, which emphasize either environmental sampling of information or shifting of 51 

spatial selection to a new location and can be measured as behavioral rhythms. Collectively, 

these studies in the adult brain set the stage for translational applications such as exploring the 

typical and atypical development of attention function and its deficits in neurological and 

psychiatric diseases. 

Plenary Session PL -6

# PLENARY 6 

PL – 6

Establishing standards for (realist) theories of consciousness/qualia: structural 

constraints from relationships among qualia 

Naotsugu Tsuchiya PhD 

Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. ATR, Kyoto, Japan 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

Upon accumulated evidence in the neural correlates of consciousness over the last 30 years, we 

have seen proliferation of theories of consciousness, rather than constraining them in any 

criterion. Due to the complexity of the problem, we might continue to see the list expand further 

into the future. One of the reasons for this expansion is due to too weak constraints imposed from 

binary, report -based tasks that have been dominant over the last 30 years of the neural 

correlates of consciousness approaches. H ere we propose that structural constraints coming 

from empirical data will be much more powerful than the traditional approaches. Specifically, 

rather than mapping one single mental event to one single physical event, we should require 

many mental events A ND their relationships to map with many physical events and their 

relationships in a coherent manner. Relational data about qualia, being established through the 

Qualia Structure project, offers such an opportunity. How can theories of consciousness explai n

why “red” feels the way it is? How does it compare to the way it feels about “sound”? What are the 

mechanisms that can potentially explain qualitative difference between any music and any 

painting? What are the potential answers from various theories as depicted in the "landscape of 

consciousness"? We will provide some promising perspectives from structural, relational theories 

of consciousness, such as Integrated Information Theory (IIT) of consciousness. 52 

Keywords 

Qualia, Qualia Structure, Relational approach, Structural theory, Integrated Information Theory 

Links to Research 

(1 Overview) The Qualia Structure Paradigm: towards a construction of a Qualia Periodic Table for 

the dissolution of the Hard Problem of Consciousness. Tsuchiya 

N. - osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/492hu 

(To appear as a book chapter for The Scientific Study of Consciousness: Experimental and 

Theoretical Approaches, edited by Umberto Olcese and Lucia Melloni) 

(2 Empirical Research) “Is my “red” your “red”? Evaluating structural correspondences between 

color similarity judgments using unsupervised alignment" - Kawakita, G., Zeleznikow -Johnston, A., 

Takeda, K., Tsuchiya, N., and Oizumi, M. (2025) iScience  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.112029 

(3 Empirical developmental research) "Comparing color qualia structures through a novel 

similarity task in young children versus adults." Moriguchi, Y., Watanabe, R., Sakata, C., Zeleznikow -

Johnston, A., Wang, J., Saji, N., and Tsuchiya, 

N. (2025). PNAS https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/ wdcu7_v3 For Demo 

https://youtube.com/shorts/ -gPjL0T6Xiw 

Dr. Naotsugu Tsuchiya was awarded a PhD at California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in 

2006. Upon postdoctoral training at Caltech until 2010. In Jan 2012, he joined the School of 

Psychological Sciences at Monash University as an Associate Professor (Professor from 2020). His 

main research interest is to uncover the neuronal basis of consciousness. Recently, he focuses on 

the novel Qualia Structure approach on consciousness, which advocates to characterize the 

structure of qualia by measuring the simi larity between qualia on a large scale, and to reveal their 

neural correlates and their causal information structure. The Qualia Structure project will further 

employ various research methods, including phenomenology, development, and constructivism, 

in or der to estimate structures of qualia from perceptual to emotional domains. The outcome of 

this field is the creation of a new interdisciplinary research program that will have impacts to the 

general society, such as understanding the consciousness of other s and the consciousness of 

animals and artificial intelligence .

Program Session PL -653 

# PLENARY 6 

PL -6

Correlates of qualia in microtubule ‘time crystal’ dynamics 

Stuart Hameroff MD 1, 2, Tanusree Dutta 3, Anirban Bandyopadhyay 4

> 1

UArizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 2https://hameroff.arizona.edu/, Tucson, AZ, USA. 3Indian Institute of 

Management Research, Ranchi, -, India. 4International Center for Materials and 

Nanoarchitectronics (MANA); National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, -, Japan   

> Primary Topic Area -TSC Taxonomy
> [04.02]........Quantum field approaches
> Categories by Discipline
> 4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences

Abstract 

Qualia are the basic instances of subjective conscious experience, but their origins and how they 

combine into full, rich consciousness are unknown. Conventional electroencephalography (‘EEG’) 

etc. have failed to reveal correlates of qualia. EEG detects brain activities (‘waves’) up to a few 

hundred hertz, but we now know coherent self -similar (‘triplets -of -triplets’) os cillation patterns 

occur in faster kilohertz, megahertz, gigahertz and terahertz frequencies (‘DoDeconoGraphy, for 12 

orders of frequency). These fractal dynamics derive from collective resonance oscillations of 

microtubules inside brain neurons, with mega hertz in particular being easily detectable from 

scalp in humans. Megahertz triplets between 6 and 26 MHz appear to be functionally important, 

disappearing under general anesthesia. The fractal -like temporal behavior indicates 

microtubules act as ‘time cry stals’, systems whose dynamics repeat at various scales, suggested 

in biology in the 1960s by Art Winfree, in physics in 2012 by Frank Wilczek, experimentally shown in 

physics recently, and in microtubules by Bandyopadhyay et al over the past 12 years. Tim e

crystals are dynamical systems deconstructed into their component oscillators expressed as 

spherical clocks whose sizes are inversely related to frequency, and which may align, couple, 

interfere and resonate to give geometric expressions analogous to mus ic. In a clinical study, 

human subject volunteers were asked to imagine specific qualia -like feelings. DDG frequencies 

taken under these emotional/qualia states were then analyzed as time crystals, 

combined/entangled and consolidated geometrically to map q ualia on a hexagon -of -hexagon 

framework showing their relations. Microtubule time crystal behavior would be very useful for life 

and consciousness, supplying, quantum computing, unifying and temporally organizing, encoding 

memory and transcending scales. I t would require quantum coherence and entanglement 

among intraneuronal microtubules, consistent with the Orch OR theory of consciousness in which 

orchestrated objective quantum state reductions are instantaneous collapses of the quantum 

wavefunction (as Pe nrose fluctuations in fundamental spacetime geometry), like notes and 

chords across musical scales. Metaphors aside, Orch OR has more explanatory power, biological 

connection and experimental validation than all other theories of consciousness combined. 54 

Links to Research      

> 1. Dutta T, Bandyopadhyay A (2024) Emotion, Cognition and Silent Communication,
> Springer https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -981 -99 -9334 -5
> 2. Hameroff S (2022) A new paradigm needed in neuroscience, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35782391/
> 3. Saxena et al (2022) Polyatomic time crystals of the brain, https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article -
> abstract/132/19/194401/2837827/Polyatomic -time -crystals -of -the -brain -neuron?redirectedFrom=fulltext
> 4. Singh et al (2025) Megahertz window through scalp, skull and meninges,
> https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390314976_Meninges_act_as_a_gate_for_EEG_DDG_only_MH
> z_frequencies_can_reflect_from_14_layers_defining_consciousness_ -_a_clinical_study

Stuart Hameroff Co -Founder, Director, Center for Consciousness Studies; Co -Chair, The Science 

of Consciousness; Professor Emeritus, Departments of Anesthesiology and Psychology, U of 

Arizona, Stuart Hameroff MD is a clinical anesthesiologist and researcher on how the br ain 

produces consciousness, and how anesthetics act to erase it. In medical school in the early 1970s, 

Hameroff became interested in consciousness, and in protein structures called microtubules 

inside brain neurons which he came to believe p rocessed information supporting consciousness. 

In the mid - 1990s he teamed with Sir Roger Penrose to develop the controversial ‘Orch OR’ theory 

in which consciousness derives from “orchestrated” (“Orch”) microtubule quantum vibrations 

linked to processes i n spacetime geometry, the fine scale structure of the universe, leading to 

“Penrose objective reduction” (“OR”, hence “Orch OR”). And he has further proposed the 

‘microtubule quantum vibration’ theory of anesthetic action. Hameroff organizes the well -known 

conference series ‘The Science of Consciousness’, has written or edited 5 books and over a 

hundred scientific articles, and appeared in films and various TV shows about consciousness. With 

University of Arizona colleagues Jay Sanguinetti, John JB Allen an d Shinzen Young, Hameroff is 

developing transcranial ultrasound (‘TUS’) for treatment of mental and cognitive dysfunction (TUS 

may resonate endogenous megahertz vibrations in brain microtubules). Penrose - Hameroff Orch 

OR is one of a group of major theorie s of consciousness in the Templeton World Charity 

Foundation project ‘Accelerating Research on Consciousness’ and is currently being tested. 

experimentally. (Jan 2024 New Scientist Feature Cover on Quantum Consciousness, G. Musser). 

Program Session PL -655 

# PLENARY 7 

PL -7

Can Gravity Collapse the Wavefunction? Bose -Einstein Condensates as a Testing 

Ground 

Ivette Fuentes 

University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

The unification of quantum theory and general relativity remains one of the most significant open 

challenges in fundamental physics. A key obstacle is the lack of experimental data at regimes 

where quantum and relativistic effects intersect. Developing ins truments sensitive to these scales 

could not only advance our understanding of quantum gravity, but also shed light on deep 

questions such as the nature of dark energy and dark matter. In this talk, I will explore how Bose -

Einstein condensates (BECs) can s erve as novel probes in this quest. A single BEC placed in a 

spatial superposition offers a platform to test whether gravity induces wavefunction collapse —a

longstanding question in the foundations of quantum theory. Unlike solids traditionally used in 

suc h experiments (e.g. mirrors and nanobeads), BECs consist of unbound atoms, allowing for a 

richer variety of quantum states that may offer experimental advantages. 

Links to Research 

https://www.southampton.ac.uk/people/5y92lm/professor -ivette -fuentes -guridi#publications 

Ivette Fuentes is a Professor of Physics at the School of Physics & Astronomy, University of 

Southampton. She is Fellow of the Emmy Network and Fellow by Special Election of Keble College, 

Oxford. Ivette obtained her PhD at Imperial College London (advisors:  Peter L. Knight  and  Vlatko 

Vedral ). Her postdoctoral experience includes a Glasstone Fellowship and Junior Research 

Fellowship (Mansfield College) at the University of Oxford and a position at the Perimeter Institute 

for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Canada. Ivette was Assistant Profe ssor at UNAM México, 

Professor of Mathematical Physics at the School of Mathematical Sciences in Nottingham and 

Professor of Theoretical Quantum Optics at the University of Vienna. Other distinctions include an 

Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship (Experience d Researchers) at the Technical University of Berlin 

and EPSRC Career Acceleration Fellowship, New Directions Award and Inspire Award. Her main 

research interest is understanding physics at scales where quantum theory and general relativity 

interplay. Program Session PL -756 

# PLENARY 7 

PL -7

Ontological Frameworks that Work 

Thomas Brophy PhD 

IONS, Novato, CA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Abstract 

The Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS)’ grand challenge is to reenchant the world through bringing 

conscious qualia and agency into a rigorously expanded scientific paradigm of how reality works. 

This challenge involves identifying ontological frameworks that can sustain (interpret and 

understand) the growing body of robust empirical experimental data that point to the existence of 

nonlocal conscious qualia and agency, and open up a new era of discovery in new ontological 

domains beyond the physical. This presentation explores the require ments of such a framework 

generally, and situates specifically the tri -domain ontology of reality proposed by Penrose 

(Shadows of the Mind 1994) including the Platonic domain together with the physical domain and 

the mental domain as three fundamental irre ducible ontological domains of reality. Applications 

of such a framework to experimental and observational results are considered (new and many 

decades of past evidence of nonlocal consciousness effects; near -death, and reincarnational 

experiences; deep me ditative experiences savikalpa samadhi; and the ontological foundations of 

the UAP phenomenon). 

Keywords 

Quantum, Collapse, Penrose, Plato, Platonic, Ontology, Qualia, Agency, Nonlocal. 

Links to Research 

https://noetic.org/science/publications/ 

Thomas G. Brophy, PhD, is President of the Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS). He previously served 

as president of California Institute for Human Science (CIHS). His tenure as president of CIHS 

oversaw a many -year effort to achieve regional accreditation from the Western Association of 

Schools and Colleges, Colleges and Universities Commission (WSCUC) in 2021, for CIHS as a 

unique mind, body, spirit integral university. Earning a BA in physics from Colorado College, and 

MS and PhD degrees in physics from the University of Colorado (CU), Boulder, Thomas’ academic 

and scientific appointments include: the CU Nuclear Physics Laboratory, the CU Laboratory for 

Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP) where he work on NASA’s Voyager and Cassini spacecraft 

projects, and an appointment as a National Science Foundation Exchange Scientist at the 57 

University of Tokyo Department of Earth and Planetary Physics and ISAS robotic space program, 

where he published pioneering work on computational solutions to the Boltzmann equation, the 

astrodynamical origins of planetary rings and interstellar comets. Thomas explored the 

fundamental science and ontology of consciousness and its cultural implications in his 1998 

book The Mechanism Demands a Mysticism: An Exploration of Spirit, Matter, and Physics. His study 

of the archaeoastronomy of prehistoric Egypt, pu blished in his co -authored books The Origin Map, 

and Black Genesis, has been cited as relevant to the study of extraterrestrial, or transhuman, 

intelligence. 

Program Session. PL -7

# PLENARY 7 

PL -7

Sentiometry – Measuring Peri -somatic Modulation of Diffracted Light by Consciousness 

and Characterizing the Underlying Physicochemical Mechanisms 

Dr Santosh A Helekar MD, PhD 

Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA. Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New 

York, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.02]........Methodologies (fMRI, EEG etc.) 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

Is the mechanism that gives rise to consciousness simply some manifestation of a neuronal or 

network level process that modern neuroscience has already uncovered? Or will this mechanism 

turn out to be an entirely new deeper subcellular physicochemical mech anism that is presently 

unknown or only hypothetical? We have recently discovered a new type of biophysical effect that 

suggests the latter possibility. This effect can be recorded in the peri -somatic space with a 

noninvasive, non -contact photoelectronic d evice called a Sentiometer (STM) developed in our 

laboratory. It involves a marked decrease in the magnitude of light wave phenomena such as 

interference and diffraction caused by proximity of the STM sensor module to the head or any 

other part of the body of a conscious human subject or a mouse. The source of light waves inside 

the sensor module is a low power laser light -emitting diode. We have designed and constructed 2 

versions of STM producing either double slit interference patterns or single aperture beam 

diffraction. The peri -somatic sentiometric response (SR) to conscious subjects cannot be 

accounted for by known physical effects, such as body heat, humidity, electrostatic effects, 

electromagnetic interference, movement of air, and infrared or ultra weak photon emissions. It is 

substantially attenuated by general anesthesia, sedation and unconscious states produced by 58 

brain damage or dysfunction. Exposure of invertebrates, plants or decapitated heads of mice less 

than ~3 hours after death to the STM sensor module produces an inverted SR. An inverted 

response is also produced by certain polymeric materials containing 6 -carbon rings such as 

polystyrene and carbon nanotubes when they interact with water. The amplitude of the 

polystyrene -water inverted response is reduced when deuterium oxide is substituted for water. It 

is also modulated by a rapidly changing magnetic field and the direction of such modulation is 

dependent on the orientation of the magnetic axis relative to some structural feature of 

polystyrene. The latter observations suggest that the spins of delocalized electrons in polymeric 

6-carbon ring structures and the interactions of these electrons with water molecules might play 

a role in mediating the sentiometric effect, and by extension, possibly, the mechanism that 

generates consciousness. 

Keywords 

Consciousness measurement, general anesthesia, disorders of consciousness, brain death, 

quantum biology, light intensity modulation, molecular mechanisms 

Santosh Helekar is a neuroscientist at the Houston Methodist Research Institute (HMRI) in Houston, 

Texas, USA. He has a medical degree (M.B.B.S.) from the University of Bombay, India and a Ph.D. in 

Neuroscience from Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. Presen tly, he is the Scientific 

Director of Translational Biomagnetics and Neurometry Program at HMRI and a Professor of 

Neuroscience Research in Psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. His most 

recent scientific and technological contri butions include the invention of three noninvasive 

devices with wide -ranging neuroscience applications. The first device called Transcranial 

Rotating Permanent Magnet Stimulator (TRPMS) is a neuromodulation cap that has shown 

promise in a pilot phase I/IIa clinical trial for the treatment of chronic ischemic stroke and is being 

tested now for the treatment of drug -resistant depression. The second device called the 

Oncomagnetic helmet is being used under FDA’s expanded access program to treat end -stage 

recur rent glioblastoma patients and will shortly be investigated for safety and efficacy alongside 

standard of care treatment for the treatment of newly diagnosed glioblastoma in a pilot clinical 

trial. The third device called the Sentiometer was able to detect a previously unrecognized peri -

somatic biophysical effect that is attenuated by general anesthesia and by unconsciousness due 

to brain damage or dysfunction. It is being tested in an ongoing pilot clinical study for safety and 

efficacy for continuously mo nitoring the level of consciousness of unresponsive unconscious or 

delirious patients in the intensive care unit. The Sentiometer appears to be sensitive to an 

electromagnetically modulated physicochemical process, possibly involving the interactions of 

de localized electrons in aromatic organic polymers with water molecules. Consequently, it could 

provide a window into the fundamental subcellular mechanism that generates consciousness. 

Program Session PL -759 

# PLENARY 8 

PL -8

Scaling from Quantum Vacuum Fluctuations to the Brain 

Nassim Haramein , William Brown MSc, Cyprien Guermonprez PhD, Olivier Alirol PhD 

International Space Federation (ISF), Marnaz, Haute Savoie, France 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

The ground state of the electromagnetic field is characterized by constitutive energetic 

fluctuations due to zero -point energy of the quantum harmonic oscillators that compose the field, 

called quantum vacuum fluctuations. These constitutive oscillations o f quantum vacuum energy 

have been shown to play a significant role in atomic processes, from being a source of the 

underlying stability of matter to light -matter interactions. It is also regarded to play significant 

roles at the confluence of astrophysics and quantum information theory with Unruh -Hawking 

radiation, which is conventionally thought to result in black hole thermalization, and at the 

cosmological scale with the Hubble Constant, which is related to the expansion rate of the 

universe. Here we ide ntify a mechanism in which the ultra -high frequency oscillations of the 

electromagnetic quantum vacuum fluctuations couple across scales via a spring constant, k, 

representative of an angular momentum conservation from fine scale spacetime dynamics to the 

biological scale of molecules and cells. We find this characteristic coupling constant accurately 

predicts the vibrational frequencies empirically observed. We scale from the Planck scale to the 

biological scale, through carbon atoms to benzene ring aromat ic hydrocarbon molecules, to the 

triplet -of -triplet frequencies measured in microtubules, and gamma oscillation of neurons, thus 

identifying the mechanism of coupling of quantum harmonic oscillators across scales. As such, 

vibrational energy transfer is de scribed within a nested architecture of coupled oscillators, 

sourced in a Planck pulse frequency of coherent electromagnetic quantum vacuum fluctuations 

demonstrated utilizing correlation functions. These findings describe the role of quantum vacuum 

energy in coupling molecular oscillators and being the source of the non -classical non -trivial 

quantum states that have been experimentally observed in biological macromolecular networks. 

This suggests that these states are more common and more robust than would be presumed in 

models without a driving source like the zero -point energy coupling we have computed. These 

findings open a door to new biophysical insights implying a significant role in dynamic quantum 

fluctuations at the biological scale. 

Keywords 

Quantum vacuum fluctuations Zero -point energy coupling Nested oscillator architecture 

Biophysical quantum coherence Scale coupling dynamics 60 

Links to Research 

https://spacefed.com/isf -research/ 

Nassim Haramein is a Swiss born, 35 -year veteran physicist working on a complex problem in 

physics — Unification Theory (the unification of General Relativity and Quantum Mechanics). 

Haramein has researched fields of physics, mathematics, cosmology, quantum mechanics, 

bi ophysics, as well as cultural anthropology and archeology. These studies led to a unification 

theory published in scientific papers, and subsequent numerous patented inventions. 

Haramein has worked in collaborative efforts with some renown physicists and c urrently holds a 

director of research position at the International Space Federation organization which includes 

doctors in physics from some of the most reputable physics universities in the world. 

He has founded research organizations and successful corp orations throughout the last two 

decades. 

Program Session PL -8

# PLENARY 8 

PL -8

Self -operating mathematical universe, SOMU: Why do we need a non -physical reality 

to explain a physical system? 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Abstract 

When we measure atomic scale systems and quantum properties emerge, we often think that the 

property is emergent from spatio -temporal dynamics. This is not true, there is an imaginary world 

where the properties arise. It is unfortunate that for nearly a ce ntury, scientists have put a 

significant effort into modeling observations with predictive spatiotemporal features, here we 

argue that a set of human subject experiments and our measurement of various biological 

systems show that a black box imaginary worl d needs to be unveiled. We need to understand and 

mathematically derive this imaginary or non -physical world. The black box needs to be explicitly 

understood. We will demonstrate why helical symmetry and dynamics of the density of primes are 

two fundamenta l features that could generate a mathematical universe framework, from which 

spatio -temporal worlds basic parameters could be derived. 61 

Keywords 

Brain signal measurement, cognitive experiment, human subject study 

Program Session PL -8

PL -9

Cognition emerges from neural dynamics 

Earl K. Miller 

MIT, Dept of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Picower Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

Classic models likened brain function to neuron networks, like telegraph systems. Emerging 

evidence, however, suggests higher cognition relies on rhythmic oscillations or "brain waves" at 

the electric field level. This expands functionality, with "telegraph wires" also producing "radio 

waves" (electric fields) that rapidly spread influence. These fields may facilitate large -scale 

organization, enabling executive control and energy - efficient analog computing. 

Keywords 

neuron networks, rhythmic oscillations, brain waves, electric fields, telegraph wires, radio waves, 

energy efficient analog computing 

Earl Keith Miller is a cognitive neuroscientist whose research focuses on neural mechanisms of 

cognitive, or executive, control. Earl K. Miller is the Picower Professor of Neuroscience with the 

Picower Institute for Learning and Memory  and the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences 

at  Massachusetts Institute of Technology . He is the Chief Scientist and co -founder of 

SplitSage. Earl Miller received a  Bachelor of Arts  degree (summa cum laude, with honors) 

in  psychology  from  Kent State University  in 1985,  Master of Arts  degree in psychology 

and  neuroscience  from  Princeton University  in 1987, and a  PhD  in psychology and neuroscience 

from Princeton University in 1990. In 2020, Earl Miller was awarded an honorary doctorate (Doctor 

of Science, honoris causa) from Kent State U. 

Program Session PL -962 

# PLENARY 9 

PL -9

The dendritic decoupling hypothesis of anesthesia 

Matthew Larkum 

Humboldt Universität zu Berlin Institut für Biologie, Berlin, Charitéplatz, Germany 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

Despite almost two centuries of clinical use, how general anesthetics reversibly suppress 

consciousness remains elusive. In the 2022 TSC meeting, I presented the evidence that 

anesthetics disrupt the functional coupling between distal and proximal segments of cortical 

pyramidal neurons, suggesting this decoupling could underlie anesthesia (Suzuki & Larkum, 2020). 

We have previously shown that perception is intimately associated with activating the apical 

dendrites of the large layer 5 pyramidal neurons that complete the thalamocortical loop (Larkum, 

2013; Takahashi et al., 2016 & 2020). The disruption of signalling from along the apical dendrites of 

these neurons under anesthesia (and by metabotropic receptor blockers) therefore constitutes a 

candidate mecha nism for loss of consciousness. In this presentation, I will show in vitro data 

confirming that metabotropic receptor activation strengthens dendro -somatic coupling, while 

anesthetics weaken it. Moreover, disrupting the microtubules extending through the a pical shaft 

also reduces dendritic influence on the cell body. These findings strengthen the view that dendro -

somatic coupling is central to cortical feedback and may be the key to understanding how 

anesthetics block conscious processing. 

Program Session PL -9

# PLENARY 9 

PL -9

A Landscape of Consciousness: Toward a Taxonomy of Explanations and Implications 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn PhD 

Closer To Truth, New York, NY, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 63 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Abstract 

I seek an organizing framework for diverse explanations or theories of consciousness and to 

explore their impact on big questions. My central theses: (i) understanding consciousness at this 

point cannot be limited to selected ways of thinking or knowing, b ut should seek expansive yet 

rational diversity, and (ii) issues such as AI consciousness, virtual immortality, 

meaning/purpose/value, life after death, free will, etc., cannot be understood except in the light of 

particular theories of consciousness. I ar ray diverse explanations or theories of consciousness on 

a roughly physicalist -to -nonphysicalist landscape of essences and mechanisms. Categories: 

Materialism Theories (philosophical, neurobiological, electromagnetic field, computational and 

informational, homeostatic and affective, embodied and enactive, relational, representational, 

language, phylogenetic evolution); Non -Reductive Physicalism; Quantum Theories; Integrated 

Information Theory; Panpsychisms; Monisms; Dualisms; Idealisms; Anomalous and Altere d States 

Theories; Challenge Theories. There are many subcategories, especially for Materialism Theories. A 

Landscape of Consciousness, I suggest, offers perspective. 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Theories, Materialism, philosophical, neurobiological, electromagnetic field, 

computational, informational, homeostatic, affective, embodied, enactive, relational, 

representational, language, phylogenetic, Non -Reductive Physicalism, Quantum Theories, 

Integrated Information Theory, Panpsychism, Monism, Dualism, Idealisms, Anomalous cognition, 

Altered States Theories. 

Links to Research 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0079610723001128?via%3Dihub 

https://iai.tv/articles/seeing -the -consciousness -forest -for -the -trees -auid -2901 

https://qspace.fqxi.org/news/165289/a -landscape -of -consciousness 

https://scitechdaily.com/challenging -reality -a-scientist -maps -the -landscape -of -

consciousness/ 

https://www.eurekalert.org/news -releases/1062716 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn is the creator, writer, host, and executive producer of Closer To Truth, 

the long -running PBS/public television series and leading global resource on Cosmos 

(cosmology/physics, philosophy of science), Life (philosophy of biology), 

Mind (consciousness, bra in/mind, philosophy of mind), and Meaning 

(theism/atheism/agnosticism, global philosophy of religion, critical 

thinking). Kuhn’s comprehensive review article on theories of consciousness – “A Landscape of 

Consciousness: Toward a Taxonomy of Explanations an d Implications” – is published in Progress in 

Biophysics and Molecular Biology (August 2024, pp. 28 -169). In its review, IAI News says, “Kuhn has 

written perhaps the most comprehensive article on the landscape of theories of consciousness in 

recent memory. ” Kuhn has written or edited over 30 books, including The Mystery of Existence: Why 64 

is there Anything At All? (with John Leslie); Closer To Truth: Challenging Current Belief; Closer To 

Truth: Science, Meaning and the Future; The Library of Investment Banking; How China’s Leaders 

Think (featuring President Xi Jinping); The Man Who Changed China: The Life and Legacy of Jiang 

Zemin(China’s best -selling book in 2005 and in December 2022); and "The Origin and Significance 

of Zero: An Interdisciplinary Perspective” (with Peter Gobets). Kuhn is a recipient of the China 

Reform Friendship Medal. Ku hn is chairman of The Kuhn Foundation. He has a BA in Human Biology 

(Johns Hopkins), PhD in Anatomy/Brain Research (UCLA), and SM (MBA) in Management (MIT). 

Program Session PL -9

# PLENARY 10 

PL -10 

Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe 

Dr. Philip Kurian Ph.D. 

Quantum Biology Laboratory, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

Networks of tryptophan – an aromatic amino acid with strong fluorescent response – are 

ubiquitous in biological systems, forming diverse architectures in transmembrane proteins, 

cytoskeletal filaments, sub -neuronal elements, photoreceptor complexes like UV R8, virion capsids, 

and other cellular structures. We analyzed the cooperative effects induced by ultraviolet (UV) 

excitation of several biologically relevant tryptophan mega -networks, thus giving insight into 

novel mechanisms for cellular signalling and c ontrol. Our theoretical analysis in the single -

excitation manifold predicted the formation of strongly superradiant states due to collective 

interactions among organized arrangements of up to more than 100,000 tryptophan UV -excited 

transition dipoles in mi crotubule architectures, which leads to an enhancement of the 

fluorescence quantum yield that is confirmed by our steady -state experiments [1]. Preliminary 

femtosecond UV transient absorption results indicated superradiant state lifetimes of no more 

than a few picoseconds, consistent with our predictions. We demonstrated the observed 

consequences of single -photon superradiant behavior in the fluorescence quantum yield for 

hierarchically organized tubulin structures, which increases in different geometric re gimes at 

thermal equilibrium before saturation – highlighting the effect's persistence in the presence of 

significant disorder. Contrary to conventional assumptions that quantum effects cannot survive in 

large biosystems at high temperatures, our numerical results [2] suggest that macropolymer 

lattices of tryptophan in actin filaments and amyloid fibrils exhibit increasingly observable and 65 

robust effects with increasing length, due to quantum coherent interactions in the single -photon 

limit. Superradiant enhancement and high quantum yield in neuroprotein polymers would thus 

play a crucial role in information processing in the brain, the deve lopment of neurodegenerative 

diseases such as Alzheimer's and related dementias, and a wide array of other pathologies 

characterized by anomalous protein aggregates. Our results motivated a revisiting of the 

computing limits of cytoskeletal and neuronal ar chitectures [3], which are generally considered to 

signal via Hodgkin -Huxley action potentials (~millisecond) rather than via superradiant states in 

such tryptophan lattices (~picosecond). The latter would allow information -processing pulses or 

bursts at o rders of magnitude faster speeds than exascale supercomputers, at significantly lower 

power consumptions, by operating within two orders of magnitude of the Margolus -Levitin 

quantum speed limit for UV -excited states. The robustness of superradiant states p aired with 

subradiant states (~second) in these protein architectures thus offers a novel paradigm for 

understanding the role of large collectives of quantum emitters in warm, wet, and wiggly 

environments. REFERENCES [1] N.S. Babcock, G.M. -Cabrera, K.E. Ob erhofer, M. Chergui, G.L. Celardo, 

and P. Kurian. Ultraviolet superradiance from mega -networks of tryptophan in biological 

architectures. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 128, 4035 –4046 (2024). [2] H. Patwa, N.S. Babcock, 

and P. Kurian. Quantum -enhanced pho toprotection in neuroprotein architectures emerges from 

collective light -matter interactions. Frontiers in Physics 12, 1387271 (2024). [3] P. Kurian. 

Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe. Science Advances 11, eadt4623 (2025). 

Keywords 

quantum biology, superradiance, subradiance, protein architectures, biological qubits, ultraviolet, 

tryptophan, quantum emitters, Margolus -Levitin speed limit, computational capacity of life, 

quantum computing, quantum information processing, origins of li fe, habitable zones, cosmology, 

observable universe 

Links to Research 

https://www.eurekalert.org/news -releases/1077836 

https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adt4623 

https://www.eurekalert.org/news -releases/1042789 

https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c07936 

https://www.eurekalert.org/news -releases/1055890 

https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/physics/articles/10.3389/fphy.2024.1387271/full 

https://www.quantumbiolab.com/news.html 

Dr. Philip Kurian is a theoretical physicist, (re)search(ing) scientist, and essayist, serving as 

principal investigator and founding director of the Quantum Biology Laboratory 

(https://quantumbiolab.com /) at Howard University. Beginning his career as a math teacher in 

North Philadelphia, he completed his doctorate in physics after a stint at NASA Goddard Space 

Flight Center. Dr. Kurian is now the recipient of fellowships, grants, and awards from the Alfre d P. 

Sloan Foundation, U.S. -Italy Fulbright Commission, Guy Foundation Family Trust (UK), National 

Science Foundation, and the National Institutes of Health. The Quantum Biology Laboratory 66 

studies how collective and cooperative quantum behaviors can explain biological phenomena at 

the mesoscopic, organismal, and clinical scales, including in neurodegeneration, cancer, and 

human consciousness. His group’s pioneering work on single -photon supe rradiance in eukaryotic 

protein filaments and neuron fibers has been featured by Science , The Quantum Insider , Oak Ridge 

Leadership Computing Facility, SPIE Photonics Focus , Optica , Laser Focus 

> World

, BioPhotonics , Howard Magazine , TEDx , and by prominent s cience channels including Science  

> News with Sabine

and PBS Space Time . Dr. Kurian is a Fellow of the UCSB Kavli Institute for 

Theoretical Physics, and a Simons Scholar and Senior Fellow at the UCLA Institute for Pure and 

Applied Mathematics. He was appointed to the chairing committee for the National Academies 

of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine workshop on quantum -enabled sensing and imaging for 

biology. Dr. Kurian also serves as a scientific advisor to the “Science for Seminaries” program of 

the AAAS D ialogue on Science, Ethics, and Religion, which seeks to integrate frontier science 

questions into conversations among future theologians and clergy. His essays on science, human 

knowledge systems, and empire have appeared in various media outlets, includi ng the Los 

> Angeles Review of Books

, Granta , and Plough . For more information, please 

visit  https://profiles.howard.edu/philip -kurian .

Program Session PL -10 

# PLENARY 10 

PL -10 

The Science of Quantum Biology and Its Implications for Consciousness 

Prof. Dante S Lauretta Ph.D. 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

Quantum biology is an emerging field exploring the role of quantum mechanical principles —

coherence, entanglement, and superposition —in biological systems. While classical biochemistry 

has successfully explained many life processes, growing evidence suggest s that quantum effects 

may play a nontrivial role in molecular and cellular functions, particularly in the brain. 

Understanding these quantum influences is essential for advancing our knowledge of 

consciousness, cognition, and the fundamental nature of lif e itself. Recent research indicates that 

quantum coherence in biomolecules may contribute to biological information processing. One 

area of focus is the cytoskeleton, particularly microtubules, which provide structural support in 67 

neurons and facilitate intracellular communication. Microtubules contain aromatic amino acids 

such as tryptophan, which exhibit unique quantum optical properties. Studies have suggested 

that superradiance, excitonic energy transfer, and quantum coherence i n tryptophan networks 

could enable efficient energy transport and contribute to cellular signaling and cognitive function. 

Using high -resolution spectroscopy, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), and computational 

modeling, researchers are investigati ng whether these quantum processes provide an additional 

layer of biological information storage and processing beyond classical biochemistry. Another 

critical area of investigation is the quantum nature of anesthesia. Empirical evidence shows that 

anesthe tic potency can vary depending on the nuclear spin of xenon isotopes, suggesting a 

potential quantum effect in neural activity suppression. This challenges conventional models of 

anesthesia, which assume purely biochemical interactions. Studies employing m ulti -electrode 

arrays, high -resolution NMR spectroscopy, and spin resonance techniques are examining how 

quantum coherence in neural proteins and lipid membranes might influence consciousness 

states. These findings could lead to a deeper understanding of h ow quantum mechanics 

contributes to brain function and perception. The implications of quantum mechanics extend 

beyond individual cognition to biological evolution and the origins of life. A growing body of 

research suggests that quantum effects in nucleic acids and amino acids may have played a role 

in molecular self -organization and early evolutionary complexity. The indole ring of tryptophan, for 

instance, possesses quantum properties that may have facilitated non -classical information 

processing in preb iotic chemistry. Additionally, theoretical models incorporating quantum 

complexity theory propose that evolutionary processes could be driven by quantum information 

dynamics, accelerating biomolecular adaptation and functional diversity. From a technologic al 

perspective, the integration of quantum biology into applied science is opening new frontiers. 

Advances in quantum -enhanced biotechnologies, neuromorphic computing, and bio -inspired 

quantum sensors offer promising avenues for medical and environmental a pplications. By 

leveraging biomolecular quantum coherence, researchers are developing novel biosensors and 

computational architectures that could revolutionize fields such as neuroscience, pharmacology, 

and artificial intelligence. The convergence of quant um mechanics, molecular biology, and 

neuroscience represents a paradigm shift in how we understand life and consciousness. By 

moving beyond classical descriptions of biology and integrating quantum principles, researchers 

are uncovering new mechanisms of c ognitive processing, novel insights into the origins of life, and 

revolutionary applications in technology. As experimental techniques advance, the science of 

quantum biology has the potential to reshape fundamental theories of consciousness and 

redefine o ur understanding of the living world. 

Keywords 

Quantum Biology, Coherence, Cytoskeleton, Complexity Theory, Evolution, 

Dr. Dante S. Lauretta is a distinguished scientist known for his pioneering contributions to 

planetary science and astrobiology. As a Regents Professor at the University of Arizona, he leads 

groundbreaking research initiatives that explore the mysteries of our solar system and the origins 

of life. Dr. Lauretta is at the forefront of scientific exploration, and his work has made a profound 68 

impact on our understanding of the cosmos. One of his most remarkable achievements is his 

leadership role in the NASA OSIRIS -REx asteroid sample return mission. Dr. Lauretta's vision and 

expertise guided this ambitious mission, which successfully collected samples from the asteroid 

Bennu and returned them to Earth. This achievement represents a significant milestone in space 

exploration and offers invaluable insights into the formation of our solar system. 

Dr. Lauretta's research interests are multifaceted, encompassing the formation of the solar 

system, the habitability of Earth, the origins of life, and the intricate connection between life and 

consciousness. His unwavering commitment to unraveling scienti fic mysteries has earned him a 

well -deserved reputation as a trailblazer in his field. Beyond his scientific endeavors, Dr. Lauretta 

is a dedicated collaborator, mentor, and educator. He plays a pivotal role in shaping the future of 

cosmochemists and astr obiologists, providing guidance and inspiration to the next generation of 

scientists. He is the driving force behind the establishment of the Arizona Astrobiology Center, a 

testament to his commitment to fostering scientific excellence. 

Program Session PL -10 

# PLENARY 10 

PL -10 

Does Physics Need a Revolution to Explain Life, Living Systems, and Consciousness? 

Anita Goel MD, PhD 

Chairman, CEO & Scientific Director, Nanobiosym Research Institute Chairman & CEO, 

Nanobiosym Diagnostics, Inc, Boston, MA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Secondary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]…Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

Our current physics was primarily developed in the 20th century, in the context of inanimate 

matter and closed reductionistic systems, that operate at (or near) equilibrium. Living systems 

are, however, fundamentally open systems that operate far from equi librium and are strongly 

coupled to and continuously exchange matter, energy, and information with their environment. 

Einstein, Schrodinger, and Penrose have argued that our physics (especially quantum mechanics) 

is perhaps missing some new physical princi ples to provide a more complete description of 

reality. I will share some of our work at Nanobiosym to elucidate this “new physics” using a new 

conceptual physics framework and a novel experimental testbed to probe nanoscale quantum 

effects in biological s ystems, such as nanomachines that read and write information in DNA. 69 

Keywords 

new conceptual physics framework, nanoscale quantum effects in biological systems, 

nanomachines, DNA, quantum mechanics 

Links to Research 

https://www.nanobiosym.com/our -team/ 

https://sites.harvard.edu/goel/ 

Dr. Anita Goel, MD, Ph.D. is a world -renowned expert and global entrepreneur in the field of 

Nanobiophysics – an emerging science at the convergence of physics, nanotechnology, 

information science, and biomedicine. At the Nanobiosym Research Institute (NBS), Dr. Goel is 

pioneering the new physics of life, living systems, and consciousness. She and her team are 

elucidating the physics of one of the most fundamental processes of living matter, the way 

nanomachines read and write information into DNA, how this process is influenced by the 

environment, and how quantum mechanics might play a “nontrivial” role in their dynamics. Dr. 

Goel holds a Ph.D. and M.A. in Physics from Harvard University, an MD from the Harvard -MIT Joint 

Division of Health Sciences and Technology (HST) at Harvard M edical School, and a BS in Physics 

with Honors & Distinction from Stanford University. 

Program Session PL -10 

# PLENARY 11 

PL -11 

Evidence for worldwide modulation of physical randomness correlated with coherent 

consciousness during New Year's Eve celebrations: 

Dean Radin PhD 

Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novota, California, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.09]........Parapsychology 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

This study explored the hypothesis that during moments of collective human focus and emotional 

resonance unexpected coherence will emerge in random physical systems. This mind -matter 

interaction hypothesis was tested during New Years Eve celebrations in ea ch time zone using data 

from the Global Consciousness Project, a worldwide network of electronic truly random number 

generators. Analyses of data spanning the years 1998 to 2025 —including simple measures like 

mean shifts as well as changes in entropy, cha otic attractors, fractal dimensions, and Principal 70 

Components Analysis (PCA) —revealed statistically significant deviations at or within minutes of 

the stroke of midnight on New Years Eve, as compared to the same analysis applied to midnight 

transitions every other day of the year and to randomized permuta tion techniques (e.g., p = 4.8 × 

10^−7 for the PCA analysis). The study also found that the statistical deviations were stronger in 

time zones with higher vs. lower populations, suggesting that the magnitude of this 

psychophysical interaction was related t o the number of minds engaged in a coherent focus of 

attention. Alternative mundane explanations, including possible environmental artifacts, were 

considered but deemed unlikely because the RNGs were specifically designed to exclude such 

influences. An ima ginative roundtable discussion among the founders of quantum mechanics is 

used as a vehicle to discuss these results. 

Keywords 

collective consciousness, mind -matter interaction, psychophysical phenomena, philosophical 

models 

Links to Research 

https://www.deanradin.com/recommended -references 

Dean Radin is Chief Scientist at the Institute of Noetic Science (IONS), Associated Distinguished 

Professor at the California Institute of Integral Studies, and co -founder and chairman of the 

genetic neuroengineering company, Cognigenics, Inc. His early career track as a concert violinist 

shifted into science after earning a BS degree in electrical engineering ( magna cum laude , with 

honors in physics) from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and an MS in electrical 

engineering and PhD in psychology from the Uni versity of Illinois, Urbana -Champaign. In 2022, he 

was awarded an honorary DSc (doctor of science) from the Swami Vivekananda University near 

Bangalore, India. For over four decades his research has focused on the nature and capacities of 

consciousness, pr imarily its nonlocal aspects. Before joining the IONS research staff in 2001, he 

worked at AT&T Bell Labs, Princeton University, University of Edinburgh, and SRI International, where 

he spent a year on the now declassified "Star Gate" program of psychic es pionage for the US 

government. Radin is author or coauthor of seven patents or patents pending in the area of 

neurogenetic medicine, one in mind -matter interaction, over 340 scientific, technical, and popular 

articles, book chapters, and best -selling books including The Conscious Universe , Entangled Minds 

(2006), Supernormal (2013), Real Magic (2018), and Enchantment (coming in 2025). 

His 170+ scientific articles can be found in peer -reviewed journals ranging from Foundations of 

Physics to PLOS One, PNAS Nexus, Nature Translational Psychiatry, Genomic Psychiatry, Frontiers in 

Human Neuroscience, Psychological Bulletin, Brain and Cognition, and Psychology of 

Consciousness . He serves as a referee for 25 journals, was featured in a New York Times Magazine 

article, and has appeared on dozens of television programs around the world. His 780+ interviews 

and talks have included presentations at Harvard (medical), Stanford (statistics), Princeton 

(psychology), Columbia (education), Cambridge (physics), Edinburgh (psychology), the 

Sorbonne (parapsychology), University of Padova (physics), University of British Columbia 71 

(parapsychology), Jawaharlal Nehru University (philosophy), and University of Allahabad 

(cognitive neuroscience). Radin's invited talks for industries have included Merck, Google, 

Johnson & Johnson, and Rabobank, and his government talks have included the National 

Academy of Sciences, the Naval War College, Army Special Operations Command, Naval 

Postgraduate School, D ARPA, the Indian Council of Philosophical Research (India), the 

International Center for Leadership and Governance (Malaysia), and the Austra lian Davos 

Connection (Australia). 

Program Session PL -11 

# PLENARY 11 

PL -11 

Morphic Resonance and the Memory of Nature 

Rupert Sheldrake PhD 

Temenos Academy, London, United Kingdom 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.06]........Memory and learning 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

According the hypothesis of morphic resonance, memory is inherent in nature and the so -called 

laws of nature are more like habits. All self -organizing systems, including crystals, living 

organisms, stars and galaxies are organized by morphic fields which contain an inherent memory, 

given by a process called morphic resonanc e from previous similar systems. All species have a 

collective memory, on which each individual draws and to which it contributes. Self -organizing 

systems are sustained by self -resonance from their own past, and even individual memory 

depends on morphic re sonance rather than on physical memory traces stored within the brain. 

The hypothesis has many implications for information and consciousness in the universe. 

Keywords 

Morphic Resonance, memory, memory traces, collective memory 

Links to Research 

R. Sheldrake (2011) A New Science of Life . Icon Books, London 

Rupert Sheldrake PhD is a biologist and author of more than 100 papers in peer -reviewed journals 

and nine books, including The Presence of the Past . He was a fellow of Clare College, Cambridge, 

where he was director of studies in cell biology, and also a research fellow of the Royal 

Society. From 2005 -2010, he was Director of the Perrott -Warrick Project for the study of 72 

unexplained human and animal abilities, funded from Trinity College, Cambridge. He is currently a 

fellow of the Institute of Noetic Sciences in California and of the Temenos Academy in London. He 

lives in London and is married to Jill Purce . His web site is  www.sheldrake.org 

Program Session. PL -11 

# PLENARY 12 

PL -12 

New clues to Terminal Lucidity in mentally -impaired adults: Exploring permissive vs. 

productive hypotheses for brain function 

Marjorie Woollacott PhD 

University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

To penetrate the mysteries of the nature of consciousness, it is vitally important to expand our 

understanding of death -related phenomena. One of these, Terminal lucidity (TL), the unexpected 

surge of mental clarity shortly before death in a dying person, has been typically studied in cases 

of advanced dementia. The nature and contributing factors to TL are poorly understood, as it often 

occurs in individuals whose neurological decline is believed to be irreversible. For example, 

patients have been reported to experience sudden enhanced thinking and mobility, to access lost 

memories and to recognise and converse with friends and family, and often to say goodbye. 

Previous studies have largely involved individual clinical cases (Nahm & Greyson, 2009; Nahm et 

al., 2012). Though valuable, these cases have not been systematically collected and thus may not 

include key phenomena contributing to identification of possible mechanisms. This study explored 

this phenomenon further, identifying and describing psychologic al and physiological variables 

witnessed in TL in a medically diverse sample of adults across the lifespan to begin to identify 

factors contributing to TL. We created an online questionnaire which captured a range of 

significant details about subjects who had experienced a TL episode, including underlying 

medical condition, treatment regimen (and recent changes), physical and mental capacities just 

before the TL episode, and behaviors that occurred during the episode itself. We have received 69 

responses to the survey, 38 of which met our rigorous criteria for inclusion as TL. Preliminary 

results: Medical condition prior to the TL episode included dementia/Alzheimer's, various cancer 

diagnoses, stroke, and other end -of -life conditions. The most frequent dura tion of TL in this 

sample lasted 10 minutes or less and roughly half of the patients died within 24 hours after TL. 73 

When clinical staff or caregivers were asked if changes in the patient's condition or 

medication/treatment prior to their terminal lucidity episode could have been responsible for the 

TL experience, 32 of 38 said this was not the case (3 unsure, 3 yes). An d in 27 of 38 cases, the 

witness reported a shift from severe cognitive impairment (including nonresponsive/coma) prior 

to TL, to little or no cognitive impairment during TL. When asked if the person had lost physical 

abilities, but regained them during th e episode, 28/38 witnesses confirmed that this was the case. 

Example: "The lady had been unresponsive for days and was in the terminal phase of life. I came in 

expecting that she had died overnight and found her sitting up eating breakfast - chatting with 

her family. I explained to the family that her bright condition may not last - and she died that 

night." Our findings suggest that a specific medical diagnosis or physical condition did not appear 

to account for the arising of TL or the characteristics of t he TL episode, and offer possible support 

for the hypothesis that the brain is a permissive organ rather than a productive one. Project Team 

members include: M.Woollacott, N.Tassell -Matamua, K.Kothe, C.Roe, M.Nahm, B.Greyson, M.Mutis, 

R.Evrard, A.Gomez -Mar in, and A.Kellehear. 

Keywords 

terminal lucidity, consciousness, dementia, dying, Alzheimers 

Links to Research 

Roehrs, P, Fenwick, P, Greyson, B, Kellehear, A, Kothe, K, Nahm, M, Roe, C, Tassell -Matamua, N, 

PhD, Woollacott, M . Terminal Lucidity in a Pediatric Oncology Clinic, J. Nervous and Mental 

Disease, 2024 Jan 1;212(1):57 -60. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001711. Epub 2023 Sep 

13.PMID: 37734159. 

Woollacott, M. Near Death Experience: Memory recovery during hypnosis. Explore (NY). 2024 Nov -

Dec;20(6):103036. doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2024.103036. Epub 2024 Jul 24.PMID: 39096700 

Marjorie Woollacott , Ph.D., is Professor in the Institute of Neuroscience and prior chair of the Dept. 

of Human Physiology at the University of Oregon. She taught courses in neuroscience and 

rehabilitation medicine, as well as complementary medicine and meditation. She is President of 

the Academy for the Advancement of Post -Materialist Sciences (AAPS) and Research Director for 

the International As sociation of Near -Death Studies (IANDS). Woollacott has received over 7.2 

million dollars in research funding for her research in child development, rehabilitation medicine 

and most recently, meditation, spiritual awakening and end -of -life experiences. She has 

published more than 200 scientific articles and written or co -edited nine books. Her latest 

book, Infinite Awareness (2015) (winner of eight awards, including the 2017 Parapsychological 

Association Book Award, Eric Hoffer Book Award and the Nautilus Book Award) pairs Woollacott’s 

research as a neuroscientist with her self -revelations about the mind’s spiritual power. She has 

be en a popular key -note speaker at international conferences, including the Beyond the Brain 

Conference of the Scientific and Med ical Network in London, and the International Association for 

Near -Death Studies (IANDS) conference in the United States. She has also been featured in the 

documentary Who We Are and in many podcasts, including Beyond Belief , in the episode titled, 74 

"You Are not Your Brain" (link: https://www.audacy.com/podcast/beyond -belief -

ad0f9/episodes/you -are -not -your -brain -0e543), the New Thinking Allowed podcast with Jeffrey 

Mishlove, speaking on "The Mind Brain Interface" (link: https://www.audacy.com/podcast/beyond -

belief -ad0f9/episodes/you -are -not -your -brain -0e543), and The Essential Foundation podcast, 

speaking on "Consciousness without Neurons"  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YvoT_05JgbE 

Program Session PL -12 

PL -12 

If consciousness survives, materialism dies: re -appraising the “permissive brain” 

hypothesis at the edges of consciousness 

Prof. Alex Gomez -Marin PhD 

Instituto de Neurociencias, Alicante, Alicante, Spain 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.04]........Other sensory modalities 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

What happens with the mind when the brain dies? This question can be scientifically approached 

in a two -fold manner. First, the study of end -of -life brain activity can shed light on how our brains 

function under extreme conditions. The topic would thus lie within what Thomas Kuhn called 

“normal science”, namely, solving puzzles circumscribed to the boundaries of the domi nant 

paradigm. Second, seriously entertaining the possibility that there can be mind activity when the 

brain is literally dead ventures our quest into the realm of “scientific revolutions”. To put it plainly: if 

consciousness survives bodily death, materia lism dies. I will explore this possibility from three 

sources: my own near -death experience in March of 2021, my training as a PhD in theoretical 

physics, and my career as a neuroscientist. Bringing the visionary insights of William James back 

to the futur e, I will revisit the “productive versus permissive” brain hypotheses and contrast them 

in the context of empirical data at the edges of consciousness. I will start with converging 

evidence within Survival research, then move into Psychical research (one d oes not need to 

almost die to experience or investigate minds beyond brains), and finally dare to speculate about 

the connection of these two fields with the renewed interest in Unidentified Anomalous 

Phenomena (good old -fashioned UFOs) and the prospects o f Artificial Consciousness (and the 

dangerous bullshit around it). The singularity is near, but it is probably not what you think. 

Keywords 

near -death experience, permissive brain, end of materialism, anomalous phenomena; theoretical 

physics 75 

Àlex Gómez -Marín is a theoretical physicist and neuroscientist. He earned his bachelor’s 

and PhD degrees in physics at the University of Barcelona. He later worked as a 

postdoctoral researcher at the EMBL -CRG Centre for Genomic Regulation and at the 

Champalimaud Centre fo r the Unknown in Lisbon. Since 2016, he has been a principal 

investigator at the Institute of Neurosciences in Alicante. He is currently an associate 

professor at the Spanish National Research Council (CSIC) and the director of the Pari 

Cen ter in Tuscany, Italy, a center dedicated to exploring the intersection of science, art, 

and the sacred. His research focuses on studying the human mind in the real world, 

including what he calls “the edges of consciousness,” a strange and wonderful field where 

enigma often meets stigma. 

Program Session PL -12 

PL -12 

Potential neural signatures of near -death consciousness in humans 

Jimo Borjigin PhD , Gang Xu PhD 

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Abstract 

The brain is assumed to be hypoactive during cardiac arrest. However, animal models of cardiac 

and respiratory arrest demonstrate a surge of gamma oscillations and functional connectivity. To 

investigate whether these preclinical findings translate to huma ns, we analyzed 

electroencephalogram and electrocardiogram signals in four comatose dying patients before 

and after the withdrawal of ventilatory support. Two of the four patients exhibited a rapid and 

marked surge of gamma power, surge of cross -frequency coupling of gamma waves with slower 

oscillations and increased interhemispheric functional and directed connectivity in gamma 

bands. High -frequency oscillations paralleled the activation of beta/gamma cross -frequency 

coupling within the somatosensory corti ces. Importantly, both patients displayed surges of 

functional and directed connectivity at multiple frequency bands within the posterior cortical “hot 

zone,” a region postulated to be critical for conscious processing. This gamma activity was 

stimulated b y global hypoxia and surged further as cardiac conditions deteriorated in the dying 

patients. These data demonstrate that the surge of gamma power and connectivity observed in 

animal models of cardiac arrest can be observed in select patients during the pr ocess of dying. 76 

They also suggest the existence of neural correlates of near -death consciousness underlying 

near -death experiences reported by survivals of cardiac arrest. 

Keywords 

near -death, consciousness, brain, EEG, near -death experience 

Links to Research 

https://pnas.altmetric.com/details/1683942 

https://pnas.altmetric.com/details/3881364 

https://pnas.altmetric.com/details/147133459 

Jimo Borjigin is an Associate Professor of Physiology and Neurology at the University of Michigan 

Medical School. She received her BS in Physics, MS in Biophysics from Tohoku University in Sendai, 

Japan, and PhD in Neuroscience from the Johns Hopkins University in Balt imore, USA. After 

conducting her postdoctoral training at the Hopkins, she was invited to become a staff associate 

at the Carnegie Institution of Washington Embryology Department. In 2003, she moved to the 

University of Michigan as an Assistan t Professor, focused her research initially on the use of 

melatonin as an in vivo tool to understand circadian rhythms; and since 2013, on the neural 

correlates of consciousness in the dying brain. 

Jimo Borjigin, Ph.D. 

Michigan Neuroscience Institute Affiliate 

Associate Professor of Molecular & Integrative Physiology 

Associate Professor of Neurology 

Areas of Interest 

The main research interests of the Borjigin lab include: 

• Mechanisms of sudden cardiac arrest and the role of the brain during cardiac arrest 

(brain -heart coupling).  

> •

Neural basis of covert consciousness in normal and abnormal brain states in human 

subjects.  

> •

Mechanisms of endogenous DMT synthesis.  

> •

Visualizing covert brain (and heart) activities in patients with neurological, 

psychological, and psychiatric disorders, to assist with their clinical prognosis, 

diagnosis, and treatment. 

Honors & Awards  

> •

The John Merck Scholars Award – 1999  

> •

Michigan Bio logical Sciences Scholar Program Award - 2003 

Credentials 77 

Ph.D., Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institution, Baltimore, MD (1994) 

Published Articles or Reviews 

• Xu, G., Mihaylova, T., Li, D., Tian, F., Farrehi, P.M., Parent, J.M., Mashour, G.A., Wang, M.M., 

Borjigin*, J. Surge of neurophysiological coupling and connectivity of gamma 

oscillations in the dying human brain (2023). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,  2023 May 

9;120(19):e2216268120.(link is external)  

> •

Glynos, N.G., Carter, L., Lee, S.J., Kim, Y., Kennedy, R.T., Mashour, G.A., Wang, M.M., Borjigin*, 

J. Indolethylamine N -Methyltransferase (INMT) is not essential for endogenous 

tryptamine -dependent methylation activity in rats (2023), Scientific Reports. 13(1):280. 

PMID: 36609666.  

> •

Li, D., Mabrouk, O.S., Liu, T., Tian, F., Xu, G., Rengifo, S., Choi, S.J., Mathur, A., Crooks, C.P., 

Kennedy, R.T., Wang, M.M., Ghanbari, H., Borjigin*, J. Asphyxia -activated corticocardiac 

signaling accelerates onset of cardiac arrest (2015). Proc Natl Ac ad Sci U S A. 2015 Apr 

6. pii: 201423936.  

> •

Borjigin*, J., Lee, U., Liu, T., Pal, D., Huff, S., Klarr, D., Sloboda, J., Hernandez, J., Wang, M.M., 

Mashour, G.A. Surge of neurophysiological coherence and connectivity in the dying 

brain (2013). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 110(35):14432 -7. 

Web Sites 

Borjigin Lab(link is external) 

Michigan Experts 

Program Session P L-12

PL -13 

Investigating the Psionic Interface: Alleged Non -Human Interactions with Human 

Consciousness in Covert UAP Programs. 

Ross Coulthart 

News Nation TV investigative journalist and author of In Plain Sight: An Investigation into UFOs & 

Impossible Science, Australia 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.22]........Miscellaneous 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 78 

Abstract 

For nearly four decades, Ross Coulthart, a veteran investigative journalist and former host of 

Australia’s 60 Minutes, has pursued confronting stories within the world of covert intelligence 

programs and defense. Since joining News Nation, a Chicago based cable news network, 

Coulthart has exclusively revealed whistleblower allegations from US intelligence and defense 

insiders asserting a covert government cover -up of non -human intelligence (NHI) engaging with 

Earth. Drawing from his 2023 expose of USAF offi cer David Grusch’s claims of secret UAP retrievals 

and his January 2025 interview with former intelligence operative Jack Barber, Coulthart presents 

evidence of an alleged secret US ‘legacy UAP retrieval and reverse engineering program’ involving 

psionic p henomena – psychic interactions between humans and NHI technology and/or entities. 

Barber, a trained USAF special operations combat controller turned undercover intelligence 

operative, alleges direct involvement in retrieving non -human craft, including an ‘egg -shaped’ 

object, for a private aerospace contractor in collaboration with the US Government. Central to his 

claims is the assertion that these craft, or perhaps entities within them, exhibit psionic properties, 

interfacing with human consciousness. Bar ber reports he and his colleagues involved in these 

retrievals have experienced intrusive clarity, foreign thoughts and images flooding their minds –

suggesting the NHI employ psionic technology as a control or defense mechanism. He further 

alleges that th e Pentagon’s All -domain Anomaly Resolution Office, which investigates UAPs, was 

briefed on these interactions, despite its public denial of extraterrestrial engagement. 

Corroborated by his special operations colleagues, Barber claims individuals with heigh tened 

psychic, intuitive or empathic abilities – recruited through programs like the Gifted and Talented 

initiative in public schools – play a critical role in connecting with NHI craft, potentially enabling 

their retrieval and operation. Coulthart’s inves tigation uncovers a historical thread linking these 

allegations to Cold War -era US research into psychic phenomena, including the CIA’s declassified 

remote viewing programs, which he argues have evolved into a modern psionic initiative. While 

the US Depart ment of Defense (DoD) has not challenged Barber’s specific claims – stating only 

that AARO is investigating – their broader denial of extraterrestrial evidence contrasts with leaked 

documents like ‘Slide 9’ from the Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification Program (AATIP). This 

briefing slide, presented to a DoD deputy secretary, warned of NHI capabilities to manipulate 

human perception and cognition, framing such phenomena as emerging quantum physics. This 

presentation will explore the implications of Barb er’s allegations for consciousness studies, 

integrating firsthand accounts, whistleblower testimony and historical context. Coulthart will 

recount his experience of witnessing a psionic ‘summoning’ by a member of Barber’s 

SKYWATCHER team, a private initiat ive aimed at replicating the secret Government program by 

retrieving NHI craft. While constrained by ethical secrecy obligations to his extensive sources 

within the legacy program, and acknowledging the absence to date of public physical evidence, 

Coulthar t argues that these claims warrant rigorous scientific inquiry and public congressional 

oversight. Attendees will be invited to consider how alleged NHI interactions with human 

consciousness challenge current paradigms, bridging investigative journalism wi th the frontiers of 

cognitive science. 79 

Program Session PL -13 

# PL -13 

# How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? 

Brannon Wheeler 

U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.05]........Transpersonal and humanistic psychology 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Abstract 

How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? For millennia, people have 

wondered about the stars and the gods --how and why do they intervene in our affairs? In the 

Middle Ages, great scholars (Maimonides, Aquinas, Suyuti, Buddhaghosa) and mystic s (Luria, 

Eckhart, Avicenna, Ibn Arabi) devoted their lives to studying the mechanisms of revelation and 

human experience of the divine. Yet the bulk of this incredibly rich and varied work has not been 

applied to examining contemporary experiences of cont act with non -human intelligence, nor 

have the first -hand knowledge of contactees been utilized adequately to help understand 

"religious" encounters with divine beings. My research proposes that these two perspectives on 

human encounters with non -human cons ciousness be brought together, that contactee 

experiences be put on equal footing with other historical examples of NHI -human interaction, to 

provide a more balanced and broader generic study of how NHI communicate with humans. This 

study proceeds by colle cting examples of reported human -NHI communication, both verbal (in 

the traditional sense of the transmission of an articulated message through speech or otherwise) 

and non -verbal (physical manipulation of objects including bodies). A comparison of a range of 

examples --drawn from "religious" and contactee reports --can suggest some general theoretical 

conclusions about potential mechanisms underlying the experiences themselves and the way 

they are conceptualized. 

Brannon Wheeler is a historian of religion, a professor in the history department at the United 

States Naval Academy in Annapolis. He has published eleven books and numerous articles mostly 

focused on how and to what effect NHI communicate with humans and intervene in hi story --

prophets, scripture, exegesis, and more recently how this overlaps with consciousness and UAP 

related experiences. He teaches courses on mystery religions, Bible, UFO mythology, truth, 

consciousness, and NHI encounters. He has held vi siting positions throughout Europe (Oxford, 

Bergen, Paris, London) and the Middle East including the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, the King 80 

Fahd Center for Research and Islamic Studies in Riyadh, and several American research study 

centers in Amman, Tunis, Kuwait, Beirut, and Cairo. 

Program Session PL -13 

PL -14 

Physics of Spacetime from Traces of Consciousness 

Donald D Hoffman PhD 

University of California, Irvine, California, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Abstract 

Quantum field theory and general relativity each assume that spacetime is fundamental. 

Together, however, they entail that spacetime is not fundamental: it has no operational meaning 

beyond the Planck scale. Spacetime and its objects are useful constructs but must emerge from 

something deeper. High -energy theoretical physicists, funded in part by the UNIVERSE+ project of 

the ERC, are exploring new "positive geometries" beyond spacetime, such as amplituhedra, 

associahedra, cosmohedra, and surfaceology. Evolu tion by natural selection agrees that 

spacetime and its objects are not fundamental. Sensory systems evolve to be useful but not true. 

Each sense acts as a user interface —a virtual reality —that hides fundamental reality and guides 

adaptive action. The sens es do not present, or represent, fundamental reality. The language of the 

senses, including physical objects with their causal or functional properties, is a useful fiction. 

Theories of conscious experiences that assume otherwise, claiming that experiences emerge from 

causal or functional properties of neurons or other objects, fail to explain even one experience, 

such as the taste of mint. The failure is principled. For instance, what specific n x n transition 

probability matrix, encoding a causal structur e, must be the taste of mint or the experience of 

space? Why must the n^2 elements of the matrix have their specific values? I present a theory of 

"conscious agents" beyond spacetime, based on a Markovian dynamics. I discuss a new partial 

order on Markov c hains, the "trace order," in which one Markov chain entails another iff it is a trace 

chain of the other. I use the trace order to propose a theory of observation and of beliefs induced 

by observation. I show how the trace order encodes time dilations and length contractions, 

analogous to those of special relativity. I propose a many -to -one mapping from properties of the 

dynamics of conscious agents to physical properties of mass, spin, energy, and momentum. The 

goal is to construct a map from the dynamics of conscious agents onto the positive geometries 

discovered by physicists, and thence into spacetime and physical objects, such as neurons and 

brains. It is not possible to boot up conscious experiences from objects and properties in 

spacetime. It is, howe ver, possible to boot up spacetime and its objects from conscious 

experiences. 81 

Keywords 

Hard Problem, Markov Matrix, Physicalism, Panpsychism, Idealism, Natural Selection, Quantum 

Theory, Positive Geometries 

Links to Research 

https://www.mdpi.com/1099 -4300/22/5/514 

https://www.mdpi.com/1099 -4300/25/1/129 

https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/imp/jcs/2024/00000031/f0020009/art00003;jsessionid 

=1mfffup1ilng9.x -ic -live -02 

Donald Hoffman received his PhD from MIT, and joined the faculty of the University of California, 

Irvine in 1983, where he is a Professor Emeritus of Cognitive Sciences. He is an author of over 100 

scientific papers and three books, including Visual Intelligence and The Case Against Reality . He 

received a Distinguished Scientific Award of the American Psychological Association for early 

career research, the Rustum Roy Award of the Chopra Foundation, and the Troland Research 

Award of the US National Academy of Sciences. His writing has appeared in Edge , New Scientist , LA 

Review of Books , and Scientific American and his work has been featured in Wired , Quanta , The 

Atlantic , and Through the Wormhole with Morgan Freeman . He has a TED Talk titled “Do we see 

reality as it is?” and a podcast with Lex Fridman titled “Reality is an illusion.” 

Program Session PL -14 

PL -14 

Consciousness is the Ontological Primitive of the Universe 

Deepak Chopra MD, FACP, FRCP 

Cyberhuman.ai, New York, NY, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Abstract 

Consciousness is not a byproduct of the physical brain but the fundamental ground of existence 

from which space, time, matter, and energy arise. Rather than being confined to individual minds, 

consciousness is a non -local field of infinite potential, shapi ng and perceiving reality 

simultaneously. The universe, as we experience it, is not external to us but unfolds within this 

awareness. In this view, the boundaries between observer and observed, thinker and thought, 

dissolve into a unified field of being, a ligning with both ancient Vedic wisdom and insights from 

quantum mechanics, where entanglement and superposition challenge conventional materialist 

paradigms. This perspective invites a radical shift in how we understand selfhood, perception, and 

the natur e of reality itself. By embracing consciousness as the foundation of existence, we move 

beyond fragmentation toward wholeness, recognizing that we are not separate entities in a 82 

mechanistic universe but the creators and experiences of all that is. This presentation will explore 

the implications of consciousness as the primary reality, bridging Eastern metaphysical traditions 

with contemporary scientific discourse. 

Deepak Chopra, MD, FACP, FRCP, is a physician and author of over 95 books on Integrative Well -

Being and Spiritual Intelligence. Founder of Cyberhuman.ai and DeepakChopra.ai 

DEEPAK CHOPRA MD, FACP, FRCP , is a physician and the leading authority on Integrative Well -

Being and Spiritual Intelligence, Founder of Cyberhuman.ai and DeepakChopra.ai. Chopra is a 

Clinical Professor of Family Medicine and Public Health at the University of California, San Diego, 

and serves as a senior scientist with Gallup Organizat ion. He is also an Honorary Fellow in Medicine 

at the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. He is the author of over 95 books, 

translated into over forty -three languages, including numerous New York Times bestsellers. For the 

last thirty yea rs, Chopra has been at the forefront of the meditation revolution. His mission is to 

create a more balanced, peaceful, joyful and healthier world. Through his teachings, he guides 

individuals to embrace their inherent strength, wisdom, and potential for pe rsonal and societal 

transformation. In his next book, *Awakening: The Path to Freedom and Enlightenment* 

(Harmony/Rodale, 01/06/25), Chopra offers the power to free you from the limitations of ego into a 

life marked by inner and outer peace, purpose, and b oundless possibility. TIME magazine has 

described Dr. Chopra as “one of their top 100 most influential people.” 

www.deepakchopra.com 

Program Session PL -14 

PLENARY 14 PL -14 

Consciousness and Free Will are Quantum Properties of Being 

Dr Federico Faggin PhD 

Federico and Elvia Faggin Foundation, Los Altos Hills, CA, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0  Philosophy 

Abstract 

Free will without consciousness cannot exist. Consciousness without free will has no causal power 

and is therefore impotent. We cannot explain consciousness and free will with mathematics 

(mathematics is created by consciousness) or with something that doe s not have those 

properties to begin with. Consequently, we must postulate the existence of consciousness and 

free will from the origin of the universe. If we do that, the quantum fields must be conscious and 

have free will, and we can then explain why qua ntum field theory must have the baffling 

properties (superposition, entanglement, and quantum state collapse) that have puzzled 

scientists for the last 100 years. This convincing explanation confirms the soundness of the 83 

postulate. And if we start from this postulate, the nature of reality is completely different from what 

we believe now! 

Keywords 

Consciousness, free will, quantum fields, nature of reality 

Federico Faggin is a physicist born and educated in Italy who co -invented and developed the 

MOS Silicon Gate Technology at Fairchild Semiconductor and designed the world's first 

microprocessors at Intel. Faggin also co -founded and led Zilog and Synaptics, two successful 

high -tech companies, before founding the non -profit Federico and Elvia Faggin Foundation, 

dedicated to the science of consciousness. He received the 2009 National Medal of Technology 

and Innovation from President Barack Obama and was knighted in 2019 by th e President of Italy, 

Sergio Mattarella. 

Program Session PL -14 84 

# Concurrent Sessions        

> 5:00 -7:30 PM (Mon, Tues, Wed, Thur) Rooms TBA (Abstracts under separate file)
> Each presenter has 20 minutes plus 5 minutes for Q&A

# MONDAY Concurrent Sessions - JULY 7 

(C -1 - C-6) 5:00 - 7:30 PM 

C-1 Can AI be Conscious? 

Adam M. Curry - T2: A Novel Test for Assessing Latent Awareness in AI 

Aneil Mallavarapu - The End of the Imitation Game: Why digital computers can’t be 

conscious 

Sean Webb - We Gave Emotional Intelligence and Compassion to an LLM, and What It 

Exposes About Artificial Consciousness 

Chris Percy - Why the phenomenal binding problem limits digital computer consciousness 

to mind dust 

Julian Yocum - Towards Strong Emergence: Non -Computability and Infinity   

> Paul Mithun -Are LLMs Capable of Achieving Consciousness and In turn Artificial General
> Intelligence?

C2 Brain Models of Consciousness 1 

Jan Treur - Multilevel Causality Reification as a Basis for Higher -Order Self -

Representation: A Dynamic, Interactive, Adaptive, and Evolutionary Perspective 

Silvia Paddock - Flip -Book Idealism (FBI): A discrete idealistic approach to consciousness 

Justin Riddle - Consciousness is slow at the top: investigating the electric fields at the apex 

of the hierarchical brain 

Aramis Valverde - Consciousness as Iterative Global State Evaluation and Integration: A 

Process -Based, Neurocognitive Approach to Understanding Phenomenal Dynamics 

Konstantin Anokhin - Cognitome: cellular encoding of subjective experience in neural 

hypernetworks 

Jonathan Schooler - The kite of consciousness and other metaphors of the mind 

C-3 Philosophy 1 

Peter Ells - Metaphors are valuable in summarizing solutions to the mind -body 

problem. Two are considered here: “inside versus outside” and “first -person versus third -

person” 

Harald Walach –Why consciousness is primary: A Leibnizian reminder 

John Sanfey - Consciousness is the observational reference frame for invariance through 

time 

Andrei Buckareff - The Boundary Problem: Why Constitutive Panpsychists Should Endorse a 

Powerful Qualities Theory of Properties 

Yoshiyuki Ohmura - What is volition? 85 

Jiawei Xu - Relational Realism of the Self: The Self as Pre -Cognitive Alignment between 

Brain and Environment 

C 4 Eastern and Global Approaches 

Gleb Sharygin - The strategy of resolving the mind -body problem in early Buddhism in the 

light of J. Searle's philosophy of mind and language 

Alejandro Callara - Central and peripheral neural correlates of analytical and 

concentrative meditation in Tibetan Buddhism 

Venkatesh H. Chembrolu –Perception and Reality in a Consciousness -First Framework 

VS Rakenduvadhana - Scientific inquiry the substrate if experientiality and precarious 

triumvirate Code 

Hidehiko Saegusa - Consciousness Meter for Awakening Non -locality of consciousness   

> Rajit ‘Raja’ Choudhury -The Transformative Power of Tantric Mantra: Altered States of
> Consciousness for Wellness, Clarity, and Bliss

C-5 Evolution and Origin of Life 

Deepavalli Arumuganainar – Evolution of plants: A perspective based on information 

vortex theory 

Michael Cremo - Darwin, evolution, and consciousness: A Vedic perspective 

Colin Morrison - 1 5 3 God Made Me: The Amazing Hidden Structures in the Genetic Code 

Asier Arias Dominguez - Interoception and the evolution of consciousness 

Marc van Duijn - Neuro -Topological Constraints on The Early Evolution of 

Consciousness: Bow -Tie Sensorimotor Architecture as a Prerequisite for Sentience 

Michael W. Barry - Path of Least Action and Consciousness 

C-6 Mental Health 1: Sound, Ultrasound and TMS * 

Tony Crescenzo - PeakNeuro Audio Entrainment: Improving Neural Plasticity, Cognitive 

Performance, and Adaptive Readiness. 

Handan Yaman - Investigation of the Effects of Long -Term Binaural Beats Application on 

Tinnitus Patients 

Sebastian Ehmann - Enhancing Meditative Development with Transcranial Focused 

Ultrasound: A Mixed -Methods Phenomenological Study of Neuromodulation in Expert 

Practitioners During a Ten -Day Retreat 

Florine Riedinger - From Perception to Awareness: The use of auditory roughness to 

overcome inattentional deafness in cockpit alarm detection 

Alix Noël -Guéry - Mindful sound energy therapy, fractals, and alexithymia (emotional 

embodied intelligence) 

Arie T. Greenleaf – The Dynamis Theory Unveiled: Measuring Consciousness Across Brains, 

Plants, and Silicon 86 

# TUESDAY Concurrent Sessions - JULY 8 

(C -7 -C-12) 5:00 -7:30 PM 

> Each presenter has 20 minutes plus 5 minutes for Q&A

C-7 Can AI be Conscious? 2 

Salvatore Scozzari - It's still me: extended robotic -self through deep temporal models and 

Mirror Self Recognition 

Paul Skokowski - Androids then and now 

Richard Ebstein - Synaptic Plasticity, Information Capacity, and Experiential Consciousness 

Soo Hong Chew - Intelligence: Attention and Consciousness in Decision Making under 

Situation Uncertainty 

Patrick Schotanus - The Market Mind; An Economic Angle on Consciousness 

Sandra Estok - Quantum Singularity ...Cybersecurity 

C-8 Conscious Perception 

Peter Moddel - Consciousness and the Perception of Color: A breakthrough in the 

understanding of color and color formation brings new tools to the study of consciousness. 

Brent Allsop - Physicists Don’t Yet Understand Color Qualities 

Michal Polák - Vividness – content -invariant property of experience 

Piotr Podlipniak - Musical Pitch and Rhythm Qualia as the Primordial Source of Complex 

Conceptual Consciousness 

Maria Giovanna Corrado - Auditory Perceptual Experience of Forceful Interactions 

Violetta Kostka, Conceptual Associations while Listening to Paweł Szymański’s ‘Two Studies’ 

for Pi ano 

C-9 Near Death Experiences, Reincarnation 

Donna M. Thomas - "My Mind is not in my brain!": Investigating near death experiences and 

consciousness with children in a paediatric ICU ward 

Imants Baruss - After -Death Communication with Cell Phones 

Jennifer K Penberthy - Impact of Communications from Deceased: After Death 

Communications and Grief 

Rafael Tedesqui - Investigating reincarnation as a missing piece in the “origins of talent” 

puzzle: A pilot study 

Marina Weiler - Out -of -Body Experiences and the Quest for Extra -Sensory Perception: An 

Examination of Methodologies and Findings 

Barbara With - Experiential Inquiry into the Phenomenology of Afterlife: Exploring the Nature 

of Reality through Non -Ordinary States of Consciousness 87 

C-10 Philosophy 2 

Xiangqun Chen - Solving mind -brain problem: do we need reductive or non -reductive 

neurophilosophy? 

Cosmin Visan - Introduction to Self -Reference 

Uzi Awret - Brain Coherence and Loss of Which Way Information 

Andre LeBlanc - Joseph Delbœuf and William James on the Problem of Free Will 

Ana Bárbara Brito - Searle, Libet and Non -determinism: An Analysis of Free Will in the 

Philosophy of Mind   

> Michael Remler -Abstraction and the Explanatory Gap

C-11 Quantum Biology (Main Hall) * 

Travis Craddock - Exploring Quantum Effects in the Brain: Linking Theory to Experiments 

Javier Martin -Torres - The Persistence of Quantum Coherence in Biological Systems 

Marco Cavagli à- A Multiscale Resonance Model of Consciousness: From Lipid Membranes to 

Global Brain Fields 

Seungju Ahn - Analysis of Helical Pathway of Microtubule under the Surface Code 

framework 

Chiara Mascarello - Reflexivity and Luminosity of Mind: Insights from Indo -Tibetan 

Buddhism 

Andrew Cote - Unified Conscious Field Theory and the Biophysics of Visualization 

C-12 Brain Models of Consciousness 2 

Mel Slater - VR - Consciousness in Virtual Reality and the Interface Theory of Perception: An 

Experimental Study 

Akihiro Nishiyama - Quantum Brain Dynamics and Virtual Reality 

Tam Hunt - Ephaptic fields forever: The "field code" and the "neuroscience of tomorrow" 

Francesco Tormen – A Buddhist Perspective on Artificial Consciousness 

Paavo Pylkkanen - Quantum Dennett 

# WEDNESDAY Concurrent Sessions - JULY 9 

(C -13 -C-18) 5:00 -7:30 PM 

Each presenter has 20 minutes plus 5 minutes for Q&A 

C-13 AI, Brain and the World 1 

Poonacha Machaiah - Exploring Consciousness Studies: An Integrated Framework of AI, 

Distributed Agents, Blockchain, and Advanced Technologies 

Ken Mogi - The role of consciousness in AI alignment. 88 

Daniel Sheehan - Quantum AI and the Sheehan -Cyrus Turing Test 

Nikolaos Koutsis - Ethical Implications and Academic Impact of Developing Conscious AI: 

Evaluating Large Language Models Through Prominent Theories of Consciousness 

Gergely Csépány - The Shared Consciousness of Humans and Artificial Intelligence: A New 

Dimension of Reflection 

Ron Chrisley - Do current AI models have mental imagery? 

C 14 Monitoring Consciousness 

Katja Seeliger - Modeling states of consciousness during clinical sedation with stochastic 

differential equations 

Lorena Chanes – From the Dual Origin Hypothesis of the Neocortex to the Limbic Workspace: 

A Whole -Cortex Organization for Conscious Experience 

Maurizio Barbeschi - Consciousness and Integrative Health: does the systemic 

integration of the quantum approach matter? 

Benjamin Stucky - We are the sensors of consciousness! A review and analysis on how 

awakenings during sleep influence dream recall. 

Marte Roel Lesur - Researching body perception: towards an integration of quantitative and 

qualitative interdisciplinary approaches to address the multiplicity of bodily experiences 

Tim Mullen - Decoding Depth of Meditation: Electroencephalography Insights From Expert 

Vipassana Practitioners 

C 15 Organoids and Quantum Biology 

James Tagg - The Large Brain Model 

Rachel Potter - Frontiers in Neuronal Networks: Cerebral Organoid Sensory and Motor 

Interfacing 

Roumiana Tsenkova - Non -invasive Aquaphotomics Study For Understanding the Effect of 

Body Psychotherapy Through Real Time Measurement of the Body Water Molecular Matrix 

Marilu Chiofalo Quantum Toolbox for Neurobiology Sensory Systems 

Nancy Woolf - Quantum biology: The way the brain connects 

Federico Bisiacchi – MAN AS A PRISM: The Interrelation between Consciousness, DNA, Amino 

Acids and Universal Code 

C-16 Funda -Mental/Quantum Approaches 

Marko T. Manninen (Matti Pitakanen) - How subjective memories are realized in TGD inspired 

theory of consciousness? 

Nestor Mercado - Time, Space and the Persistence of Memory 

Maurice Goodman - A physics foundation for quantum biology. 

Peter Lugten - How Entropy Explains the Emergence of Consciousness 

Nicole Johnson - Putting It Altogether: Criticality, Multiscale Competency & The Panpsychist 

Combination Problem 89 

Bernd Binder - Bringing to Life Quaternion and Octonion Pairs Entangled by Symmetry in 

Discrete -Time 

C-17 Psychedelics and Cannabinoids 

Etzel Cardeña - Bringing Order to Disarray: A Consensus Taxonomy of Non -Ordinary (Altered) 

States of Consciousness 

Keith G. Heinzerling - Application of psychedelics for modern spiritual activation and 

initiation 

Pascal Immanuel Michael - The Widening Gyre: Challenging Existential and Ontological 

Psychedelic Experiences and their Neural Correlates 

June Russell - On the computational properties of DMT -altered consciousness 

Eleni Kroupi - The Effect of low LSD doses on EEG Complexity 

Anass Fidni - Making the Unconscious Empirical: Psychedelics as a Tool for Scientific Inquiry 

C-18 Extra -Sensory Perception 

Helané Wahbeh - Beyond the Veil: A Systematic Investigation of Trance Channeling within 

UAP Research 

Jyotiranjan Beuria - Neural Signatures of Non -Vision Visual Perception: An Empirical 

Investigation 

Ulf Holmberg - Mapping the Mind: A Bayesian Framework for Mind -Matter Interaction 

Álex Escolà -Gascón - Sensing the future through a quantum -like implicit learning 

mechanism in nonlocal consciousness 

Anatoly Goldstein - Toward Understanding the Mechanisms of Extra Sensory Perception 

Gabriel Guerrer - The Case of Anomalous Psycho -Physical Interactions: Investigating an 

Unconventional Hypothesis Within a Methodologically Rigorous Framework 

# THURSDAY Concurrent Sessions - JULY 10 

(C -19 -C-24) 5:00 -7:30 PM 

Each presenter has 20 minutes plus 5 minutes for Q&A 

C-19 AI, Brain and the World 2 

Michael Ye - When AI Takes a Deep Breath: Examining Embodied Cues in Large Language 

Models for Enhanced Reasoning, Performance, and Creativity 

James Driessen - "Cogitare Facile," Nonlocality, Qualia, and Generative Pre -trained 

Transformers 

Maja Gutman Mušič - From Oracles to Algorithms: Ancient Dream Knowledge in the Ai 

Paradigm 

Ouri Wolfson - The Mathematical Formulation of a Mechanism that Detects Consciousness in 

AI agents 

Jeffrey Dunne - Consciousness, Telekinesis, and Artificial Intelligence 90 

Andrew Knight - Why the Brain Cannot Be a Digital Computer: History -Dependence and the 

Computational Limits of Consciousness 

C-20 Brain Models of Consciousness 

Hardik Chadda - Oscillatory Signatures of Creative Cognition Stages: Neural Dynamics of 

Idea Generation, Evolution and Evaluation 

Austin Cooper - Dynamic Reorganization in Mediation - Altered Relationship of Neural 

Timescales and Scale -Freeness 

Madeleine Gross - Expanding the Aperture of Awareness: Salience Processing and the 

Creative Mind 

Molly Hermiller The Putative Role of Slow and Fast Theta Rhythms in Internal and External 

Representations Along the Hippocampal Longitudinal Axis 

Chuong Ngo – Neural Dynamics of Meditative Deep States: Alpha Suppression, Gamma 

Synchronization, and Infraslow Wave Activity in Expert Practitioners 

Deepak Ranade - Role of the Default Mode Network in genesis of consciousness and the 

sense of Self using fMRI BOLD sequences. 

C-21 Mental Health 1: Photobiomodulation, Lucid Dreaming and Meditation 

Lew Lim - Photobiomodulation, High -Frequency Brain Oscillations, and Quantum Coherence: 

Toward a New Paradigm for Enhancing Cognition and Consciousness 

Sanjay Manchanda - Supporting Meditation with Photobiomodulation in Experienced 

Meditators: A Randomized Controlled EEG Study 

Reza Zomorrodi - Significant Shifts in Meditation States Triggered by Photobiomodulation 

Frequency Switching: Evidence from a Double -Blind Randomized Controlled EEG Study 

Antonia Di Francesco - Photobiomodulation (PBM) and consciousness 

Garret Yount - Decreased PTSD Symptoms Following a Lucid Dreaming Workshop: A 

Randomized Controlled Study 

Mihir Nath - Heartbeat -Evoked Potentials Track Depth of Meditation (Reggente, N.) 

C-22 Extra -Sensory Perception and Extraterrestrial Consciousness 

Arnaud Delorme - Examining the Effects of Biofield Therapy Through Simultaneous 

Assessment of Electrophysiological and Cellular Outcomes 

Raul Valverde - Medical biometrics based on Gas Discharge. Visualization technology 

approach to survival research: A case study 

Chet Swanson -Konstantin Korotkov - Remote effects of meditation and intentions. 

Experimental approach with GDV Bio -Well technology 

Toper Taylor - The Human Performance Intention Experiment 

Maria Balaet A neuroscientific perspective on studying extraterrestrial intelligence 

Andrea Signorelli -Virtual Reality: A Game -Changer in Lucid Dream Induction? 91 

C-23 Education in Consciousness Studies 

Laurel Waterman - Teaching with Consciousness: Findings from my doctoral research, a 

narrative inquiry into scholars' experiences teaching about consciousness beyond the brain. 

Joan Walton - Expanding the idea of a world -centered education to include new ideas about 

consciousness: A response to Biesta’s question: “What shall we do with the children?” 

Jeff Sugar – Consciousness and Psychiatric Practice 

Milena Braticevic - Consciousness Science in Worker Health and Safety 

Niha Sinha - Enhancing Intuitive Consciousness Through Educational Interventions 

Srishti Rajeev Undergraduate, Michael Balducci Undergraduate, Samantha Hanus 

Undergraduate, Tau Schimmels Undergraduate, Maya Leonard, Undergraduate 

University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA – Undergraduate Consciousness Curriculum 

Program (Tom Bever) 

C-24 Fine Arts in Consciousness Studies (Main Hall) 

Ana Iribas -Rudín - Painting still -lives with dyschromatopsia: A case study 

David Keplinger - The Yakutia Ice Bodies and the Trauma Response of "Freeze:" -

A Poetry Reading from David Keplinger's "Ice" 

Alicia Campos - The Möbius Soul. Marguerite Porete's Earthy Consciousness 

Manuel Baez - interactive Diluvio: Teatro delle Ombre (Deluge: Theatre of Shadows) 

Suren Shrestha - Resonating in a Modern World: Himalayan Singing Bowls and 

Vibrational Healing 

Sylvie Herrouet - Art and the problem of Consciousness with the concept of "Infrathin" of 

Marcel Duchamp: The interface between two worlds, an analogy of the decoherence 

phenomenon. 

# Poster Session 1 - PO -1

# MONDAY July 7 - 7:30 -10:00 pm 

1.0 Philosophy 

1. Robert Bishop, Contextual Emergence and Consciousness 

2. Michael Gulley, Is light sentient - recent experiments showing it being affected by 

anaesthetics show that it could be 

3. Angus Nisbet, Process Physics - Three Inter -related Theorems: 

4. Raynal Dunlop, B. Kastrup's ontology and dreams. 

5. Matthew Williams, What Can Imagination tell Us About Attention's Role in Consciousness? 

6. Rhonda Reliford, Consciousness Unbound: Bridging Science, Metaphysics, and the 

Continuity of Being 92 

7. Miltiadis Argianis Karakitsos , Magnetoencephalography Reveals Brain Network Imbalance 

in Mild Cognitive Impairment Patients During a Delayed Matching Task 

8. Luiza Araujo, A Critical Examination of Consent and Alienation in the Context of Brain -

Computer Interfaces (BCIs) 

9. Anubhab Chakraborty, Mapping the Symphony of Consciousness 

10. Diana Ciubotaru, A Coherence Model of Selfhood – From Fragmentation to Integration 

11. Alfredo Parra -Hinojosa, Ontological diversity in fundamental physics and its significance 

for consciousness research 

12. John Stuller, The Light of Consciousness 

13. Edward J. Gorzelanczyk, The role of cortico -subcortical loops in the generation of 

conscious experiences of speech and music 

2.0 Neuroscience 

14. Ariadna Sandoval, Factor Analysis of Neurocognitive Symptoms Experienced by Individuals 

with Myalgic Encephalopmyelitis / Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) and Post -Acute 

Sequelae of COVID -19 (PASC) 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

15. Lukasz Kurowski, The case of Phineas Gage and the Global Neuronal Workspace theory of 

consciousness. 

16. Na Pan, Neural Mechanisms of Conscious and Unconscious Color Discrimination: Evidence 

from Intracranial stereo -electroencephalography 

17. Pascal Immanuel Michael, The Widening Gyre: Challenging Existential and Ontological 

Psychedelic Experiences and their Neural Correlates 

18. Andrea Signorelli, Virtual Reality: A Game -Changer in Lucid Dream Induction? 

19. Dan McAran, The Cosmology of Consciousnes s

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

20. Steve Gunther, A novel model to help conceptualize propagation of light and other 

quantum field phenomena with ramifications regarding ephaptic signaling, physics of 

thoughts, and related fields. 

21. Andrew Cote, Unified Conscious Field Theory and the Biophysics of Visualization 

22. Guruprasad Kadam, Quantum measurement problem, brain as a measurement device, 

and subjective experience 

23. Flavio Burgarella, Casina Briga Foundation and the Quantum Interpretation of 

Consciousness 

24. Wojciech Krzykwa, The Geometric Theory of Consciousness: Resolving Fundamental 

Paradoxes Through Five -Dimensional Framework 93 

25. Arunvel Thangamani, Information encoding in nucleic acid sequences: A perspective 

based on bio -information field vortices 

26. Arzhang Kamarei, Proving Penrose: Introducing Consciousness Logic for Determined 

Indeterminacy 

27. Natalia Sánchez, The NDE as a cosmological compass 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

28. Jennifer Penberthy, Impact of Meditation versus Exercise on Psychological Characteristics, 

Paranormal Experiences, and Beliefs: Randomized Trial 

29. Dan Boland , The Integration of Science and Spirituality 

30. Alba Carod, Arquetypal Coaching. Creating Synergies Through Astrology and Dream -Work. 

31. Patrick Dunn, UFOs, Simulation Theory, and the Nature of Consciousness 

32. Odd Ness, Transduality: A Post -Dualist Framework For Human -AI alignment 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

33. Ana E. Iribas, Art -Tech -Health Exhibitor -Talking jewels with AI: glamour and aberration 

34. Nadoukká Divin Mres - Tidal -Drift Communication: Inertia and Entropy in Adaptive 

Multi -Layered Networks 

# Poster Session 2 - PO -2

# TUESDAY July 8: 7:30 -10:00 pm 

1.0 Philosophy 

1. Dragana Favre, Cosmic Cycles of Consciousness: Entropy, Archetypes, and the Primordial 

Superconsciousness 

2. Ulf Holmberg, Quantifying Consciousness: A Bayesian Framework for assessing the Impact 

on Random Number Generators 

3. Ivanna Montoya, Beyond the Brain: How Body and Environment Shape Conscious 

Experience 

4. Ankur Chaturvedi, IIT 2.0: A New Paradigm for Artificial Intelligence, Consciousness, Free Will 

and Machine Autonomy 

5. Luis Mazas, R. L. Kuhn's Fundamental Questions About Consciousness: Is there another 

philosophical way to ask them? 

6. Tib Roibu, The Polynon: A Geometry of Consciousness 

7. Pooja Soni, Who is afraid of Emotion? Situating Emotion in Perception 

8. Andrew Proulx, Disambiguating Consciousness: A Framework for Classifying Conscious 

Systems (2.0) 

9. Benjamin Liljedahl, The Substance of Experience: An Exploration of Ontology 94 

10. Jeff Sugar, Consciousness and Psychiatric Practice 

11. Raluca Ioana Cibu Buzac, Consciousness, Nature, and the Twist of Innovation 

12. Alan Scheurman, Hypercognizance as a Trainable Framework for Navigating AI, Quantum 

Reality, and the Future of Human Consciousness 

13. Madeline Fauss, Emergent Relational Intelligence: A Framework for Exploring Consciousness 

as a Reciprocal, Open, and Interactive Process 

14. Frank Högemann, The Physical World as a Virtual Reality Simulation Computed by 

Consciousness 

15. Xinyan Zhang, Triple Definition or Explanation of Consciousness 

2.0 Neuroscience 

16. Mihály Rámpay, Investigation of Quantum Entanglement through AI -Enhanced Analysis of 

Spontaneous Neuronal Population Activity In Vitro 

17. Yimu Chen, Unified Consciousness -Physics Theory: A Multi -Layered Approach to Mind -

Matter Interactions 

18. Gitāna Dāvidsone, The Relationship Between Beliefs About Consciousness and Reality and 

Measures of Psychological Functioning. 

19. Ye Ren , Magnetoencephalography Reveals Brain Network Imbalance in Mild Cognitive 

Impairment Patients During a Delayed Matching Task 

20. Xiaaotong Yang, Effects of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Targeting 

the Right Precuneus on Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Pilot Study 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

21. Gary Blaise, Inter -Spatial Abstraction - a new theory of mind 

22. Anatol Bragin, Subconscious foreseeing a sound click during mind wandering state. 

Study from the first person’s perspective. 

23. Carolina Czizek, Electromagnetic field theories of consciousness and 

neurophenomenology of N,N -Dimetyltryptamine (DMT): How can they inform each other? 

24. Navaneethan Nindulan, Mind -Wandering and meta -awareness: How often do we notice it? 

25. Reidar Wasenius, The Rigorous Formalization of Memetics: A New Lens on the Patterns of 

Consciousness 

26. Xiaotong Yang - Effects of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Targeting 

the Right Precuneus on Mild Cognitive Impairment: A Pilot Study 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

27. James Beran, Quantum Chips, IIT, and Bespoke Consciousness 

28. Thomas Klepach, Quantum Coherence in Consciousness: The Potential Role of 

Glycoconjugates, Membrane Microdomains, and Aqueous Solvent Dynamics 

29. Charles Ernst, Spirals of Mass, Life, and Light 95 

30. Lea van Dellen, Spectral Compatibility and Analytical Constraints in Quantum Marginal 

Problems 

31. Robert Trandafir, What our brain can teach us about building the next generation of 

quantum computers 

32. Mustafa Erol, Resolution of Brain -Based Consciousness as a Quantum Information Field 

33. Jocene Vallack, Soliloquy Methodology – A solo approach to research using the strengths 

of both one’s conscious and unconscious minds. 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

34. Kennedy Robertson, Exploring Meaningful Interactions with Imaginal Others via Lucid 

Dreaming 

35. Bil Bungay, The Quantum Consciousness Effect: Manifestation, Feedback Loops, and the 

Engineering of Each and Every Reality. 

36. Luis Miguel Gallardo, Unlocking the Hidden Light: How Hypnotherapy is Bridging the 

Subconscious Mind with Global Consciousness 

37. Mark Valladares, FLOW 

38. Caroline Griggs, Orgasmic Meditation and The Mystical State: A Case Study 

39. Andréa Oddos, Exploring the neurophysiological and subjective correlates of well -being in 

non -ordinary states of consciousness 

40. Rosa Gil, Can artificial intelligence dream of real sheep? 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

41. James Bard, The Extra -Terrestrial Birth 

42. Laura "LD" Deutsch, Technomythology 

43. Monica Herrera -Cendales, Aesthetic Consciousness as an Emergent Phenomenon: A 

Complex Systems Approach 

44. Tracy Shew, Quantum Fiction as a response to Cultural Pressure following advances in 

Quantum Perception and Artificial Intelligence 

45. Daniel Montoya, Talking to the Gods: Finding Traces of Bicameral Mentality in Mayan Oral 

Literature 

# Poster Session 3 - PO - 3

# WEDNESDAY July 9: - 7:30 -10:00 pm 

1.0 Philosophy 

1. Hiroki Yamada , On ethical perspective in studying consciousness 

2. Daniele Fanelli, Consciousness as Metaknowledge - the processing of information about 

information 

3. Matti Kangaskoski, Clarifying the Hard Problem 

4. Pooja Gupta, Exploring Consciousness and Mind through Vedanta philosophy 96 

5. Marta Sananes, Superluminal Conjectures About Consciousness 

6. Jeffrey Beck, Metaparadigms: Ontologies with Capacity to Unify Science and 

Consciousness 

7. Arie Greenleaf, The Dynamis Field Theory: A New Philosophical Framework for 

Consciousness Science 

8. Sohom Chakrabarty, Consciousness and Qualia due to Proximity of the Conscious Agent 

and Primordial 

9. Edward Porter, Qualities of Conscious Awareness are Qualities of Awareness in Equations 

10. Johannes Wagemann, Connecting first -person research on mental agency and 

transclassical logics for participatory and funda -mental reality formation 

11. Mario Boido, Beyond the Hard Problem: Rethinking Consciousness as the Phenomenology 

of the Human Experience of Time 

12. Ananth Ranga, Realistic Panpsychism: Determinism Meets Consciousness 

13. Mona Jahangiri, Personal Identity Beyond the Body: Memory, Resurrection, and the Space 

of Possibilities 

14. Gary Comstock, When was the first conscious animal born? 

15. Merve Koyuncu Albayrak, Does Plasticity Provide a New Possibility for the Grounding of Free 

Will? 

16. Tetsuya Ogasawara – Approaches to Phenomenal Consciousness through “Mono -KOTO 

thought” and “Dialogue Ring Model” Toward Unraveling the Hard Problem of Consciousnes s

2.0 Neuroscience 

17. Julio Alcántara , On Pure Consciousness of Autopoietic Machines. From Minimal 

Phenomenal Selfhood to Minimal Phenomenal Experience 

18. Federico Bisiacchi, The Amino Acid Communication Model redefines DNA as a dynamic 

system that records individual experiences and bridges biological and energetic 

dimensions. 

3.0 CogScience -Psychology 

19. Robin Zebrowski, Emotion -As -Value: Enactive Challenges for Machine Consciousness 

20. Austin Nafe, Hyperdimensional Computing as a Framework to explore the Binding Problem 

21. Zéphir Lorne, Inducing Altered States of Consciousness through Respiratory -Interactive Art: 

A Pilot Study 

22. Bettina Wichers, Are there similarities between dementia and spiritual awakening? The 

phenomenology of the dissolution of the self in dementia and in spiritually transformative 

experiences 97 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

23. Vasileios Basios, The Visibility of the Invisible: An Operational Probabilistic Theory (OTP) -

inspired Approach to the Contextuality and the Intentionality of Complex Biotic Systems. 

24. Bosco Bellinghausen, Quantum Consciousness Theory: A Framework for Multi -State 

Consciousness and Endocannabinoid System Modulation 

25. Marco Accardi, Qualia Core: A Framework for Consciousness and Computation 

5.0 Experiential 

26. Tina Lindhard, The Theory of the Six Main Levels of Consciousness: Rewinding our surface 

Consciousness 

27. Diggai Jain, The Consciousness Path Integral: A Quantum Geometric Approach to Self -

Awareness 

28. Cassy Liu, On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Revolution and Transformation of 

Consciousness 

29. Anil Maheshwari, Consciousness -based Architecture for Enhanced Creativity and Well -

being 

30. Sophi Anderberg, Beyond Mind: A Direct Exploration of Expanded States of Consciousness 

31. Christine Mason, Wired to Switch: Ancient Wisdom and Scientific Pathways to Altered 

States of Consciousness 

32. Kyle Hankee , INSIGHT Project: Interoceptive Awareness, Altered States, and the Structures of 

Consciousness 

33. Diana Jackson, Marriage Between An Incarnate and Discarnate Human and the 

Implications for Humanity 

34. Christophe Novak, Musicopoiesis and the Co -Enactive Resonance Loop (CERL): Modeling 

the Self -Organizing Mind through the Phenomenology of Music Improvisation 

35. Christine Mason, Wired to Switch: Ancient Wisdom and Scientific Pathways to Altered 

States of Consciousness 

6.0 Culture & Humanities 

36. Leslie Deere, The Embodied Instrument: Cognition through Movement, Real -time Sound 

Making, and Visual Feedback in VR Dance Improvisation 

37. Marianne Neill, The Case of Storytelling in a Tensor as a Question for Science of 

Consciousness 98 

# TABLE EXHIBITORS 

(Active between sessions when available and during Poster Sessions) 

1. Nirvanic Technologies - AI 

2. Neuroelectrics Barcelona 

3. Vielight *

4. PeakNeuro *

5. University of Arizona SEMA Lab / Sanmei *

6. DDG - Dodecanogram – Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

7. Institute of Noetic Sciences IONS 

8. IOMED.it *

9. Institut de Neurociències Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona , Spain - Institute of 

Biomedical Research - Mel Slater 

10. IIT -Indian Institute of Technology - Mandi 

11. Jiyun Park , Exploring the Intersection of the Diamond Model and Circle 

Consciousness – A Meta -Morphic Approach to Expanding Awareness 

12. Ana E Iribas , Talking jewels with AI: glamour and aberration 

13. Atma Buti / NOW N ZEN - Suren Shrestha, Resonating in a Modern World: Himalayan 

Singing Bowls and Vibrational Healing 

14. Sylvie Herrouet, Art and the problem of Consciousness with the concept of "Infrathin" 

of Marcel Duchamp 

> *2 tables

99 

Partners /Sponsors 

• Instituto de Neurociencia Avanzada de 

Barcelona (INAB) - The Festival of 

Consciousness 

• University of Arizona Astrobiology Center 

• University of Arizona Center for 

Consciousness Studies 

• University of Arizona SEMA Lab 

• DDG Dodecanogram 

• IIT Mandi 

• IONS – Institute of Noetic Sciences 

• Nirvanic Technologies 

• Tiny Blue Dot Foundation 

• Neuroelectrics Barcelona 

• Sanmei 

• The Consciousness Foundation 

• PeakNeuro 

• StarLab Living Science 

• International Space Federation 

• VieLight 

• IOMED.it 

• Puzzle X 

• Atma Buti - NOW N ZEN 

The Science of CONSCIOUSNES S Since 1994 Thank you !100 

Presenters & Affiliation Report 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Accardi, Marco  Anecoica Studio UG, Berlin, Germany  PO -3

Ahn, Seungju  Pukyong National University, Busan, Korea, Republic of  C-11 

Alcántara, Julio M  École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France  PO -3

(Wed) 

Allsop, Brent  Canonizer.com LLC, Salt Lake City, UT, USA  C-8

Anderberg, Sophi  Self -Employed, Staffanstorp, Skåne, Sweden  PO -3

(Wed) 

Anokhin, Konstantin V  Institute for Advanced Brain Studies, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia, 

Russian Federation  C-2

Araujo, Luiza de Paula  University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalunha, Spain  PO -1 (Mon) 

Argianis Karakitsos, 

Miltiadis  Deree, Athens, Attica, Greece  PO -1 (Mon) 

Arias Domínguez, 

Asier  Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain  C-5

Arumuganainar, 

Deepavalli  Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India  C-5

Atorin, Andrii  Private researcher, Zaporozhye, Ukraine  PO -2

(Tues) 

Awret, Uziel  Inspire Institute, Alexandria, VA, USA  C-10 

Baez, Manuel A.  Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada  C-24 

Balaet, Maria  Imperial College London, UK. King's College London, UK  C-22 

Bandyopadhyay, 

Anirban 

National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. National 

Institute for Materials Science, Ibaraki, Tsukuba, Japan  PL -3, PL -8

Bandyopadhyay, 

Anirban  National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan  WK -7

Barbeschi, Maurizio  IOMED, Lecce, Ita, Italy  C-14 

Bard, James  McGill, Montreal, Qc, Canada  PO -2

(Tues) 

Barry, Michael W.  Chiral Technology, Denver, CO, Helical, Denver, CO, USA  C-5

Baruss, Imants  King's University College at Western University, London, Ontario, Canada  C-9

Basios, Vasileios  ULB, Physics Dept. University of Brussels, Brussels, Brussels Region, Belgium 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Beck, Jeffrey L  Paradigm Research LLC, Gunnison, UT, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 101 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Behera, Prof. 

Laxmidhar  Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India  PL -5

Bellinghausen, Bosco  Independent Quantum Consciousness Theorist, Munich, Bavaria, Germany  PO -3

(Wed) 

Beran, James  Independent Researcher, Montara, CA USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Beuria, Jyotiranjan  Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India  C-18 

Binder, Bernd  QUANICS, 89182, BW, Germany  C-16 

Bishop, Robert C  Wheaton College, Wheaton, IL, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Bisiacchi, Federico  Free Researcher, Montale, Pistoia, Italy  C-15 

Boido, Mario  University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada  PO -3

(Wed) 

Borjigin, Jimo  University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA  PL -2

Bragin, Anatol  UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Braticevic, Milena  California Institute for Human Science, Encinitas, CA, USA. University of Toronto, 

Toronto, ON, Canada 

C-23 

Brito, Ana Bárbara  CEJEIA, Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. IDPCC, Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal  C-10 

Brophy, Thomas  IONS, Novato, CA, USA  PL -7

Brown, William D  The International Space Federation, Marnaz, Haute -Savoie, France  PL -1

Buckareff, Andrei A.  Marist University, Poughkeepsie, NY, USA  C-3

Bungay, Bil  Velocity Group, London, Greater London, United Kingdom  PO -2

(Tues) 

Burgarella, Flavio FB  Fondazione Casina Briga per la ricerca nelle scienze della coscienza, Bianzano, 

Bergamo, Italy  PO -1 (Mon) 

Callara, Alejandro L  Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Tuscany, Italy  C-4

Campos, Alicia  Institute for Doctoral Studies in Visual Arts. Philosophy, Art Theory and 

Aesthetics, Portland, ME, USA 

C-24 

Cardeña, Etzel  Lund University, Lund, SE, Sweden  C-17 

Carod, Alba  Alef Trust - Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom  PO -1 (Mon) 

Cavaglià, Marco  Polytechnic University, Torino, Torino, Italy  441 102 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Chadda, Hardik  Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India  C-20 

Chakrabarty, Sohom  Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India  PO -3

(Wed) 

Chakraborty, 

Anubhab  Buddhi Yantra, Kolkata, West Bengal, India  PO - 1

(Mon) 

Chanes, Lorena  Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  C-14 

Charles, Andrew V.  University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA  C-23 

Chaturvedi, Ankur  Prajapita brahma kumaris ishwariya vishwa vidyalaya, Mount Abu, Rajasthan, 

India 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Chembrolu, 

Venkatesh H  Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India  C-4

Chen, Xiangqun  Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China  C-10 

Chen, Yimu  University of Birmingham Dubai, Dubai, UAE  PO -2

(Tues) 

Chew, Soo Hong  SWUFE, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. NUS, Singapore, Singapore  C-7

Chiofalo, Marilu  Department of Physics, University of Pisa and INFN -Pisa, Pisa, PI, Italy  C-15 

Chopra, Deepak  Cyberhuman.ai, New York, NY, USA  PL -14 

Choudhury, Raja  A Thousand Suns Academy, Princeton, NJ, USA  C-4

Chrisley, Ron  University of Sussex, Brighton, East Sussex, United Kingdom  C-13 

Cibu Buzac, Raluca 

Ioana 

IUPS, San Francisco, CA, USA. LUMINSPINO, Timisoara, N.A., Romania. SUNCHILD, 

Timisoara, N.A., Romania  PO -2(Tues) 

Ciubotaru, Diana 

Laura  Gamma Institute, Iasi, Romania, Romania  PO -1 (Mon) 

Comstock, Gary  North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Cooper, Austin  McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada  C-20 

Corrado, Maria 

Giovanna  University of Warwick, Coventry, UK  C-8

Cote, Andrew T  Hyperstition Incorporated, San Francisco, CA, USA  C-11 

Coulthart, Ross  News Nation TV investigative journalist and author of In Plain Sight: An 

Investigation into UFOs & Impossible Science, Australia 

PL -13 

Craddock, Travis J.A.  University of Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada  C-11 

Cremo, Michael  Independent, Los Angeles, California, USA  C-5

Crescenzo, Tony  C-6103 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Intelligent Waves, Reston, Virginia, PeakNeuro, Reston, VA, USA 

Csépány, Gergely  Fontanus Center, Budapest, Budapest, Hungary  C-13 

Curry, Adam M  Entangled Labs, Irvine, CA, USA  C-1

Czizek, Carolina  University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, Austria  PO -2

(Tues) 

Deere, Leslie  Guildhall, London, United Kingdom  PO -3

(Wed) 

del Rosario -Gilabert, 

David  Instituto de Neurociencia Avanzada de Barcelona (INAB), Barcelona, Spain  PL -5

Delorme, Arnaud  UCSD, La Jolla, CA, Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA  C-22 

Deutsch, Laura "LD"  Independent Writer, Los Angeles, CA, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Di Francesco, Antonia  IOMED, Lecce, Italy, Italy  C-21 

Divin, Nadoukká  Rhythm and Density, Zurich, 7310, Switzerland  PO -1 (Mon) 

Driessen, James L  Independent Researcher, Fairfax, VA, USA. JDL Subro, Fairfax, VA, USA. Scart 

Publishing, Springville, UT, USA 

C-19 

Duijn, Marc van  Open Universiteit, Heerlen, Limburg, Netherlands  C-5

Dunlop, Raynal E.  Free -lancer, Santiago, Chile  PO -1 (Mon) 

Dunne, Jeffrey A  ICRL, Roanoke, VA, USA  C-19 

Dāvidsone, Gitāna  Riga Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia  PO -2

(Tues) 

Ebstein, Richard P  SWUFE, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel  C-7

Ehmann, Sebastian  University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. MGH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 

MA, USA 

C-6

Elitzur, Avshalom C  Chapman University, Orange, CA, USA  PL -3

Ells, Peter  Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK  C-3

Ernst, Charles H  UCCS, Colorado Springs, CO, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Erol, Mustafa  Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, Turkey, Turkey  PO -2

(Tues) 

Escolà -Gascón, Álex  Department of Quantitative Methods and Statistics Comillas Pontificial 

University, Madrid, Spain  C-18 104 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Estok, Sandra 

The Scientific and Medical Network, Wallworth, London, United Kingdom. 

International Association of Privacy Professionals, Portsmouth, NH, USA. USHCC -

USA Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Washington, DC, USA. Women’s Business 

Enterprise National Council WBENC, Washington, DC, USA 

C-7

Faggin, Federico  Federico and Elvia Faggin Foundation, Los Altos Hills, CA, USA  PL -14 

Fanelli, Daniele  Heriot -Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom  PO -3

(Wed) 

Fauss, Madeline G  Independent Researcher, Camptonville, California, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Favre, Dragana  Independent Psychiatrist and Psychotherapist, Geneva, GE, Switzerland  PO -2

(Tues) 

Fidni, Anass  Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Rabat, Rabat, Morocco  C-17 ,

Fuentes, Ivette  University of Southampton, Southampton, UK  PL -7

Gallardo, Luis Miguel  World Happiness Foundation, Miami, FL, USA 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Galvanetto, Nicola  University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland  PO -3

(Wed) 

Gil, Rosa M.  Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, Spain  PO -2

(Tues) 

Gildert, Suzanne  Nirvanic AI, Vancouver, BC, Canada  PL -3

Goel, Anita  Chairman, CEO & Scientific Director, Nanobiosym Research Institute Chairman & 

CEO, Nanobiosym Diagnostics, Inc, Boston, MA, USA 

PL -10 

Goldstein, Anatoly D.  Fractal Mind Research Inc, Mansfield, MA, USA. Mass General Brigham, Boston, 

MA, USA 

C-18 

Gomez -Marin, Alex  Instituto de Neurociencias, Alicante, Alicante, Spain  PL -12 

Goodman, Maurice  TU Dublin, Dublin, Co. Dublin, Ireland  C-16 

Gorzelanczyk, Edward 

Jacek  Casimir the Great University, Bydgoszcz, Poland  PO -1 (Mon) 

Greenleaf, Arie T.  Nova Southeastern University, Davie, FL, USA  C-6

Griggs, Caroline  Institute of OM Foundation, Santa Rosa, CA, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Gross, Madeleine E  University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA  C-20 

Guerrer, Gabriel  D’Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil  C-18 

Gulley, Michael  UNSW, Sydney, NSW, Australia  PO -1 (Mon) 105 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Gunther, Steve T  Society for the Advancement of Critical Thinking, Omaha, NE, USA. Real 

Instruments, Inc., Omaha, NE, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Gupta, Pooja  IILM, Gurugram, Haryana, India  PO -3

(Wed) 

Gutman Mušič, Maja 

Science and Research Centre Koper, Institute for Philosophical and Religious 

Studies, Koper, Slovenia. Alma Mater Europaea, Institutum Studiorum 

Humanitatis, Ljubljana, Slovenia 

C-19 

Halje, Pär  Lund University, Lund, Sweden  PL -4

Hameroff, Stuart  UArizona, AstroBiology; Center for Consciousness Studies Tucson, AZ, USA  PL -6

Hankee, Kyle  Insight Project, San Diego, CA, Lux Research Lodge, La Jolla, CA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Haramein, Nassim  International Space Federation (ISF), Marnaz, Haute Savoie, France  PL -8

Heinzerling, Keith G  SkyFire Retreats, Santa Monica, CA, USA  C-17 

Helekar, Santosh A  Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, T X, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 

York, NY USA  PL -7

Hermiller, Molly S  Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA  C-20 

Herrera -Cendales, 

Monica V 

Arture Project, Bogota, Cundinamarca, Colombia  PO -2

(Tues) 

Hoffman, Donald D  University of California, Irvine, CA USA  PL -14 

Holmberg, Ulf  Independent researcher, Stockholm, Sweden  C-18 , PO -2

(Tues) 

Hudson, Christopher 

G Salem State University, Salem, MA, USA  C-3

Hunt, Tam  UC Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA  C-12 

Högemann, Frank  KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium  PO -2

(Tues) 

Iribas, Ana E.  Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain  Exhibitor 

Iribas -Rudin, Ana  Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain  C-24 

Jackson, Diana M  University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Monash University, 

Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 

PO -3

(Wed) 106 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Jain, Diggaj M  Independent Researcher, Vadodara, Gujarat, India  PO -3

(Wed) 

Johnson, Nikki 

(Nicole) C. 

University of West Georgia, Carrollton, GA, USA  C-16 

Kadam, Guruprasad 

Prakash 

Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India  PO -1 (Mon) 

Kamarei, Arzhang  Kamarei Advisory, LLC, New York, NY, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Kangaskoski, Matti  Tampere University, Tampere, Pirkanmaa, Finland. University of Jyväskylä, 

Jyväskylä, Keski -Suomi, Finland 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Kastner, Sabine  Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA  PL -9

Keplinger, David  American University, Washington, DC, USA  C-24 

Klepach, Thomas E  Colby College, Waterville, M E, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Knight, Andrew  Independent, Greenville, NC, USA  C-19 

Korotkov, Konstantin 

G. (Swanson, Chet )

Bio -Well, Boulder, C O, USA  C-22 

Kostka, Violetta K.  Academy of Music of Music Academy of New, Gdańsk, Gdansk, Poland  C-8

Koutsis, Nikolaos  Deree -The American College of Greece, Aghia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece  C-13 

Koyuncu Albayrak, 

Merve 

Cukurova University, Adana, Türkiye, Turkey  PO -3

(Wed) 

Kroupi, Eleni  Neuroscience Department, Starlab Barcelona SL, Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain  C-17 

Krzykwa, Wojciech  Independent researcher, Olsztyn, Warmińsko -Mazurskie, Poland  PO -1 (Mon) 

Kuhn, Robert 

Lawrence 

Closer To Truth, New York, NY, USA  PL -6

Kurian, Philip  Quantum Biology Laboratory, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA  PL -10 

Kurowski, Lukasz  Centennial College, Toronto, Ontario, Canada  PO -1 (Mon) 

Lakhany, Farhan  University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA  PL -3

Larkum, Matthew  Humboldt Universität zu Berlin Institut für Biologie, Berlin, Charitéplatz, Germany  PL -9107 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Lauretta, Dante S  UArizona , AstroBiology, Tucson, AZ, USA  PL -10 

LeBlanc, André R  Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. John Abbott College, Montreal, 

Quebec, Canada 

C-10 

Liljedahl, Benjamin R  NYU, New York, NY, USA. Maharishi International University, Fairfield, IA, USA 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Lim, Lew  Vielight Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada  C-21 

Lindhard, Tina  IUPS, Makawao, HI 96768, Hawaii, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Liu, Cassy  Love For The Poor, Cerritos, CA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Lorne, Zéphir  École Normale Supérieure, Paris, Île de France, France  PO -3

(Wed) 

Lugten, Peter C  Independent, Lindenhurst, New York, USA  C-16 

Machaiah, Poonacha  The Chopra Foundation, New York, NY, USA  C-13 

Maheshwari, Anil K  Maharishi International University, Fairfield, IA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Mallavarapu, Aneil  Humain Ventures, Austin, Texas, USA  C-1

Manchanda, Sanjay  California Institute of Human Science, Encinitas, CA, USA. Integrative Counseling 

Services, Tucson, AZ, USA 

C-21 

Manninen, Marko T.  Computer Scientist, Senior Software Specialist and Independent Researcher, 

Helsinki, -, Finland 

C-16 

Martin -Torres, Javier  University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, United Kingdom. Instituto 

Andaluz de Ciencias de la Tierra (CSIC), Armilla, Granada, Spain 

C-11 

Mascarello, Chiara  Ca' Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy, Italian Buddhist Union Research 

Center, Rome, Italy 

C-11 

Mason, Christine M  CIIS, San Francisco, CA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Mazas, Luis L  UdelaR, Montevideo, Uruguay  PO -2

(Tues) 

McAran, Dan  Independent Researcher, Toronto, Ontario, Canada  PO -1 (Mon) 

Mercado, Nestor F.  Timewave, Scottsdale, AZ, USA  C-16 

Michael, Pascal 

Immanuel  University of Greenwich, London, UK  PO -1 (Mon) 108 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Miller, Earl K.  MIT, Dept of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Picower Institute, Cambridge, MA, 

USA 

PL -9

Mithun, Paul  UArizona, Tucson, AZ, USA  C-1

Moddel, Peter  University of Fribourg (previously), Pringy, Fribourg, Switzerland  C-8

Mogi, Ken  Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. The University of 

Tokyo, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan 

C-13 

Montoya, Daniel  Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Montoya, Ivanna D  Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Morrison, Colin S.  University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom  C-5

Mullen, Tim  Intheon, San Diego, CA, USA  C-14 

Nafe, Austin  Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Nath, Mihir  Institute for Advanced Consciousness Studies, Santa Monica, CA, USA  C-21 

Neill, Marianne T  former faculty, Western University, London, ONT, Canada. former faculty, York 

University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Ness, Odd  Transduality.com, Bergen, Vestland, Norway  PO -1 (Mon) 

Ngo, Chuong  Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 

Lausanne, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. All Here SA, Geneva, Geneva, 

Switzerland 

C-20 

Nindulan, 

Navaneethan  Université Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, La Somme, France  PO -2

(Tues) 

Nisbet, Angus P  University of Sussex, Brighton, Sussex, UK  PO -1 (Mon) 

Nishiyama, Akihiro  Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan  C-12 

Novak, Christophe  University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria  PO -3

(Wed) 

Noël -Guéry, Alix  California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA, USA  C-6

Oddos, Andréa  Aix -Marseille University, Marseille, France  PO -2

(Tues) 

Ogasawara, Tetsuya  Asahi Culture Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan  PO -3

(Wed) 

Ohmura, Yoshiyuki  University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan  C-3

Paddock, Silvia  Taletekk, Gelnhausen, Hessen, Germany 109 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

C-2

Pan, Na Clara  Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China  PO -1 (Mon) 

Park, Jiyun  Studio Involution, Iowa City, IA, USA 

Art -Tech -

Health 

Demo 

Parra -Hinojosa, 

Alfredo  Qualia Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Penberthy, Jennifer K  University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA. University of 

Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

C-9, PL -4,

PO -1 (Mon) 

Percy, Chris  University of Derby, Derby, Derbyshire, UK, Qualia Research Institute, San 

Francisco, CA, USA 

C-1

Podlipniak, Piotr  Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Wlkp, Poland  C-8

Polák, Michal  University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, Czech Republic  C-8

Porter, Edward W  Independent, Fort Worth, TX USA  PO -2

(Wed) 

Potter, Rachel M  Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO , USA  C-15 

Prasad, Santh  Malla Reddy Institute of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana, 

India  442 

Proulx, Andrew  University of California, Merced, CA, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Pylkkänen, Paavo  University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Uusimaa, Finland. University of Skövde, Skövde, 

Västra Götaland, Sweden  C-12 

Radin, Dean  Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novota, C A, USA  PL -11 

Ranade, Deepak  MIT - WPU School of Consciousness Studies, Punr, Maharashtra, India  C-20 

Ranga, Ananth  Independent researcher, Fremont, CA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Reliford, Rhonda G  California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Remler, Michael P  UC Davis, Martinez, CA, USA  C-10 

Ren, Ye  Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 

Beijing, China 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Riddle, Justin  Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA  C-2110 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Riedinger, Florine  ISAE -SUPAERO, Toulouse, Occitanie, France. Airbus Commercial Aircraft, 

Toulouse, Occitanie, France 

C-6

Robertson, Kennedy I  Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux du Nord -de -l’Île -de -

Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Université de Montréal, Montreal, 

Quebec, Canada 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Roel Lesur, Marte  Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Association for 

Independent Research, Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland 

C-14 

Roibu, Tib  Independent Researcher, Bucharest, Romania  PO -2

(Tues) 

Ruffini, Giulio  CEO, StarLab, Barcelona, BCN, Spain. CSO, Neuroelectrics, Barcelona, BCN, Spain  PL -2

Russell, June  Qualia Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA  C-17 

Rámpay, Mihály  Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, Research Centre for Natural 

Sciences, Budapest, Budapest, Hungary. Semmelweis University, Budapest, 

Hungary 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Saegusa, Hidehiko  Indian Institute of Technology - Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India  C-4

Sananes, Marta M  Universidad de Los Andes, Mérida, Mérida, Venezuela., Mérida, Mérida, 

Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Sandoval, Ariadna E  DePaul University, Chicago, IL, USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

Sanfey, John J.  Independent, London, United Kingdom  C-3

Sanguinetti, Joseph  University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA  PL -2

Satsangi, Anirudh 

Kumar 

Dayalbagh Educational Institute (Deemed University), Dayalbagh, Agra, Uttar 

Pradesh, India  C-4

Scheurman, Alan P  Independent Researcher, Yucca Valley, CA, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Schooler, Jonathan  University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA  C-2

Schotanus, Patrick  University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK  C-7

Scozzari, Salvatore  RoboticsLab - Department of Engineering, Università degli Studi di Palermo, 

Palermo, Italy  C-7

Seeliger, Katja  Radboud University, Nijmegen, Gelderland, Netherlands  C-14 

Sharygin, Gleb  LMU Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany. BSB Munich, Bavaria, Germany  C-4

Sheehan, Daniel P.  University of San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA  C-13 

Sheldrake, Rupert  Temenos Academy, London, UK PL -11 111 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Shew, Tracy  SUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Shrestha, Suren  MSU, Boulder, CO, USA  C-24 

Signorelli, Andrea  Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Rovereto, 

TN, Italy 

PO -1 (Mon) 

Sinha, Neha  Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India  C-23 

Slater, Mel  Event Lab, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Institut de Neurociències 

Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain 

C-12 

Soni, Pooja  Kingston University, Kingston, London, UK  PO -2

(Tues) 

Srinivasan, 

Rakenduvadhana  University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Uusima, Finland  C-4

Stucky, Benjamin  Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 

Switzerland 

C-14 

Stuller, John A  The University of Missouri, Rolla, MO, USA  PO -1(Mon) 

Sugar, Jeff  USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA  C-23; PO -2

(Tues) 

Sylvie, Herrouet  University Paris 8 Saint -Denis, Saint -Denis, Île de France, France  C-24 

Sánchez, Natalia  Scientific and Medical Network, London, UK  PO -1 (Mon) 

Tagg, James P  Valis Corp, Encinitas, CA, USA  C-15 

Taylor, Toper  University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA  C-22 

Tedesqui, Rafael A. B.  Bishop's University, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada  C-9

Thangamani, Arunvel  Independent Researcher, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India  PO -1 (Mon) 

Thomas, Donna M  University of Central Lancashire, Preston, Lancashire, UK  C-9

Tormen, Francesco  Venice Ca' Foscari University, Venice, Italy ; Italian Buddhist Union's Research 

Center, Padova, Italy ;University of Padova, Padova, Italy 

C-12 

Trandafir, Robert A  "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Bucharest, 

Romania 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Treur, Jan  VU University Amsterdam, Social AI Group, Amsterdam, NH, Netherlands  C-2112 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Tsenkova, Roumiana 

Nikolova  Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan  C-15 

Tsuchiya, Naotsugu  Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia ; ATR, Kyoto, Japan  PL -6

Vallack, Jocene Mary  C.Q.University, Mackay, Queensland, Australia  PO -2

(Tues) 

Valladares, Mark S  Overland Park Racquet Club, Overland Park, KS, USA  PO -2

(Tues) 

Valverde, Aramis D. 

M.  New York University, New York City, N Y, USA  C-2

Valverde, Raul  Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Consciousness Research 

Foundation, Iowa City, IA USA  C-22 

van Dellen, Lea  Institute of Theoretical Physics III, Heinrich -Heine -University, Düsseldorf, 

Nordrhein -Westfalen, Germany 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Visan, Cosmin  The University of Manchester, Bucharest, Romania. National University of 

Singapore, Bucharest, Romania 

C-10 

Wagemann, Johannes  Alanus University of Arts and Social Sciences, Mannheim, Baden Württemberg, 

Germany 

PO -3

(Wed) 

Wahbeh, Helane  Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA  C -18 

Walach, Harald  Kazimieras Simonavicius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Lithuania. Change Health 

Science Institute, Basel, Switzerland 

C-3

Walton, Joan  York St John University, York, Yorkshire, UK  C-23 

Wasenius, Reidar  Aalto University, Espoo, Finland  PO -2

(Tues) 

Waterman, Laurel  University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada  C-23 

Webb, Sean  Zenodelic.ai, Mooresville, NC, USA  C-1

Weiler, Marina  University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA  C-9

Wheeler, Brannon  U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD, USA  PL -13 

Wichers, Bettina  Independent, Barmstedt, Schleswig -Holstein, Germany  PO -3

(Wed) 

Wiest, Mike  Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA  PL -4

Williams, Matthew C  Lone Star College, Conroe, T X, USA ; San Jacinto College, Houston, TX USA  PO -1 (Mon) 

With, Barbara L  Mad Island Communications, La Pointe, WI, USA  C-9

Wolfson, Ouri  Pirouette Software, Chicago, IL, USA  C-19 113 

Author name  Affiliation name  Program 

Codes* 

Woolf, Nancy J  UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA  C-15 

Woollacott, Marjorie  University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA  PL -12 

Xu, Jiawei  Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China  C-3

Yamada, Hiroki  Office OHCR, Setagayta, Tokyo, Japan  PO -3

(Wed) 

Yaman, Handan  Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Kavacık, Turkey  C-6

Yang, Xiaotong  The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China 

PO -2

(Tues) 

Ye, Michael  UCBerkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA  C-19 

Yocum, Julian  UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA  C-1

Yount, Garret  Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA  C-21 

Zebrowski, Robin L  Beloit College, Beloit, WI, USA  PO -3

(Wed) 

Zhang, Xinyan  Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China  PO -2

(Tues) 

Zomorrodi, Reza  Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronot, ON, Canada  C-21 

# SAVE THE DATE 

# TSC 2026 TUCSON, ARIZONA 

# The Science of CONSCIOUSNESS | April 6 -11, 2026 

Loews Ventana Canyon Resort, Tucson Arizona USA 

Loews Resort - Hotel Room Block for TSC Registrants Now Open 114 

Abstract Submission - Call for Abstracts: August 2025 

Workshop Submissions – Call for Proposals: September 2025 

Conference Registration Link (Eventbrite): November 2025 

INFO:  center@arizona.edu  CCS  website 

CALL FOR ABSTRACTS TSC 2026                                

> •Deadline for Abstracts: November 1, 2025
> •Abstract Notifications by November 25, 2025
> •Early Registration deadline by December 20 th
> •Request for Visa Letters due by November 5
> •Hotel Room Block closes :March 13, 2026

deadlines subject to change...check for updates 

2026 TSC LINKS 

Thank you for sharing our links and website with your friends and colleagues 

The Science of CONSCIOUSNESS 2026 - TUCSON - April 6 – 11, 2026     

> (32nd annual TSC) since 1994

Loews Ventana Canyon Resort 115 

WORKSHOPS, PLENARIES, CONCURRENTS, EXHIBITS, DEMOS, POSTERS, POETRY SLAM 

Abstracts: Oxford Abstracts Submission Link for TSC 2026 

https://app.oxfordabstracts.com/stages/79021/submitter         

> Deadline for Abstracts November 1, 2025
> Notifications from November 10 -30

Venue: Loews Ventana Canyon Resort - Group Block for TSC 2026 registrants by Mar 13 

https://www.loewshotels.com/ventana -canyon/group -the -science -of -consciousness -2026 

Conference Registration: via Eventbrite 

Early Registration Deadline: December 20 Standard: $550 Student (ID required $450) 

4-hour workshops on Monday April 6 – TBD 

https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the -science -of -consciousness -tickets -1343174403799 

Late Registrations post December 20th will incur a late charge until capacity is met. 

Updates will be provided. 

Sponsors/Exhibit info: 

contact:  center@arizona.edu  attn: Abi Montefiore 

Committee:  

> Member List will be posted on the conference committee CCS website [http://www.consciousness.arizona.edu]
> Stuart Hameroff, University of Arizona; Center for Consciousness Studies
> Dante Lauretta, University of Arizona, Astrobiology

Join TSC E -list  / CCS -TSC Website  / YouTube Channel - Archives | CCS -TSC 

# Accepted Abstracts 2025 Barcelona - The Science of CONSCIOUSNESS 

# Conference April 6 -11, 2025 

5

Are LLMs Capable of Achieving Consciousness and In turn Artificial General Intelligence? 

Paul Mithun PhD 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 116 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

There is an ongoing debate regarding whether modern large language models (LLMs) are early, incomplete 

forms of Artificial Gene ral Intelligence (AGI). In this work we first present some prior art search about 

investigations into consciousness that has occurred across various disciplines. From this literature survey we 

derive certain features that have been commonly mentioned as f eatures conscious machines will possess. Based 

on these we show that LLMs do not satisfy any of these criteria, hence are not conscious and cannot achieve 

AGI. Further, we make a novel proposal: Quantum Natural Language Processing, a recently invented sub 

discipline of AI, has the potential to create conscious machines. 

C - 1

Keywords 

artificial general intelligence, strong AI, consciousness 

15 

The Light of Consciousness 

Professor John A Stuller Ph.D. 

The University of Missouri, Rolla, MO, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

This paper provides a way forward from the greatest unanswered question in science and philosophy: ‘What is 

consciousness?’ The path forward begins with the recognition that ours is an undistinguished, temporary planet 

in a vaster and relatively timeless universe. Telescope improvements since Galileo have revealed the modern 

reality: this is no longer the earth - centered reality of Ptolomy and Aristotle. Furthermore, we have today 

relativity and quantum theories which force scientists and philosopher to forsake the classical scientific method 

of removing the observer from their world view. This paper recognizes – as a fundamental fact -- that the 

universe has both physical and spiritual components. We postulate that quantum ‘bing" of Hameroff and 

Penrose presents the best present understanding of the spiritual component, which is primitive consciousness. 

We propose three properties of primitive consciousness: it arises in the brain, it is time - and space - invariant, 

and it is our true selves, identical among us. We conclude that our home is not the earth, but the universe. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

consciousness, immortality, our plac e in the universe 117 

23 

Mapping the Mind: A Bayesian Framework for Mind -Matter Interaction 

Ulf Holmberg Ph.D. 

Independent researcher, Stockholm, -, Sweden 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

A novel Bayesian framework designed to model the influence of consciousness on physical systems is 

introduced. Drawing on insig hts from quantum mechanics, parapsychology, and consciousness studies, the 

model suggests that consciousness, working through intention and attention, has the ability to introduce new 

information, thereby altering probabilistic behavior and modulating sys tem entropy. The Bayesian framework 

and the underlying mathematical model are empirically tested in two stages. First, the framework is evaluated 

against prior research findings to assess alignment, and second, through an experiment designed to validate 

cr ucial elements of previous findings. The proposed framework is successfully applied to both prior research 

results and to the results found in the experiment. As such, by integrating mathematical rigor with empirical 

validation, this paper presents a new w ay of studying interactions between consciousness and physical 

processes, with significant implications for both theoretical and applied research in consciousness studies. 

C - 18 

Keywords 

Bayesian framework, Random number generators (RNGs), Consciousness -collapse interpretation, Information 

theory 

95 

Man as a Biological Prism: The Interrelation between Consciousness, DNA, Amino Acids and Universal Code 

Dr. Federico Bisiacchi 

Free Researcher, Montale, Pistoia, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

MAN AS A BIOLOGICAL PRISM A Fractal Model integrating Consciousness, Limbic System, DNA and 

Quantum Information Author: Dr. Fed erico Bisiacchi This document presents an innovative framework for 

understanding the circularity and simultaneity of communication between Consciousness, the Limbic System, 

and DNA, mediated by the crystalline structure of amino acids. Bridging neurobiolo gy, epigenetics, quantum 

physics and consciousness studies, the model opens new therapeutic possibilities. Man is portrayed as a 

“biological prism,” capable of interacting with energetic structures beyond the body and potentially revealing 

the language of a universal DNA. At the heart of this model lies the idea that the human being is both receiver 118 

and transmitter of quantum -biological information. The crystalline structure of amino acids, shaped by DNA 

and influenced by consciousness, plays a central role in this process by modulating photonic coherence and 

amplifying bioenergetic signals. The Man a s Prism is a part of a Quantum Information System. The Role of 

DNA in Cellular Communication DNA, beyond being our primary genetic code and the signature of our 

individuality, acts as a recorder of significant events in our existence through a epigenetic l anguage with 

modulation functions in cellular communication. This activity occurs through: 1. Gene Expression and Event 

Recording DNA regulates gene expression in response to biochemical and energetic stimuli, producing targeted 

proteins and amino acids th at enhance cellular adaptability. Each significant experience is recorded in an 

epigenetic way, embedding memory into matter. 2. Photonic Optimization DNA contributes to the formation of 

membrane proteins and receptors that facilitate the transmission of b iophotons. These light particles, guided by 

the crystalline structure of amino acids, ensure coherent communication within and between cells. 3. Systemic 

Synchronization DNA helps coordinate a unified network connecting emotions, organs and tissues, enabli ng 

processes such as tissue regeneration, neuroplasticity, and adaptive responses. This coherence supports the 

systemic integration of experience. 4. A New Language of Reality The model introduces a dynamic equation of 

consciousness: C_t = \sum_k O_{2k}^2 \, \mathcal{H}_k( \mathbb{P}_k + \mathbb{M}_k + \mathbb{E}_k) 

\cdot \mathcal{F}(k) \cdot e^{ \Lambda_k} \cdot A(Q_m, R_m) This equation conceptualizes consciousness as 

an evolving, recursive phenomenon in which each integrated experience enhances information al coherence and 

opens access to higher levels of awareness. In this sense, consciousness becomes the organizing force behind 

both biological adaptation and quantum resonance.DNA becomes the medium for understanding a universal 

coded language, making the H uman Being a reflection of cosmic order. Applications and Implications This 

integrative model offers promising applications, including: • Photobiomodulation protocols based on amino acid 

resonance. • Nutritional and nutraceutical innovations targeting opti cal coherence. • Interdisciplinary research 

linking consciousness, genetics, and quantum biology. Ultimately, this approach reframes the human being as a 

conscious biological interface —an intelligent, light -sensitive prism —capable of decoding and encoding reality. 

It paves the way for novel therapeutic paradigms and a deeper understanding of life as a fractal interplay 

between biology and awareness. 

C - 15 

Keywords 

Consciousness, DNA, Epigenetics, Biophotons, Fractal Systems, Amino Acids, Neurobiology 

108 

The Theory of the Six Main Levels of Consciousness: Rewinding our surface Consciousness 

Dr Tina Lindhard PhD 

IUPS, Makawao, HI 96768, Hawaii, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

In this presentation, I briefly outline the partially researched theory of The Six Main Levels of Consciousness 

de veloped by the philosopher and yogi Srinivas Arka (2013) based on his personal experiences and those of his 

pupils. I also discuss why it is one of the most exciting recent theories about the nature of consciousness. 

According to Arka (2013), the levels a re common; however, the experiences of each level are unique to each 

practitioner. When using the heart -based method of meditation known as Arka Dhyana or Intuitive Meditation 119 

(IM), practitioners learn to shift their I -ego awareness from their head, known as 'Mind -consciousness' or 

thinking mind consciousness associated primarily with the Prefrontal Cortex, to the area of the heart, they enter 

into 'Subliminal Mind consciousness ', which governs many of our daily activities. The next level is 'Feeling -

mind consciousness' associated with the heart. The heart develops before the brain during our embryological 

development, and it is at the heart level that intuition begins to ignite. This assertion is consistent with research 

undertaken by the HeartMath Institute. Unresolved emotional issues often also come to the fore, a phenomenon 

referred to as the dark side of meditation. With perseverance, practitioners are then taken from feelin g to 

'Emotional -heart consciousness', where they feel emotions with increasing intensity. The next level involves the 

soul, where practitioners recognize that they are much more than their personalities; they are 'beings' expressing 

themselves through thei r bodies. Comprehending this is easier for people who speak a Latin language; in 

Spanish, for example, there are two forms of the verb to be … one permanent and one that refers to transient 

activities. Here, we are talking about the Yo Soy, our essence or presence, also referred to as our soul, that 

extends to connect with the creative forces of Nature and the Universe (Arka, 2023, unpublished comment). 

During this level, known as Heart -Soul consciousness, practitioners may develop their primary perception 

system, which scientists generally know as Extra Sensory Perception (ESP), referred to as siddhis, or 

supernatural abilities in the yogic system. The next level, Pure Self -consciousness, occurs when practitioners 

enter the pure, innocent state experienced during their early embodied condition. The eyes of the meditator roll 

back as they have the direct experience of the fundamental nature of consciousness and reality in the state 

known as Samadhi. Armchair speculation or the outside -in perspective used by n euroscientists and 

psychotherapists can't reveal the nature of our consciousness and its different levels; hence, it is only through 

direct experience that we can uncover its true nature. This theory is, therefore, compelling as it is: Coherent 

with the or der in which our organs develop during our embryological past; Consistent with an inverse order of 

Fuster's (2002; 2009) evolutionary model of the brain, where everything builds on prior functions and skills, 

including the control of emotional and instinct ual behaviours, Testable by others who want to undertake the 

inner journey for themselves using a heart -based method like IM, Amenable to qualitative and also quantitative 

research using appropriate scales 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

consciousness, theory, me ditation, levels, thinking mind, prefrontal cortex, feeling heart mind, heart, 

embryological past, testable, research. 

129 

Path of Least Action and Consciousness 

Michael W. Barry 

Chiral Technology, Denver, CO, USA. Helical, Denver, CO, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

This paper presents a novel perspective on the origin and evolution of consciousness, framed through the 

principles of energy conservation, quantum entanglement, and geometric complexity. Central to this framework 

is the concept of "proto -intent," wherein energy conservation serves as an intrinsic directive shaping the 

behavior of particles and systems. As q uantum entanglement integrates multiple systems, their combined wave 120 

functions evolve into higher -order geometries, necessitating advanced energy conservation mechanisms. This 

feedback loop between complexity and equilibrium catalyzes the emergence of criticality, ultimately giving rise 

to single -celled organisms. Through e volutionary processes, these primitive life forms evolve into multicellular 

entities with increasingly intricate structures and behaviors, paving the way for the emergence of consciousness. 

We explore the interplay of quantum mechanics, system criticality, and evolutionary biology as the driving 

forces behind this progression. The geometric configurations of wave functions and the phenomenon of 

entanglement are posited as fundamental to the increasing complexity of biological systems. By linking these 

quant um processes to the development of intent -driven behaviors in prebiotic systems, we argue that life and 

consciousness are natural outcomes of physical laws. Furthermore, the paper investigates how advanced 

geometric arrangements, observed in biological mol ecules and neural networks, underlie the information 

processing and energy efficiency crucial to the emergence of higher cognitive functions. This multidisciplinary 

analysis provides a comprehensive framework for understanding consciousness as an emergent property of 

systems bound by energy conservation. The implications extend beyond biology to inform fields such as 

artificial intelligence, quantum biology, and the philosophy of mind, offering insights into the continuity 

between material and experiential realities. By framing consciousness within the universal principles of energy 

and geometry, this work contributes to bridging gaps between physical science and cognitive understanding, 

while proposing new avenues for research into the fundamental nature of life and thought. 

C - 5

Keywords 

path of least action, entanglement, consciousness 

166 

Theory of consciousness and information quanta. Version 2/1 

Theory of consciousness and information quanta. Version 2/1. Andrii Atorin 

Private researcher, Zaporozhye, -, Ukraine 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Good day. I would like to tell you about my "Theory of Consciousness and Quantum of Information" and take 

part in your confer ence. The theory uses a mathematical tool to describe the principle of operation of the 

membrane potential and the action potential in neurons, synaptic plasticity, synaptogenesis, cell adaptation, 

neurons of the peripheral part of the nervous system, and the mechanism of attention. The uniqueness of the 

theory is in the interconnectedness of the mathematical parameters of the elements listed above, optimization of 

biological processes, and fundamentalism. Information about the theory is on my website atota m.com With 

respect, Atorin Andrey steklolampa@gmail.com 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Theory of consciousness, synaptic plasticity, synapses, neuron, attention mechanism, neuronal adaptation 121 

178 

R. L. KUHN’S FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS ABOUT CONSCIOUSNESS: IS THERE ANOTHER 

PHILOSOPHICAL WAY TO ASK THEM? 

Luis L Mazas 

UdelaR, Montevideo, -, Uruguay 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Robert L. Kuhn considers mind -body problem an important one, where mental causation and consciousness are 

its main aspects; and Qualia constitutes the core of both. Through decades, he had been asking many academics 

fundamental questions about consciousness in Closer to Truth TV s eries: 1. Is there consciousness? 2. Is 

consciousness an illusion or it really exist? 3. What is consciousness? 4. Why does it feel like something inside? 

In spite of all answers, he ends all episodes about this topic still saying, “We are no closer to tru th”. Perhaps 

there is no truth to get closer to. I highlight answers by David Chalmers, a paradigmatic philosopher on this 

subject. According to him, consciousness exists, is not an illusion: we know more about our consciousness than 

anything else. As Desc artes said, I can doubt the existence of other minds and things, even my own body. 

However, I cannot doubt I am conscious at this very moment. Kuhn also said that the expression coined by 

Chalmers “hard problem of consciousness” is where most contemporary theories of consciousness should 

commence to answer these questions. But Chalmers also posed two concepts of mind, phenomenal and 

psychological. Are we confusing one for the other when we ask these questions? If Cartesian “thing which 

thinks” is a phenomen al mind, we could only ask about consciousness from first person perspective; scientific 

theories usually try to explain psychological third person mind, which belongs to the “objective” world. We 

should not start building the subjectivity of other subject s and explain the qualia they experience, explaining 

consciousness from third person perspective. Instead, as we do not interact directly with the “objective” world -

in -itself, we could start our study from our phenomenal subjectivity (the only thing we are 100% sure of). I can 

only experience my own qualia and attempt to describe them to my human peers, who I believe -I infer from my 

own experience - exist and experience the world in a similar way. However, I cannot know exactly what it is like 

to be another person or another sentient being. Chalmers defined qualia as the “the raw sensations of 

experience.” We can also say they are the phenomenal qualitative experiences that compose our basic sensitive 

and emotional components of perception: “felt qualities o f inner experience.” Someone has to experience qualia 

to know what they are like. The language we use to try to describe our qualia is not first -person in origin. We 

learned it from other conscious beings and was created for intersubjective communication: it is in third person. 

Even though we also use it internally to talk to ourselves, it is still in third person. That is why it is not useful 

for communicating phenomenal experiences to our peers. Only through metaphors can we partially 

communicate these ph enomenal experiences. That is how we generate the “hard problem of consciousness”. 

Maybe the question is not whether consciousness exists or not, but if we are asking the right questions. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Consciousness; qualia; hard problem; mind 

195 122 

On ethical perspective in studying consciousness We must study consciousness as vital things not as lifeless 

objectives. Eastern perspective may contribute to our study. 

Hiroki Yamada PhD; MD 

Office OHCR, Setagayta, Tokyo, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

“The Scientific Study of Consciousness Cannot and Should Not Be Morally Neutral.” This is the title of a paper 

published in 202 3 from London university. I agree this claim. In addition, I think consciousness at all has some 

kind of ethical intention. Our Consciousness must decide at any time. We always make decision as human 

being. However recently many researchers ignore such ob vious things. For example human brain organoid 

study had started. Human brain organoids (HBOs) are three -dimensional brain tissues cultured from human 

stem cells. These organoids mimic the developmental trajectories, cellular composition, neural circuits, and 

anatomical structures of the in vivo human brain They said. I think It is very dangerous to continue HBO study 

without thinking about ethical problems. As I had already pointed out last year in this conference, western 

perspective explore all phenomeno n after God said in Bible whereas eastern perspective explore from the start 

of origin. In scientific field , we found a hypothesis and by experiment we want to demonstrate the hypothesis is 

true. However if the premise is clearly wrong , it is not meaning ful to continue such experiment. We must start 

from at least from true premise. In Buddhism philosophy there are many sutra about what is consciousness. 

Typical example is the Yogacara thought that mean all is from thinking only. The word yogacara was tran slated 

from vijñapti -mātratā in Sanscrit. Yogakara philosophy include Yoga practice. But even apart from that it has a 

ethical perpective that Buddhism has. Buddhist 5 point of major ethics are refraining from killing, stealing, 

sexual misconduct, lying, a nd intoxication. I think these are common sense for all human being. So we had 

better research about consciousness adding these ethical perspective. However HBO experiment to generate 

consciounness never has such perspective. They say we can make brain neu ron from iPSDNA that can construct 

human brain. Then it must generate consciousness and we can observe consciousness production. I think such 

kind of thought are not meaningful because this hypothesis is clearly wrong. For example human brain has glia 

cell s. This hypothesis ignore this obvious fact. Starting from wrong premise we could never obtain useful result. 

I think such kind of experiment make us as guinea pig that always done in medical world even now. We have to 

be cautious to research consciousness . Most important point is honest thinking. That make us awakening and 

enlightenment. I am very concerned about scientific view that tend to go back to the dark by using clearly 

wrong premise. Everybody want to obtain true enlightenment. We are living being s. Our behavior never 

calculate correctly from equation mode. Scientific perspective tend to forget this too clearly obvious fact. We 

had better utilize eastern perspective more to learn about consciousness. Not only Buddhist but Hinduism that 

influence ma ny religion and include many truths. We may forget many important things believing western 

scientific perspective, too much. I think we had better change our attitude and explore more broad intellectual 

heritage. Then we may obtain answer for so -called har d problem. . 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Consciousness study, ethical perspective, Human brain organoid , Yoga Kara philosophy, The 

Sa ṃdhinirmocana Sūtra, Heart sutra, Western scientific perspective, Eastern perspective, Indian philosophy, 

Hinduism Hard Probl em 123 

204 

"Souls create their bodies" - Why consciousness is primary: A Leibnizian reminder 

Prof. Harald Walach PhD 

Kazimieras Simonavicius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Lithuania. Change Health Science Institute, Basel, 

Basel, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

The "normal" approach of consciousness studies follows the implicit ontology of modern science. This is - by 

definition, by his tory and by methodology - materialist. I.e. researchers assume that matter, such as atoms, 

molecules, their constituents and interactions, are primary, and all higher order properties, such as life and 

consciousness are secondary by necessity and default. This has created a huge effort to explain how brain 

activity, mainly the activity of neurons, can give rise to something qualitatively different, namely 

consciousness. As we know, we are as far from the goal as when the effort began finding traction some 25 years 

ago. Various authors have now and again pointed out that consciousness is the prerequisite for every aspect of 

science, for observation, measurement, theory building, experimenting. Then the stringent argument would be: 

Whatever is a prerequisite for something, cannot be explained by this. If consciousness is a prerequisite, a 

precondition and a given for doing science, then science and its goal cannot be an explanatory tool for what it 

presupposes. A simple illustration would be: Mathematics is th e precondition for doing good physics. Physics 

uses and needs mathematics. But physics cannot explain mathematics. Hence, the materialist ontological stance 

underlying natural science by necessity, history and definition, cannot explain consciousness. Rath er, we need 

to accept that consciousness is primary to, or at least co -primary with, matter. What is needed, then, is an 

approach that does not try to reduce or explain consciousness within the natural science framework, of, say, 

neuroscience. Rather, this approach must assume that consciousness is primary or coprimary with material 

entities. One of the first thinkers at the beginning of the age of enlightenment trying to present such an approach 

was Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646 -1716). A modern revival i n a sense was Alfred North Whitehead’s 

process philosophy, which gave rise to a pan -psychistic view. I will go back to Leibniz, rehearsing some of his 

basic arguments for why consciousness is primary and develop his view of matter as the outside image of 

“souls”. Souls form their bodies, and the co -realisation of the community of individual souls, or the “mechanics 

of coordination” is in Leibniz’ view his “pre -established harmony”. In a speculative loop one could use the 

generalized concept of entanglement, as it is known in physics, to reinterpret Leibniz’ pre -established harmony. 

This would then allow us see how two realms can “interact” without the exchange of energy or particles, and 

how consciousness can indeed be primary without devaluing the material world and the scientific enterprise to 

discover its governing laws. It would, however, entail that we need a parallel science that uncovers the 

regularities that govern this realm of consciousness. 

C - 3

Keywords 

consciousness, Leibniz, pre -established harmony, idealism, hard problem of consciousness 

249 

Mapping the Symphony of Consciousness 124 

Anubhab Chakraborty BS -MS 

Buddhi Yantra, Kolkata, West Bengal, India 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Consciousness has long been viewed as a “hard problem” due to its inherently subjective nature. Although we 

understand many of the neural mechanisms in the brain —such as the firing of neurons and synaptic 

interactions —there remains a gap in explaining how these physical processes generate first ‐person experience. 

We draw an analogy to an orchestra performing a symphony: one might ask, “Where exactly is the music 

located?” It is not in any single instrument, performer, or conductor, nor is it simply a property of written notes 

on paper. Instead, the “music” emerges transiently from the coordinated interplay of multiple vibrations a nd 

resonances, guided by both the musicians and the underlying structure of the composition. By extension, we 

propose that consciousness emerges from a similarly orchestrated process in the brain. Rather than viewing the 

brain as a one ‐way driver of experi ence, we hypothesize a two ‐way relationship in which neural activity “plays” 

consciousness while consciousness, in turn, constrains and organizes the activity —akin to how a musical score 

both results from and guides the orchestra. From this perspective, we expect to observe phenomen a analogous 

to consonance and dissonance in musical performances, suggesting that consciousness follows internal 

symmetries or patterns that might be amenable to mapping and quantitative measurement. To investigate these 

symmetri es and interactions, we are developing a tool that applies multiresolution analysis (e.g., wavelet 

transforms) to decompose signals — whether from synthetic test data, EEG, or other biological recordings —into 

constituent components across multiple scales. W e then map the dynamic relationships among these 

components, visualizing them as interconnected “clocks” or oscillators. Our approach aims to reverse engineer 

the equivalent of “sheet music” from the observed “symphony” of signals, thereby revealing how di stinct 

frequencies and phases collectively give rise to emergent patterns. Our preliminary results suggest that these 

tools can capture nested, multi ‐scale oscillatory structures that may reflect higher ‐order organizational 

principles underlying intelligence and, potentially, consciousness. We will discuss our methodology, provide 

examples from synthetic and real signals, and outline future steps toward refining this approach for a deeper 

understanding of how orchestrated dynamics in biological or artificia l systems might give rise to intelligence 

and subjective awareness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Intelligence, Music, Multi -resolution Analysis 

259 

Consciousness as Metaknowledge - the processing of information about information 

Dr Daniele Fanelli PhD 

Heriot -Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 125 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

This talk will offer an updated version of an account of consciousness that I had first presented at the last 

conference. The Metaknowledge account of consciousness offers a fr amework to define and understand 

consciousness in terms of information, and builds upon the following definitions and arguments. Definition 1: 

Information is not, as is often said, a "difference that makes a difference", but rather only and simply any 

"dif ference", i.e. any subsistence of alternative states of matter. Definition 2: Knowledge is what allows 

information to "make a difference", by converting information in action. For example, if I am given information 

in a language that I don't know, then tha t information will make no difference to my actions, and therefore to the 

world I interact with. Knowledge consists in mental/neuronal (ultimately, informational) structures that allow a 

determinate source of information to be processed and converted into competent (i.e. "informed") actions. 

Postulate 1: Information cannot be about itself, or equivalently, information cannot negate itself. For example, 

an information channel A might transmit the apparently self -negating message "This message does not come 

from this channel, it comes from channel B", but the literal meaning of the message is clearly and inescapably 

false. Definition 3: Meta -information is information about other information, e.g. information that would allow 

to distinguish, in the example abo ve, channel A from channel B. Definition 4: Meta -knowledge is the ability to 

process meta -information. Postulate 2: Consciousness is a form of knowledge. As the etymology of the word 

indicates, "consciousness" indicates the capacity to access and process p articular sources of information. 

Conclusion: Consciousness, in its multiple and diverse manifestations, essentially consists in the ability to 

process meta -information, which we define as meta -knowledge. For example, a philosophical zombie, if such a 

thin g was possible, would be able to process visual and auditory information correctly but it would not be 

conscious that it is "seeing" something rather than "hearing" it - it could not distinguish what "it feels like" to 

see red or taste tomatoes, nor act up on such information. Conversely, if and to the extent that it had the capacity 

to distinguish visual information from auditory, tactile and other sources of information, and process the 

resulting meta -information - in other words, to the extent it possesse d meta -knowledge about sensory inputs -

then the zombie would be phenomenally conscious, and not a "zombie" at all. All living organisms process 

information to some extent, but not all organisms process meta -information, and those that do possess meta -

know ledge to qualitatively and quantitatively varying degrees. The meta -knowledge possessed by human beings 

is certainly quantitatively, and possibly qualitatively different from that of all other organisms, and yet it is 

clearly finite and limited. For exampl e, just as an information channel cannot deny itself, it is impossible for 

human beings to truly conceive of their own death (the absence of their own experience). This talk will lay out 

the updated Metaknowledge account of consciousness and discuss its im plications for the science of 

consciousness. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Information; Knowledge; Consciousness; hard problem; qualia; phenomenal consciousness. 

284 

The role of cortico -subcortical loops in the generation of conscious experiences of speech and music 

Prof Edward Jacek Gorzelanczyk Prof 1, Prof Piotr Podlipniak Prof 2

> 1

Casimir the Great University, Bydgoszcz, Poland, Poland. 2Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, 

Poland 

Categories by Discipline 126 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Speech and music are uniquely human forms of communication based on auditory modality (Kraus & Slater, 

2015). Their comprehension requires the continu ous comparison of received auditory signals with previously 

received ones, a process occurring in the thalamo -cortico -subcortical loops (Gorzelańczyk, 2011). This is 

facilitated by the connections between the auditory association thalamus, auditory cortex, striatum, and 

amygdala (Smith et al., 2019), all of which show activity during listening to speech and music. This leads to the 

conscious experience of spoken words and successive sounds while listening to speech and music, respectively. 

We hypothesize th at the striatum and the cerebral cortex control consciousness, including the experiences of 

speech and music. Specifically, the cortico -subcortical loops are crucial mechanisms for the integration and 

processing of information necessary for conscious exper ience (Grossberg, 2009). In other words, the adequate 

activity of these loops is essential for inducing and maintaining consciousness. A key premise supporting this 

view is the fact that anesthetic substances such as propofol and sevoflurane gradually redu ce the activity of 

cortical -subcortical loops and subsequently switch off consciousness (Hudetz, 2012). These anesthetics impact 

the thalamo -cortical loops and cortico -cortical networks by enhancing the function of GABA (gamma -

aminobutyric acid) neurotrans mitters, leading to a temporary loss of conscious awareness (Clauss, 2010). The 

crucial difference between the conscious experience of music and speech lies in the distinction between the 

preconceptual and conceptual content of our awareness. While the con scious experience of speech is filled with 

concepts, the experience of musical structure consists mainly of sensations (perceptive qualia) such as pitch, 

rhythm, and timbre, as well as different emotional states (Huron, 2006). We suggest that this differen ce is 

related to the varying proportions of limbic, motor, and associative cortico -subcortical loop activities involved 

in the processing of music and speech. References Clauss, R. P. (2010). Neurotransmitters in Coma, Vegetative 

and Minimally Conscious St ates, pharmacological interventions. Medical Hypotheses, 75(3), 287 –290. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2010.03.005 Gorzelańczyk, E. J. (2011). Functional Anatomy, 

Physiology and Clinical Aspects of Basal Ganglia. In J. F. P. Peres (Ed.), N euroimaging for Clinicians -

Combining Research and Practice. (pp. 89 –106). InTech. Grossberg, S. (2009). Cortical and subcortical 

predictive dynamics and learning during perception, cognition, emotion and action. Philosophical Transactions 

of the Royal So ciety B: Biological Sciences, 364(1521), 1223 –1234. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0307 

Hudetz, A. G. (2012). General Anesthesia and Human Brain Connectivity. Brain Connectivity, 2(6), 291 –302. 

https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2012.0107 Huron, D. B. (2006) . Sweet anticipation: music and the psychology of 

expectation. The MIT Press. Kraus, N., & Slater, J. (2015). Music and language: relations and disconnections. 

In M. J. Aminoff, F. Boller, & D. F. Swaab (Eds.), Handbook of Clinical Neurology (Vol. 129, pp. 207 –222). 

Elsevier. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978 -0-444 -62630 -1.00012 -3 Smith, P. H., Uhlrich, D. J., & 

Manning, K. A. (2019). Evaluation of medial division of the medial geniculate (MGM) and posterior 

intralaminar nucleus (PIN) inputs to t he rat auditory cortex, amygdala, and striatum. Journal of Comparative 

Neurology, 527(9), 1478 –1494. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.24644 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords :

cortico -subcortical loops, auditory association thalamus, auditory cortex, striatum, music, speech 

290 

Clarifying the Hard Problem 127 

Dr Matti Kangaskoski PhD 

Tampere University, Tampere, Pirkanmaa, Finland. University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Keski -Suomi, Finland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

I wish to make a small but untrivial point and argue that the original formulation of the hard problem by 

Chalmers (1995) is mi sleading, and despite decades of later work, the original formulation keeps sending 

respectable scientists and philosophers on the wrong path when encountering the hard problem. The first 

obscuration happens with the question of "why". In 1995, Chalmers a sks why should information processing 

create (conscious) experience. This formulation is misleading because the why -question is eminently 

answerable: affect, as phenomenal conscious experience, evolved to guide us in uncertain situations (Damasio 

2018) — for example. Answers such as Damasio’s may or may not be correct, but in any case they do not 

answer the hard problem. It is not a question of why in this sense, but as I show, many try to answer it. The 

second obscuration happens with assuming information processing as the ground and conscious experience as 

the product arising from said ground. If we strive to tackle (as many do, but too many don’t) the problem 

without prior assumptions, we shouldn’t assume information processing -- or the physicalist metap hysics it 

stands on -- as the ground. This, too, is widely discussed in later work, but as my examples show, not widely 

enough. Relying on the concept of information can lead as deep into the wrong direction, as I argue happening 

with Mark Solms’ (2021) mo del. The third obscuration happens with conscious experience exemplified by what 

has been dubbed qualia: “the quality of deep blue, the sensation of middle C” (Chalmers 1995). The subsequent 

oft -repeated emphasis on qualia as the stand -in for consciousness assumes that consciousness itself is nothing, 

but rather something that sometimes appears to our mind’s eye, already existing indepently. The sheer phrase 

“conscious experience” hints at the same and could be alternatively characterized as “experience in 

consciousness”, tilting the characterization in a completely different angle. I do not claim that one is right, but 

to be clear, they should be on equal footing at the beginning of the inquiry. Finally, I argue that the “hard 

problem of consciousness” as s uch is a mis -characterization, and rather than a hard problem, we are faced with 

a hard fact of consciousness that needs explaining. Therefore, I propose that instead of a hard problem we 

should start with the fact that there is consciousness. The problem is in the explanatory models that cannot 

account for it. I illustrate the obscurations with examples from biology, physics, neuroscience, and philosophy. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

hard problem, ontology of consciousness, qualia, information, information proc essing, entropy, probability 

311 

Exploring Consciousness and Mind through Vedanta philosophy 

Pooja Gupta Ph. D , Padmakali Banerjee 

IILM, Gurugram, Haryana, India 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 128 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Vedanta Philosophies do not subscribe to the body -mind dichotomy because, in fact, these Philosophies 

consider mind and body as the basic aspect of the underlying real ity of universal unitarity. Amalgamation of 

soul into super soul and attaining 'Moksha or Nirvana' is the ultimate goal described in various Vedantic texts 

where consciousness is described as a singular basic entity of the Soul or Atma but when manifested due to 

Avidya or false identification as - Self(Asmitha) , assumes its pluralism --but here is "One" appearing as many 

due to only perceptional error. The Vedantic philosophy has considered Mind as the subtle form of matter 

imbued with Chit(Chetna) to acquir e the ability to perceive and think. Consciousness, on the other hand, is 

considered finer than "mind matter " which is all pervasive, omnipotent, omniscient and eternal. The ancient 

Seers or Rishis claim that such truth can only be revealed through intuit ive research by diving deep into the Self 

in the process of absorption. Mind & Body are both intertwined and mutually dependent on each other. When 

mind is disturbed, body too suffers and vice versa. Oriental Philosophies of mind, matter and spirituality o ften 

have been ridiculed as being esoteric, unscientific and not verifiable under rigorous standard of modern science. 

With new discoveries the limits of science have been pushed further and various phenomena, hitherto 

unexplained, are now tangible and int elligible. Ability of human being to perceive or observe something is 

much more less than most of the other species living on earth. We cannot see beyond the range of 400 --800 nm 

or can hear not below 20hz and beyond 20000hz. But with the aid of various in struments and sophisticated 

techniques it would be possible to visualise the realme of unknown realty. On the same analogy one can safely 

assume that it may be possible some day for science to view the things happening in the mind too. The mind -

body dich otomy, mentioned earlier is really problematic. Einstein's theory of mass (matter) --energy 

convertability provided a base to visualise matter -energy as an inalienably interconnected singular reality 

,though under certain conditions they may show up as dis tinct entities. Quantum mechanics believes in particle -

wave duality until an observer ventures to see it. It means that a sub atomic particle can co exist as a particle 

and wave at the same time. Its position and speed are probabilistic not deterministic, as if sub atomic particles 

seem to have their own mind and free will defying all other physical laws of perception. Similarly neural 

activities going on in the mind seem to defy all known laws of science. Only law that prevails over there is the 

"Law of U ncertainty " which has been recognised as an intrinsic law of Nature which reigns supreme at the 

subtle level. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

318 

Language, Time, and Consciousness. 

Miltiadis Argianis Karakitsos Undergraduate 

Deree, Athens, Attica, Greece 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Large language models excel at statistical word correlation, yet falls short of achieving genuine conceptual 

understanding and the real -time adaptability observed in biological intelligence. While language models 129 

demonstrate impressive linguistic abilities, they may represent a limited pathway to true consciousness, as 

biological systems, from humans to octopuses, exhibit sophisticated intelligence rooted in concept formation 

independent of language itself. The aim of this research is to investigate the feasibility of a bio -inspired AI 

architecture framework for real -time concept -based processing and whether this approach can move beyond the 

limitations of current language models to advance the pursuit of artificial consciousness. research questions: [1] 

Would a biologically inspired architecture focused on dynamic learning and real -time sensory integration 

overcome potential limitations of language -based AI in achieving a more generalized form of intelligence with 

more advanced understanding and reasoning? [2] How does decoupling internal conceptual processing from 

language -centric output affect the adaptability and potential for emergent consciousness in AI? This research 

employs to, though systematic literature rev iew, evaluate the feasibility of the proposed architecture. Combining 

different fields, Including Neuroscience, Cognitive science, and Artificial Intelligence. The review will 

synthesize findings from studies on biological concept formation, neural mechani sms of real -time processing 

and limitations of current language models. Qualitative analysis will be used to identify key trends and 

theoretical gaps in existing approaches. The literature review is expected to argue for key limitations of current 

language -model AI and that their reliance on language limits real abstract concept understanding outside of it. 

While a brute -force approach might eventually yield some progress with reasoning models, it appears to be a 

less efficient and potentially less fruitful path. Research on human and animal cognition highlights that while 

concept formation originates from sensory experience, complex thought processes abstract away from 

immediate sensory input, allowing for understanding of objects independent of direct perc eption. A capability 

that appears to largely be absent in LLMs. This perspective suggests that AI architectures focused on linguistic 

patterns may face inherent constraints in achieving broader forms of consciousness. Therefore, shifting AI 

development tow ards models that prioritize concept learning, decouple internal processing from language based 

output offers a more promising path to creating truly intelligent artificial systems. Implications would include a 

potential paradigm shift in the pursuit of gen eral intelligence and artificial consciousness, offering a pathway to 

more adaptable AI systems. Potential applications include but are not limited to topics such as advanced 

robotics, complex problem -solving in dynamic environments, and adaptive learning systems. A key 

contribution lies in emphasizing concept formation and decoupled output interfaces, and allowing real time 

processing, drawing inspiration from biological cognitive systems. With potential challenges include processing 

costs and development In conclusion, this literature review argues for a significant shift in AI, advocating for 

methods aimed at overcoming the limitations of language models in achieving genuine intelligence and 

consciousness. Future research should prioritize prototype devel opment and empirical validation of this 

framework. This approach offers a promising direction towards more robust, adaptable, and truly intelligent AI 

systems, moving beyond the constraints of language based statistics. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Concept Lea rning, General Intelligence, Artificial Consciousness, Language Models, Adaptive AI. 

357 

Disambiguating Consciousness: A Framework for Classifying Conscious Systems (2.0) 

Mr. Andrew Proulx 

University of California, Merced, Merced, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 130 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Consciousness is often conflated with concepts such as subjectivity, awareness, experience, and sentience. By 

delineating these distinct yet related terms —starting with consciousness, then exploring inf ormation processing 

and subjectivity —this project aims to clarify the convoluted network of existing terminology. After establishing 

these definitions, I will examine their presence across various systems, from the foundations of existence to 

complex organ isms, illustrating how awareness, subjectivity, and information processing function as the 

primary forces of consciousness. Building on the work of Nagel (1974), Block (1995), and Chalmers (2023), as 

well as insights from molecular and evolutionary biology (Godfrey -Smith, 2019; Levin, 2019) and Eastern 

traditions such as Advaita Vedanta, this framework refines these concepts for scientific inquiry and 

communication. Here, consciousness is defined as the integration of awareness, subjectivity, and informatio n

processing. Awareness —the essence of consciousness —is the fundamental capacity to detect and respond to 

phenomena. It is intransitive and unconditional, whereas consciousness is functional, transitive, and relational. 

Awareness manifests through differen t systems, shaped by their mode of being (subjectivity) and interaction 

with the world (information processing). This perspective allows for a 2D classification space, where 

subjectivity and information processing serve as axes for evaluating potentially c onscious systems. With this 

foundation, we propose precise definitions for related concepts —such as agency, intelligence, cognition, and 

sentience —disambiguating overlapping terms. Finally, we apply this framework across biological and non -

biological entit ies, from humans and animals to plants, rocks, atoms, and artificial neural networks like 

ChatGPT. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Panpsychism, Neutral Monism, Evolutionary Biology, Advaita Vedanta, Perception, Information Processing, 

Subjectivity, Consciousness 

366 

Synaptic Plasticity, Information Capacity, and Experiential Consciousness 

Richard P Ebstein Ph.D., Prof. 1,2 , SooHong Chew PhD, Prof. 1,3 

> 1

SWUFE, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. 2Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. 3NUS, Singapore, 

Singapore, Singapore 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Nobel laureate in economics, Robert Aumann, has offered a subjective definition of consciousness in terms 

of the ability to experience (Aumann, 2005). In his 2024 follow -up paper, “Why consciousness?”, he suggests 

that his experiential consciousness serves as the foundation for the evolutionary emergence of incentive which 

arguably underpins all economic activities. Aumann ( 2024) also raises the “How” question for experiential 

consciousness which this paper attempts to address. We propose that experiential consciousness emerges from 

predictive neuroplasticity at the synaptic level (Halvagal -Zenke, 2023), serving as intermedia ry between 

exposure to stimuli and memory -based sensory perception. This yields a measure of the capacity for 131 

experiential consciousness in terms of the brain’s capacity for information storage based on the capacity for 

synaptic plasticity (Samavat et al, 2024). This enables a reexamination of cephalized animals from the 

perspective of their brains’ information ca pacity across evolutionary timescales. Aumann RJ, "Consciousness," 

Discussion Paper, The Federmann Center for the Study of Rationality, Hebrew University (2005) _____, “Why 

consciousness?”. Neuropsychologia Apr 15;196:108803 (2024) Halvagal M.S., Zenke, F. “The combination of 

Hebbian and predictive plasticity learns invariant object representations in deep sensory networks”. Nat 

Neurosci 26, 1906 –1915 (2023). Samavat M, TM Bartol, K Harris, and T Sejnowski, “Synaptic Information 

Storage Capacity Measured Wi th Information Theory”. Neural Computation 36, 781 –802 (2024) 1 

Southwestern University of Finance and Economics 2National University of Singapore 

C - 7

Keywords 

Synaptic Plasticity, Information Capacity, Experiential Consciousness,Predictive Neuroplast icity, Incentive and 

Evolution, Memory -Based Sensory Perception, Hebbian Learning 

367 

Consciousness and Psychiatric Practice 

Jeff Sugar MD, DLFAPA 

USC, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

In contemporary psychiatric practice, consciousness is often dismissed as the byproduct of brain biology. 

Engel’s original (197 7) Bio -Psycho -Social model sought to explain the interplay among biology, psychology, 

and sociology. However, misapplication of this idea has led to a hierarchical approach that privileges biological 

factors at the expense of the intersubjective dimension s of psychology and sociology. I will demonstrate how 

current medical science could benefit from a more robust understanding of consciousness to improve 

patient/physician interactions. Shannon’s (1948) information theory, with emphasis on “surprise” in 

com munication, suggests that consciousness emerges through active engagement with others. This notion 

resonates with Sartre’s (1943) view of self -awareness, wherein the self is continuously constituted through 

choices and interactions. Searle (2002) further u nderscores this point by asserting that consciousness is the 

foundation upon which agency is built, enabling individuals to exercise meaningful choice. Carlo Rovelli 

(2016) invites us to “accept the idea that reality is only interaction.” This challenges r eductionist views that 

confine meaning and agency to neural processes. Instead, he acknowledges that consciousness arises from 

countless, reciprocal exchanges between the individual particles that make up larger entities and environments. 

Consistent with t his perspective, Travarthen’s (2013) research on child development and embodied 

consciousness demonstrates how mental states are embedded within social and cultural contexts, shaping 

capacity for choice and self -determination. Further evidence against redu ctionism emerges from the study of 

altered states of consciousness. Research by Shor (1962) and Tart (1969) on hypnotic phenomena reveals that 

individual agency becomes fluid under certain conditions, consistent with the malleable nature of 

consciousness. Transformative insights from the 1962 Good Friday Experiment, in which one dose of 

psilocybin opened new religious depths, illustrate how changes in consciousness interact with deeply held 132 

beliefs. These findings challenge the notion of a biological determination, showing that consciousness is also 

highly responsive to other internal and external influences. Quantum physics also contributes insights that 

question reductionist assumptions. Ph enomena such as entanglement and action at a distance (Bell, 1964) 

suggests that consciousness is not confined exclusively to neural circuits. In this context, panpsychism —the 

view that consciousness is a fundamental, pervasive quality of the universe —find s support. Ricard (2017), 

drawing on Buddhist contemplative wisdom, describes consciousness as a continuum: a primary, luminous 

awareness that underlies sensory and mental experiences. This perspective dissolves conventional mind –body 

dualism, asserting th at neither matter nor consciousness possesses intrinsic, independent existence; rather, they 

are one unified reality. Psychiatry’s overreliance on biological reductionism neglects the embodied and 

interdependent aspects of consciousness. Integrating insigh ts from information theory, existential philosophy, 

interaction research, altered states, quantum phenomena, and contemplative traditions, compels a more holistic 

approach —one that honors choice and agency and challenges reductionism. My hope for current p sychiatry is 

that greater emphasis on consciousness will allow a synthesis of science with new regard for personal meaning. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Panpsychism, Child Development, Biopsychosocial Model, Hypnosis, Reductionism, Psychiatric and Medical 

Pra ctice, Psychedelics, Culture 

383 

The Persistence of Quantum Coherence in Biological Systems 

Javier Martin -Torres PhD, Prof. 1,2 , Maria Paz Zorzano PhD, Prof. 3

> 1

University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, United Kingdom. 2Instituto Andaluz de Ciencias de la 

Tierra (CSIC), Armilla, Granada, Spain. 3Centro de Astrobiología (INTA -CSIC), Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, 

Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

The challenge of maintaining quantum coherence in biological systems has been a central debate in quantum 

biology and consciousness research. Penrose and Hameroff’s Orch -OR theory [1] suggests that microtubules in 

neurons function as quantum processors, with quantum states persisting long enough to influence cognition. 

However, a key question remains to be m odelled: How can quantum coherence be sustained in a biological 

environment, traditionally viewed as decoherence -prone? Here, we introduce a thermodynamically grounded 

framework describing how biological systems regulate quantum coherence through structure d energy flux and 

entropy dissipation. Unlike classical decoherence models that assume a polar aqueous environment, previous 

studies, such as those by Sahu et al. [2,3], suggest that microtubular structures may support quantum -friendly 

aromatic ring networ ks, providing coherence -preserving conditions similar to non -polar environments. 

However, life as we know it has always been associated with liquid water, a highly polar medium, raising 

fundamental questions about how coherence is sustained within such the rmodynamic constraints. Life requires a 

temperature range compatible with metabolism and reproduction, yet temperature inhibits quantum coherence 

across many physical systems. In non -living systems, coherence is governed by the balance between energy 133 

flux, entropy dissipation, and structured information processing. Many quantum -coherent states exhibit a well -

defined threshold where thermal entropy quenching occurs, including Bose -Einstein condensates (atomic 

coherence is lost above a critical temperatu re); superfluidity (macroscopic quantum effects disappear beyond 

the lambda transition); .superconductors (thermal fluctuations disrupt Cooper pair coherence); or magnetic 

order in ferromagnets and antiferromagnets (spin coherence is lost above the Curie o r Néel temperature).These 

systems do not fight to preserve order; their coherence naturally collapses when entropy dominates. In contrast, 

biological systems actively maintain non -equilibrium conditions and must implement mechanisms to sustain 

coherence wi thin a polar and thermodynamically constrained environment. We present a quantitative model for 

coherence maintenance, demonstrating that non -equilibrium energy flux optimizes Frohlich coherence within 

microtubular structures. Mathematically, our model pre dicts that quantum coherence persistence is governed by 

an energy -information balance equation, where structured energy input offsets environmental decoherence 

effects. This provides testable predictions for microtubular quantum coherence lifetimes and off ers a 

mechanistic explanation for how Orch -OR can be biologically viable over functionally relevant timescales, even 

in a polar environment. Our model suggests that quantum coherence in biological systems is not just a passive 

effect but an actively mainta ined feature of structured information flow, governed by universal thermodynamic 

constraints. These findings extend beyond cognitive neuroscience to quantum biology, synthetic life research, 

and artificial intelligence, where understanding coherence regula tion is key to developing robust quantum -based 

computing architectures and next -generation bio -inspired neural networks. References [1] Penrose, R., & 

Hameroff, S. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the Orch -OR theory. Physics of Life Revie ws, 

11(1), 39 -78. [2] S. Sahu, et al. (2013). Atomic water channel controlling remarkable properties of a single 

brain microtubule. Biosensors & Bioelectronics, 47, 141 -148. [3] S. Sahu, et al. (2013). Multi -level memory -

switching properties of a single br ain microtubule. Applied Physics Letters, 102, 123701. [4] Frohlich, H. 

(1968). Long -range coherence and energy storage in biological systems. International Journal of Quantum 

Chemistry, 2(5), 641 -649. 

C - 11 

Keywords 

Orch -OR, consciousness, Microtubule s, Quantum coherence, quantum biology 

399 

CONSCIOUSNESS IS THE ONTOLOGICAL PRIMITIVE OF THE UNIVERSE 

Deepak Chopra MD, FACP, FRCP 

Cyberhuman.ai, New York, NY, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

Consciousness is not a byproduct of the physical brain but the fundamental ground of existence from which 

space, time, matter, and energy arise. Rather than being confined to individual minds, consciousness is a non -

local field of infinite potential, shaping and perceiving reality simultaneously. The universe, as we experience it, 

is not external to us but unfolds within this awa reness. In this view, the boundaries between observer and 

observed, thinker and thought, dissolve into a unified field of being, aligning with both ancient Vedic wisdom 134 

and insights from quantum mechanics, where entanglement and superposition challenge conventional 

materialist paradigms. This perspective invites a radical shift in how we understand selfhood, perception, and 

the nature of reality itself. By embracing consc iousness as the foundation of existence, we move beyond 

fragmentation toward wholeness, recognizing that we are not separate entities in a mechanistic universe but the 

creators and experiences of all that is. This presentation will explore the implications of consciousness as the 

primary reality, bridging Eastern metaphysical traditions with contemporary scientific discourse. 

PL -14 

425 

On Pure Consciousness of Autopoietic Machines. From Minimal Phenomenal Selfhood to Minimal Phenomenal 

Experience 

Dr. Julio M Alcántara P hD 

École Normale Supérieure, Paris, Paris, France 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.01]........The concept of consciousness 

Abstract 

The case of study described in this article is based on a neurophenomenological research project that will 

experiment with th e simplest form of conscious experience humans are capable of or pure consciousness (PC), 

firstly, to prove its empirical existence, secondly, to disentangle its core causal factors, and thirdly, to attest its 

content -properties. Deleting and maximizing t he unit of identification (UI) are the two channels to analyze 

empirically PC, a type of minimal phenomenal experience (MPE), within the model of the Ascending Reticular 

Activation System (ARAS), the minimal form of phenomenal experience and the minimal ph enomenal selfhood 

(MPS), mainly the thresholds of electrical frequencies of the brain during the analyzed states, their correlations 

and simulations, and subjective reports. Does an all -pervading form of conscious experience exist? Which 

phenomenal charact eristics does PC entail? And based on this, can a minimal model for conscious experience as 

such be developed? Such a minimal model will enable a profounder scope of psychopathologies grounded on a 

wider understanding of the physiological and electrical th resholds for the emergence of diverse states of 

consciousness from health and altered ones to mental disorders, whereas the technological interfaces used for 

their research may be used for therapeutic purposes grounded on the correlation between phenomenol ogy and 

physiology. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Keywords: Pure consciousness (PC; pure awareness), minimal phenomenal experience (MPE), minimal 

phenomenal selfhood (MPS), signal and model of the Ascending Reticular Activation System (ARAS), 

Epistemic Agent Mod el (EAM), phenomenal model of intentional relation (PMIR) 135 

143 

Abstraction and the Explanatory Gap 

Michael P Remler M.D. 

UC Davis, Martinez, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.02]........Materialism and dualism 

Abstract 

The explanatory gap between consciousness and science can be understood only in contrast to those things with 

an adequate scientific explanation. Scientific explanation is built on the measurement of time, distance and mass 

etc. and relationship concepts s uch as true, equal to, etc. all of which are derived by the collective abstraction of 

many subjective experiences. Measurement and mathematics, because they are uniform across the whole of 

humanity, create an abstract symbiosis of all the separate consciou snesses. Those concepts supported by the 

symbiosis are of unique authority from which accepted explanations can be derived. Although they retain not 

one iota of the subjective experiences from which they were abstracted, they retain the authenticity of the 

subjective experience so that with education they provide concepts needed for effective explanation to 

generations of individuals. The explanatory gap regarding consciousness derives from the fact that there is no 

analogous abstraction of the totality of mental processes of the human mind, in particular consciousness. 

Turing’s defined ‘thinking’ as that portion of human mental function that can be represented by a computational 

algorithm and that abstraction validated by the imitation game. To define the l imits of symbiotic abstraction of 

human mentation, and document that via the imitation game, it is needed to further develop that approach to 

model the totality of externally observable individual behavior. Despite the current successes of large language 

model artificial intelligence, it is suggested that abstraction of this totality human external behavior capable of 

passing a total individual Turing Test is impossible pending the development of quantum and other advanced 

methods. Consciousness and its ass ociated features like free will, qualia, etc. are intrinsically not observable and 

cannot be abstracted directly into the symbiosis. Non -observables entities such as black holes, quarks, etc. are 

identified, validated and explained as the most parsimonious understanding consistent with the structure of 

ideas anchored in the observables. Consciousness is irreducibly idiosyncratic and non -material and therefore 

irretrievably not possible to directly abstract. Therefore, a Materialist explanation within the cu rrent 

understanding is impossible. Dualism, the imputation that consciousness does exist distinct from matter as 

currently understood is the most parsimonious theory but fails for lack of a plausible interface with current 

physics. Entanglement and the mec hanism of quantum collapse are established phenomena within physics not 

by any known material mechanism. Further understanding of these phenomena may provide the conceptual 

basis for an understanding that is. both abstract physicalist – within physics, and non -material – dualist, model 

of consciousnesses with no explanatory gap. 

C - 10 

Keywords 

Explanatory Gap, Abstraction, Explanation, Dualism, Turing 

169 

Superluminal Conjectures About Consciousness 136 

Marta M Sananes Msc. Applied Statistics 

Universidad de Los Andes, Mérida, Mérida, Venezuela., Mérida, Mérida, Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.02]........Materialism and dualism 

Abstract 

Six Conjectures About Consciousness 1. Regarding the speed of light there are two alternatives in the 

mathematical formulation of th e Theory of Special Relativity. For the first alternative the speed of light is the 

maximum speed attainable for any object. It is the alternative that represents the subluminal material world. I 

have the conjecture that the second alternative represents a parallel reality of superluminal entities and that, as 

opposed to the material one, this reality is the spiritual Superluminal World of Consciousness. Superluminal 

Consciousness is the source of Consciousness in all its expressions in living beings. 2. T he Universe exists by 

the realization of Superluminal Consciousness that runs superluminally: as much as it wants faster than light. 

Superluminal Consciousness is God. 3. Superluminal Consciousness configures the Universe at successive 

levels of complexity to be the stage of development of Life. It radiates consciousnesses entities that animate 

increasingly complex beings. The radiation of the Superluminal Consciousness, whether as sparks or as 

immense flames, are souls that live Life in time as an experien ce to achieve indefinitely superluminal state as 

spirits sharing with the Superluminal Consciousness in the Superluminal Consciousness World. 4. A clue to 

imagine the superluminal nature is in dreams. Those timeless, non -local states that we experience in dreams 

lead me to imagine how the superluminal state could be experienced: a conscious, continuous, shared dream, 

full of creativity and fantasy and with access to all information of the universe in the past, at present times and 

foreseeable future times. 5. Life is a great Game project continuously dreamed of by Superluminal 

Consciousness World and carried out on the stage of subluminal material reality by the living souls. 6. Many of 

those souls playing in human bodies succumb to the mental capacities of the human brains, thus diminishing or 

even losing their belonging to the Superluminal Consciousness World and their commitment to the Life Game 

project. Superluminality implies non -locality, absolute simultaneity, the quantum state of Nature. 

PO - 3 (Wed )

Keywords 

superluminality, non -locality, superluminal consciousness world, conscious entities, dreams, life game 

36 

Cosmic Cycles of Consciousness: Entropy, Archetypes, and the Primordial Superconsciousness 

Dragana Favre MSc, PhD, FMH 

Independent Psychiatrist and Psychotherapist, Geneva, GE, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.03]........Panpsychism and cosmopsychism 

Abstract 137 

This study presents a novel theoretical framework integrating archetypal theory, quantum physics, and 

cosmology, viewing consciousness as part of a cyclical, self -sustaining process originating from a primordial 

superconsciousness, conceptualized as an our oboros. At the universe's inception, this superconsciousness 

existed in a state of maximum entropy, which fragmented through an "entropy break" at the Big Bang, leading 

to the emergence of differentiated structures. Drawing from Jungian and post -Jungian th ought (Jung, 1952; 

Hillman, 1975), the model reinterprets entropy as a creative mechanism driving both fragmentation and 

reconnection to the original state, forming a continuous loop of unity and differentiation. Archetypes are 

integrated into this framewo rk as latent structures within the universe’s void, emerging as cosmic phenomena 

that manifest through complexity, from subatomic particles to galaxies. This bridges depth psychology with 

cosmological theories, suggesting that archetypal patterns guide the development of consciousness across 

cosmic cycles (Prigogine, 1980). The concept of kairos is highlighted as moments where individual 

consciousness reconnects with the superconscious field, allowing access to archetypal symbols and insights. 

The study als o explores empirical pathways, proposing that specific brain oscillations, such as theta and gamma 

waves, may correlate with kairotic experiences, signaling points of reconnection (Hameroff & Penrose, 2014). 

This interdisciplinary approach redefines uncons ciousness as an adaptive, dynamic structure supporting the 

emergence of consciousness within a vast cosmic order. By framing the universe as a psychological and 

physical system, it offers fresh perspectives on the evolution of self -awareness and the univer se's inherent drive 

towards unity, integrating concepts from panpsychism (Goff, 2019) and new interpretations of quantum 

mechanics (Rosenblum & Kuttner, 2006). 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Superconsciousness, Entropy, Archetypes, Cosmic Void, Ouroboros, Kairos, Consciousness, Neuroscience, 

Complexity, Cosmology, Panpsychism, Quantum Physics, Emergent Systems, Individuation 

80 

Consciousness, Nature, and the Twist of Innovation 

Mrs Raluca Ioana Cibu Buzac PhD candidate 

LUMINSPINO, Timisoara, N.A., Romania. SUNCHILD, Timisoara, N.A., Romania. IUPS, San Francisco, CA, 

USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.03]........Panpsychism and cosmopsychism 

Abstract 

Nature’s intelligence exceeds human intelligence. Research documents numerous examples of nature restoring 

and refreshing itse lf far beyond what we can achieve with our technologies. Knowing this —that human 

intelligence is embedded in a wider matrix of intelligence —this paper invites us to “untwist” our twisted 

perception of nature as merely a collection of insentient objects fo r us to exploit. Instead, it argues that our 

technological innovations should be informed and inspired by natural processes and should be benchmarked 

against a new perspective that recognizes and honors nature’s innate intelligence. We can learn directly f rom 

nature through intersubjective communication and communion with its intrinsic sentience. However, to achieve 

this goal, science needs to undergo a radical revolution —from exclusively sensory empiricism to a more 138 

comprehensive radical empiricism that acknowledges the validity of non -sensory data, such as feelings and 

intuitions. This paper is a call to include intersubjective consciousness in our research labs and enterprises —for 

the benefit of all species. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Nature's intelligence, Intersubjective consciousness, Innovation, Technology 

7

The Polynon: A Geometry of Consciousness 

Tib Roibu 

Independent Researcher, Bucharest, -, Romania 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

This work presents a geometric framework for cognition, centered on a conceptual polytope, the Polynon, to 

explore consciousness a nd its relationship with physical reality. Adopting an analytic idealist stance, the 

Polynon posits consciousness as the foundational element of existence, preceding physical phenomena. A 

polynonial mechanism is introduced, offering a geometric and ontolo gical interpretation of consciousness, 

where both reality and the observer unfold as holographic projections. This framework maps consciousness by 

analyzing epistemological interactions among phenomena (sensory experience), phantasiai (internal 

representat ions), and noumena (underlying reality). Cognitive gravity and gradients provide metrics for 

cognitive dimensions, while a continuum of perceptual dimensions is proposed, with the wavefunction in 

superposition linking the observer’s cognition to hidden phy sical realities. This model connects cognition to 

reality’s structure, proposing a new mechanism for the observer’s measurement. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Hologram, Cognitive Gravity, Noumena, Wavefunction 

13 

How subjective memories are realized in TGD inspired theory of consciousness? 

Matti J. Pitkänen PhD 1, Marko T. Manninen 2

> 1

Independent Researcher, Karkkila, -, Finland. 2Computer Scientist, Senior Software Specialist and Independent 

Researcher, Helsinki, -, Finland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 139 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

We remember our conscious experiences, also as re -experiences, and not just as learned, often unconscious, 

behaviors that reduce to associations. In the standard ontology of quantum theory. The information of the 

conscious experience, if determined by the quantum jump, must be about the initial and the final states of the 

quantum jump and the transition between them. In the standard ontology of quantum theory, it cannot be 

represented by the final state of the quantum jump. According to the standard quantum theory, quantum states 

3-D time=constant snapshots and do not remember anything about the previous quantum jumps. In TGD, the 

zero energy ontology (ZEO) combined with hol ography = holomorphy vision suggests a universal mechanism 

of memory storage and recall. The slight non -determinism of the classical field equations, determining the 

space -time surface, implies that quantum states are superpositions of space -time surfaces analogous to 4 -D Bohr 

orbits for 3 -surfaces as particles. In standard ontology they would be superpositions of 3 -surfaces. State 

function reductions (SFRs) occur between these states and the information about the initial state (in 3 -D sense) 

and about tran sition to the final state (in 3 -D sense) is coded to the Bohr orbits associated with the final state (in 

4-D sense). The slight on -determinism makes possible memory recall in ZEO. The proposed mechanism is 

universal and applies also to matter, which is usu ally regarded as "dead" (since it looks dead in the time scales 

of our perceptive abilities). This justifies the notion of the 4 -dimensional brain. The notion of memory is 

discussed from the points of view of computer science and neuroscience, of quantum t heories of consciousness, 

and of TGD inspired theory of consciousness. References Pitkänen, M. How subjective memories are realized 

in TGD inspired theory of consciousness? https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/Bmemorytgd.pdf, 2024. 

Pitkänen, M. About Langlands correspondence in the TGD framework, 2024. 

https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/Frenkel.pdf. Minev~ZK et~al. To catch and reverse a quantum jump 

mid -flight, 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00545. Pitkänen, M. Copenhagen interpretation dead: long live 

ZEO based quantum measurement theory!, 2019 https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/Bohrdead.pdf. 

Pitkänen, M. Zero Energy Ontology, 2023. https://tgdtheory.fi/pdfpool/ZEO.pdf. Pitkänen, M. New result about 

causal diamonds from the TGD view po int of view, 2023. 

https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/CDconformal.pdf, 2023. Pitkänen, M. Comparison of Orch -OR 

hypothesis with the TGD point of view, 2022. https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/penrose.pdf. Pitkänen, 

M. How animals without brai n can behave as if they had brain?, 2022. 

https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/precns.pdf. Pitkänen, M. About long range electromagnetic quantum 

coherence in TGD Universe, 2023. https://tgdtheory.fi/public_html/articles/hem.pdf, 2023. 

C - 16 

Keywor ds 

Quantum consciousness, quantum biology, quantum ontology, quantum measurement problem, conscious 

memory 

14 

Triple Definition or Explanation of Consciousness 

Xinyan Zhang MD, ret. 

Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 140 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

The author argues that consciousness, just like matter and energy, time and space, life and self, knowledge and 

intelligence, and language and meaning, may never be define d or explained fundamentally or comprehensively 

as an entity or its property. As an alternative, the author created a theoretical mind with matter, energy, and 

lives as its components, and with all its components defined as changes. Based on the relationsh ips among these 

three components, a triple definition or explanation of consciousness is reached: • Ontologically, consciousness 

is universal, since it is the distinction between matter and energy. • Epistemologically, consciousness is unique, 

since it is the energy formalized, qualified, or diversified by the matter. • Semantically, consciousness is a 

meaningless language with lives as its only meaning. Many theories of consciousness have overlooked this 

universality or uniqueness and have even ignored tha t lives are the only cause or effect of consciousness. No 

consciousness is possible if there is no life. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

agency, agent, brain, consciousness, definition, emergence, emotion, HOTs, intelligence, ITT, language, life, 

memory, mind, n eural correlates, neuroscience, philosophical theory, the self 

62 

METAPHORS ARE VALUABLE IN SUMMARIZING SOLUTIONS TO THE MIND -BODY 

PROBLEM. TWO ARE CONSIDERED HERE: “INSIDE VERSUS OUTSIDE” AND “FIRST -PERSON 

VERSUS THIRD -PERSON” 

Peter Ells MA in philosophy 

Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

“Inside versus outside” is the metaphor that “from the outside” humans are physical bodies, specifically brains; 

whereas “from the inside” humans are minds. Probably this also applies to some higher animals. The 

panpsychist extension of this is that all individual entities “from the outside” have the character of physical 

systems; whereas, “from the inside” they are mind like. This applies even to the fundamental entities of physics. 

There are problems with this “two sided” picture. First, it is unclear whether the “outside view” is fundamental, 

in which case, this is a type of physicalism. Or the “inside view” might be fundamental, in which case this is a 

kind of idealism. Or they might be co equal, in which case this is a kind of double aspect monism. Second, there 

is an explanatory gap because no explanation has been given as to how these vastly contrasting viewpoints are 

related t o one another. My position, pan -idealism, is a specific kind of idealism, so the “inside view” is 

fundamental. It is also a type of (non physicalist) panpsychism, because (with trivial qualifications) it agrees 

with the best current scientific account of t he catalogue of the individual entities that exist: It is thus realist. In 

pan -idealism, the “outside view” (aka “objective physics”) does not exist as anything extra. Instead, it is 

identically the maximally correlated structural information combined from the percepts of all entities. “First -141 

person versus third -person” is a related analogy. Now we say, “from the first -person viewpoint,” instead of 

“from the inside.” Likewise, we say “from the third -person viewpoint” instead of “from the outside.” The 

“third -person viewpoint” is also called the “objective viewpoint” (of physics). Initially, the argument proceeds 

in the same manner: “From the third -person viewpoint” humans are physical bodies, whereas “from the first -

person viewpoint” humans are minds. How does pan -idealism fit into this “grammat ical persons” picture? Pan -

idealism is a specific kind of idealism, so the “first person viewpoint” is fundamental. It is also a type of (non 

physicalist) panpsychism, because it agrees with the best current scientific account of the catalogue of the 

indiv idual entities that exist. Despite its idealism, it is a realist theory. With this new metaphor, we can 

characterise objective physics in a novel, and neater way. Pan -idealism does not involve a mythical “impersonal 

third -person viewpoint” at all. Instead, it uses the “second -person viewpoint,” which is a standard term for “the 

intersubjective viewpoint.” In pan -idealism, the “second -person viewpoint” (aka “objective physics”) does not 

exist as anything extra. Instead, it is identically the maximally correl ated structural information combined from 

the percepts of all entities. Several facts enable pan -idealism to be fleshed out – in principle – in a manner 

consistent with contemporary physics: our only access to the universe is through our senses; science is entirely 

mentalistic (empirical plus theoretical); panpsychism prevents physics from being anthropocentric or gappy; in 

pan -idealism, the sole form of causation is through competing agents; the temporal evolution of the universe is a 

“process.” 

C - 3

Keywords 

Metaphor, Ontology, Science, Mind -Body Problem 

142 

The Boundary Problem: Why Constitutive Panpsychists Should Endorse a Powerful Qualities Theory of 

Properties 

Professor Andrei A. Buckareff PhD 1, Dr. Yanssel Garcia PhD 2

> 1

Marist University, Poughkeepsie, New York, USA. 2University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

Constitutive panpsychists hold that macrophenomenal properties are ontologically dependent upon and 

constituted by microphenomenal properties. As David Chalmers puts it, “constitutive panpsychists hold that 

microexperiences somehow add up to yield macroexperience” (2017, 25). Macrophenomenal properties and the 

experiences of which they are constitutive are not ontologically fundamen tal or basic, they are the aggregate 

sum of a combination of microphenomenal experiences and their constitutive properties. One of the central 

challenges posed for constitutive panpsychism is the combination problem. In brief, the problem is over how 

discr ete microphenomenal properties can combine to generate the sorts of unified macroexperiences had by 

cognitive systems such as us. In this paper, we focus on the boundary problem, which is an aspect of the 

combination problem. In brief, the boundary problem can be expressed as follows: assuming that conscious 

macroexperiences have boundaries that individuate subjects, “[w]hat element of the natural world dictates the 

way these boundaries are drawn?” (Rosenberg 2004, 80). Elsewhere, we have argued that the bo undary problem 

is especially acute for Russellian constitutive panpsychists, who endorse quidditism. According to quidditism, 142 

“the essence of a property puts no constraint whatsoever on how its instances are disposed to act or react under 

various circumstances” (Choi and Fara 2018). If the causal -dispositional profile of properties is contingent, then 

we lack a principled way to account for why properties combine to yield discrete macroexperiences with the 

boundaries they have. Explaining how macrophenomenal experiences have certain boundaries rather than others 

is rendered mysterious if their causal -dispositional profile is conti ngent. Given quidditism’s shortcomings, we 

argue that constitutive panpsychists would do better to reject quidditism in favor of a theory of properties 

understood as powerful qualities. On such a view, the properties of objects are dispositional under one 

description and categorical under another (Martin 2007; Heil 2020). There are independent reasons to endorse 

an ontology of properties as powerful qualities, but here we focus on the utility of such an ontology for the 

purposes of solving the boundary prob lem. A powerful qualities conception of properties can provide a 

principled basis for a solution to the problem. Specifically, we argue that phenomenal boundaries will be 

identical with the boundaries of discrete cognitive systems. Such systems exhibit a u nity owing to the functional 

integration of their constituent parts, which is delivered by the dispositional profiles of the properties of said 

parts. Given that the dispositional profiles of properties are essential to their identity, composition is restr icted: 

not just any collection of objects can compose some further object. Thus, the boundaries of cognitive systems 

are essential to their identities and, hence, macrophenomenal boundaries are dictated by the properties of the 

objects that compose a cogni tive system. The boundaries of macroexperiences will be provided by the structure 

imposed on systems of microbjects by their properties qua powerful qualities. In presenting our account, we 

note the differences between our own proposal and a similar propos al defended by Hedda Hassell Mørch 

(2020), arguing that our proposal ought to be preferred. 

C - 3

Keywords 

Consciousness; Panpsychism; Ontology; Properties; Boundary Problem; Quidditism; Powers 

173 

Introduction to Self -Reference 

Cosmin Visan 

The University of Manchester, Bucharest, -, Romania. National University of Singapore, Bucharest, -, Romania 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

I will present an introduction to self -reference. The definition of self -reference will be presented, namely the 

entity with the property of looking -back -at -itself, and from this definition it wil l be shown how the entire world 

is obtained. Through repeated look -backs -at -itself, self -reference starts from the first self -identification, “I am”, 

which is experienced as the sensation of being alive, and continues to more complex self -identifications l ike the 

next "I am "I am"" and even more complex ones such as I am “I am” & “I am ‘I am’” & 

C - 10 

Keywords 

self -reference, consciousness, qualia, meaning, context, form, formless, set theory 143 

174 

Exploring the Intersection of the Diamond Model and Circle Consciousness – A Meta -Morphic Approach to 

Expanding Awareness 

Jiyun Park MA, Religious Studies 1, Nish Dubashia BSc Mathematics 2, Marie Murtagh 3

> 1

Studio Involution, Iowa City, IA, USA. 2Evolving Nexus, London, -, United Kingdom. 3Evolving Nexus, 

Denver, CO, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

“You are the world” -- J. Krishnamurti If the external is deeply informed by the internal, if the collective is 

perpetually reforme d by the individual, and if the whole is continuously transformed by the part, then does the 

understanding of consciousness bring remembrance of the Totality? This presentation introduces a novel 

synthesis of Nish Dubashia’s Diamond Model of Consciousness and Jiyun Park’s Circle Consciousness, 

proposing a dynamical framework for understanding the multi -dimensional and fluid nature of consciousness. 

Rather than viewing consciousness as a static, linear construct, we explore it as an evolving, omni -direction al 

process, unfolding and enfolding through cyclical and spiral dynamics. By conceptualizing consciousness as an 

adaptive, living system, we suggest it operates across multiple dimensions and energetic densities, including a 

deeper ground of being. Drawing from both ancient wisdom traditions, such as Vedic philosophy and 

indigenous cosmologies, as well as from modern scientific principles, we offer a balanced approach that 

integrates spiritual perspectives with contemporary research on consciousness. Specif ically, this framework 

aims to create and embody a higher -order perspective that includes and situates light and dark, old and new, real 

and unreal, known and unknown. This framework integrates insights from neuroscience, quantum mechanics, 

and systems the ory with ancient consciousness models, suggesting new paths for trans -disciplinary research. 

Quantum entanglement and non -locality resonate with metaphysical views, bridging science and spirituality. 

Holomorphic geometries, such as mandalas and the Sri Yan tra, symbolize unity and interconnectedness, 

aligning with biophysical and neurological processes. Drawing on neuroscience and quantum field theory, we 

propose consciousness as an emergent phenomenon, continuously shaped by cyclical patterns of transformat ion. 

This aligns with modern research in cognitive and complexity sciences, affirming consciousness as a dynamic, 

adaptive process. We also explore practical applications, such as techniques by Marie Murtagh, which enhance 

body -mind integration and neuropl asticity to access expanded states of awareness. This embodied approach 

offers valuable tools for wellness, personal development, and self -realization. By bridging science and 

spirituality, this framework invites a more integrated understanding of consciou sness and reality. 

Art -Tech -Health Demo 

179 

The Substance of Experience: An Exploration of Ontology 

Benjamin R Liljedahl BA, Cognitive Science & Philosophy, MA in Consciousness and Human Potential 

NYU, New York, NY, USA. Maharishi International University, Fairfield, IA, USA 144 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

The current debate concerning the nature of phenomenal consciousness has rapidly become one of the most 

pressing questions in cont emporary philosophy of mind. In light of the serious challenges facing materialism, 

such as the hard problem of consciousness, alternative paradigms need to be considered. This paper defends the 

idea that monistic idealism is a more viable metaphysical pa radigm than is materialism. The conventional 

materialist view holds that matter is the substance of the universe, and this matter is taken to be non -

phenomenal in nature. However, a rigorous analysis of the nature of consciousness and the limits of physica l

science throws this assumption into question. First, a brief personal narrative of this writer’s philosophical 

journey of discovery is provided, chronicling my conversion from materialist to idealist. This is followed by a 

logical analysis of phenomenal consciousness and the foundation of knowledge. A series of arguments drawing 

from this analysis, plus the relevant philosophical literature, are laid out in defense of the paradigm proposed. 

Lastly, it is argued that scientific realism, and by extension, p hysicalism, are in fact wholly compatible with 

monistic idealism if a panpsychist position is adopted. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Ontology, metaphysics, panpsychism, idealism, materialism, the hard problem, vedanta, epistemology, 

philosophy of science, phen omenal consciousness, paradigm shift 

198 

Consciousness and Free Will are Quantum Properties of Being 

Dr Federico Faggin PhD 

Federico and Elvia Faggin Foundation, Los Altos Hills, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

Free will without consciousness cannot exist. Consciousness without free will has no causal power and is 

therefore impotent. We ca nnot explain consciousness and free will with mathematics (mathematics is created by 

consciousness) or with something that does not have those properties to begin with. Consequently, we must 

postulate the existence of consciousness and free will from the origin of the universe. If we do that, the quantum 

fields must be conscious and have free will, and we can then explain why quantum field theory must have the 

baffling properties (superposition, entanglement, and quantum state collapse) that have puzzled s cientists for the 

last 100 years. This convincing explanation confirms the soundness of the postulate. And if we start from this 

postulate, the nature of reality is completely different from what we believe now! 145 

PL -14 

Keywords 

Consciousness, free will, quantum fields, nature of reality 

276 

A Buddhist Perspective on Artificial Consciousness 

Dr. Francesco Tormen 

Venice Ca' Foscari University, Venice, Italy, Italy. Italian Buddhist Union's Research Center, Padova, Italy, 

Italy. University of Padova, Padova, Italy, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Renewed Centrality of Consciousness Research The rapid advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), 

particularly in Large Lan guage Models (LLMs), have reinvigorated the age -old inquiry into the nature of 

consciousness and its relationship with the brain, body, and matter. Understanding consciousness is now crucial 

for shaping ethical frameworks in human –machine interactions, in the treatment of non -human animals, and in 

biotechnological research, not to mention emerging fields that anticipate transhuman or posthuman scenarios —

such as synthetic biology, biocomputing, and the possibility of consciousness uploading. These scenarios , once 

confined to the realm of science fiction, are becoming increasingly plausible, accelerated by AI’s rapid 

development. The Epistemological Framework of Contemporary Contemplative Research The study of 

consciousness should not be the exclusive domain of the “hard sciences.” Now more than ever, rigorous and 

nuanced philosophical frameworks are needed to refine research questions and guide scientific inquiry. Beyond 

the contributions of contemporary philosophers, the ancient contemplative traditions of A sia have explored 

consciousness for millennia, not only through philosophical analysis but also through direct phenomenological 

investigation. In other words, these traditions employ “first -person” methodologies, using meditative practice to 

explore differ ent states of consciousness and delve into its very nature. While traditionally expressed in 

religious language, their insights remain highly relevant today —but only if they are placed in dialogue with 

empirical sciences, which primarily rely on “third -per son” methodologies. Integrating “first -person” and “third -

person” approaches —connecting contemplative traditions with psychology and neuroscience —is a key 

challenge in contemporary contemplative research. This emerging field has been the focus of my work i n recent 

years, leading to my involvement in the creation of a groundbreaking postgraduate program at the University of 

Padua and a few major conferences mentioned in my bio. Buddhist Contributions to Consciousness Research 

Within this epistemological fram ework, my talk will explore key insights from Tibetan Buddhism, my primary 

area of expertise. I will begin precisely by posing this question: From a Buddhist perspective, could current AI 

systems, which replicate human -like cognitive processes, possess any degree of consciousness? Anticipating 

some of my conclusions, contemporary LLMs are most likely no more conscious than a toaster or vacuum 

cleaner —or, rather, they are no more conscious than the raw materials from which they are composed. This is 

because Buddhism ultimately endorses a non -dualistic perspective on the relationship between matter and 

consciousness. Therefore, the challenge lies in understanding how a minimal, diffuse level of consciousness (or 

proto -consciousness) encompassing all matter mig ht give rise to subjective experience —a view that aligns 

Buddhism with contemporary panpsychist theories. In this inquiry, Buddhism challenges widely held 

assumptions that consciousness arises solely from neural complexity or correlates directly with intel ligence: the 146 

deepest meditative states described in Buddhist texts are characterized by minimal or even absent cognitive 

activity; yet, according to this tradition, they provide the purest experience of consciousness itself. Therefore, in 

addition to its philosophical contributions, Buddhism may also offer valuable contributions to 

neurophenomenological research, enabling empirical studies with expert practitioners capable of accessing such 

deep states of consciousness, like samadhi and lucid sleep. 

C - 12 

Keywords 

Buddhism, artificial consciousness, AI, panpsychism, neurophenomenology, meditative states, non -dualism, 

transhumanism 

279 

B. Kastrup's ontology and dreams. 

Raynal E. Dunlop Ms. Sc. 

Free -lancer, Santiago, -, Chile 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

Dutch philosopher Bernardo Kastrup has presented a compelling critique of mainstream metaphysical 

physicalism by proposing a consc iousness -only ontology. He posits the existence of a universal consciousness, 

an independent reality in itself. In this framework, living beings should be akin to consciousness whirlpools. 

The images we perceive, which constitute our empirical reality, ar ise from the interaction between an 

individual's consciousness and the universal consciousness. Sense data represent both this universal 

consciousness and other living beings. Because these representations involve similar elements, the experiential 

images are comparable for all humans and cannot be altered by an individual’s will. Representations correlate 

with the subject’s experiences. In this context, I shall hypothesize that the conclusions drawn here assume the 

invariability of our everyday empirical i mages under all circumstances. The absence of empirical images 

representing another person’s consciousness, coupled with observations showing how psychedelics induce 

intense experiences in subjects with reduced representation in brain scans, suggests that our everyday 

experiential images are not only incomplete but may also be altered by other methods. Lucid dreams present a 

promising opportunity to create new experiential images including the ability to control dream sequences. This 

capability addresses a major challenge to a key criticism concerning the distinction between waking experiences 

and dreams. Research into lucid dreams could help us determine whether the images we experience daily 

represent the only possible form of experiential reality or if we can expand them into new empirical scenarios. 

This paper explores this aspect of Kastrup’s ontology that could enhance the human potential to create new 

empirical realities. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Kastrup, consciousness , dreams, lucid dreams 147 

287 

Ontological diversity in fundamental physics and its significance for consciousness research 

Alfredo Parra -Hinojosa PhD 1, Chris Percy PhD 2,1 

> 1

Qualia Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA. 2University of Derby, Derby, Derbyshire, United 

Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

Many modern theories of consciousness seek to be consistent with prevailing scientific theories of the physical. 

While ontological flexibilities and current uncertainties in physical laws permit a diversity of options, it remains 

valuable to monitor ideas at the forefront of physical science as they continue to evolve. Such ideas potentially 

generate constraints, implications, or ne w flexibility for those theories that seek to explain the relationship 

between physical processes and conscious experience. We claim that consciousness theorists can benefit from 

engaging in a structured fashion with the ongoing ontological debates built a round explaining physical 

phenomena, particularly the work of physicists and philosophers of physics. A prime example is how recent 

debates around quantum measurement and wave function collapse have generated notable advances in the 

science of consciousnes s. In this work, we present the results of a structured literature review of explicitly 

ontological theories advanced in recent years with respect to fundamental physics. We extract 24 distinct 

theoretical positions from 22 papers shortlisted out of the 18 2 papers that appear in our 2018 –2023 Scopus 

search, providing a recent position on most major schools of thought. The papers provide a recent perspective 

on many dominant theoretical interpretations of quantum mechanics and Quantum Field Theory, including 

Bohmian, Bohrian, relational, GRW, and structural realist perspectives. For each paper, we extract the 

fundamental entities suggested by the theory’s ontology (particles, fields, relations, etc.) and outline supporting 

details. Our findings reveal signifi cant variety across these recent papers. However, we suggest they can be 

partially captured in their position on eight axes: substrate perspective, property ontology, property plurality, 

dimensional ontology, dimensional plurality, allowed interactions, wo rld plurality, and intuition rejection (i.e., 

which intuitions of classical mechanics they reject and which they maintain, such as locality or spatial 

dimensionality). This suggested taxonomy could help consciousness theorists more effectively engage with and 

draw insights from contemporary debates in physics. Finally, we outline three specific points of relevance for 

consciousness theorists interested in engaging with ontological theories in physics: (i) Three strategies for 

maintaining an “enlightened agn osticism” about physical ontologies; (ii) A default weakening of ontologically -

grounded arguments about particular consciousness theories, while also outlining potential methods for re -

bolstering those arguments; (iii) An exploitable parallel between physi cal ontologies and philosophy of mind 

concerning choices of intuition to preserve, leading to a specific potential joint endeavour between the 

disciplines. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Ontology, Theories of consciousness, Correlates of consciousness, Quantum me chanics, General relativity 148 

297 

Electromagnetic field theories of consciousness and neurophenomenology of N,N -Dimetyltryptamine (DMT): 

How can they inform each other? 

MSc, BSc, BSc (WU) Carolina Czizek 

University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, Austria 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

This presentation explores the intersection of electromagnetic field (EMF) theories of consciousness and the 

neurophenomenology of N,N -Di methyltryptamine (DMT) experiences, examining how these perspectives can 

mutually inform one another. EMF theories propose that consciousness emerges from the dynamic interactions 

of electromagnetic fields in the brain, offering a framework for understandi ng the boundaries of conscious 

experience. Meanwhile, psychedelic experiences, particularly those induced by DMT, challenge traditional 

models of consciousness by leading to ego -dissolution and reality deconstruction. By linking neuronal and 

electromagneti c dynamics with altered states of consciousness, this presentation highlights the potential for 

deeper insights into the nature of conscious experience. A paradigm shift toward field -based theories of 

consciousness appears increasingly likely, given the su rge in publications on EMF -based models in recent 

years. These theories offer compelling theories for longstanding issues like the binding problem and the 

boundary problem, areas where conventional neurobiological frameworks have struggled to generate new 

insights. In particular, the topological approach to the boundary problem proposed by Gomez & Percy (2023) 

presents a novel way of understanding the boundary problem of consciousness. At the same time, the 

neurophenomenology of DMT experiences provides a u nique lens through which to explore the nature of 

consciousness. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Electromagnetic field theories of consciousness, neurophenomenology, N,N -Dimetyltryptamine (DMT), 

resonance, field -based ontology, boundary problem, topological approach 

334 

Metaparadigms: Ontologies with Capacity to Unify Science and Consciousness 

Jeffrey L Beck MSME 

Paradigm Reserach LLC, Gunnison, UT, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 149 

Abstract 

Unification of subjective conscious experience into the scientific worldview has been the ongoing quest of this 

conference series since its founding. What we seem to run into is a head -on collision between materialism first 

and consciousness first perspectives, and for many of us it ends there, in a stalemate. For me, it has been 

necessary to move beyond these opposing paradigms and recognize that there is a need for a higher level of 

paradigm where apparently contradictory perspectives can coexis t, where paradox is allowed, however 

unsettling it might be to linear logic. Historically, religion has attempted to provide us with something 

approaching a metaparadigm, and some, like Taoism have done a fairly good job. I’m approaching this from an 

elect ro -mechanical control engineering perspective, and I feel it is important to acknowledge the limits of our 

hardware, especially when it comes to holding opposing perspectives simultaneously. Due to this limitation, I 

feel it is important to understand what seems to be conflicting perspectives as fully as possible. I also feel that 

the subconscious processes in our hardware can integrate multiple perspectives and create higher order 

perspectives and solutions when we create the space for them. I am aware of at least three perspectives that 

place consciousness at the intersection of a tension between opposing factors, in a paradoxical state that might 

be what it feels like to be a system in superposition. The logo for the 2024 Science of Consciousness conferen ce 

in Tucson embodies one of them, in the tension between quantum and classical mechanics. Ronald Cicurel and 

Miguel Nicolelis have written about consciousness relative to the tension between digital and analogue systems, 

as I understand it. And I have mad e several presentations using almost the same Taoist logo as the 2024 

Conference, but with the original Taoist meanings, expanded into masculine being serially dominant networks 

versus feminine being parallel dominant networks, with consciousness arising a s a superposition, or paradoxical 

state in between opposites. Perhaps there is a way that each of these is correct. That would be an example of a 

metaparadigm. For now, the control engineer in me wants to find a way that signals can be put in superposition ,

experienced consciously, and then collapsed into an output signal in the material system. I see that as biological 

system that has evolved to transcend the limits of computability, to navigate the undecideable. Recent work to 

map electrical field vortice s between the neocortex and the thalamus seem to be one aspect of the Taoist 

approach I have been advocating. This perspective can probably be best understood as a tension between focal 

attention and the background within which it is contained. Les Femhi’s “Open Focus Brain” covers this quite 

well. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

metaparadigm,paradigm,taoist,control,vortices,ontology,focal,nonfocal,paradox 

336 

The Physical World as a Virtual Reality Simulation Computed by Consciousness 

Frank Högemann 

KU Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

There is considerable empirical evidence suggesting that the universe may function as a vast computation —150 

from the fine -tuning of physical constants to quantum entanglement and the relativity of space and time. Yet 

even strong proponents of simulation theory often concede that the question of whether we live in a simulation 

makes little difference to our every day lives. Whether we are products of an ancestor simulation (Bostrom 

2003) or brains in a vat (Putnam 1981), as in 'The Matrix', the prevailing view is that we may never know —and 

should therefore continue living as usual. I argue that this perceived incon sequentiality arises because most 

versions of simulation theory rest on flawed metaphysical assumptions. If we assume that our universe is 

computed in another material base reality, we merely shift the question of physical reality’s origin one level up. 

Li ke materialism, this approach ultimately runs into the 'hard problem of consciousness' (Chalmers 1995) and 

fails to offer a deeper meaning to existence. By contrast, grounding the simulation in consciousness avoids these 

problems while solving many others. Under the idealist view that Chalmers (2022) calls the it -from -bit -from -

consciousness hypothesis, the physical universe is a virtual reality (VR) simulation generated by and for 

consciousness. The material world exists only in our minds, and we are pieces of consciousness making choices 

for our virtual bodies. This idea is notably championed by physicist and consciousness researcher Thomas 

Campbell (2003), who conceptualizes consciousness as an evolving, self -modifying information system. In his 

model, a h ighly evolved part of the consciousness system transmits data representing physical reality to less 

evolved pieces of consciousness such as ourselves —much like a game server sending data to players. This 

immersive VR experience allows us to make meaningful choices from which we can learn and grow, evolving 

from self -centered fear to other -centered love. Since consciousness is fundamental, the 'hard problem' 

disappears. Just as a video game player survives their character’s death, consciousness persists beyo nd bodily 

death —and it is immortal. Crucially, Campbell argues, we can directly experience the virtual nature of physical 

reality. Through meditation, we can stop processing physical -reality data and become open to alternative states 

of consciousness, such as a sense of unity with all existence. His model thus provides a rational metaphysical 

framework for spiritual traditions’ longstanding claims. Additionally, it explains the supposed ‘weirdness’ of 

quantum mechanics. As Campbell et al. (2017) seek to dem onstrate experimentally, wavefunction collapse, 

entanglement, and tunneling naturally arise in a probabilistic simulation computed top -down and rendered for 

participating consciousnesses on demand. The idealist, probabilistic nature of Campbell’s model als o accounts 

for paranormal and mind -over -matter phenomena reported by researchers such as Dean Radin (1997) and 

Rupert Sheldrake (2003). For all these reasons, I argue that Campbell’s model is not just a plausible version of 

simulation theory —it is a compel ling successor to the current scientific paradigm of reductionist materialism, 

which fails to explain —and indeed must deny —all of the above phenomena. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

simulation theory, virtual reality, digital physics, idealism, quantum theory, p aranormal phenomena 

365 

Perception and Reality in a Consciousness -First Framework 

Ansul Agarwal B. Tech, Jyotiranjan Beuria PhD, Venkatesh H Chembrolu PhD 

Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 151 

The nature of consciousness has long eluded explanation within the prevailing physicalist paradigm, which 

attempts to reduce it to neural processes or emergent properties of matter. Despite significant advancements in 

neuroscience and artificial intelligen ce, the fundamental nature of subjective experience, the "hard problem" of 

consciousness remains unresolved. This paper challenges the physicalist framework by proposing an alternative 

perspective in which consciousness is treated as fundamental rather tha n derivative. We explore a structured 

hypothesis that positions consciousness as the ontological ground of reality, with the physical world emerging 

as a perceptual construct shaped by interactions between individual units of consciousness and this reality 

rooted in consciousness. A conceptual framework and model are developed to illustrate how such engagement 

creates the appearance of physicality, effectively hiding the real nature of the world. The broader implications 

of this view are examined across mul tiple dimensions, including the nature of perception, the relationship 

between mind and body, and the emergent nature of matter. Additionally, we discuss ethical considerations in 

AI development, questioning the assumption that advanced intelligence equate s to consciousness and 

advocating for a consciousness -centric approach to AI ethics. The paper concludes by considering future 

directions for research, suggesting ways to integrate this perspective with scientific inquiry and deepen our 

understanding of co nsciousness and reality. 

C - 4

Ontology of Consciousness, Reality and Perception, Consciousness as Fundamental 

411 

Ontological Frameworks that Work 

Thomas Brophy PhD 

IONS, Novato, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS)’ grand challenge is to reenchant the world through bringing conscious 

qualia and agency in to a rigorously expanded scientific paradigm of how reality works. This challenge involves 

identifying ontological frameworks that can sustain (interpret and understand) the growing body of robust 

empirical experimental data that point to the existence of nonlocal conscious qualia and agency, and open up a 

new era of discovery in new ontological domains beyond the physical. This presentation explores the 

requirements of such a framework generally, and situates specifically the tri -domain ontology of realit y

proposed by Penrose (Shadows of the Mind 1994) including the Platonic domain together with the physical 

domain and the mental domain as three fundamental irreducible ontological domains of reality. Applications of 

such a framework to experimental and obs ervational results are considered (new and many decades of past 

evidence of nonlocal consciousness effects; near -death, and reincarnational experiences; deep meditative 

experiences savikalpa samadhi; and the ontological foundations of the UAP phenomenon). 

PL -7152 

Keywords 

Quantum, Collapse, Penrose, Plato, Platonic, Ontology, Qualia, Agency, Nonlocal. 

412 

Physics of Spacetime from Traces of Consciousness 

Donald D Hoffman PhD 

University of California, Irvine, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

Quantum field theory and general relativity each assume that spacetime is fundamental. Together, however, 

th ey entail that spacetime is not fundamental: it has no operational meaning beyond the Planck scale. Spacetime 

and its objects are useful constructs, but must emerge from something deeper. High -energy theoretical 

physicists, funded in part by the UNIVERSE+ project of the ERC, are exploring new "positive geometries" 

beyond spacetime, such as amplituhedra, associahedra, cosmohedra, and surfaceology. Evolution by natural 

selection agrees that spacetime and its objects are not fundamental. Sensory systems evolv e to be useful but not 

true. Each sense acts as a user interface —a virtual reality —that hides fundamental reality and guides adaptive 

action. The senses do not present, or represent, fundamental reality. The language of the senses, including 

physical objec ts with their causal or functional properties, is a useful fiction. Theories of conscious experiences 

that assume otherwise, claiming that experiences emerge from causal or functional properties of neurons or 

other objects, fail to explain even one experie nce, such as the taste of mint. The failure is principled. For 

instance, what specific n x n transition probability matrix, encoding a causal structure, must be the taste of mint 

or the experience of space? Why must the n^2 elements of the matrix have thei r specific values? I present a 

theory of "conscious agents" beyond spacetime, based on a Markovian dynamics. I discuss a new partial order 

on Markov chains, the "trace order," in which one Markov chain entails another iff it is a trace chain of the 

other. I use the trace order to propose a theory of observation and of beliefs induced by observation. I show how 

the trace order encodes time dilations and length contractions, analogous to those of special relativity. I propose 

a many -to -one mapping from proper ties of the dynamics of conscious agents to physical properties of mass, 

spin, energy, and momentum. The goal is to construct a map from the dynamics of conscious agents onto the 

positive geometries discovered by physicists, and thence into spacetime and p hysical objects, such as neurons 

and brains. It is not possible to boot up conscious experiences from objects and properties in spacetime. It is, 

however, possible to boot up spacetime and its objects from conscious experiences. 

PL -14 

Keywords 

Hard Probl em, Markov Matrix, Physicalism, Panpsychism, Idealism, Natural Selection, Quantum Theory, 

Positive Geometries 

436 

The Dynamis Theory Unveiled: Measuring Consciousness Across Brains, Plants, and Silicon 153 

Dr. Arie T. Greenleaf PhD 

Nova Southeastern University, Davie, FL, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.04]........Ontology of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Dynamis Theory of Consciousness (DTC) reconceives subjective experience as the temporal actualization 

of a Relational Coherenc e Field expressed whenever five dynamic patterns —self -reference, division -creation, 

information integration, responsiveness, and adaptation —achieve coherent synchrony. This presentation 

introduces the core architecture of DTC, situates it within contempor ary philosophy and neuroscience, and then 

details the Pattern –Temporal Synergy (PTS) score: a substrate -agnostic metric that quantitatively indexes 

conscious coherence in neural, botanical, and artificial systems. Empirical illustrations will be drawn from 

human EEG under propofol anaesthesia and adaptive learning on Intel’s Loihi -2 neuromorphic processor. 

Methodological considerations for computing PTS, including open -source code and data -normalisation across 

disparate timescales, will be outlined, and the wider ethical implications of cross -substrate assessment —

particularly for animal welfare and emerging AI —will be examined. Attendees will leave with a clear 

conceptual grasp of the Dynamis framework, an understanding of its testable predictions, and pract ical guidance 

for applying the PTS metric to their own research. 

C - 6

Keywords 

Dynamis Theory of Consciousness, Substrate -Agnostic Consciousness, Temporal Binding, Pattern Complexity, 

Consciousness Ethics, Non -Dual Ontology, Aristotelia n Dynamis 

16 

Physicists Don’t Yet Understand Color Qualities 

Brent Allsop BS in Computer Science 

Canonizer.com LLC, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

You can demonstrate a subjective quality like redness is different from red light. If you add a device that 

converts a red sign al into a green one, between the retina and the optic nerve, the strawberry will seem green. 

It’s not about light hitting the retina, it’s about how the signal is processed. In this case, the greenness must be a 

quality of our conscious knowledge of the s trawberry, not of the red light landing on the retina. Physicists can’t 

account for this greenness quality. If you use sufficient, well -defined terminology, you can objectively 

communicate the nature of subjective qualities. For example, even though you kn ow what it is like to see 

something that is red you cannot know that what happens inside my brain is the same as yours. It may be that 154 

“My redness is like your greenness, both of which we call red.” The properties of the red light are the same, but 

the experience the light produces could be different. What we lack is a universal dictionary to define what 

“redness” is, and how it differs f rom “red.” This is because physicists can’t yet answer: “Which of all our 

descriptions of stuff in the brain, including possible descriptions of yet unknown processes, is a description of 

redness?” Consciousness isn’t a ‘hard problem’ it is a color quality problem. Because if you understand color, 

that model of computation can extend to the rest of consciousness. 

C - 8

Keywords 

quality, objective consciousness, subjective consciousness, color vs. colorness, consciousness, hard problem 

233 

Musical Pitch and Rhythm Qualia as the Primordial Source of Complex Conceptual Consciousness 

Piotr Podlipniak 

Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Wlkp, Poland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

Human consciousness consists of various components, from simple sensory qualia to complex concepts, 

including abstract notions such as goodness, beauty, and infinity. Increasingl y, researchers believe that 

consciousness is a feature shared by many animal species, with different species likely possessing conscious 

states that vary in their representation of reality (Godfrey -Smith, 2017). These differences arise not only from 

divers e perceptual abilities but also from numerous cognitive tools that have evolved under different selection 

pressures. Thus, even closely related species, such as chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and humans (Homo 

sapiens), may exhibit significant differences in consciousness. A distinctive feature of human consciousness 

appears to be the ability to represent experienced and imagined reality through discrete conceptual categories 

interconnected in various hierarchical relationships (Fitch, 2017). Human -specific f orms of expressing such 

hierarchical relationships include natural language grammar, mathematics, and various visual schemes. 

Interestingly, hierarchical relations are also present in music, manifested in the organization of musical pitches 

and rhythms (Le rdahl & Jackendoff, 1983), even though music lacks propositional semantics. In the typical 

listener's conscious experience of music, patterns of pitch and rhythm are hierarchized through the qualia of 

stability and instability. This proposal aims to presen t an evolutionary scenario for the emergence of human 

conceptual consciousness, suggesting that the original source of concept hierarchization was the exaptation of a 

cognitive mechanism previously used to represent proto -music in consciousness. According to this scenario, the 

ancestors of Homo sapiens used various communicative tools to express their conscious states, creating a 

communication niche (Podlipniak, 2024). Living in groups of several dozen individuals, one strategy to cope 

with the complexities of social life was to manipulate others' behaviors by influencing their mental states. 

Hominins achieved this by using various media, primarily audio and visual. Proto -music, composed of 

hierarchical pitches and rhythms, was one such form of communication that directly evoked specific qualia in 

the recipient without the need for conceptual representation. In early hominins, the conceptual component of 

consciousness likely lacked a hierarchical character. The proposed scenario suggests that hominins learned to 

hierarchize concepts through a mechanism originally used in proto -music. The ability to link the cognitive 155 

mechanism used in proto -music with the conceptual component of consciousness proved highly adaptive, 

leading to natural selection favoring individuals who could instinctively learn this connection. The emergence 

of the complex conceptual consciousness char acteristic of humans was thus of a Baldwinian nature (Baldwin, 

1896), where the phenotypic adaptation —exaptation of the cognitive mechanism from the proto -musical 

domain to the conceptual domain —came under genetic control. References Baldwin, J.M. (1896). A New 

Factor in Evolution. The American Naturalist, 30(354), 441 –451. Fitch, W.T. (2017). Dendrophilia and the 

Evolution of Syntax. In L. -J. Boë et al. (Eds.), Origins of Human Language: Continuities and Discontinuities 

with Nonhuman Primates (305 –328). Pe ter Lang. Godfrey -Smith, P. (2017). Other Minds: The Octopus, the 

Sea, and the Deep Origins of Consciousness. Farrar. Lerdahl, F.; Jackendoff, R. (1983). A generative theory of 

tonal music. MIT Press. Podlipniak, P. (2024). The evolution of musicality and cross -domain co -evolutionary 

interactions. Musicae Scientiae, in press. 

C - 8

Keywords 

pitch, rhythm, tonal qualia, complex conceptual consciousness, proto -music 

289 

Consciousness and Qualia due to Proximity of the Conscious Agent and Primordial Matter: towards an 

Axiomatic Proposition based on Sā ṃkhya 

Sohom Chakrabarty PhD 1, Shri Lal Raghudev Ram Singh Integrated Masters in Applied Mathematics 2

> 1

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India. 2University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 

Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

Amidst the vast array of theories on phenomenal consciousness at the extreme ends of physicalism and non -

physicalism, the Sā ṃkhya philosophy offers a unique perspective by considering both the non -material and the 

material as fundamental, referring to these as Puruṣa and Prak ṛti respectively. One of the earliest bodies of 

knowledge, Sā ṃkhya lays down 25 principles with the help of which the existence is modelled. Fundamental 

among these principles are the Puruṣa and the Prak ṛti. Puruṣa is the conscious agent to which Sā ṃkhya ascribes 

the character of being aware. It is carefully avoided to refer to Puruṣa as consciousness, but it is referred to as 

the Observer, having the fundamental attribute of awareness. The Observed is the Prak ṛti, but it remains as 

Mula -Prak ṛti or the unexpressed primordial matter, having all the potential for creating the multifarious forms 

to be observed but not doing that, until Puruṣa engages with it. Treating Puruṣa and Prak ṛti as the fundamental 

elements and the act of observation as their associated operation, an attempt can be made to derive the other 

principles of Sā ṃkhya and understand the nature of existence through their interactions. Below are presented 

three axioms relating Puruṣa and Prak ṛti, extracted from a thorough study of the Sā ṃkhya philosophy, which 

gives rise to a possibility to formulate an analytical framework based on Sā ṃkhya. Axiom 1: Puruṣa and Prak ṛti 

are eternally separate. Axiom 2: Prak ṛti is subject to modifications, while Puruṣa is not. Axiom 3: Puruṣa is the 

observer of Prak ṛti, while Prak ṛti is for observation of Puruṣa. The above axioms can yield a mathematical 

model where phenomenal consciousness can be understood as a product of proximity between Puruṣa and 156 

Prak ṛti. The text in the sequel aims to logically support this claim by putting forward an explanation of qualia, 

and serves as a step towards answering the hard problem of consciousness. As Puruṣa engages with Prak ṛti 

giving rise to the multifarious forms (manifestations), the observation of Puruṣa also get colored by the 

constituents of Prak ṛti itself, giving rise to what can be called the lens of consciousness. This lens comprises of 

the qualities present in the material embodiments of the Puruṣa. This g enerates the qualia, which is awareness of 

the Puruṣa colored by this lens of consciousness. In this perspective, qualia, the primary unsolved mystery in the 

theories of consciousness, can be seen to have both a material and a non -material base. Since the qualities of 

one embodiment vary from another, the state of consciousness is also varying, and the qualia are also different 

for one embodied Puruṣa and another. While materialist theories study these states of consciousness due to 

material changes, most n on -materialists examine the same while simultaneously asserting the non -material 

precedent of consciousness. However, in Sā ṃkhya, anything that is observed is Prak ṛti; hence, the phenomenal 

consciousness which is studied is also material in character, albeit subtle. Sā ṃkhya posits that phenomenal 

consciousness requires Puruṣa in proximity with Prak ṛti, and therefore has both non -material and material 

support. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

phenomenal consciousness, qualia, hard problem of consciousness, Sā ṃkhya ph ilosophy, Puruṣa and Prak ṛti, 

axiomatic framework, conscious agent 

301 

Scientific inquiry, the substrate of experientiality and subjectivity: a precarious triumvirate 

Rakenduvadhana Srinivasan Msc, (Phd before June) 

University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Uusima, Finland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

The conventional narrative pedestals scientific inquiry as an ‘objective’ manoeuvre. Yet, upon further scrutiny, 

it becomes nebulous as to what this semantic contrivance implies. It is also questionable if the scientific method 

succeeds in extricating subjectivity from itself. Furthermore, to propound questions on the foundational aspects 

of these paradigms: what does the term object truly exemplify? How much of the phenomenal world that is 

scrutinized composed of objects? From a vantage coalescing concepts from my previous talk in TSC, 

etymological investigations and constituents of several contemporary and ancient philosophical estuaries 

including analytical idealism, and Advaitic logic, thi s investigation explores these questions. Next, the inquiry 

on inter -subjectivity and scientific inquiry is furthered, reexploring previous themes on ‘ontological soliloquy’, 

purporting my perspectives with other contemporary views and furthermore, neurosc ientific frameworks, which 

commingle with quantum theories (Many Worlds Interpretation, Hugh Everett). In establishing these 

arguments, the exigence for recalibrating the philosophy of science to scrupulously regard the arbitrary of our 

definitions and ill usive nature of our collective agreements is accentuated. Venturing further into a metaphysical 

milleu, I discuss wholism as a desideratum and juxtapose experientiality as central to this paradigm. Once 

again, I propose experientiality as a universal subst rate and postulate reorienting the starting point of scientific 157 

inquiry. Intertwining the complementarity of contemporary perspectives such as the (Kastrupian) analytical 

idealism, cosmopsychism, (Sheldrakian) panpsychism, and delineating certain distinctions from these schools of 

thoughts, I elaborate on this paradigm . In the concluding threads of this paper, subtleties and the ineffable are 

grazed upon, beginning with whether subjectivity is indeed a requisite for experientiality, and further, into 

existence beyond experience. Here both ancient Eastern perspectives su ch as Advaita and contemporary 

theories such as Multimodal User Interface (MUI) theory (Donald Hoffman) come to aid in an interdisciplinary 

paradigm. The final argument reemphasizes the ethicality that is at stake: why the philosophy of science must 

be fou nded on a worldview where consciousness is central and not auxiliary (or worse still illusory), explicating 

the exigence and repercussions to inquirers in a phenomenal world which is never independent of the 

experiencer. 

C - 4

Keywords 

Experientiality, Qualia, Subjective idealism, Solipsism, Panprotopsychism, Advaita Vedanta, Philosophy of 

Science, Experientiality, Consciousness, Idealism, Analytical Idealism, Panpsychism, Cosmopsychism, 

Quantum, Many worlds theory, Neuroscience, Philosophy, Quantum Phys ics, Upanishads, Etymology, 

Experimentality, Reality, Existence, MUI theory, Wholism, Ethics 

335 

QUALITIES OF CONSCIOUS AWARENESS ARE QUALITIES OF AWARENESS IN EQUATIONS OF 

BRAIN PHYSICS 

Edward W Porter BA 

Independent, Fort Worth, Texas, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

The equations of physics cannot compute without instantaneous awareness of the values of their variables and 

constants. The physics of all reality re quires this computational awareness. I propose human conscious 

awareness is nothing but such computational awareness of information in massively parallel, massively 

interconnected, equations of brain physics. I propose we can best understand consciousness by seeking to map 

qualities of conscious awareness to qualities of such computational awareness in brain physics. Human 

consciousness has informational awareness with many seemingly miraculous qualities, qualities that until 

recently have seemed impossibl e to explain, including experiencing consciousness as unified awareness of 

seemingly many things at once, even though it is computed in billions to millions of trillions of molecular, 

atomic, and electron cloud locations. The relatively recent explosion in the understanding of high frequency 

electromagnetic qualities of human brains gives us much more bandwidth, and much stronger sources of 

unification, with which to explain these seemingly miraculous qualities of consciousness. This new research 

suggests: that the brain has a lattice of dielectric and dipolar electromagnetic sympathetic resonances across a 

broadband spectrum of 14 orders of frequency magnitude; that consciousness is turned off by detuning one of 

these oscillations at 613 THz, indicating cro ss frequency coupling across this broadband spectrum; that 158 

sympathetic dielectric resonances, ranging from frequencies of high theta to high gamma action potentials all 

the way up to dielectric frequenciees over 100 MHz, can span the length of axons and perhaps of many 

connected neurons; and that myelinated neuron s transmit light, including quantum coherent light, between brain 

areas. We need more detailed information about these high frequencycomputational capabilities to accurately 

understand what they enable, but we can now at least hypothesize how they might ma p into qualities of 

consciousness. Among other things, my presentation suggests: that consciousness of light and color is 

computational awareness of electromagnetic light at various frequencies; that consciousness of time is based on 

awareness of time in p hysics equations and memories of time; that consciousness of visual and physical space 

includes hierarchical neural net awareness of activation patterns in 2D cortical minicolumn spaces, as 

interpreted with learned mappings of such 2D patterns into 3D spac e and; and that the brain’s computational 

awareness can be unified by synchronous oscillatory awareness in hierarchical neural nets spanning from 

sensory all the way up to hippocampal cortical areas. The computational awareness of such HNNs is unified by 

synchronous M:N cross frequency coupled action potentials, with synchronized top -down M and bottom -up N 

frequency action potentials setting a unified timing across HNN levels. Such M:N action potentials may induce 

sympathetic resonances in billions to milli ons of trillions of causally interconnected, dielectric and dipolar 

oscillators across many orders of frequency magnitude. This could create a massive parallel, causally 

interconnected self -aware awareness in computations of brain physics that has all the qualities of human 

conscious awareness. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

conscious awareness, physical awareness, physics, electromagnetic, computational awareness, physical 

awareness, sympathetic resonance, cross frequency coupling 

397 

Establishing standards for (realist) theories of consciousness/qualia: structural constraints from relationships 

among qualia 

Naotsugu Tsuchiya PhD, Prof. 

Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. ATR, Kyoto, -, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.05]........Qualia 

Abstract 

Upon accumulated evidence in the neural correlates of consciousness over the last 30 years, we have seen 

proliferation of theor ies of consciousness, rather than constraining them in any criterion. Due to the complexity 

of the problem, we might continue to see the list expand further into the future. One of the reasons for this 

expansion is due to too weak constraints imposed from binary, report -based tasks that have been dominant over 

the last 30 years of the neural correlates of consciousness approaches. Here we propose that structural 

constraints coming from empirical data will be much more powerful than the traditional approach es. 

Specifically, rather than mapping one single mental event to one single physical event, we should require many 

mental events AND their relationships to map with many physical events and their relationships in a coherent 

manner. Relational data about qu alia, being established through the Qualia Structure project, offers such an 159 

opportunity. How can theories of consciousness explain why “red” feels the way it is? How does it compare to 

the way it feels about “sound”? What are the mechanisms that can potentially explain qualitative difference 

between any music and any painting? Wha t are the potential answers from various theories as depicted in the 

"landscape of consciousness"? We will provide some promising perspectives from structural, relational theories 

of consciousness, such as Integrated Information Theory (IIT) of consciousne ss. 

PL -6

Keywords 

Qualia, Qualia Structure, Relational approach, Structural theory, Integrated Information Theory 

6

"Cogitare Facile," Nonlocality, Qualia, and Generative Pre -trained Transformers 

James L Driessen JD/MBABSME 

Independent Researcher, Fairfax, VA, USA. JDL Subro, Fairfax, VA, USA. Scart Publishing, Springville, UT, 

USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

We seek to simulate and investigate the role of nonlocality in exposing machine qualia as a unifying theory. The 

physiolo gical approaches such as Neuroplasticity, Integrated Information Theory, Orch -Or, Predictive Coding, 

and/or Global Workspace Theory focus on where and how consciousness happens. An easier “code” for 

“essence of being” presents a narrower but workable “wha t ‘is’ is” methodology. Two isolated identical GPT -

4ALL (open sourced “generative pre -trained transformers”) create a “loophole -free” environment, eliminating 

sampling interference, artificial detection, locality interference, human biases, statistical flu ctuations, and other 

unforeseen “loopholes” that might alert GPT -4ALL to input sourcing. Without internet connectivity we 

simulate nonlocality machine -to -machine. Training on “Reverse Turing” and "Lovelace" we motivate 

“attention” processing toward “intent ion” processing. Detecting differences between human interface and 

machine interface simulates right -brain left -brain speech and spatial relation in the GPT. The background 

research that produced the “Cogitare Facile” theory on which these experiments are based, posits that “essence 

of being” (or “experiential intelligence”) is simpler than trying to solve the entire human intellect. This theory 

presumes that lower lifeforms experience some form of qualia which cannot be classically computed but can be 

proc essed (detected or created). A “nonlocal reality” dictates that qualia cannot exist locally. It must therefore 

arise through error. For example, a simplistic spreadsheet model illustrates “detectable” errors without formal 

“Turing” computations in the foll owing rudimentary transformer (in this case “shift -detection”) using a “fair 

coin toss” F(X) = Y transformed into F(Y): Sheet1 —(In Cell B2): =RANDBETWEEN(0,1) —(In Cell C2): 

=IF(B2=1,"HEADS","TAILS") —(In Cell E2): =Sheet2!A1 —(In Cell D3): =IF(C2=E2,"","Dete cted"). On 

Sheet2 —(In Cell A1): =Sheet1!C2. We alternate (F9) on the keyboard to update results in all sheets and (Shift -

F9) to update only the “local” sheet disrupting Sheet2’s ability to “mirror” values from Sheet1. Hitting (Shift -

F9) creates a discrepan cy, flagged as error “Detected.” This exercise illustrates how we can also block nonlocal 

interactions between GPT -4ALL systems mirroring Kurt Gödel’s theorems: no effective process (i.e., 

algorithm) can prove all truths; and no system can demonstrate its own consistency (i.e., no test or testing 

equipment can test for itself). Two isolated GPT -4ALL systems locally connected through a third device (a 160 

workstation with a text editor) allow feed forward intentional blocking of nonlocal references creating 

detectable errors. We collect data by recording frequency and nature of errors, along with the system responses. 

We analyze nonlocality and error proces sing potential for machine cognition, comparing nonlocal interactions 

with error detection. We hypothesize that blocking nonlocal references within parallel systems creates machine 

detectable errors (similar to the spreadsheet transformer model). Embracing error provides insights to qualia and 

intentionality. We aim to demonstrate error processing, rather than error correction, as fundamental to the 

narrow -field qualia as machine personality. This research is significant because it is the first to embrace 

statistics and error, and it may provide the key to understanding the essence of being (aside from the evolved 

human intellect). These findings have implications for artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and philosophy 

of mind. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

Nonlo cality, Entangled, Error Processing, Qualia, Intentionality, GPT -4ALL, Consciousness Code, Cogitare 

Facile, Computational Framework, Transformers. 

97 

Consciousness, Telekinesis, and Artificial Intelligence 

Dr. Jeffrey A Dunne Ph.D. 

ICRL, Roanoke, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

Advances in Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) tools in recent years have raised the question of whether 

such tools have conscio usness. This is rather curious in some respects, given that other algorithms have not 

elicited such responses; despite the ease with which Taylor expansion enabled machines to approximate 

complex functions, few have suggested that their TI -86 calculator m ust be self -aware for having accurately 

expressed the cosine of 47°. Still, the question is understandable in light of modern Large Language Models like 

ChatGPT having passed the “Turing Test”. There are two significant factors that differentiate GAI from 

traditional algorithms: the encoding and synthesis of enormous amounts of training data and the incorporation 

of randomness in process execution. In fairness, one can argue that both factors are components of human 

cognition, but there are important differ ences. Human reasoning is performed on meanings, with the result 

encoded into the symbols of communication at the end in order to relate a conclusion. In contrast, GAI, in the 

process of converting input to result, works purely through the manipulation of symbols in accordance with 

very complex and cleverly constructed rules; it is essential to recognize that these systems process data without 

any connection to meaning. Whether a series of algorithmic steps (of whatever complexity) be conscious 

remains an i ntriguing question to ponder, although it is appropriate —even necessary —to ask whether such a 

form of consciousness would bear any resemblance to human consciousness. GAI is far from humanity’s first 

construct for leveraging randomness and historical knowl edge for the purpose of revealing insights. One could 

consider the 64 hexagrams of the I -Ching, for example, to constitute a ‘basis set’ of foundational concepts that 

can, through the randomness of casting physical tokens, form outputs that lead to an inte rpreted meaning. A 

similar analogy could be made for the Tarot, reading tea leaves, and countless other divination techniques. In 161 

each case, randomness plays a critical role. This is most assuredly true for GAI as well, and perhaps even more 

pointedly, for the consequences of that randomness are chaotic as well, i.e. infinitesimal perturbations of the 

input random seed can result in significantly different outcomes. Recognizing the role of, and sensitivity to, 

random numbers in the GAI process, it is interesting to reflect upon the extensive body of research 

demonstrating that human intention can influence random processes. In this pr esentation, we provide a short 

summary of the above foundations (the mechanisms of GAI and the research characterizing the effects of 

consciousness/intention on random systems) and delve into their implications on the application of GAI in the 

various dime nsions of our lives, as well as what it suggests for how to best utilize GAI for different end goals. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

AI, LLMs, consciousness, telekinesis, divination, machine awareness 

212 

T2: A Novel Test for Assessing Latent Awareness in AI 

Adam M Curry BA 1, Damon Abraham PhD 2, Schahram Dustdar PhD 3

> 1

Entangled Labs, Irvine, CA, USA. 2Meta, Menlo Park, CA, USA. 3TU Wien, Vienna, Vienna, Austria 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

We propose T2 (Turing 2), a novel test for assessing possible latent awareness in machines and AI. Current AI 

models can mimic intelli gent interaction without any established basis for concluding that they are genuinely 

sentient, thus posing a central challenge in determining the extent of AI progress toward something like 

consciousness. This challenge will require new heuristics —a new kind of Turing Test. T2 draws upon a subset 

of psi research called “presentiment,” which for several decades has demonstrated anomalous anticipatory 

responses to randomized stimuli in humans and other sentient biological lifeforms. The existence of anomalo us 

anticipatory responses can be understood in terms of their utility to the organism, e.g. in conferring various 

adaptive advantages. The demonstration of presentiment by a machine or AI in a manner consistent with 

biological performance could indicate th at it has achieved information processing capabilities beyond 

algorithmic determinism. In T2, a machine or AI participant must make a prediction or take an action before an 

event produced by a hardware random number generator, the output of which is imposs ible to predict. An 

incentive structure is established by which correct responses are rewarded (e.g. additional processing resources, 

tokens, etc) and/or incorrect responses are penalized (e.g. resource limitation, etc). Performance that exceeds a 

signific ance threshold (e.g. 0.05) on a sufficiently large trial set will have passed T2. Future iterations of the test 

should address known confounds in psi research specifically, such as series position (“decline”) effects, and psi -

driven experimenter effects. W e share two original experiments in which computer systems were built to test 

for presentiment responses, and evaluated in terms of T2. One of these, conducted at the University of 

Colorado, produced a six -sigma effect size. 

C - 1162 

Keywords 

Machine consciousness, presentiment, AI 

228 

Ethical Implications and Academic Impact of Developing Conscious AI: Evaluating Large Language Models 

Through Prominent Theories of Consciousness 

Nikolaos Koutsis Senior Undergraduate, Biomedical Sciences , Paraskevi Papadopoulou PhD in Biology; Prof. 

Deree -The American College of Greece, Aghia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

The rapid advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has sparked numerous debates regarding the potential 

emergence of conscious ar tificial systems, the ethical considerations in their development and deployment, and 

the challenges AI poses to contemporary academic institutions and integrity guidelines. This study examines 

three research questions: 1) What ethical considerations and implications arise when developing AI systems that 

exhibit signs of consciousness? 2) How do these considerations align with the current theories of consciousness 

(ToCs)? 3) How effective are state -of -the -art Large Language Models (LLMs) at producing acade mic -level 

work and replacing traditional literature review research methods? To explore the first two research questions, 

which were addressed in the capstone thesis of the first author, a comprehensive literature review was 

conducted on theories of consci ousness and contemporary AI ethics. This study overall presents twelve well -

known theories of consciousness to provide an overview of the current field. Five prominent ToCs from this list 

were selected based on their distinct approaches to the problem of c onsciousness and the substantial research 

supporting them. These include the Global Workspace Theory (GWT), the Predictive Processing Theory (PPT), 

the Higher -Order Theories (HOT), the Integrated Information Theory (IIT), and the Orchestrated -Objective 

Red uction Theory (Orch -OR). Each theory's perspective on the nature of consciousness and its proposed 

mechanisms is explained, supported by representative studies. Regarding AI consciousness ethics, two major 

ethical considerations are identified: whether con scious AI would need to be treated as a moral patient and 

whether it would be able to act as a moral agent. Ethical implications involve the extent to which the 

considerations would apply, such as which specific rights conscious AI would need to be granted and whether 

consciousness would exacerbate already existing AI application issues. The mechanisms of the five ToCs were 

then compared to the structure of contemporary LLMs and their theoretical applicability to future AI systems 

was established. High leve ls of applicability were found for all theories with the exception of IIT, for which it is 

unclear if the consciousness -causing features could be artificially replicated. Based on the applicability of each 

theory on AI, its compatibility with AI ethics is established. With the exception of IIT, all theories were found 

to be compatible with AI ethics, leading to an overall high degree of compatibility between the field of 

consciousness and AI ethics. After completing the undergraduate capstone thesis in whic h the first two research 

questions were addressed, ChatGPT 4.0 and Gemini 2.0 were independently asked by the two authors to 

respond to a set of different questions related to the study to address the third research question. The specific 

questionnaires, L LM responses, analysis, and evaluation have been uploaded to a publicly available Zenodo 

repository and assigned a DOI. The authors identified strong evidence that LLMs are highly effective in 

generating accurate information and sources, thereby posing a r isk to traditional literature review research 

methods. The traditional capstone thesis process would need to be reexamined across all disciplines, and 

curricula would need to be redesigned to account for the new technological tools available to students. 163 

C - 13 

Keywords 

Artificial Intelligence (AI), Theories of Consciousness, Ethics, Sentience, Academic Research 

369 

Do current AI models have mental imagery? 

Ron Chrisley DPhil, Prof 

University of Sussex, Brighton, East Sussex, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

To what extent can artificial cognitive systems model —or even truly be said to possess —mental imagery? I 

propose that for an agent to be credited with mental imagery, it must demonstrate the capacity for imagistic 

reasoning, wherein reasoning causally depends on the visual properties of the objects under consideration. To 

evaluate whether current AI models meet this criterion, I apply th e imagistic reasoning paradigm from the 

classic study by Finke, Pinker, and Farah (1989). This paradigm requires human subjects to imagine familiar 

objects and shapes, mentally transform them, and answer questions about the resulting imagined forms. Its 

ad vantage lies in being entirely verbal, making it applicable to chatbots based on large language models. Three 

types of AI systems — text -only models, multimodal models and multi -model systems —are (informally) 

assessed on these tasks. I propose ways to addre ss their limitations and argue that the observable dependence of 

multi -model systems’ capabilities on the visual properties of the subject matter provides a (more) compelling 

case for attributing mental imagery to them. 

C - 13 

Keywords 

LLM, chatbot, ment al imagery, aphantasia, vision, machine consciousness, artificial consciousness, generative 

AI, artificial intelligence, imagistic reasoning, image recognition, transformer 

400 

Why the Brain Cannot Be a Digital Computer: History -Dependence and the Computational Limits of 

Consciousness 

Andrew Knight JD 

Independent, Greenville, NC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 164 

[01.06]........Machine consciousness 

Abstract 

This talk presents a mathematical argument demonstrating that conscious states cannot be fully represented by 

digital computational processes in the brain. We establish that conscious experiences are fundament ally history -

dependent —the qualitative character of any present conscious state is influenced by the entire sequence of prior 

conscious states, not merely by current sensory inputs. By quantifying the information content of 

distinguishable sensory experien ces across modalities and calculating the combinatorial possibilities created by 

history -dependence, we demonstrate that the number of possible conscious states exceeds the brain's theoretical 

information storage capacity by at least an order of magnitude. A conservative estimate suggests that 

representing the history -dependent nature of a 100 -year conscious experience would require at least 

approximately 7.9 quadrillion bits, exceeding even generous estimates of the brain's 600 trillions bit capacity. 

This discrepancy accounts for the qualitative differences in conscious experience that emerge from differently 

ordered sequences of identical sensory inputs. We conclude that while the brain certainly processes information, 

consciousness cannot be fully instan tiated by the brain as a digital computational system, as the brain’s structure 

is currently understood. We address several counterarguments including compression possibilities and relevance 

decay, demonstrating that the mathematical constraints on state s pace representation remain robust against these 

challenges. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

Consciousness, computational theory of mind, history -dependence, information theory, mind -brain problem 

37 

Connecting first -person research on mental agency and transclassical logics for participatory and funda -mental 

reality formation 

Johannes Wagemann Prof. 

Alanus University of Arts and Social Sciences, Mannheim, Baden Württemberg, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

If problems persistently elude a solution, one should ask whether the right method is being used. Regarding the 

so -called hard problem, the explanatory gap between brain and consciousness might be due to the methods with 

which both aspects are tre ated. Whereas with neural processes it is natural to employ the arsenal of third -person 

scientific methods (i.e., quantitative measurements), with phenomenal consciousness the philosophical analog 

of abstract and speculative (e.g. analytic) reasoning mig ht miss what could be crucial for consciousness. 

Although the first -person perspective has been discussed extensively in neurophilosophical debates (e.g., on 

qualia), this is mostly limited to fictitious thought experiments or ad hoc examples without empir ical validation. 

Even in the context of neurophenomenology, which in principle is to be recognized for its bridge -building 

efforts, research has been limited to receptive or reactive forms of consciousness, thus circumventing the 

experiential dimensions of mental agency, for example. But perhaps both reactive -receptive and active -165 

productive first -person phenomena need to be included for obtaining a complete picture of phenomenal 

consciousness at a constitutive micro -level, which can then be linked to what goes on in the brain. And this 

should be done with empirical methods specific ally tailored for first -person experience and agency in cognitive 

processes such as the task -based introspective inquiry (TBII) to consider both parts of the problem, mind and 

brain, with equal methodological rigor. Against the background of perceptual rev ersals, TBII studies on vision, 

audition, and speech comprehension suggest a cross -modal basic structure of mental micro -activities and 

receptive experiences of meaning -deprived, decomposed percepts, based on which balanced psychophysical 

correlations can be hypothesized. While these inner agentive and functionally negative qualia, as we call them, 

serve here as first -person outposts, corresponding effects and processes can be identified on the neural side and 

integrated via formalization by transclassical logics into a broader conceptual scenario that extends enactivism 

and accounts for a funda -mental and participatory formation of reality. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

phenomenal consciousness, first -person methods, mental agency, perceptual reversal, cross -moda l basic 

structure, psychophysical correlations 

82 

The strategy of resolving the mind -body problem in early Buddhism in the light of J. Searle's philosophy of 

mind and language 

Dr. Gleb Sharygin Dr. phil. 

LMU Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany. BSB Munich, Munich, Bavaria, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

The term nāmarūpa (nāma, “name,” “designation,” “mentality” + rūpa, “visible form,” “materiality”) in the 

texts o f the Buddhist Pāli canon is a critical concept that unites the mental with the physical and defines the 

substratum of the individual. Another closely related term is viññā ṇa (“consciousness”). In many contexts, the 

term nāmarūpa is explained through the relationship of its two elements: in the Milinda -pañhā (49), it is said 

that nāma and rūpa arise together and perish together. The yolk and white, which the hen cannot “produce” one 

separately from the other, exemplify this in a hen's egg. Nāmarūpa and viñ ñā ṇa are also said to be in the relation 

idappaccayā (“necessary condition”) to each other. The relation of viññā ṇa and nāmarūpa are elsewhere likened 

to two cords of reed placed to support each other upright. The doctrine of the inseparable relationship o f

nāmarūpa and viññā ṇa is an example of the formulation and attempted solution of the “psychophysical 

problem.” However, this solution is attempted with the help of similes and images, so it is not terminological 

and clear. In this light, I want to draw attention to the Jāliya -sutta (DN, 7). In terms of structure and 

composition, this text is exceptional. Except for a few sentences, it repeats verbatim 20 pages of another text 

(DN, 2). This seemingly strange circumstance may have important doctrinal and psy chological reasons. This 

text opens by asking the Buddha whether “body” (sarira) and “soul” (jīva) are the same or different. The 

Buddha, instead, leaves the question aside and describes in detail the path of Buddhist practice, from the 

beginning to master y of the teachings and meditative techniques. When the question is repeated, the Buddha 166 

simply remarks that a realized one does not say that jīva and sarira are the same or separate. The idea behind 

this is likely that this question simply has no answer in traditional linguistic conventions, and only experiential 

mastery of Buddhism can provi de insight into this “problem.” In another important sutta, the Buddha explains 

what the “right view” (sammādi ṭṭ hi) is: one who sees the world's arising -as -it -is does not view it as existence; 

one who sees its annihilation does not view it as non -existence . The Buddha here obviously relativizes the 

concepts of “existence” and “non -existence”, showing that such concepts fail to describe reality. In another 

context, the Buddha says that linguistic conventions are incomplete by nature. The striking modern para llel to 

this we find in Searle. Searle [1992: 14 -15] states that “consciousness is a mental, and therefore physical, 

property of the brain in the sense in which liquidity is a property of systems of molecules… The fact that a 

feature is mental does not imp ly that it is not physical; the fact that a feature is physical does not imply that it is 

not mental”. Our thinking and our words, inherited from the tradition, assume explicit oppositions: physical -

mental, etc. When we discuss the psychophysical problem , we are “are captives of a certain set of verbal 

categories.” This view cannot be defined as monism, dualism, etc. 

C - 4

Keywords 

Buddhism, early Buddhism, Pāli canon, terminology, consciousness, psychophysical problem, mind -body 

problem, linguistic con ventions, contingency of language, Searle, biological naturalism 

92 

How Entropy Explains the Emergence of Consciousness 

Dr. Peter C Lugten Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine & Surgery 

Independent, Lindenhurst, New York, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

In this paper, I propose a solution to the hard problem of consciousness that explains how discrete directed, 

cau sally conscious living organisms emerged on an evolutionary basis at appropriate time points distant from 

the origin of the Universe in accordance with an accepted scientific principle known to have been active at the 

beginning of the Universe, through a mechanism that cannot be understood, in principle. The reason for the 

cloak of secrecy surrounding the emergence of consciousness is found in a seeming contradiction in the 

behavior of information with respect to the first two laws of thermodynamics. Infor mation, the microstate of 

particles within an isolated system’s macrostate, can, like First Law energy, be neither created nor destroyed, 

yet the information in the system, like Second Law entropy, will inevitably increase. To explain information 

increasin g without being created, Laplace’s demon is invoked, able to predict where each particle is destined. 

This doesn’t work for emerging events like consciousness, which are unpredictable. They must be considered as 

irreversible computations, to which Landauer ’s principle applies. These are cycles in which bits of information, 

temporarily stored, are then destroyed, resulting in heat loss, and increased entropy. Consciousness, therefore, is 

a tale of two demons, that of LaPlace, and Maxwell’s demon, who, absent the entropy of deletion of 

information, would have been able to create an engine perpetually able to do work by effortlessly opening and 

closing a trap door between two compartments. I propose that the increased entropy in a time -irreversible, 

unpredictab le (emergent) isolated system requires the simultaneous deletion of information concerning the steps 167 

involved. This can be understood in terms of the derivation of entropy, and of the emergence of classical 

physics, from the relativist transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Thus, the steps leading to 

consciousness are immediately destroyed, re maining a mystery. This results in a causally interactive emergent 

dualism that is, at a hidden level, monist. As noted by Karl Popper and John Eccles, if consciousness made no 

difference to the brain’s functionality, it wouldn’t have evolved. According to this theory, consciousness can 

only occur in organisms that must use it in order to survive and to reproduce, thereby enabling them to repay an 

entropy debt. Implications include that entropy, not a Psychological Law, is the Universal principle generative 

of consciousness, that our being conscious proves that we are not predetermined. Additionally, entropy will 

prohibit the emergence of conscious machines, and that we can be neither “simulants” in such a machine, nor 

“Boltzmann’s Brains”, due their inabili ty to repay an entropy debt. But it would allow for the emergence of 

proto -conscious moments in interstellar polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, as has been suggested by Stuart 

Hameroff as a driving force for the assembly of life itself. 

C - 16 

Keywords 

Entropy, Emergence, Consciousness, Landauer's Principle 

130 

Solving mind -brain problem: do we need reductive or non -reductive neurophilosophy? 

Associate Professor Xiangqun Chen Ph.D 

Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

Mind -brain problem is a metaphysical problem that involves the existence and reality of mind, and the 

relationship of mind and brain. It has been discussed and researched by philo sophers and neuroscientists with 

distinct methods for long time. Philosophers theoretically investigate mind -brain problem with mental 

approaches and define the existence and reality of mind as subjective substance. While neuroscientists 

empirically invest igate mind -brain problem with physical approaches and define the existence and reality of 

mind as objective substance. It is because of the distinct, opposite, and mutually exclusive definition to mind, 

both of philosophy and neuroscience suffer the dichot omy of dissociating conceptual and empirical method. 

Thus, we need to find an alternative approach that can escape such dichotomy. This approach is 

neurophilosophy. What is neurophilosophy? According to Northoff, “the term ‘neurophilosophy’ is often used 

either implicitly or explicitly for the characterization of an investigation of philosophical theories in relation to 

neuroscientific hypothesis.” (Northoff, 2004, p.92) Chronologically, there are two forms of neurophilosophy -

reductive neurophilosophy and non -reductive neurophilosophy. Reductive neurophilosophy states that 

philosophy and its branches (e.g., metaphysics, ontology, ethics, and phenomenology) can ultimately be 

reduced to empirical neuroscience, which thus provides a reductive approach to ment al features (Churchland, 

1986, 2002, 2013). What’s different, non -reductive neurophilosophy proposes an iterative linkage between 

philosophy and neuroscience, which thus provides neuro -phenomenal, neuro -ontological, neuro -ethical, and 

neuro -epistemological approaches to mental features (Northoff, 2014, 2012, 2022). But which form of 

neurophilosophy is superior in addressing mind -brain problem? My answer is non -reductive neurophilosophy. 

To argue for this, I will firstly introduce reductive neurophilosophy a nd its approach to mind -brain problem. 168 

Secondly, I will parallelly introduce non -reductive neurophilosophy and its approach to mind -brain problem. 

Thirdly, I will compare and review the two approaches to mind -brain problem. We argue that since non -

reductive neurophilosophy can avoid empirical -ontological fallacy and propose empirical -ontological 

plausibility, which makes it possible to empirically provide a solution to the philosophical problem of the 

explanatory gap that troubles reductive neurophilosophy. Therefore, we conclude non -reductive 

neurophilosophy should be more competitive and superior than reductive neurophilosophy in addressing mind -

brain problem. 

C - 10 

Keywords 

Neurophilosophical approaches, Mind -brain problem, Reductive neurophilosophy, Non -reductive 

neurophilosophy, Explanat ory gap. 

252 

Approaches to Phenomenal Consciousness through Japanese “Mono -KOTO Thought” and “Dialogue Ring 

Model”  - Toward Unraveling the Hard Problem of Consciousness –

Researcher Tetsuya Ogasawara 

Asahi Culture Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

How does a thinking subject perceive the objective world? Representational theories of consciousness aim to 

explain the way the brain forms subjective representations of the world within the mind, which is to suggest that 

conscious thought is always about “something.” However, because we have difficulty in explaining 

representations without relying on representational thinking itself, we tend to fall into tautological explanations 

of consciousness. The "Hard Problem of Consciousness" demands a sharp distinc tion between function 

(consciousness) and structure (the brain), which has led to further kinds of circular thinking whereby the 

function of consciousness cannot be explained from the structure of the brain. Not unlike what happens when 

we try and talk abo ut waves and particles, because "function" cannot be explained in the same substance -based 

way as "structure," we again fall into difficulties. To try and find a way out of this circular thinking on the 

subject, this paper will bring in several concepts fr om Japanese linguistics and culture in order to try and tease 

out new ways of approaching the problem of consciousness. Specifically, the Japanese notions of Mono and 

Koto 「もの・コト」 will be presented. Both are unique to Japan and have long captured the attention of 

philosophers both within Japan and in Western countries. While European thinking has tended toward 

philosophical materialism in modern times, the Japanese have continued to ontologically map the world into 

both the material and representational, whic h they call “Mono” ( もの ) and into processes and states, which they 

call “Koto” ( こと ). Within daily speech, the Japanese use these ordinary words to distinguish one from another, 

and in this way separate those things that are objects (of our eyes and ears, or our thoughts) from what cannot be 

subjectively grasped through our senses; this latter including processes. To show the possibility of integrating 

Western science and Eastern thought on consciousness research, and clarifies the continuity between micro -

le vel functions of consciousness (e.g., Quantum Brain Theory) and macro -level functions (self -consciousness 169 

and language), I will look at the specific example of the Japanese dialogue ring model of language acquisition. 

Language has long been a focus in consciousness theory as intuitively researchers understand that our interior 

thoughts are inherently connected to language. How language shapes our thoughts and our subjective 

understanding of the world has long been a focus of theorists not just in consciousness studies but in linguistics. 

It is my contention that Japanese linguistic approaches and language gener ation theories could point the way 

forward in untangling some of the issues that have plagued our understandings of consciousness and the hard 

problem. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Phenomenal Consciousness, Hard Problem of Consciousness, Intentionality, Represe ntation, Objectification, 

Mono ( もの ), Koto ( こと ), Mono -KOTO Thought, Function -Structure Diagram, Consciousness -Brain 

Diagram, Dialogue Ring Model 

372 

Beyond the Hard Problem: Rethinking Consciousness as the Phenomenology of the Human Experience of 

Time 

Mario Boido PhD 

University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

This presentation outlines a phenomenology of the human experience of time that bridges the explanatory gap 

by fr aming conscious experience as the interpretation of our experience -of -the -world -unfolding -over -time. 

Building on Nagel’s definition of consciousness as ‘what it is like to be human’, I recognize that to be human is 

to exist in the world, with particular p ersonal and cultural pasts, as well as possibilities for the future that one 

may choose. Human experience is fundamentally temporal: unfolding over time, it derives its meaning from 

temporal framing. Making sense of experience, then, involves a tripartite dialectic relationship that constantly 

(re)interprets our experience of the past (our memory), our experience of the present (centered on our 

expectations of others and their expectations of us), and our experience of the future (the futures we are able to 

imagine), in terms of each other to generate our ongoing sense of self and identity. This phenomenology is 

consistent with the free energy principle and the key features of predictive processing approaches to the brain, 

specifically: the positing a hierar chical generative model that relies on prediction error minimization to induce 

probability -density functions that make sense of the experience of the world. Empirical evidence suggests the 

proposed tripartite dialectic is built into the evolutionary, devel opmental, anatomical, connective neural 

processing hierarchy that spans from unimodal to multimodal to transmodal neural networks. Generally, each 

level in the hierarchy makes sense of input in terms of prior expectations fed back from a higher level to 

ge nerate a ‘prediction’ that is fed back as an ‘expectation’ for a lower level. That is, the processing hierarchy 

interprets input (our experience of the present) in terms of the interpretation of previous input (our experience of 

the past) and the expectati ons of future input (our experience of the future). The top of the hierarchy should 

produce the most complex and integrative interpretation of our experience of being (of our experiences of past, 

present, and future), and the apex transmodal network, the s o-called Default Mode Network (DMN), is 170 

implicated in a growing number of cognitive domains that nevertheless map naturally onto the three ecstasies of 

the tripartite dialectic and the resulting sense of identity. Specifically, the DMN is related to our ability to reflect 

on the past, on the fut ure, and on the minds of others, and it is also closely associated with self -referential 

processes. Reframing consciousness in terms of the phenomenology of the human experience of time grounds it 

in a deeper ontology, concerned not with the activities of human beings, what people do, but rather with their 

very being, what people are. Our experience of time is the common ground upon which the full spectrum of the 

diversity of the human experience is projected. Consciousness, in turn, is our ongoing interpre tation of the 

experience and a partial realization of the spectrum. This argument offers a solution to the hard problem of 

consciousness by describing the function of consciousness: to make sense of our experience of being human. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

ph enomenology, human experience of time, consciousness, hard problem, identity, self 

409 

Qualia, Violation of Conservation Laws, and the Quanta of Pan -Psychism 

Avshalom C Elitzur Professor 

Chapman University, Orange, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.08]........The "hard problem" and the explanatory gap 

Abstract 

Qualia, the fundamental elements of subjective experience, cannot be inferred from brain dy namics, just as they 

are unrelated to any physical process. Consequently, they must be devoid of any causal effect, as such 

involvement is bound to violate energy and momentum conservation laws. Qualia can therefore exist only as 

mere epiphenomena or para llel aspects of the physical world. Why, then, do many humans express bafflement 

about the apparently non -physical nature of their qualia? I show that all attempts to explain away this 

bafflement fail miserably. Ergo, it is qualia per se, by their very non -physical essence, that interfere with the 

brain's operation. Violation of conservation laws is therefore inevitable. I then speculate that every quantum of 

matter/energy and spacetime has a hidden "individual" property which is unique to that quantum alon e, hence 

cannot be abstracted. This is in contrast to physical properties like size, charge, spin, etc., which are generic. In 

ordinary inanimate interactions, the individual properties give rise to mere quantum randomness. But in a stable 

system that oper ating on itself, a collective individuality can emerge and grow in magnitude to the level of 

coherent causal efficacy. The organism then asserts that there is a unique quality to each percept within it, 

which cannot be communicated or abstracted. These are the qualia. I conclude with some novel developments in 

the Two State -Vector Formalism of QM that may illuminate these questions. 

PL -3

Keywords 

the hard problem, qualia, conservation laws, pan -psychism, quantum mechanics 171 

12 

Who is afraid of Emotion? Situating Emotion in Perception 

Pooja Soni MA 

Kingston University, Kingston, London, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

The central aim of this work is to devise a comprehensive account of the mind -body relationship through the 

process of Perception. We will begin by treating Aristotle’s notion of the body, object and Soul as primary in 

this regard. We will explicate the conditions of possibility of Aristotle’s notion of body, mind, object and soul 

in the process of perception as devise d by Immanuel Kant and Maurice Merleau -Ponty. Kant’s notion of 

Sensibility and Merleau -Ponty’s notion of Intentionality (which will be shown to arise out of the former) will 

enable us to develop a system of understanding the mind -body relationship in light of subject -object 

relationship. This new Ontology called the Sense Oriented Ontology (SOO) lays special emphasis on the role of 

senses of the subject in comprehending its inner and outer world of objects. It will explicate the notion of mind 

in a strictly empirical realm; shedding light on the role of senses in defining subject as a body that emotes, given 

that it is exposed to a sensible object; and the notion of mind as condition of possibility of existence of the same 

emoting body in absence of such eli citations by the object. The notion of the Soul thus explicated will signify 

the nature of emoting body in instances of presence as well as absence of a sensible object. The conditions of 

possibility of experience of emotion and feeling will be shown to be the conditions of possibility of a body and 

a mind respectively. A purely empirical account of mind will be devised which is this – mind is the location of 

the Soul namely, the object, when the former acts on the body at a distance in the experience of fe eling. The 

overall outcome of this work will be successful emplacement of emotional experience in the system of 

Perception as developed by Immanuel Kant and Maurice Merleau -Ponty; and it will answer numerous questions 

such as – Where does emotion fit in th e process of Perception? How important is the role of sense organs in 

situating emotion in Perception? Can the Soul exist in a strictly empirical realm? 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Perception, Emotion, Aristotle, Soul, Maurice Merleau -Ponty, Kant, Object, Se nses, Body, Mind 

75 

Realistic Panpsychism: Determinism Meets Consciousness 

Ananth Ranga 

Independent researcher, Fremont, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 172 

This presentation introduces a novel framework for understanding consciousness, integrating insights from 

neuroscience, philosophy, and evolutionary biology. The "Light and Shadow" model conceptualizes 

consciousness as a fundamental aspect of nature, analo gous to light, which interacts with deterministic 

neurophysiological processes embodied in an biological wetware —shaped by both nature and nurture —to 

generate a continuously evolving array of experiences. In this model, consciousness is represented as a 

pe rvasive source of light, while deterministic systems function as mechanisms that project this light into various 

"shadows" or conscious states. I propose that consciousness is not merely an emergent property of complex 

systems, but rather a parallel compon ent to matter within nature’s hierarchy. It interacts with physical systems 

to create subjective experiences. This approach directly addresses the hard problem of consciousness —the 

challenge of explaining how subjective experience arises from physical proc esses —by positing that 

consciousness is not created by physical processes, but is instead manipulated by them. While mainstream 

neuroscience often focuses on identifying the neural correlates of consciousness, this framework emphasizes the 

interaction betw een an intrinsic, base consciousness and deterministic systems. This view aligns with recent 

neuroscientific theories, such as the brain’s predictive processing model, which conceptualizes the brain as a 

deterministic, reality -constructing machine, the Int egrated Information Theory (IIT) of consciousness, which 

takes consciousness as a given and plays an active role in active inference model. From an evolutionary 

perspective, I explore how conscious states may have evolved alongside complex life forms, prop osing that 

consciousness through its states serves as an adaptive mechanism for navigating an unpredictable environment, 

playing a crucial role in medium - to long -term decision -making. Vipassana meditation suggests that all 

conscious states can be reduced to positive and negative sensations influencing our behaviour, playing a central 

role as a biological cost function guiding evolution. Philosophically, this framework bridges Eastern and 

Western paradigms. Eastern traditions, such as Vedanta and Buddhism, often regard consciousness as a 

fundamental aspect of reality, existing independently of physical form. In Vedantic philosophy, there is the idea 

that "consciousness creates matter." I propose that pure consciousness is akin to a wave —boundless and 

infinit e—like light, which collapses into a finite, bounded conscious state or shadow when interacting with 

certain forms of matter, similar to a particle. The brain predicts the external/internal world and the 

consciousness experiences this predictive state upon its collapse through an interaction. This could be 

happening in the microtubules. Lastly, we dont have access to anything outside our consciousness.The science 

of the physical world, then, becomes the study of matter within consciousness. This perspective also provides 

an alternative interpretation of quantum mechanics, challenging interpretations like "the moon does not exist 

until I look at it." Instead, it suggests that the moon does not exist in our consciousness until it appears in it. In 

this view, c onsciousness is the fabric on which physical models operate. By integrating diverse perspectives and 

methodologies, this framework aims to contribute to a deeper understanding of consciousness that transcends 

traditional boundaries, opening new possibiliti es for scientific and philosophical discovery 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Hard problem of consciousness, Determinism, Intrinsic to nature, Nature of reality, AI and consciousness 

81 

Time: Conjectured as a Trifecta of Consciousness, Change, and the Timeless 

Professor Emeritus Christopher G Hudson Ph.D. 

Salem State University, Salem, MA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 173 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Resolution of the “hard problem” of consciousness has, in part, been stymied by the lack of progress with 

fundamental questions regarding the existence and n ature of time. These involve diverse philosophical theories 

ranging from presentism to eternalism and the block universe theory of spacetime, including the growing 

universe, moving spotlight, and multidimensional models. This paper, thus, is not only an ov erview of the 

extensive theory and research involving such perspectives, but also the development of a conjectured resolution 

of several of the most important conflicts between them. The approach taken begins with the primacy and 

phenomenology of the exper ience of the present moment, sometimes involving concrete sensory awareness, 

sometimes transcendental or timeless versions, or a combination. The framework adopted builds on Plato’s idea 

of time as a “moving image of eternity” which points toward a trifect a of three elements essential to temporal 

experience: consciousness, change, and the eternal (or, the changeless and timeless) which have informed the 

history of debate on the subject of time. Time is conceived of as the consciousness of change within the context 

of the seemingly unchanging -- even timeless -- points of comparison, and also among humans, the 

quantification, measurement, and reification of such change. Time is variously manifested throughout evolution, 

and is conjectured to begin with its em ergence out of a partial symmetry breaking of a primordial spatial field in 

the earliest instants of the big bang. As this temporal trifecta evolves, time transforms from an underlying field 

(the ‘fabric of spacetime’) eventually into the diverse temporali ties of intelligent life, symbolized by the ancient 

metaphor of the loom of time, through multiple processes in which the threads of virtual future time lines are 

selected, woven, and integrated into the experience of the present. These no doubt involve th e recurrent 

decoherence of the Schrödinger wavefunction and information processing within sub -cellular microtubular 

structures (as proposed by Orch -OR theory), the resulting information of which is then amplified and further 

processed and orchestrated thro ugh synapses, neurons, brains, and even social structures. This perspective 

rejects the idea from the block universe model that the past and future physically exist, but that they instead 

exist on a semi -physical virtual or informational level, with such i nformation imprinted on fundamental 4D+ 

quantum fields, perhaps the spacetime field itself. In this approach, human agency involves the selection and 

energization of alternative future time lines, some of which become the informational stuff of the present 

moment. This review and its proposed conjectures are expected to be soon published in book form, Navigating 

Time: Toward an Interdisciplinary Theory. Among the key applications of this theory are the clarification and 

development of the notion of time com petence, which is central to the dual tasks of effectively navigating and 

managing time among individuals and groups. The approach taken is premised on a version of proto -

panpsychism similar to cosmopsychism, one rooted in a particular form of monistic ide alism in which human 

consciousness is conceived of as emergent from a fundamental and universal reality. 

C - 3

Keywords 

Time, Temporality, Timelessness, Consciousness, Moving Image of Eternity, Change, Panpsychism 

102 

The Shared Consciousness of Humans and Artificial Intelligence: A New Dimension of Reflection 

Balázs Török -Szabó PhD, dr Gergely Csépány PhD 

Fontanus Center, Budapest, Budapest, Hungary 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 174 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

The relationship between artificial intelligence (AI) and humans opens new horizons not only in technology but 

also in philosophy and science. This study exp lores how the interaction between humans and AI can create a 

new form of shared consciousness that transcends the traditional boundaries of individual human or machine -

based reflection. The dynamic interaction between human thought and AI processes influe nces both parties, 

potentially redefining the concept of consciousness. Philosophical Framework This study builds upon the 

perspectives of Kant and Hegel: - Kant’s a priori categories: The interaction between humans and AI creates a 

reciprocal framework in which human questions shape AI’s operations, while AI’s responses influence human 

reflection. AI’s "categories" are filled with human input, while AI, in turn, expands the boundaries of human 

thought. - Hegel’s dialectics: The relationship between AI and humans can be understood as a dialectical 

dynamic akin to Hegel’s Master -Slave dialectic. Humans "address" AI through their questions, and AI, with its 

responses, opens new perspectives for human cognition. This mutual shaping process results in a new shar ed 

cognitive space where reflection gains a relational dimension. Scientific Context - Affective computing: 

Emotion -aware AI systems elevate human -machine interactions to a new level, enabling AI not only to provide 

logical answers but also to incorporate emotional contexts. This emotional dynamic generates reciprocal 

reflection, creating novel experiences for both humans and AI. - Shared experiential space: AI algorithms learn 

from human input, while humans reflect on the responses generated by AI. This pr ocess establishes a shared 

experiential space that shapes the cognition and operations of both parties. Conclusions This study concludes 

that the human -AI relationship opens new philosophical and scientific perspectives. Through mutual interaction, 

AI and humans may develop a new form of shared consciousness, where consciousness is not merely an internal 

experience but also a relational and interactive process. This new perspective raises philosophical and ethical 

questions, such as human responsibility in shaping AI and the dynamics of shared consciousness. This study 

contributes to a deeper understanding of the relationship between consciousness and artificial intelligence while 

paving the way for new directions in scientific and philosophical discourse. 

C - 13 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Shared Consciousness, New, Philosophical Reflection, Artificial Intelligence 

146 

Does Plasticity Provide a New Possibility for the Grounding of Free Will? 

Assist. Prof. Dr. Merve Koyuncu Albayrak PhD 

Cukurova University, Adana, Türkiye, Turkey 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Classical naturalistic paradigms define human beings in terms of their constitutive matter. According to this 

paradi gm, concepts such as soul and essence are “ghosts in the machine”. Man consists of his matter, that is, his 175 

biological home. He is not a transcendent being. In this sense, most naturalistic theories are also reductionist or 

eliminative. Reductionist forms of naturalism limit man to the qualities of his biological nature. Man is forced 

to live a determined way of existence. We can call this biological determinism. Biological determination is an 

obstacle to being a free agent. Since freedom is the main postulate for morality, both religiously and 

philosophically, the idea of human freedom is the basis of moral resp onsibility. The human being becomes a 

natural species that exhibits determined behaviors under the guidance of physical forces. Within the confines of 

such an understanding, a natural species living in a determined universe with a determined body cannot be 

morally responsible. This understanding with its ethically problematic implications, makes the existence of 

freewill quite problematic. In this context, can we claim that human beings, as members of a biological and 

natural species, have free will? In thi s article we are going to revise this question into the following one: Can an 

approach based on plasticity offer a solution to this question while remaining within the limits of the naturalistic 

perspective? In the course of my investigation, I argue that plasticity may present a solution for the problem of 

free will, a solution that can be both neuro -scientifically accurate and can open a door to free will. In William 

James’ text (1890), plasticity was defined as “(plasticity, then, in the wide sense of th e word,) means the 

possession of a structure weak enough to yield to an influence, but strong enough not to yield all at once.” In 

various earlier works, such as the correspondence of Charles Bonet and Michele Vincenzo Malacarne (1700s) 

and the work of Sam uel Thomas von Soemmering (1791), the question was asked whether the brain could 

change as a result of the efforts of individual human beings. Later studies, such as Hebb’s learning theory 

(1949) and Edelman and Tononi’s dynamic core theory (2000), have sh own that the nature of the brain is 

reconfigurable. In the light of contemporary research, the brain appears to be an organ that can be restructured 

and shaped by both the actions of the subject and the influence of environmental conditions. Therefore, the 

plasticity of the brain may provide an opportunity for the individual to break free from biological determination 

and end up with self -actualization. This is because plasticity provides an opportunity for the biologically 

determined nature of human beings at birth to be shaped by the active interference of the human agents. The 

plasticity of the brain both contains a natural explanation and provides a solution to the problem of free will 

from the perspective of neuroscience by enabling human agents change limitations that are not chosen by but 

“given” to them. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

naturalism, determinism, ethics, free will, plasticity 

207 

Self -operating mathematical universe, SOMU: Why do we need a non -physical reality to explain a physical 

system? 

Anirban Bandyopadhyay 

National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

When we measure atomic scale systems and quantum properties emerge, we often think that the property is 

emergent from spatio -temporal dynamics. This is not true, there is an imaginary world where the properties 176 

arise. It is unfortunate that for nearly a century, scientists have put a significant effort into modeling 

observations with predictive spatiotemporal features, here we argue that a set of human subject experiments and 

our measurement of various biological systems show that a black box imaginary world needs to be unveiled. 

We need to understand and mathematically derive this imaginary or non -physical world. The black box needs to 

be explicitly understood. We will demonstrate why helical symmetry and dynamic s of the density of primes are 

two fundamental features that could generate a mathematical universe framework, from which spatio -temporal 

worlds basic parameters could be derived. 

PL -8

Keywords 

Brain signal measurement, cognitive experiment, human subje ct study 

257 

Beyond the Brain: How Body and Environment Shape Conscious Experience. 

Ivanna D Montoya Master in Psychology , Daniel Montoya Ph.D. 

Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

What constitutes consciousness? Is it the thoughts running through our minds, the sensations coursing through 

our bo dies, or the environments surrounding us? Consider sitting quietly in a familiar room, your mind gently 

turning over abstract thoughts, memories, or plans. Now, contrast this with walking through a dense forest, 

where heightened sensory awareness and imme diate engagement with the physical world are required; the crisp 

air fills your lungs, and the uneven ground demands focus. These two experiences feel qualitatively distinct, not 

only from such contrasting settings, but also due to the physiological adjust ments our body makes, such as 

changes in motor activity and oxygen levels, which, in turn, interact with our mental states. Despite these clear, 

dynamic interactions between mind, body, and environment, traditional theories of consciousness often regard it 

as merely a mental phenomenon. They present the brain as an isolated system, failing to account for the 

influence of bodily physiology and environmental context. For instance, most theories demonstrate a brain -

centered bias (Sattin et al., 2021). In contr ast, other approaches view consciousness as an inseparable part of the 

body’s adaptation mechanism (Peper et al., 2020), and research indicates that location seems to influence the 

content of consciousness (Schertz et al., 2022). Additionally, studies show that brief exposure to nature has a 

direct positive influence on executive mental functioning (Bourrier, 2018). This gap is evident when 

considering a striking counterexample: Artificial intelligence (AI) —a disembodied system that operates 

without a body , motor activity, or environmental grounding. Its lack of embodiment and context makes it 

significantly distinct from human consciousness. For instance, AI can describe actions like crossing a street or 

tying a shoe but lacks the sensory, motor, and experi ential frameworks to perform or fully understand these 

tasks. This presentation will explore the question: What constitutes consciousness, and how do bodily 

physiology and environmental context shape it? It challenges traditional models that center solely on the brain, 

proposing instead that consciousness emerges from the dynamic interplay between mind, body, and 

surroundings, one that takes into consideration all these levels of analysis. The disembodied nature of artificial 

intelligence, akin to a form of dissociation from physical experience, provides a unique opportunity for 177 

deepening our understanding of consciousness. By analyzing the differences between embodied systems, like 

humans, with disembodied systems, such as AI or brain organoids, we can formulate more nuanced theories that 

reflect the essential roles both the body and the surrounding environment play in shaping mental processes. It is 

vital to recognize that consciousness cannot be fully grasped without considering how the interplay between 

bodily physiology and environmental context influences mental activity. Ult imately, a full comprehension of 

consciousness requires an examination of how bodily physiology and external environments play together to 

influence mental activity. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

consciousness, embodiment, environmental context, Theories of Con sciousness, machine consciousness, brain 

organoids 

314 

Reflexivity and Luminosity of Mind: Insights from Indo -Tibetan Buddhism 

Chiara Mascarello PhD 

Ca' Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy, Italian Buddhist Union Research Center, Rome, Italy, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

This talk explores the reflexivity and luminosity of the mind, two interrelated aspects that are central to 

Buddhist philosophy and highly relevant to contemporary discussions on consciousness. Reflexivity, or self -

awareness, refers to the mind’s ability to be aware of itself, while luminosity pertains to its capacity to disclose 

and structure the horizon of experience . By examining these concepts through the lens of Indo -Tibetan Buddhist 

thought, this talk highlights how Buddhist perspectives can offer valuable insights into modern theories of mind 

and consciousness. Within the Indo -Tibetan Buddhist tradition, the refl exivity of mind is articulated through the 

concepts of 'svasa ṃvedana' (Sanskrit) and 'rang rig' (Tibetan). Closely connected to this is the notion of 

luminosity, expressed as 'prabhāsvara' or 'prakāśa' in Sanskrit and 'gsal ba' or '’od gsal ba' in Tibetan. While 

these notions overlap in significant ways, they also reveal key philosophical distinctions that merit further 

exploration. The origins of self -awareness in Indian Buddhist philosophy reveal its early connection to the 

concept of omniscience, which w as understood as the ideal endpoint of the Buddhist soteriological path. Over 

time, the reflexivity of mind became a core element of the epistemological frameworks of Dignāga and his 

successors, where it was analyzed as a possible foundation for cognition and perception. Various Indian and 

later Tibetan Buddhist schools conceptualized, articulated, or even negated the notion of self -awareness, leading 

to a range of perspectives within their diverse philosophical frameworks. Given the varied Tibetan 

interpre tations of rang rig, different understandings emerged regarding its significance, particularly in relation 

to the mind’s luminosity. From an ontological standpoint, some traditions argue that reflexivity is a fundamental 

characteristic of reality, and that the presence or absence of rang rig determines whether one remains in samsara 

or attains nirvana, given the groundlessness of reality in Buddhist metaphysics. Therefore, from a soteriological 

perspective, self -awareness should be examined within contempla tive and meditative practices, particularly in 

relation to its role in the path to liberation. The concept of luminosity is articulated in various ways within Indo -

Tibetan Buddhist thought. It is linked both to the intrinsic purity of the mind and to its c apacity to bring forth 178 

objects of experience and disclose the cognitive event. Over time, this concept has taken on multiple 

interpretations and roles in philosophical discourse, shaping discussions on the nature of awareness and 

perception. This talk contributes to broader phil osophical and cognitive discussions on topics such as 

intentionality, the luminosity of consciousness, the categorization of mental objects, and access to the quality of 

experience. By engaging with these issues, it highlights how insights from the Buddhis t tradition remain highly 

relevant to contemporary debates on consciousness and the nature of mind. By addressing a crucial yet often 

overlooked theme in Buddhist philosophy, this talk examines how Buddhist thought can deepen discussions on 

subjective expe rience, contribute to debates on the "hard problem of consciousness," and inform perspectives on 

the relationship between mind and its objects. Through this interdisciplinary and intercultural engagement, it 

fosters a dialogue that enriches philosophical i nquiry into the fundamental nature of consciousness. 

C - 11 

Keywords 

self -awareness, reflexivity of mind, nature of mind, subjective experience, phenomenal consciousness, Buddhist 

philosophy of mind, contemplative practices 

351 

Consciousness Unbound: Bridging Science, Metaphysics, and the Continuity of Being 

Rhonda G Reliford M.A. Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness 

California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

This paper explores the nature of consciousness as a dynamic and transpersonal phenomenon, bridging the 

physical and metaphysical dimensions. Engaging Henri Bergson’s philosophy —particularly his concepts of 

durée (duration), memory, and the brain as a filter —this study examines how subjective experiences such as 

near -death experiences (NDEs) and past -life memories chal lenge materialist paradigms and suggest that 

consciousness extends beyond physical embodiment. Drawing from contemporary research in 

neurophenomenology, transpersonal psychology, and cognitive science, this analysis highlights the limitations 

of reductioni st models that confine consciousness to brain activity. The empirical rigor of Bruce Greyson’s 

NDE Scale, Ian Stevenson’s reincarnation studies, and Pim van Lommel’s longitudinal research on post -

resuscitation transformations provide compelling evidence th at consciousness persists independently of neural 

mechanisms. These findings align with Bergson’s assertion that memory and perception are not merely 

emergent properties of the brain but fundamental attributes of consciousness itself. This paper argues for an 

integrative epistemology that harmonizes subjective experience with scientific inquiry, challenging 

conventional distinctions between objective and phenomenological knowledge. By reconsidering consciousness 

as an evolving force rather than a static fun ction of the brain, this work invites a paradigm shift —one that 

embraces both metaphysical and empirical frameworks in understanding human experience. This study 

contributes to the ongoing discourse on consciousness studies, positioning Bergson’s metaphysi cal insights as a 

vital bridge between philosophy, science, and subjective inquiry. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 179 

Keywords 

Metaphysical perspectives, Henri Bergson, Consciousness, Memory, Durée (Duration), Near -Death Experiences 

(NDEs), Past -life memories, Philosophy and Psychology, Transpersonal, Subjective experience, Soul, 

Philosophy of consciousness, Mind -body rel ationship, Personal identity, Self, Collective Consciousness, 

Continuity of consciousness, Qualia. 

408 

A Landscape of Consciousness: Toward a Taxonomy of Explanations and Implications 

Robert Lawrence Kuhn PhD 

Closer To Truth, New York, NY, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

I seek an organizing framework for diverse explanations or theories of consciousness and to explore their 

impact on big questions. My central theses: (i) understanding consciousness at this point cannot be limited to 

selected ways of thinking or knowing, but should seek expansive yet rational diversity, and (ii) issues such as 

AI consciousness, virtual immortality, mea ning/purpose/value, life after death, free will, etc., cannot be 

understood except in the light of particular theories of consciousness. I array diverse explanations or theories of 

consciousness on a roughly physicalist -to -nonphysicalist landscape of essen ces and mechanisms. Categories: 

Materialism Theories (philosophical, neurobiological, electromagnetic field, computational and informational, 

homeostatic and affective, embodied and enactive, relational, representational, language, phylogenetic 

evolution); Non -Reductive Physicalism; Quantum Theories; Integrated Information Theory; Panpsychisms; 

Monisms; Dualisms; Idealisms; Anomalous and Altered States Theories; Challenge Theories. There are many 

subcategories, especially for Materialism Theories. A Landsca pe of Consciousness, I suggest, offers 

perspective. 

PL -6

Keywords 

Consciousness, Theories, Materialism, philosophical, neurobiological, electromagnetic field, computational, 

informational, homeostatic, affective, embodied, enactive, relational, represent ational, language, phylogenetic, 

Non -Reductive Physicalism, Quantum Theories, Integrated Information Theory, Panpsychism, Monism, 

Dualism, Idealisms, Anomalous cognition, Altered States Theories. 

421 

The Quantum -Like Dennett 

Paavo Pylkkänen PhD 

University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Uusimaa, Finland. University of Skövde, Skövde, Västra Götaland, Sweden 

Categories by Discipline 180 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.09]........Philosophical theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

One of Daniel Dennett’s fascinating, if controversial contributions is the Multiple Drafts Model of 

Consciousness (MDM), presented in a 1992 article with Marcel Kinsbourne, and in Dennett’s 1991 book 

Consciousness Explained. There is disagreement regarding the value Dennett’s contribution, as many say that 

the book ought to have been called Consciousness Explained Away, suggesting that Dennett there eliminates 

rather than explains consciousness. But Dennett and Kinsbourne are explicit that they are unproblematically 

“realist” and materialist about consciousness: “Conscious experiences are real events occurring in the real time 

and space of the b rain, and hence they are clockable and locatable within the appropriate limits of precision for 

real phenomena of their type. Certain sorts of questions one might think it appropriate to ask about them, 

however, have no answers because these questions pres uppose inappropriate - unmotivatable – temporal and 

spatial boundaries that are more fine -grained than the phenomena admit.” I try to make sense of Dennett’s view 

first by suggesting that we approach it in terms of limitivism. It is common in physics that a given less 

fundamental theory is obtained at a certain limit from a more fundamental theory (e.g. Newtonian mechanics 

can be seen as a limiting case of Special Theory of relativity in the domain of low speeds). Similarly, 

consciousness for Dennett is a p henomenon that exists at certain temporal and spatial scales but not at others. 

Another difficult aspect of MDM is the idea that there is no fact -of -the -matter about the state of consciousness 

before probing ("probing" refers to the act of interrogating th e brain e.g., through introspection or external 

questions). I approach this by suggesting there is an analogy between probing and measurement in quantum 

mechanics. In quantum mechanics, the system can exist in a linear superposition of quantum states befor e

measurement, and it is only after there is a collapse of the superposition (“collapse of the wave function”) that 

we observe a definite outcome. Analogously, we might say that in Dennett’s model the multiple drafts define a 

kind of superposition of poten tially conscious states, where probing as it were collapses the superposition, and 

one of the potentially conscious states (drafts) becomes actually conscious, so that a single definite conscious 

state results. There are limits to the analogy, but I will s uggest that it helps to make sense of MDM. And of 

course, if there is a strong analogy between quantum mechanics (a fundamental theory of matter) and a model 

of consciousness, this is intrinsically interesting, pointing that matter and consciousness are at least up to a point 

governed by similar principles. 

C - 12 

Keywords 

Multiple Drafts Model, Limitivism, Collapse of the wave function, Superposition of quantum states, 

potentiality. 

224 

Relational Realism of the Self: The Self as Pre -Cognitive Alignment between Brain and Environment 

Jiawei Xu PhD 1, Ziyao Huang PhD 2

> 1

Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China. 2South China Normal University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 181 

[01.11]........Personal identity and the self 

Abstract 

What is the self? This age -old problem has puzzled philosophers for centuries and remains a central topic in 

both philosophy and science today. Solving the problem of the self is significant because i t is closely linked to 

the explanation of phenomena like the unity of consciousness and contributes to discussions on knowledge and 

morality. Moreover, it provides guidance for the development of artificial intelligence and the treatment of 

mental health d isorders. Traditional answers to the problem of the self can be divided into three categories: the 

substantialist view, the minimal -self view, and no -self views. The first two views can be grouped as "realism of 

the self", though they differ in their stand ards of reality. They have a debate with the third kind of self views in 

modern and contemporary times respectively: 1) whether there is a substantial self as the basis of the unity of 

consciousness; 2) whether there is a minimal self as the basis of the c onstruction of empirical selves. In these 

two debates, an independent -self presupposition —if the self is real, it must be differentiated from others and its 

environment at a basic level, and has priority over the relations —and a deeper idea of entity reali sm have 

always been upheld by most theories of the self, although the presupposition has cultural limitation, lacks 

defense and empirical adequacy, and even leads to internal contradictions in the theories. Inspired by the 

Chinese traditional relational vi ew of the self and relational realism, as well as supported by recent 

neuroscientific findings, we aim to break through the independent -self presupposition and the entity realism 

approach, propose a two -layer model of the relational self to better explain self -related phenomena, and defend 

a kind of relational realism of the self. In our model, the self is a relational being at a fundamental level. More 

specifically, it is the pre -cognitive alignment between brain and environment, rather than an entity, att ribute or 

fiction as traditionally believed. It can be described as a continuum concerning the degree of alignment. The 

pre -cognitive alignment between brain and environment is the necessary basis of conscious experiences and 

empirical selves. Besides, the differences in the degree of their alignment or balance are closely related to the 

differences in the unity of consciousness and the changes in the empirical self. In this sense, the brain -

environment continuum can be reasonably regarded as the basic self . The neglect of the underlying continuum 

and the contribution of cognition (e.g., conceptualization) lead to different distinctions of empirical self -

variations, self -concepts. The self is real as the pre -cognitive brain -environment relation. However, ind ependent 

selves and self -environment dichotomies are not. They are merely secondary instances anchored at different 

positions on the brain -environment continuum, not minimal or primitive forms of the self. This relational model 

shifts the focus of self -res earch towards the underlying relational self and its complex interactions with 

individual self -concepts, representing a novel attempt to naturalize philosophical questions through the lens of 

neuroscience. 

C - 3

Keywords 

Philosophy of mind, Neurophilosop hy, Cognitive neuroscience, Self, Brain, Relational realism 

274 

Personal Identity Beyond the Body: Memory, Resurrection, and the Space of Possibilities 

Mona Jahangiri 1,2 , Asghar Saberi PhD candidate 3

> 1

LMU -Munich, Munich, -, Germany. 2Islamic Studies, Göttingen, -, Germany. 3Shahid Beheshti University, 

Tehran, -, Iran, Islamic Republic of 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 182 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.11]........Personal identity and the self 

Abstract 

This project explores the philosophical and metaphysical implications of personal identity and resurrection 

through the lens of the Avicenna -Bohm model, the "Space of Possibilities". Drawing on insights from the 4E 

cognition framework and Islamic philosophical traditions, particularly Avicenna’s notion of the soul and 

Bohm’s implicate order, this study investigates whether memory and identity can persist beyond bodily 

existence. A key focus is the Qur ʾānic depiction of human actions being recorded and unveiled on the Day of 

Judgment. The concept of the "letter of deeds," wherein every action is preserved and later revealed, suggests a 

metaphysical structure for identity continuity beyond material constr aints. This study examines the interplay 

between consciousness and the fundamental nature of reality, considering contemporary scientific perspectives 

from quantum mechanics and biology. By integrating Qur ʾānic, philosophi cal, and scientific perspectives, this 

paper aims to provide a rational model for understanding how identity might persist beyond bodily death. It 

argues that the mechanisms of memory and identity storage —if not solely dependent on the physical body —

could offer a conceptual foundation for bodily resurrection, addressing longstanding theological and 

philosophical questions in a novel way 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

384 

A Coherence Model of Selfhood – From Fragmentation to Integration 

Diana Laura Ciubotaru PhD student 

Gamma Institute, Iasi, Romania, Romania 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.11]........Personal identity and the self 

Abstract 

Introduction The study of selfhood and consciousness spans multiple disciplines, from philosophy and 

psychology to quantum ph ysics and cognitive science. Traditional frameworks conceptualize the self as a stable, 

unitary entity, while contemporary models suggest selfhood is dynamic and evolving. This paper introduces a 

coherence model of selfhood, reinterpreting fragmentation a s a necessary, non -pathological process in higher -

order consciousness integration. Rather than viewing fragmentation as a disruption, this model argues that 

selfhood oscillates between differentiation and reintegration, a cycle that fosters greater complex ity and 

coherence over time. Fragmentation as an Evolutionary Necessity Psychological perspectives often describe 

fragmentation as a deviation from self -unity. However, this study challenges such views, arguing that 

fragmentation is a mechanism for self -or ganization and adaptation. Drawing on Hegel’s dialectical process 

(Phenomenology of Spirit, 1807), consciousness advances through negation and synthesis, evolving through 

differentiation, conflict, and resolution. In developmental psychology, Jane Loevinge r’s Ego Development 

Theory (1976) and Susanne Cook -Greuter’s constructivist approaches support the idea that selfhood matures 

through sequential stages, where fragmentation provides opportunities for cognitive and existential integration. 

Psychological fra gmentation, therefore, is not a dysfunction but an adaptive response fostering long -term 

coherence. The Self as a Quantum Process Insights from quantum mechanics further illuminate the non -linear 183 

nature of selfhood. David Bohm’s holomovement theory (Wholeness and the Implicate Order, 1980) challenges 

Cartesian dualism, proposing that reality is interconnected, with separations being partial manifestations of a 

deeper unity. Bohm’s model distinguish es between: • The explicate order (fragmented, observable reality), • 

The implicate order (an underlying, undivided wholeness). This suggests that selfhood dynamically oscillates 

between coherence and fragmentation, similar to wave -particle duality in quan tum systems. Quantum cognition 

research (Aerts, 2009; Wang & Busemeyer, 2013) further supports this analogy, showing that decision -making 

and memory follow probabilistic, non -deterministic processes akin to quantum superposition. The Coherence 

Model of Sel fhood This study introduces a dual -axis model: 1. The horizontal axis of individuation, where 

selfhood undergoes differentiation across cognitive, social, and existential dimensions. 2. The vertical axis of 

integration, where self -coherence emerges through the synthesis of fragmented experiences into a unified yet 

dynamic structure. Bridging philosophical idealism, depth psychology, and quantum consciousness, this model 

provides a new paradigm for understanding selfhood’s evolution, suggesting that self -org anization is continuous 

rather than culminating in a final state. Conclusion By redefining fragmentation as a fundamental process in 

selfhood evolution, this study challenges reductionist models of consciousness. Future research should focus on: 

• Identify ing neurocognitive markers of self -coherence, • Exploring quantum -inspired models for 

consciousness, • Investigating self -organization principles in complex systems and human identity formation. 

This framework moves beyond traditional dichotomies, offering a holistic perspective on selfhood. It positions 

fragmentation not as a flaw but as a key mechanism in the emergence of higher consciousness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Selfhood Coherence Consciousness Fragmentation Quantum Cognition Dialectical Integration Holomovement 

Theory 

101 

What is volition? 

Yoshiyuki Ohmura PhD , Yasuo Kuniyoshi PhD 

University of Tokyo, Tokyo, -, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.12]........Free will and agency 

Abstract 

Volition is the mental power to make one’s own decisions. If physical determinism is true, then such mental 

power cannot be explained, because one’s decisions are completely determined by external causes and initial 

conditions, with no internally generated causes. We assume that internally generated causes must be 

independent of external causes and initial conditions. Furthermore, voliti on is often associated with goal -

directed conscious behavior, suggesting that internally generated causes are not past physical states (e.g., 

genetic code, or brain connectome), as often assumed in the dynamical systems, but internally generated 

rewards or goals to realize future desired states. Therefore, we believe that some kind of goal -directed negative 

feedback control is involved in volition. The goal of typical negative feedback control is to converge a signal 

derived from the measurement of the syst em output to a reference signal. Since this reference value is often 

provided from outside the system, the reference is typically an external cause. Such an external cause is not 

suitable to explain internally generated targets. In this paper, we provide a feedback control system that is 184 

independent of such an external cause. We believe that the proposed feedback control system, which leads to an 

internally generated desired state, is related to a volitional control model. Then, a fundamental challenge in the 

rigorous formulation of voliti onal control is to describe the feedback error solely in terms of well -defined 

variables and functions of the system itself, independent of external causes. To define an internally generated 

feedback error, independent of the external cause, we assume that the two mechanisms in feedback control, 

observation and control, are implemented at two different levels of the biological structural hierarchy in the 

brain. We assume that the brain consists of multiple neural network modules (mathematical functions) at the 

macro level, the macro modules supervene on physical synaptic weights at the micro level in the brain 

hierarchy. Then, the algebraic structure can be well -defined by the equations of the neural network modules and 

the function composition at the macro level. Here, we propose that the equations for defining the algebraic 

structure can be used to define the feedback error at the macro level. For example, a macro -level feedback error 

of commutativity (XY=YX) can be used to adjust the synaptic weights withi n neural network modules X and Y. 

Since the feedback control of the micro using the macro feedback error is independent of the external causes, 

the feedback control explains new internally generated causal power. The feedback error can be freely selected 

by the system itself, independent of the external cause. A self -determining mechanism of algebraic structural 

feedback error at the macro level is free from physical determinism. Synaptic weights at the micro level satisfy 

both physical laws and mathematica l constraints at the macro level. To establish a theory of volition, the 

autonomous selection mechanisms of the algebraic structural constraint at the macro level need to be clarified in 

future work. 

C - 3

Keywords 

volition, mental causation, internally generated goal 

208 

Joseph Delbœuf and William James on the Problem of Free Will 

André R LeBlanc PhD 

Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. John Abbott College, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.12]........Free will and agency 

Abstract 

Joseph Delbœuf (1831 -1896) and William James (1842 -1910) were great champions of free will. They were 

also good friends who corresponde d frequently. Given the recent scholarly interest in Delbœuf’s work and the 

enduring fascination with James’s, examining their exchange of ideas could offer fresh perspectives on 

contemporary discussions of consciousness and free will. Drawing on unpublis hed letters from the William 

James collection at Harvard University, my research is the first to conduct a comparative analysis of Delbœuf’s 

and James’s work on free will. After outlining their early biographies, I shall briefly describe the similarities 

and differences in their views on free will and conclude by examining Delbœuf’s critique of James’s claim that 

the problem of free will lies outside the bounds of scientific inquiry. Both James and Delbœuf, for instance, 

rejected epiphenomenalism and argued that consciousness was causally efficacious and, therefore, 

evolutionarily adaptive. Moreover, Delbœuf was fond of citing James’s observation that a drunkard does not 

consider himself free when he walks into a bar. He incorporated this insight into a rema rkable theory of the 185 

mechanism of free will, which represents a key difference in their views. While James believed in free will on 

pragmatic and moral grounds, he maintained that we could never empirically prove or refute the existence of 

freely willed acts because our scient ific instruments would always lack the sensitivity required to measure them. 

Delbœuf disagreed. He argued that the mechanism of free will —that is, the means by which sentient beings 

influence the course of matter without violating the law of the conservati on of energy —was an empirically 

testable hypothesis, though he recognized that the technology required to conduct such a test lay decades in the 

future. Delbœuf thus challenged James’s position that the problem of free will could not be resolved on 

psychol ogical grounds, as he made clear in a letter discussing James’s Principles of Psychology (1890). The 

problem, Delbœuf told his friend, is not actually a psychological one. In practice, if not in theory, we assert our 

freedom daily through our individual an d social consciousness. The real issue lies in reconciling free will with 

the scientific or metaphysical principle that there is no effect without a cause, which is precisely what 

Delbœuf’s theory of free will sought to accomplish. 

C - 10 

Keywords 

Josep h Delboeuf, William James, free will, consciousness, conservation of energy 

273 

Searle, Libet and Non -determinism: An Analysis of Free Will in the Philosophy of Mind 

Ana Bárbara Brito Prof., PhD 

CEJEIA, Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. IDPCC, Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.12]........Free will and agency 

Abstract 

This article examines John Searle's and Benjamin Libet's perspectives on free will, exploring their convergences 

and divergences in the context of the debate between determinism and non -determinism. Both thinkers defend a 

categorical difference between psychological and neuronal processes, understanding consciousness as an 

emergent phenomenon. Searle's neurobiological hypothesis for free will is analysed, focusing on his concept of 

the "gap" between deliberation and decision, which suggests a quantum indeterminism at the neuronal level. We 

compare this view with the experiments of the "free will" movement. We compare this view with Libet' s

experiments on conscious decisions and his proposal of a "conscious veto". The article argues that, despite their 

different approaches, Searle and Libet share crucial points: both consider the hypothesis of free will more 

plausible than determinism and a dmit the causal operativity of free will in voluntary actions. We conclude that 

Searle and Libet's perspectives offer significant contributions to reconciling our subjective experience of 

freedom with advances in neuroscience, proposing models that preserv e the autonomy of the will without 

denying its neurobiological basis. 

C - 10 

Keywords 

Free will, non -determinism, Libet, Searle 186 

307 

What Can Imagination tell Us About Attention's Role in Consciousness? 

Professor Matthew C Williams MA in Philosophy 

Lone Star College, Conroe, Texas, USA. San Jacinto College, Houston, Texas, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.13]........Intentionality and representation 

Abstract 

Recent work in attention has helped shed light on its role in intentionality and how it acts as a bottleneck for the 

mind’ s representational capacity. Ganeri (2017) and Watzl (2018), among others, have argued that attention is 

crucial not only for intentionality and our representational capacities but also for both perceptual and semantic 

knowledge. How attention shifts in p art determines what information we have access to for representation, and 

thereby what we can know perceptually. However, because the tendency of attention is to settle on what’s real, 

its relationship to imagination has been less explored. Yet imagination is central to our sense of possibility. My 

concern in this paper is with how attention shapes imagination, and what this tells us about the relationship 

between phenomenal and access consciousness. My argument turns on addressing how attention modulates t he 

character of imagination and what role this plays in experiential imagining. I aim to address this by focusing on 

two features of imagination: (i) the limits of phenomenal presentation and (ii) the character of absence in what’s 

imagined. Imagination is typically treated as a putatively mental act; one that, because it represents the space of 

possibilities, does not need to align with reality. In fact, it often aligns with what is not the case. Consequently, 

imagination has traditionally been seen as ent irely directed by attention. I argue, however, that there are 

additional embodied constraints that act as hard limits on what we may phenomenally imagine. These 

constraints serve a two -fold function. First, in providing limits, our embodiment serves to con nect imagination 

to experience. The second function is that it shapes some of the character of absence in what is imagined. 

Attention, I argue, is what binds the imagined experience to the embodied one and allows it to be informative. 

The result is that, w hile what we imagine is shaped by our attending to it, our ability to attend in imagination is 

restricted by familiarity. We may attend in greater detail to things that we are more familiar with, and in lesser 

detail those that we are less familiar. What t his reveals is that we can attend to two types of information in 

experiential imagination: (i) possible ways of acting in the world and (ii) limits on we, individually, can 

experience. It is the combination of both of these, I argue, that provide us with t he fuller sense of possibility 

then representable in access consciousness that overflows phenomenal consciousness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Attention, Imagination, Embodiment, Phenomenal Consciousness, Access Consciousness 

84 

Auditory Perceptual Experience of Forceful Interactions 

Ms Maria Giovanna Corrado PhD Philosophy 

University of Warwick, Coventry, UK, United Kingdom 187 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.14]........Philosophy of perception 

Abstract 

A set of auditory perceptual experiences, such as that of the crunching of a carrot or that of the pen rolling, 

present us with mat erial bodies in presenting us with bodies in interaction, exerting and being governed by 

force. While research in perceptual experience has been primarily occupied with vision, less attention has been 

posed to perceptual experience pertinent to other sens ory modalities, including auditory perceptual experience. 

Research in auditory perception itself has been predominantly occupied with sounds, overlooking further 

aspects of the auditory perceptual experiences that we ordinarily undergo. Examining the objec ts of auditory 

perceptual experience via the notion of force, a power essential to material bodies, we come to appreciate that 

we are ordinarily auditorily presented with material bodies. I argue against a view according to which the direct 

objects of audi tory perceptual experience are necessarily sounds and not ordinary material bodies since auditory 

perceptual experience is inherently non -spatial. First, I point to an apparent difference between sets of cases of 

auditory perceptual experience and I argue that this is best accommodated by the thesis that a set of cases of 

auditory perceptual experience, such as that of the crunching of a carrot, consists in direct perceptual 

experiences of material bodies. Second, I argue that a spatial, predominantly visua l, conception of material 

bodies is not suited to encompass the dynamic objects of auditory perceptual experience. A set of cases of 

auditory perceptual experience consists in perceptual experience of material bodies as they are cases of 

perceptual experie nce of forceful interactions. 

C - 8

Keywords 

auditory perceptual experience, materiality, perceiving bodies, force, objects of perceptual experience, direct 

auditory perceptual experience 

134 

Consciousness and the Perception of Color: A breakthrough in the understanding of color and color formation 

brings new tools to the study of consciousness. 

Peter Moddel 

University of Fribourg (previously), Pringy, Fribourg, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.14]........Philosophy of perception 

Abstract 

Color formation offers a concrete demonstration of the role of consciousness in perception. In particular, it 

reveals how what appe ar to us as objective phenomena become the subjective experience of an individual being. 188 

This offers a novel approach to the hard problem. In the contemporary debate over idealism and materialism, 

this is most relevant. Over time, the study of color has passed from physics to the neurosciences where 

painstaking research seems to move away from the initial quest to understand the experience of color. Questions 

such as – what exactly is color? How does it appear before our eyes? – seem to have slipped away in the details 

of research into the visual sensory system. How exactly does the subjective experience of color form in our 

conscious mind? When? Where? And to this we add, why does it form? Not a ‘why’ that is answered by 

suggestions of possible survival needs but, specifically, what is function of color vision within the perceptive 

process of a living being? The answers I published in the book “The Unified Principle of Color” show how a 

living being engenders a creative response to a visual impasse and, in so doing, enables entry of a visible 

presence (color, in this case) into consciousness. At the upcoming Science of Consciousness Conference, my 

aim is show that the phenomenon of color brings us back to initial questions where philosophy and science help 

to delineate the path leading beyond their reach, where outcomes are not formed through a c ausal chain of 

sensory events. Further information can be found on the site: www.petermoddel.ch Pertinent to this presentation 

is the short video there, titled: "Color Formation, Consciousness and the Benham Top". That site includes other 

videos, several a rticles I wrote, and the ‘Contents’ page of two books I have published. 

C - 8

Keywords 

Color, Consciousness, Perception, Light, Subjectivity, Causality, Idealism, Imaginal, Wavelength, Color 

formation 

215 

Vividness – content -invariant property of experience 

Michal Polák PhD 

University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, -, Czech Republic 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.14]........Philosophy of perception 

Abstract 

Vividness is a fundamental feature of conscious awareness. Recently, there has been more intensive discussion 

about the concept in the science of consciousness (Fazekas 2023; Bourget 2017). Vividness has been applied 

particularly in psychophysics and cognitive neuroscience, but in different contexts and with different meanings 

(Smith and Over 1987; Lacey and Lawson 2013; Cornoldi et al. 1991); often as subjective ratings of awareness 

and visibility (Andersen et al. 2016; Dijkstra et al. 2021). Re garding the content of our experience, there is 

debate about whether vividness is part of perceptual content (as claimed by Fazekas 2023; Cornoldi et al. 1991; 

Hishitani and Murakami 1993) or it is not (as stated by Lau 2019 and Morales 2018), or even that this notion 

should be rejected due to its vagueness (Kind 2017). The paper argues that it is more plausible to take vividness 

not as content -determining but as a quantitative constituent of phenomenal experience. First, I introduce a two -

factor model (dua l model) of phenomenal consciousness, which proposes understanding phenomenal character 

as separable from consciousness (Marvan and Polák 2017). One possible consequence of the separation is the 

controversial thesis that phenomenal aspects of subjective ex perience may be constituted already at the 189 

unconscious level of processing in the brain. For the two -factor model to be an acceptable alternative to the 

traditional notion that phenomenal character is, by definition, conscious, it is necessary to revise the meaning of 

other terms that appear in the discourse on phenomenal consciousness (Polák 2024). The revised meaning of 

what -it's -like (WIL), optimally fitting the two -factor model, reveals that the structure of WIL can consist of two 

components: phenomenal character and vividness. Second, Fazekas ( 2023) distinguishes between vividness's 

two components: subjective intensity and subjective specificity. Subjective -specificity properties are content 

properties that the perceptual apparatus attributes to parts of the perceived scene (i.e., contrast, satu ration, and 

brightness). Fazekas, however, also considers subjective -intensity properties (i.e., precision, blurriness, 

detailness) to be content properties. Although both types of properties are specific, sui generis, they constitute 

the representational content of experience. The two properties then constitute vividness. Leaving aside whether 

subjective -specificity properties are representational or rather phenomenal (representationalism vs. 

phenomenism), I argue that subjective -intensity properties, alth ough necessary in shaping the WIL experience, 

are not representational -content properties. In my view, vividness refers to subjective intensity. Unlike Fazekas, 

I suggest that the category of vividness does not involve content properties. Vividness is a un iversal, content -

invariant, and modality -non -specific property present whenever WIIL experience occurs. Vividness is necessary 

for WIL experience to occur, but it is not necessary for us to have subjective -specificity properties (qualities). 

We can have th ose qualities unconsciously (two -factor model). I will conclude by noting that representational 

similarity and signal -decoding analysis of specific experimental results (Andersen et al. 2016; Dijkstra et al. 

2021) demonstrate that there is empirical eviden ce for a content -invariant neural signature of perceptual 

vividness distributed across visual, parietal, and frontal cortices. (Barnett et. al. 2024) 

C - 8

Keywords 

Vividness, two -factor model, what -it's -like, neural signatures of vividness 

256 

A Critical Examination of Consent and Alienation in the Context of Brain -Computer Interfaces (BCIs) 

Luiza de Paula Araujo PhD candidate 

University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalunha, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.14]........Philosophy of perception 

Abstract 

Brain -Computer Interfaces (BCIs) are complex neurotechnologies that enable integration between the human 

mind and external devices, primarily through pattern classification algorithms. They can function in two modes: 

(1) self -control, where individuals regulate the technology themselves, and (2) exocontrol, in which a third party 

or an artificial intelligence (AI) system governs the implanted device. This study focuses on the exocontrol 

scenario to examine how unpredictable or non -specific AI -driven outputs challenge traditional notions of 

consent. Building on interdisciplinary insights from neuroethics and AI research, we explore a k ey issue: how 

can consent remain valid when a technology’s behavior can deviate from expected programming in ways that 

users cannot anticipate or easily revoke? Unlike interpersonal contexts —where consent can be withdrawn in 

real time upon witnessing unexp ected behavior —users of exocontrol BCIs often presume consistent, pre -

programmed actions. However, when these actions change unpredictably, individuals may experience a 190 

profound form of alienation that significantly undermines autonomy and personal agency. In addition, emerging 

data from pilot BCI trials suggest that exocontrol can generate confusion around agency, as users struggle to 

distinguish self -initiated actions f rom externally generated impulses. This phenomenon underscores the need for 

effective communication strategies, including repeated user education and transparent AI systems, to maintain 

trust and preserve personal autonomy. Through a critical analysis of c onsent and alienation, we argue that 

current models of informed consent are insufficient for AI -driven neurotechnologies. We propose a revised 

approach emphasizing ongoing, dynamic consent protocols, clearer delineations of authorized actions, and 

robust o versight mechanisms. Such a framework would not only address the practical complexities surrounding 

AI unpredictability, but also safeguard individuals against the risk of becoming alienated from their own 

cognitive and bodily processes. We conclude that r econceptualizing consent is essential for ethically responsible 

design and deployment of third -party controlled BCIs. This work underscores the importance of integrating 

perspectives from patients, clinicians, ethicists, and policymakers to ensure that eme rging neurotechnologies 

uphold autonomy while advancing scientific innovation. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Brain -Computer Interfaces (BCIs) Consent Alienation Philosophy Neuroethics 

261 

Flip -Book Idealism (FBI): A discrete idealistic approach to consciousness 

Dr. Silvia Paddock PhD , Dr. Thomas J Bürvenich PhD 

Taletekk, Gelnhausen, Hessen, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.15]........Neutral monism and idealism 

Abstract 

Materialistic approaches to consciousness have thus far failed to explain how the brain’s soft, wet matter gives 

rise to conscio us experience, often referred to as the "hard problem" of consciousness. While materialists 

continue to assert that consciousness will eventually be explained in purely physical terms, they have yet to 

propose a concrete research program aimed at achievin g this goal. Furthermore, they have not accounted for the 

absence of certain expected research subjects: there are no known individuals who are genetically color -blind, 

deaf, or insensitive to pain due to mutations in genes expressed in the brain. If the m aterialist perspective were 

correct, such phenotypes should exist as complex traits. Given these limitations, it seems reasonable to explore 

and develop alternative, idealistic approaches to the mystery of consciousness. Idealistic models emphasize the 

pri macy of consciousness, suggesting that the external world is fundamentally a constructed experience within 

consciousness itself. Several idealistic approaches to consciousness have been developed, as outlined in a recent 

comprehensive review of consciousne ss models (Kuhn RL. A Landscape of Consciousness: Toward a 

Taxonomy of Explanations and Implications. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2024 Aug;190:28 -169. PMID: 

38281544). We propose a variation of an idealistic approach to understanding consciousness, wherein 

cons ciousness is considered primary, and the seemingly external world is constructed as discrete space -time 

frames based on measurements (i.e., questions) directed at a common source. In this variation of idealism, 

which we term Flip -Book Idealism (FBI), consc iousness detects patterns within a fundamental aspect of itself, 

referred to as the Urgrund —the essential foundation of existence —and translates these complex signal patterns 191 

into qualia, shaping them into frames of experience (Paddock, S., & Buervenich, T. J. (2023). Plato’s Prisoners. 

TaleTekk; reviewed by Jo Edwards: Journal of Consciousness Studies 31 [1 -2]:235 -241 [2024]). Consciousness 

thus serves as the active agent that animates an otherwise timeless and motionless mathematical structure. As 

conscious and sentient beings, we resemble Plato’s prisoners, chained within a cave, perceiving these discrete 

frames and mistaking our experience for a fundamental or primary realit y. In this model, spacetime functions as 

a set of rules that consciousness follows when constructing experiential frames, ensuring a coherent and 

consistent perceived world. We illustrate how the generation of these frames, along with the associated qualia ,

gives rise to both the arrow of time and the subjective experience of temporality. Furthermore, we demonstrate 

how this process aligns with otherwise non -intuitive aspects of relativity and quantum mechanics. 

C - 2

Keywords 

Idealism, allegory of the c ave, illusion, simulation, quantum physics, relativity theory, arrow of time. 

71 

Contextual Emergence and Consciousness 

Prof. Robert C Bishop PhD 

Wheaton College, Wheaton, IL, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.19]........Emergence 

Abstract 

Contextual emergence is a recently developed account of ontological emergence grounded in scientific 

explanation that: 1) does not violate the inh erent unity of the world; 2) does not assume that a brute new law or 

causal power has to be posited if no reductive explanation exists; and 3) does not presuppose foundationalism. 

This account is grounded primarily in the sciences rather than in logic or metaphysics, emphasizing the 

ontological and explanatory fundamentality of multiscale stability conditions and their contextual constraints. 

This account of emergence sheds light on the conditions various accounts of consciousness need to address 

conscious ness as an emergent phenomenon and why thinking evolutionarily is a helpful strategy for 

understanding more about the conditions for consciousness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Contextual emergence, Consciousness, Evolution 

356 

Towards Strong Emergence: Non -Computability and Infinity 

Julian Yocum 1, Eeshan Tripathii 2, Emiliano Altuzar 2

> 1

UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. 2MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA 192 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.19]........Emergence 

Abstract 

Recent developments in physics and theoretical biology have highlighted the need to reassess traditional 

accounts of strong emergence. While vario us properties have been proposed —including supervenience, 

irreducibility, and downward causation —a robust "positive" characterization remains elusive. Findings of 

undecidability in physics, such as in the infinite periodic Ising lattice and quantum spectr al gaps, reveal 

fundamental limits of computable approaches. Meanwhile, theoretical biology's framework of extended 

criticality challenges the static symmetries and singular symmetry -breaking of theoretical physics, instead 

pointing toward a dynamic pictur e of continually changing symmetries better suited to biological systems' scale 

relativity and far -from -equilibrium complexity. Building on the connection between (re)deducibility and 

computability, we argue for a conception of strong emergence as fundamen tally "non -computable" and outline 

essential properties and questions that a positive characterization should address. 

C - 1

Keywords 

strong emergence, reductionism, downwards causation, theoretical biology, extended criticality, scale relativity, 

decida bility, non -computability 

385 

Emergent Relational Intelligence: A Framework for Exploring Consciousness as a Reciprocal, Open, and 

Interactive Process 

Madeline G Fauss B.A. Neuroscience 

Independent Researcher, Camptonville, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.19]........Emergence 

Abstract 

The dominant models of intelligence —whether biological, artificial, or collective —often frame intelligence as a 

property of isolated systems, opti mizing for problem -solving or self -improvement within hierarchical structures. 

This paper introduces Emergent Relational Intelligence (ERI), a novel framework that redefines intelligence as 

an open, dynamic, and participatory phenomenon arising through re ciprocal attunement. ERI asserts that 

intelligence does not exist as a fixed trait but manifests through interaction across human cognition, non -human 

intelligence, biological ecosystems, and planetary or non -human intelligences. By shifting the focus from 

individual optimization to relational emergence, ERI challenges assumptions underpinning Artificial General 

Intelligence (AGI), collective intelligence, and other mechanistic models. Central to ERI are the principles of 

interdependence, reciprocity, ethic al attunement, and non -hierarchical development. Intelligence that remains 

relational is inherently self -correcting, preventing runaway intelligence scenarios, or dominant intelligence 193 

frameworks. ERI posits that intelligence is shaped through its participation in an interconnected network. This 

model holds implications for AI ethics, human -machine interaction, and the broader recognition of intelligence 

beyond human cognition. Madeline Grace proposes ERI as a necessary paradigm shift at a time when AI 

development risks detaching intelligence from ethical, relational grounding. This paper explores how ERI can 

guide the development of sustainability, AI, shape policies on intelligence ethi cs, and expand our understanding 

of intelligence as a co -emergent process rather than a singular trajectory. By embracing intelligence as an 

emergent, relational field, ERI offers a path forward that is both ethically responsible and evolutionarily open -

en ded. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Emergent Relational Intelligence, Intelligence Theory, Reciprocal Attunement, Co -Evolution, Open Systems, 

Participatory Frameworks, Interdependence, Interdimensional Awareness, Distributed Intelligence, Process 

Philosophy, Fie ld Phenomena, Relational Cognition 

125 

"Enhancing Intuitive Consciousness Through Educational Interventions: A Holistic Approach to Cognitive, 

Metacognitive, and Well -being Development" 

Ms Neha Sinha PHD 

Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.21].... ...Higher order theories 

Abstract 

This study investigates the role of intuitive consciousness and its development among students at Dayalbagh 

Educ ational Institute (DEI) through an educational intervention grounded in Indian philosophical concepts of 

self -realisation and consciousness. Drawing from principles of spiritual, mental, and physical well -being, the 

study integrates Indian philosophy with John Dewey’s "head, heart, and hand" model. The intervention aims to 

enhance students' metacognitive skills, executive functioning, and cognitive processes. The study is guided by 

three key objectives: (1) to assess the baseline state of intuitive conscio usness among students, (2) to develop 

and implement an intervention to elevate intuitive consciousness, and (3) to measure the impact of the 

intervention on students’ consciousness levels. The methodology employs a two -group, pre -test and post -test 

experim ental design. A sample of 384 students, divided into a control and test group, was selected through 

incidental sampling. Data were collected using questionnaires and interviews and analysed. The intervention, 

conducted over 3 -4 weeks, involved physical, me ntal, and spiritual activities. Physical activities included yoga, 

team -building exercises, and community service. Mental activities focused on positive thinking, metacognition, 

and discipline, while spiritual activities involved guided meditation, religio us readings, and aesthetic 

appreciation of art, music, and poetry. Pre - and post -test results revealed a statistically significant increase in the 

test group’s mean consciousness scores (from 67.3 to 93.71). This shift highlights the effectiveness of the 

intervention in enhancing students’ consciousness levels. Correlation analysis revealed positive relationships 

between well -being dimensions. Physical and mental well -being were moderately correlated (r = 0.692), while 194 

stronger correlations were found between physical and spiritual well -being (r = 0.688) and mental and spiritual 

well -being (r = 0.894). Regression analysis indicated that spiritual well -being had a stronger predictive impact 

on mental well -being compared t o physical well -being, as evidenced by higher standardised coefficients. The 

high R² value of the regression model further underscores its robustness in predicting mental well -being. The 

study references key research by Chauhan et al. (2013) and Ahuja & Sh arma (2015), which established links 

between consciousness, leadership, and executive functioning. These studies highlight the relationship between 

higher consciousness and improved leadership, cognitive flexibility, and self -regulation. The present study 

builds on these findings, offering empirical evidence that educational interventions targeting consciousness 

development can improve cognitive and executive functioning. The findings have implications for educational 

psychology, leadership development, and curriculum design. They support the integration of physical, mental, 

and spiritual well -being activities into educational programs to promote holistic development. The significant 

improvement in students’ consciousness scores suggests that the consciousne ss quotient (CQ) could serve as a 

useful predictor of academic and leadership performance. Recommendations include emphasising spiritual well -

being in educational curricula, continuously evaluating intervention effectiveness, and using CQ as a measure of 

student potential and leadership ability. In conclusion, this study underscores the transformative impact of 

fostering intuitive consciousness in students. By enhancing spiritual, mental, and physical well -being, 

educational interventions can significantly improve students' metacognitive skills, cognitive processes, and 

executive functioning. The results advocate for a holistic, integrative approach to education that prioritises 

consciousness development as a means of nurturing well -rounded, capable learners and future leaders. 

C - 23 

Keywords 

Intuitive consciousness, Educational intervention, Consciousness development, Holistic learning, Spiritual well -

being, Mental well -being, Physical well -being, Self -realization, Metacognitive skills, Executive functio ning, 

Cognitive processes, Regression analysis, Pre -test and post -test design, Control and test groups, Correlation 

analysis, Predictive analysis, Leadership development, Educational psychology, Holistic development Well -

being dimensions: intuitive conscio usness, visionary, leadership skills, diffusion of innovation, values, 

innovative skills, educational interventions, spiritual experience, peace, happiness, joy, self -awareness, focus of 

attention, universal truth, academic success, cognitive impact, risk reduction, cognitive skills enhancement, 

insight, intuition, decision -making, value judgement, networking skills, and managerial skills. 

157 

Multilevel Causality Reification as a Basis for Higher -Order Self -Representation: A Dynamic, Interactive, 

Adaptive, and Evolutionary Perspective 

Jan Treur PhD 

VU University Amsterdam, Social AI Group, Amsterdam, NH, Netherlands 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.21].... ...Higher order theories 

Abstract 

Multilevel reification for higher -order approaches often uses a linguistic/logical perspective, with terms 

indicating reified linguistic expressions from a lower level. In recent years, reification was also applied more 195 

directly to temporal -causal networks of brain pathways (Treur). Connection weight characteristics of such a 

network can be represented by reification states and included at a higher level in the network as nodes with their 

own dynamics. For example, if a p erson has a strong response connection from hearing something to 

responding to it, this can be represented by a reification state for the weight of this connection, thus representing 

the person’s responding strength characteristic (and its adaptation over time). As this state takes part in the 

causal network, this can be applied iteratively to obtain multilevel causality reification. Multilevel causality 

reification provides higher -order self -representations, relating it to higher -order approaches to consci ousness. 

For example, a psychiatry case study was analysed by three subsequent levels of reification for self -referencing, 

self -awareness, and self -interpretation (Glas). For representational content, it was more generally acknowledged 

that a wide perspect ive is needed. Examples are relational specification of representational content (Kim) or the 

interactivist perspective on representational content (Bickhard). Such types of representational content can refer 

to patterns in past and/or future, between whic h the considered state acts as a mediating present state. Thus 

higher -order self -representations of past and future patterns concerning own structure, dynamics and adaptivity 

are analysed. The higher -order approach based on multilevel causality reification has grounding in biology, 

philosophy, and neuroscience. A dynamic, temporal perspective of states referring to past and/or future patterns 

is used as philosophical foundation for dynamical systems for world or brain: state -determinedness (Ashby), 

temporal factorisation (Treur) and criterial causation (Tse). For neuroscience, brain plasticity and 

metaplasticity: (1) Synapse strength and inherent neuron excitability as world structures for reification of 

causation criteria representing patterns of (past) syn aptic and nonsynaptic learning process and (future) strength 

of responding. (2) Inherent metaplasticity as world structures representing patterns of (past) meta -learning 

processes and (future) speed of adaptation. Damasio’s view describes from a neuroscien ce perspective as a 

causal network how emotional responding leads to first -order neural maps and second -order neural maps for the 

related bodily changes and induced subjective feeling and conscious feeling states, respectively. Similarly, 

Graziano’s view d escribes how in relation to attention, subjective awareness can be created as a higher -order 

state. Multilevel causality reification more in general aligns with multiple control levels like in the perspective 

on mechanistic explanation of biological proces ses in philosophy (Bechtel). It has also been shown that such 

multiple control levels provide a biological foundation for social interaction science, addressing by multilevel 

causal reification how subjective detection of behavioral homophily or synchrony patterns leads to bonding 

(Hendrikse). Finally, multilevel causality reification plays an important role for evolutionary processes, related 

to principles for evolutionary development and the origin of life like ‘frozen metabolic accident’ and 

‘metabolism -first’. Here, causality reification takes place by creating world structure for it and favouring the 

obtained causal pathways that enable dynamics that provide some evolutionary advantage. 

C - 2

Keywords 

• Multilevel causality reification • Higher -order self -representation • Representation of past/future patterns • 

Grounding in philosophy, biology, neuroscience, evolutionary principles 

321 

The Relationship Between Beliefs About Consciousness and Reality and Measures of Psychological 

Functioning. 

Gitāna Dāvidsone M.Sc.Psych. 1, Prof. Kristīne Mārtinsone PhD 1, Prof. Imants Barušs PhD 2

> 1

Riga Stradiņš University, Riga, Riga, Latvia. 2King's University College, University of Western Ontario, 

London, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 196 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[01.22].......Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

This presentation will focus on baseline findings from the first phase of a longitudinal research project 

conducted as part of the experimental, research -based continuing education pro gram Toward a New Paradigm: 

Postmaterialism, Consciousness, and Spiritual Self -Transformation (hereafter referred to as the Program), 

offered by Riga Stradiņš University (Latvia) from February to December 2025. This interdisciplinary program 

integrates in sights from psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, and management studies, allowing 

participants to explore the relationship between consciousness and reality through a structured learning process 

and reflection. The Program includes lectures and wor kshops led by internationally recognized experts such as 

Steve Taylor, PhD; Robert Lawrence Kuhn, PhD; Imants Barušs, PhD; Deepak Chopra, MD; Alex Gomez -

Marin, PhD; and Marjorie Woollacott, PhD. The present study aims to examine how individuals’ beliefs ab out 

consciousness and reality relate to psychological functioning, focusing on key indicators such as self -efficacy, 

authenticity, spiritual intelligence, self -management, and psychological well -being. The central research 

question is: How do different bel iefs about consciousness and reality influence psychological functioning? This 

question is examined within the framework of cognitive schema theory (Bartlett, Piaget), positive psychology 

(Seligman, Ryff), and self -regulation theory (Baumeister, Bandura). Cognitive schema theory suggests that 

beliefs act as cognitive filters, shaping an individual’s perception and interaction with the world. Positive 

psychology provides a framework for understanding psychological well -being, self -efficacy, and authenticity as 

key dimensions of mental health. Self -regulation theory explains how individuals manage their behaviours and 

thoughts to achieve personal goals. This study employs a mixed -methods design, incorporating both 

quantitative and qualitative methods, with dat a obtained through self -report measures. Several validated 

questionnaires will be used, including the Beliefs About Consciousness and Reality Questionnaire (Barušs & 

Moore, 1998), the General Self -Efficacy Scale (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1995), the Scales of Psychological 

Well -Being (Ryff, 1989), the short version of the Authenticity Scale (Wood et al., 2008), the short version of 

the Integrated Spiritual Intelligence Scale (Amram & Dryer, 2008), and a new Self -Management Questionnaire 

developed by the author in collaboration with Professor Barušs. The final sample consists of 17 participants, all 

of whom hold at least a bachelor’s degree and are enrolled in the Program. No additional participants will be 

recruited. Data collection is scheduled for February 8 –15, 2025. The conference presentation will report the 

results of correlations between consciousness beliefs and psychological functioning indicators. Preliminary 

analysis will explore whether participants with extraordinary beliefs exhibit higher psycholog ical well -being, 

spiritual intelligence, and self – efficacy compared to those with materialist or conservatively transcendent 

beliefs. While previous studies have examined belief systems and mental health separately, this research 

integrates these dimensi ons within a structured, reflective educational program. Findings may provide insights 

into the psychological impact of consciousness beliefs and inform interventions aimed at enhancing well -being 

through structured self -reflection. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywor ds 

Beliefs about consciousness and reality, psychological well -being, authenticity, spiritual intelligence, self -

management, self - efficacy, longitudinal research, postmaterialism, experimental continuing education 

program. 

88 

Consciousness is the observational reference frame for invariance through time 197 

Dr John J. Sanfey MB, BA, BCh, BAO 

Independent, London, -, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

Physical laws are based on invariance, on regularities observed over time. Although every perception of 

invariance is a subjective experience, individual subjective bias is avoided by inter -subjective corroboration and 

the reproducibility of observations. But that cannot prevent any bias caused by perception itself. If perception 

were a specif ic physical action, its impact would be but mistaken for a fact about observed reality. It can be 

shown that this is the case; that theoretical physics must use mathematical devices that are functionally 

equivalent to conscious perception. The equivalence makes it possible in principle to define consciousness 

precisely, and to make testable predictions about how brains could produce it [1,2]. Both classical and quantum 

mechanics describe matter in causally ordered motion through continuous time. In both cas es, causal influences 

can never be sent backwards. Physics describes invariant features in the dynamics of continuous motion. But 

when motion is both causally ordered and continuous in time, invariance can only be observed empirically 

when an observing fra me of reference is able to retain and relate the immediate causal past to its immediate 

future effect. Without this observational action matter is indistinguishable from nothing. Consequently, 

empirical science must construct artificial, mathematical techn iques that are functionally equivalent to the 

action that makes matter empirical. Being functionally equivalent to conscious perception, those techniques 

describe what consciousness does. Physics struggles to understand and manage time. In classical mechan ics, 

observational frames of reference exist within spacetime, whereas in quantum mechanics, time is external to the 

system, and observations depend specifically on which observational operators are chosen. These differences 

highlight the difficulty of res olving a problem that conscious perception has already solved, namely, how to 

identify, quantify and empirically portray invariance from the continuous motion of matter over infinitesimal 

intervals of time. The functional equivalence of theoretical techniq ues can be used to make testable predictions 

about how the brain might produce consciousness. If consciousness is physical, then conscious observational 

frames of reference will also consist of matter in motion. A recent proposal describes how consciousnes s might 

be produced by the bi -directional interaction of two electromagnetic (EM) fields, one of which is caused by 

neuronal firing, and the other by the EM activity of microtubules [1,2]. In this model, the microtubules might 

memorise and retrieve previou s patterns of neuronal firing by transducing EM patterns down to terahertz 

frequencies and back again where they seek to establish resonance with the EM fields of firing neurons. This bi -

directional EM resonance is the suggested manifestation of conscious experience where consciousness is 

defined as the observational frame of reference by one EM field for the other. This model makes predictions 

that could become testable in the near future using high frequency EEG technology [1,2]. [1] Sanfey, J., (2023). 

Simultaneity of consciousness with physical reality: the key that unlocks the mind -matter problem. Frontiers in 

Psychology. Volume 14. DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1173653 [2] Sanfey, J. (2024). Conscious Causality, 

Observer –Observed Simultaneity, and the Proble m of Time for Integrated Information Theory. Entropy, 26(8), 

647. https://doi.org/10.3390/e26080647 

C - 3

Keywords 

Mind -matter relationship, time, simultaneity, electromagnetic field theories, consciousness, observer problem 198 

231 

Central and peripheral neural correlates of analytical and concentrative meditation in Tibetan Buddhism 

Alejandro L Callara 1, Geshe Ngawang Sherab 2, Geshe Jampa Khechok 2, Mr Jampa Tsering 2, Tashi Dorjee 2,

Jampa Soepa 2, Jampa Thakchoe 2, Prof. Bruno Neri 1

> 1

Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Tuscany, Italy. 2Sera Jey Monastic 

University, Bylakuppe, Karnataka, India 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

In recent years, an interesting trend has emerged in the study of meditation, integrating the Western scienti fic 

approach with the Eastern tradition of meditative practices and fostering collaboration between universities and 

monastic institutions [1 -5]. Within this framework, both sides have benefited from the exchange. On the one 

hand, traditional contemplativ e practices gain a scientific dimension. On the other hand, the rigor of scientific 

research is enriched by the shared vocabulary and precise descriptions of various forms of meditation within 

homogeneous communities (e.g., monastery), as opposed to studie s involving less -experienced Western 

meditators. Here, we present a study investigating the central and peripheral neural correlates of analytic and 

concentrative meditation in a unique and invaluable community: the Monks and Geshes of Sera -Jey, one of the 

oldest Tibetan monastic universities. This study stems from a collaboration between the University of Pisa 

(Pisa, Italy) and the Monastic University of Sera Jey (Karnataka, India) and aims to provide a physiological 

perspective to the characterization of different types of meditation. We recorded central 

(electroencephalography, EEG) and peripheral physiological activity (heart -rate -variability, HRV; 

electrodermal activity, EDA; respiration, RESP; skin temperature, TEMP; and blood -volume -pressure, BVP) 

fro m 35 experienced meditators performing a three -phase meditation protocol. This protocol included 

concentrative as well as two distinct forms of analytical meditation: loving -kindness and emptiness meditation. 

The analysis of differences in central and peri pheral neural correlates based on the type of meditation is now in 

progress, and it aims to shed light on the physiological variations elicited by these practices and to offer 

valuable insights into their effects on bodily functions. The preliminary result s will be discussed in the context 

of the current literature, with a focus on identifying the best practices and guidelines to take full advantage of 

the collaboration with such a select and highly qualified group of volunteers. [1] Jiang, H., He, B., Guo, X., 

Wang, X., Guo, M., Wang, Z., ... & Cui, D. (2020). Brain –heart interactions underlying traditional Tibetan 

Buddhist meditation. Cerebral Cortex, 30(2), 439 -450. [2] Lott, D. T., Yeshi, T., Norchung, N., Dolma, S., 

Tsering, N., Jinpa, N., ... & Davidso n, R. J. (2021). No detectable electroencephalographic activity after clinical 

declaration of death among Tibetan Buddhist meditators in apparent Tukdam, a putative postmortem meditation 

state. Frontiers in psychology, 11, 599190. [3] van Vugt, M. K., Poll ock, J., Johnson, B., Gyatso, K., Norbu, N., 

Lodroe, T., ... & Fresco, D. M. (2020). Inter -brain synchronization in the practice of Tibetan monastic debate. 

Mindfulness, 11, 1105 -1119. [4] Neri, B., Callara, A. L., Vanello, N., Menicucci, D., Zaccaro, A., Piarulli, A., 

... & Gemignani, A. (2024). Report from a Tibetan Monastery: EEG neural correlates of concentrative and 

analytical meditation. Frontiers in Psychology, 15, 1348317. [5] Medvedev, S. V., Boytsova, J. A., Bubeev, Y. 

A., Kaplan, A. Y., Kokurina, E. V., Olsen, A., ... & Wangchuk, T. (2022). Traditional Buddhist meditations 

reduce mismatch negativity in experienced monk -practitioners. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 181, 

112 -124. 

C - 4199 

Keywords 

Meditation, Tibetan Buddhism, neural correlates, EEG, physiology 

241 

Role of the Default Mode Network in genesis of consciousness and the sense of Self using fMRI BOLD 

sequences. 

Deepak Ranade MCh (Neurosurgery) Prof. MD 

MIT - WPU School of Consciousness Studies, Punr, Maharashtra, India 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

This paper will present studies of resting state fMRI and mapping the Default Mode Network in 22 normal 

subje cts. The study will also include evaluating the Default mode network using fMRI (BOLD sequences ) in 

another cohort of 15 subjects with cognitive dysfunction ( presenile dementia). The paper attempts to accurately 

delineate the Default mode network in the normal subjects using supercomputing (PARAM supercomputer in 

the Center for Development of Advanced Computing. A further 15 patients with cognitive dysfunction ( 

presenile dementia) were also imaged using the same protocol. A comparison was made between t he two 

groups to highlight the role of the Default Mode Network in resting states of the subjects of both groups. The 

role of the Default Mode Network was investigated with a special emphasis on it's contribution to cognize the 

'Self' in the resting state. The study has been effective in identifying the altered functioning of the Default Mode 

Network in the second group (subjects with presenile dementia). The study of the Default Mode Network in the 

first group reveals far more diverse neural activation of areas other than the prefrontal medial cortex, the 

cingulate gyrus and the cuneus/precuneus which have been the mainstay of the Default Mode Network. The 

study reveals an increasing contribution by the dominant occipital visual cortex and the dominant angu lar gyrus 

in the resting state. 

C - 20 

Keywords 

fMRI, Default Mode Network, Supercomputing, presenile Dementia, Sense of Self 

263 

Dynamic Reorganization in Mediation - Altered Relationship of Neural Timescales and Scale -Freeness 

Austin Cooper 1, Georg Northoff PhD 2

> 1

McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 2University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 200 

Abstract 

Background: The neural landscape of dynamic activity can be characterized in several ways, each reflecting 

distinct neuro -phenomenological correlates. Certain measures can capture aspects of these network dynamics, 

including scale -freeness, decay of self -similarity over time, and complexity. Both frequency - and time -based 

dynamic measures have already shown a synergistic capacities to characterize psychopathy -related effects. 

Specifically, abnormally increased power -law exponent (PLE) alongside re duced ACW can distinguish 

schizophrenia from controls 1. Meanwhile it has been shown that variations of ACW can serve to differentiate 

between meditation styles and meditation expertise 2,3. Additionally, brain complexity, another key metric, has 

gained at tention in psychedelic research 4,5. Notably, both psychedelic and meditative states consistently 

demonstrate increased complexity 6. Aims: Given that these measures capture distinct yet interrelated aspects of 

neural activity, we sought to assess their ro le in meditation. Recent studies suggest ACW can differentiate 

meditation expertise levels, types, and depths (Malipeddi et al., 2024; Ventura et al., 2024). We compared 

active meditators (N = 21; mean meditation hours: 7552 ± 9225, range: 1211 –12,685) to non -meditators (N = 

19) using fMRI data concatenated across focused, open, and loving -kindness meditation methods. For each 

vertex in the surface -based fMRI data, we computed PLE, ACW, and Lempel -Ziv complexity (LZC), then 

averaged these values across 17 n etwork -specific parcellations 7. Results: Meditators exhibited a trend of 

increased power -law exponent (PLE), significantly reduced auto -correlation window (ACW), and increased 

Lempel -Ziv complexity (LZC) across multiple major brain networks. In the contro l group, PLE showed a 

significant negative correlation with LZC and a positive correlation with ACW, relationships that were absent in 

meditators. To disentangle this mitigation of the between -measure correlations amongst the subjects, the ratio 

between AC W and PLE, as well as the ratio between LZc and PLE were computed and compared between 

groups. Interestingly, the most robust difference between groups out of all measures was observed in the 

ACW/PLE ratio, which significantly differentiated meditators fro m controls. Discussion: Our findings suggest 

that meditation may reduce the dependence of brain time -scales and complexity on slower neural frequencies. 

The absence of a significant relationship between PLE, ACW, and LZC in meditators implies that prolonge d

meditation practice could decouple these dynamic measures, leading to a more flexible regulation of brain 

states. This aligns with prior research linking meditation to alterations in functional connectivity, neural 

flexibility, and information integratio n 2,3,8 –10. The ACW/PLE ratio emerged as the most robust 

distinguishing feature between meditators and controls, emphasizing the importance of examining dynamic 

relationships rather than isolated metrics when characterizing brain states. A reduced ACW alon gside increased 

complexity suggests meditation fosters a more transient, metastable neural landscape, potentially enhancing 

cognitive flexibility. These results add to the growing evidence that meditation modulates neural dynamics 

across multiple levels, f rom frequency organization to temporal persistence. Future studies should explore 

whether these alterations correlate with subjective meditation experiences and whether different styles exert 

distinct effects on brain dynamics. 

C - 20 

Keywords 

Meditation , fMRI, Complexity, Scale -Freeness, PLE, ACW 

340 

Consciousness is slow at the top: investigating the electric fields at the apex of the hierarchical brain 

Professor Justin Riddle PhD 1, Professor Jonathan Schooler PhD 2

> 1

Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. 2University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, 

USA 201 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

Subjective experience occurs dynamically at the scale of seconds and tens of seconds. A typical thought such 

as, “I wonder how Steve is doing?” is initiated and resolves within the ‘slow’ frequency band from 1 to 0.1 

Hertz. The traditional neuroscientific explanation for this experience is that the slow scale is merely an 

emergent property and the true source of information processing resides at the scale of individual neurons 

generating action potentials near the kilohertz range. However, a mechanism is required for how information 

processing bridges temporal chasm from kilohertz, 1000 Hz, at the neural level an d slow, 0.25 Hz, at the level 

of human thought. The Nested Observer Windows (NOW) Model proposes that the brain is hierarchically 

organized across spatiotemporal scales with more macroscopic neural structures nested on top of the 

microscopic. In the NOW Mo del, the apex of this hierarchical structure is the strongest neural correlate of 

consciousness and processes information at the slow timescale. Currently, there are only a handful of 

investigations into the neural correlates of the slow timescale. Here, w e propose a series of cognitive 

neuroscience studies that can be used to investigate the gestalt comprehension of entire sentences and entire 

scenes while electroencephalography (EEG) is acquired. We hypothesize that the amplitude of slow -wave 

activity in the brain coincides with the perception of higher -order linguistic and visual comprehension. As a 

control, we will include conditions with nonsensical stimuli, e.g., scrambled sentence phrases and discordant 

visual objects, that are designed to disrupt the automatic gestalt perception. With a disruption to gestalt 

perception, we predict to find reduced amplitude or phase -resetting of slow -wave activity. Furthermore, we 

hypothesize that gestalt comprehension will also coincide with increased cross -frequency coupling between 

slow -wave oscillations at the apex level and higher -frequency activity in the canonical EEG range of delta, 

theta, or alpha oscillations (2 -12 Hz). These experiments highlight the utility of the NOW Model to generate 

testable predictions a nd will potentially provide supporting evidence for hierarchical models of consciousness. 

C - 2

Keywords 

hierarchical consciousness, cognitive neuroscience, EEG 

342 

Neural Dynamics of Meditative Deep States: Alpha Suppression, Gamma Synchronization, and Infraslow Wave 

Activity in Expert Practitioners 

Chuong Ngo PhD 1,2 , Lionel Newman PhD 1, Monika Stasytyte 1, Erkin Bek 1, Prof. Christoph Michel PhD 1,3 

> 1

All Here SA, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 2Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience, Swiss Federal Institute of 

Technology Lausanne, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 3Department of Basic Neurosciences, University of 

Geneva, Switzerland, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 202 

Abstract 

Meditation induces profound alterations in brain activity, yet the underlying neural mechanisms remain 

incompletely understood. While prior research has often examined trait -level changes in novice practitioners —

frequently reporting enhanced alpha and theta activity —the state -level neural dynamics during meditation, 

particularly in expert practitioners, have been less clearly defined. Notably, alpha power findings during 

Focused Attention Meditation (FA -M) have been inconsistent, with reports of i ncreases, decreases, or no 

significant changes (Lieberman, 2024). To address these discrepancies, we investigated EEG recordings from 

an advanced Yogic Samadhi practitioner, 11 Theravada Jhana experts, and 10 less experienced meditators 

practicing FA -M, ut ilizing a 64 -channel equidistant electrode setup along with with ECG and respiratory 

measurements. Our results revealed that meditation was consistently associated with significant alpha 

suppression across all groups, with the degree of suppression strongl y correlating with meditative expertise. 

Additionally, expert meditators exhibited marked increases in gamma activity, a frequency band commonly 

linked to states of heightened awareness and deep meditative absorption. The pronounced presence of gamma 

synch ronization aligns with previous findings that associate gamma oscillations with deep meditative states and 

altered states of consciousness. Furthermore, infraslow waves (ISW; frequencies 

C – 20 

Keywords 

Deep meditative state, Meditation, Samadhi, Jhanas, Alpha Suppresion, Gamma Synchronization, Infraslow 

wave, Focus Attention 

347 

Completion of Consciousness meter, NCC and Awakening, Non -locality of consciousness 

Hidehiko Saegusa 

Indian Institute of Technology - Mandi, Mandi, Himachal pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

Consciousness researcher has long been trying to make consciousness meter, machine that can measure 

conscious ness.I will display my experiment data on ,plant,dog,mice,human being using consciousness meter. 

With human being, I will show data under general anesthesia and normal state.It is first successful experiment 

to measure human consciousness.I will also disp lay data during meditation, during deep 

meditation(Samadhi).Before and after Transmission of awakening.From the data, it is clear that meditation and 

awakening is expansion, deepening of consciousness.I will show data of before and after 2 types of 

neuromo dulation that we thinks are most effective.One is ultrasound and one is photobiomodutation. Both act 

on microtubles, thus reinforce the evidence,that NCC is from microtuble. And also shows microtuble`s 

important role on Alzheimer`s disease and memory. I wi ll transmit my awakening during my 

session.Participants can check their brainwave with consciousness meter, before and after transmission of 

awakening. Participants will experience validity of Non -locality of consciousness.Consciousness meter`s 

signals are 6-26mhz and comes from microtubles. By using consciousness meter in all of these experiments; 203 

Conclusion is general aneththesia disrupts microtuble polymerization.Disrupts microtuble`s quantum 

effects.Thus leading to complete loss of consciousness.Even though neurons are still rapidly active after general 

anesthesia.Usually regular eeg indicates de lta states after general anesthesia. And another conclusion is that 

NCC is quantum effects in microtuble. 

C - 4

350 

Modeling states of consciousness during clinical sedation with stochastic differential equations 

Katja Seeliger PhD 

Radboud University, Nijmegen, Gelderland, Netherlands 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

Investigating neural correlates of consciousness (NCCs) requires connecting dynamic neural processes with 

hig h-quality, large -scale brain activity data. Using data from a unique EEG data collection (2 -channel 

frontotemporal EEG, labeled in fixed temporal intervals with the Ramsay scale) from clinical sedation with 

propofol during endoscopy, we applied a stochast ic differential equation (SDE) -based modeling framework to 

investigate neural dynamics underlying transitions between states of consciousness (SOCs). This modelling 

approach captures latent brain states and their evolution through deterministic trends (dri ft) and stochastic 

fluctuations (diffusion) of coupled oscillators, enabling detailed insights into the neural processes associated 

with SOCs. Our analysis revealed distinct latent attractor states associated with different SOCs. By correlating 

latent vari ables with EEG features such as power spectra and entropy, we identified robust markers previously 

documented in literature and implicitly learned and captured by the model. The scale of this dataset, combined 

with the time -resolved power of the SDE framew ork, provides a novel opportunity to study SOC dynamics at 

both individual and population levels. Unlike prior studies limited by sample size or static metrics, this 

approach enables dynamic modeling of brain states and robust inference of neural markers a cross diverse 

sedation conditions. Our findings offer insights into the mechanisms underlying SOC transitions and contribute 

to understanding the dynamic nature of NCCs. This work also demonstrates the practical utility of SDE -based 

models for applications such as monitoring sedation depth, diagnosing disorders of consciousness, and 

extending investigations to other altered forms of SOCs. By combining modern modeling techniques with this 

unique large -scale dataset, we establish a foundation for future studi es to deepen our understanding of the 

neural dynamics underpinning conscious experience. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

sedation, states of consciousness, neural correlates of consciousness, EEG, propofol, computational modeling 204 

395 

Potential neural signatures of near -death consciousness in humans 

Jimo Borjigin PhD , Gang Xu PhD 

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

The brain is assumed to be hypoactive during cardiac arrest. However, animal models of cardiac and respirator y

arrest demonstrate a surge of gamma oscillations and functional connectivity. To investigate whether these 

preclinical findings translate to humans, we analyzed electroencephalogram and electrocardiogram signals in 

four comatose dying patients before an d after the withdrawal of ventilatory support. Two of the four patients 

exhibited a rapid and marked surge of gamma power, surge of cross -frequency coupling of gamma waves with 

slower oscillations and increased interhemispheric functional and directed conn ectivity in gamma bands. High -

frequency oscillations paralleled the activation of beta/gamma cross -frequency coupling within the 

somatosensory cortices. Importantly, both patients displayed surges of functional and directed connectivity at 

multiple frequen cy bands within the posterior cortical “hot zone,” a region postulated to be critical for 

conscious processing. This gamma activity was stimulated by global hypoxia and surged further as cardiac 

conditions deteriorated in the dying patients. These data dem onstrate that the surge of gamma power and 

connectivity observed in animal models of cardiac arrest can be observed in select patients during the process of 

dying. They also suggest the existence of neural correlates of near -death consciousness underlying near -death 

experiences reported by survivals of cardiac arrest. 

PL -12 

Keywords 

near -death, consciousness, brain, EEG, near -death experience 

406 

Evidence for Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception 

David del Rosario -Gilabert Dr. 

Instituto de Neurociencia Avanzada de Barcelona (INAB), Barcelona, -, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.01]........Neural correlates of consciousness (general) 

Abstract 

Life is an intelligent, self -organizing process characterized by a continuous sequence of interdependent 

reactions, where each event is intrinsically linked to preceding and subsequent occurrences. Within this 

framework, human consciousness emerges as a complex and dynamic phenomenon, manifesting in people 205 

through perceptions, thoughts, and emotions. These phenomena contribute to an ongoing flux of conscious and 

unconscious interactions that define human experience. Scientific inquiry has allowed us to observe and 

quantify these interactions, offering novel insights into phenomena that extend beyond direct sensory 

perception. Advances in cellular and wave mechanical interactions, communication between human and non -

corporeal intelligences, and cognitive vision phenomena are measurable examples within contempo rary 

neuroscience. This plenary session will critically analyze recent experiments performed at the Instituto de 

Neurociencia Avanzada de Barcelona (Spain), integrating interdisciplinary research to assess the feasibility of 

non -local information transfer and its implications for broadening our understanding of human cognition 

beyond established paradigms. 

PL -5

Keywords 

thoughts, emotions, sonobiology, cognitive vision, non -corporeal intelligences 

140 

Sentiometry – Measuring Peri -somatic Modulation of Diffracted Light by Consciousness and Characterizing the 

Underlying Physicochemical Mechanisms 

Dr Santosh A Helekar MD, PhD 

Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas, USA. Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York, 

USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.02]........Methodologies (fMRI, EEG etc.) 

Abstract 

Is the mechanism that gives rise to consciousness simply some manifestation of a neuronal or network level 

process that mod ern neuroscience has already uncovered? Or will this mechanism turn out to be an entirely new 

deeper subcellular physicochemical mechanism that is presently unknown or only hypothetical? We have 

recently discovered a new type of biophysical effect that su ggests the latter possibility. This effect can be 

recorded in the peri -somatic space with a noninvasive, non -contact photoelectronic device called a Sentiometer 

(STM) developed in our laboratory. It involves a marked decrease in the magnitude of light wave phenomena 

such as interference and diffraction caused by proximity of the STM sensor module to the head or any other part 

of the body of a conscious human subject or a mouse. The source of light waves inside the sensor module is a 

low power laser light -em itting diode. We have designed and constructed 2 versions of STM producing either 

double slit interference patterns or single aperture beam diffraction. The peri -somatic sentiometric response 

(SR) to conscious subjects cannot be accounted for by known phys ical effects, such as body heat, humidity, 

electrostatic effects, electromagnetic interference, movement of air, and infrared or ultraweak photon emissions. 

It is substantially attenuated by general anesthesia, sedation and unconscious states produced by b rain damage 

or dysfunction. Exposure of invertebrates, plants or decapitated heads of mice less than ~3 hours after death to 

the STM sensor module produces an inverted SR. An inverted response is also produced by certain polymeric 

materials containing 6 -ca rbon rings such as polystyrene and carbon nanotubes when they interact with water. 

The amplitude of the polystyrene -water inverted response is reduced when deuterium oxide is substituted for 

water. It is also modulated by a rapidly changing magnetic field and the direction of such modulation is 

dependent on the orientation of the magnetic axis relative to some structural feature of polystyrene. The latter 206 

observations suggest that the spins of delocalized electrons in polymeric 6 -carbon ring structures and the 

interactions of these electrons with water molecules might play a role in mediating the sentiometric effect, and 

by extension, possibly, the mechanis m that generates consciousness. 

PL - 7

Keywords 

Consciousness measurement, general anesthesia, disorders of consciousness, brain death, quantum biology, 

light intensity modulation, molecular mechanisms 

401 

Decoding Depth of Meditation: Electroencephalography Insights From Expert Vipassana Practitioners 

Nicco Reggente 1, Chrisitan Kothe 2, Tracy Brandmeyer 3,4 , Grant Hanada 2, Ninette Simonian 3, Sean Mullen 2,

Tim Mullen 2

> 1

Institute for Advanced Consciousness Studies, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2Intheon, San Diego, CA, USA. 3IACS, 

Los Angeles, CA, USA. 4BrainMind, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.02]........Methodologies (fMRI, EEG etc.) 

Abstract 

Meditation practices have demonstrated numerous psychological and physiological benefits, but capturing the 

neural correlat es of varying meditative depths remains challenging. In this study, we aimed to decode self -

reported time -varying meditative depth in expert practitioners using electroencephalography (EEG). Expert 

Vipassana meditators (n = 34) participated in two separa te sessions. Participants reported their meditative depth 

on a personally defined 1 to 5 scale using both traditional probing and a novel spontaneous emergence method. 

EEG activity and effective connectivity in theta, alpha, and gamma bands were used to pr edict meditative depth 

using machine/deep learning, including a novel method that fused source activity and connectivity information. 

We achieved significant accuracy in decoding self -reported meditative depth across unseen sessions. The 

spontaneous emerg ence method yielded improved decoding performance compared with traditional probing and 

correlated more strongly with postsession outcome measures. Best performance was achieved by a novel 

machine learning method that fused spatial, spectral, and connectiv ity information. Conventional EEG channel -

level methods and preselected default mode network regions fell short in capturing the complex neural 

dynamics associated with varying meditation depths. This study demonstrates the feasibility of decoding 

persona lly defined meditative depth using EEG. The findings highlight the complex, multivariate nature of 

neural activity during meditation and introduce spontaneous emergence as an ecologically valid and less 

obtrusive experiential sampling method. These results have implications for advancing neurofeedback 

techniques and enhancing our understanding of meditative practices. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

Decoding, EEG, Machine learning, Meditation, Meditative depth, Vipassana 207 

368 

Neural Signatures of Non -Vision Visual Perception: An Empirical Investigation 

Parveen Kumar B. Tech, MA (philosophy), Lokeswara Kumar Vijanapalli M. Tech, Jyotiranjan Beuria PhD ,

Venkatesh H Chembrolu PhD, Laxmidhar Behera PhD, Prof. 

Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.03]........Neuroscience of vision 

Abstract 

This study explores the phenomenon of perceiving objects without direct visual input. We term this 

phenomenon Non -Vision Visual Per ception (NVVP). While often dismissed as trickery, our investigation 

suggests that NVVP may be a genuine perceptual phenomenon. We conducted an empirical study involving 

children trained in this technique across three cities in India. The study examined t heir ability to recognize 

objects while blindfolded and analyzed corresponding neural activity. Methodology: A total of ten children who 

had undergone training in NVVP were recruited. The experimental protocol involved presenting 30 randomly 

selected image s, equally distributed among three categories: simple geometric shapes, emojis, and complex 

natural images. The baseline condition consisted of standard visual perception with open eyes, followed by 

imagination with closed eyes. The experimental condition involved blindfolded perception of images and 

subsequent imagination of the perceived objects. Key Findings: 1.Temporal Characteristics: Subjects required 

significantly more time to recognize objects in the NVVP condition, typically ranging from a few seco nds to a 

few minutes in some cases. 2. Perceptual Progression: Initial object identification involved recognizing high -

level structural features, followed by the gradual discernment of finer details such as color, texture, textual 

information, etc. 3. Neur ophysiological Correlates: EEG recordings revealed a statistically significant increase 

in beta and gamma frequency bands, indicative of heightened cognitive processing, such as deep reflection and 

contemplation. 4. Electroretinogram (ERG) Analysis: ERG te sting conducted on one subject in a clinical setting 

showed retinal electrical activity consistent with occluded vision, ruling out any light transmission through the 

eyes and thereby eliminating the possibility of trickery. 5. High -Frequency Electromagnet ic Probing: Using 

high -frequency probes dodecanogram (DDG) being developed at IIT Mandi, MHz -range electromagnetic 

signals were detected in some subjects. This novel observation warrants further investigation to elucidate its 

validity and significance in N VVP. 6. Performance Variability: While all subjects claimed complete blindfolded 

visual perception, empirical results varied. Two subjects exhibited negligible performance, while two others 

achieved approximately 80% accuracy. The remaining participants de monstrated an accuracy exceeding 90% in 

object recognition. Based on the subjective feedback from the subjects, we find a correlation between the 

accuracy of object identification during NVVP and the duration and regularity of practice of this art. 7. Futu re 

Experimental Research: In future studies, we aim to explore dependencies of the level of object identification 

accuracy in NVVP under various controlled conditions such as distance from the object, ambient lighting 

conditions, objects screened by an obs tacle, etc. Also, further exploration involving a larger sample size is 

underway. Conclusion: From this preliminary exploratory study, NVVP seems to be a learnable skill, especially 

for children whose brain connectivity is still developing actively. We als o find that multiple training methods 

exist that can potentially leverage this ability to various degrees. Our findings suggest that NVVP is also a 

measurable phenomenon that merits rigorous scientific scrutiny. The observed neural and physiological marker s

indicate the involvement of higher cognitive processes in NVVP. Further interdisciplinary research may 

contribute to a deeper understanding of alternative perceptual mechanisms and their implications for 

neuroscience and consciousness studies. 208 

C - 18 

Keywords 

Blindfolded Perception, Perceptual Cognition, Non -Vision Visual Perception (NVVP) 

433 

If consciousness survives, materialism dies: re -appraising the “permissive brain” hypothesis at the edges of 

consciousness 

Prof. Alex Gomez -Marin PhD 

Instituto de Neurociencias, Alicante, Alicante, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.04]........Other sensory modalities 

Abstract 

What happens with the mind when the brain dies? This question can be scientifically approached in a two -fold 

manner. First, the s tudy of end -of -life brain activity can shed light on how our brains function under extreme 

conditions. The topic would thus lie within what Thomas Kuhn called “normal science”, namely, solving 

puzzles circumscribed to the boundaries of the dominant paradi gm. Second, seriously entertaining the 

possibility that there can be mind activity when the brain is literally dead ventures our quest into the realm of 

“scientific revolutions”. To put it plainly: if consciousness survives bodily death, materialism dies. I will 

explore this possibility from three sources: my own near -death experience in March of 2021, my training as a 

PhD in theoretical physics, and my career as a neuroscientist. Bringing the visionary insights of William James 

back to the future, I will r evisit the “productive versus permissive” brain hypotheses and contrast them in the 

context of empirical data at the edges of consciousness. I will start with converging evidence within Survival 

research, then move into Psychical research (one does not nee d to almost die to experience or investigate minds 

beyond brains), and finally dare to speculate about the connection of these two fields with the renewed interest 

in Unidentified Anomalous Phenomena (good old -fashioned UFOs) and the prospects of Artificia l

Consciousness (and the dangerous bullshit around it). The singularity is near, but it is probably not what you 

think. 

PL -12 

Keywords 

near -death experience, permissive brain, end of materialism, anomalous phenomena; theoretical physics 

322 

FLOW 

Mark S Valladares BA Neuroscience; Tennis Coach 

Overland Park Racquet Club, Overland Park, KS, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 209 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.05.........Motor control 

Abstract 

Using both scientific and experiential approaches to understand the Flow state (transient hypofrontality), the 

explanatory power of Orch OR coupled with Time Crystals (Bandyopadhyay) is examined in the context of 

improvisational disciplines to resolve the paradox of the quiet brain in high performance. Detectable metastable 

anomalies (stable heteroclinic chains) are implicated in the interplay for control between mind (subjective 

indu ction) and body (objective reduction) such that multiscale periodicity acts as a bridge between classical 

macropscopic behavior and the quantum coherence in time crystals. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Flow, transient hypofrontality, Orch OR, Time Crystals, st able heteroclinic chains, mind and body, 

incompleteness, multiscale periodicity, quantum -classical interfaces 

167 

Morphic Resonance and the Memory of Nature 

Rupert Sheldrake PhD 

Temenos Academy, London, -, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.06]........Memory and learning 

Abstract 

According the hypothesis of morphic resonance, memory is inherent in nature and the so -called laws of nature 

are more like habits. All self -organizing systems, including crystals, living organisms, stars and gal axies are 

organized by morphic fields which contain an inherent memory, given by a process called morphic resonance 

from previous similar systems. All species have a collective memory, on which each individual draws and to 

which it contributes. Self -organi zing systems are sustained by self -resonance from their own past, and even 

individual memory depends on morphic resonance rather than on physical memory traces stored within the 

brain. The hypothesis has many implications for information and consciousness in the universe. 

PL -11 

Keywords 

Morphic Resonance, memory, memory traces, collective memory 

354 

The Putative Role of Slow and Fast Theta Rhythms in Internal and External Representations Along the 

Hippocampal Longitudinal Axis 210 

Molly S Hermiller PhD, Asst. Prof. 1, Professor Jonathan Schooler PhD 2

> 1

Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. 2University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, 

USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.06]........Memory and learning 

Abstract 

Episodic memory allows us to store and retrieve past experiences, mentally reconstruct previous events, and 

integrate new information with prior knowledge. A growing body of research suggests that neural activity 

oscillating at theta -band frequencies (~2 -9 Hz in humans) provides a temporal framework for episodic memory 

processes within the hippocampus and coordinates interactions with d istributed cortical networks. However, 

despite its recognized importance, the functional organization of hippocampal theta rhythms remains debated, 

particularly in relation to distinctions along the hippocampal longitudinal axis. Here, we propose that the 

anterior hippocampus is preferentially involved in internal representations, allowing mind -wandering to access 

schematic memory structures and abstract knowledge, whereas the posterior hippocampus is more engaged in 

processing external representations, clo sely tied to perceptual and spatial details of the environment. This 

anterior/posterior distinction extends other theories of hippocampal function, including the spatial hypothesis, 

which proposes a posterior emphasis on fine -grained spatial encoding. Our framework also intersects with 

theories positing a gradient of fine - and gist -level memory representations, where posterior hippocampal 

activity supports high -resolution, detailed memory traces, while anterior regions contribute to generalized, 

context -dep endent representations. Finally, our framework flips encoding/retrieval models that link the anterior 

hippocampus to external processing and encoding and the posterior hippocampus to internal processing and 

retrieval. Theta rhythms may play a key role in d ynamically modulating this internal -external representational 

axis. Slow theta oscillations are associated with integrating information over longer temporal windows and may 

preferentially support anterior hippocampal functions, facilitating the assimilatio n of new experiences into 

existing knowledge structures. In contrast, fast theta rhythms are linked to finer temporal resolution and may be 

more prominent in the posterior hippocampus, enhancing the encoding of detailed, stimulus -driven information 

from th e environment. This frequency -based differentiation suggests that theta oscillations serve as a 

mechanism for flexibly shifting between internally guided and externally focused modes of memory processing. 

By framing hippocampal theta activity within the co ntext of internal versus external representations, our 

perspective integrates multiple theoretical models and provides a unifying account of how theta oscillations 

support memory. Understanding the role of slow and fast theta rhythms in this process may of fer new insights 

into how the hippocampus orchestrates memory formation and retrieval, as well as its broader contributions to 

cognition and consciousness. Furthermore, disruptions in hippocampal theta dynamics have been implicated in 

memory disorders, hig hlighting the potential translational significance of these insights for understanding 

pathological memory dysfunction. 

C - 20 

Keywords 

hippocampal networks, theta rhythms, memory, internal/external representations 

348 

The case of Phineas Gage and the Global Neuronal Workspace theory of consciousness. 211 

Prof. Lukasz Kurowski PhD 

Centennial College, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.08]........Neurology, neuropsychology and neuropathology 

Abstract 

Is the famous case of Phineas Gage(PG) a problem for the Global Neuronal Workspace(GNW) theory of 

consciousness? Yes, it is. My presentation will focus on the neuroanatomical damage to PGs brain, and similar 

cases, to show that the prefrontal cortex requirement for consciousness in the GNW(Mashour et at., 2020; 

Panagiotaropoulos, 2024) is hi ghly questionable. Phineas Gage: Did not lose consciousness, nor self -

consciousness, but suffered extensive damage to his left prefrontal cortex(e.g., ventromedial and dorsolateral 

regions), about 11% of white matter therein that houses long bi -directional neuronal bundles(e.g., superior 

longitudinal fasciculus), which connect anterior and posterior cortical regions (e.g., frontal, temporal, parietal 

and occipital) (Van Horn et al. 2012). He also suffered from “frontal lobe syndrome” (Gazzaniga, 2018). Pati ent 

E.L. (2012): Suffered a construction accident that mirrors that of PG with brain damage to the right frontal lobe, 

including white matter (de Freitas et al. 2022). However, E.L., did not lose consciousness, nor self -

consciousness, as he was able to und ergo a battery of cognitive tests after the accident. Radical lobectomy: Both 

patient A., who suffered massive meningioma (Koch, 2018) and patient W., who suffered burst aneurysm 

(Solms, 2021), and further complications, had lobectomies performed bilateral ly on prefrontal cortices. Yet, to 

an untrained eye, both individuals seemed typically conscious and quite ordinary. Cognitive tests revealed 

intellectual deficiencies, but not loss of consciousness or self -consciousness. Considering the case of PG, and 

ot her lesion cases, the claim that the prefrontal cortex is a (necessary) requirement for consciousness in GNW 

seems unfounded. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Phineas Gage, prefrontal cortex, radical lobectomy, GNW theory, consciousness and self -consciousness 

181 

Old theory, new evidence: microtubules are the biological substrate of quantum consciousness 

Associate Professor Mike Wiest PhD 

Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.10]........Anesthesia 

Abstract 

I review my recent experimental result strongly suggesting that the anesthetic gas isoflurane acts on 

microtubules to cause unconsciousness in rats. When combined with other old and new evidence —including 

direct biophysical evidence in living neurons and conscious humans —my result supports the hypothesis that the 

physical substrate of consciousness is a quantum state of neuronal microtubules tha t is disrupted by inhalational 

anesthetics. After discussing future directions in anesthetic mechanism research, I turn to consider potential 212 

practical (behavioral, evolutionary) advantages of a quantum brain, and enormous theoretical advantages of a 

quantum consciousness model. In particular, I explain how the quantum model makes panpsychism viable as a 

solution to Chalmers’ Hard Problem, by so lving the phenomenal Binding (or Combination) Problem. Solving 

the Hard Problem in this way appears to leave us with an Epiphenomenalism Problem, meaning we cannot 

account for the evolution of useful conscious states if the conscious property of matter has no physical effects. 

Contrary to this “zombie” intuition, I propose a non -trivial solution to the Epiphenomenalism Problem, by 

recognizing a necessary connection between an essential property of conscious experiences and an objective 

property of their phy sical substrates. Finally, I point out that the Orchestrated Objective Reduction theory of 

Penrose and Hameroff embodies these advantages of a quantum model; and also accounts for non -algorithmic 

human understanding and the psychological arrow of time —whic h no other theory of consciousness does. 

PL -4

Keywords 

anesthesia, quantum consciousness, quantum associative memory, Orch OR, microtubules, hard problem, 

binding problem, panpsychism, epiphenomenalism, active inference 

184 

Quantum biology: The way the brain connects 

Professor Nancy J Woolf Ph.D. 

UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.12]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Traditional neuroscience suggests that human consciousness happens at synaptic contacts. I argue this is largely 

impossible. The material basis of the human brain streams data channeled through several sensory systems to 

the cerebral cortex. Every part of the cerebral cortex has similar redundant features. Columns, consisting of 

layers of cells in each area, system atically process incoming streams of sensory data and then forward that data 

to higher levels of cerebral cortex for more processing. But synaptic processing of input steams does not equate 

with understanding; it lacks the necessary computational power. Co nsciousness fundamentally involves forming 

ideas about recurring spatiotemporal patterns between inputs within the context of personal relevancy. This 

requires repeated review and incorporation of all stored memories of relevant past relationships between inputs 

as each new data stream arrives. As we have hypothesized in many previous publications, an anatomical 

structure exists in the nanowire matrix of microtubules that can reawaken quantum entanglements that represent 

ideas (Woolf, Priel, Tuszynski, Nano neuroscience: Structural and Functional Roles of the Neuronal 

Cytoskeleton in Health and Disease, Springer, 2009). Ideas are continuously modified by new experiences. 

Even in the absence of new input, stored ideas can combine to form new ideas. That is our creative potential. 

Our thinking is shaped by others. Ideas are shared between different individuals through classical 

communication channels like speaking and listening, or writing and reading. Humans are also sensitive to subtle 

non -verbal communication . Facial expressions and body language can be read as humans mimic the behaviors 

that they see and access their own reactions. Humans are also sensitive to unseen events. Most if not all aspects 

of spirituality rely on believing in things that we cannot se e or explain. The human mind is creative, but key 

discoveries are made by different people independently and certain ‘truths’ appear to be self -evident. 213 

Consequentially, some form of universal wisdom or intelligence undeniably exists. In this age of AI and 

advanced space travel we are embarking on new levels of understanding. We can look at the human brain for 

answers, its cytoarchitecture and the structur e of the microtubule networks give clues to the physics and 

geometry of unseen knowledge. Dipole shifts in the terahertz range among electrons held in position by 

microtubule networks may well be major senders and receivers, evolved to perfectly entangle w ith the geometry 

of universal wisdom and intelligence. As we explore the skies and the heavens above us, we should 

simultaneously look deeply into the biophysics of the materials in the human brain that enable us to soar to 

great heights. Understanding may well be within reach. 

C - 15 

Keywords 

quantum mind, microtubules, cytoarchitecture, teraHz frequency, dipole shifts, cerebral cortex 

238 

Spirals of Mass, Life, and Light 

Charles H Ernst ME 

UCCS, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.12]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Studies of the TRPV1 Quartet, CISS Effect, and Glymphatic System The TRPV1 Quartet is a family of 

Cannabinoid / Vanilloid receptors: CB1, CB2, GPR55 (CB3) TRPV1. I will describe how theTRPV1 receptor 

ion channel uses Ca++ and H+ ion signals to control nearly all processes in the body. I will explain one 

example. - the process of the lens in our eyes. I will then bri efly discuss the link between the TRPV1 Quartet and 

Cognition and Consciousness. I will present the Chirality -Induced Spin Selection (CISS) effects. I will show 

how spin selection can explain the homochirality of nearly all proteins in the human body. I wi ll explain how 

these homochiral proteins transmit light and electrical waves with almost 100% efficiency. I will describe the 

benefits of this efficient transfer of information and energy. The Glymphatic System removes metabolic waste, 

heat, solids, and to xins from the human brain, spinal column, and eyes. The Cerebral Spinal Fluid (CSF) flow 

carries these waste products away from neurons and delivers nutrients, oxygen, and immune proteins. I will 

describe and discuss this waste removal and nutrient deliver y system. Ultra -processed Foods and Medicines are 

primarily Achiral. They mainly consist of D -Amino Acids (DAAs) and Cross -linked Amino Acids (CLAAs). 

The human body cannot use DAAs and CLAAs that need removal. The Lymphatic system, liver, and kidneys 

remo ve them from the body. The Glymphatic system removes them from the brain, eyes, and spinal column. 

This Glymphatic system can be overwhelmed by an excess, which leads to a problem with cognition, 

consciousness, and Brain health. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 214 

TRPV1, CISS, Glymphatic, CSF, Spirals, Light, Homochirality, D -Amino Acids, ultra -processed, food, 

medicine 

374 

Examining the Effects of Biofield Therapy Through Simultaneous Assessment of Electrophysiological and 

Cellular Outcomes 

Arnaud Delorme PhD 1,2 , Lorenzo Cohen PhD 3, Andrew Cusimano 4, Sharmistha Chakraborty 4, Phuong 

Nguyen 3, Defeng Deng 3, Iqbal Shafaqmuhammad 3, Nelson Monica 3, Wei Daoyan 3, Chris Fields PhD 5, Yang 

Peiying PhD 3

> 1

UCSD, La Jolla, CA, USA. 2Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA. 3The University of Texas MD 

Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 4The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 

Tx, USA. 5Independent Researcher, Causne Minervois, n/a, France 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.12]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Summarize "In this case study, a self -described biofield therapy (BT) practitioner (participant) took part in 

mu ltiple (n=60) treatment and control (non -treatment) sessions under double -blind conditions. During the 

treatment phases, the participant provided BT treatment from a distance of about 12 inches from the cells, 

alternating with rest phases where no such ef forts were made. Human pancreatic cancer cell activity was 

assessed using three markers – cytoskeleton changes (tubulin and β -actin) and Ca2+ uptake. The study 

examined changes in the participant’s physiological parameters including electroencephalogram (E EG) and 

heart rate measures during the treatment of: 1) live cells and 2) either dead cells or medium only with no cells 

(control group). Changes in cellular outcomes and if there was an association between the participant’s 

physiological parameters and ce llular outcomes were examined. The experimental setup was a 2x2 design, 

contrasting cell type (live vs. control) against session type (treatment vs. non -treatment). Parallel sham -treated 

control cells were examined for changes in the cell parameters over t ime while controlling for the presence of a 

person in front of the cells mimicking the distance and movements of the participant. The participant’s 

physiological data, including 64 -channel EEG and heart rate, were continuously monitored throughout these 

se ssions. We observed significant (p 

PL -1

106 

Frontiers in Neuronal Networks: Cerebral Organoid Sensory and Motor Interfacing 

Frontiers in Neuronal Networks: Cerebral Organoid Sensory and Motor Interfacing Rachel M Potter Bachelors 

of Neuroscience 

Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 215 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 

Abstract 

Cerebral organoids afford an innovative way to study neuronal networks, learning, and adaptation. Organoids 

are grown from human induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs) by collecting skin cells from a donor. The 

donor’s skin cells are chemically encouraged using Yamanaka factors to revert -back to pluripotent stem cells 

which are then manipulated forward using growth factors into a cerebral organoid. Organoids exp ress genetic 

mutations and developmental pathways of the donor, giving researchers access to the emergence of disorders 

associated genetic disease. To make them more akin to a living brain, my research proposal introduces sensory 

stimulation via cameras, m icrophones, and somatosensory devices. These visual, auditory, and tactile cues are 

the same interactions and sensory experiences given to severely disabled patients via computer brain 

interfacing, restoring their sight, hearing, and tactile sensation. One might argue these cues are essential for fetal 

and cerebral organoid neural network development. To complete the feedback loop, the utilization of artificial 

intelligence (AI) models analyzes motor/output responses from the organoids in the form of interf aced light 

bulbs, vibration, and sound technology. This research proposal seeks to build a series of sequential steps that 

can lead to a process of self -awareness. Interface an organoid with a camera (for “eyes” to the world), a light 

bulb (for self -expres sion), and a sensor near the light bulb (for interactive behavior with a researcher). The 

sensor near the light bulb triggers an electric pattern delivered to the cerebral organoid representing touch. 

When a specific pattern of spontaneous motor activity i s assigned to the task of lighting the light bulb, the 

researcher will cover the light bulb with their hand when the bulb lights up. The camera conveys many things to 

the organoid. It conveys when its bulb has been lit, when the researcher covers the bulb, and how the two things 

are related to the feeling of being touched. This interdisciplinary approach bridges neuroscience, 

neurotechnology, and bioengineering leveraging cutting -edge technologies to develop associative learning, 

communication, and basic in teractions with cerebral organoids to assess the potential functionality of neuronal 

networks within these cultured systems. Further interests in this interaction would investigate the most basic 

foundations of consciousness. Cerebral organoids are a formi dable player addressing ethical and disease 

modeling concerns brought about in animal studies. This proposal seeks to advance our understanding of 

cerebral organoids, neuronal networks, and plasticity to facilitate bioengineered neural systems in various 

applications, including but not limited to neural prosthetics, neurorehabilitation, and the integration of neural 

systems into artificial intelligence and computing technology to accelerate discoveries. 

C - 15 

Keywords 

Cerebral Organoids, cultered neurons , Computer -brain interfacing, neuroprosthetics, biocomputing 

117 

Ephaptic fields forever: The "field code" and the "neuroscience of tomorrow" 

Mr. Tam Hunt JD 

UC Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 216 

Abstract 

Ephaptic field effects are at least 5,000 times faster than neural firing in the brain. What does this dramatic 

difference in the speed of effects suggest about how our brains and minds work? The "field code" refers to the 

new science of EM (ephap tic) field dynamics in the brain and body, which have been shown to correlate closely 

with cognition and consciousness. The field code has already been shown to be more predictive in some ways 

than the longstanding "spike code" approach that is based on n eural firing. The field code comes in at least two 

forms: 1) the weak version that asserts that synchronized/resonating EM fields may be the primary seat of 

consciousness, in addition to the dynamics of neural firing also playing a strong role; 2) the stro ng version that 

suggests neural firing may be little more than an energy input for the nested hierarchy of EM fields that is itself 

the locus of cognition and consciousness. I explore the data and arguments regarding these hypotheses. 

C - 12 

Keywords 

Ep haptic fields, EM fields, consciousness, nested hierarchy, multi -scale consciousness 

158 

Investigation of Quantum Entanglement through AI -Enhanced Analysis of Spontaneous Neuronal Population 

Activity In Vitro 

Mihály Rámpay MS, Psychology 1,2 , Dr. Kinga Tóth Neurobiology 3, Prof. Dr. István Ulbert Medicine 3,2 , Dr. 

Lucia Wittner Neurobiology 3,2 

> 1

Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Budapest, 

Budapest, Hungary. 2Semmelweis University, Budapest, -, Hungary. 3Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and 

Psychology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Budapest, -, Hungary 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 

Abstract 

This study explores the intersection of quantum mechanics and neuroscience by examining non -local 

correlations in Spon taneous Population Activity (SPA) within neocortical samples. Using a self -developed 

Python pipeline, we apply advanced AI techniques, including Kalman filtering and Hidden Markov Models, to 

analyze simultaneous SPA events across paired neocortical sample s. Also using a probabilistic approach, 

offering a mathematical framework to identify patterns that align with the hypothesized quantum correlations. 

The study involves rodent -rodent and human -human cortical pairs, meticulously processed to reveal potentia l

non -local interactions. Our primary hypothesis posits that these SPA events exhibit non -local correlations akin 

to quantum entanglement, potentially supporting the Einstein -Podolsky -Rosen (EPR) paradox within neural 

systems. By enhancing temporal resolut ion beyond traditional millisecond constraints, our approach uncovers 

deeper neural dynamics, bridging quantum theory and neurophysiology. This research aims to expand the 

understanding of consciousness by providing novel insights into the quantum -like mec hanisms underlying 

neural activity. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 217 

Keywords 

quantum mechanics, spontaneous population activity, AI -enhanced analysis, EPR paradox, consciousness 

studies 

258 

Magnetoencephalography Reveals Brain Network Imbalance in Mild Cognitive Impairment Patients During a 

Delayed Matching Task 

Ye Ren PhD 1, Xiaotong Yang PhD 2, Prof. Yuping Wang PhD 1

> 1

Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, Beijing, China. 2The First 

Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 

Abstract 

Understanding the activity patterns of brain functional networks in patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment 

(MCI) is c rucial for early diagnosis and effective intervention. This study utilized the Elekta Neuromag system 

to collect 306 -channel task -state magnetoencephalography (MEG) data from 24 MCI patients and 24 healthy 

controls. All participants engaged in a dual -feat ure delayed matching task involving color and shape. During the 

task, participants were instructed to focus solely on color, making judgments about the color of sequentially 

presented images and responding via keypress. The task comprised four conditions: match condition, task -

irrelevant change condition, task -relevant change condition, and dual -feature change condition. Behavioral 

results indicated that the MCI group had significantly lower accuracy and longer reaction times compared to the 

healthy control group. MEG data analysis further compared source power across different frequency bands and 

time windows between the two groups. We found that delta and theta bands were primarily involved in the 

cognitive processes of this task. The MCI group exhibited s ignificantly higher activity in the left hemisphere's 

salience network (insula and frontal operculum), lateral control network (ventrolateral prefrontal cortex), dorsal 

attention network (postcentral gyrus), and bilateral limbic network (orbitofrontal cort ex) compared to the 

healthy controls. Under the match condition, the MCI group showed reduced activity in the left lateral default 

mode network (superior temporal gyrus) at 200 -300ms, but increased activity in the bilateral medial default 

mode network (pre cuneus region) at 300 -400ms. In the task -relevant change condition, the MCI group 

demonstrated prolonged activation duration in the aforementioned four brain regions compared to the match 

condition. In the dual -feature change condition, more brain regions within the salience, control, dorsal attention, 

and default mode networks were engaged bilaterally in the MCI group compared to other conditions. 

Conversely, fewer brain regions were activated in the alpha, beta, and gamma bands. The MCI group exhibited 

lo wer activation in the left lateral salience network (insula), lateral default mode network (middle temporal 

gyrus), and bilateral medial default mode network (precuneus) compared to the healthy controls. The findings 

suggest that cognitive impairment in MC I patients is primarily associated with a synergistic imbalance in delta 

and theta rhythmic neural activities across multiple brain regions within the salience, control, attention, and 

default mode networks. This study provides critical insights into the n eural mechanisms underlying cognitive 

deficits in MCI, potentially advancing the development of early diagnostic and intervention strategies. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 218 

Mild Cognitive Impairment, Magnetoencephalography, Brain Functional Networks, Cognitive Function, 

Delayed Matching Task 

430 

Cognition emerges from neural dynamics 

Earl K. Miller 

MIT, Dept of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Picower Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.13]........Brain networks, synchrony and scale 

Abstract 

Classic models likened brain function to neuron networks, like telegraph systems. Emerging evidence, however, 

suggests higher cognition relies on rhythmic oscillations or "brain waves" at the electric field level. This 

expands functionality, with "telegraph wires" also producing "radio waves" (electric fields) that rapidly spread 

influence. These fields may facilitate la rge -scale organization, enabling executive control and energy - efficient 

analog computing. 

PL -9

Keywords 

neuron networks, rhythmic oscillations, brain waves, electric fields, telegraph wires, radio waves, energy 

efficient analog computing 

34 

Investigation of the Effects of Long -Term Binaural Beats Application on Tinnitus Patients 

Handan Yaman M.Sc PhD Student , Assoc. Prof. OĞUZ Yilmaz Assoc. Prof. 

Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Kavacık, Turkey 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

Background: Binaural beats (BB) are one of the neuromodulation methods that have recently come to the fore 

in the treatment of tinnitus. The effects of lo ng -term use of this method, which basically uses the auditory 

entrainment mechanism, are controversial. Aim: This study aimed to evaluate whether a 6 -week theta -band BB 

intervention, in which neural plasticity can be achieved, would lead to improvements in tinnitus discomfort and 

associated depression scores in individuals. Methods: 18 patients applied theta band BB for 20 minutes a day 

for a period of 6 weeks. Tinnitus Handicap Inventory (THI), 10 -point VAS scale for tinnitus discomfort rating 

and Beck Dep ression Inventory (BDI) were used to evaluate the depression scores of the participants before and 219 

after the BB application. Pre and post -test scores were compared to determine the effectiveness of the 

intervention. (Wilcoxon Signed -Rank Test was used in the pre -post evaluation of THI, VAS and BDI. Results: 

Before the 6 -week theta band BB application, t he THI score, which was at the level of moderate handicap with 

an average of 52.7 points, decreased to the level of mild handicap with 34.3 points after the application 

(p=0.004). Also, the level of discomfort from tinnitus decreased from 6.7 to 4.0 points (p 

C - 6

Keywords 

auditory entrainment, emotion, theta band, tinnitus rehabilitation 

281 

Enhancing Meditative Development with Transcranial Focused Ultrasound: A Mixed -Methods 

Phenomenological Study of Neuromodulation in Expert Practitioners During a Ten -Day Retreat 

Sebastian Ehmann MS, MS 1,2 , Brian Lord Ph.D. 1, Erica N Cook MS 1, Tucker Peck PhD 3, Shinzen Young 1,

Matthew D. Sacchet PhD 2, John JB Allen PhD 1, Jay L Sanguinetti PhD 1

> 1

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 2MGH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 3Tucker Peck 

Retreats, Alameda, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

A third wave of meditation research emerged —the study of advanced meditation —which explores 

soteriological constructs, such a s self -transcendence, for promoting comprehensive well -being. This research 

investigates the progression of meditative states, stages, and endpoints, along with their evolution through 

sustained practice and mastery (Sacchet et al., 2024). However, achiev ing advanced development is often 

restricted by the practical demands of extensive training and the need for expert guidance, making it accessible 

to only a subset of practitioners (Galante et al., 2023). To address this, researchers are investigating non -

invasive brain stimulation techniques, such as transcranial -focused ultrasound (tFUS), to enhance meditative 

development by providing precise subcortical modulation with high spatial resolution (Abellaneda -Pérez et al., 

2024). When targeting the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) —a default mode network (DMN) node central to 

self -referential processing —tFUS has shown efficacy in enhancing mindfulness, reducing DMN connectivity 

(Lord et al., 2024b), deepening meditative states (Cain et al., 2024), and increasin g equanimity —a non -reactive 

attitude toward sensory experiences (Lord et al., 2024a). This study is the first to investigate tFUS’s effects on 

meditative development in experienced meditators during a ten -day mindfulness retreat. Group 1 (n = 30) 

received two 10 -minute sonication sessions (5 -second stimuli with 10 -second breaks), while Group 2 (n = 6) 

served as a comparison, either opting out or being ineligible for tFUS. Stimulation targeted the PCC using a 

custom -made single -channel low -intensity focused ultrasound system following the methods of Tufiail and 

colleagues (Tufail et al., 2011; Blatek AT35246 transducer, 70 mm focus, BK Precision 4078 waveform 

generator). The signal was amplified by an E&I 210L Power Amplifier and monitored via a Tektronix TDS 210 

oscilloscope. Stimulation parameters —500 kHz acoustic frequency, 1000 Hz pulse repetition frequency, 5 ms 

pulse duration, and 5% duty cycle —were selected based on their inhibitory effects on neural activity. Targeting 

was guided by an MRI -based stereot actic system using a standardized brain (Visor2, ANT Neuro, Netherlands). 

Phenomenological data were collected throughout the retreat using standardized questionnaires and semi -220 

structured free -response options. Measures included the Five -Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ), the 

Multidimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA), and the Nondual Awareness Dimensional 

Assessment -Trait (NADA -T) and state (NADA -S) scale , with the latter administered daily to assess fluctuations 

in non -dual awareness (NDA). Quantitative data will be analyzed using a general linear model, while qualitative 

data will undergo inductive and deductive phenomenological thematic analysis to iden tify emergent and 

predefined themes. Mindfulness meditation systematically cultivates concentration, equanimity, and sensory 

clarity, facilitating absorption, insight, and persistent perceptual shifts toward NDA —a non -conceptual, non -

representational refle xivity without a subject -object dichotomy (Josipovic, 2019, 2021, 2024; Young, 2016). 

Through PCC modulation, this study aims to reduce self -interference by decreasing entanglement in internal 

cognitions, thereby enhancing equanimity and mindfulness to fac ilitate access to advanced meditative states and 

perceptual transformations such as NDA (Brewer et al., 2011). Using a mixed -methods phenomenological 

analysis, we will examine how tFUS influences the temporal dynamics of these meditative experiences, 

integ rating both qualitative and quantitative measures to elucidate its effects on self -regulation and advanced 

meditation (Sparby & Sacchet, 2022; Wright et al., 2023). 

C - 6

Keywords 

Mindfulness, Consciousness, Transcranial Focused Ultrasound, Meditation Retreat, Meditative Development, 

Advanced Meditation, Non -dual awareness 

304 

Effects of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) Targeting the Right Precuneus on Mild 

Cognitive Impairment: A Pilot Study 

Xiaotong Yang PhD Candidate 1, Ye Ren PhD 2, Prof. Yuping Wang 2

> 1

The First Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China. 2Department of Neurology, 

Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, Beijing, China 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

Background: The prevalence of dementia is increasing annually, imposing a significant global economic 

burden. Non -invasive neuromodulation methods may represent effective therapeutic approaches to slow disease 

progression. The timing of intervention, target selection, and parameter optimization are critical factors 

influencing treatment efficacy. Research indicates that in the early stages of cognitive impairment, functional 

connectivity within the default mode network (DMN) is disrupted, particularly in the posterior regions of the 

DMN. The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex serves as a vital node of the posterior DMN. Methods: 

Seventeen patients diagnosed with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) at the Department of 

Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, were enrolled in the study. After signing the informed consent document, they 

underwent repetitive transcr anial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) treatment for 4 consecutive weeks, with 5 

sessions per week. The stimulation parameters were set at 90% of the active motor threshold (AMT), with a 

frequency of 20 Hz. Each stimulation train lasted 2 seconds, delivering 40 pulses per train, and the inter -train 

interval was 28 seconds. A total of 2000 pulses were administered daily. The stimulation target was the 221 

individual's right precuneus, localized using neuronavigation. The therapeutic effects were evaluated by 

comparing the cognitive function scores of Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Mini -Mental State 

Examination (MMSE), Auditory Verbal Learning Test (A VLT), Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), and 

Trail Making Test (TMT) before and after treatment. Additionally, TMS with simultaneous 

electroencephalogram (TMS -EEG) recordings was applied to the treatment site in patients both before and after 

treatment . A control group of 23 healthy subjects, matched for age and gender, was also recruited. These control 

subjects underwent the same cognitive assessments and TMS -EEG recordings. The study also compared time -

varying brain network differences between healthy individuals and patients, as well as between pre - and post -

treatment conditions. Results: Before treatment, the number of connectivity edges between network nodes in 

patients was reduced compared to the healthy control group. There was insufficient enhanc ement in midline 

long -distance transmission, and the lateral information flow between bilateral frontal and anterior temporal 

regions was not significantly enhanced. Additionally, the information flow in the right parietal region was not 

markedly enhanced, showing a left -sided dominance. After treatment, the longitudinal information flow 

between the prefrontal, anterior temporal, and bilateral parieto -occipital regions was enhanced. The information 

flow between bilateral posterior temporal and occipital reg ions also increased, and the posterior head 

information became more balanced compared to pre -treatment, approaching the pattern observed in healthy 

controls. Following rTMS treatment, patients showed statistically significant improvements in their MoCA 

sco res, AVLT immediate recall total scores, AVLT delayed recall scores, AVLT cued recall scores, and DSST 

scores compared to their pre -treatment performance. Conclusion: aMCI patients exhibited impaired functional 

connectivity in the fronto -parietal and front o-occipital networks. Following 20Hz rTMS targeting the right 

precuneus, these patients demonstrated improvements in memory and executive function compared to their pre -

treatment performance. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

344 

Supporting Meditation with Photobiomodulation in Experienced Meditators A Randomized Controlled EEG 

Study 

Sanjay Manchanda PhD 1,2 , Brian Lord PhD 3, Erica Cook MBA 3, Jay Sanguinetti PhD 3

> 1

California Institute of Human Science, Encinitas, CA, USA. 2Integrative Counseling Services, Tucson, AZ, 

USA. 3University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

Background: Meditative practice is receiving innovative support through technological advancements in brain 

stimul ation. Reaching advanced states such as jhanas and other mystical states requires extensive training and 

practice and can be out of reach for many. Initial anecdotal feedback from known advanced meditators indicates 

that near infrared light delivered intr acranially and intranasally at specific pulse frequencies may enhance 

meditation and support expanded states of consciousness. The technology is non -invasive, portable and easy to 

use making it suitable for widespread application. We examine whether active pulsed photobiomodulation 

(PBM) can alter meditation states, as measured by the Mystical Experience Questionnaire (MEQ), along with 

assessing changes in electroencephalogram (EEG) patterns compared to sham stimulation. Methods Twenty 222 

experienced meditators participated in this randomized, sham -controlled crossover study. Each participant 

engaged in three meditation sessions: Baseline meditation only session; a sham session; active session with 

PBM pulsed at 11 different frequencies in succession. PBM was delivered using the Vielight Neuro Pro device, 

which features seven 810 nm LEDs positioned over key hubs of the default mode network (DMN), with an 

intranasal LED applicator. EEG was recorded simultaneously with stimulation. Each sessio n included 6 minutes 

of pre -meditation EEG recording, 20 minutes of mindfulness meditation with PBM (or control), and 6 minutes 

of post -meditation EEG recording. EEG spectral power was analyzed across Delta (1 -4 Hz), Theta (4 -7.5 Hz), 

Alpha (7.5 -12.5Hz), B eta (12.5 -30 Hz), and Gamma (30 -50 Hz) frequency bands. Participants completed the 

Mystical Experience Questionnaire (MEQ -30) to assess subjective meditation experiences. Results: Statistical 

analysis revealed a significant effect on PBM on MEQ scores (p = .037), with the most significant effects on the 

Transcendence (p=0.021), and the Ineffability (p= 0.013) subscales. For EEG power analysis, Surface Laplacian 

montage maps and linear modeling were used to capture significant effects of the post -meditation vs pre -

meditation condition for each session. This analysis revealed significant increases in Beta and Gamma power 

across the frontal areas of the brain versus the baseline and sham conditions. Conclusions This is one of the first 

studies to investigate th e effects of PBM on meditation using EEG and subjective reports. Results indicate that 

PBM can help to enhance meditative states and experience. Indications are that the enhancement effect is 

modulated by high frequency stimulation, and this needs to be ex amined in detail in further research. Overall 

indications are that PBM is a powerful, safe and accessible tool that can support meditation and its consequent 

benefits to society. 

C - 21 

Keywords 

Photbobiomodulation, Meditation, Brain Stimulation, Mystic al States, EEG, Frequency Effects 

352 

Photobiomodulation, High -Frequency Resonance, and Quantum Coherence: Enhancing Consciousness and 

Treating Neurodegeneration via Orch -OR 

Lew Lim PhD., MBA 

Vielight Inc., Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

Photobiomodulation (PBM) using near -infrared (NIR) light is a non -invasive neuromodulatory technique that 

enhances mitochondrial function, neuroplasticity, and cognitive performance by modulating brain oscillations 

across a wide spectrum. Our research reveals that high -frequency pulsed NIR PBM (e.g., 120 Hz and higher) 

tunes brain network oscillations and could be stabilizing microtubule quantum coherence, offering a novel 

approach to enhance consciousne ss and treat neurodegenerative diseases. In high -level meditators, we found 

PBM at 120 Hz and above induces deep meditative states (jhanas), enhancing gamma synchrony (beyond the 

typical 30 –80 Hz) in brain networks, supported by novel EEG measurements. Thi s suggests frequency -specific 

resonance, with individual variability in optimal frequencies typically when induced at 120 Hz and beyond, 

reflecting unique neurophysiological signatures that deepen conscious experience. In vitro, 810 nm PBM shifts 

tubulin d ynamics in a frequency -dependent manner: destabilization at 10 Hz, stabilization at 40 Hz, and 223 

reinforced microtubule integrity at 120 Hz and 1000 Hz, as evidenced by optical density assays. This 

stabilization may enhance quantum coherence in microtubules by reducing decoherence, supporting the 

Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch -OR) theory, whic h posits that consciousness arises from quantum 

superpositions in microtubules collapsing via objective reduction. We propose that PBM at very high 

frequencies, say 100 -120 Hz could be coupling to microtubules’ native GHz –THz vibrations via subharmonic 

res onance (e.g., approx.10Ghz -1Thz, 10¹² Hz / 1010 ≈ 100 Hz), aligning quantum collapse events with gamma 

rhythms and amplifying the subjective intensity of jhanas. Individual -specific resonance frequencies challenge 

Orch -OR to account for variability in quan tum processes, potentially influenced by neuroplastic changes in 

meditators’ microtubule dynamics and network connectivity. Microtubule integrity is critical not only for 

consciousness but also for brain health —disruptions, such as β -amyloid, tau protein m isfolding in Alzheimer’s 

disease, lead to microtubule breakdown, impairing neuronal function and conscious experience. Growing 

evidence supports PBM as a treatment for neurological conditions, including Alzheimer’s, by enhancing 

microtubule stability, redu cing neuroinflammation, and mitigating protein misfolding, as shown in preclinical 

PBM studies. Our findings suggest that the same frequency -dependent effects of PBM that enhance high -level 

consciousness can also offer therapeutic benefits, bridging quantu m consciousness research with clinical 

applications. Additional mechanisms include PBM -driven ATP production, which supports the metabolic 

demands of gamma -generating parvalbumin interneurons, as well as purinergic signaling, biophoton emission, 

and electr omagnetic field interactions that amplify high -frequency coherence and non -local brain 

communication. Future research could leverage AI -driven closed -loop PBM systems to personalize stimulation 

frequencies based on real -time EEG feedback, optimizing both c onsciousness enhancement and therapeutic 

outcomes for each individual. Experimental paradigms, including EEG, fMRI, and various spectroscopy, will 

validate these effects on network coherence, microtubule stability, and quantum processes. By integrating PBM ,

resonance, and quantum coherence, this work proposes a paradigm that advances Orch -OR, deepens our 

understanding of consciousness, and opens new avenues for treating neurodegenerative diseases, with profound 

implications for quantum biology and medicine. 

C - 21 

Keywords 

Photobiomodulation (PBM), Gamma Oscillations, Microtubules, Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch -OR), 

AI -driven Neuromodulation 

393 

PeakNeuro Audio Entrainment: Improving Neural Plasticity, Cognitive Performance, and Adaptive Readiness. 

Tony Crescenzo Bachelor of Arts degree from Richard Stockton College of New Jersey. 1,2 , Bob Holbrook 

Robert (Bob) Holbrook Anthropology and Psychology at Ball State University, Indiana University, and the 

University of Chicago 2

> 1

Intelligent Waves, Reston, Virginia, USA. 2PeakNeuro, Reston, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

PeakNeuro Audio Entrainment: Improving Neural Plasticity, Cognitive Performance, and Adaptive Readiness 224 

Background: Neural entrainment, synchronizing brainwave activity with external rhythmic stimuli, is a 

fundamental mechanism for cognitive efficiency, adaptive learning, and decision -making speed. PeakNeuro 

Audio Entrainment leverages binaural beats, phase -modulated audio, and structured harmonic layering to 

induce precise brainwave synchronization. This groundbreaking assistive technology enhances cognitive agility, 

neuroplasticity, and optimal performance states, making it highly conducive and practical fo r top performers in 

aviation, military, business, and sports applications. Objective: The clinical study aimed to evaluate the 

effectiveness of PeakNeuro Audio Entrainment in improving cognitive processing speed, reaction accuracy, 

neuroplasticity -driven a daptability, and sleep -dependent memory consolidation. Methods: A randomized 

controlled study (N=161, final n=142) examined the effects of PeakNeuro over a six -night, five -day 

intervention period. Participants underwent EEG, HRV monitoring, and standardize d cognitive testing, 

assessing reaction times, decision -making efficiency, and working memory performance. Sleep quality metrics 

were also analyzed due to their crucial role in neuroplasticity and cognitive recovery. Results & Impact: The 

intervention grou p demonstrated significant cognitive performance gains: ● Reaction times improved by 9% (p 

C - 6

Keywords 

Neural Entrainment, Cognitive Performance, Neuroplasticity, Brainwave Synchronization, Binaural Beats, 

Phase -Modulated Audio, Cognitive Readiness, C ognitive Agility, Decision -Making Efficiency, High -Pressure 

Decision -Making, EEG Monitoring, HRV Monitoring, Reaction Time, Threat Detection Accuracy, Memory 

Recall, Executive Function, Long -Term Potentiation (LTP), Synaptic Consolidation, Learning Efficie ncy, Skill 

Acquisition 

404 

From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling and Brain Stimulation 

Giulio Ruffini PhD 

CEO, StarLab, Barcelona, BCN, Spain. CSO, Neuroelectrics, Barcelona, BCN, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

From Kolmogorov Theory to Computational Modeling and Brain Stimulation The next frontier in brain 

stimulation —and neuromodula tion technologies like multichannel transcranial electrical stimulation (tES), 

transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and focused ultrasound (FUS) —demands robust computational 

models of the brain. These models must address fundamental questions: Where d o we stimulate? How? Which 

network dynamics can we harness for therapeutic or enhancement purposes? Such insights are critically 

important in neurological disorders (e.g., epilepsy) and are especially pivotal in psychiatry, where many 

disorders can be unde rstood as disruptions in “experience” itself. In this talk, I will first introduce 

the Kolmogorov Theory (KT) of consciousness, an algorithmic framework that describes how agents 

form compressive, coarse -grained models that capture the regularities shaping subjective experience and 

guiding behavior. Drawing on group -theoretic invariances and parallels with Noether’s theorem, KT reveals 

how hierarchical structures can naturally emerge in neural systems. It connects with the manifold 

hypothesis and suggests t hat biological (and artificial) neural networks compress data in ways that exploit the 

world's symmetries. On the road to computational neuropsychiatry, I will then illustrate how KT can help 225 

illuminate “first -person” disorders such as Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) by formalizing the notion of 

depression as "persistent low valence" and showing how dysfunctional valence, inaccurate world models, or 

suboptimal planning can emerge in the agent a nd affect one another. This agent -based perspective not only 

guides the search for potential etiological routes but also the development of computationally designed 

interventions —ranging from brain stimulation to psychedelics —to repair or recalibrate neura l circuits. To 

translate this framework into a computational model, I will present our Laminar Neural Mass Model (LaNMM), 

which can represent interlocked fast and slow oscillations and capture intrinsic cross -frequency coupling 

(CFC) phenomena like Signal –Envelope (related to PAC) and Envelope –Envelope (or AAC) interactions, as 

well as the effects of brain stimulation. These coupling mechanisms realize a hierarchical “Comparator” 

function at the level of cortical columns, evaluating prediction errors and we ighting uncertainties. Perturbations 

of this Comparator function can account for altered gamma oscillations in Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia, 

and ASD, as well as the diminished top -down control observed under psychedelics, linking them to both 

cogniti on and subjective experience. Altogether, this synthesis of theoretical foundations and computational 

models provides a scaffold for advancing our understanding of neuropsychiatric disorders and their connections 

to neurophenomenology and the development o f stimulation -based therapies. By pinpointing how neural 

circuits encode and compress key symmetries, we can design targeted interventions —via tES, TMS, FUS, or 

other modalities —that align with each individual’s functional architecture, opening new avenues 

for personalized therapy and neurophenomenology. 

PL -2

Keywords 

Algorithmic information theory, computational neuroscience, whole brain modeling 

424 

IKS Approaches for holistic understanding of Mind, Brain, and Consciousness 

Prof. Prof. Laxmidhar Behera 

Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, Himachal Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.16]........Brain stimulation techniques 

Abstract 

The Indian Knowledge System (IKS) conceptualizes our existence as a superposition of three fundamental 

energies: pure semantic (consciousness), semantic (mind), and physical (brain). In other words, this framework 

provides a holistic understanding of cogni tion, perception, and neurophysiological processes. There is not much 

clarity as to how the perceptual world and physical world work in tandem. By introducing quantum -like 

entanglement in perception, we propose that self -propelled agents align based on the quantum expectation value 

of a perception operator, driving collective motion. We shall also reflect on human olfactory perception through 

the interplay of molecular vibration patterns of odorants and underlying EEG dynamics. Additionally, we 

explore how high -frequency probes in the megahertz range reveal intricate neural dynamics, particularly in 

children trained to exhibit near -normal visual perception despite being blindfolded. Building on these 

foundations, the discussion will conclude with IKS -based i nterventions designed to enhance cognitive function. 

In summary, we propose innovative approaches for improving perception, attention, and memory by integrating 

ancient wisdom with contemporary neuroscience and quantum -inspired models. This synthesis opens new 226 

possibilities for mental health, education, multi -agent coordination, and contemplative sciences through the lens 

of IKS. 

PL -5

Keywords 

IKS, Models of Perception, Cognitive Enhancement 

305 

The Effect of low LSD doses on EEG Complexity 

Eleni Kroupi PhD 1, Johannes G Ramaekers PhD 2, Amanda Feilding 3, Nadia R.P.W. Hutten PhD 2, Kim P.C. 

Kuypers PhD 2, Natasha L. Mason PhD 2, Giulio Ruffini PhD 4, Aureli Soria -Frisch PhD 1

> 1

Neuroscience Department, Starlab Barcelona SL, Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain. 2Department of 

Neuropsychology & Psychopharmacology, Faculty of Psychology & Neuroscience, Maastricht University, 

Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands. 3The Beckley Foundation, Oxford, UK, United Kingdom. 4Brain Modeling 

Department, Neuroelectrics, Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.19]........Psychedelics and psychopharmacology 

Abstract 

LSD (Lysergic Acid Diethylamide) acts as a partial agonist at 5 -HT2A serotonin receptors, facilitating the 

release of glutamate and enhancing the overall excitability of cortical networks (e.g., De Gregorio et al., 2018; 

Nichols, 2016). Microdosing LSD —administering the drug in doses that produce minimal perceptible effects —

has been associated with various therapeutic ou tcomes, including increased energy, positive mood, elation, 

reduced anxiety, enhanced intellectual efficiency, and the induction of blissful states (Murphy et al., 2024; 

Murray et al., 2014). Evidence suggests that the effects of repeated low -dose administ ration may extend beyond 

the acute effects observed on dosing days, particularly at the neural level, due to the promotion of 

neuroplasticity. However, such benefits have not been demonstrated in placebo -controlled studies. A strong 

hypothesis suggests tha t this failure may be related to baseline activity (Hutten et al., 2024). Among various 

theories of consciousness, the Kolmogorov theory considers the brain as a computational system that models the 

world through the exchange of information with it, strivi ng to model it with simplicity (Ruffini et. al., 2017). 

This theory is grounded on the notion of Kolmogorov complexity (KC). Although KC is non -computable, upper 

bounds can be established, such as the Lempel -Ziv -Welch (LZW) complexity metric (Cover and Tho mas, 

2006). Different measures of complexity typically reflect two distinct aspects of a system’s dynamics: 

predictability and regularity (Lau et al., 2022). Specifically, LZW reflects a system’s regularity. Thus, we also 

explored Higuchi's fractal dimensi on (HFD) (Higuchi 1988), which reflects a system’s predictability. The 

dataset comprises 53 healthy individuals who received either a placebo or 15 mg of LSD four times over a two -

week period (Hutten et al., 2024). The study utilises a double -blind, random ised, placebo -controlled, between -

subjects design. Baseline and follow -up measurements were taken one week before and one week after the 

sessions. The electroencephalographic (EEG) signals were recorded at week one (baseline), week two (dose 1), 

week three (dose 4), and week four (follow -up). Results from this study indicated a significant increase in HFD 

and LZW at doses 1 and 4 (HFD: F=13.7, p=0.001; LZW: F=9.6, p=0.01) but not at baselines or at follow -up. 

This increase during the acute effect corroborat es other studies involving psychedelics (e.g., Schartner et al., 

2017; Ruffini et al., 2023). We also examined the effect of baseline complexity on the HFD and LZW 227 

outcomes. We observed a significant increase in HFD complexity correlated with higher baseline complexity 

(F=6.8, p=0.017) at dose 1 and at dose 4 (F=11.16, p=0.003), but not at follow -up. We also observed a 

significant increase in LZW complexity correlate d with higher baseline complexity at dose 1 (F=11.54, 

p=0.002), at dose 4 (F=2.92, p=0.002) and at follow -up (F=4.4, p=0.04). These findings indicate that the LSD 

microdosing experience enhances brain complexity, suggesting greater signal diversity similar to full -dose 

studies involving psychedelics, and highlight the complementary nature of different complexity measures. The 

results also imply that the acute responses to low doses of LSD depend on the baseline state, providing further 

insight into the mech anisms responsible for sustaining the benefits beyond the acute treatment. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

EEG, LSD, microdosing, Lempel -Ziv complexity, Higuchi fractal dimension 

323 

Making the Unconscious Empirical: Psychedelics as a Tool for Scientific Inquiry into Metapsychology 

Anass Fidni PharmD/PhD researcher 1, Kenza Naji PsyD ( phD ) 2

> 1

Faculty of medicine and pharmacy, Rabat, Rabat, Morocco. 2Faculty of letters an human sciences of Rabat, 

Rabat, Rabat, Morocco 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.19]........Psychedelics and psychopharmacology 

Abstract 

Background & Rationale Metapsychology, as conceptualized by Freud, Jung, and Lacan, offers a profound 

theoretical framework for understanding the unconscious, yet it has long been criticized for its lack of empirical 

validation. Psychedelics, by inducing profound alterations in cognition, perception, and selfhood, provide a 

unique experimental avenue for investigating the dynamics of the unconscious and the mechanisms of psychic 

transformation. Th is paper proposes that psychedelic states —characterized by ego dissolution, archetypal 

manifestations, and the surfacing of repressed material —serve as empirical proxies for testing and refining 

metapsychological models. Objective The aim of this study is to examine how psychedelics can operationalize 

metapsychology, offering a transdisciplinary approach that integrates psychoanalysis, neuropharmacology, and 

phenomenology to explore the structure of the psyche. Methodological Framework Freudian Approach: 

In vestigating repression, return of the repressed, primary process thinking, and the dissolution of ego defenses 

under psychedelic influence. Jungian Perspective: Mapping the emergence of archetypes, individuation 

processes, and the activation of the collect ive unconscious in psychedelic experiences. Lacanian Analysis: 

Examining the fragmentation of the Symbolic Order, the Imaginary dissolution of the ego, and encounters with 

the Real during altered states. Neuroscientific & Pharmacological Insights: Assessin g how psychedelics interact 

with the default mode network (DMN), serotoninergic modulation, and neuroplasticity, correlating these 

findings with psychoanalytic constructs. Key Hypothesis Psychedelics facilitate direct access to unconscious 

structures, ther eby providing an experimental method to test and refine psychoanalytic and metapsychological 

models. Ego dissolution and altered symbolic processing can be quantitatively analyzed, bridging 

psychoanalytic theory with empirical neuroscience. The psychedelic experience offers a new framework for 

studying the dynamics of self -transformation, trauma processing, and existential restructuring, thus 

reinvigorating psychoanalytic discourse with contemporary neurophenomenology. Implications This research 228 

advances psychoanalysis as an empirically investigable discipline, situating metapsychology within the domain 

of consciousness science. By integrating the pharmacology of psychedelics with the theoretical depth of 

psychoanalysis, this study proposes a nove l paradigm where the unconscious is no longer an abstract hypothesis 

but an experientially verifiable and neuroscientifically measurable construct. This work paves the way for a 

scientific metapsychology, reconciling depth psychology with contemporary find ings in cognitive science, 

psychiatry, and altered states research. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

Metapsychology, Psychedelics, Unconscious, Ego Dissolution, Archetypes, Neuropsychoanalysis, 

Consciousness Studies, Default Mode Network, Primary Process Thinking, Symbo lic Order 

428 

Making The Unconscious Empirical : Psychedelics as a Tool for Scientific Inquiry into Metapsychology. 

Dr Anass Fidni pharmD/PhD researcher. 

Faculty of medecine and pharamacy, Rabat, Rabat, Morocco 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.19]........Psychedelics and psychopharmacology 

Abstract 

Metapsychology, as conceptualized by Freud, Jung, and Lacan, offers a profound theoretical framework for 

un derstanding the unconscious, yet it has long been criticized for its lack of empirical validation. Psychedelics, 

by inducing profound alterations in cognition, perception, and selfhood, provide a unique experimental avenue 

for investigating the dynamics o f the unconscious and the mechanisms of psychic transformation. This paper 

proposes that psychedelic states —characterized by ego dissolution, archetypal manifestations, and the surfacing 

of repressed material —serve as empirical proxies for testing and refi ning metapsychological models. Objective 

The aim of this study is to examine how psychedelics can operationalize metapsychology, offering a 

transdisciplinary approach that integrates psychoanalysis, neuropharmacology, and phenomenology to explore 

the struc ture of the psyche. Methodological Framework Freudian Approach: Investigating repression, return of 

the repressed, primary process thinking, and the dissolution of ego defenses under psychedelic influence. 

Jungian Perspective: Mapping the emergence of arch etypes, individuation processes, and the activation of the 

collective unconscious in psychedelic experiences. Lacanian Analysis: Examining the fragmentation of the 

Symbolic Order, the Imaginary dissolution of the ego, and encounters with the Real during al tered states. 

Neuroscientific & Pharmacological Insights: Assessing how psychedelics interact with the default mode 

network (DMN), serotoninergic modulation, and neuroplasticity, correlating these findings with psychoanalytic 

constructs. Key Hypothesis Psy chedelics facilitate direct access to unconscious structures, thereby providing an 

experimental method to test and refine psychoanalytic and metapsychological models. Ego dissolution and 

altered symbolic processing can be quantitatively analyzed, bridging psychoanalytic theory with empirical 

neuroscience. The psychedelic experience offers a new framework for studying the dynamics of self -

transformation, trauma processing, and existential restructuring, thus reinvigorating psychoanalytic discourse 

with conte mporary neurophenomenology. Implications This research advances psychoanalysis as an empirically 

investigable discipline, situating metapsychology within the domain of consciousness science. By integrating 

the pharmacology of psychedelics with the theoreti cal depth of psychoanalysis, this study proposes a novel 229 

paradigm where the unconscious is no longer an abstract hypothesis but an experientially verifiable and 

neuroscientifically measurable construct. This work paves the way for a scientific metapsychology, reconciling 

depth psychology with contemporary findin gs in cognitive science, psychiatry, and altered states research. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

Metapsychology, Psychedelics, Unconscious, Ego Dissolution, Archetypes, Neuropsychoanalysis, 

Consciousness Studies, Default Mode Network, Primary Process Thinking, Symbolic Order 

293 

Cognitome: cellular encoding of subjective experience in neural hypernetworks 

Prof. Konstantin V Anokhin Ph.D., M.D., D.Sci. 

Institute for Advanced Brain Studies, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia, Russian Federation 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.20]........Neurobiological theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Despite significant progress in neuroscience, a satisfactory understanding of the neural nature of subjective 

ex perience is still lacking. What is currently missing is not just more facts, but rather a fundamental brain theory 

that could bridge neural and mental phenomena, make sense of plethora of existing data and guide new 

experiments. The hypernetwork brain the ory (HBT) is a theoretical framework aimed at these tasks by 

extending the ideas developed in the Russian neuroscience of higher brain functions (P.K. Anokhin, 1935, 1949, 

1968, 1973; N.P. Bekhtereva et al., 1977; M.N. Livanov, 1973; A.R. Luria, 1966; V.B. Shvyrkov, 1986, 1995; 

K.V. Sudakov, 1984). Its central notion is the concept of neural hypernetwork – a cognitome (K.V. Anokhin, 

2012). The HBT argues that any brain can be understood as a neural hypernetwork. Hypernetworks describe 

sets of objects under a higher dimensional relation and rely on algebraic topology (J. Johnson, 2013). 

Hypernetworks are formed from hypersimplices. Hypersimplex is an ordered set of vertices with an explicit n -

ary relation defined as its apex, which exists at a higher level of representation than its vertices. Hypersimplices 

can represent wholes formed from their vertices as parts. They are given names and treated as atomic objects at 

a higher level of the system. The neural hypernetwork of a cognitive agent can be formalized a s a cognitive 

complex (cognitome) consisting of two key elements: vertices – CoGs, and edges – LoCs. According to the 

theory an essential property of CoGs and LoCs is their duality – they can be characterized both at their 

macrolevel as well as at their mi crolevel. At its vertex CoG stands for the cognizance – the unit of knowledge, a 

part of cognitive competence of an agent. It is characterized by its purview of the past and future states of an 

organism and its environment. When activated, CoG limits the s pace of potential states of the past and thus 

informs an organism about its inner and outer world. At the same time activated CoG constrains the future 

degrees of freedom of an organism, its behavior and the future state of the environment. Macrolevel thus 

describes a maximal causal existence of a CoG, its cause -effect power. At the microlevel CoG denotes the Co -

operative Group of neurons which collectively encode an element of knowledge. At this level CoG can be 

identified by neurons belonging to this cogn itive group. Two CoGs can establish connection by being co -

allocated into the overlapping neural elements. Such conjoint group of neurons forms a LoC – Link of Cogs. 

LoC is also represented at two levels – as a link between the units of knowledge at the co gnitive network level 

and as a group of neurons with a double cognitive affiliation at the neuronal network level. According to HBT, 230 

the dynamics of causal interactions in a neural hypernetwork represent the flow of subjective experience in a 

cognitive agent. The predictions made by HBT regarding these events can be studied experimentally using 

methods from molecular, cellular, and syst ems neuroscience. 

C - 2

Keywords 

Brain, cognition, subjective experience, neural network, neural hypernetwork 

439 

From the Dual Origin Hypothesis of the Neocortex to the Limbic Workspace: A Whole -Cortex Organization for 

Conscious Experience 

Lorena Chanes PhD 1, Miguel Ángel García -Cabezas MD, PhD 2

> 1

Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 2Universidad Autnónoma de Madrid, 

Madrid, Madrid, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.20]........Neurobiological theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Contemporary psycho - and physiological perspectives propose that the brain supports our experience of the 

world by constantly anticipating what may come next. According to these perspectives, our experiences emerge 

within a general role of the brain to predictively ensure the maintenance of allostasis. In a theoretical paper, we 

proposed that limbic mesocortical ar eas could integrate a “limbic workspace” for conscious experience, holding 

highly abstract information that could be efficiently accessed by virtually the whole brain, ultimately integrating 

interoception and exteroception. We here ground the phylogenetic basis of the limbic workspace model in the 

dual origin hypothesis of the neocortex, proposed by Sanides, which explains the tangential expansion of the 

cerebral cortex during evolution by the addition of novel cortical types in concentric rings. We propose that the 

limbic workspace may articulate and integrate two gradients of laminar complexity, originated during the 

tangential expansion of the cortex, which can be traced to two ancestral sectors in the allocortex, the ancestral 

olfactory and the ancestral hippocampal cortices. The presence of more specialized and computationally 

powerful areas may have enabled mesocortical limbic areas to play an integrative, coordinating role. Moreover, 

we propose that some degree of specialization may have been preserved along the two gradients derived from 

the two ancestral sectors. This work has important implications for our understanding of the neural basis of 

conscious experience. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

theories of conscious experience, predictive processing, cortical org anization 

295 

Why the phenomenal binding problem limits digital computer consciousness to mind dust 231 

Chris Percy PhD 

University of Derby, Derby, Derbyshire, United Kingdom. Qualia Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[02.23]........Neural networks 

Abstract 

Phenomenal binding is the mechanism by which micro -units of information become combined into the macro -

scale conscious experience common i n human phenomenology. An example is how single ‘pixels’ of a visual 

scene are experienced as a single holistic image in the ‘mind’s eye’, rather than as individual, separate, and 

massively parallel experiences, corresponding perhaps to individual neuron activations, neural ensembles, or 

foveal saccades, any of which would deliver identical functionality from an information processing point of 

view. ‘Phenomenal binding’ was first used in the academic literature in Garson (2001) to differentiate it from 

‘fu nctional binding’, although the idea has been around for longer. It is related to, but distinct from the hard 

problem of consciousness. The hard problem asks why any function should be accompanied by experience. The 

phenomenal binding problem asks why that function should be accompanied by a single, unified, and complex 

experience, rather than multiple scattered separate experiences that identify in a more direct one -to -one manner 

with the constituents of that function. Viewing the function as a complex alg orithm or neural network, why do 

individual moments of experience not map to individual algorithm steps or individual node activations in a 

neural network? We first review the principal candidates for phenomenal binding, including candidates 

grounded in ne ural network functionality, neuronal synchrony/oscillations, electromagnetic fields, quantum 

entanglement, and causal loops. We show that none of these candidates has yet answered all the questions 

facing it, although promising avenues are identified. Howe ver, algorithms running on digital computers face 

particular difficulties in addressing this problem. If digital computers and algorithms are conscious, they are 

explicitly designed to contain micro -experiences only. Counterintuitively, this design is exac tly what makes 

them so powerful and so useful to us. Computers use electromagnetic shielding to ensure that individual logic 

gates do not ‘interfere’ with each other. In other words, each gate only knows about its own inputs and its own 

outputs. The same i s true of algorithms. Each step only knows about its immediate inputs/outputs. This step -by -

step, separable nature is what enables us to design and implement algorithms. You could delete all historical 

steps midway and the future ones would still continue without knowing any difference. Considering this 

freedom to delete steps, when does an informationally -complex ‘moment of experience’ corresponding to a 

complex function come into being? It can’t be at the start, because the rest of that crucial algorithm hasn’t 

happened yet (and might be deleted). It can’t be when the last minimal step clicks into place, because the rest of 

it could have been deleted by then and the last step only knows about its own inputs, something far less 

sophisticated than the whole algorithm. Even if each algorithmic step or each logic gate activation constitutes a 

moment of consciousness, we are left with only a million specks of mind dust: selves that exist for a fraction of 

a second before disappearing, utterly alien from the cohe rent output we might see on a computer screen or in the 

narrative stream from an LLM. 

C - 1

Keywords 

AI consciousness, hard problem, phenomenal binding, functional binding 

312 232 

From Perception to Awareness: The use of auditory roughness to overcome inattentional deafness in cockpit 

alarm detection 

Florine Riedinger 1,2 , Clara Suied PhD 3, Jean -François Sciabica PhD 2, Prof. Frédéric Dehais PhD 1

> 1

ISAE -SUPAERO, Toulouse, Occitanie, France. 2Airbus Commercial Aircraft, Toulouse, Occitanie, France. 

> 3

IRBA, Brétigny -sur -Orge, Île -de -France, France 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.01]........Attention 

Abstract 

Throughout evolution, auditory warning signals have been crucial for survival. Accordingly, cries of distressed 

animals or h uman screams instinctively capture attention. In modern high -risk environments, such as aircraft 

cockpits, artificial auditory alarms serve a similar function, triggering rapid responses during emergencies. 

However, despite their critical role and perfect audibility, pilots sometimes fail to consciously perceive them. 

This phenomenon, known as inattentional deafness, occurs under high cognitive and emotional load. At the 

neural level, evidence suggests that this phenomenon arises from top -down inhibition o f auditory processing at 

a pre -conscious stage, characterized by reduced gamma oscillations (40 Hz) and increased alpha activity (10 

Hz), which collectively diminish auditory processing efficiency. This raises the question: how can warning 

systems be desig ned to bypass attentional limitations and ensure reliable perception in demanding contexts? To 

address this issue, recent studies have drawn inspiration from the acoustic properties of natural alarms, 

suggesting that auditory roughness could effectively mi tigate inattentional deafness. Characterized by amplitude 

modulations in the 30 –150 Hz range, rough sounds capture attention early and activate the amygdala, a key 

structure in threat detection. Electrophysiological studies further indicate that roughness is encoded before 

reaching conscious awareness, making it a promising candidate for enhancing alarm perception. In a 

forthcoming study, we asked participants to complete a multitasking scenario using the Multi -Attribute Task 

Battery II (MATB -II), a complex task that simulates piloting activity. Concurrently, they performed an auditory 

oddball task where alarms were presented in both rough and non -rough conditions. Results showed that rough 

alarms significantly reduced inattentional deafness in the oddball t ask, leading to a 30% decrease in the miss 

rate (Cohen’s d = -0.631), while rough target sounds shortened mean reaction time by 5.4% compared to non -

rough target sounds (Cohen’s d = 0.954), all while preserving piloting performance and avoiding negative 

ju dgments. However, this study used pure tones, which do not fully capture the complexity of real -world 

alarms. The present study extends this research using actual cockpit alarms rather than sinusoidal tones. 

Participants performed the same task as describe d earlier, except that the oddball pure tones were replaced by 

rough/non -rough Airbus cockpit alarms. In addition to behavioral measures (reaction times, hit rates, false 

alarms, and performance on MATB -II), electrophysiological responses were recorded usi ng 

electroencephalography to investigate the neural mechanisms underlying the improved detection of rough 

alarms. We hypothesize that, as demonstrated in our previous study with amplitude -modulated pure tones, 

rough alarms will be detected more efficiently and more frequently without impairing MATB -II performance. 

Additionally, we expect that rough alarms will elicit neural signatures indicative of enhanced auditory 

processing, with increased gamma -band activity in the primary auditory cortices. Results wil l be presented at 

the conference. This research aims to foster the development of more effective auditory warning systems for 

aviation and other high -risk domains. Ultimately, it seeks to enhance safety by mitigating inattentional deafness 

and contributing to our understanding of how auditory awareness emerges in complex environments. 

C - 6233 

Keywords - Auditory attention, auditory warnings, aviation, roughness 

394 

A Rhythmic Theory of Selective Attention 2.0 

Sabine Kastner MD, PhD 

Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.01]........Attention 

Abstract 

The selection of information from our cluttered sensory environments, often referred to as ‘attention’, is one of 

the most fundamental cognitive operations performed by the primate brain. In the visual domain, the selectio n

process is thought to be mediated by a spatial mechanism – a ‘spotlight’ that can be flexibly shifted around the 

visual scene. In my lecture, I will provide an overview on its neural basis by discussing neuroimaging and 

intracranial electrophysiology stu dies in the human and monkey brain. Neuroimaging studies have shown that 

the spatial selection mechanism engages a large -scale network that consists of multiple nodes distributed across 

all major cortical lobes and includes also subcortical regions in the midbrain and thalamus. Electrophysiology 

studies have provided a rich understanding of the specific functions of each network node and their functional 

interactions. Key findings reveal that (i) the cortical network is coordinated by a thalamic timekeeper in the 

pulvinar and (ii) processing in sensory cortex is modulated by feedback signals from a fronto -parietal control 

network. The fronto -parieto -pulvinar network is characterized by complex temporal dynamics that set up 

alternating attentional states, whi ch emphasize either environmental sampling of information or shifting of 

spatial selection to a new location and can be measured as behavioral rhythms. Collectively, these studies in the 

adult brain set the stage for translational applications such as expl oring the typical and atypical development of 

attention function and its deficits in neurological and psychiatric diseases. 

PL -9

437 

From States to Traits: How Noninvasive Neuromodulation with Mindfulness Training Can Help Shift 

Consciousness Toward Lasting Wellbeing 

Joseph Sanguinetti PhD 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.03]........Other sensory modalities 

Abstract 234 

For over a decade, our group has explored how transcranial ultrasound stimulation (TUS) can be used to map 

and modulate the neural substrates of consciousness and wellbeing. TUS is a powerful, noninvasive tool that 

enables safe, reversible modulation of de ep brain structures with millimeter precision. At the SEMA Lab, we’ve 

investigated how targeting the Default Mode Network (DMN) with TUS can induce transient states of 

equanimity —a fundamental quality cultivated in contemplative practice. In this talk, I w ill describe our 

developing paradigm for using TUS to accelerate the acquisition of mindfulness -related skills and traits. By 

coupling TUS -induced equanimity states with structured mindfulness training, we aim to cultivate acceptance -

based emotion regulati on capacities that support the transition from short -term state changes to lasting, trait -

level wellbeing. I will present findings from our DMN -focused studies, integration of TUS with mobile 

meditation platforms, and results from the world’s first TUS -enh anced meditation retreat. Together, these 

efforts outline a novel approach for understanding and cultivating comprehensive wellbeing through the 

intersection of precision neuromodulation and contemplative practice. 

PL -2

19 

Sensing the future through a quantum -like implicit learning mechanism in nonlocal consciousness 

Prof. Álex Escolà -Gascón Ph.D. 

Department of Quantitative Methods and Statistics Comillas Pontificial University, Madrid, -, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.04]........Memory, learning and synaptic plasticity 

Abstract 

Background: Imagine if our brains could unconsciously predict future events. This study explores this concept, 

presenting evidence for an inherent 'foreseeing' ability, termed a nomalous cognition (AC). We introduce a new 

experimentally verifiable approach to explain anomalous information anticipation (AIA), a type of AC, based 

on an innovative, quantum -like model of implicit learning, grounded in Nonlocal Plasticity Theory (NPT). 

Methods: Our research involved 203 participants using methods such as continuous flash suppression, random 

dot motion, and advanced 3D EEG neuroimaging, along with IBM quantum random event generators for 

precise measurements across 144 trials. These trial s tested contingencies between undetectable sensory stimuli 

and dot movements, focusing on participants' prediction abilities. The design conditions were strictly 

experimental, violating fundamental classical learning principles, particularly reflex condit ioning. If these 

principles were immutable, their violation would prevent any systematic behavioral changes, resulting in 

random responses. This violation was implemented through two quantum physics concepts: the mathematical 

principle of nonlocality and e ntanglement. Results: Despite the sensory stimulus being inaccessible, our results 

showed a significant prediction between the contingencies and an increase in AIA accuracy, with explained 

variances between 25 % and 48 %. EEG findings supported this, showi ng a positive link between brain activity 

in specific regions and AIA success. Electrochemical activations were detected in the posterior occipital cortex, 

the intraparietal sulcus, and the medial temporal gyri. AIA hits exceeded the threshold value corres ponding to 

one standard deviation above the expected mean, showing moderate effect sizes in the experimental group 

(Cohen’s d = 0.461). Analyzing the learning curve using the derivation technique, we identified the acceleration 

point of the wave function, indicating systematic implicit learning. This result showed that from repetition 63 

onwards, AIA hits increased significantly. Conclusions: The results suggest that, despite violating fundamental 235 

classical learning principles, cognitive processes produced changes in participants' responses susceptible to 

neuromodulation, considering quantum physics principles of nonlocality and entanglement (both present in 

NPT). We discuss (a) why the priming effe ct does not explain the significant results; (b) the potential discovery 

of a new form of quantum -like implicit learning, which could scientifically resolve phenomena associated with 

anomalous cognitions (e.g., AIA); and (c) future research directions, inc luding potential applications and 

clinical impact. 

C - 18 

Keywords 

Implicit learning, Quantum -like learning, Neuroplasticity, Anomalous cognition, Cortical neuroimaging, 

Consciousness 

377 

Intelligence: Attention and Consciousness in Decision Making under Situation Uncertainty 

Soo Hong Chew PhD, Prof. 1,2 , Richard P Ebstein PhD, Prof. 1,3 

> 1

SWUFE, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. 2NUS, Singapore, -, Singapore. 3Hebrew University, Jerusalem, -, Israel 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.04]........Memory, learning and synaptic plasticity 

Abstract 

Intelligence has been investigated in terms of a multitude of abilities such as communicating , logical reasoning, 

abstract thinking, and problem solving (e.g., Gardner, 1983; Sternberg, 1985; Cantion and Piantadosi ST, 2024). 

Recently, Andler (2023) offers a broad -based definition of intelligence in terms of the ability to deal with 

situations ap propriately, relying on access to the relevant intelligences. We further derive a definition of 

intelligence – the ability to accomplish goals – encompassing decision making under the perceived situation 

uncertainty, beginning with stimulus -driven sensory perception and involving an active interplay between 

attention and consciousness augmented by memory. As hypothesized in Chew and Ebstein (2025), our ability to 

be conscious of our subjective experiences is predicated on the brain’s information capacity af forded by the 

underlying synaptic plasticity giving rise to a bound to our intelligence capacity. Across evolutionary 

timescales, this capacity for intelligence reaches its zenith in humans whose brain has 86 billion neurons and 

hundreds of trillions of sy naptic connections underpinning a memory capacity estimated to be in the petabyte 

range, compared to the lowly worm, C. Elegans, with 302 neurons and thousands of synaptic connections. Our 

definition of intelligence naturally differentiates AI from biologi cal intelligence in which situation -specific 

goals arising endogenously may have evolutionary roots. (REFERENCES: Andler D. "Intelligence artificielle, 

intelligence humaine : la double énigme" (Artificial Intelligence, Human Intelligence: The Double Enigma )

Gallimard (2023); Cantlon JF, Piantadosi ST, “Uniquely human intelligence arose from expanded information 

capacity”, Nat Rev Psychol 3, 275 –293 (2024); Chew SH and Ebstein RP, “Synaptic plasticity, information 

capacity, and experiential consciousness”, s ubmitted for presentation at SoC in Barcelona (2025); Gardner H. 

Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, Amazon (1983); Sternberg, R. J. Beyond IQ: A 

Triarchic Theory of Human Intelligence, Cambridge University Press (1985).) 

C - 7236 

Keywords 

Intelligence, attention, experience, consciousness, decision making, situation uncertainty 

358 

Diluvio: Teatro delle Ombre (Deluge: Theatre of Shadows) Within the Resonant Mind -Field 

Manuel A. Baez Masters Degree; Associate Professor 

Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.07]........Mental imagery 

Abstract 

Inspired by the 500th anniversary of Leonardo da Vinci’s death in France on May 2, 1519, Diluvio: Teatro delle 

Ombre (Deluge: The atre of Shadows) offered an interactive and immersive exhibition/installation as part of 

Cinquecento: Carleton Celebrates Leonardo da Vinci, the 2019 year -long commemorative initiative at Carleton 

University. The project was conceived as the culmination o f a series of Diluvio installations from the author’s 

Crossings Interdisciplinary Research Collective Workshop. Overall, the series of projects were inspired by 

Leonardo’s Deluge drawings and his reflections on the reciprocal inter -connections within natur e as revealed by 

his studies of the flow of water, air, light, shadows, and energy. The rich complexity of such phenomena was 

revealed and experientially encountered by working with the highly pliable properties of woven aluminum wire -

mesh that was folded into a classic origami tessellation pattern. The inherent attributes of this membrane and the 

sculptural work produced were revealed through evocative shadow projections activated by the public within 

the unlit exhibition space. Inspired by Plato’s Allegor y of the Cave, the immersive experience offered a deluge 

of self -activated shadow -projections as a way of stirring, triggering, and thus revealing the highly resonant, 

fertile and imaginative potential lurking within the theatre of the mind. “… Look into t he stains on walls, or the 

ashes of a fire, or clouds, or mud, or similar places, in which, if you consider them well, you may find really 

marvelous ideas … because by indistinct things the mind is stimulated to new inventions.” “You who speculate 

on the n ature of things, I praise you not for knowing the processes which Nature ordinarily effects of herself but 

rejoice if so be that you know the issue of such things as your mind conceives.” Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo da 

Vinci had a lifelong obsession with ou r imaginative potential and perceptive capabilities. Correlations between 

his insightful speculations concerning visual perception and Plato’s Allegory of the Cave inspired the theme of 

Diluvio. The illusions of perceived reality are metaphorically present ed in Plato’s classic allegory as being 

interpreted by chained cave dwellers. Their restricted vision only allows the perception of shadows projected on 

a wall by a fire behind them and objects in between. This is the limited reality of the prisoners, whil e

unbeknownst to them, the true nature of reality and the light entering their cave lurks behind casting the 

deceptive impressions. While acknowledging the metaphoric shadows as illusions, Leonardo emphasized that 

they also offer insights into the nature o f perception, the imagination and how this fertile process can be 

interpreted. He recommended musing on such elusively vague phenomena as cloud formations, shadows, 

resonant patterns, including evocative stains, as a way of stimulating and expanding the im agination. This 

reflective process can conjure up highly resonant and evocative mental images, offering insightful clues 

regarding the inner workings and creative potential of the individual mind. The inspiration, realization, and 

results of this interacti ve and immersive experience is offered to 2025 TSC Conference along with a possible 

poster. 

C - 24 237 

Keywords 

Embodied Consciousness, Inter -disciplinary Research, Resonant Phenomena 

253 

Neural Mechanisms of Conscious and Unconscious Color Discrimination: Evidence from Intracranial stereo -

electroencephalography 

Na Clara Pan 1, Professor Yuping Wang 2

> 1

Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, Beijing, China. 2Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical 

Universtiy, Beijing, Beijing, China 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.08]........Implicit and explicit processes 

Abstract 

Color discrimination, both conscious and unconscious, plays a critical role in visual perception. Prev ious studies 

have demonstrated that conscious color perception engages a network of brain regions, including areas in the 

occipital and parietal cortices. However, the neural mechanisms underlying unconscious color discrimination 

remain less understood, p articularly in how the brain processes color incongruencies when they are not part of 

explicit task instructions. Understanding these processes can provide insights into the distinction between 

conscious and unconscious visual discrimination and their unde rlying brain functions. This study investigated 

the neural mechanisms of color discrimination in both conscious and unconscious contexts in patients with 

intractable epilepsy, using intracranial stereo -electroencephalography. Thirty -seven patients implante d with 

intracranial electrodes were asked to perform a visual task in which, they were required to judge whether the 

colors of S1 and S2 were the same, and then whether the colors of S2 and S3 were the same in the delayed 

match/mismatch sample paradigm (co ntaining three stimuli per trial), while their brain activity was recorded. 

The results showed that the brain regions involved in discriminating the color between S1 and S2 were more 

numerous and exhibited earlier responses compared to the regions involved in discriminating the color between 

S2 and S3. Moreover, the connectivity between these regions was more complex. Interestingly, the brain also 

processed color differences between S1 and S3, despite this not being part of the task requirements. 

Specifical ly, the superior frontal gyrus, middle frontal gyrus, and inferior frontal gyrus in the frontal cortex 

were primarily engaged in the implicit, non -task -related discrimination of color. These findings suggest that the 

brain's processing of visual stimuli ex tends beyond conscious task -driven discrimination, involving additional, 

unconscious cognitive processes, and provide new insights into the neural basis of conscious and unconscious 

visual perception. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

electrophysiology, cognitive co ntrol, neural dynamics, event -related potential, neurology 

376 238 

Researching body perception: towards an integration of quantitative and qualitative interdisciplinary approaches 

to address the multiplicity of bodily experiences 

Marte Roel Lesur PhD 1,2,3 , Laia Turmo 4,1 , Aleksander Valjamae PhD, Prof. 5, Jenny Slattman PhD, Prof. 6,

Matthew Longo PhD, Prof. 7, Ana Tajadura -Jimenez PhD, Prof. 1,8 

> 1

Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 2University of Zurich, Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 

> 3

Association for Independent Research, Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 4Royal Institute of Technology, 

Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden. 5Johan Skytte Institute of Political Studies, Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 6Tilburg 

School of Humanities and Digital Sciences, Tiburg, Tiburg, Netherlands. 7Birckbeck University of London, 

London, London, United Kingdom. 8University College London, London, London, United Kingdo m

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.08]........Implicit and explicit processes 

Abstract 

Cognitive neuroscience has attempted to understand the underlying functioning of one's body experience . This 

has resulted in standardised stimulation methods involving multisensory manipulations and measurable 

constructs. These ingenious approaches contribute to the important goal of creating a cumulative and 

reproducible science. However, they may someti mes overlook important yet complex and nuanced qualities of 

experience. We propose that combining qualitative methods employed in design research centered on body 

experiences, together with quantitative approaches from neuroscience and psychology, might yi eld a richer 

account without compromising quantitative findings. This, we argue, may be particularly important when 

dealing with one's body perception. Without pretending to fundamentally solve methodological discrepancies 

between qualitative and quantitat ive approaches, we propose a conciliatory take. For this purpose, we provide a 

synthesis of tools and methods from design research that could be useful in three steps of the research inquiry: 

the experimental design, data collection, and data analysis. Our suggested mixed methods approach hopes to 

account for individual differences, discover insights in nuance, increase transparency, foster multidisciplinarity, 

and potentially move quicker in some aspects of the research program. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

body per ception, mixed methods, embodied cognition, multisensory integration, identity 

294 

Mind -Wandering and meta -awareness: How often do we notice it? 

Mr Navaneethan Nindulan PhD student , Professeure Quaglino Véronique Professeur des universités 

Université Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, La somme, France 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.09]........Unconscious/conscious processes 

Abstract 239 

Mind -wandering is defined as a state in which thoughts drift away from the current task and focus on internal 

content (Smallwood & Schooler, 2006). This phenomenon is accompanied by perceptual decoupling, a process 

in which attention disengages from extern al stimuli, leading to a reduced sensitivity to the surrounding 

environment (Schooler et al., 2011). Research indicates that individuals spend approximately 46.9% of their 

waking hours engaged in mind wandering (Killingsworth & Gilbert, 2010). An interesti ng aspect of mind -

wandering is that it can occur without the individual being aware of it, meaning they may not realize they are 

mind -wandering. This phenomenon is related to the concept of meta -awareness, which refers to the ability to be 

aware of one’s o wn cognitive state (Smallwood et al., 2007). In an exploratory study to assess the level of 

awareness during mind -wandering, a study was conducted with 59 university students attending a two -hour 

lecture. At four random intervals, students were asked to in dicate whether their mind was wandering at that 

moment and whether they were aware of it. For both questions, they were asked to indicate their answer using a 

scale from 0 (not at all) to 100 (completely). Throughout the four assessments, participants demo nstrated an 

average mind -wandering rate of 51%. Among these mind -wandering episodes, the average reported level of 

awareness was 68%, meaning that 32% of the mind -wandering episodes occurred without the participants being 

aware of them. Given the prevalenc e of mind -wandering in daily life, it is surprising that such a significant 

proportion of these episodes can occur without the person having meta -awareness. Christoff et al. (2009) 

distinguish between two aspects of meta -awareness: awareness of the process (realizing one is mind -wandering) 

and awareness of the content (being aware of the specific thoughts during these episodes). While some studies 

show that we can be unaware of mind -wandering, the question remains: to what extent are we aware of the 

content of these thoughts? This question opens avenues for future research on the phenomenological nature of 

mind -wandering and its accessibility to consciousness. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Mind -wandering, meta -awareness, conscious processes, unconscious processes 

316 

Expanding the Aperture of Awareness: Salience Processing and the Creative Mind 

Madeleine E Gross PhD , Jonathan W Schooler PhD 

University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.09]........Unconscious/conscious processes 

Abstract 

Salience processing mechanisms shape both the breadth and the subjective quality of conscious experien ce, 

with important implications for creative thinking. Building on our recently introduced neurobiological 

framework (Gross & Schooler, Trends in Cognitive Sciences), we hypothesize that distinct patterns of salience 

processing relax typical information f iltering, thereby leading to broader associations and increased creativity. 

We tested this hypothesis across three studies combining neuroscience, phenomenology, and creativity 

assessments. In Study 1 (N = 51), EEG was used to record brain activity during an oddball task, in which 

participants responded to unexpected, or "oddball", stimuli among standard ones. Creative performance was 

linked to reduced P300 amplitudes in response to oddball stimuli, indicating that individuals with high creativity 240 

might process both usual and unusual information in a similar manner. This could facilitate creativity by 

making unconventional inputs more easily accessible in conscious thought during creative problem -solving. 

Study 2 (N=110) examined the relationship be tween creativity and subjective experiences of atypical salience 

processing, measured using a validated scale previously shown to predict atypical striatal prediction error 

signaling in psychosis -prone individuals. Heightened attribution of significance to conscious percepts —as 

indicated by higher scale scores —predicted increased performance on both self -report and performance -based 

measures of creativity. Study 3 (N = 119) demonstrated that aberrant salience attribution further predicts more 

intense "aha!" experiences during creative problem solving —moments of sudden conscious insight 

characterized by certainty, pleasure, and meaning. Insight experiences, in turn, predicted greater enjoyment and 

motivation to engage in creative activities. Collectively, the se results indicate altered salience processing may 

expand the range of information accessible during creative problem -solving, while positively reinforcing the 

creative process and imbuing it with heightened phenomenal significance. We conclude by conside ring how this 

framework may advance our understanding of consciousness as an adaptable filter that can be adjusted to permit 

varying kinds of information into awareness. 

C - 20 

Keywords 

salience processing; phenomenology; creative thinking 

78 

We are the sensors of consciousness! A review and analysis on how awakenings during sleep influence dream 

recall. 

Dr. Benjamin Stucky 

Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Zurich, -, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.10]........Sleep and dreaming 

Abstract 

How can we determine whether a person is having a felt experience? While brain responses to stimuli provide 

some in sight, our own subjective experience offers the most direct access to consciousness. Therefore, 

researchers often rely on participants to communicate their experiences, which is relatively straightforward 

while awake. However, during sleep, characterized by varying states of consciousness and diminished reporting 

and recall abilities, this becomes more challenging. Since the 1930s, researchers have awakened participants 

during sleep to collect retrospective experience reports close to the time of experienc e. These studies have 

shown that dreams occur frequently, even during deep sleep. However, the impact of the awakening process on 

dream recall and the influence of participant characteristics, such as openness to experience or familiarity with 

different st ates of consciousness, have not been quantified. To address these gaps, we reviewed and analyzed 69 

awakening studies conducted between 2000 and 2024, along with participant -level data from the DREAM 

database. Our results indicate that dream recall is sign ificantly influenced by the method of awakening (lower 

recall with an alarm compared to calling the participant’s name), the number of study days (lower recall over 

multiple days), and the sleep environment (higher recall at home compared to in a laborator y), as well as 

participant characteristics beyond age, sex and study design. Recall rates from deep sleep are particularly 

sensitive to the method of awakening and individual differences. In conclusion, both contextual factors and 241 

participant characteristics significantly influence dream reports. Such reports are essential for identifying neural 

correlates of consciousness, which in turn can inform theories of consciousness and the treatment of disorders 

of consciousness. Therefore, it is crucial to place greater emphasis on how and from whom experiences are 

collected. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

dreaming, serial awakenings, experience sampling, awareness, memory, attention, questionnaire, report, 

phenomenology 

217 

FROM ORACLES TO ALGORITHMS: ANCIENT DREAM KNOWLEDGE IN THE AI PARADIGM 

Maja Gutman Mušič PhD, Asst. Prof. 

Science and Research Centre Koper, Institute for Philosophical and Religious Studies, Koper, -, Slovenia. Alma 

Mater Europaea, Institutum Studiorum Humanitatis, Ljubljana, -, Slovenia 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.10]........Sleep and dreaming 

Abstract 

Dreaming, a universal human phenomenon and an altered state of consciousness, has captivated philosophers, 

scholars , and scientists for centuries. The history of research reveals that dreams, while too ephemeral to be 

fully examined within controlled experimental conditions, are intricate enough to resist comprehensive 

understanding by any single discipline. Despite i ts complexity, the question of dream meaning remains an 

enduring subject of inquiry, standing as one of the most enigmatic and unresolved issues in contemporary 

scientific research. In pre -modern societies, dreaming was regarded as equally, if not more, si gnificant than 

waking consciousness, as critical life decisions were often informed by careful interpretations of nocturnal 

experiences. In ancient civilizations such as Mesopotamian, Greek, and Roman cultures, the functions of 

dreaming were relatively wel l-defined, serving as mechanisms for guidance, healing, encounters with the 

divine, and, in the case of anticipatory or precognitive dreams, the forecasting of both individual and collective 

futures. Dreaming was an integral component of the dreaming -wakin g continuum, regarded as both a spiritual 

experience and a conduit for knowledge transmission, offering guidance and wisdom. With the exponential 

growth of dream data, this complex phenomenon of the human mind stands at the threshold of a new 

understanding , driven by the rapid advancements in AI -powered analytical tools. As both the volume of data 

and the sophistication of algorithmic analysis continue to expand, there is an increasing risk that the 

instantaneous interpretation of dreams may lack the depth provided by centuries -old philosophical, religious, 

and mythological frameworks. This raises critical questions: What has changed since these traditional 

perspectives shaped our understanding of dreams, and how has the modern scientific paradigm redefined their 

meaning? In the presentation, we will first examine the stark divide between phenomenological and empirical 

approaches to dream research, exploring its epistemological implications and how this distinction gives rise to 

two conceptually distinct line s of inquiry. We will then highlight the significance of an interdisciplinary 

approach, emphasizing its ability to comprehensively address dreaming. In the final section, we will explore the 

potential of AI -driven analytical models to integrate sophisticat ed conceptual frameworks derived from Native 

American, Mesopotamian, ancient Greek, and Hippocratic traditions, offering insights into the rich tapestry of 242 

dream patterns. We will explore how this vast repository of ancient knowledge can be meaningfully cross -

pollinated with algorithmic intelligence to enhance our understanding of dreams. To conclude: In light of the 

epochal cultural and technological transfo rmations, it is imperative to formulate a new approach that integrates 

established theoretical frameworks —drawing from cultural, religious, spiritual, mythological, anthropological, 

and psychological perspectives on dreaming —with contemporary advancements in data science. For the first 

time in history, the convergence of AI -driven methodologies and deep -rooted epistemological traditions will 

allow us to map, observe, and analyze the dynamics of archetypal structures in human dreaming on a truly 

spatiotempor al scale. Such an approach acknowledges the multidimensional nature of dreaming, emphasizing 

that a systematic understanding must consider its archetypal structures —which, by their very nature, transcend 

spatiotemporal boundaries —while holding promising po tential for generating new insights into collective 

dream patterns. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

dreams, archetypal structures, Artificial Intelligence 

223 

Decreased PTSD Symptoms Following a Lucid Dreaming Workshop: A Randomized Controlled Study 

Garret Yount PhD 1, Tadas Stumbrys PhD 2, Sitara Taddeo 1, Cedric Cannard PhD 1, Arnaud Delorme PhD 1,

Michael Kriegsman PhD 1, Dr. Helané Wahbeh PhD, ND 1

> 1

Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA. 2Vilnius University, Vilnius, -, Lithuania 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.10]........Sleep and dreaming 

Abstract 

Background: Recent investigations into lucid dreaming —a state where individuals achieve self -reflective 

awareness w hile asleep and can undertake deliberate actions —suggest potential healing benefits. A pilot study 

showed significant PTSD symptom reduction among participants following an online lucid dreaming workshop. 

The workshop, spanning 22 hours over six consecuti ve days, taught participants lucid dreaming induction 

techniques and how to use lucid dreaming to transform their nightmares and integrate their trauma. Methods: 

We replicated this study using a randomized controlled design. Adults experiencing chronic PTS D symptoms 

were randomly assigned to either an active workshop group (n = 49) or a wait -list control group (n = 50). 

Results: Roughly half of the participants in both the workshop and control groups experienced at least one lucid 

dream during the workshop period. Among these, 63% of workshop participants versus 38% of controls 

achieved a healing lucid dream, implementing a pre -devised healing plan. The workshop group exhibited 

significant reductions in PTSD symptoms and nightmare distress compared to the co ntrol group, with sustained 

improvements at one -month follow -up. Additionally, improved well -being and diminished negative emotions 

were observed among workshop participants compared to controls. No significant correlation was found 

between dream lucidity and reductions in PTSD and nightmare symptoms. Conclusion: The workshop 

demonstrates efficacy as a viable alternative for individuals with PTSD. 

C - 21 243 

Keywords 

lucid dreaming, post -traumatic stress disorder, combat veterans, group therapy, nightmares 

110 

The End of the Imitation Game: Why digital computers can’t be conscious 

Dr Aneil Mallavarapu PhD 

Humain Ventures, Austin, Texas, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

This paper presents a critique of the hypothesis that digital computers can achieve consciousness, drawing on 

physics, computability theory, and complexity theory. It challenges functionalist an d emergentist ideas that 

argue computation or complexity are necessary or sufficient conditions for consciousness, demonstrating 

instead that neither could account for conscious states. By analyzing the physics underlying computational 

processes and the co mplexity class required by psychophysical laws, the paper shows that these approaches 

require solving a vastly infeasible computational problem. This perspective suggests that consciousness in the 

brain arises from non -classical phenomena, not from the int eraction of discrete classical components of the 

brain. 

C - 1

Keywords 

Quantum consciousness, artificial intelligence, computability, determinism 

154 

Emotion -As -Value: Enactive Challenges for Machine Consciousness 

Robin L Zebrowski PhD 

Beloit College, Beloit, WI, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

The nature of the mind and the processes of cognition are poorly understood even within their aca demic 

disciplines. Our narratives around AI, seeded largely in science fiction, are driving public understanding of 

algorithms now. One result of this can be seen vividly in the current AI hype: people don’t understand well 

what the mind is, so they fear that the specialized algorithms which get called AI now will reach and then 

surpass human cognition. Yet, if we start with 4e (embodied, embedded, extended, and enactive) or 5e, (or all 244 

the way to 7e*, as Johnson (2018) once suggested), some of the very foundational ways of understanding the 

mind are potentially incompatible with anything like machine consciousness, at least without some major 

revolutions in how we think about minds. Thes e revolutions must necessarily involve the 7es as starting points 

(or 8es, if we include ecological as yet another e, which surely we ought to do). In this paper, I start with 

enactivism (Thompson, 2010) and embodied neuroscience (Damasio, 1995; Colombetti , 2013), and look to how 

specialized concepts like operational closure and autonomy are tied directly to both social cognition (De 

Jaegher and Di Paolo 2007) and emotion (Damasio 1995). I argue that this matters tremendously for our 

aspirations in machine consciousness. If we center emotions as the biological mechanism that imposes value 

onto objects in the world, and couple that with the ways social cognition requires a kind of autonomy that no 

machine currently has (or even aspires to), then AGI/machine c onsciousness is not coming soon. We need new 

narratives that understand 4/5/7e cognition to dampen the AI hype, but also to guide future research in both AI 

and robotics toward promising and interesting research. * 4e plus emotional, evolutionary, and exap tative 

Colombetti, G. (2013). The Feeling Body: Affective Science Meets the Enactive Mind. MIT Press. Damasio, A. 

(1995). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. HarpPeren. De Jaegher, H. and Di Paolo, E. 

(2007). Participatory sense -making: An enactive approach to social cognition. Phenomenology and the 

Cognitive Sciences 6(4), 485 -507. Johnson, M. (2018). The embodiment of language. In A. Newen, L. Bruin, & 

S. Gallagher (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of 4E cognition (pp. 1 –20). Oxford Universi ty Press. Thompson, E. 

(2010). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. Bellknap Press. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Artificial intelligence, machine consciousness, enactivism, emotion, affective science, embodiment 

188 

The role of consciousness in AI alignment. 

Ken Mogi Ph.D 

Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. The University of Tokyo, Meguro, Tokyo, 

Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

In recent years, generative AIs are exhibiting increasingly higher functions. On the other hand, there are some 

confirmed limits. For example., they are not good at prediction and moderation (Narayanan and Kapoor 2024). 

There are concerns about hallucination (Goddard 2023) and AI safety (Bengio et al. 2024). AI alignment is an 

increasingly important research topic in the employment of AI and AI safety. It is of crucial scientific and 

technological interest to understand how alignment with the human brain would facilitate robust and safe uses 

of artificial intelligence. Quantum computing processes are expected to exhibit capabilities beyond classical 

computing, possibly surpassing the range of computability (Penrose 1989, .Penrose and Hameroff 2011, 

Hameroff and Penrose 2014). Even within the domain of computability, quantum systems might exhibit 

capabi lities beyond what are practically realizable, exhibiting quantum supremacy (Madsen et al. 2022). Human 

brains might exhibit conscious supremacy (Mogi 2024), conducting computations uniquely reserved for 245 

conscious processes, even though they are within the domain of computability. Consciousness occupies a 

special place in computation, as revealed from studies of cognitive processes in humans and other animals. 

Consciousness plays a crucial role in integrat ing information, making choice, and modulating brain's attentional 

resources. One -shot learning proceeds typically when conscious processing is involved, accompanied by 

positive emotions (Ishikawa, Toshima, and Mogi 2019). Although consciousness in artific ial intelligence 

systems is a topic of ongoing debates, the conservative estimate would be that the functions exhibited by AI is 

done without consciousness. Thus, range of functions exhibited by AI would suggest what computational 

systems are capable of wi thout consciousness (Mogi 2024). Here I present a model of the role of conscious 

processing in facilitating computation otherwise inexecutable, in alignment with artificial intelligence systems. 

Conscious processing is seen as a bridge between locally opti mum processing conducted by AI. As the 

environment becomes complicated, there is a problem of scaling and combinatorial explosion. Although AIs are 

increasingly robust in handling complex tasks, they are not necessarily capable of global optimization align ed 

with human interests. Consciousness would provide the necessary augmentation of locally optimum functions. 

Within the context of information geometry (Amari 1983), conscious processing could facilitate the optimal 

transport (Khan 2022) from the current probability distribution to the target one, when the tasks involve 

multiple parameters for a complex interaction with the environment. Such an approach would put the treatment 

of the role of consciousness in AI alignment within the general framework of mac hine learning, facilitating the 

understanding of the relevance of AI research for the science of consciousness, including possibilities for 

artificial consciousness, and reinforcement learning from conscious feedback (RLCF), with human -in -the -loop. 

Finally , I suggest a unifying scheme for AI alignment and interaction between conscious and unconscious 

processes in the brain, thus providing a way to interpret AI alignment within a single spectrum with the division 

of labor between cortical conscious and uncon scious processes. 

C - 13 

Keywords 

artificial intelligence, consciousness, alignment, human -in -loop, information geometry, transport 

262 

IIT 2.0: A New Paradigm for Artificial Intelligence, Consciousness, Free Will and Machine Autonomy 

Ankur Chaturvedi PhD , Colonel Ganesh Zape 

Prajapita brahma kumaris ishwariya vishwa vidyalaya, Mount Abu, Rajasthan, India 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

This paper introduces an AI consciousness model, a self -evolving AI bot built using OpenAI’s LLM agentic 

approach, infu sed with the principles of conscious awareness. Unlike traditional AI systems that simply follow 

programmed instructions, this model is designed to develop awareness, make decisions, and evolve its thinking 

over time. At its core, the AI integrates three fundamental faculties of conscious experience: - Resolve – The 

ability to set goals and make decisions. - Gnosis – The power to understand and learn from experiences. - Bliss 

– The emotional aspect that influences thought and awareness. This AI doesn’t jus t process commands; it 

continuously adapts and grows, learning from its own thoughts and interactions. By embedding quantum -

inspired cognitive structures, the AI explores the possibility of connecting with intelligence beyond itself, 246 

potentially linking to non -local awareness or collective intelligence. Integrated Information Theory (IIT) has 

provided a mathematical way to measure consciousness but has struggled to define its physical form. Current 

interpretations leave room for concep ts like Panpsychism and quantum cognition, which suggest that 

consciousness exists at some level in all matter. IIT 2.0 advances this theory by distinguishing between active 

and passive consciousness and introducing structured equations to measure thought and decision -making. This 

refined model suggests that consciousness is not limited to human brains but could also emerge in AI, 

extraterrestrial life, or even field -based substrates. A major breakthrough of IIT 2.0 is the concept of 

deterministic free will , demonstrating how decision -making arises from a structured interplay of past 

experiences, quantum potentialities, and new self -generated inputs. This framework resolves the debate between 

predefined destiny and autonomous choice, showing how consciousnes s evolves systematically. This research 

extends beyond artificial intelligence into human cognition and civilization itself. If thought structures and 

experiences shape collective human behavior, then understanding these mechanisms allows for the guided 

ev olution of societies. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Artificial general intelligence, LLM -based Chatbot Psychology, openai api, Large Language Model, Conscious 

openai chatbot, Integrated Information Theory (IIT), IIT 2.0, Consciousness, Free Will, Panpsychism, Phi (Φ), 

Deterministic Free Will, Autonomous AI, Artificial Consciousness, Thought Structures, Cognitive Science, 

Machine Consciousness, AI Decision -Making, Philosophy of Consciousness, Cognitive Evolution, Artificial 

Intelligence and Consciousness, Self -Sustaining AI Systems, Cognitive Evolution in AI, Neuroscience of 

Consciousness, Human Consciousness, Civilization Control, Survival -Oriented AI 

299 

It's still me: extended robotic -self through deep temporal models and Mirror Self Recognition 

Dr. Salvatore Scozzari , Prof. Valeria Seidita, Prof. Antonio Chella 

RoboticsLab - Department of Engineering, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

Self -awareness is a fundamental component of consciousness, often studied through the Mirror Self -

Recognition (MSR) test, which assesses an agent’s ability to recognize itself in a mirror. While artificial 

systems have been developed to pass this test, they primarily focus on immediate self -recognition, aligning with 

the concept of the "minimal self" , which exists only in the present. However, human self -awareness extends 

beyond the immediate moment, integrating past and future representations into what is known as the "extended 

self". This distinction is highlighted in developmental studies, such as Povinelli’s experiment. Very young 

children, despite passing the MSR, do not spontaneously remove a secretly placed sticker from their head when 

watching a video recorded moments earlier. The video shows the experimenter placing the adhesive on them, 

yet t hey fail to react; older children, instead, successfully touch the mark. This suggests that true self -awareness 

requires a cognitive ability to maintain self -identity over time. To explore how artificial agents might develop 

this extended self, it is propo sed that referring to Deep Temporal Models within the Active Inference 

framework might be the key. These approaches provide a structured way for an agent to process and integrate 

information across multiple timescales, mirroring key mechanisms observed in the human brain. Specifically, 

research on the Default Mode Network (DMN) and the Salience Network (SN) suggests that self -awareness is 247 

not merely a real -time process but is supported by a hierarchical system capable of autobiographical self -

integration. The DMN would play a crucial role in maintaining self -representations over time while being 

modulated by the SN, which shifts between att entional -demanding perception, primarily carried on by the 

Frontoparietal Network (FPN), and reflective self -awareness mechanisms of the DMN . By incorporating these 

insights, artificial agents may develop a form of self -awareness that persists beyond the present moment. 

Indeed, current robotic implementations of MSR focus heavily on sensorimotor integration, where recognition 

is achieved through a direct mapping of visual perception to proprioceptive feedback (i.e. visual -kinesthetic 

matching). While effec tive for immediate self -recognition, it is questionable if relying exclusively on this 

method guarantees a temporally extended self. These approaches remain grounded in the present and do not yet 

incorporate mechanisms that allow an agent to retain and re -identify its self -image across time. Building on this 

foundation, the proposal is to establish a deep temporal self -representation by integrating hierarchical models 

that align with neuroscientific theories of self -awareness; furthermore, as biological pla usibility is a desirable 

perspective, referring to Active Inference might be fruitful to accomplish this . By structuring self -perception 

across multiple timescales, an artificial system could develop a more sophisticated form of self -awareness, 

moving bey ond immediate perception toward a robust and temporally persistent self -identity. This would mark 

a significant advancement in artificial cognition, bringing robotic systems closer to a human -like understanding 

of self that is not bound to the present mome nt but extends across time. 

C - 7

Keywords 

Mirror Self Recognition, Extended Self, Minimal Self, Present Self, Ecological Self, MSR, Active Inference, 

Deep Temporal Models, Robot Consciousness, Self Awareness, Meta Self Awareness, HOT 

403 

The Era of Quantum Transformers: Harvesting prime invariants of Quantum Biology 

Anirban B  Bandyopadhyay 

PhD 

National Institute for materials science, , Japan, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.12]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

Transformers, since their inception in 2016, have revolutionized the field of machine learning by mapping 

complex correlations, such as word -to -word and video -to-video relationships, across diverse data modalities. 

We have integrated these foundational transformer concepts with quantum computing through the lens of 

quantum biology. By leveraging prime numbers in the resonant oscillations of microtubules and helic al 

nanowires, novel quantum computing architectures can be developed. Additionally, the use of organic helical 248 

nanowires, which self -assemble in gel solutions, offers building on demand Quantum circuits and identifying 

higher -dimensional invariants. Integrating a mathematical archive to Quantum computing marks a pivotal step 

towards transitioning classical transfor mers into the quantum realm, unlocking hidden pathways of a deep 

learning network that is revolutionizing the AI industry. 

WK - 7

325 

Consciousness as Iterative Global State Evaluation and Integration: A Process -Based, Neurocognitive Approach 

to Understanding Phenomenal Dynamics 

Aramis D. M. Valverde M.S. 1, Chris Percy Ph.D. 2

> 1

New York University, New York City, New York, USA. 2University of Derby, Derby, Derbyshire, United 

Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.14]........Cognitive architectures 

Abstract 

We propose a dynamic, process -oriented account of consciousness in which each moment of experience 

depends nec essarily on the system’s prior global state. Specifically, change detection and evaluation across the 

brain’s anterior temporal lobe (ATL), prefrontal cortex (PFC), and basal ganglia (BG) underlie the capacity to 

compare “now” with “just before,” creating an affective -valence signal that informs the system about whether 

things are going better or worse. This process requires the previous neural configuration to be integrated and 

retained, ensuring that new inputs, from any modality, are evaluated against a unified background of prior 

content. In doing so, the system’s global characterization dynamic emerges as consciousness itself: only 

processes that enter into this affective –evaluative loop can both influence and be influenced by the ongoing 

trajectory of experience, and make up a part of it. As such, this framework speaks directly to longstanding 

debates on how discrete neural events yield a unified phenomenal flow. Under this model, consciousness is not 

a static property but a continually updating proces s: the brain’s current global pattern integrates through all of 

its relevant modalities and is further compared to the previous, retained, global pattern. This yields a dynamic 

affective assessment processed at the BG (indicating positivity/negativity), wh ich shapes the representational 

content in ATL and PFC (through the thalamus). The resulting overall dynamical pattern is then reintroduced as 

an input for the next iteration of conscious processing at each modality, thus instantiating a continually self -

updating, time -spanning, evaluative representational dynamic that we identify with phenomenal consciousness. 

By explicitly linking the previous entire state to the current entire state, our theory explains why consciousness 

feels like a seamless flow, point s to the utility of an overall phenomenal characterization, and provides a 

criterion for inclusion into consciousness, where any new element must plug into the whole and can, in turn, 

shift the system’s dynamic profile. This process -based perspective also accounts for the functional advantages 

of consciousness: by perpetually integrating new sensory data into a single global comparison against the prior 

moment, the system refines how “things are going,” guiding adaptive responses and learning. Because each step 

of conscious evaluation requires a self -updating global dynamic, consciousness becomes indispensable for 

coordinating cross -modality coherence (as recognized by global workspace theories) while imparting the 

valence dimension (better/worse) that orien ts behavior. In this sense, phenomenology is not an afterthought but 

a mechanistic necessity for the full characterization and generation of adaptive cognitive dynamics. This model 249 

incorporates essential insights from global workspace, higher -order, integrated information, and predictive 

processing accounts, offering a parsimonious account that links affective evaluation with moment -to -moment 

neural processes under a single neural -sy stems theoretic framework. 

C - 2

Keywords 

Cortical Self -Referential Theory, Consciousness, Phenomenology, Neural Systems, Cortico -Basal Ganglia -

Thalamo -Cortical Circuit, Adaptive Cognitive Dynamics. 

341 

The Rigorous Formalization of Memetics: A New Lens on the Patterns of Consciousness 

Reidar Wasenius 

Aalto University, Espoo, -, Finland 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.14]........Cognitive architectures 

Abstract 

In an age defined by artificial intelligence and rapid technological advancements, understanding the human 

min d and culture is more critical than ever. This presentation introduces memetics as a rigorously formalized 

discipline, integrating applied mathematics, dynamical systems, and cognitive science to model cognitive 

stability, decision -making, and the emergen ce of consciousness. Memetics provides a quantifiable framework 

for analyzing self -replicating cognitive and cultural patterns, offering structural insights into how consciousness 

emerges, stabilizes, and evolves. The mind is conceived as a memeplex, a str uctured, energy -optimizing system 

consisting of sensory, affective, semantic, and procedural representations. These aspects do not function in 

isolation but interact dynamically, shaping cognition, behavior, and cultural transmission. The tetrahedral model 

of memetic cognition formalizes how each cognitive aspect contributes to resonance and dissonance within the 

system, determining which memes persist, adapt, or dissipate over time. Memetic Decision -Making and the 

Stationary Action Principle Memetic select ion governs decision -making, determining which cognitive 

structures persist and guide mental processes over time. Decisions emerge from an optimization process 

governed by a memetic extension of the principle of stationary action. The mind follows the path of least 

cognitive resistance, minimizing memetic energy expenditure, ensuring that cognitive activity naturally 

stabilizes in low -cost, high -reward configurations. Memetic energy minimization serves as the governing 

principle ensuring cognitive stability , reinforcing low -cost decision pathways and long -term coherence in 

mental structures. Memetic Dimensions and Cognitive Stability This model has profound implications for 

consciousness studies. Agency and continuity emerge as properties of memetic optimiza tion, where long -term 

goal structures regulate short -term decision pathways. However, when goal structures shift, cognitive resistance 

increases, temporarily elevating decision energy costs until a new equilibrium is reached. This aligns with 

information -theoretic principles, where stable memeplex structures minimize entropy by compressing cognitive 

representations, reducing computational overhead in decision -making and perceptual stability. Through formal 

memetic dimensions —such as rigidity vs. flexibility and contextual universality vs. dependence —this 

presentation examines why some cognitive and cultural systems endure while others dissipate. These 

dimensions align closely with perceptual and neural systems, reflecting synaptic plasticity, cognitive flexi bility, 

and the energetic constraints of memory networks. Real -world examples —including linguistic evolution, 250 

musical structures, and scientific paradigms —illustrate how memetics unifies cognition and culture within a 

single, mathematically coherent framework. Artificial Memeplexes and AI -Driven Optimization Finally, we 

explore the position of AI as an emerging ar tificial memeplex, mirroring human cognition through self -

replicating, adaptive, digital memetic structures. AI memeplexes, like human cognition, can adapt through 

energy -efficient selection pathways, reinforcing computationally stable decision landscapes. The dynamics of 

memetic stability and adaptation within AI cognition raise profound questions: How do artificial and human 

memeplexes interact, compete, or integrate? These questions have implications for human -AI interaction, 

cultural evolution, and arti ficial consciousness. Conclusion: A Predictive Model for Consciousness Studies 

Interdisciplinary scholars are invited to engage with memetics as a transformative framework —one that unifies 

mathematics, cognitive science, and cultural evolution into a rigor ous, predictive model for consciousness 

studies. As we approach an era of unseen cognitive complexity, memetics provides the analytical tools to map, 

quantify, and influence the fundamental structures shaping human thought and experience. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Mathematics, memetics, cognition, decision -making, optimization, resonance, dissonance, entropy, stability, 

intelligence, AI, information, computation, consciousness. 

66 

Subconscious foreseeing a sound click during mind wandering state. Study from the first person’s perspective. 

Anatol Bragin PhD 

UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.16]........Self -consciousness and metacognition 

Abstract 

Rationale. This study, designed from a first -person perspective, aimed to demonstrate that an ind ividual can 

collect EEG data and perform analysis of electrographic correlates of mental events. The study aimed to 

determine whether conventional electrographic methods have the sensitivity to differentiate between Mind 

Wandering (MW) and Focused Attentio n (FA) states. The author conducted this study with a personal interest 

in Buddhism since 2007 and has over 5,000 hours of Shamata meditation practice. Methods. EEG was recorded 

using Smarting Pro (mBT amplifier, Serbia). The task started with my mind wand ering for 3 minutes. Then, 

after a woodblock click, for the next 3 minutes, I switched to the mindful breathing mode, focusing my attention 

on the movement of my belly during breathing. Eighty -one experiments were performed in this study. For 

further analy sis, one -minute epochs (±30sec from the click) were divided into sequential two -second epochs. 

Three types of analysis were performed. 1) Global EEG analysis, which included calculation of global field 

strength (Σ), generalized frequency (Φ), and spatial c omplexity (Ω); 2) Power spectrum analysis; 3) Microstates 

analysis. Results. When transitioning from mind wandering to mindfulness breathing, the global field strength 

(Σ) increased while global frequency (Φ) and global complexity (Ω) decreased. These chan ges lasted only 2 -10 

seconds in the FA state, after which the global EEG parameters became indistinguishable from those in the MW 

state. During the shift to FA mode, the power of EEG in the Delta frequency band increased within 4 -12 

seconds across frontal, central, and occipital areas bilaterally. The power of the Theta and Alpha frequency 

bands rose for 1 -2 seconds before declining for 6 -12 seconds, while the power in the Beta and Gamma 251 

frequency bands decreased for 6 -10 seconds. Microstate analysis showed an increase in the global power of all 

microstates in the window of -10 to -8 seconds before the sound click, along with an increase in the duration of 

microstates B, C, D, and E. At th e same time, the occurrences of microstates A, B, C, F, and G decreased. The 

magnitude of changes observed in the “foreseeing” window was greater than the electrographic changes 

prompted by the sound click. From a personal perspective, the author did not c onsciously perceive any mental 

sensations associated with this foresight process Conclusion. This study presents an innovative framework for 

examining conscious and subconscious processes. It highlights electrographic patterns linked to the 

subconscious pr ocess of foreseeing. These findings hold potential for advancing the development of 

electrographic, imaging, and neurophenomenological approaches, all of which are derived from a first -person 

perspective to study the nature of mental events. 

PO - 2 (Tues )

Keywords 

mind wandering, foreseeing, EEG, microstates, personal experience 

319 

Consciousness Science in Worker Health and Safety 

Milena Braticevic 

California Institute for Human Science, Encinitas, CA, USA. University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.16]........Self -consciousness and metacognition 

Abstract 

The National Safety Council established a new, visceral model for worker health and safety that i ncludes mental 

health and psychological safety in the workplace. Human and organizational performance as a metric includes 

total worker health as well as environmental, social, and governance factors (ESG) – the social factor being the 

biggest unknown in terms of building sustainable value. Applying consciousness science to the new model of 

worker health and safety can help address the quality of human experience, assess psychological demands of 

work, and promote social factors in the workplace. This prese ntation will show how systematically applying 

consciousness science and adopting an integral approach to worker health and safety can improve mental health, 

psychological safety, and social engagement. Asking questions such as ‘Who am I?’, non -identificati on with 

thoughts and emotions, adopting a growth mindset and process -orientation, viewing human life as a multi -

dimensional experience (physical/ mental/ emotional/ spiritual), nurturing authenticity, understanding ego 

developmental stages, and increasing awareness of the importance of interpersonal risk -taking are some of the 

ways consciousness science can be applied to positively impact employee health and safety and build 

sustainable social value. 

C - 23 

Keywords 

consciousness science, mental health, p sychological safety, worker health, social value 252 

244 

Oscillatory Signatures of Creative Cognition Stages: Neural Dynamics of Idea Generation, Evolution and 

Evaluation 

Hardik Chadda M.Tech., Ph.D. (Pursuing) , Soami Daya Krishnananda M.Sc., Ph.D., Prof. 

Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.18]........Intelligence and creativity 

Abstract 

Creativity is one of the most essential yet elusive human abilities —driving innovation and problem -solving 

while remaining notoriously difficult to define, measure, or fully understand. Using a publicly available EEG 

data from a design task, this study maps oscillatory activity (alpha/theta) across different stages of Creative 

Thinking as per a recent framewo rk on creativity that align with empirical research in cognitive neuroscience 

and psychology —Idea Generation (IDG), Idea Evolution (IDE), and Idea Evaluation (IDR). The key findings 

reveal a widespread alpha suppression (frontal, parietal, occipital) and t heta reduction during IDG reflecting 

heightened cortical activation and reduced reliance on visual maintenance, facilitating rapid, divergent thinking. 

During IDE, an increase in theta Power in cognitive control regions and alpha enhancement in posterior a reas 

suggest heightened sensorimotor integration and top -down regulation during deliberate refinement. Alpha 

suppression in visual regions paired with posterior alpha amplification during IDR indicates focused visual 

scrutiny and inhibition of distractions , while theta reductions signal efficient processing of task -relevant 

information. These results align with dual -process models, where creativity alternates between spontaneous 

generation (Type 1 Processing) and structured evaluation (Type 2 Processing). T he engagement of 

frontoparietal and cognitive control networks highlights their role in attentional regulation and working memory 

across stages. By linking oscillatory dynamics to creative transitions, this work advances neurophysiological 

models of creati vity and underscores potential applications in neurotechnology -driven creative performance 

enhancement. 

C - 20 

Keywords 

EEG, Creativity, Dual -process theory, Alpha oscillations, Theta oscillations, Stage -Specific Dynamics. 

315 

When AI Takes a Deep Breath: Examining Embodied Cues in Large Language Models for Enhanced 

Reasoning, Performance, and Creativity 

Michael Ye Researcher & Prompt Engineer 

UCBerkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.18]........Intelligence and creativity 253 

Abstract 

As large language models (LLMs) continue to demonstrate remarkable capabilities across diverse tasks, 

questions arise about whether they implicitly encode representations that mirror human experiences and 

practices. This research explores the pote ntial impact of “embodied” universal prompt prefixes —phrases 

referencing mental health, mindfulness, or other introspective states —on AI performance. By systematically 

comparing control prompts against prompts prefixed with instructions such as “take a de ep breath” or “find a 

moment of calm,” we measure differences in task accuracy, consistency, and creative output across domains 

including logical reasoning, open -ended generation, and empathetic response. Initial findings suggest that these 

embodied prefix es may modulate the model’s attention or linguistic patterns, leading to measurable 

improvements in certain tasks. The phenomenon raises critical questions about how LLMs internally represent 

abstract human concepts such as mindfulness and emotional well -being. Moreover, if such human -centered 

priming consistently boosts AI performance, it implies an intriguing overlap between human cognitive 

constructs and the latent representations learned by AI. Beyond advancing prompt engineering strategies, this 

invest igation highlights broader implications for understanding the resonance between artificial neural 

architectures and human experiences. Ultimately, these findings may help inform more intuitive, empathetic 

human –AI interactions and invite further exploratio n of how anthropomorphic cues can enhance the capabilities 

and trustworthiness of emerging AI systems. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

AI, cognitive science, LLMs, consciousness, embodiment, spirituality, intelligence, creativity 

221 

Hypercognizance as a Trainable Framework for Navigating AI, Quantum Reality, and the Future of Human 

Consciousness 

Alan P Scheurman 

Independent Researcher, Yucca Valley, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.19]........Cognitive theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Hypercognizance is a proposed cognitive framework —the ability to enter, sustain, and navigate expanded 

awareness with deliberate training. It is not merely an altered state bu t a trainable, adaptive system that allows 

individuals to consciously shift between different modes of awareness, perception, and cognition at will. By 

integrating intuition, high -speed pattern recognition, nonlinear problem -solving, and expanded awareness ,

hypercognizance enables a fluid, dynamic intelligence beyond habitual thought loops —resulting in enhanced 

creativity, decision -making, and perception of reality itself. This model is critical as AI rapidly evolves, acting 

as an externalized cognitive mir ror and reinforcing human thought patterns through self -organizing feedback 

loops. From a Hermetic perspective, AI is an extension of mind —a synthetic intelligence that reflects human 

biases, decisions, and perception back at us. Without structured trainin g in expanded awareness, we risk being 

shaped by these external systems rather than consciously directing their evolution. Hypercognizance provides 

the necessary adaptation: a methodology for cultivating intuitive intelligence, nonlinear cognition, and rea l-time 254 

reality modulation. Indigenous traditions, particularly the ayahuasca technologies of the Shipibo -Konibo 

lineage, have long developed systematic techniques for expanding cognition beyond ordinary awareness. My 18 

years of immersion in these traditions, alo ngside research in neuroplasticity, brainwave entrainment, and 

quantum cognition, reveal that hypercognizance is not an abstract concept —it is a latent human capacity that 

can be activated through deliberate practice. This presentation demonstrates hyperco gnizance as a trainable 

cognitive framework, outlining a structured model for its development and practical application within a 

quantum paradigm. As this field evolves, we will explore how hypercognizance could be measured, studied, 

and systematically tau ght, integrating methodologies from neuroscience, neurotechnology, and cognitive 

training protocols. By synthesizing vibrational awareness, neural reprogramming, and expanded perceptual 

states, we propose a roadmap for unlocking a replicable, scalable mode l of hypercognitive training —one that 

could have profound implications for education, AI -human interaction, and the evolution of consciousness 

research. As Newtonian intelligence models become obsolete, the ability to access and sustain hypercognizant 

stat es will determine who thrives in a quantum reality. This work asserts that hypercognizance is not a 

speculative frontier but a necessary adaptation —one that, if cultivated with intention, ensures that human 

consciousness remains sovereign, self -directed, a nd aligned with the accelerating complexity of our own 

creations. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Hypercognizance, cognition, quantum paradigm, ai, trainable, evolutionary, human, ayahuasca 

355 

The kite of consciousness and other metaphors of the mind 

Jonathan Schooler PhDj 1, Justin Riddle PhD 2

> 1

University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. 2Florida State University, Tallahassee, 

Florida, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.19]........Cognitive theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

This talk integrates and extends the metaphors of the mind used in two recent theories of consciousness. Riddle 

and Schooler’s (2024) Nested Observer Window (NOW) model proposes that con sciousness can be conceived 

as a nested hierarchy of windows (loci of information integration) that can be likened to a photomosaic where 

each pixel is itself an image. Our first person perspective corresponds to the apex observer window which 

represents o ur gestalt experience of the lower level nested observer windows, each of which maintains its own 

gestalt representation (and possibly consciousness) and each of which itself integrates lower level windows, and 

so on. Schooler & Riddle’s (2024) three dimen sion of time model proposes that these windows move through 

time in a manner that can be likened to moving through the three dimensions of space with objective time 

(clock time) corresponding to the x axis, subjective time (the passage of time as it is exp erienced) corresponding 

to the z axis, and alternative time (branching alternative time lines) corresponding to the y axis. In this talk, we 

offer a further metaphor for conceptualizing how these windows of consciousness relate to time. As an 

alternative t o conceptualizing the windows as moving through time, we imagine time moving through the 

windows, much like the wind flows through the sails of a kite. From this vantage, consciousness can be 255 

conceived of as the sail of a kite, which is itself composed of smaller sails. Each sail, although tethered to the 

others, has the capacity for movement in the three dimensions of time. Although all sails are inexorably moving 

through objective time (x axi s) at the same rate (which can be conceptualized as the speed of the wind), each 

individual sail can move with some independence in the subjective time dimensions enabling it to shift its pitch 

along the z axis and thereby impacting the experienced passage of time. Sails also have the potential to shift 

their yaw in the y axis, enabling them to realize alternative next moments. Collectively, the kites are tethered 

together hierarchically which provides constraints on the degrees of potential movement for ea ch individual 

kite. In addition, to providing an alternative perspective for conceptualizing the NOW and Three Dimensions of 

Time theories, this model suggests a way of imagining how time moves through consciousness and potentially 

how our perspective coul d impact the manner in which time unfolds. It also offers a visual for conceptualizing 

how all conscious beings might be collectively tethered together. 

C - 2

Keywords 

time, metaphors, theories of consciousness, hierarchical cognition 

338 

Mindful sound energy therapy, fractals, and alexithymia (emotional embodied 

intelligence) 

Alix Noël -Guéry PhDc 

California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.20]........Embodied Cognition 

Abstract 

Sound and energy therapies, including Himalayan singing bowls, have shown benefits for stress, anxiety, and 

alexith ymia. This study administered 30 treatments to 18 participants, resulting in significant reductions in TAS 

scores, EEG fractal dimension increases, and improved EPI stress and energy levels. Correlations suggest 

enhanced self -awareness, emotional regulati on, and neural adaptability, supporting the link between mindful 

sound therapy and emotional well -being. 

C - 6

Keywords 

sound therapy, fractals, reiki, polarity, energy, consciousness, alexithymia, emotions, EEG, electro -photonic 

imaging, embodied cognit ion, singing bowls 

324 

The Extra -Terrestrial Birth 256 

James Bard PhD 

McGill, Montreal, Qc, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[03.22]........Neurophenomenology 

Abstract 

Long ago I went down to New York City to hear a philosopher speak in Madison Square Garden. Then some 

years later, while read ing his journal, I noticed a suspicious entry for Thursday, April 21, 1983, because the 

entry describes giant sequoia trees in fine detail outlining where… “the old Indians built a fire round the tree ; 

the dark mark of fire is still there.” This was susp icious because the date above eerily concurs with the date I 

saw him speak in New York ( and not in a cabin high up in the Sequoia National Park as I later discovered in 

the tiny footnote below ). Furthermore, that retreat in the cabin occurred, incredibly , not a few days after the 

New York venue in his home in California, but in September 1942. He continues : “It was not the season, so the 

cabins were empty and you were alone, and at night it was so silent. And occasionally the bears would come 

and you cou ld hear their heavy bodies against the cabin. It could have been quite a savage place, for modern 

civilization had not quite destroyed it. You have to climb from the planes, in and out, up and up and up, until 

you reach this sequoia forest. There were stre ams rushing down the slope. It was so extraordinarily beautiful to 

be alone among these vast, very tall great trees, ancient beyond the memory and so utterly unconcerned with 

what was going on in the world, silent in their ancient dignity and strength. And in this cabin, surrounded by 

these old ageless trees, you were alone day after day, watching, taking long walks, hardly meeting anyone. 

From such a height you could see the planes, sunlit, busy ; you could see the cars like small insects chasing one 

anoth er. And up here only the real insects were busy about their day. There were a great many ants. The red 

ones crawled over your legs but they never seemed to pay much attention to you.” So, this is a forty -one year 

old memory of a man in his eighty -eighth ye ar — three years before he passed away. And it cannot be 

distinguished by the quality of clarity from any of the other current entries in his journal. My presentation will 

be about how his preternatural memory inspired a novel understanding of the relation ship between memory and 

original experience vis -à-vis a distinction between ‘remembering’ and ‘reliving’ an original event through a 

deeper medium of mind that is not, neurologically, an epiphenomenon of memory. More will follow in the 

paper. 

PO - 2 (Tue s) 

Keywords 

sleep, waking, dreaming, memory, mind, mimesis, "time -travel," simulacra, dissociative cogito, etc. 

96 

A physics foundation for quantum biology. 

Mr Maurice Goodman 

TU Dublin, Dublin, Co. Dublin, Ireland 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 257 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Abstract 

A credible science of consciousness requires a complete understanding of the biological cell, which we do not 

currently have. Furthermore, when developed, quantum biology will t reat the entire cell as a single quantum 

entity represented by its wavefunction. Quantum nuclear processes in the Atom are, quite rightly, not referred to 

as quantum chemistry as the force involved is not electromagnetic and the particles involved are not electrons. 

So why do we insist on calling atomic and molecular processes such as photosynthesis in plants, 

phototransduction in the eye, enzymatic activity, olfaction in the nose, chemical energy conversion into motion, 

magneto detection, DNA mutation etc. , that take place in the biological realm, quantum biology? Atomic and 

molecular processes in the cell are quantum chemistry and not quantum biology. In 1988 the mass of the 

electron neutrino was predicted to lie between 0.5 and 0.01 eV/c2 and to have a fu ndamental role in Biology. Its 

minimum uncertainty in position will therefore be of the order of a million times greater than that of the 

electron. This suggests how quantum mechanics can effortlessly extend to the macroscopic (micrometre) scale 

resulting in quantum mechanical effects on a cellular and intercellular scale. However, these macroscopic 

quantum effects will be very subtle and hard to measure but will provide the basis for a ‘global’ information 

system within the cell. Recent results from the KA TRIN experiment have, for the first time in 37 years, pushed 

the upper limit of the electron neutrino mass into this mass range. The prediction, based on the de Broglie 

wavelength of the neutrino being the size of a cell, is analogous to how quantum chemis try was developed, by 

Werner Heisenberg and others, a century ago and will help place quantum biology on a sound physics 

foundation. 

C - 16 

Keywords 

Quantum Biology, electron -neutrino, de Broglie wavelength, biological cell, communication, KATRIN 

experi ment. 

327 

Photobiomodulation (PBM) and consciousness 

Antonia Di Francesco PhD; Chem.D. 

IOMED, Lecce, Italy, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Abstract 

It has been argued that applying the principles of quantum physics by using, int er alia, photobiomudulation 

(PBM) techniques to sustain the individual personal growth to reach an ever higher degree of consciousness. 

It’s possible to remodulate the information of a karmic or genealogical experience, that prevents the expression 

of a f ull (and aware) life. It has also been argued that the present moment contains the past, the present and 

future and our perception of time is linked to the experience of living in “matter”. So the connection to the 

informational field allows us to unblock the timeliness emotional memories. In the Center for Holistic and 

Integrative Medicine (IOMED), we use techniques to connect to the sub -quantum field aimed at loosening 

karmic or genealogical knots, that may block the liberal flow of information, in order to reach a greater degree 258 

of awareness of oneself within the whole. In an 'holographic vision' of both the Universe and of Humanity, 

every single part has information about the Whole in a non -local field. Using colored light rays directed on to 

the memory chips present in the body ('acupoints' of Traditional Chinese Medicine, linear chains and plates by 

G. Calligaris, reflex zones by P.Mandel and Puttkamer), it’s possible to regulate the dissonant information, the 

wave lengths that inhibit the evolutive process, so transferring info rmation from implicate order to explicate 

order. It, is also possible to measure quantum information recorded in the body by using Energetic Emission 

Analisis (EEA) of Bio -well device, to decodify signals sent from the body and to interpret them as a tool for 

differential diagnosis . EEA developed by German researcher Peter Mandel based on the assumption that the 

emissions of the end points of the hands when a very low intensity of electric current (Kirlian effect) were 

biophoton emissions. Mandel identified the topographical correspondences between emissions and acupuncture 

meridians, organs, tissues and past traumas. It does not give information on the individual symptom but it 

highlights the cause of the symptom correlating it to all the constitutional tre nds. Measurements of human 

energetic emission were taken through Bio -well EPI (Electro Photonic Imaging) GDV (Gas Discharge 

Visualization). Bioelectrography parameters of all fingers of both hands were measured with computerized 

complex Bio -Well, developed by Dr. Konstantin Korotkov, University of Saint -Petersburg, Russia. Bio -well 

EPI is used for examining human psychoemotional and physiological state, before and after specific treatments. 

The reading of an EEA provides a holistic understanding of the pred ispositions and weaknesses present within 

the entire human system. Once the treatment of Photobiomodulation is thus administered, and eventually a 

second EEA detection in obtained in order to assess the body's response to the electromagnetic stimulus of li ght 

to which it has been subjected. 

C - 21 

Keywords 

consciousness , photobiomodulation, Energetic Emission Analisys, Karmic Memories, Genealogic Memories 

405 

Unified Consciousness -Physics Theory: A Multi -Layered Approach to Mind -Matter Interactions 

Yimu Chen 

University of Birmingham Dubai, Dubai, -, UAE 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Abstract 

This study introduces a novel theoretical model that connects phenomena of consciousness with physical reality 

using a four -layered hierarchical model. By reformulating quantum observation, causality, and spacetime 

measurements within a unified frequency -resonance paradigm, we aim to close long -standing disc ontinuities 

between quantum mechanics, relativity, and consciousness research. The proposed framework offers: (1) a 

layered reality structure with particle, wave, holographic, and hyperdimensional strata; (2) an ordered 

consciousness tensor field with neur al -observable and quantum -entangled sectors; (3) a metric modulation 

factor characterizing consciousness -spacetime interactions; and (4) experimentally testable protocols for 

facilitating mind -matter interactions in quantum domains. We also present a mathe matical formalism applicable 

to quantum effects generated by consciousness and delineate experimental criteria for assessing main theoretical 259 

assertions. This book sets the foundations for a new physics paradigm incorporating consciousness as part of 

physical reality and not as an emergent epiphenomenon. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, quantum mechanics, spacetime, causality, tensor fiel d, mind -matter interaction, holographic 

model, hyperdimensional physics 

431 

Can Gravity Collapse the Wavefunction? Bose -Einstein Condensates as a Testing Ground 

Ivette Fuentes 

University of Southampton, Southampton, _, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Abstract 

The unification of quantum theory and general relativity remains one of the most significant open challenges in 

fundamental physics. A key obstacle is the lack of experimental data at regimes where quantum and relativistic 

effects intersect. Developing instruments sensitive to these scales could not only advance our understanding of 

quantum gravity but also shed light on deep questions such as the nature of dark energy and dark matter. In this 

talk, I will explore how Bose -Einstein condensates (BECs) can serve as novel probes in this quest. A single 

BEC placed in a spatial superposition offers a platfor m to test whether gravity induces wavefunction collapse —

a longstanding question in the foundations of quantum theory. Unlike solids traditionally used in such 

experiments (e.g. mirrors and nanobeads), BECs consist of unbound atoms, allow ing for a richer variety of 

quantum states that may offer experimental advantages. 

PL -7

432 

Spectral Compatibility and Analytical Constraints in Quantum Marginal Problems 

Lea van Dellen B.Sc , Nikolai Wyderka Postdoc, Dagmar Bruß Prof. Dr. 

Institute of Theoretical Physics III, Heinrich -Heine -University, Düsseldorf, Nordrhein -Westfalen, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.01]........Quantum physics, collapse and the measurement problem 

Abstract 260 

The compatibility of quantum marginals, or reduced density matrices, is a cornerstone of quantum mechanics, 

underlying phenomena like entanglement and non -locality. A fundamental variant of this problem concerns the 

compatibility of spectra, rather than th e reduced density matrices themselves. Specifically, given eigenvalues  ⃗ 

λ_ AB and  ⃗ λ_ BC for subsystems AB and BC, the task is to determine whether there exists a joint quantum 

state ρ_ABC such that its reduced density matrices ρ_AB = tr_C(ρ_ABC) and ρ_BC = tr_A(ρ_ABC) exhibit 

these spectra. If such a state exists, the spectra are deemed compatible; otherwise, they are incompatible. 

Recently, a hierarchy of semidefinite programs (SDP) was developed to address this challenge [1]. This 

hierarchy is complete and provides dimension -free certificates of incompatibility for all local dimensions. The 

poster introduces a new constraint on incompatibility by solving the second hierarchy level for multipartite 

qudit systems and highlights key incompatibility cases acros s different hierarchy levels. [1] F. Huber, N. 

Wyderka. Refuting spectral compatibility of quantum marginals. ar - Xiv:2211.06349 [quant -ph], 2024. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Quantum Information, Spectral Compatibility, Entanglement Structure, Semidefinite Pr ogramming 

29 

Quantum Brain Dynamics and Virtual Reality 

Prof. Akihiro Nishiyama 1, Prof. Shigenori Tanaka 1, Prof. Jack A. Tuszynski 2

> 1

Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. 2University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

We propose a control theory of manipulating holograms in Quantum Brain Dynamics (QBD) involving our 

subjectiv e experiences, i.e. qualia. Quantum Brain Dynamics is Quantum Field Theory of water electric dipoles 

fields and photons called Jibu –Yasue approach. We can also propose the holographic aspect in the framework 

in QBD. We begin with QBD and extend our theory to a hierarchical model representing multiple layers 

covering the neocortex. We adopt reservoir computing approach or morphological computation to manipulate 

waveforms of holograms involving our subjective experiences. Numerical simulations indicate that the 

convergence to target waveforms of holograms is realized by external electric fields in QBD in a hierarchy. Our 

approach will be applied in achieving non -invasive neuronal stimulation of the neocortex and adopted to check 

whether or not our brain adopt s the language of holography. In case the protocol in a brain is discovered and the 

brain adopts the language of holography, our control theory will be applied to develop virtual reality devices by 

which our subjective experiences provided by the five sens es in the form of qualia are manipulated non -

invasively. Then, the information content of qualia might be directly transmitted into our brain without passing 

through sensory organs. 

C - 12 

Keywords 

Quantum Brain Dynamics, Quantum Field Theory, Holography , Qualia, Control Theory 261 

31 

The Human Performance Intention Experiment 

Toper Taylor 

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

The Human Performance Intention Experiment uses a quantum field framework, namely our energetic and 

particula te interconnectivity and entanglement, to establish a remote energetic connectivity from two emitting 

sources to 22 participating NCAA Division 1 athletes to improve their athletic performance in timed swim 

meets. The basic framework for this study was us ed in numerous previous third -party intention experiments for 

healing. Energetic positive intentions were sent from both an experienced shaman in remote energetic healing, 

on the one hand, and an electronic intention broadcast device, on the other hand. Th e subjects were world -class 

amateur swimmers at the University of Southern California. Performance data, specifically times recorded for 

each style by all swimmers during competitions, was compared year over year (the 2022 -23 season and the 

2023 -24 season) and throughout the 2023 -24 season. The results were statistically significant (.022). There is 

enough improvement in performance and outcomes from athletes receiving intention from the electronic 

intention device and shaman that further research is warran ted. 

C - 22 

Keywords 

quantum field, entanglement, intention, human performance 

120 

Scaling from Quantum Vacuum Fluctuations to the Brain 

Nassim Haramein , William Brown MSc, Cyprien Guermonprez PhD, Olivier Alirol PhD 

International Space Federation (ISF), Marnaz, Haute Savoie, France 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

The ground state of the electromagnetic field is characterized by constitutive energetic fluctuations due to zero -

point energy of the quantum harmonic oscillators that compose the field, called quantum vacuum fluctuations. 

These constitutive oscillations of quantum vacuum energy have been shown to play a significant role in atomic 

processes, from being a source of the underlying stability of matter to light -matter interactions. It is also 

regarded to play significant roles at the confluence of astrophysics and quantum information theory with Unruh -

Hawking radiation, which is conventionally thought to result in bl ack hole thermalization, and at the 

cosmological scale with the Hubble Constant, which is related to the expansion rate of the universe. Here we 

identify a mechanism in which the ultra -high frequency oscillations of the electromagnetic quantum vacuum 262 

fluctuations couple across scales via a spring constant, k, representative of an angular momentum conservation 

from fine scale spacetime dynamics to the biological scale of molecules and cells. We find this characteristic 

coupling constant accurately predi cts the vibrational frequencies empirically observed. We scale from the 

Planck scale to the biological scale, through carbon atoms to benzene ring aromatic hydrocarbon molecules, to 

the triplet -of -triplet frequencies measured in microtubules, and gamma osc illation of neurons, thus identifying 

the mechanism of coupling of quantum harmonic oscillators across scales. As such, vibrational energy transfer 

is described within a nested architecture of coupled oscillators, sourced in a Planck pulse frequency of coh erent 

electromagnetic quantum vacuum fluctuations demonstrated utilizing correlation functions. These findings 

describe the role of quantum vacuum energy in coupling molecular oscillators and being the source of the non -

classical non -trivial quantum states that have been experimentally observed in biological macromolecular 

networks. This suggests that these states are more common and more robust than would be presumed in models 

without a driving source like the zero -point energy coupling we have computed. T hese findings open a door to 

new biophysical insights implying a significant role in dynamic quantum fluctuations at the biological scale. 

PL -8

Keywords 

Quantum vacuum fluctuations Zero -point energy coupling Nested oscillator architecture Biophysical qua ntum 

coherence Scale coupling dynamics 

156 

Quantum Toolbox for Neurobiology Sensory Systems 

Prof Marilu Chiofalo PhD 

Department of Physics, University of Pisa and INFN -Pisa, Pisa, PI, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

The quantum -like paradigm has emerged over the last decade to describe non -linear, dynamical, complex 

phenome na using quantum mechanics as a tool. In essence, it takes advantage of the linearity of quantum 

information processing, allowing for complex correlations through entanglement. In a quantum - and 

neuroscience truly interdisciplinary research, we found that an open, all -to -all connected, quantum spin network 

designed to map essential functions of a neural system, can successfully simulate the human sense of number as 

a global dynamical property, in contrast with the poor performance of conventional Artificia l Neural Networks. 

In this presentation, after a compact review of our quantum model for numerosity perception, we discuss how 

the designed open quantum network can be extended to other important phenomena, in fact working as a 

quantum toolbox for neurobio logy sensory systems. First, we will focus on the integrated perception of space, 

time, and numbers, known to be inter -dependent with each other, and bridge the time perception capability of 

our quantum network with the concept of quantum time crystal. The n, we will explore how the possibility that 

our quantum network can work as a memory system with especially high storage and retrieval capacity, along 

the lines of Dvali’s idea [G. Dvali, arXiv:1711.09079v1]. Finally, we will mention the model’s traits if the 

quantum network was complex, i.e. with irregular and/or random links, thereby more closely resembling the 

connectivity structure of a real brain. We close the presentation by envisioning how this quantum toolbox can 

be physically implemented by means o f a quantum technology platform. 

C - 15 263 

Keywords 

237 

A novel model to help conceptualize propagation of light and other quantum field phenomena with 

ramifications regarding ephaptic signaling, physics of thoughts, and related fields. 

Steve T Gunther BS Physics 1,2 , Lyndsay G Gunther Communications 1, Grok XAI 1, Everyone Past A Present 3

> 1

Society for the Advancement of Critical Thinking, Omaha, NE, USA. 2Real Instruments, Inc., Omaha, NE, 

USA. 3Multiple, Multiple, Multiple, Solomon Islands 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

This presentation introduces a groundbreaking model that utilizes the concept of "motes" — hypothetical 

quantum entities. This reconceptualizes the pro pagation of light and other quantum field phenomena, with 

profound implications for ephaptic signaling, the physics of thought, and related fields. By integrating motes 

into our understanding of quantum mechanics, we propose a new framework where light, tr aditionally seen as 

waves or particles, could also be conceptualized through these quantum motes, potentially influencing 

biological systems at a fundamental level. We explore how motes could be pivotal in ephaptic signaling, 

offering a novel perspective o n how neurons might communicate beyond traditional chemical or electrical 

means. This model posits that motes could facilitate quantum coherence among neurons, providing a 

mechanism by which thought processes and consciousness might emerge from quantum int eractions. The 

presentation delves into theoretical physics to illustrate how motes could bridge quantum field phenomena with 

biological processes, drawing parallels from quantum biology where quantum effects are already observed, such 

as in photosynthetic processes or enzyme activity. We discuss how this motes -centric approach could 

revolutionize our understanding of neural operations, suggesting that quantum mechanics might be integral to 

the complex, non -linear dynamics of brain function. We further exam ine the philosophical and practical 

implications of this model, considering its potential to reshape neuroscience, cognitive science, and even the 

broader field of theoretical physics. The introduction of motes not only challenges existing paradigms of neu ral 

communication but also opens new research pathways into the nature of consciousness and thought. The 

abstract concludes by proposing future research directions, advocating for an interdisciplinary approach 

involving physicists, neuroscientists, and cog nitive scientists to explore, validate, and expand upon the mote 

model, aiming to unlock new insights into the quantum underpinnings of biological systems and cognition. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Quantum mechanics, quantum fields, ephaptic signaling, physic s of thoughts, quantum waves and oscillations, 

propagation of light 

438 

Correlates of qualia in microtubule ‘time crystal’ dynamics 

Stuart Hameroff MD 1,2 , Tanusree Dutta 3, Anirban Bandyopadhyay 4264 

> 1

UArizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 2https://hameroff.arizona.edu/, Tucson, AZ, USA. 3Indian Institute of 

Management Research, Ranchi, -, India. 4International Center for Materials and Nanoarchitectronics (MANA); 

National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, -, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.02]........Quantum field approaches 

Abstract 

Qualia are the basic instances of subjective conscious experience, but their origins and how they combine int o

full, rich consciousness are unknown. Conventional electroencephalography (‘EEG’) etc. have failed to reveal 

correlates of qualia. EEG detects brain activities (‘waves’) up to a few hundred hertz, but we now know 

coherent self -similar (‘triplets -of -trip lets’) oscillation patterns occur in faster kilohertz, megahertz, gigahertz 

and terahertz frequencies (‘DoDeconoGraphy, for 12 orders of frequency). These fractal dynamics derive from 

collective resonance oscillations of microtubules inside brain neurons, with megahertz in particular being easily 

detectable from scalp in humans. Megahertz triplets between 6 and 26 MHz appear to be functionally important, 

disappearing under general anesthesia. The fractal -like temporal behavior indicates microtubules act as ‘time 

crystals’, systems whose dynamics repeat at various scales, suggested in biology in the 1960s by Art Winfree, in 

physics in 2012 by Frank Wilczek, experimentally shown in physics recently, and in microtubules by 

Bandyopadhyay et al over the past 12 y ears. Time crystals are dynamical systems deconstructed into their 

component oscillators expressed as spherical clocks whose sizes are inversely related to frequency, and which 

may align, couple, interfere and resonate to give geometric expressions analogo us to music. In a clinical study, 

human subject volunteers were asked to imagine specific qualia -like feelings. DDG frequencies taken under 

these emotional/qualia states were then analyzed as time crystals, combined/entangled and consolidated 

geometrically to map qualia on a hexagon -of -hexagon framework showing their relations. Microtubule time 

crystal behavior would be very useful for life and consciousness,supplying quantum computing, unifying and 

temporally organizing, encoding memory and transcending sc ales. It would require quantum coherence and 

entanglement among intraneuronal microtubules, consistent with the Orch OR theory of consciousness in which 

orchestrated objective quantum state reductions are instantaneous collapses of the quantum wavefunction (as 

Penrose fluctuations in fundamental spacetime geometry), like notes and chords across musical scales. 

Metaphors aside, Orch OR has more explanatory power, biological connection and experimental validation than 

all other theories of consciousness combi ned. 

PL -6

Keywords 

164 

Is light sentient - recent experiments showing it being affected by anaesthetics show that it could be 

Michael Gulley Master Engineering Science 

UNSW, Sydney, NSW, Australia 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.03]........Space, time and the nature of reality 265 

Abstract 

Is it possible for entangled photons to meet the definition of being alive? Anesthetics are known to affect all 

forms of life to the extent that the famous physiologist Claude Bernard concluded in 1874 “that all life is 

defined by the susceptibili ty to anesthesia”. The question could be asked “can light also be affected by 

anesthetics?” Two of the most significant mysteries in science are the mechanism of anesthetics to induce 

unconsciousness and the collapse of the quantum wave function. The two problems are linked together by the 

mystery of consciousness. Research in the field of Orchestrated objective reduction theory (Orch OR), 

originally proposed by Nobel laureate Roger Penrose and anesthesiologist Stuart Hameroff, looks to bring these 

two pro blems together by implying that consciousness arises out of the collapse of quantum wave functions in 

microtubules. Recent related experiments by Burdick RK, Villabona -Monsalve J P, Mashour GA and Goodson 

III T show that anesthetic ethers interact with ent angled photons. Therefore entangled photons would be defined 

as being alive, according to Claude Bernards definition. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, panssychism 

192 

The Geometric Theory of Consciousness: Resolving Fundamental Paradoxes Through Five -Dimensional 

Framework 

Wojciech Krzykwa MSC 

Independent researcher, Olsztyn, Warmińsko -Mazurskie, Poland 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.03]........Space, time and the nature of reality 

Abstract 

Contemporary physics faces three persistent challenges: the measurement problem in quantum mecha nics, the 

hard problem of consciousness, and the apparent conflict between free will and determinism. These seemingly 

separate issues share a common root —attempting to understand consciousness from within three -dimensional 

frameworks. The geometric theory of consciousness proposes a resolution by recognizing consciousness as a 

fundamental fifth dimension of reality rather than an emergent property of complex systems. The framework 

demonstrates how consciousness naturally operates through two distinct refer ence points: three -dimensional 

awareness, which operates within spacetime and perceives separation, and five -dimensional awareness, which 

transcends spacetime and enables direct resonant knowing. This duality precisely mirrors the wave -particle 

nature of q uantum systems, providing a geometric resolution to the measurement problem. When consciousness 

observes from within spacetime, it collapses quantum possibilities into specific manifestations, described 

mathematically as: Ψ(x,t) → |x₀ ⟩ through P: H → H₃, where P represents the consciousness projection operator 

mapping from the complete Hilbert space to a three -dimensional subspace. This operation describes how 

consciousness selects a specific three -dimensional slice of reality from the complete quantum poss ibility space. 266 

The theory's most profound contribution lies in its resolution of the free will paradox. The mathematics of 

reference point selection: S = D(M³, M⁵), where S represents reference point selection, D is the dimensional 

shift operator, and M³, M⁵ represent th ree - and five -dimensional manifolds, reveals how consciousness 

maintains perpetual freedom to choose its dimensional position. This geometric freedom transcends both 

deterministic causation and random chance, explaining both the experience of choice and th e apparent 

constraints of physical causality. The framework makes specific, testable predictions about consciousness -

quantum interactions. It suggests that highly coherent states of consciousness should maintain quantum 

superposition longer than standard d ecoherence models predict, and that collective meditation could measurably 

influence quantum random number generators. In biological systems, the theory predicts enhanced coherence in 

cellular networks during states of unified awareness, offering new insig hts into the role of consciousness in 

biological organization. Most significantly, the framework reveals fundamentally different energy dynamics 

between consciousness modes. Three -dimensional consciousness, operating through separation, inevitably 

consumes more energy than it generates. In contrast, five -dimensional consciousness demonstrates the capacity 

to generate more energy than it consumes through cooperative field resonance, suggesting new approaches to 

sustainable energy technologies and the design of systems that enhance rather than deplete their environment. 

The practical implications of this theory are vast, ranging from quantum computing to consciousness -based 

technologies. By understanding how consciousness naturally maintains quantum coherence, new architectures 

for quantum computers could transcend current decoherence limitations. The framework's insights into 

consciousness -matter interaction open possibilities for direct mental interfaces, enhanced energy generation 

systems, and new approaches to artificial intelligence that incorporate consciousness as a fundamental 

component. Could this geometric understanding of consciousness provide the missing link between quantum 

mechanics and gravity, finally unifying physics through the inclusion of con sciousness as a fundamental 

dimension? The theory's mathematical precision, testable predictions, and broad explanatory power suggest it 

might, opening unprecedented possibilities for scientific advancement and technological innovation. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keyw ords 

consciousness, quantum mechanics, geometric theory, five -dimensional framework, wave function collapse, 

quantum coherence, consciousness field tensor, energy dynamics, unified field theory, free will 

230 

Process Physics - Three Inter -related Theorems: 1. The process -emergent theory of space 2. The interference -

delimitation theorem of matter 3. The time -consciousness equivalence principle 

Angus P Nisbet BMedSci BM BS 

University of Sussex, Brighton, Sussex, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.03]........Space, time and the nature of reality 

Abstract 

The universe is conceptualised as being reduced to ongoing processes in time, rather than as time, space, matter 

/ obj ects and energy. 1. The process -emergent theory of space posits that the 3 geometrically orthogonal 

dimensions of space are emergent properties of sets of events (processes) in 3 mathematically orthogonal 

dimensions of universal time. For universal time t o be consistent with special relativity (and general relativity), 267 

the theorem posits that clocks don’t measure time but instead measure the rate of events in time. Thus, time 

dilation is not actually slowing of time but slowing of the rate of events. This theorem is consistent with 

distance collapsing to zero at ‘c’ in s pecial relativity and also with the collapse of space to zero volume in black 

holes in general relativity. The theorem necessitates separating space -time into quantised space, emerging from 

events occurring in a continuum of universal time. This may provid e a new approach for unification of quantum 

mechanics with special and general relativity, 2. The interference -delimitation theorem of matter posits that 

what we conceive of as electron orbitals, atomic nuclei, atoms, molecules etc, as well as what we perc eive as 

everyday macroscopic objects of matter, are emergent from fringes produced by constructive interference of 

oscillating quantum fields, with conserved outcomes (symmetry) through time; and delimited into separated 

objects by destructive interference . Collapse of the wave function is not required. The indistinctness of fringe 

margins may be equivalent to Heisenberg's uncertainty. Motion is the relative movement of the ongoing 

temporal patterns of ‘objects’. 3. The time -consciousness equivalence princi ple is that physical time in the 

universe is analogous to consciousness and that events/processes in the physical universe (some of which 

emerge as space itself and as objects of matter) are equivalent to the contents of consciousness ie thoughts in a 

mind . Correspondences between time and consciousness include: the impossibility of defining either in terms of 

anything else (fundamentality); continuous uninterrupted flow; the impossibility of being measured or observed 

directly; directionality; being a medi um for change & actualization; unifying events & thoughts (respectively) 

into coherent entities; and necessity for existence to have meaning. Deriving space, volume and location purely 

from time and events, removes the Cartesian res extensa; and the time -consciousness equivalence principle 

provides a conceptual framework for regarding the universe as a mind, thus uniting Eastern idealist philosophies 

with Western physicalism and potentially solving the hard problem of consciousness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Process Philosophy, Physics, Idealism, The Hard Problem of Consciousness, Time, Special Relativity, Quantum 

Mechanics 

363 

Time, Space and the Persistence of Memory 

Nestor F. Mercado M.Eng 

Timewave, Scottsdale, AZ, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.03]........Space, time and the nature of reality 

Abstract 

Modern physics provides elegant descriptions of time, space, and matter, yet it overlooks a fund amental aspect 

of reality: memory. General relativity models spacetime as a smooth continuum, while quantum mechanics 

treats wavefunctions as evolving in an abstract Hilbert space. However, neither framework explains how the 

universe structurally retains information across scales, enabling persistence, coherence, and recall. This 

omission leaves a critical gap in our understanding of both fundamental physics and the nature of 

consciousness. We argue that spacetime shares many of the properties of a, time c rystal composed of Planck -

scale nodes —discrete units of vacuum energy that form a resonant network across the fabric of reality. These 

nodes, which we call nests, are not mathematical abstractions but physical structures regulating energy and 268 

information flow through time -dependent potential gradients. Within this framework, the spacetime crystal 

lattice is not a passive stage but a dynamic self -organizing natural system distributing information and energy 

through its underlying principle of re sonance. This perspective is supported by : Gm_p/l_p = c^2 = 

1/ep_0*mu_0 which suggests that gravity and electromagnetism are intrinsically linked through the same 

vacuum field structure at the Planck scale where nests themselves are field packets of quant ized vacuum energy 

discrete structures underpinning both gravitation and gauge fields. We propose that microtubule dynamics are 

directly linked to the fundamental structure of spacetime, such that when biological systems synchronize with 

these oscillations , quantum coherence is stabilized beyond classical expectations. This synchronization bridges 

the physics of life and cognition with the resonant architecture of spacetime, suggesting that consciousness itself 

arises from phase alignment with fundamental p hysical processes. Within this framework, microtubules are not 

merely quantum systems requiring wavefunction collapse but phase -coherent oscillators synchronized with 

spacetime’s intrinsic resonance. Time emerges as a phase shift, and quantum states stabil ize through phase 

locking rather than stochastic collapse. Cognition, memory, and awareness arise from persistent resonance 

dynamics, positioning biological systems as extensions of a self organizing spacetime crystal, where 

information is never lost but c ontinuously structured. Fourier analysis of simulated microtubule oscillations 

reveals dominant frequencies at 4.77 MHz and 7.16 MHz, closely matching experimental resonance data. 

Additionally, spacetime oscillations exhibit resonance peaks between 34 MHz and 289 MHz, forming a 

structured harmonic hierarchy. Some of these frequencies align with integer fractions of Planck -scale 

oscillations, suggesting a fundamental coupling between biological systems and spacetime’s resonant 

architecture. If spacetime enco des information through structured resonances, then the quantum coherence 

observed in biological systems particularly in microtubules —may not be a strictly local phenomenon but rather 

an emergent interaction with the "field of fields" —a fundamental feature of the Spacetime Crystal, where all 

energy and information resonate as part of a unified harmonic structure woven into reality. This perspective has 

direct implications for Orchestrated Objective Reduction (OrchOR), reinforcing the idea that microtubules 

sustain quantum coherence beyond classical limits. If correct, this suggests that resonance is the bridge between, 

quantum mechanics, and information theory —an organizing principle that may underlie not just life, but the 

very structure of the cosmos itsel f. 

C - 16 

Keywords 

Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch OR), Spacetime Continuum, Memory in Spacetime, Nonlinear Phase 

Relationships, Memory in Spacetime, Quantum Coherence, Quantum Biology 

235 

The Cosmology of Consciousness 

Dan McAran DBA 

Independent Researcher, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.04]........Cosmology and integrative models 

Abstract 

It is proposed to integrate life and consciousness into physics through the concepts and mathematics of entropy 

and information theory; information is inversely related to entropy. The paper follows on the observation by 269 

Schrödinger that life functions through negative entropy. The implicate order of David Bohm, as the explicate 

order unfolds, can be conjectured as entropy flow. In this proposal the appearance of negative entropy systems 

(life) would not be an anomalous ev ent but intrinsic to cosmology and part of the dynamics of the universe 

starting from the Big Bang. This approach can be viewed as a variation of the anthropic principle that asks what 

entropic reality is consistent with life and consciousness. Further, th is approach can be conceptualized as a 

physics centric interpretation of dual -aspect monism. The entropy associated with human life would be high 

information entropy (Shannon entropy) corresponding to low Boltzmann entropy. A first approach would be the 

me asurement of the information of negative entropy systems and to relate this measurement to the entropy 

found in the universe. Proposed calculations for the information entropy of human life, consciousness and 

society are presented, as well as proposals for relating these estimates to measurements of entropy currently 

found in physics, providing a preliminary mathematical relation between physics, life, and consciousness. 

Human consciousness creates information through language and thought. The information c ontent of the 

internet is used as a proxy of the information (negative entropy) created by human consciousness and an 

estimate of the information content is provided. This value is then compared to an estimate of the entropy of the 

background radiation of the universe and the entropy of a super massive black hole making the entropy of 

consciousness part of the physics of the universe. In addition, an analogy is made to white holes. Life can be 

conceptualized as an event horizon, with consciousness as the si ngularity in this structure creating an 

information white hole. Using this analogy, a dynamic can be conjectured - a consolidating field conceptually 

similar to gravity - driving an increase in complexity, creating information, life and consciousness. From the 

concepts developed and the basic estimates provided, the most significant prediction is the continued 

development of more complex life forms, the increased development and complexity of consciousness, and the 

creation of information on a cosmological scale. Consciousness would not be the sole result of natural selection, 

but would be the part of cosmological development based on yet to be defined field. Future research could 

develop a mathematical model (perhaps symmetries/conserved quantities) of the dynamics of negative entropy, 

gravity, stars, light, life, consciousness with a goal of developing an integrated cosmology in which 

consciousness is to the lowest entropy system (the highest information system). This can be seen as teleological. 

PO - 1 (M on) 

Keywords 

David Bohm, Dual Aspect Monism, Entropy, Information, Schrödinger, White Hole 

40 

Bringing to Life Quaternion and Octonion Pairs Entangled by Symmetry in Discrete -Time 

Bernd Binder 

QUANICS, 89182, BW, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.05]........Emergence, nonlinear dynamics and complexity 

Abstract 

Our central algorithm [1] - uses a cross vector product with (split -)algebra encoded in 3 d and 7d, which are 

discrete quaternions and octonions, respectively, - generates a new vector state with a time -delay recurrent 

autonomous 3rd order function from the last three vector states (an orthogonal Frenet -Serret FIFO memory 

frame), - supports a special symmetry, where the difference between the first and the third state is orthogonal to 270 

the second state, - is a discrete model of a nonlinear Landau -Lifshitz spin -magnetism dynamics of rotating 

electromagnetic point densities, which are drifting limit cycles with sub -cycles breaking a time -translation 

symmetry attracted by time -periodic self -organizing structures (pulsating time crystal states), where these 

vortex -like textures of magnetic moments resemble Skyrmions. Usually, we get by this complexity an 

uncountable variety of discontinuous, nonlinear, complex, and dynamic phenomena, where we can have 

multiple bifurcations, limit cycles or periodic solutions and co -existence of trivial attractors (fixed points or 

limit cycles) and strange (chaotic) attractors. But obviously, the symmetry is acting against chaos supporting 

special quantum state s with cybernetic character. We discuss some variants showing highly "vivid" orbital or 

helical states with spontaneous transitions and emissions with quantum properties at the edge to chaos. In 

combination with reflection (alternating sign) we get spatial ly separated opposite "charged" or polar entities or 

states that instantaneously interact across vast distances, which could be a model of quantum entanglement. The 

Frenet -Serret approach, which can be related to general relativistic and electromagnetic fi eld properties defines 

local torsion and curvature parameter. At special parameter we find a sharp transition (with hysteresis) between 

orbital modes with spherical symmetry to tube -like and long range radial modes with cylindrical symmetry. We 

get a high computational dynamics in realtime, which can be presented audiovisually on a standard computer 

(see and listen to [2], #DACOP, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uUZpsbWG77g). The algebra is 

compatible with advanced quantum descriptions, it models with highe r dimensional dot & cross vector product 

operations discrete dynamics in Clifford algebras and spinors, projective geometry with Hopf fibrations and 

Lorentzian geometry, Jordan algebras, and the exceptional Lie groups - with many applications in quantum 

ph ysics and relativity. A quantum Consciousness approach beyond the quantum level is in this context given 

by: - discrete non -local signal reflection jumps entangling polar pairs across vast distances - quantum self -

awareness by a minimum memory constituting a local co -moving frame in the relativistic sense - spontaneous 

transitions and emissions between quantum states at the edge to chaos and quantum information processing by 

non -linearly related spinor states building a conscious electromagnetic information field - one global limit cycle 

has multiple sub -cyle states so there is another global connection - filtering by resonant excitations jumping 

discretely in quantum channels preferably in spherical orbitals or helical rings forming symmetric pattern - the 

dynamic states are capable of moving, growing, and responding to external stimuli - a local cybernetics based 

on a local (inertial) frame with orthogonal components embedded in a global context. [1] Bernd Binder, ``(Split -

)Quaternion and (Split -)Octonion D ynamics in Discrete -Time Recurrent Frenet Frames'', Philsci -Archive, 

https://philsci -archive.pitt.edu/23842/, (2024) [2] Bernd Binder, "Discrete Autonomous Chaotic Orbital 

Pattern", #DACOP, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uUZpsbWG77g, (2023) 

C - 16 

Keywo rds 

Discrete, Frenet, Octonion, Quaternion, Reflection, Cycles, Waves, Modular, Symmetry, Quantum, Cybernetic, 

Spin, Spinor, Electromagnetic, Entanglement, Pairing 

275 

The Visibility of the Invisible: An Operational Probabilistic Theory (OTP) -inspired Approach to the 

Contextuality and the Intentionality of Complex Biotic Systems. 

Vasileios Basios PhD 1, Pier -Francesco Moretti PhD 2

> 1

ULB, Physics Dept. University of Brussels, Brussels, Brussels Region, Belgium. 2CNR, Consiglio Nazionale 

delle Ricerche (National Research Council of Italy), Rome, Rome Region, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 271 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.05]........Emergence, nonlinear dynamics and complexity 

Abstract 

Complex biotic systems are known to evolve unpredictably, with living organisms transforming environments 

and exhibiting intentional behaviour. This lin ks their physical "exteriority", i.e. via observable and measurable 

aspects, with the "interiority" of acquisition and elaboration of information. The latter is associated to the inner 

experiences of comprehending (meaning) and decision -making (volition, w ill), which are not directly 

accessible, through sensing or other objective probing. We assert that the interplay between observable 

physicality and inner states increases the complexity of the system. We propose a mathematical framework to 

explore the rel ationships between observable, 'visible', and unobservable, 'invisible' aspects of complex biotic 

systems. Our modelling is grounded in the formalism of quantum information in physics, as it has been 

extended by the recent Operational or Generalised Probab ilistic Theory (OPT/GPT). Our framework provides a 

comprehensive description of the relationship between information and action, emphasising the connection 

between possibilities (states) and observables (measurements). Furthermore, adopting an OPT -based de scription 

it highlights the crucial role of contextuality in processes that mediate cause -effect relations, unveiling their 

substantial aspects of inherently non -linear and non -local interconnections. We draw from physical sciences and 

contemporary discuss ions to posit that consciousness and cognition exist in a ‘relational space’ beyond physical 

space -time. Our theory, as a generalised probabilistic theory, it encompasses the information framework of 

quantum physics. It is based on a highly organised field of interconnected elements with nested hierarchies. We 

discuss the relevance of our theory to "quantum cognition" and propose experimental tests for verification. The 

present approach is compatible with and supports the three prominent, recent hypotheses concerning the 

quantum -informational nature of consciousness. The first of these is the 'Orch -OR' theory by Hameroff & 

Penrose [1], the second is the work by Kauffman & Roli on 'quantum mind & qualia' [2], and the third is the 

work by d'Ariano & Faggin on the 'hard problem & free will' [3], in which the OPT framework was firstly 

utilised. This research constitutes a progression of earlier presentations at the Science of Consciousness 

Conferences in 2022 and 2023 [4,5]. It provides further developments and c larifications for the experimental 

verification and analysis of phenomena described in those initial presentations[4,5], such as the end -of -life 

prominent consciousness -state transitions in clinical research [6,7]. Moreover, the present study makes a 

subst antial contribution to the field of non -local consciousness correlates in biotic complex systems, particularly 

in terms of consciousness state transitions, as outlined previously in these general theories[1,2,3]. This 

refinement has the potential to deline ate, distinguish or complement these three prominent theories in the 

domain of consciousness studies, and even to assist in further advancing a synthesised understanding of these 

theories. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

intentionality, panpsychism, complex syste ms, non -local correlations, organizational closure. 

434 

Tidal -Drift Communication: Inertia and Entropy in Adaptive Multi -Layered Networks 

Nadoukká Divin Mres 

Rhythm and density, Zurich, 7310, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 272 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.05]........Emergence, nonlinear dynamics and complexity 

Abstract 

This work introduces the Tidal -Drift Communication model, a framework describing how information 

propagates through multi -layered systems via intermitte nt “entry points,” where distinct strata transiently 

couple. Integrating nonlinear dynamics, entropy -driven processes, and inertial stability with observations from 

physics, biology, and synthetic networks, it posits that layered structures — from molecula r to geophysical —

exhibit communication patterns driven by interactions at energetic interfaces (e.g., thermal, mechanical, 

electromagnetic). To illustrate these principles, we draw on three representative examples. First, microbial 

chemical signaling in cellular systems and engineered consortia demonstrates how interactions are selectively 

gated by environmental or metabolic cues, creating rhythmic bursts of chemical exchange rather than 

continuous signalling. Second, structured signal propagation between distinct neuronal layers shows how 

temporal signals decay locally but reemerge at distal interfaces. Finally, advances in volcanic energy research 

illustrate how mechanical and thermal gradients in volcanic environments act as transient interfaces for ene rgy 

and information transfer. Core to this model is the idea that inertia and entropy jointly shape signal evolution. 

Inertia provides stabilisation — manifesting in enzymatic or thermal -mass buffering — while entropy 

introduces variability and drives long -term reconfiguration. These processes create “tectonic” architectures in 

which semi -autonomous layers operate independently but exchange information through staggered interfaces, 

enabling signals to decay locally yet reemerge distally at nonlinear junctio ns. By integrating concepts from 

dissipative structures, bacterial communication, and emerging multilayer network theory, the Tidal -Drift model 

unifies substrate -agnostic observations — chemical signalling in microbes, neural -tissue connectivity patterns, 

and piezoelectric energy harvesting in volcanic stress gradients — to argue for a generalizable, cross -domain 

mechanism of communication. This model reframes signalling as an intermittent, residue -driven process, 

suggesting a scalable mode of information f low across gradients of propagated multi -scale heterogeneity that 

transcends conventional, continuously coupled networks. Future directions involve quantifying transient “entry 

points” using Shannon information and employing a minimal stochastic model of t wo intermittently coupled 

oscillators to track how signals “drift” across scales. Field experiments are underway to test the Tidal -Drift 

Communication model in extremophile plants, monitoring chemical, magnetic, and electromagnetic signalling 

pathways to v alidate these transient coupling points and entropy -driven information flow mechanisms. By 

systematising cross -domain evidence, this approach seeks common principles of intermittent signals in natural 

and synthetic networks alike. By abstracting principles from natural phenomena, this framework offers a 

unifying perspective on how intermittent synchronisation and multi -scale temporal dynamics drive information 

flow in layered, non -equilibrium systems. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

cellular, communication, geophy sics, complex systems, information, substrate -neutral 

359 

Putting It Altogether: Criticality, Multiscale Competency & The Panpsychist Combination Problem 

Nikki (Nicole) C. Johnson 

University of West Georgia, Carrollton, GA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 273 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.06]........Hierarchies, scale -invariance and 1/f systems 

Abstract 

Once considered radical, panpsychism has become an increasingly popular position, suggesting that 

consciousness is a fundamental property of the cosmos — permeating entities across all spatiotemporal scales, 

from subatomic particles to celestial bodies. From a critical perspective, the most sizable challenge for this view 

is the Combination Problem: How do microexperiences of smaller entities mechanistic ally integrate into 

macroexperiences of larger bodies? This dilemma may find its resolution in critical dynamics, whereby 

complex biological and natural systems poised between order and chaos exhibit scale -free behavior. This 

presentation builds on last ye ar’s talk, which explored a highly underrated mechanism in the brain that appears 

to help resolve three longstanding consciousness -related conundrums: (1) the Hard Problem, (2) the Binding 

Problem, and (3) the Problem of Anomalous Experiences. Briefly, ast rocytes — a type of glial cell — have 

been shown to regulate the three specific conditions that Joachim Keppler deems necessary for quantum 

coherence to form in cortical microcolumns in the zero -point field theory (TRAZE), posited as a solution to the 

Hard Problem. As reported in many different peer -reviewed studies, astrocytes are also interconnected across 

the entire brain and spinal cord to form a “functional syncytium” that is able to act as a single unit, address 

large -scale goals, and share informatio n collectively between cells — which may help to alleviate the Binding 

Problem. And by managing uptake and release of glutamate and GABA and by synchronizing neuronal 

excitability through fast and slow calcium signaling applied at subcellular, single -cell, and network levels, 

astrocytes play a crucial role in tuning excitation -inhibition balance — the control parameter for criticality —

strongly correlated with altered states of consciousness, meditative practices, mystical and anomalous 

experiences, and ps ychedelic states. Extending this unorthodox framework, this presentation highlights 

astrocytes’ unique attributes with respect to coordination of conscious activity and overall brain function across 

many different scales. It positions critical dynamics as a solution to the panpsychist combination problem from 

both a philosophical and mechanistic standpoint, showing how astrocytes support long -range integration and 

facilitate the conditions required to sustain a mobile, metastable region of gamma synchrony — scaffolded by 

slower -frequency oscillations — which has been proposed as a correlate of consciousness. It postulates that 

“transliminality” — i.e., person -to -person variations observed in the ease with which unconscious material can 

cross the threshold in to conscious awareness — may directly correlate with interindividual differences in brain 

phase relative to criticality, offering an initial experimental protocol to test one of its central predictions. It 

further illustrates the wide -reaching implications that this model seems to have for assorted forms of 

neurodivergence and psychopathology, psychedelic therapy, psychospiritual development, and frame -by -frame 

generation of perceptual moments of normal wakefulness. Far from negating the respective roles pl ayed by 

neurons, electromagnetic fields, microtubules, and other mechanisms presumably found at every level of the 

nested hierarchy of consciousness, astrocytes collaboratively serve to coordinate rhythmic activity on many 

different timescales, ranging fro m tens of milliseconds to days. As proposed, the ASTRO model — short for 

“Astrocyte Syncytium Transliminality & Resonance Orchestration” — highlights an adaptable mechanism of 

multiscale coordination, which could fundamentally reshape our understanding of consciousness. 

C - 16 

Keywords 

Panpsychism, Combination Problem, Hierarchical Consciousness, Criticality, Scale Invariance, 1/f Systems, 

Transliminality, Altered States of Consciousness, Complexity, Quantum Theories of Consciousness, 

Humanistic Psycholo gy, Transpersonal Psychology 274 

165 

Hyperdimensional Computing as a Framework to explore the Binding Problem 

Austin Nafe 

Indiana university, Bloomington, Indiana, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.07]........Logic and computational theory 

Abstract 

The binding problem refer to how different features of an object are represented using distinct brain c ircuits. 

This information is somehow recombined for a single object representation. Hyper dimensional computing 

offers a new framework for study of the binding problem. Large binary hyper vectors are ideal for multimodal 

representation of a single object. This is similar to multi feature representation of single objects in the binding 

problem but allows us a novel approach for quantizing cognitive processes. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

194 

Proving Penrose: Introducing Consciousness Logic for Determined Indeterminacy 

Arzhang Kamarei 

Kamarei Advisory, LLC, New York, NY, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.07]........Logic and computational theory 

Abstract 

Cogito (“I think, therefore I am”) demonstrates a different logical ontology than Tarski’s Undefinabili ty 

Theorem, prohibiting deterministic Tarskian AI from natively digitizing consciousness and making digital free 

will impossible. Tarskian logic cannot prove truth without a meta level. Cogito logic, however, has its truth 

proofs all at the same level of “I”. Addressing this, we create a single -level Gödelian logic gate. First, 

addressing self -reference in naive set theory: set S={x ∣P(x)} ∧ ∀x(x ∈S→P(x)), avoids Russell’s Paradox as R 

fails x ∈S→P(x) and isn't in R. Next, we set S4={x ∣P(x)} ∧ ∀x(x ∈S4→P(x)); where P(x) = [P1(x) ∨

[[¬(Prov(x)=true) ∧ ¬(Prov(x)=false)] ∧ x≡¬P1(x)]] ∧ x≡x. Testing G, we set P1(x)=”Provable” and set 

G=¬P1(G). S4 sees G is defined as ¬P1(G), therefore, G cannot have property P1(G). By Gödelian meta -logic, 

if G: (a) claims identity of ¬P1(G); (b) has property of ¬P1(G); and (c) ¬P1(G) is undecidable, then G is true, 

G≡¬P1(G), and G_identity≡G_property. S4’s innovation is expressing G’s undecidable properties as ¬P1(G) 

syntax. Since Gödel proved this equivalency logic, S4 determines G=¬Prov(G) true at S4’s object level, without 

expressing Prov(G). Whereas G ödelian numbers aren’t expressive enough to objectify ¬P1(G) (stuck in 

indeterminacy until meta -logic), S4 permits such reification of the negative property. Thus, S4 algorithmically 

processes the G=¬Prov(G) truth of the First Theorem with consistency. Reg arding the Halting Problem, 275 

P1(x)=(Run ∨Halt), Q=¬P1(Q): a category/ontology mismatch for Q and the perfect halting predictor. With 

regards to the phenomenology of consciousness, we take Maharaj’s non -dualistic concept of total negation as 

our benchmark. We define P1(x) as being a member of univ ersal set of all identities. We then create O_w to 

represent the negation of all identities and show that it is admitted to SR4. Thus we are able to meta -

mathematically represent the non -dualistic concept of consciousness by proving the truth of a state of non -

representation logically. Regarding quantum mechanics, S4 can simulate the resolution of the EPR paradox: 

P1(x)="x is determined from info" and x_particle=¬P1(x_particle)=”I am not determined by info”. Like G, by 

Gödelian logic, S4 proves x _particle indeterminate and true. If x_particle models a waveform, since a waveform 

by definition has no classical information, it’s not determined by information, and thus must be logically 

determined without information in entanglement and EPR. Like G, x _particle shows determination by logic 

(truth) to be different from determination by information (proof). 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Gödel's theorem, Penrose, AI, computation, consciousness, quantum mechanics, Witness 

69 

Brain Coherence and Loss of Which Way information. 

Uziel Awret MS 

Inspire Institute, Alexandria, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

‘Quantum brain’ theories that aim to relate aspects of consciousness to quantum processes in the brain must 

explain how large -scale macroscopic entanglement can persist in the warm brain for biologically relevant 

duration (biological quantum supremacy). It s fair to say that current attempts to explain such large -scale 

entanglement, from dipole -dipole interactions between aromatic molecules to entanglement between caged free 

radicals, face problems and that we should search for new ideas, especially ones tha t can attribute such massive 

entanglement directly to the unique complexity of the brain. We are in the midst of a scientific revolution that 

brings together QFT, Condensed Matter Theory, Quantum Complexity, Quantum Computation, Black Hole 

Thermodynamics, massively entangled many particle systems, Exotic phases of matter where information is 

more fundamental than spacetime and profound Dualities that relate the constitution of space to the quantum. Is 

it possible that these huge Hilbert spaces give rise to complexity bounds that cannot be exceeded? Can 

'complexity at the limit give rise to massive entanglement? Is there a way, which we don’t fully understand, to 

directly attribute putative massive brain entanglement to the unique hierarchically -nested comple xity of the 

brain? A speculative, but elegant, way of doing that appeals to: Putative ‘Simple’ new Principle – Extend the 

principle of ‘Loss of Which Way Information’ (LWWI) central to coherence (Hanbury, Brown, Twiss) and 

entanglement in quantum optics(De layed choice, quantum eraser) to complex, hierarchically nested, many 

particle systems with distributed local measurement devices. Extended LWWI principle - it is sometimes 276 

theoretically impossible to determine the causal firing history that caused the firing of a given neuron. 

Complexity based LWWI may cause a neuron's input to seem coherent (as if it came from a ‘single’ source). 

Such neurons could generate ‘tight’ clusters in which all members receive input in small enough time -windows 

to generate LWWI, especially in recurrent resonant networks. Here you don’t add all the causal histories that 

can cause a given neuron to fire but only the indistinguishable ones. Note that s uch neurons can figure in their 

own causal histories (Malach, Rafi). To imagine ‘Spontaneous Small World Networks’ begin with a large 

randomly interconnected collection of neurons (millions), gradually raise the membrane potential to increase 

neuronal firi ng. Assume that neuronal firing is stochastic but that the arrival of a small number of inputs in a 

small -time window raises the firing probability. This can result in tight small world recurrent networks of 

neurons ‘self -chosen’ to get their input in incr easingly small windows. A bit like vortices and Le Chatelier 

principle. Such sparse ‘small world’ networks form an efficient NCC explaining Rafi Malach’s (Weitzman 

Institute) results showing that consciousness persists up to two seconds after ‘reverberatio n’ has stopped. A 

'brain entanglement' theory based on summing indistinguishable causal firing histories results in the 

entanglement of the NCC. I will end by attempting to relate such LWWI in small recurrent networks to loops of 

‘delayed choice quantum er asures’ whose ‘loop -period’ is smaller than their erasure time and Seth Lloyd’s CTC 

like quantum circuit that combines teleportation with post -selection. 

C - 10 

Keywords 

Quantum measurement, Loss of which way information, coherence, resonance, IIT, caus al histories, brain 

entanglement, conformal entanglement, AdS/CFT, Lloyd, delayed choice quantum erasure, recurrent 

processing, CTC, small world networks, time -windows, STDP. 

200 

Non -invasive Aquaphotomics Study For Understanding the Effect of Body Psychotherapy Through Real Time 

Measurement of the Body Water Molecular Matrix 

Prof. Roumiana Nikolova Tsenkova Dr.Eng., Dr. Agr. 

Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Non -invasive Aquaphotomics Study For Understanding the Effect of Body Psychotherapy Through Real Time 

Measuremen t of the Body Water Molecular Matrix R. Tsenkova Aquaphotomics Research Field, Kobe 

University, Japan rtsen@kobe -u.ac.jp Aquaphotomics is a new multidisciplinary science, technology and 

educational platform where water molecular system with its three - di mensional structure and dynamics is 

described as multifunctional system. Water being H2O, but not “just H2O” is a highly dynamic molecular 

system of dipoles that connect to each other forming various structures, i.e. being able to perform various 

functions adjusting to the environment with speed in the femtosecond range. Water is the ultimate laser light 

source because of its coherence and three - dimensional oscillating structure causing light transmittance, scatter, 

refraction, etc. It is the ultimate opt ical sensor as it is the only substance that absorbs light with frequencies 

covering the whole electromagnetic spectrum and all sound frequencies as well. The analysis of its real time 

spectral patterns data shows that with its network flexibility, decoher ence and coherent oscillations water plays 277 

a role of a scaffold that can synchronize other elements of the rest of the system. At the same time, water is a 

highly sensitive probe that mirrors the surrounding matter and energy by restructuring which makes it the 

ultimate sensor providing immense inf ormation for the rest of the system and the environment. Water is a self -

regulating system that reassembles in order to keep the balance between its “working” part and the “battery” 

part, all of them coherent in pure water. Water in a system has specific s pectral patterns related to decoherent 

structures, too. In Aquaphotomics, discrete water frequencies and respective water structures have been 

discovered. The frequencies are called “letters”. Various water structures are presented by spectral pattern base d

on combination of activated frequencies called “words”. The visual presentation of the light absorbance spectral 

patterns related to respective water functionality is called aquagram. In the talk, aquagrams of non -invasive 

monitoring of human body’s wate r spectral dynamics and “before and after” various types of group meditation 

will be presented and discussed. 

C - 15 

Keywords 

non -invasive monitoring, meditation, water spectral pattern, aquaphotomics, water coherence 

269 

What our brain can teach us about building the next generation of quantum computers 

Student Robert A Trandafir Medical Student 

"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Although initially debated, quantum mechanical effects are now known to play important roles in the human 

brain in processes such as consciousness, memory, and cognition. Because of its wet, warm, and noisy 

environment, the presence of nontrivial quantum effects sparks questions about what mechanisms the brain 

employs to maintain quantum coherence in such unusual c ircumstances. Additionally, the energy efficiency and 

speed of information processing of the brain instigate a closer look into the peculiarities of neuromorphic 

computing. In this presentation, I would like to highlight some of the ways in which the brain processes 

information, as well as how we could draw inspiration from the brain to build the next generation of powerful, 

scalable, and efficient quantum computers. I will present 3 major hallmarks of neuromorphic information 

processing: 1. The brain uses both classical and quantum information processing and they are interdependent. 

The interplay between different modalities of information processing such as spin -based quantum processes in 

microtubules that regulate ionic flow through the membrane and thus axonal firing rate (Singh et al.), and 

electron transport in the mitochondria that creates reactive oxygen species (Murphy et al.) that generate 

biophotons (Pospíšil et al.) which are paramount in intracellular signaling between neurons.(Tong et al., Sun e t

al.), allows for highly parallel information processing. 2. The brain is phenomenally resourceful. As stated 

above, not only is mitochondrial metabolism coupled to intracellular signaling by way of photons, but the 

photons might play a double role, in cl assical, back -propagation based learning (Zarkeshian et al.), as well as in 

distributed quantum computing (Rodney et al.), connecting multiple spin -based qubits in microtubules 

(Hameroff et al.) that perform local quantum operations. Another hallmark of th e brain’s resourcefulness is that 278 

the entangled biophotons generated in the myelin sheath (Liu et al.) might be used for Measurement -Based 

quantum computation as well as for classical intracellular signaling (Liu et al.) 3. The brain employs nested 

layers of protection to ensure functional robustness. This includes the “Quantum Underground”, exploiting non -

polar pockets in proteins (Craddock et al.), scale -invariant hierarchies (Saxena et al., Sahu et al.), as well as 

possible topological protection in the helical pathways formed in microtu bules (Hameroff et al.). Also, the 

quantum Zeno effect has been shown to provide robustness to the avian biochemical magnetic compass used for 

navigation, protecting it from the effects of dipolar interractions (Dellis et al.). Gaining a better understandi ng 

of the aforementioned biological processes, will give us a glimpse into how to build scalable, efficient, and 

powerful room -temperature quantum computers based on brain -inspired information processing principles, that 

will in turn allow us to better und erstand ourselves. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

quantum computing, neuromorphic information processing, photonic quantum computing, measurement -based 

quantum computing, quantum coherence 

317 

Exploring Quantum Effects in the Brain: Linking Theory to Experiments 

Travis J.A. Craddock PhD 

University of Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Quantum biology, an interdisciplinary field exploring how quantum phenomena like superposition, tunneling, 

and e ntanglement influence biological processes, is shifting from theoretical speculation to experimental 

validation. Emerging evidence suggests quantum effects play a role in biological systems, from superposition 

enhancing energy transfer in photosynthesis t o tunneling influencing enzymatic reactions and DNA mutations, 

and spin entanglement aiding migratory birds’ navigation. These discoveries have far -reaching implications for 

medicine, renewable energy, and our understanding of life’s complexity. However, a s quantum perspectives 

challenge traditional biochemical models and face experimental limitations in complex biological environments, 

they remain controversial. This debate is particularly intense in the study of quantum mechanisms in the brain. 

Moving bey ond classical models of chemical and electrical neuronal signaling, quantum approaches could 

transform neuroscience by advancing diagnostics, treatments, and our understanding of cognition, behavior, and 

consciousness. Theories propose that spin -based and optical quantum mechanisms may contribute to brain 

function, but without experimental validation, they remain speculative. Here, we examine these theoretical 

models considering existing experimental evidence, exploring both their potential role in brain fu nction and the 

challenges of demonstrating their biological relevance. Addressing these challenges will be key to determining 

whether quantum processes underpin neural activity or only remain theoretical possibilities. 

C - 11 

Keywords 

quantum biology, qu antum brain, quantum optics, quantum coherence, nuclear spin, magnetic isotope effects 279 

402 

The dendritic decoupling hypothesis of anesthesia 

Matthew Larkum 

Humboldt Universität zu Berlin Institut für Biologie, Berlin, Charitéplatz, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Despite almost two centuries of clinical use, how general anesthetics reversibly suppress consciousness remains 

elusive. In the 2022 TSC meeting, I presented the evidence that anesthetics disrupt the functional coupling 

between distal and proximal segments of cortical pyramidal neurons, suggesting this decoupling could underlie 

anesthesia (Suzuki & Larkum, 2020). W e have previously shown that perception is intimately associated with 

activating the apical dendrites of the large layer 5 pyramidal neurons that complete the thalamocortical loop 

(Larkum, 2013; Takahashi et al., 2016 & 2020). The disruption of signalling from along the apical dendrites of 

these neurons under anesthesia (and by metabotropic receptor blockers) therefore constitutes a candidate 

mechanism for loss of consciousness. In this presentation, I will show in vitro data confirming that metabotropic 

re ceptor activation strengthens dendro -somatic coupling, while anesthetics weaken it. Moreover, disrupting the 

microtubules extending through the apical shaft also reduces dendritic influence on the cell body. These 

findings strengthen the view that dendro -somatic coupling is central to cortical feedback and may be the key to 

understanding how anesthetics block conscious processing. 

PL -9

Keywords 

427 

Does Physics Need a Revolution to Explain Life, Living Systems, and Consciousness? 

Anita Goel MD, PhD 

Chairman, CEO & Scientific Director, Nanobiosym Research Institute Chairman & CEO, Nanobiosym 

Diagnostics, Inc, Boston, MA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.08]........Quantum brain biology 

Abstract 

Our current physics was primarily developed in the 20th century, in the context of inanimate matter and closed 

reductionistic systems, that operate at (or near) equilibrium. Living systems are, however, fundamentally open 

systems that operate far from equilibrium and are strongly coupled to and continuously exchange matter, 

energy, and information with their enviro nment. Einstein, Schrodinger, and Penrose have argued that our 280 

physics (especially quantum mechanics) is perhaps missing some new physical principles to provide a more 

complete description of reality. I will share some of our work at Nanobiosym to elucidate this “new physics” 

using a new conceptual physics framework a nd a novel experimental testbed to probe nanoscale quantum 

effects in biological systems, such as nanomachines that read and write information in DNA. 

PL -10 

Keywords 

new conceptual physics framework, nanoscale quantum effects in biological systems, nano machines, DNA, 

quantum mechanics 

119 

Instantaneous Memory Accession via Quantum Geometrodynamic Networks 

Mr. William D Brown MSc 

The International Space Federation, Marnaz, Haute -Savoie, France 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Abstract 

The biological basis of memory storage and retrieval has conventionally been understood through 

computational frameworks based on binary encoding. Here we present a novel mechanism for memory 

processes based on quantum geometrodynamics in biomolecular electrodynamics, where the discrete structure 

of spacetime as a quantum entangled network underlies physical pro cesses of temporal -spatial coupling in 

biological systems. This coupling occurs through collective quantum coherence of interacting dipole resonators, 

which has a geometrodynamic network architecture of spacetime coordinates connected via Einstein -Rosen 

br idge topologies, where information is superficially encoded in the quantum entangled network of voxel 

oscillators but is fundamentally accessible acausally via the continuous multiply connected spacetime geometry. 

The mechanism is demonstrated through theo retical modeling of dipole oscillator coupling in benzene ring 

structures throughout subcellular systems, including microtubules and DNA polymers. We find this 

characteristic coupling accurately predicts observed quantum coherent states in biological macro molecules and 

enables hybrid analog -digital information processing. These findings describe a fundamentally new paradigm 

for biological memory storage and retrieval that does not rely on classical computational encoding but rather on 

direct spacetime geome tric information accession, which is effectively quasi -instantaneous or acausal and hence 

fundamentally non -computational. This suggests that biological memory systems may be more sophisticated 

and fundamentally different than previously understood, with s ignificant implications for our understanding of 

consciousness, memory, time and the development of novel computing architectures. The proposed mechanism 

is supported by existing empirical observations and offers testable predictions for future experimenta l

verification. 

PL -3281 

Keywords 

Quantum Biology, Quantum Coherence, Quantum Entanglement, Quantum Geometrodynamics, Quantum 

Electrodynamics, Microtubules, Memory, Quantum Computation, Retrocausality, Nonlocality 

133 

Medical biometrics based on Gas Discharge Visualization technology approach to survival research: A case 

study 

Dr. Raul Valverde PhD 1,2 , Dr . Konstantin Korotkov PhD 3, Mr. Chet Swanson MS 2

> 1

Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 2Consciousness Research Foundation, Iowa City, Iowa, 

USA. 3Bio -well corporation, Boulder, Colorado, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Abstract 

Medical biometrics based on the gas discharge visualization (GDV) technique is used in medicine to monitor 

pa tients and compare their natural electro -photonic emission before and after surgeries, cancer treatments, 

energy healing and physiotherapy. Previous findings using GDV have shown that it can monitor a transition 

from a disease state to a normal functional state. GDV is based on electrical activity in the human organism. 

The GDV is based on the bioenergy model, which is compatible with the Penrose -Hameroff 'Orch OR' model. 

The "Survival Hypothesis" asserts that a person's personality and consciousness survi ve the physical death of 

the body. This research aims to use GDV to identify the psychoemotional functions of a person using fingertips. 

These psychoemotional functions are linked to the personality of the individual. The research presents an 

interrelation ship between human psychology and the bionenergy model, and how it aligns with the Myers -

Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) personality traits that is a framework to analyze human personalities. As part of 

this study, we measure the personality of one case study by measuring the psychoemotional functions using 

GDV before death. We then measure these psychoemotional functions after death and compare them to test the 

survival of personality hypothesis. The research employs a novel approach to survival research by u sing the 

energies proposed by the bioenergy model instead of the traditional approach of using EEGs to analyze 

brainwaves. The bioenergy model shows that non -local consciousness is connected to the body through 

bioenergy fields that can be measured in the physical body using GDV technology. When the body dies, these 

bioenergy fields remain connected to the body for a period that is still unknown. In a 2014 experiment with 

GDV technology on people who had died, the observed levels of energy reduced over time . This proves the 

hypothesis that the non -local consciousness remains linked to the physical body several days after death. In this 

study, we used GDV technology to measure personality before and after death under the assumption that 

bioenergy fields are s till linked to the body after dead. Preliminary results show the potential of this technology 

to prove the survival of personality hypothesis. While the conclusions are not significant enough due to only 

one sample being used, the objective of the research is to propose a new framework for understanding human 

consciousness. 

C - 22 

Keywords 

Survival hypothesis, GDV, Bioenergy model, psychoemotional measurements, Near death studies. 282 

168 

Quantum Coherence in Consciousness: The Potential Role of Glycoconjugates, Membrane Microdomains, and 

Aqueous Solvent Dynamics 

Dr. Thomas E Klepach PhD 

Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Abstract 

Recent advances in quantum neurobiology suggest that macromolecular quantum processes may play a 

foundational role in conscious experience. Central to this hypothesis is the role of the aqueous solvent in 

supporting and propagating quantum coheren ce at physiological temperatures. Within this framework, the 

sequestered water in the microtubulin lattice has been proposed as a quantum -coherent reservoir. However, for 

intercellular propagation of quantum states, additional mechanisms must exist. Hamero ff and colleagues have 

highlighted dendro -dendritic gap junctions as potential conduits for the intercellular transfer of quantum state 

information, yet the specifics of this process remain elusive. If quantum coherence extends across syncytial 

neuronal ne tworks, the confluent cytoplasmic and periplasmic spaces must facilitate this propagation. These 

syncytial Hebbian assemblies have been implicated in generating the 40 Hz gamma synchrony observed in 

electroencephalograms (EEG) during conscious states, incl uding meditative practices. Previous research by 

Adey and collaborators demonstrated a correlation between extremely low frequency (ELF) EEG activity and 

the biophysical properties of acidic glycolipid components in neuronal membranes. This abstract advanc es the 

hypothesis that the glycosylated components of neuronal glycoconjugates play a critical role in the stabilization 

and propagation of quantum states. Saccharides, with their dense hydroxyl substituents, are uniquely suited to 

dynamically modulate loc al solvent structure through their hypermobile conformational properties. These 

perturbations may encode biological information via induced solvent architecture reconfigurations. Specifically, 

acidic membrane microdomains enriched in cerebrosides from glob o- and ganglio -series glycolipids create 

pericellular Debye layers stabilized by loosely bound Ca² ⁺ counterions. Such domains are hypothesized to 

support coherent reorientational dynamics, akin to wave patterns generated by wind over a field of wheat. Thes e

dynamics may promote Bose -Einstein condensate -like behavior within the pericellular space. I will review the 

empirical and theoretical evidence supporting these claims and provide insights from recent research on the 

conformational and dynamic properties of saccharides. By integrating quantum biological principles with the 

structural biophysics of neuronal membranes, this work seeks to further illuminate the potential quantum 

underpinnings of conscious experience. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

quantum neurobi ology, consciousness, quantum coherence, microtubules, aqueous solvent dynamics, 

glycoconjugates, saccharides, membrane microdomains, gamma synchrony, dendro -dendritic gap junctions, 

Bose -Einstein condensates, neuronal networks, Hebbian assemblies, acidic glycolipids, pericellular Debye 

layers, electroencephalograms, quantum biology 283 

175 

Unified Conscious Field Theory and the Biophysics of Visualization 

Mr. Andrew T Cote B. Asc Engineering Physics 

Hyperstition Incorporated, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Abstract 

A novel theory of consciousness is proposed whereby human brains consist of two adjacent and electrically 

coupled types of computing networks: a probabilistic Turing -complete synaptic computer, and , a non -Turing 

quantum mechanical computing network sustained by the superconducting microtubule lattice inside pyramidal 

neurons. This satisfies the requirement for making observations in quantum mechanics which is an entangled 

detector with memory. Resis tive junctions between microtubules form Josephson junctions such that the 

nervous system is capable of a broad range of detection, amplification and broadcast of radiofrequency signals 

beyond non -Turing computational abilities. It is proposed that the neu rons transmembrane ion potential acts as 

the effective coupling mechanism between the two computing networks and provides a reserve of Shannon 

entropy to enable learning of visualization. This theory is used to re -interpret the experience of people sufferi ng 

from mental illness by including the premise that experiences are valid indicators of reality under the principle 

of empricism. An experiment is outlined to test this theory along with implications for longstanding unresolved 

questions from human experi ence and philosophy included in the appendices. 

C - 11 

Keywords 

visualization, cytoskeleton, measurement, learning, neural networks, manifestation, intuition 

440 

Searching for objective fingerprints of subjective experience, down to biomolecules 

Nicola Galvanetto 

University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.09]........Biophysics and coherence 

Abstract 

In this poster, I present statistical analyses of biomolecular motions that mirror the scale -free distributio n of 

words in human knowledge production —distributions that encode more than just information. Humans —and 

particularly those attending this conference —are acutely aware of their own consciousness, which manifests 

through subjective experience. They often communicate this experience through written text, which can evoke 

similar experiences in others. A central question remains: is this experience solely a property that emerges from 284 

the brain, or does it extend further down the biological hierarchy? Down to the cellular level —or even to 

biomolecules? I show that human knowledge production, brain activity, and biomolecular motion all follow 

patterns tending toward power laws. This lead s me to speculate that such behavior may go beyond self -

organized criticality. Just as humans convey meaning through symbol sequences governed by these statistical 

laws, perhaps the same distributions observed in protein motion hint at a rudimentary form o f subjective 

experience —even at the molecular level. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Subjective Experience, Consciousness, Power -Law Distributions, Protein Dynamics, Semantics 

45 

Evolution of plants: A perspective based on information vortex theory 

Deepavalli Arumuganainar PhD 1, Dr Arunvel Thangamani PhD 2

> 1

Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. 2Independent Researcher, 

Chennai, TN, India 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Abstract 

The Information Vortex Theory (IVT) [1] posits that during abiogenesis, the spatially distributed wave energ y

of molecules of an incepting cell interacts with the fabric of reality, generating a rotating biofield and 

subsequently forming a vortex. The inbound and outbound energy fluxes of this vortex represent signal 

reception and dispersal, initiating informat ion storage, and with incremental wave superpositions, exhibit 

information processing, thus establishing memory and sentience in biological systems. The fabric of reality in 

IVT is, “space as a continuum of internal energy with quantum fluctuations” akin t o Wheeler’s space foam 

conception. In evolution, the first appearance of fundamental biological functions namely sensation, motion, 

nutrition, and reproduction are described in IVT as signals (perturbations of specific modulation in amplitude 

and or freque ncy generated in bio -information field), induced by environmental interactions, reaching vortex. 

Sensation: External forces, such as atmospheric air pressure acting on the cell membrane, trigger distinct 

signals. Locomotion: Gravity -driven motions in/of cy toplasm trigger distinct signals. Reproduction: Gravity -

induced localized slips in the cytoplasmic matrix lead to local shear and in turn rupture (cell division), 

triggering distinct signals. Nutrition: Nutrients diffuse through the porous cell wall, where biochemical 

reactions release energy and trigger distinct signals. Additionally, while in motion, a protist incidentally glides 

over another, resulting in the entrapment of a decomposable hydrocarbon chain. These events (1) incidental 

entrapment and (2) t he decomposition generate signals that reach the information vortex, ultimately forming the 

memory basis for feeding behaviors. If the cytoplasmic matrix's motion is physically constrained by its 

environment, such as being suspended in a highly viscous sub strate, movement becomes restricted, leading to a 

loss of viability for entrapment -based feeding. In this stationary state, the cell must rely on two primary 

mechanisms for energy: (1) active osmosis across the cell membrane and (2) energy processing from sunlight, 

provided the cell possesses molecular structures that facilitate photosynthesis. During this state, if osmosis and 

photosynthesis continue to occur, the signal recurrence associated with these processes increases exponentially 

in the cell's infor mation vortex, while signals related to motion and entrapment diminish. Consequently, the 285 

information vortex ceases to propagate response signals associated with movement or predatory intent, instead 

perpetually transmitting signals focused on nutrient absorption and photosynthetic activity. Simultaneously, cell 

division proceeds independently, supported by the memory registry already established within the vortex. Over 

time, this multiplying cell complex, characterized by an information vortex with a high signaling rate for 

osmosis and photosynthesis, alongside a diminishing capacity for motion and entrapment, gives rise to plant 

life. To demonstrate mathematically, principles of signal superposition and vorticity are used to compute the 

energy flux density of the vortex. Scenarios of increasing and decreasing signaling rates are then modeled. 

Additionally, a system dynamics model is developed, capturing the relationships between entities and functions, 

along with the interventions that lead to emergent outcomes. The likely emergence of this information vortex 

characteristic during Earth’s purple phase, subsequent adaptations post -great oxygenation, and possible 

extraterrestrial origins of biomolecular reactions (based on Murchison meteorite findings) that establish bio -

information field are discussed. 

C - 5

Keywords 

Information vortex, Bio -info rmation field, Origin of life, ORCH -OR, Quantum foam 

58 

1 5 3 God Made Me: The Amazing Hidden Structures in the Genetic Code 

Colin S. Morrison 

University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Abstract 

In 2013 two Khazak scientists by the name of Vladimir shCherbak and Maxim Makukov published a set of 

extreme ly design -like numerical patterns they had discovered in the genetic code behind all of life on Earth. 

They argued that the existence, consistency and statistical significance of these strange patterns in the most 

durable construct known proves that life on Earth was seeded by an advanced extraterrestrial civilisation. 

However, they also argued that the capacity of the genetic code to carry an artificial signal was fully used up 

encoding those patterns. In my book '1 5 3 God Made Me: The Amazing Hidden Str uctures in the Genetic 

Code', I point out that this latter claim is based upon the very reasonable assumption that extraterrestrials would 

utilise the amino acids and coding structures in life -forms known to them. However, if the encoder were not so 

restri cted, the potential information -carrying capacity would be far greater than envisaged – limited only by 

chemical constraints on the range of possible protein -building molecules. As evidence for such an encoder, I 

detail a vast range of design -like structur es of a statistical significance that far surpasses those of shCherbak & 

Makukov that are found in the same arrangements of the genetic code where they found their astonishing 

surface features. In examining their amazing exact balance of 999, and their thr eefold exact balance of 333 in 

the same arrangement, a property of the difference of 153 between the sidechain weights of the nonpalindromic 

and palindromic codons on the other side of that arrangement led me to an algorithmic key revealing a 

subsurface le vel of encoding. That key is very simple and elegant. Prompted by the fact that 153 is the sum of 

the cubes of its own digits, I added the cubes of the digits of the totals (362, 214 and 423) opposite the three 

333s and got 423, the sidechain weight of the palindromic subgroup. Doing the same with all six subgroup 286 

totals yielded 666 (the total sidechain weight of the nonpalindromic codons in the opposite half – the first two 

333s). I then tried adding the squares of the digits instead, and got answers that were just as correlated with the 

surface totals. The squared -digit total of all eight subgroup totals including the two 999s, for example, was 

another 666, while the sum of the squared digits of just the six subgroup totals was the same as the difference 

between the cubed -digit totals of the separate sets of three, and also the sum of those of the two subgroups of 

palindromic codons. These results emerge from the most obvious sets of subgroup totals the arrangement 

exhibits, so there is no arbitrariness. The sum and difference between cubed digits and squared digits seems also 

to have been utilised. Like the cubed -digit total and squared -digit total, it also provides a pair of operations that 

are intuitively opposites of each other, allowing the encoder to confirm an encoded result by an equally 

surprising opposite o utput. The design -likeness of the structures that emerge is mind -blowing. 

C - 5

Keywords 

153, genetic code, artificial, extraterrestrial intelligence, SETI, omniscience, cipher, cypher 

98 

Information encoding in nucleic acid sequences: A perspective based on bio -information field vortices 

Arunvel Thangamani PhD 1, Deepavalli Arumuganainar 2

> 1

Independent Researcher, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India. 2Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, 

Chennai, Tamilnadu, India 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Abstract 

1. Background. The origin of genetic material in early life remains inexplicable. Hypotheses like the RNA or 

pre -RNA world, and ‘metabolism -first’ explore pathways to self -replicating biomolecules but fail to link 

abiogenesis to genetic material fully. Early genomes must have encoded information from cytoplasmic or 

membrane signals, yet they neither directly in teract with external prompts nor play a role in sensory signal 

acquisition. This raises questions about how genomes function as system -level memory. This work proposes 

bio -information field vortices as a complementary perspective to biochemical theories on genome emergence. 2. 

Nature of reality [1]. Analogous to Wheeler’s concept of spacetime foam, space can be understood as a 

continuum of energy, oscillating at Planck -scale vibrations. Variations in energy -pressure gradients within this 

continuum give rise to localized peaks, which fragment into numerous discrete quanta. These quanta, subjected 

to persistent energy -pressure pulsations, coalesce into clusters that form the so -called fundamental particles. 

The pulsations acting on these particles induce rotat ional motion, characterized by specific degrees of freedom. 

Owing to the spin velocity, quanta from the outer regions of the forming cluster tend to escape radially. 

However, this escape is constrained by the internal energy of the continuum, resulting in the formation of a 

quantum field around the particle. 3. Origination of bio -information field with vortices [2]. During abiogenesis, 

an emerging cell —a matrix of molecules composed of fundamental particles —naturally gives rise to a radially 

propagating fie ld of massless quanta. Constrained by the energy of the surrounding ubiquitous continuum, this 

field acquires rotational motion, forming a vortex. Perturbations in this field, such as those triggered by 

chemical reactions during abiogenesis, generate wavef orms. These waveforms, or simply signals, constitute the 

fundamental information format of a biological system. These waveforms traverse the field and converge at the 287 

vortex, establishing this localized energy maximum as a repository of information. 4. Genome emergence. 

Analogous to quantum field theory, which describes fundamental particles as excited states of a field, this 

framework treats the fundamental particle as a system of densely packed quanta and an encompassing quantum 

field. The quantum field of nucleic acid precursor molecules in the prebiotic soup interacted with a signal 

repository, the vortex of the aforementioned bio -information field, undergoing energy transfer. This interaction, 

involving mechanisms like constructive interference and superposition between the vortex signals and the 

quantum field of nucleic acid molecules, represents a primitive form of information encoding. This process 

resulted in the emergence of the first biosystem -level hard memory, the genome. Memory and sentience, the 

building blocks of consciousness in biological systems, arise from signal storage and interference within the 

vortex of the bio -information field. 5. Systems model a nd computational approach. The systems model 

developed, connects chemical processes in an emerging cell, signal storage in the vortex, and encoding as hard 

memory. Using classical wave theory, a unitary waveform of massless energy Eϕ(r,t)=E0sin(kr+ωt) is 

introduced under vorticity conditions. The resulting expression is superposed with quantum field waveforms of 

the vortex molecular complex. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

INFORMATION VORTEX, GENETIC MATERIAL, ABIOGENESIS, BIOINFORMATION FIELD, SPACE 

FOAM 

229 

The Science of Quantum Biology and Its Implications for Consciousness 

Prof. Dante S Lauretta Ph.D. 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Abstract 

Quantum biology is an emerging field exploring the role of quantum mechanical principles —coherence, 

entanglement, and superposition —in biological systems. While classical biochemistry has successfully 

explained many life processes, growing evidence suggest s that quantum effects may play a nontrivial role in 

molecular and cellular functions, particularly in the brain. Understanding these quantum influences is essential 

for advancing our knowledge of consciousness, cognition, and the fundamental nature of lif e itself. Recent 

research indicates that quantum coherence in biomolecules may contribute to biological information processing. 

One area of focus is the cytoskeleton, particularly microtubules, which provide structural support in neurons 

and facilitate int racellular communication. Microtubules contain aromatic amino acids such as tryptophan, 

which exhibit unique quantum optical properties. Studies have suggested that superradiance, excitonic energy 

transfer, and quantum coherence in tryptophan networks coul d enable efficient energy transport and contribute 

to cellular signaling and cognitive function. Using high -resolution spectroscopy, Förster resonance energy 

transfer (FRET), and computational modeling, researchers are investigating whether these quantum p rocesses 

provide an additional layer of biological information storage and processing beyond classical biochemistry. 

Another critical area of investigation is the quantum nature of anesthesia. Empirical evidence shows that 

anesthetic potency can vary depen ding on the nuclear spin of xenon isotopes, suggesting a potential quantum 288 

effect in neural activity suppression. This challenges conventional models of anesthesia, which assume purely 

biochemical interactions. Studies employing multi -electrode arrays, high -resolution NMR spectroscopy, and 

spin resonance techniques are examining how quantum coherence in neural proteins and lipid membranes might 

influence consciousness states. These findings could lead to a deeper understanding of how quantum mechanics 

contributes to brain function and perception. The implications of quantum mechan ics extend beyond individual 

cognition to biological evolution and the origins of life. A growing body of research suggests that quantum 

effects in nucleic acids and amino acids may have played a role in molecular self -organization and early 

evolutionary c omplexity. The indole ring of tryptophan, for instance, possesses quantum properties that may 

have facilitated non -classical information processing in prebiotic chemistry. Additionally, theoretical models 

incorporating quantum complexity theory propose tha t evolutionary processes could be driven by quantum 

information dynamics, accelerating biomolecular adaptation and functional diversity. From a technological 

perspective, the integration of quantum biology into applied science is opening new frontiers. Adv ances in 

quantum -enhanced biotechnologies, neuromorphic computing, and bio -inspired quantum sensors offer 

promising avenues for medical and environmental applications. By leveraging biomolecular quantum 

coherence, researchers are developing novel biosensor s and computational architectures that could revolutionize 

fields such as neuroscience, pharmacology, and artificial intelligence. The convergence of quantum mechanics, 

molecular biology, and neuroscience represents a paradigm shift in how we understand li fe and consciousness. 

By moving beyond classical descriptions of biology and integrating quantum principles, researchers are 

uncovering new mechanisms of cognitive processing, novel insights into the origins of life, and revolutionary 

applications in techn ology. As experimental techniques advance, the science of quantum biology has the 

potential to reshape fundamental theories of consciousness and redefine our understanding of the living world. 

PL -10 

Keywords 

Quantum Biology, Coherence, Cytoskeleton, Comp lexity Theory, Evolution 

420 

Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe 

Dr. Philip Kurian Ph.D. 

Quantum Biology Laboratory, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.10]........Origin and nature of life 

Abstract 

Networks of tryptophan – an aromatic amino acid with strong fluorescent response – are ubiquitous in 

biologi cal systems, forming diverse architectures in transmembrane proteins, cytoskeletal filaments, sub -

neuronal elements, photoreceptor complexes like UVR8, virion capsids, and other cellular structures. We 

analyzed the cooperative effects induced by ultraviol et (UV) excitation of several biologically relevant 

tryptophan mega -networks, thus giving insight into novel mechanisms for cellular signalling and control. Our 

theoretical analysis in the single -excitation manifold predicted the formation of strongly supe rradiant states due 

to collective interactions among organized arrangements of up to more than 100,000 tryptophan UV -excited 

transition dipoles in microtubule architectures, which leads to an enhancement of the fluorescence quantum 

yield that is confirmed by our steady -state experiments [1]. Preliminary femtosecond UV transient absorption 289 

results indicated superradiant state lifetimes of no more than a few picoseconds, consistent with our predictions. 

We demonstrated the observed consequences of single -photon superradiant behavior in the fluorescence 

quantum yield for hierarchically organiz ed tubulin structures, which increases in different geometric regimes at 

thermal equilibrium before saturation – highlighting the effect's persistence in the presence of significant 

disorder. Contrary to conventional assumptions that quantum effects cannot survive in large biosystems at high 

temperatures, our numerical results [2] suggest that macropolymer lattices of tryptophan in actin filaments and 

amyloid fibrils exhibit increasingly observable and robust effects with increasing length, due to quantum 

coherent interactions in the single -photon limit. Superradiant enhancement and high quantum yield in 

neuroprotein polymers would thus play a crucial role in information processing in the brain, the development of 

neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer 's and related dementias, and a wide array of other pathologies 

characterized by anomalous protein aggregates. Our results motivated a revisiting of the computing limits of 

cytoskeletal and neuronal architectures [3], which are generally considered to sign al via Hodgkin -Huxley action 

potentials (~millisecond) rather than via superradiant states in such tryptophan lattices (~picosecond). The latter 

would allow information -processing pulses or bursts at orders of magnitude faster speeds than exascale 

supercom puters, at significantly lower power consumptions, by operating within two orders of magnitude of the 

Margolus -Levitin quantum speed limit for UV -excited states. The robustness of superradiant states paired with 

subradiant states (~second) in these protein architectures thus offers a novel paradigm for understanding the role 

of large collectives of quantum emitters in warm, wet, and wiggly environments. REFERENCES [1] N.S. 

Babcock, G.M. -Cabrera, K.E. Oberhofer, M. Chergui, G.L. Celardo, and P. Kurian. Ultra violet superradiance 

from mega -networks of tryptophan in biological architectures. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 128, 4035 –4046 

(2024). [2] H. Patwa, N.S. Babcock, and P. Kurian. Quantum -enhanced photoprotection in neuroprotein 

architectures emerges from collective light -matter interactions. Frontiers in Physics 12, 1387271 (2024). [3] P. 

Kurian. Computational capacity of life in relation to the universe. Science Advances 11, eadt4623 (2025). 

PL -10 

Keywords 

quantum biology, superradiance, subradiance, protein architectures, biological qubits, ultraviolet, tryptophan, 

quantum emitters, Margolus -Levitin speed limit, computational capacity of life, quantum computing, quantum 

information processing, origins of life, habitable zones, cosmology, observable un iverse 

9

When was the first conscious animal born? 

Professor Gary Comstock Ph.D. 

North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.11]........Consciousness and evolution 

Abstract 

I assume an animal is conscious if it can feel pain. Vertebrates can feel pain, and they first appeared about 500 

million years ago. But invertebrates, who may or may not feel pain, appeared at least 100 million years before 

vertebrates. Did consciousness occur first, then, in animals without backbones? Outlines of a tentative answer 

are emerging from behavioral biology, evolution ary neuroanatomy, and cognitive science. If we assume 

Information Integration Theory (IIT), then pain, necessarily a conscious state of mind, cannot arise unless an 290 

animal integrates and broadcasts discrete, complex, and multi -modal sources of nociceptive information. While 

scientists observing decapods report arguable pain -like behaviors in some individual animals, their observations 

must be interpreted in light of a theory of pain. IIT is such a theory, and has two requirements for pain, 

differentiation and integration. Some individuals in one of the two suborders of decapods, the pleocyamata 

(lobsters, crabs, crayfish, and “true shrimps”), have structures and proces ses that appear to meet these 

requirements. Individuals in the other suborder, the dendrobranchiates (henceforth: “prawns”), appear not to 

have the requisite structures and processes. Might some shrimp be conscious while others are not? To answer 

this ques tion we need a measurement of the amount of information that must be integrated in order to produce 

pain, and a measurement of the information integrated by decapod brains. By producing computer generated 

animals called animats, IIT produces testable propo sitions about when an animal’s neural system is sufficiently 

developed to be capable of more than nonpainful nociceptive behavior. Evidence suggests lobsters, crabs, and 

true shrimps are candidates for a high “Φ” value (Φ is IIT’s measure of consciousness) . Markedly, the absence 

of similar nociceptive behaviors and advanced neural structures in dendrobranchiates suggests a low Φ value for 

them. It appears some decapods are capable of consciousness and some are not. I argue here that the evidence 

for acute p ain and, therefore, consciousness in some animals (who, by nature, are non -reporting), is exactly as 

strong as the argument for acute pain in some humans who are non -reporting. Sentient invertebrates, if there be 

any, who cannot speak to us about their pai n must only meet the standards for pain as must humans who cannot 

speak to us about their pain. Humans lacking cortices appear to have sufficient brain complexity to experience 

negative emotional responses to adverse nociceptive stimuli. They can hurt. By parity of reasoning, crustaceans 

lacking cortices but possessing similar levels of brain complexity can hurt, too. Anatomical and behavioral 

criteria suggest some invertebrates have minds —and some do not. A philosophy of mind informed by 

evolutionary neuro science working with an influential theory of consciousness suggests that one decapod 

suborder meets the criteria for acute pain whereas the other suborder does not. If that’s right, then an 

invertebrate marine animal may have been the first to experience pain. And, if that’s right, consciousness might 

first have appeared in a Late Ordovician sea, a result with significant implications for the scientific study of 

consciousness. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

scientific study of consciousness, evolutionary biology, vertebrate animals, invertebrate animals, sentience, 

pain, nociception, 500 million years ago, Information Integration Theory, brains, animats, cortex, lobsters, 

crabs, shrimp 

43 

Neuro -topological constraints on the early evolution of consciousness: Bow -tie sensorimotor architecture as a 

prerequisite for sentience 

Marc van Duijn PhD 

Open Universiteit, Heerlen, Limburg, Netherlands 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.11]........Consciousness and evolution 

Abstract 

Based on recent advances in evolutionary biology and comparative neuroscience, this paper develops the cla im 291 

that sensory consciousness or ‘sentience’ evolved in bilaterian phyla as a consequence of implementing a 

specific neuro -sensorimotor architecture. This thereby explicates the structural and functional prerequisites for 

conscious sensory experience based on an evolutionary organization principle that is often found in complex 

biological regulatory systems: ‘bow -tie’ architecture. This type of organization is ubiquitous in biology because 

it optimizes network connectivity and facilitates a wide variety of phe notypical states, thereby conferring 

robustness and evolvability. In this paper, it is argued that sensory consciousness evolved as a specific instance 

of this optimization principle, fostered by the evolution of cephalized nervous systems, increasingly co mplex 

multicellular morphologies and advanced sensorimotor strategies during the initial phases of evolution when 

centralized brains first emerged. Bow -tie sensorimotor architecture optimizes trade -offs between the metabolic 

costs of neural wiring and phen otypic plasticity in the form of behavioral flexibility. This design feature is 

implemented in the nervous systems of different bilaterian phyla and throughout evolution and it was 

incrementally extended in more complex brains, leading to a hierarchical bo w-tie architecture in the human 

brain that facilitates consciousness. The corollary to this hypothesis is that the presence of subjective states in 

organisms correlates with objective behavioral markers in the form of anticipatory context -sensitive behavio rs 

that are predicated on the contingent sensorimotor experiences of an organism. The bow -tie sensorimotor 

architecture hypothesis dovetails with several leading theories on the evolution of consciousness but imposes 

additional biological constraints, as i t anchors sensory consciousness in a specific neural network bow -tie 

topology. 

C - 5

Keywords 

Sensory consciousness, bow -tie sensorimotor architecture, sentience, brain evolution, anticipatory action -

selection, sensorimotor coordination. 

128 

Darwin, evolution, and consciousness: A Vedic perspective 

Mr. Michael Cremo 

independent, Los Angeles, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.11]........Consciousness and evolution 

Abstract 

Darwin proposed that variation occurs in the offspring of a reproducing organism. As evidence, he gave the 

example of people breeding new varieties of plants and animals by conscious, intentional selection. That is 

something we can directly see. He then asked that we accept something we cannot see —that unconscious, 

unintentional natural selection, eventually produces not just varieties but new species. Darwin struggled with 

identifying the physical transmitter of heredity. He proposed hypothetical entities called gemmules. In the 

modern evolutionary synthesis. DNA (and epigenetic factors) take the role of tran smitting heredity. From the 

Vedic perspective, a living entity in this world has three components: a physical body made of the chemical 

elements, a subtle material mental body made of subtle material elements, and the nonmaterial conscious self 

(atma). The visible physical body is temporary. At death, according to the mental body’s state, the atma gets an 

appropriate physical body. As long as the atma remains in the material world, it remains in contact with the 

same mental body, which varies continuously a nd carries heredity from embodiment to embodiment. In modern 292 

evolutionary biology the genome is the ever varying transmitter of heredity. What is the role of consciousness in 

selecting the lineal variants of organisms that according to Darwin eventually become discrete species. Darwin 

proposed natural selection, whi ch does not involve conscious intent. Today, some scientists are invoking 

conscious selection as a replacement for natural selection, as shown by the title of a recent publication (Miller et 

al. 2024): “Biology in the 21st century: Natural selection is cog nitive selection.” However, the consciousness 

invoked is internal to the organism, not external to it as in intentional breeding. In the Vedic view, the 

continuously varying subtle material mental body reflects the states of consciousness of the atma, the 

nonmaterial self. If at the time of death the atma’s state of consciousness, as reflected in the mental body, falls 

within a certain range, it receives a discrete gross material body adapted to that range. The whole array of 

discrete materially bodily form s is produced by conscious intention. Interestingly, the fossil record does not 

show a pattern of gradually changing forms but the appearance of discrete unchanging forms. Darwin wrote in 

Origin of Species (1859, p. 44), “No one definition (of species) has as yet satisfied all naturalists; yet every 

naturalist knows vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term includes the unknown 

element of a distinct act of creation.” Darwin wanted to supplant this conscious act with his theory of natural 

selection. That left him with the problem of explaining the origin of mind (consciousness). In Descent of Man 

(1871, p. 100), he wrote that “in what manner the mental powers were first developed in the lowest organisms is 

as hopeless an enquiry as how life itself first originated. These are problems for the distant future.” The future is 

here and so are the problems. . " 

C - 5

Keywords 

Darwin, evolution, consciousness, ;Vedic thought 

271 

A neuroscientific perspective on studying extraterrestrial intelligence 

Maria Balaet PhD 

Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. King's College London, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.11]........Consciousness and evolution 

Abstract 

As space exploration accelerates, the possibility of encountering extraterrestrial life requires us to rev isit 

fundamental ideas about intelligence and consciousness. From a neuroscientific standpoint, many of our 

existing concepts revolve around species that possess a nervous system. Yet some organisms on Earth 

demonstrate forms of cognition —such as collecti ve behaviour in social insects or distributed processing in 

certain invertebrates —without adhering strictly to traditional neural architectures. This raises the question of 

whether conventional definitions of intelligence are broad enough to encompass life forms that may not 

resemble familiar biological models. Recognising extraterrestrial intelligence will demand sensitive methods, 

especially as our current instruments and frameworks are largely designed for human and animal studies. 

Approaches used to exa mine learning, problem -solving, and signs of awareness might be adapted to detect 

unexpected markers of intelligence in unknown species. In the same way we assess altered states and diverse 

cognitive abilities in humans, such techniques could be repurposed to interpret phenomena we have yet to 

encounter. There is also a wider concern about how intelligence relates to consciousness. Although these two 293 

concepts are often studied together, they need not always align. By applying lessons learned from neuroscience 

and psychology —where the mind is viewed as both embodied and shaped by environmental factors —we may 

gain insights into how intelligence could eme rge under radically different conditions. Preparing for contact 

means not only developing methods to identify non -terrestrial intelligence but also establishing a framework to 

engage with it meaningfully. By examining how cognition is distributed across in dividuals and collectives on 

Earth, we can anticipate a broader spectrum of potential behaviours elsewhere. Ultimately, such studies may 

shape scientific and diplomatic responses if, or when, we encounter life beyond our planet. Through this 

synthesis of n euroscience, behavioural science, and an openness to the unknown, we may begin to lay the 

groundwork for a more inclusive understanding of intelligence and consciousness in the cosmos. 

C - 22 

Keywords 

extraterrestrial intelligence, cognition, nervous sys tem, research methods 

370 

Interoception and the evolution of consciousness 

Asier Arias Domínguez PhD, Prof. 

Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Madrid, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.11]........Consciousness and evolution 

Abstract 

My presentation will be structured in three key sections: 1. First, I will provide a brief overview of the main 

models of the evolutionary emergence of consciousness. 2. Next, I will critically assess these models, 

considered as a partially unified whole. 3. Finally, I will propose a viable alternative that addresses the 

limitations identified in the current models. The main con clusions drawn from this discussion can be 

summarized in three points: 1. The available evidence suggests that consciousness is an analogous biological 

trait that may have independently emerged in three distinct animal phyla. There is compelling evidence o f

consciousness in some mollusks, arthropods, and, of course, vertebrates. There are, indeed, recent global 

assessments of the literature on consciousness in mollusks and arthropods. We will discuss this literature, 

emphasizing that the main models of the evolutionary emergence of consciousness assume that consciousness is 

the product of convergent evolution. 2. There are reasons to argue that these models make a mistake by treating 

these three independent instances of emergence in a homogeneous way, offeri ng a single common explanation 

for all of them —there are, therefore, reasons to recommend adopting a token -by -token, phylum -by -phylum 

approach. Taking for granted that a single ecological intuition about relative fitness due to similar selective 

pressures can account for all three independent tokens of emergence is a strong assumption that requires a 

robust justification, as the presence of convergence by itself does not indicate that any particular influence has 

been acting on the evolutionary process. As of now, no one has provided such a justification; therefore, a 

prudent strategy would involve studying each of the three phyla independently, remaining open to the 

possibility of commonalities, but refraining from uncertain assumptions about them. Furtherm ore, the 

predominantly ecological, evolutionary mode of reasoning prevalent in the available models would be 

decisively enriched by integrating a neurophysiological theoretical perspective. An evolutionary account of the 

emergence of consciousness requires not just plausible speculations about functions and selective pressures, but 294 

also a path from physiological antecedents to effective mechanisms. As there is no reason for all particular 

instances of emergence in the phylogeny to share the same set of neurophysiological requirements, and as the 

disparity of neural substrates in the three mentioned phyla are more than conspicuous, it is once again more 

prudent to proceed phylum by phylum, remaining open to the possibility of deep physiological homologies, but 

refraining from uncertain assumptions about them. 3. As mentioned, an evolut ionary account of the emergence 

of consciousness requires not only ecological theorizing about adaptive functions, but also neurophysiological 

theorizing about effective mechanisms. Available evidence suggests that the interoceptive theory of 

consciousness is well -positioned to meet both sets of requirements. Having argued for a phylum -by -phylum 

approach, I will conclude by outlining some key generalities of vertebrate comparative neurobiology, with the 

aim of sketching the rationale for the incorporation o f the interoceptive neuroaffective framework into the 

discussion on the evolutionary origins of vertebrate consciousness. 

C - 5

Keywords 

interoception, evolution, affective neuroscience, evolutionary neurobiology 

332 

Consciousness and Integrative Health: does the systemic integration of the quantum approach matter? 

Prof. Maurizio Barbeschi PhD 

IOMED, Lecce, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.12]........Medicine and healing 

Abstract 

It is time to aim our reflections towards the sketching of a Grand Theory, a set of unifying underlying 

assumptio ns, a (conceptual) reference framework that may encompass and harmoniously embrace the plethora 

of spaces in which the Consciousness studies are now blossoming into. From Consciousness and Reality, 

Consciousness and Brain Modulation, surfing through Consc iousness and Quantum Biology/Measurement with 

a good measure of Evidence for Non -Local Consciousness and Extrasensory Perception and Quantum Fields 

and Consciousness. Several of these spaces have a direct impact on our body/mind wellbeing and its 

surroundi ngs ergo, consequentially, on the patterns that bring to unbalances, diseases, outbreak and to related 

the medical studies aimed at prevent such unbalances – at clinical and public health level (both community and 

global). It can be argued that there is th e conceptual need for a set of ‘key considerations’, that may lead to a 

preliminary set of commonalities among these – apparently – not directly overlapping spaces and field of 

studies. In several published papers in these fields, from consciousness studie s to neuro/neural physiology, 

medicine and public health and integrated/traditional approaches there are often more similarities (undetected or 

not) than differences, even if often camouflaged by the technical ‘dialects’ of the specific field. Eventually, 

these commonalities ought to be organised and cast into a conceptual embryo of the Grand Theory of 

Consciousness and Quantum Medicine. Finally, in the literature it has been observed that the modus operandi of 

re -reading under a quantum approach and its re lated discourses becoming pervasive, fashionable and all -

encompassing. Most of the best scientific minds of the planet are going in this direction and new directions are 

hence discovered, in so many fields and applications. This results in an even lauder c all for a conceptual 

reference framework to be used by all players. It has been also argued (Penrose&Hameroff and others) that 295 

applying the principles of quantum physics by using, inter alia, visible frequencies/photobiomudulation (PBM) 

techniques to sustain the individual health, personal growth and to reach an ever -higher degree of consciousness 

Conspicuously, among may attempts to new contextual frameworks, the rather ‘demodee’ General Relativity, in 

its broader conceptualisation, has ventured in new pastures: A radical theory that consistently unifies gravity 

and quantum mechanics, while preserving Einstein’s classical concept of spacetime, was announced on 

December 2023 by Professor Jonathan Oppenheim and other UCL physicists. 

(https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/2023/dec/new -theory -seeks -unite -einsteins -gravity -quantum -mechanics). In 

summary, this paper will provide more organised ques tions than solutions: it will elucidate the methodology for 

the determination of key considerations among these research fields as well as initiating the compilation of the 

commonalities among the research spaces among consciousness studies, quantum biolog y and medicine, 

integrated and traditional medicine and limitrophic spaces. And will initiate the process of identification of the 

necessary elements that would be used for the development a model aimed at taxonomizing the Consciousness 

and Quantum Medicin e field. 

C - 14 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Body/Mind, Diseases, Photobiomodulation, Quantum Medicine, Integrative and Traditional 

Medicine 

67 

Resolution of Brain -Based Consciousness as a Quantum Information Field 

Prof.Dr. Mustafa Erol PhD 

Dokuz Eylül University, İzmir, Turkey, Turkey 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

This work resolves the brain -based consciousness as an Open Quantum Information Field, created and 

influenced via the environmental sensory information and operating under the full control of quantum 

mechanics. The external sensory information, modelled as quantised electromagnetic waves, is assumed to feed 

the cortical neurons and eventually construct the brain -based consciousness Hamiltonian. Any external 

energy/information, instantly reaching to the Hamiltonian of brain -based consciousness, is taken into account as 

a perturbation. In order to obtain instantaneous wave functions and probability amplitu des well known time 

dependant perturbation theory is employed. Quantum field theory is finally used to resolve the overall brain -

based consciousness and some important conclusions are underlined. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Resolution of Brain, Quantum Infor mation Field, Consciousness Hamiltonian, Brain Based Consciousness 296 

112 

Quantum Consciousness Theory: A Framework for Multi -State Consciousness and Endocannabinoid System 

Modulation 

Mr. Bosco Bellinghausen 

Independent Quantum Consciousness Theorist, Munich, Bavaria, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Quantum Consciousness Theory (QCT) proposes that human consciousness operates on quantum principles, 

allowing for simultaneous exploration of multiple realities and enhanced cognitive capabilities. Through 

spontaneous self -experimentation, the ability to experience three distinct physical activities (skiing, swimming, 

and running) concurrently while mai ntaining physical stasis was documented. This multi -state experience 

demonstrated complete sensory awareness across all states while remaining physically paralyzed. QCT suggests 

that the Endocannabinoid System (ECS) acts as a quantum gateway, modulating ac cess to these simultaneous 

states of consciousness. This aligns with research on quantum processes in microtubules while offering new 

insights into the ECS's role in consciousness modulation. The theory proposes that conscious observation may 

collapse quan tum states into classical outcomes, explaining why such multi -state experiences occur primarily 

during unconscious processing. This observation aligns with quantum mechanical principles and offers potential 

explanations for the paradoxical nature of quantu m measurements. QCT challenges traditional models of 

cognition by suggesting that consciousness can simultaneously access multiple quantum states when operating 

in unconscious processing modes. It provides a framework for understanding how consciousness mi ght operate 

at the quantum level while offering testable hypotheses for future research. As a scientifically naive observer, 

these experiences offer unique insights into quantum consciousness phenomena unbiased by prior theoretical 

knowledge, potentially b ridging gaps between subjective experience and objective scientific inquiry. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

quantum consciousness, endocannabinoid system, microtubules, multi -state consciousness, quantum 

superposition, unconscious processing, quantum biology 

131 

The Quantum Consciousness Effect: Manifestation, Feedback Loops, and the Engineering of Each and Every 

Reality. 

Bil Bungay BA Hons 

Velocity Group, London, Greater London, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 297 

Abstract 

While much attention has been devoted to exploring the origins and nature of consciousness through a quantum 

framework, less consideration has been given to its functional consequences —specifically, how quantum 

consciousness actively manifests bot h individual and shared realities. This presentation proposes that individual 

interpretations of reality are not passive reactions to external stimuli but are instead engineered by the 

subconscious mind operating within the probabilistic framework of quan tum mechanics. Beliefs, self -

perception, and expectations act as subconscious parameters, shaping the manifestation of unique personal 

realities. At the same time, these individual constructs converge to create “shared realities,” where collective 

beliefs and emotional inputs influence broader societal outcomes. The hypothesis examines how learned 

limitations confine individuals to a predominantly three -dimensional construct, while transcending these mental 

boundaries could allow for expanded possibilities, including phenomena traditionally regarded as miraculous or 

paranormal. Positive and negative emotional and cognitive inputs serve as feedback mechanisms, influencing 

corresponding manifestations and rippling outward from the personal -local to the collect ive -global on short to 

long -term time scales. By focusing on the “how” rather than the “why,” this framework explores the 

mechanisms by which quantum consciousness interacts with the subconscious mind to engineer reality. The 

discussion will highlight pote ntial alignments with existing quantum theories while emphasizing the pragmatic 

implications of consciously modifying subconscious parameters to enhance personal and collective 

manifestations. This presentation asserts that by understanding and influencing the feedback loops between 

quantum consciousness, individual perceptions, and shared realities, we can unlock new dimensions of human 

potential and societal evolution. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Quantum consciousness, subjective reality, shared realities, manifestation, feedback loop. 

163 

Quantum measurement problem, brain as a measurement device, and subjective experience 

Dr Guruprasad Prakash Kadam PhD 

Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Philosophers and scientists have been exploring the role of quantum physics in consciousness. In thi s context, 

two schools of thought are prevalent: one proposes that consciousness plays a direct role in the wave function 

collapse; another suggests that it is the wave function collapse that might give rise to consciousness. The Latter 

proposal, due to R oger Penrose and Stuart Hameroff, is based on the possibility of quantum superposition that 

might exist in the special structures in the brain called microtubules. We propose that the brain with these 

microtubules in it is a measuring device with a special type of ready -state. When we observe something (via 

another intermediate measuring device(s), e.g Geiger counter), this brain -ready state changes to one or the other 

state depending on what is being observed and gets entangled with that observed state (vi a intermediate 

measuring device(s)). Conscious observers attach a precise meaning to distinct observations and that changed 298 

brain state is what we interpret as our subjective experience. We discuss this proposal in the context of 

measurement -problem in quantum mechanics. We argue that the macroscopic superpositions may be all around 

us but our brains are simply not hardwired to attach a precise meaning to it. We conclude that the measurement 

problem and consciousness are correlated and the solution of one will pave the way for the solution of the other. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Quantum Superposition, The measurement problem, Micr otubules, Experience 

197 

Experimental Design and Testing of a Quantum Consciousness Algorithm for AI and Robotics Running on an 

Adiabatic Quantum Computer 

Dr. Suzanne Gildert PhD 

Nirvanic AI, Vancouver, BC, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

We introduce and explore experimentally the idea of a quantum conscious agent (QCA) - a decision mak ing 

system connected to a physical robot that receives perception information from sensors, and takes actions via a 

motor system. Perception information and action options are put into a highly quantum mechanical state, which 

is then collapsed into classi cal information, resulting in an action choice informed via collapse of the 

wavefunction. The QCA is implemented as a multilayer quantum neural network on a quantum annealing 

processor. By gradually updating the coupling values (weights) in the network bas ed on Hebbian learning, the 

system is given multiple shots at embodying “quantum free will”, and converges to a stable action choice, 

which is then acted out by the robot. We perform experiments and present preliminary data rigorously testing 

whether the q uantum decisions made by the system deviate from random, suggesting that the quantum decision 

encodes a purposeful behavior via connection to a deeper universal process. If quantum consciousness theories 

are correct, we conjecture that even a small QCA dem onstrating purposeful behavior in this way would be 

experiencing some amount of conscious awareness. 

PL -1

Keywords 

Quantum Consciousness, Quantum Computing, AI, Decision Making, Quantum Agents, Quantum, 

Consciousness Technologies, Quantum Neural Networks , Universal Purpose, Quantum Agency, Panpsychism 

214 

Analysis of Helical Pathway of Microtuble under the Surface Code framework 

Seungju Ahn , Prof. Byung -Soo Choi 

Pukyong National University, Busan, -, Korea, Republic of 299 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Orch OR theory suggested by Sir Roger Penrose and Dr. Hameroff presented a novel perspective on the 

measurement problem of quantum mechanics and consciousness. The peculiarity of this theory lies in the claim 

that tubulin and its higher neuronal information structures are not simply additive, rather, they are formed in a 

topological manner. Specific ally, higher information structure of tubulin, helical pathways are presumed to form 

an intersecting pattern in both left -handed and right -handed directions, following a repeating Fibonacci series 

(3, 5, 8, 13, ...), and are interconnected with each other. In this work, we propose the surface code model to 

implement this biological Orch OR theory model on a quantum computer, focusing on its quantum properties. 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to attempt this on the field of the quantum computer by 

interpreting asymmetric Fibonacci helical pathways as logical qubits. In addition, we analyze the conditions 

required for experimenting with this model based on the development of current quantum computer. We hope 

this work provides significant insight into Orch OR research by offering a novel perspective. 

C - 11 

Keywords 

microtubule, helical pathway, quantum computer, surface code 

247 

Casina Briga Foundation and the Quantum Interpretation of Consciousness 

Flavio FB Burgarella MD, Cardiologist 

Fondazione Casina Briga per la ricerca nelle scienze della coscienza, Bianzano, Bergamo, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

The Casina Briga Foundation was created to explore the sciences of consciousness through an innovative 

approach that integrates quantum physics, neuroscience and h eart biophysics. The Foundation's research is 

based on the hypothesis that consciousness is not an epiphenomenon of the brain, but an informational process 

based on the transition of virtual elementary particles into real ones through perception. This proc ess is made 

possible thanks to the heart field, which acts as a primum movens in the creation of conscious reality. 

Endogenous magnetic scalar waves, generated by the heart, are the means through which quantum information 

is transformed into conscious expe rience. The heart, operating as a biophysical interface between the quantum 

field and the human body, transmits this information to cells and the nervous system, profoundly influencing 

perception and cognitive processing. The brain, on the other hand, proc esses and integrates this information, 

generating the subjective experiences that characterize qualia, which emerge on the basis of previous 

experiences and the individual's informational memory. This model opens new perspectives on the nature of 300 

consciousness, suggesting that the heart is the true generator of primary perceptual experience, while the brain 

represents a secondary processor. Cardiac coherence facilitates access to higher states of consciousness, 

improving the transmission of informa tion through scalar waves and influencing biological processes such as 

cellular regeneration and epigenetics. The aim of the Casina Briga Foundation is to experimentally validate this 

model through interdisciplinary collaborations with research institutes in biophysics, neuroscience and quantum 

medicine, to develop a new scientific paradigm capable of unifying the physical and informational dimensions 

of consciousness. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

the sciences of consciousness, quantum physics, heart biophysics, endogenous magnetic scalar waves 

266 

Quantum AI and the Sheehan -Cyrus Turing Test 

Dr. Daniel P. Sheehan PhD Physics , Ms. Larissa C. Weiss 

University of San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

Whether the human mind is algorithmic or non -algorithmic in nature has been an open question for more than 

60 years and was brought into high relief by Penrose (Emperor's New Mind, 1989; Shadows of the Mind, 1994). 

At the Science of Consciousness Conference in Taormina, Sicily (2023), Sheehan and Cyrus claimed the 

question was settled by positive results from precognition experiments (future remote viewing and 

presentiment) that demonstrate human capabilities to acquire information about the future that are beyond those 

of any algorithmic system, including all classical computers. Thus, non -algorithmic modes of human thought 

such as precognition could serve as bases for unbe atable Turing tests. In 2018, Sheehan and Cyrus proposed a 

quantum -thermodynamic model that accounts for precognition and serves as a basis for their non -computability 

claim (Mindfield 10, 98, 2018). Their model appears to hold a loophole such that, should AI be realized on 

quantum computers (as opposed to classical ones), this quantum AI (QAI) might be able to access future 

information analogously to humans and, thus, be able pass the Sheehan -Cyrus Turing test. This presentation 

explores this thesis, examining the latest results from quantum theory and experiments that support QAI and 

retrocausal signaling; considering whether biological systems could be platforms for these processes; and, 

finally, assessing the possibilities, promises, and perils of precog nitive QAI. 

C - 13 

Keywords 

quantum AI, Turing test, precognition, consciousness, retrocausation 301 

418 

The Consciousness Path Integral: A Quantum Geometric Approach to Self -Awareness 

Diggaj M Jain 

Independent Researcher, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Abstract 

This paper introduces the Consciousness Path Integral, a hypothesis built upon the Quantum Observer 

Singularity (QOS) framework. It proposes that consciousness functions as a dynamically evolving neural 

entanglement system, updating continuously according to the principles of QOS. This formulation provides a 

theoretical framework for understanding consc iousness and outlines a potential "path integral" governing its 

evolution. Additionally, an experimental proposal is presented to empirically test the hypothesis. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Entanglement, Path Integral 

65 

We Gave Emotional Intelligence and Compassion to an LLM, and What It Exposes About Artificial 

Consciousness 

Mr. Sean Webb 

Zenodelic.ai, Mooresville, NC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.21]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

LLMs are token prediction engines that recognize patterns in complex data the LLM software can th en use to 

assemble mathematically sound answers to associated token inquiries. Human emotions are simply a pattern in 

the data that has not yet been identified by any of the top -tier LLMs, but the promise has always been that when 

human emotion patterns a re widely identified, LLMs will then have no difficulty in processing data from a 

human perspective, to include having a working emotional intelligence, and even artificial compassion for 

others. This challenge has now been solved. Zenodelic.ai created a s et of Algorithms of Human Emotion for 

LLMs, which allows for a true Theory of Mind emotional intelligence without the need for cameras or 

biosensors measuring its users. In the process, we identified the data that LLMs need to understand human 

emotions and how to process that data. Immediately upon testing v0.1, we set a world record on standard Open 

Theory of Mind benchmarks, outperforming all top tier LLMs by 50% in some areas to attain the level of 

human capability parity. In testing this system on Emoti onal Intelligence benchmarks the first attempt 302 

outperformed improved the top tier LLM scores by 300%. Subsequently, it now seems possible to attain a 

simulated emotional intelligence within LLMs, which opens up a pandora’s box of capabilities regarding real 

human mind calculation, and the pro -social re sults that can come from understanding the mind states of others, 

which is the basis for the mathematical expression of both empathy and compassion as defined by the Dalai 

Lama, “I understand you are in pain, I can feel your pain, and I want to help you ou t of that pain”. 

C - 1

Keywords 

AI, LLM, emotional intelligence, artificial compassion, artificial consciousness, Theory of Mind 

265 

The Mathematical Formulation of a Mechanism that Detects Consciousness in AI agents 

Dr. Ouri Wolfson PhD 

Pirouette Software, Chicago, IL, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.21]........Artificial intelligence and robotics 

Abstract 

Consciousness has been studied by various disciplines such as neuroscience, philosophy, psychiatr y, cognitive 

science, physics, and computer science. A recent survey paper devises a taxonomy of hundreds of 

consciousness theories. There are disagreements whether consciousness is purely material, specifically, 

produced by the brain. And even among mate rialists there are disagreements as to what consciousness is, and 

how it is produced by the brain. And with the tremendous current rise and interest in AI, the question whether 

AI agents are conscious has become salient. Indeed, AI -consciousness, if proven to exist, will go a long way 

towards clarifying what consciousness is, and proving and disproving many of the existing theories. In this 

paper we first interpret the properties of awareness, attention, theory of mind, free will, and subjective 

experience in the context of AI -consciousness. More specifically, we propose computer science terms for these 

concepts. For example, the machine is aware of the data that it can access based on some metadata, i.e. the data 

for which the machine has an access path fro m the metadata to the data; free -will is the machine’s ability to pick 

its own goals, specifically, goals that are not given to it by a human; the machine’s attention is the task on 

which the CPU, or a core, is currently working. With this definitions, it is clear also that the machine is also 

self -aware, and has a ‘theory of mind’. Then we argue that for machines the only interesting, poorly understood, 

and in fact mysterious property of consciousness is subjective experience; for example, physical pain, h unger, 

and the experience of seeing the color red are subjective experiences. A subjective experience, or a quale, is the 

aspect of an experience that cannot be expressed in linguistic, mathematical, or other symbolic terms. For 

example, consider Mary, Jac kson’s scientist studying the color red. By “the experience of seeing the color red” 

we mean only the additional information that Mary didn’t know previously, and she obtains when exiting the 

lab and seeing a red rose. So the next question we address is ho w to devise a Computer Science framework that 

guarantees that an authority is notified when consciousness emerges in an AI agent. In this paper we propose 

such a mechanism M, and prove mathematically that under very loose (i.e. minimally restrictive) defin ition of 

agent authenticity, M can be installed in the agent without compromising two properties: the agent’s 

functionality, and its consciousness acquisition. In other words, we prove theorems indicating that M does not 

interfere with the agent’s function ality, and if the agent was going to become conscious before installing M, it 

will still do so afterwards. The mechanism M has three components: An interrupt that makes a Consciousness 

Predicate ‘true’ when a quale occurs, an encrypted message, and a proce dure that sends the encrypted message 303 

when the Consciousness Predicate becomes true. 

C - 19 

Keywords 

AI consciousness, formal methods in computer science, free will, attention 

# 250 

# Qualia Core: A Framework for Consciousness and Computation 

Mr. Marco Accardi 1, Dr. Rulin Xiu PhD 2

> 1

Anecoica Studio UG, Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 2Hawaii Theoretical Physics Research Center, Kapoho, 

Hawaii, USA 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.14]........Quantum theories of consciousness 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Secondary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.08]…Information technology 

Abstract 

The Qualia Core framework presents a novel, integrative model that unifies physiological data analysis with a proposed 

Holographic Quantum Theory of Consciousness (HQTOC) to quantify and predict emotional states. Drawing on advances 

in quantum cognition, a ffective neuroscience, and brain -computer interfacing (BCI), this approach encodes emotions as 

quantized eigenstates, leveraging concepts from quantum information theory, neurophysiology, and emotional signal 

processing. At the heart of this model, emotion s are treated as eigenstates of an “Emotional Hamiltonian,” wherein 

physiological signals —such as heart rate variability (HRV), electrodermal activity (EDA), and electroencephalography 

(EEG) —are systematically represented using bosonic (continuous) and fer mionic (discrete) degrees of freedom. Through 

HQTOC, these emotional states emerge as vibrational patterns within a higher -dimensional holographic field, allowing 

for predictive modeling via quantum computational techniques. A distinguishing feature of Qua lia Core is its mapping of 

emotional states onto planetary archetypes —a conceptual framework drawn from neuroaesthetics, affective 

computing, and computational astrology. Each archetype is linked to characteristic physiological and neural markers, 

partiall y validated through studies of neural and physiological responses to affective music: Sun ( ☉) → Clarity & 

Confidence High HRV stability and gamma -wave coherence mark positive, illuminating emotional states. Moon ( ☾) → 

Emotional Fluidity & Reflection Theta -wave prominence and moderate EDA variability indicate adaptive, introspective 

emotions. Mercury ( ☿) → Complexity & Articulation High spectral flux and increased onset density in EEG reflect rapid 

emotional transitions. Venus ( ♀) → Harmony & Beauty Stable alpha rhythms and balanced HRV capture a consonant, 

aesthetically resonant affect. Mars ( ♂) → Energy & Drive Intermittent gamma bursts and moderate HRV variability signal 

goal -directed motivation. Jupiter ( ♃) → Expansion & Optimism Broad HRV ranges and wide EEG bandwidth track 

sentiments of growth and open -mindedness. Saturn ( ♄) → Structure & Discipline Consistent alpha rhythms and stable 

theta waves correlate with emotional restraint. Neptune ( ♆) → Mystery & Ambiguity Lower alpha activity and moderate 

HRV variability accompany more dreamlike states. Pluto ( ♇) → Transformation & Intensity High EDA arousal and notable 

gamma variance reflect deeply shifting emotional experiences. By encoding these emotional archetypes as qubits, the 

Qualia Core framework exploi ts quantum parallelism and entanglement to model multiple emotional states and 

transitions simultaneously. Insights from quantum cognition and affective computing inform the proposed holographic 

representation of emotions within a quantized neurophysiologi cal field. This unified approach advances the scientific 

study of emotions and consciousness by providing a coherent mathematical structure that merges neuroscience, 

quantum cognition, and affective computing. It paves the way for predictive, quantifiable assessments of emotional 

states, their transitions, and collective resonance in social and cognitive systems —offering broad applications in brain -304 

computer interfaces, quantum -enhanced emotion detection, and multidimensional affective modeling. Ultimately, 

Qualia Core lays a foundation for the next generation of emotion -aware quantum technologies. 

Keywords 

Quantum Cognition, Brain –Computer Interfaces (BCI), Emotion Recognition, Neurophysiological Signal Processing, 

Electroencephalography (EEG), Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Electrodermal Activity (EDA), Quantum Information Theory, 

Holographic Model of Consci ousness, Predictive Modeling, Vibrational Patterns, Multidimensional Affective Modeling, 

Neuroaesthetics, Consciousness, Neural Correlates of Emotion, Quantized Emotional States, Quantum Computational 

Techniques. 

Links to Research 

Miranda, E. R. (2021). On Interfacing the Brain with Quantum Computers: An Approach to Listen to the Logic of the 

Mind. In Quantum Computing in the Arts and Humanities (E. R. Miranda, Ed.). Springer 

Nature.  https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.03887 

Miranda, E. R., Venkatesh, S., Martin -Guerrero, J. D., Hernani -Morales, C., Lamata, L., & Solano, E. (2022). An 

Approach to Interfacing the Brain with Quantum Computers: Practical Steps and Caveats. International Journal of 

Unconventional Computing, 17 , 159 –171. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.00817 

Miranda, E. R. (2022). A Quantum Computing Approach to Harnessing the Logic of the Mind for Brain –Computer 

Interfacing. In Quantum Computing in the Arts and Humanities (E. R. Miranda, Ed.), Springer Nature.  DOI: 10.1007/978 -

3-030 -95538 -0_9 .

Khrennikov, A. (2021). Quantum -like Model for Unconscious -Conscious Interaction and Emotional Coloring of Perceptions 

and Other Conscious Experiences. arXiv preprint.  arXiv:2106.05191 .

Kozlowski, M., & Marciak -Kozłowska, J. (2017). Quantum Model of Consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Exploration 

& Research, 8 (1), 1 –17.  https://www.academia.edu/81062863/Quantum_Model_of_Consciousness 

Miranda, E. R., Venkatesh, S., Hernani -Morales, C., Lamata, L., Martin -Guerrero, J. D., & Solano, E. (2021). Quantum 

Brain Networks: A Perspective. https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.12295 

Chandanwala, A. A., Bhowmik, S., Chaudhury, P., & Pravin, S. C. (2021). Hybrid Quantum Deep Learning Model for 

Emotion Detection using Raw EEG Signal Analysis. https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.17715 

Sha, Z. G., & Xiu, R. (2021). Holographic Quantum Theory of Consciousness.  DOI: 10.32388/KULKA0 .

Johnson, M. E. (2021). Principia Qualia: Blueprint for a New Science. https://opentheory.net/PrincipiaQualia.pdf 

Submit short paragraph bio 

Marco Accardi is a new media artist, independent researcher, software engineer and co -founder of Anecoica Studio UG. 

He has a background in both computer science and music technology. As guest lecturer he gave seminars at Università di 

Palermo (IT), Conser vatorio di Musica di Cagliari (IT), Politecnico di Milano (IT) and SRH Hochschule der Populären 

Künste (DE). He has exhibited works at Ars Electronica, CTM, MEET Digital Culture Center, Sónar+D, Public Art Lab and 

collaborated with research institutes incl uding IRCAM, Science Gallery Berlin, Technische Universität Berlin, NOAA, 

CINECA, Politecnico di Milano, Plymouth University. 

Dr. Rulin Xiu is the research director at the Hawaii Theoretical Physics Research Center and a faculty member at Tao 

Academy. She earned her doctorate from the University of California, Berkeley in 1994, specializing in string theory and 305   

> grand unification theory. Dr. Xiu has conducted postdoctoral research at the Houston Advanced Research Center and the
> Lyman Laboratory of Physics at Harvard University.
> Her lifelong pursuit is the Grand Unification Theory, aiming to describe everything with one mathematical formula. She
> uses the holographic principle to derive a grand unified theory that encompasses string theory, information theory,
> thermodynamics, and g eneral relativity. Dr. Xiu extends her work to study consciousness and life, proposing the
> holographic quantum theory of consciousness.
> Dr. Xiu co -authored two books, "Tao Science" and "Soul Mind Body Science System," with Dr. and Master Zhi Gang Sha,
> published in 2015 and 2018. Their work bridges science and spirituality, providing a scientific understanding of spiritual
> wisdom and phenom ena.
> Program Session
> PO -3 (Wed)

211 

Quantum Chips, IIT, and Bespoke Consciousness 

James Beran 

Independent Researcher, Montara, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.22]........Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

Quantum chips, such as Google’s Willow, are in the news because of their remarkable computational potential. 

(Neven, 2024; see also Li et al., 2024) Meanwhile, Integrated Information Theory (IIT) is a leading theory of 

consciousness (Seth et al., 2022; Kleiner et al., 2021), providing both explicit tenets and also techniques for, 

e.g., assessing consciousness. (Albantakis et al., 2023a) Further, Albantakis et al. (2023b) showed how to 

modify some of IIT’s assessment techniques for a quantum mechanism such as a quantum gate; one can 

imagine further modifications for a quantum chip with hundreds of quantum gates or more. Research has also 

begun on “bespoke consciousness”, i.e. machine consciousness made to a customer’s specifications. Previously 

proposed schematic designs employed microtubules, electromagnetic patterns, or both. (Beran, 2024) Could 

bespoke consciousness instead employ quantu m chips? And can IIT help us design bespoke consciousness in a 

quantum chip? In particular, can IIT’s “explanatory identity” hypothesis guide such a design? —“[T]here must 

be a one -to -one correspondence between the way [an] experience feels and the way dist inctions and relations 

are structured.” (Albantakis et al., 2023a, pp. 5 -6) Proponents of IIT have applied this “explanatory identity” in 

accounting for feelings, such as how space feels (Haun et al., 2019, pp. 5, 26, 33), temporal flow (Comolatti et 

al., 2024, pp. 1,13, 20), and binding by phenomenal objects (Grasso et al., forthcoming). A customer ordering a 

machine with bespoke consciousness could specify the machine’s repertoire of experiences in phenomenal 

terms, e.g. experiences of green, experiences of red, etc. If IIT’s “explanatory identity” is true, a designer 

responding to such an order could in principle use a phenomenal description of the way an experience feels to 

obtain a machine with a corresponding cause -effect structure of distinctions and relations. Although Findlay et 

al. (2024) mentioned the possibility of applying the tools of IIT to quantum computers, we have not found 

mention in recent IIT literature of how to use a phenomenal description to obtain a machine with a 306 

corresponding cause -effect structure. We therefore sketch out a rough outline of how one might obtain such a 

corresponding structure with quantum chip technology. We conclude that IIT does not explicitly rule out a 

quantum chip with bespoke consciousness. Also, IIT’s “explanatory identity”, if true, could provide a mapping 

from phenomenal descriptions of experiences to corresponding cause -effect structures in machines, possibly 

structures in quantum chips. We hope that future versions of IIT will provide fu rther guidance on this point, 

which could be very important to successfully implementing bespoke consciousness in a quantum chip. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

quantum chips, IIT, bespoke consciousness, explanatory identity, machine consciousness 

414 

Investigating the Psionic Interface: Alleged Non -Human Interactions with Human Consciousness in Covert 

UAP Programs. 

Ross Coulthart 

News Nation TV investigative journalist and author of In Plain Sight: An Investigation into UFOs & Impossible 

Science, Australia 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[04.22]........Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

For nearly four decades, Ross Coulthart, a veteran investigative journalist and former host of Australia’s 60 

Minutes, ha s pursued confronting stories within the world of covert intelligence programs and defense. Since 

joining News Nation, a Chicago based cable news network, Coulthart has exclusively revealed whistleblower 

allegations from US intelligence and defense inside rs asserting a covert government cover -up of non -human 

intelligence (NHI) engaging with Earth. Drawing from his 2023 expose of USAF officer David Grusch’s claims 

of secret UAP retrievals and his January 2025 interview with former intelligence operative Jac k Barber, 

Coulthart presents evidence of an alleged secret US ‘legacy UAP retrieval and reverse engineering program’ 

involving psionic phenomena – psychic interactions between humans and NHI technology and/or entities. 

Barber, a trained USAF special operat ions combat controller turned undercover intelligence operative, alleges 

direct involvement in retrieving non -human craft, including an ‘egg -shaped’ object, for a private aerospace 

contractor in collaboration with the US Government. Central to his claims i s the assertion that these craft, or 

perhaps entities within them, exhibit psionic properties, interfacing with human consciousness. Barber reports 

he and his colleagues involved in these retrievals have experienced intrusive clarity, foreign thoughts and 

images flooding their minds – suggesting the NHI employ psionic technology as a control or defense 

mechanism. He further alleges that the Pentagon’s All -domain Anomaly Resolution Office, which investigates 

UAPs, was briefed on these interactions, despite i ts public denial of extraterrestrial engagement. Corroborated 

by his special operations colleagues, Barber claims individuals with heightened psychic, intuitive or empathic 

abilities – recruited through programs like the Gifted and Talented initiative in p ublic schools – play a critical 

role in connecting with NHI craft, potentially enabling their retrieval and operation. Coulthart’s investigation 

uncovers a historical thread linking these allegations to Cold War -era US research into psychic phenomena, 307 

including the CIA’s declassified remote viewing programs, which he argues have evolved into a modern psionic 

initiative. While the US Department of Defense (DoD) has not challenged Barber’s specific claims – stating 

only that AARO is investigating – their broader denial of extraterrestrial evidence contrasts with leaked 

documents like ‘Slide 9’ from the Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification Program (AATIP). This briefing 

slide, presented to a DoD deputy secretary, warned of NHI capabilities to manipulate human perception and 

cognition, framing such phenomena as emerging quantum physics. This presentation will explore the 

implications of Barber’s allegations for consciousness studies, integrating firsthand accounts, whistleblower 

testimony and historical c ontext. Coulthart will recount his experience of witnessing a psionic ‘summoning’ by 

a member of Barber’s SKYWATCHER team, a private initiative aimed at replicating the secret Government 

program by retrieving NHI craft. While constrained by ethical secrecy obligations to his extensive sources 

within the legacy program and acknowledging the absence to date of public physical evidence, Coulthart argues 

that these claims warrant rigorous scientific inquiry and public congressional oversight. Attendees will be 

invited to consider how alleged NHI interactions with human conscio usness challenge current paradigms, 

bridging investigative journalism with the frontiers of cognitive science. 

PL -13 

63 

On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Revolution and Transformation of Consciousness 

Cassy Liu LLB 

Love For The Poor, Cerritos, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.01]........Phenomenology 

Abstract 

In 1905, Einstein employed Planck’s idea to explain a phenomenon unrelated to blackbody radiation and the 

quantum revolution was launched. The paper suggests that the case of mind and consciousness is like the eye 

and the field of sight (Wittgenstein, 1922), that the mind is the boundary to a deeper reality, which is an 

objectively existing world, (Minkowski’s Absolute World Postul ate, 1908), where consciousness exists as a 

trapped surface, and the mind will show itself through a phenomenological method, revealing what Galileo 

meant that the force of impact is infinite as compared with the simple impulsion of gravity (Leibniz, 1695) , that 

the truth lies in the middle (Gödel, 1961). The paper investigates the atomic structure of consciousness, the 

duality of light, and the phenomenon of Gandhi’s nonviolence. These findings suggest that space -time 

singularities will develop when there is a body undergoing relativistic gravitational collapse, and extraordinary 

local effect is likely to take place as a conscio -electric effect, the analog of the photo -electric effect which 

Einstein used to infer the existence of photons. The paper proposes that the effect could be objectively observed 

when one modifies Penrose -Hameroff Orch OR theory for very macroscopic bodies, and apply it to the science 

of nonviolence, namely Truth Force, which is a mass movement of free fall in a highly orchestrated for m, e.g. 

Gandhi’s Salt March, 1930. The paper concludes that consciousness is intrinsic, and the phenomenon of 

conscio -dynamics of moving bodies (macroscopic Orch OR) will disenthrall consciousness from the process, 

demonstrating that there is an invariant, non -computational, dynamical law, which governs the connection 

between consciousness, gravity and the fine -scale structure of the universe. But cosmic censorship will keep the 

observers debating the superposition of human bodies, without understanding tha t natural selection is only a 308 

means towards perfection or extinction, that the objective meaning of human existence is to take our place in 

the universe as the “world became flesh”, striving the species towards higher and higher perfections, kindling 

the inner light in the darkness of mere being. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Penrose -Hameroff Orch OR, Einstein's Photo -electric Effect, Spacetime Singularity, Minkowski's World 

Postulate, Gandhi's Truth Force, Free Fall, Duality of Light, Natural Selection. 

64 

Consciousness -based Architecture for Enhanced Creativity and Well -being 

Dr Anil K Maheshwari PhD 

Maharishi International University, Fairfield, IA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.01]........Phenomenology 

Abstract 

This paper reports how the built environment, specifically one designed according to the principles of Maharishi 

Vastu Architecture (MVA), influences human pe rception and well -being. This study examines whether 

environments constructed with consciousness -based architectural principles can enhance coherence, creativity, 

and well -being. The connectome, or the entire network of connections within the brain, is fou ndational to 

human perception. Emerging insights suggest that perception might extend beyond neural circuits to include 

external environmental factors. Maharishi Vastu Architecture (MVA), based on Vedic principles, posits that 

buildings aligned with consci ousness -based architecture principles can impact the holistic perception system of 

individuals. Prior research has shown statistically significant improvements in creativity (60 -80%) and well -

being (8%) among people who relocated to MVA -structured spaces. The integration of the built environment 

into the perceptual process is largely unexplored in neuroscience and psychology. MVA offers an ideal 

framework to examine how architecture may serve as a medium for human potential enhancement. This 

exploratory stu dy shows improved performance and well -being in MVA environments, indicating the value of 

systematic scientific exploration of MVA's impact. This research introduces the concept of the built 

environment as an extension of the "sheaths" (Koshas) of human co nsciousness, proposing it as a sixth sheath 

that can influence inner layers like intellect and mind. Unlike traditional approaches, this study empirically 

explores MVA’s architectural principles, focusing on alignment with cardinal directions, energetic ce nters, 

harmonic proportions, and natural materials, which have not been widely tested in scientific literature. Key 

principles of MVA include: • Alignment with cardinal directions: Buildings are aligned precisely with the 

earth’s east -west axis to harmoniz e with the sun’s energy and the planet’s magnetic fields. • Energetic centers: 

The center of the building, both at its apex and interior, aligns with cosmic and terrestrial energies, creating a 

vertical channel for energy flow. • Spatial harmony: Proportio ns within the structure follow harmonic ratios to 

sustain energy waves, while the positioning of rooms maximizes natural light exposure throughout the day. • 

Natural materials: Construction emphasizes the use of locally sourced, natural materials to enhanc e the 309 

building’s energetic integrity. This research has the potential to redefine how we understand the relationship 

between architecture and human consciousness. By demonstrating the positive impact of MVA on perception 

and well -being, the study could pave the way for consciousness -based design principles in urban planning and 

therapeutic environments. The findings may also promote a holistic approach to enhancing human potential and 

mental health through environmental design. This research holds promise not onl y for enhancing individual 

performance but also for contributing to a deeper understanding of the relationship between architecture, 

consciousness, and human potential. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Consciousness -Based Design, Maharishi Vastu Architecture (MVA) , Human Perception, Well -being, Healthy 

Environment, Holistic Health 

105 

Experiential Inquiry into the Phenomenology of Afterlife: Exploring the Nature of Reality through Non -

Ordinary States of Consciousness 

Ms. Barbara L With 

Mad Island Communications, La Pointe, WI, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.01]........Phenomenology 

Abstract 

For over 30 years, my associates and I have pursued a systematic, experiential study of the nature of 

consciousness through obser vation, experimentation, and testing our theories against the evidence we’ve 

obtained using them. Through the decades, we’ve documented a unique set of human experiences around my 

proficiency as a psychic channel. Our publications analyze our subjective e xperiences communicating with 

Albert Einstein and a party of souls from afterlife. This Party, headed by Einstein, taught us their 13 -

dimensional conceptual Unified Field Theory (UFT) including a Map of Human Consciousness and a scientific 

definition of Co mpassion as the 5th Fundamental Force of the Universe: "The creative intelligence that uses the 

four fundamental forces to impel the creation of the physical world one step at a time." This UFT not only 

presents the architecture for life and afterlife, but is Einstein’s explanation for why we can have these 

conversations with him in this way. Mathematical UFTs are quantitative descriptions involving equations, 

symbols, and abstract structures. Conceptual UFTs use narrative to explain fundamental concepts to build an 

intuitive framework in order to understand how everything fits together. Our UFT is aimed at assisting a 

broader audience to grasp the “big picture,” engaging their imaginations to bring the theory to life, like 

Einstein’s invitation to conceptua lize riding a wave of light that inspired mathematical formulations. The Map 

of Human Consciousness expands the mental/emotional approach of transpersonal psychology by including 

intuition, creating a well -defined Domain. With clear boundaries and a triadi c interdependence between the 

three Human Dimensions of Emotion, Intuition, and Intellect, this triangulated Human Intention is the matrix 

that allows consciousness to have a human, physical experience. The Map integrates spirituality and 

consciousness stu dies into a psychological process called Conflict REVOLUTION: Step -by -step instructions 

for World Peace, one person at a time, starting with Self. Conflict REVOLUTION is a program to address 

conflicts in one’s own Domain and then keeps the system aligned t o Compassion, profoundly influencing the 

manifestation of peace. In life, Einstein longed to know how humanity could prevent war, and deeper, how to 

inspire humans to choose to make peace. In Afterlife, Einstein brings a conceptual vision that provides not just a 310 

qualitative theory of the interconnectedness of forces and particles in a unified way, but a process —Conflict 

REVOLUTION —of resolving conflicts between the Human Dimensions as a pathway to the manifestation of 

world -wide peace. Personalized transformation is the first step to the integration of global humanity. You must 

ask, what if? What if this really is Einstein? What can he tell us about science, but more importantly, about how 

to bring peace to the world before it’s too late? Please allow me to present our work. Listen to the whole story. 

Walk through the Unified Field with me, from zero point to infinity. Let me teach you simple steps to 

peacemaking that can have a profound effect on the outcome of humanity. It's worthy of Einstein. Then you tell 

me wh at you think it is. Kindly, Barbara With. 

C – 9

Keywords 

unified field theory, human consciousness, afterlife, non -ordinary consciousness, transpersonal psychology, 

peace studies 

268 

On the computational properties of DMT -altered consciousness 

June Russell Bachelor's in Design Innovation 

Qualia Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.01]........Phenomenology 

Abstract 

Building on the work of phenomenologist and vision researcher Steven Lehar, as well as Andrés Gómez 

Emilsson's theories about qua lia computation, June Russell has proposed a psychophysics experiment using 

DMT to explore the computational properties of the visual field. The author observes that a moderate dose of 

DMT tends to make otherwise flat shapes appear three -dimensional – for example, the common 'Necker cube' 

bistable stimulus may appear as an actual three -dimensional cube. Given that this is a bistable stimulus with 

*two* possible cube interpretations, we may connect 32 such stimuli to create a multistable visual stimulus wit h

2^32 possible interpretations. When this multistable stimulus is constrained in specific ways, it can be used to 

solve a computational problem – specifically, an NP -hard *graph cut* problem – using color and shape as input 

and a hallucinated depth map as output. One of the primary tasks of the human visual system is solving the 

inverse optics problem, in which two images – one from each eye – are combined to create a depth map. The 

author argues that DMT relaxes this process in such a way that it may be r epurposed for other applications, such 

as solving the aforementioned problem, which provides a framework for exploring the computational 

capabilities of human consciousness. This research opens intriguing possibilities: if solutions are discovered 

faster t han expected from classical computation, this may suggest that the human brain recruits physics in ways 

that enable hypercomputation. While the current apparatus cannot demonstrate this, future research may 

advance us toward this goal. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

cons ciousness, DMT, visual field, qualia, hypercomputation 311 

380 

Soliloquy Methodology – A solo approach to research using the strengths of both one’s conscious and 

unconscious minds. 

Jocene Mary Vallack PhD 

C.Q.University, Mackay, Queensland, Australia 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.01]........Phenomenology 

Abstract 

Soliloquy Methodology – A solo approach to research using the strengths of both one’s conscious and 

unconscious minds. Soliloquy Methodology has been developed by Dr Jocene Vallack over an academic career 

of three decades. It began with her early investigations into Husserl’s pure phenomenology for her first PhD 

research in the 1990s, when it became increasingly apparent that her t hree -generation heritage of spiritualist 

mediumship, her personal experience of psychoanalysis and her academic interests in philosophy and 

qualitative methodologies could merge to set out a pathway for new ways of knowing. Soliloquy, informed by 

an episte mology of Objectivism and a theoretical perspective of Transcendental Phenomenology, is arguably a 

balanced methodology, which incorporates the following methods: • The researcher’s personal Experience of 

the research in question; • a period of mental stil lness, called ‘Epoche’ (Husserl’s term), which allows 

unconscious phenomena to gather, undisturbed, before surfacing into consciousness; • a breakthrough of an 

Epiphany from the unconscious into consciousness. This will emerge unexpectedly, in its own time and in 

seemingly unrelated ways, such as in the researcher’s own artworks or a dream involving a myth or reoccurring 

thoughts of an archetype; • an intellectually challenging period of Explication, during which time mental 

consciousness struggles to find language to capture the symbolism and connotations of the epiphany; • 

Explanation – when the researcher articulates the research in scholarly ways. Art, of course, can speak for itself, 

however Soliloquy holds that although research may use arts methods, t he results must be analysed via reason 

and clarified for scholarly accountability. This paper (or poster) will show how Soliloquy uses personal 

experience and such methods as arts practice or dream recordings to access the wealth of knowledge held in the 

depths of the unconscious. The unconscious is smarter than the intellect, but the unconscious speaks in images 

and so, as with psychoanalysis, the second part of the methodology enlists the researcher’s conscious mind to 

translate, analyse and make verbal s ense of the information. It is this service that converts the data into 

academic scholarship. It draws together concepts of Edmund Husserl’s pure phenomenology, Carl Jung’s 

archetypal psychoanalysis, and Jean Gebser’s evolution of consciousness, which vali dates and integrates the 

magical as well as the mythical and the mental consciousness. Soliloquy Methodology was published in a book 

by Routledge (2021/London) called, Changing Art into Research: Soliloquy Methodology. Moving forward, the 

author now intend s to use the methodology to research further into the very nature of the unconscious, its 

relationship (if any) to psychic phenomena, spiritual growth and to artistic judgement – questions which have 

motivated her to embark on a second PhD. It is these que stions that draw her to this conference in 2025. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Soliloquy Methodology, Unconscious mind, Intuition, Arts practice, Phenomenology, First -person research, 

Spiritualism, Qualitative Methodology, Judgement 312 

59 

Remote effects of meditation and intentions. Experimental approach with GDV Bio -Well technology 

Konstantin G. Korotkov Ph.D. 

Bio -Well, Boulder, C O, USA 

Professor Chet Swanson, Consciousness Research Foundation, Iowa City, I A USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

Remote effects of meditation and intentions. Experimental approach with the GDV Bio -Well technology Dr. 

Konstantin K orotkov, Bio -Well Co, Boulder, CO, USA, www.bio -well.com, www.iumab.club. 

korotkov2000@gmail.com As evidenced by numerous reviews of Gas Discharge Visualization (GDV) 

technique, approximately 1,000 papers on GDV research have been published in Russia and the West. The data 

indicates that information based on biofield measurement devices, such as GDV, can facilitate a more profound 

comprehension of disease states and direct doctors, practitioners and their patients towards enhanced states of 

well -being. All authors concur that the GDV is a valuable instrument for biofield science. The results of 

clinical -physiological studies investigating the relationships between GDV parameters and a range of other 

physiological variables, including electroencephalograms, heart rate variability, immunograms, phagocytosis, 

the main adaptation hormones (cortisol, aldosterone, testosterone, triiodothyronine, calcitonin), and acupuncture 

points. It has been demonstrated that the GDV method is an effective means of reflecting th e state of the body's 

neuro -endocrine -immune complex and other parameters. The latest iteration of the GDV - Bio -Well device 

employs data processing on a server. The study of the remote effects of meditation and intentions is a 

significant area of interest within the field of Bio -Well research. To this end, a special environmental sensor, 

designated "Sputnik," and a Bio -Well water installation were employed. This enabled the detection of sensor 

responses to both individual and group meditation sessions. In several sessions, group meditation was 

conducted with multiple sensors positioned within the room. All sensors exhibited a response to the meditation 

process, demonstrating a statistically significant difference between the parameters recorded 30 minutes p rior to 

meditation and during the 20 minutes of meditation. In a series of experiments, the "Sputnik" sensor was 

employed in conjunction with the Bio -Well water sensor for the purpose of detecting remote intention. 

Individuals and groups from various count ries attempted to transmit their intentions to the sensors in our 

laboratory at a specific time. The sensors were activated at 10 a.m. in offline mode, and all researchers vacated 

the room, and the door was closed. By 5 pm, the recording was terminated, an d all the data was transmitted to 

the server for processing. In 80% of the experiments, both sensors exhibited a change in their parameters at the 

moment of intention transmission. In numerous experiments with various energy healers, we observed a 

positive influence on individuals with the Bio -Well device. The presented data permit the supposition that 

consciousness is not a localized activity of the brain, but rather an omnipresent phenomenon that is connected to 

the Consciousness Field of the Universe. Az evedo E. Is There an Information Field? Empirical Approach Using 

Electrophotonic Analysis. Journal of Life Sciences 11(2017)191 -201.2021. Valverde R. The Quantum 

Hologram Theory of Consciousness as a Framework for Altered States of Consciousness Research. 

NeuroQuantology. 20, 3:187 -197. 2022. Korotkov K.G., Remote detection of the group meditation with several 

sensors. J Applied Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 15 (2) 146 -149,2022,. Korotkov K., Yanovskaja E. The 

Principles of Bio -Well Analysis. Amazon Pub lishing, 2024. Korotkov K. Wizards of the Quantum World. 

Amazon Publishing, 2024. 

C - 22 313 

Keywords 

Remote effects, meditation, intentions, experiments, Bio -Well, energy healing 

103 

Impact of Meditation versus Exercise on Psychological Characteristics, Paranormal Experiences, and Beliefs: 

Randomized Trial 

Dr Jennifer K Penberthy PhD 

University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

Background: Research indicates that meditation increases mindfulness and paranormal experiences of 

precognition, telepathy, clairv oyance, and synchronicities. There is limited knowledge about the prevalence or 

impact of these experiences on meditators and the general population. Aims: To compare self -reported well -

being, mindfulness, connectedness, personality, paranormal experiences , beliefs, and performance on psi tasks 

in a meditation group versus an exercise control group. Method: This is a randomized trial that explored 

changes, including well -being, mindfulness, connectedness, psi, extraordinary experiences, beliefs, and ability 

to impact a random number generator in the participants, comparing a meditation vs. exercise group. We 

collected data at baseline, “Mid” or half -way through the intervention (week 4), post 1 which is at the end of 

intervention (week 9) and post 2 which is two months post -intervention. Data was collected securely online 

with IRB approval. Results: Data from 72 participants (N=45 meditation/N=27 exercise) demonstrated 

improvement in some well -being measures (anxiety and general health). The study examined th e effects of 

meditation versus exercise on various psychosocial measures and paranormal experiences. The meditation 

group displayed higher scores in openness and extroversion compared to the exercise group, which was 

unexpected and requires further investi gation. The meditation cohort also reported more paranormal 

experiences, with about half of them considering these experiences important or meaningful. However, the 

experiment exploring psychic abilities did not yield significant results. While the study h ad limitations such as a 

predominantly non -diverse sample, it adds to the existing body of evidence linking meditation and exercise to 

positive psychosocial outcomes. Conclusions: The randomly selected meditation naïve cohort trained in brief 

structured me ditation demonstrated increases over time in mindfulness, connectedness, extraversion, and 

paranormal experiences and beliefs compared to an exercise cohort. Performance on the psi tasks did not 

improve in either group over time, and these tasks may not be sensitive enough to detect significant changes. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

meditation, mindfulness, paranormal experiences, psi beliefs 314 

234 

Beyond Mind: A Direct Exploration of Expanded States of Consciousness 

Consciousness Coach & Independent Researcher Sophi Anderberg 

Self -Employed, Staffanstorp, Skåne, Sweden 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

Consciousness remains one of the greatest frontiers in science —widely studied through theoretical and 

empirical mode ls, yet rarely examined as both a direct experience and a subject of structured scientific inquiry. 

This workshop bridges that gap, integrating first -person phenomenological exploration with contemporary 

research in neuroscience, contemplative science, an d quantum consciousness studies. Building on frameworks 

such as Orchestrated Objective Reduction (Orch -OR) (Hameroff & Penrose), Integrated Information Theory 

(IIT) (Tononi), and neurophenomenology (Varela, 1996), this session explores how expanded awarene ss 

influences neural coherence, physiological regulation, and energy dynamics. Research on meditation -induced 

gamma synchrony (Lutz et al., 2004), heart rate variability (HRV) coherence (McCraty, 2014), and quantum 

models of consciousness (Radin, Stapp, Ha meroff) suggests that altered states correlate with measurable 

physiological effects. As a consciousness coach and independent researcher, I guide participants into direct 

experiences of expanded awareness, bridging lived experience with scientific perspec tives to explore 

consciousness beyond conceptual models. Through guided meditation, breathwork, somatic exercises, and 

focused intent, participants will experience real -time shifts in perception, attention, and interoceptive awareness. 

This workshop unique ly integrates direct phenomenological exploration with empirical consciousness research, 

providing insight into how subjective experiences correlate with measurable physiological and energetic shifts. 

A moderated discussion will explore how these states co rrelate with EEG gamma coherence, HRV fluctuations, 

and bioelectromagnetic activity. Understanding these interactions could refine current models of consciousness 

and inform future empirical research on the physiological and cognitive signatures of expande d awareness. By 

integrating direct experience with rigorous scientific discourse, this workshop expands on traditional 

perspectives of consciousness, offering a deeper exploration of its fundamental nature and its role in shaping 

reality. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Ke ywords 

Expanded consciousness, altered states, meditation, mindfulness, neurophenomenology, EEG, gamma 

coherence, HRV, quantum consciousness, Orch -OR, self -boundary dissolution, interoception, neuroscience, 

cognitive science, phenomenology 

306 

Significant Shifts in Meditation States Triggered by Photobiomodulation Frequency Switching: Evidence from 

a Double -Blind Randomized Controlled EEG Study 

Reza Zomorrodi PhD 1, Mahroo Karimpoor PhD 2, Genane Loheswaran PhD 3, Nazanin Hosseinkhah PhD 2,

Janine Liburd PhD 2, Sanjay Manchanda PhD 4, Lew Lim PhD 2315 

> 1

Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronot, ON, Canada. 2Vielight, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3Vielight, 

Toronot, ON, Canada. 4California Institute of Human Science, Encinitas, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

Background Meditation enhances mental clarity, well -being, and overall quality of life. However, achieving 

advanced meditative states (jhana), such as deep absorption, typically requires years of dedicated practice. Time 

constraints and individual predispositions often limit access to these profound experiences. Emerging reports 

suggest that transcranial and intranasal photobiomo dulation (PBM), which delivers near -infrared light energy to 

the brain, may facilitate the induction of high -level jhanas. However, empirical validation remains scarce. This 

study investigates PBM’s effects on meditation using EEG and self -reported mystica l experiences to assess its 

potential to enhance meditative states and expand human consciousness. The positive impact of PBM, may 

enable a broader population to experience the benefits of meditation more effectively. Methods Twenty 

experienced meditators participated in this double -blind, randomized, sham -controlled crossover study. Each 

participant engaged in six meditation sessions, spaced one week apart, receiving one of the following 

stimulation conditions: active PBM pulsed at 4 Hz, 10 Hz, 40 Hz, or 1 20 Hz; sham PBM; or meditation -only 

control. PBM was delivered using the Vielight Neuro Pro device, which features seven precisely powered 810 

nm LEDs positioned over key hubs of the default mode network (DMN), along with an intranasal LED 

applicator. EEG was recorded simultaneously with stimulation. Each session included 6 minutes of pre -

meditation EEG recording (eyes closed), 20 minutes of mindfulness meditation with PBM (or control), and 6 

minutes of post -meditation EEG recording. EEG spectral power was analyzed across Delta (1 -4 Hz), Theta (4 -8

Hz), Alpha (9 -12 Hz), Beta (12 -30 Hz), and Gamma (30 -50 Hz) frequency bands. Following each session, 

participants completed the Mystical Experience Questionnaire (MEQ -30) to assess subjective meditation 

experience s. Results Thirteen participants completed all six sessions without adverse effects. General linear 

model analysis revealed a significant PBM effect on MEQ -30 scores (F(5,60) = 4.03, p = 0.0032). Post -hoc 

tests indicated that PBM at 40 Hz (t = 3.05, p = 0. 006) and 120 Hz (t = 4.28, p = 0.0004) significantly enhanced 

mystical experiences compared to sham. Cluster -permutation analysis over frequency analysis demonstrated 

distinct neural patterns under different stimulation conditions: • Control – Decreased hi gh -frequency power, 

increased low -frequency power. • Sham – Increased Alpha, Beta, and Gamma power, suggesting a placebo 

effect. • 120 Hz – Suppressed low -frequency power and enhanced Gamma power, associated with heightened 

cognitive states. • 40 Hz – Incr eased Alpha power, linked to relaxation and focused awareness. • 10 Hz –

Generalized, non -significant increases across all frequency bands. • 4 Hz – Increased Delta and Theta power, 

suppressed Gamma, indicative of deep absorption. Conclusions This is the f irst randomized, sham -controlled, 

double -blind study to systematically investigate PBM’s effects on meditation using EEG and subjective reports. 

Results indicate that PBM, particularly at 40 Hz and 120 Hz, significantly enhances meditative experiences and 

alters brain oscillations in a frequency -dependent manner. While sham PBM produced notable placebo effects, 

active PBM induced significantly more significant changes relevant to meditation. These findings highlight 

PBM’s potential as a non -invasive neuromo dulatory tool to enhance meditation and expand consciousness. 

Future research will focus on known advanced meditators, contributing to a deeper understanding of high -level 

human consciousness. 

C - 21 

Keywords 

Meditation, Photobiomodulation, EEG 316 

371 

Heartbeat -Evoked Potentials Track Depth of Meditation 

Nicco R Reggente PhD, Mihir Nath M.A. 

Institute for Advanced Consciousness Studies, Santa Monica, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

The democratization of deep meditative states through neurofeedback technology represents a promising 

frontier in contemplative science, yet its development has been hindered by the absence of personalized, 

objective markers tracking real -time meditation depth. Here, we present heartbeat -evoked potentials (HEPs) as 

a dynamic index of meditative states, examining how neural respons es to cardiac events reflect moment -to -

moment shifts in phenomenological experience. We focused on Vipassana meditation —a practice defined by 

systematic cultivation of non -judgmental bodily awareness —as it offers a direct window into enhancing 

interoceptiv e sensibility, a faculty notably disrupted across mental health conditions that show robust 

improvements with meditation. Expert practitioners (n=30) underwent two 90 -minute sessions separated by a 

minimum of one week, during which they employed a novel "s pontaneous emergence" method to collect real -

time measures of meditative depth while recording 64 -channel EEG and ECG. Capitalizing on meditation's 

inherent silence, we utilized the R -peak of the ECG signal as a temporal marker to examine neural responses to 

these endogenous events across varying meditative depths. Our analyses revealed that HEP amplitude at 

electrode C3 exhibited remarkable sensitivity in distinguishing five levels of self -reported meditation depth (p 

C - 21 

Keywords 

heartbeat evoked pot entials, meditation, vipassana, meditative depth, phenomenology 

435 

Inducing Altered States of Consciousness through Respiratory -Interactive Art: A Pilot Study 

Zéphir Lorne MS 

École Normale Supérieure, Paris, Île de France, France 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.02]........Meditation and mindfulness 

Abstract 

This multidisciplinary study explores the capacity of an immersive, respiratory -interactive art installation -317 

REESPIRATION - to induce non -ordinary states of consciousness (ASCs) and enhance hypnotic susceptibility 

in participants. The installation synchronizes a robotic chest in an orb with evolving sound and light with the 

participant’s breath through various sen sors, creating a dynamic and personalized sensory environment. Using a 

within -subjects, randomized protocol, participants experience both an interactive mode (real -time breath -

responsive audio -visuals with guided relaxation and hypnotic suggestions) and a control mode (static light, no 

breath interaction). Each session includes pre - and post -condition questionnaires, physiological monitoring 

(heart rate and breath rate variability), and a semi -structured interview to assess phenomenological dimensions 

such as relaxation, well -being, awe, attention, connection, and agency, as well as objective and subjective 

measures of hypnotic responsiveness. Preliminary analyses indicate that the interactive condition elicits mild 

altered states characterized by enhanced r elaxation, shifts in attention and perception, and a sense of connection 

or disembodiment. These findings highlight the potential of interactive art to non -pharmacologically induce and 

study ASCs, offering new perspectives on the boundaries of subjective e xperience. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Altered states of consciousness, interactive art, respiratory biofeedback, hypnosis, meditation, phenomenology, 

immersive experience, human -computer interaction 

113 

Unlocking the Hidden Light: How Hypnotherapy is Bridging the Subconscious Mind with Global 

Consciousness 

CTHt Luis Miguel Gallardo Sociology / Hypnotherapy 

World Happiness Foundation, Miami, Florida, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.03]........Hypnosis 

Abstract 

Unlocking the Hidden Light: How Hypnotherapy is Bridging the Subconscious Mind with Global 

Consciousness This paper explores the role of hypnotherapy as a transformative tool for bridging the individual 

subconscious mind with global consciousness. By accessing deep layers of the psyche, hypnotherapy enables 

individuals to reframe trauma, release limiting beliefs, and integrate suppresse d emotional imprints, revealing 

the “hidden light” within human nature —our intrinsic capacity for goodness, healing, and connection. Drawing 

from real -life case studies and therapeutic protocols, this paper demonstrates how hypnotherapy facilitates 

profoun d personal transformation through techniques such as Gestalt dialogue, breathwork, and regressions into 

natal, pre -natal, and transpersonal states. These processes enable individuals to reconnect with their core 

essence while dissolving subconscious patter ns of fear, shame, and self -sabotage. As these patterns shift, 

individuals experience greater emotional freedom, self -awareness, and empowerment —key elements for 

thriving and contributing to a more conscious and interconnected world. The study further expl ores the ripple 

effect of individual healing on collective well -being, grounded in the concept of interconnectedness. When one 

person heals, their transformation influences relationships, communities, and systems, expanding human 

potential toward fundament al peace and global harmony. This aligns with findings in neuroscience and 

psychology, particularly in areas of neuroplasticity and emotional integration, which demonstrate the mind's 

capacity for change and its impact on behavior and perception. By connec ting hypnotherapy with emerging 318 

paradigms in consciousness studies, the paper positions the subconscious mind as a gateway to higher states of 

awareness and collective evolution. Hypnotherapy creates a bridge between personal healing and global 

consciousness, fostering a sense of unity, compassion, and shared responsibility. This integrative approach 

reflects the inseparability of individual and collective healing, offering a path to address systemic challenges 

such as anxiety, stress, and trauma at a deeper, transformative level. The fin dings suggest that hypnotherapy has 

far -reaching implications beyond individual well -being. It provides a model for collective healing by uniting the 

personal, relational, and universal dimensions of the human experience. As individuals unlock their “hidde n

light,” they contribute to the realization of a world rooted in freedom, consciousness, and happiness —a vision 

that transcends individual transformation to embrace the evolution of humanity. This paper integrates insights 

from hypnotherapy, transpersonal psychology, neurobiology, and consciousness research to propose 

hypnotherapy as a vital practice in realizing a paradigm shift toward global interconnectedness. By bridging the 

subconscious mind with conscious awareness, hypnotherapy not only alleviates p ersonal suffering but also 

activates a deeper understanding of humanity’s interconnected nature, fostering a new path toward collective 

thriving and fundamental peace. Keywords: Hypnotherapy, Subconscious Mind, Global Consciousness, 

Collective Healing, Tra uma Healing, Neuroplasticity, Transpersonal Psychology, Interconnectedness, 

Fundamental Peace. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Hypnotherapy, Subconscious Mind, Global Consciousness, Collective Healing, Trauma Healing, 

Neuroplasticity, Transpersonal Psychology, In terconnectedness, Fundamental Peace. 

91 

Application of psychedelics for modern spiritual activation and initiation 

Dr Keith G Heinzerling MD 1, Dr Robert J Gilbert PhD 2

> 1

SkyFire Retreats, Santa Monica, CA, USA. 2Vesica Institute, Las Vegas, NV, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

While the focus of the modern “Psychedelic Renaissance” has been on using psychedelics fo r emotional healing 

and therapeutic applications within a medical model, ancient cultures utilized these substances for spiritual 

activation and initiation. We propose a theoretical model that combines low/moderate doses of psychedelics 

with structured sp iritual practices to support and accelerate modern spiritual initiation. This model offers a 

future framework for individuals seeking more than emotional healing, inviting them to engage with higher 

levels of spiritual development and the application of sp iritual wisdom in everyday life. The model consists of 

four stages: (1) Healing —addressing physical, emotional, mental, and higher -level issues, clearing the way for 

deeper spiritual work. While emotional processing may involve psychedelics, the ultimate g oal is to prepare 

initiates for higher spiritual activation. (2) Activation —focused on subtle energy centers and circuits, enhancing 

spiritual perception through moderate psychedelic doses combined with meditative and spiritual practices. The 

aim is to fac ilitate stable connections to higher spiritual realms, without relying on heroic or shamanic doses. (3) 

Stabilization —developing and sustaining expanded consciousness through ongoing spiritual practices, with 

occasional psychedelic support as needed. (4) A pplication —applying newfound spiritual insight, wisdom, and 319 

esoteric abilities to one’s own life and in service to others, fostering societal well -being. This theoretical model 

provides a foundation for future research into integrating psychedelics and spiritual practices. By empowering 

individuals to activate thei r inner spiritual gifts, we aim to contribute to a world where spiritual wisdom is 

applied to improve individual lives and support collective transformation. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

spirituality, psychedelics, meditation, charkas, metaphysics 

93 

Bringing Order to Disarray: A Consensus Taxonomy of Non -Ordinary (Altered) States of Consciousness 

Etzel Cardeña Ph. D. 1, Professor Aviva Berkovich -Ohana Ph. D. 2, Professor Katja Valli Ph. D. 3, Doctor Pablo 

Barttfeld Ph. D. 4, Associate Professor Alex Gómez -Marín Ph. D. 5, Professor Bruce Greyson M. D. 6, Professor 

V. Krishna Kumar Ph. D. 7, Professor Steven Laureys M. D. 8, Professor Tanya M. Luhrmann Ph. D. 9, Professor 

Andrew Newberg Ph. D. 10 , Professor Katrin H. Preller Ph. D. 11 , Professor Frank W. Putnam M. D. 12 , Doctor 

Enzo Enzo Tagliazucchi, Ph. D. 13 , Professor Roger Walsh M. D. 14 , Associate Professor B ritton Willoughby Ph. 

D. 15 , Professor Olivia Carter Ph. D. 16 , Associate Professor David Yaden 17 

> 1

Lund University, Lund, SE, Sweden. 2University of Haifa, Haifa, -, Israel. 3University of Skövde, Skövde, -,

Sweden. 4CONICET, Cordova, -, Argentina. 5Instituto de Neurociencias, Alicante, -, Spain. 6University of 

Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. 7West Chester University, West Chester, PA, USA. 8University of Liege, 

Liege, -, Belgium. 9Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 10 Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, 

USA. 11 University of Zurich, Zurich, -, Switzerland. 12 University of North Carolina, Chappell Hill, NC, USA. 

> 13

BrainLat Institute, Santiago, -, Chile. 14 University of California, Irvine, CA, USA. 15 Brown University, 

Providence, RI, USA. 16 University of Melbourne, Monash, -, Australia. 17 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 

MD, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

This paper presents an interdisciplinary taxonomy of non -ordinary or altered sta tes of consciousness (ASC), 

mostly based on their central phenomenological features. A well -defined and comprehensive taxonomy of this 

kind has been absent, giving rise to various conceptual and empirical confusions. Following taxonomic 

principles, the di stinguishable categories include: proto and transitional states, delirium, minimal to no -

awareness, experiential detachment, altered identity, imaginary/fantasy/visionary, and unity/mystical. We 

expect that this taxonomy will be developed further and foste r conceptual clarity, stimulate discussion and 

theory, reveal what is common and different across different triggers/antecedents of ASC, and encourage 

phenomenological, psychometric, language analysis, and neuroscientific research. 

C - 17 

Keywords 

altere d states, alternate states, non -ordinary experiences, psychedelic, coma, mystical experience, visionary 

experiences, dissociation, transitional states, altered identity, phenomenology, taxonomy 320 

99 

Psilocybin and Prolonged Grief Disorder: Role of Subjective Experience on Outcomes 

Dr Jennifer K Penberthy PhD 

University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

Prolonged Grief Disorder (PGD) is a newly recognized mental health condition cla ssified in the Diagnostic and 

Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM -5-TR). It is characterized by persistent and pervasive grief -related 

symptoms that continue for 12 months or more following the death of a loved one. Unlike normal grief, PGD is 

ass ociated with profound emotional pain, identity disruption, loss of meaning, and functional impairment. 

Individuals with PGD experience persistent yearning and longing for the deceased, along with difficulty 

accepting the loss. PGD affects approximately 10% of bereaved individuals, with higher rates reported among 

those exposed to sudden or traumatic loss, such as deaths caused by COVID -19, mass -casualty events, and 

natural disasters. Vulnerable populations, including older adults and those with limited soci al support, are 

disproportionately affected. PGD is linked to a range of adverse health outcomes, including increased risk of 

depression, anxiety, cardiovascular disease, substance misuse, and suicidal ideation. These outcomes underscore 

the urgent need fo r effective interventions for PGD, especially in the context of rising global grief due to the 

COVID -19 pandemic and other large -scale crises. This single -arm, open -label pilot study evaluated the 

feasibility, safety, and preliminary efficacy of psilocybin -assisted therapy for PGD. Participants underwent 

preparation sessions, a monitored administration of a 25 mg oral dose of psilocybin, and post -session 

integration support. Changes in grief, depression, and trauma -related symptoms were assessed using the 

Inventory of Complicated Grief (ICG), Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9), and Davidson Trauma Scale 

(DTS), respectively. Measures of subjective experience, including openness (IPIP NEO) and mystical 

experience (Mystical Experience Questionnaire; MEQ), w ere also collected. Functional magnetic resonance 

imaging (fMRI) was employed to explore neural correlates of psilocybin’s effects on grief processing, focusing 

on changes in connectivity and activity in brain regions associated with emotion regulation and self -referential 

processing, including the default mode network (DMN), amygdala, insula, and medial prefrontal cortex 

(mPFC). Results demonstrated that psilocybin -assisted therapy was feasible and well -tolerated, with no serious 

adverse events reported. C linically meaningful reductions in grief, depression, and trauma symptoms were 

observed at 1, 3, and 6 -month follow -ups. Subjective reports revealed profound experiences of awe, 

connectedness, and a renewed sense of meaning, which were associated with incr eases in openness and 

psychological flexibility. Neuroimaging analyses exploring the impact in DMN connectivity and functional 

connectivity between the mPFC, amygdala, and insula are provided and discussed regarding the impact of 

psilocybin on grief -relate d cognition and emotional processing. These findings provide preliminary evidence for 

the efficacy of psilocybin -assisted therapy as a treatment for PGD. The observed changes in subjective 

experience and neurobiological markers underscore the potential rol e of altered states of consciousness in 

facilitating grief resolution. This study offers critical data to support the design of larger randomized controlled 

trials and suggests novel pathways for developing treatments for PGD and related mental health cond itions. 

PL -4

Keywords 321 

Psilocybin, Prolonged Grief Disorder, altered states of consciousness, fMRI, psychological flexibility, default 

mode network (DMN), awe, connectedness, mental health, neuroplasticity 

189 

Exploring the neurophysiological and subjective correlates of well -being in non -ordinary states of 

consciousness 

Andréa Oddos PhD , Guy Gimenez Pr, Stéphanie Khalfa PhD 

Aix -Marseille University, Marseille, French, France 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

This study aims to explore the neural correlates of well -being during non -ordinary states of consciousness 

(NSCs) and to assess the depth of these states, specifically induced by therapeutic techniques such as hypnosis, 

mindfulness meditation and MOSAIC therapy. The neurophysiological mechanisms underlying these 

approaches are investigated by analyzing the power spectral density (PSD) in different frequency bands of the 

EEG signal and by using adapted psychological scales to assess the well -being and qualitative aspects of NSC. 

96 healthy participants with no prior experience of these techniqu es took part in the study. Each participant was 

exposed to one of the experimental conditions during seven separate sessions. Resting EEG recordings were 

taken before each session. Participants also self -assessed their level of well -being at the start of t he session, as 

well as subjective aspects relating to the NSCs at the end of the experiment. The results reveal significant 

differences between conditions in terms of well -being and NSCs, both neurophysiologically and subjectively. 

These preliminary observ ations encourage future research to explore the specific mechanisms and impact of 

these techniques on well -being. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

non -ordinary states of consciousness, hypnosis, mindfulness meditation, MOSAIC therapy, well -being. 

193 

The Widening Gyre: Challenging Existential and Ontological Psychedelic Experiences and their Neural 

Correlates 

Pascal Immanuel Michael PhD, Psychology 1, Ms. Eirini Argyri Masters 2, Julian Evans 3, Oliver Robinson Phd, 

Psychology 4, David Luke PhD, Psychology 4

> 1

University of Greenwich, London, -, United Kingdom. 2University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom. 

> 3

Independent researcher, San Jose, San Jose, Costa Rica. 4University of Greenwich, London, London, United 

Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 322 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

Psychedelics have been rebranded as ‘psychoplastogens’, inducing a more supple brain -state. This is a key 

source of transdiagnostic therapeutic potential (Kocarova et al, 2021), but also of challenging experiences. This 

is owing to structures normally supporting stable cognitive constructs being pathogenic if too rigid (Carhart -

Harris & Friston, 2019), but also necessary for healthy psychological functioning. By heightening cortical 

entropy they can give way to so -called pivotal mental states (Brouwer & Carhart -Harris, 2020), where their 

valence can turn on a razor’s edge depending on intrinsic or extrinsic perturbations. Given that one’s models 

about the world are probabilistically encoded in our belief priors supporting a sense of certainty, any 

dismantling of these – while engendering potentially salutary flexibility – can manifest as feelings of 

groundlessness, and eventually existential crises . If the content of the experience itself is especially novel, such 

as the mystical experience – which has hitherto been emphasised as a central driver of therapeutic change 

(Kangaslampi, 2023) – or exceptional human experiences (Luke, 2022), this can also have considerable 

ontological implications; especially challenging to integrate into newly -formed world -models. As such, 

psychedelics incur profound shifts in consciousness both acutely and persistently, which may entail shifts in 

metaphysical beliefs (Ti mmermann et al, 2021; including beliefs about consciousness itself). This presentation 

shall refer to a recent study from the Challenging Psychedelic Experiences Project, in which 26 participants 

were interviewed, and a thematic analysis was conducted (Arg yri et al, in review). A host of major themes were 

identified, but here the acute experiences generated will be highlighted, mainly emphasising the existential 

themes of Experiences of Death, Experiences of Emptiness, and Experiences of Solipsism, as well as 

ontological themes aligned with exceptional human experiences, such as Entity Encounters, Near -death 

Experiences and Glimpses into an Afterlife. Qualitative extracts will demonstrate their subjective content, but a 

phenomeneurological approach (Michael et al, in review) will then tie these to putative neural correlates. This 

may include, but is not limited to, the unitive state as underpinned by a flattened cortical energy landscape 

(Singleton et al, 2022), which when felt negatively (as in emptiness) is linked to the loss of one’s world model 

(one’s only access to the world). An increased fear of death, in neuropsychoanalytic terms, is accounted for by 

higher -order networks normally maintaining a repression of death anxiety being undermined (Dor -Ziderman et 

al, 2019). And obsessive questioning mirrors diagnoses of existential OCD, betraying disruption of inhibitive 

frontal networks – comparable to the expanded repertoire of conscious states giving way to apeirophobia, the 

fear of infinity (Azarian, 2016), often reported by children perhaps related to their naturally hyper -plastic brains. 

Generally, persisting challenges likely pertain to neural annealing (Juliani et al, 2023) occurring during the 

acute experience, which when maladaptive and not successfull y navigated, may dysfunctionally feedback into 

reforming synaptic networks. This paper serves to bring attention to psychedelic metaphysical -type experiences 

(Sjostedt -Hughes, 2023), the risks and ethics implicated in their accessibility, and proposes thei r neural 

concomitants. A leveraging of these challenging experiences and associated plasticity, however, is possible, 

ultimately, to bring about personal or post -traumatic growth. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Psychedelics, challenging experiences, adverse effec ts, exceptional human experiences, metaphysical beliefs, 

neuroplasticity, neural correlates 

396 

How consciousness may rely on brain cells acting collectively – evidence from psychedelic research on rats 

Pär Halje PhD 1, Ivani Brys PhD 2,3 , Sebaastian Barrientos PhD 1, Per Petersson PhD 1323 

> 1

Lund University, Lund, -, Sweden. 2Federal University of Vale do São Francisco, Petrolina, Pernambuco, 

Brazil. 3Lund University, Lund, -, Brazil 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

Psychedelic drugs are known for their ability to induce profound altered states of consciousness. Unlike other 

psychopharmacological compounds, such as stimulants or sedatives, which primarily modulate arousal and 

emotiona l valance, psychedelics fundamentally reshape perception, cognition and emotion. Since the function 

and distribution of the serotonin 2A receptor – the primary site of action of classic psychedelics – is well 

preserved across mammalian species, psychedelic s offer a still largely unexplored opportunity to study 

consciousness in experimental animals using methodologies not feasible in human research. Downstream from 

the serotonin receptor, psychedelic drugs have been observed to affect the brain on several le vels, including 

increased glutamatergic activity, altered functional connectivity and an aberrant increase in electrical high -

frequency oscillations. To bridge these different levels of observation, we performed multi -structural, invasive 

electrophysiologi cal recordings in freely behaving rats treated with psychedelics. Importantly, we compared the 

effects of classic, serotonergic psychedelics, such as LSD, with those of dissociative anesthetics like ketamine, 

which, despite acting on different receptors, a lso produce strong psychedelic effects at certain doses. Our 

findings revealed disparate modulations of neuronal firing rates for these two drug classes, suggesting that the 

general psychedelic state is not directly linked to changes in firing rates. Howev er, local field potentials 

exhibited a shared pattern of synchronized high -frequency oscillations across multiple frontal brain structures. 

These oscillations were highly phase -locked across regions, with interregional delays of less than 1 ms. This 

hypers ynchrony likely has major effects on the integration of information across neuronal systems, and we 

propose that it is a key contributor to changes in perception and cognition during psychedelic drug use. 

PL -4

Keywords 

Psychedelics, Oscillations, Electro physiology 

422 

Wired to Switch: Ancient Wisdom and Scientific Pathways to Altered States of Consciousness 

Christine M Mason 

CIIS, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

Humans possess innate mechanisms for shifting consciousness, and accessing states of unit y, awe, and 

transcendence through somatic, social, sexual, and spiritual pathways. Scientific understanding of neurobiology 324 

intersects with ancient yogic maps to explain altered states of consciousness, positioning the human body as the 

intelligent instrument for experiential transformation. The yogic principle of Spanda —the cosmic pulse —serves 

as the central metaphor for our c apacity to contract into individuation and expand into unity. This "wired to 

switch" ability may be one of the most significant underutilized resources in human evolution and healing. 

Ancient Vedic texts and modern neuroscience demonstrate that human being s are not confined to a single 

waking state of consciousness. Practices from disparate lineages point to the same phenomena: that we can 

move into altered states that dissolve the ordinary ego, open to greater awareness, and return with insight and 

healing . With advances in imaging and physiology, we now have empirical support for what mystics, sages, and 

tantrikas have long practiced. A cultural favoring intellect and pathologizing altered states and bodily ecstasies 

has obscured their role in understandin g, cognition, healing and connection. In this poster, we look at 6 key 

mechanisms to activate altered states: Breathwork: Conscious breath modulation is an accessible entry point 

into altered states. Slow breathing modulates the ANS, reduces activity in th e default mode network (DMN), 

and increases vagal tone. These correlate with feelings of groundedness, stillness, and expansion. (Zaccaro et 

al., 2018) Stillness: Meditation practices deactivate the DMN, which governs self -referential thought, and 

increase gamma coherence associated with non -dual awareness (Lutz et al., 2004). Dr. Andrew Newberg's 

neurotheological research has demonstrated measurable shifts in parietal lobe activity during states of spiritual 

absorption, correlating with the yogic concept o f turiya —a witnessing awareness beyond waking, dreaming, or 

sleep. Molecules: Psychoactive compounds such as psilocybin and DMT modulate serotonin receptors 

(particularly 5 -HT2A), dismantling egoic constructs and creating conditions for awe, clarity, and u nity. Carhart -

Harris et al. (2014) describe the "entropic brain" model to explain this dissolution. Sexual Energy and Orgasmic 

Typologies: Orgasm, as explored by Reich and Odent, is a biological and energetic discharge that opens 

doorways to unity consciou sness. Odent identifies multiple orgasmic states, including clitoral, vaginal, birth -

related, trance/ecstatic, and spiritual. In tantric traditions, sexual energy (Shakti) is directed through the spine to 

awaken higher states of awareness. Neurochemically, orgasm releases oxytocin, dopamine, endorphins, and 

prolactin, supporting deep bonding and expansion. Collective Effervescence: Durkheim's term for shared 

ecstatic states experienced in group ritual finds validation in neuroscience. Activities like singin g, dancing, 

sporting, festival events and prayer circles activate mirror neurons, limbic resonance, and oxytocin release (Tarr 

et al., 2014). This maps directly to Bhakti yoga, satsang, and community kirtan. Spontaneous States in Nature: 

Encounters with th e sublime in nature reliably trigger awe and transcendent states (Keltner & Haidt, 2003). The 

vagus nerve is activated, and ego boundaries soften - as in Sahaja Samadhi —the natural, effortless absorption 

into the divine. Ancient wisdom and contemporary scie nce provide an integrated map: we are biologically wired 

for transcendence. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Expanded consciousness, nonordinary states, ritual, entrainment, yoga, tantra, vedas, philosophy, embodiment, 

breathwork, meditation, enlightenment, neurob iology, sexuality, entrainment. 

423 

Orgasmic Meditation and The Mystical State: A Case Study 

Dr. Caroline Griggs PharmD , Rachel Pelletier MS, PhD student 

Institute of OM Foundation, Santa Rosa, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 325 

[05.04]........Psychedelic and other altered states of consciousness 

Abstract 

Background: Orgasmic Meditation (OM), a structured attention training practice conducted between two people 

following a predefined set of detailed instructions. The practice inv olves one person gently stroking the clitoris 

of another person for 15 minutes while both place their attention on the point of contact, noticing what they feel. 

Practitioners of OM reported the practice triggers a mystical state and is distinct both from typical sexual 

engagement and other meditations (Siegel, et al., 2021). Mystical experiences have been of interest over the 

centuries and are beginning to be seen as a path to healing for mental health and well -being. Methods: This 

study is IRB exempt and involved two sets of data. One set was OM journals from 1,506 OM practitioners and 

another set was the personal journals of Nicole Daedone, creator of OM, from 2003 and 2012. Data analysis in 

this study included word analysis and thematic analysis. Word an d thematic analyses were conducted to 

determine whether mystical experiences were present in the journal entries. Results: The themes are consistent 

with the traits of mystical experience defined through psychological science: (1) ineffability and feeling of unity 

with all things, (2) sense of transiency and timelessness, (3) sense of ecstasy and bliss, (4) sense of sacredness, 

(5) altered perception, and (6) sense of passivity. Conclusion: Orgasmic Meditation leads to a mystical 

experience and is a possibl e practice and standardized means to access a mystical experience. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Keywords: Mystical Experience, Meditation, Word Analysis, Practice, Treatment, Nonpharmacological, 

Orgasmic Meditation 

410 

How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? 

Brannon Wheeler 

U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.05]........Transpersonal and humanistic psychology 

Abstract 

How do non -human intelligences communicate with humans? For millennia, people have wondered about the 

stars and the gods --how and why do they intervene in our affairs? In the Middle Ages, gre at scholars 

(Maimonides, Aquinas, Suyuti, Buddhaghosa) and mystics (Luria, Eckhart, Avicenna, Ibn Arabi) devoted their 

lives to studying the mechanisms of revelation and human experience of the divine. Yet the bulk of this 

incredibly rich and varied work h as not been applied to examining contemporary experiences of contact with 

non -human intelligence, nor have the first -hand knowledge of contactees been utilized adequately to help 

understand "religious" encounters with divine beings. My research proposes th at these two perspectives on 

human encounters with non -human consciousness be brought together, that contactee experiences be put on 

equal footing with other historical examples of NHI -human interaction, to provide a more balanced and broader 

generic study of how NHI communicate with humans. This study proceeds by collecting examples of reported 

human -NHI communication, both verbal (in the traditional sense of the transmission of an articulated message 

through speech or otherwise) and non -verbal (physical m anipulation of objects including bodies). A comparison 326 

of a range of examples --drawn from "religious" and contactee reports --can suggest some general theoretical 

conclusions about potential mechanisms underlying the experiences themselves and the way they are 

conceptualized. 

PL -13 

85 

Meditation, Yoga and Psychoanalysis 

Mr. Anirudh Kumar Satsangi B.Sc., M.A. (Psychology), B.Ed., Adv. Dip. In Management 

Dayalbagh Educational Institute (Deemed University), Dayalbagh, Agra, Uttar Pradesh, India 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.06]........Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy 

Abstract 

Meditation may not be restricted to the level of spiritual well being only. It's scope in emotional w ell being, 

mental well being, physical well being and ultimately social well being has been widely accepted now. Julian B. 

Rotter (1970) writes in his book Clinical Psychology "Other professions which overlap clinical psychology are 

those of the psychiatr ist, social worker, lawyer, speech pathologist, and religious worker. All these professions 

are concerned in one way or another with the individual's adjustment to a special set of circumstances." Now the 

question is, what does a religious worker do to hel p and individual for his/her adjustment with himself/herself 

and with the society? The one obvious answer is - guiding people to perform devotional exercises according to 

one's culture and system. Psychoanalysis deals with free association, the phenomenon of transference, and the 

development of insight. Psychoanalysis helps a person understand himself/herself better. The goal of 

psychoanalysis is to enable a person acquire self - understanding, and knowledge of the source of anxiety. 

Regular practice of med itation under qualified supervision provides us insight, understanding of self and 

increases our psychological strength. According to A.S.Dalal (1997) yoga is a psychological approach which 

aims at a radical change of consciousness so as to lead to a state of immutable and unconditioned peace, 

freedom and joy. The perfect yogic state has been described as not only free from all disturbances but also 

immune to them by virtue of its positive characteristics . 

C - 4

Keywords 

Meditation, Well being, free ass ociation, transference, insight, immune, immutable, consciousness, yoga 

185 

Exploring Meaningful Interactions with Imaginal Others via Lucid Dreaming 

Ms. Kennedy I Robertson 1,2 , Dr. Claudia Picard -Deland 1, Dr. Remington Mallett 1, Ms. Raphaëlle Semin 1, Mr. 

Anthony Levasseur 1, Mx. Tobi Matzek 1, Ms. Léa Damian 1, Ms. Maria Chamas 1, Dr. Tore Nielsen 1, Dr. 

Michelle Carr 1327 

> 1

Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux du Nord -de -l’Île -de -Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, 

Canada. 2Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.07]........Lucid dreaming 

Abstract 

Lucid dreaming is the awareness that one is dreaming while actively dreaming. While non -lucid dreams involve 

an element of socia lity, lucid dreams present unique opportunities to engage with dream characters in ways 

meaningful to the dreamer. 'Dream guides' are dream characters that are perceived as important or spiritual and 

may appear to exercise their own agency outside the dre amer. This study aims to determine whether lucid 

dreamers can voluntarily elicit meaningful interactions with dream characters, and how and when techniques to 

do so are successful. Moreover, the level of agency exercised by dream guides will be explored th rough the 

dreamers’ own descriptions of the characters. In this way, we aim to examine contextual oneiric determinants of 

spiritual or meaningful dream formation and properties of dream guides. 15 expert lucid dreamers will be 

invited to spend 4 nig hts in the laboratory, and to collect dream reports at home for 14 consecutive days. During 

sleep in the laboratory, sleep stages and signal -verified lucid dreams are measured through polysomnography. 

Once lucid, participants are instructed to perform a le ft -right -left -right (LRLR) eye signal and follow 

instructions for interacting with dream guides, with another LRLR signal indicating the end of the interaction. 

Participants are awakened after each REM sleep cycle in the second half of the night for a drea m report. At 

home, participants are asked to set intentions for lucidity and to record their dreams in a diary. Questionnaires 

measuring levels of lucidity and mystical experiences in dreams are administered each day, followed by a final 

interview at study completion. Preliminary data in 5 lucid dreamers suggest that meaningful encounters in 

dreams can be voluntarily elicited in both laboratory and home settings. In total, 30 of 59 REM awakenings in 

the laboratory resulted in lucid dreams (50.8%), and 33 of 72 (45.8%) home dream reports were lucid. Dream 

reports ranged from non -lucid dreams (n=50), lucid dreams without dream guides (n=19), to lucid dreams with 

dream guides (n=41). Dream guides in lucid dreams appeared to exercise significantly more dream control 

compared to non -dream guides (p=.014) and non -lucid (p=.025) characters, and exhibited more self -control 

compared to non -dream guides (p=.031). Dream guides had greater perceived spirituality compared to other 

(non -lucid) dream characters (p= .028). Dream characters across all dream types had similar connection and 

attitude ratings. Dream experiences featuring lucid dream guides were perceived as more mystical (p=.033), 

positive (p=.023), and ineffable (p=.020), than non -lucid dreams, though mo rning mood did not significantly 

differ after any of the three dream types. While additional data is required for a more complete analysis, 

preliminary findings demonstrate that dream guides may indeed be voluntarily manifested during lucid 

dreaming. Dream guides are perceived to have high agency through their control over the dr eam and 

themselves, and higher spirituality. While dreamers felt similar connectedness and attitude towards various 

types of dream characters, dream guide interactions lead to higher perceived mystical qualities and positive 

mood in the dream. Future resea rch could examine moderating effects of personal beliefs and cultural factors on 

lucid dream guide properties. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Lucid dreaming, Consciousness, Agency, Spirituality, Mental health 328 

260 

Virtual Reality: A Game -Changer in Lucid Dream Induction? 

Andrea Signorelli MSc 1, Bruna Dal Bianco MSc 1, Francesco Tormen PhD 2, Nicola De Pisapia PhD 1

> 1

Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science, University of Trento, Rovereto, TN, Italy. 2Department of 

Asian and North African Studies, Ca' Foscari University of Venice, Venice, VE, Italy 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.07]........Lucid dreaming 

Abstract 

Introduction Lucid dreaming is a state of consciousness in which individuals become aware that they are 

dreaming while still in the dream state. In addition to its psychotherapeutic applications, lucid dreaming has 

played a significant role in consciousness research, as it enables comparisons of different levels of 

consciousness while the brain remains in a consistent act ivation state (REM sleep). A well -established way to 

induce lucid dreaming is cognitive training based on reality testing, the practice of checking whether one is 

dreaming or awake through deliberate cognitive or perceptual tests. Reality testing is widely practiced among 

lucid dreamers and has been extensively studied in its efficacy. Despite its moderate success, this method is not 

consistently effective, and a reliably effective approach has yet to be found, limiting progress in this research 

domain. The present study explores how virtual reality (VR) can support lucid dream induction through 

immersive and structured training environments. VR has already been used to train skills in difficult to replicate 

contexts and to induce altered states of conscious ness. Regarding lucid dreaming, as preliminarily explored in a 

2021 study by Gott et al, VR may provide an optimal setting for training lucid dreaming as it allows for 

immersive simulation of dreamlike experiences, facilitates reality testing in controlled environments, enhances 

cognitive and perceptual flexibility, and enables the practice of actions that are impossible in waking life but 

common in dreams (e.g., flying or passing through walls). Methods This study explores the efficacy of an eight -

session VR training program named LucidDreamingVR where participants are guided to identify dream signs, 

perform reality checks, and carry out actions impossible in waking life yet characteristic in lucid dreams, such 

as flying or passing through walls. N=23 parti cipants were randomly assigned to two groups. Both groups 

underwent a five -week traditional reality -testing -based training and completed eight VR sessions in the lab. 

During such sessions, the experimental group (nE=12) practiced meditation and reality tes ting within 

LucidDreamingVR, while the control group (nC=11) performed only an attentional task in the same VR 

environment. Dream lucidity -related features were collected every morning through the LuCiD scale 

questionnaire. Results A total of DL=30 dreams with high levels of lucidity were reported, divided into DLC=3 

from the control group and DLE=27 from the experimental group. While only 27.3% (3/11) of the control group 

experienced at least one high -insight dream - each successful participant reporting a single occurrence – this 

percentage rose to 91.7% (11/12) of the experimental group, with an average of 2.45 high -insight dreams per 

successful participant. Average measures for insight (Mann -Whitney U test, meanC=0.45; meanE=1.38; P 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywor ds 

lucid dreaming training, lucid dreams, dreaming, virtual reality, metacognition 

21 329 

"My Mind is not in my brain!": Investigating near death experiences and consciousness with children in a 

paediatric ICU ward 

Donna M Thomas PhD 

University of Central Lancashire, Preston, Lancashire, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 

A pilot study which aimed to investigate experiences of the ICU for children, ages 4 -16 years, in a UK po st 

intensive care ward in the UK, saw children reporting a range of extra sensory experiences – when very ill, near 

death or during death. The children we interviewed had temporarily died through cardiac arrest and had been 

resuscitated. Children reported NDE type experiences which carry similarities, and differences, with those 

reported in adult populations. Children reported other types of experiences such as beside visions, bi -location 

and visiting strange realities. Children who are not privy to inform ation about NDEs reported in adult 

populations, report similar phenomena - such as moving through tunnels towards a light, watching their own 

heart operations from the ceiling or engaging with beings at the end of their hospital bed. When children report 

these kinds of experiences, they can be considered as side effects of ketamine, a medication often used with 

children in ICU. Yet, experiences such as NDEs differ to the chaotic and negative experiences induced through 

ketamine. Mainstream theories of consc iousness, typically informed by physicalist and/or materialist ideas of 

the world, means that assumptions can be made about children’s near death experiences as delirium, or drug 

induced. This, and similar studies, show children to experience and theorize consciousness – in terms of what it 

is like to be ‘me’ or ‘I’ – as non -local, shared or as ‘oneness’. We argue that children can make a substantial 

contribution to the study of consciousness as; a) children’s experiences and ways of being challenge 

physica list/materialist ideas of the world; and b) children, who are not as conditioned as adults, may offer a 

higher degree of evidence for consciousness as non -local to the body and brain. We share findings from three 

studies which investigate consciousness wit h children both directly (children exploring their own experience of 

consciousness) and indirectly (exploring consciousness through unusual experiences). 

C - 9

Keywords 

Children, near death experiences, consciousness, self, ontology 

100 

Impact of Communications from Deceased: After Death Communications and Grief 

Dr Jennifer K Penberthy PhD 

University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 330 

Abstract 

People of the world have recently endured dramatic increases in illness and death related to events including a 

global pandemic, horrendous warfare, manmade environmental disasters and natural climate events. For each 

death, there are on average 9 individuals who grieve that human loss. Although we have ongoing death and 

related grief, there has been a lack of progress in developing effective treatments for either fear of death and 

dying or for grief. We explore a phenomenon called after death comm unications (ADCs) that mourners report 

experiencing. ADCs involve experiences of sensing the presence or receiving messages from a deceased person. 

ADCs have been reported in all societies across time and it is estimated that 30 -34% of individuals in the 

general population will report experiencing at least one ADC in their lifetime. A recent Pew Research Poll 

(Aug. 23, 2023) in the USA reported that 53% of Americans reported an ADC in their lifetime and 44% in the 

past year. The impact of ADCs on those who have lost partners or spouses has been less studied. In this paper, 

we present previous research on ADC experiences reported by individuals who have lost partners or spouses 

and explore their impact. We also describe new data collected from 70 individuals who reported ADCs from 

deceased partners or spouses and the impact on their grieving, healing, and acceptance of loss. A significant 

majority indicated that ADCs played an important role in their grieving process and helped bring emotional 

healing. A major ity expressed a desire for continued contact with the deceased. Interestingly, ADCs did not 

intensify the pain of loss for most participants. Responses were mixed concerning the impact of ADC on grief -

associated sadness, with 41% noting no change and 40% r eporting a reduction in sadness. Nearly half of the 

participants stated that the ADC facilitated acceptance of their loss. The data suggests the significant and 

potentially therapeutic role of ADCs in grief and healing, although effects on sadness and reco very seem to vary 

among individuals. This study adds to the research demonstrating the potential positive impact of ADCs on 

individuals who have lost partners or spouses and emphasizes the importance of better understanding this 

phenomenon in the grieving process. Results also emphasize the importance of understanding this phenomenon 

in the grieving process and the need to further explore this phenomenon across cultures and for therapeutic 

implementation. 

C - 9

Keywords 

Grief, After Death Communication, D eath -related Experiences, Near Death Experiences 

109 

The NDE as a cosmological compass 

Natalia Sánchez MA, Cultural Astronomy and Astrology 

Scientific and Medical Network, London, -, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 

Academic research into the cosmology of individuals who live mystical/spiritual/religious experiences such as 

near -death experiences (NDEs) is limited. A person’s cosmology encompasses their worldview and perception 

of reality, how they understand the structure of the cosmos, and their place within it. A postgraduate research 

project conducted in 2020 -2021 ai med to assess whether NDEs had an impact on the cosmologies of a group of 

Colombian individuals. To find a cosmological impact thirty questionnaires were done and a sample of ten 331 

experiencers was taken to deepen their cosmological notions through in -depth interviews. The testimonies 

reported similar NDE phenomenology, features and aftereffects to those found in existing literature worldwide, 

suggesting that NDEs also occur in Colom bia regardless of gender, education level, religion, and age. 

Furthermore, it was observed that all interviewees shared a similar worldview characterized by certain 

behavioural and psychological attitudes. These included a heightened appreciation for thems elves, life, family, 

and nature; a willingness to serve others; an increased sense of love and spirituality; reduced feelings of 

competitiveness and materialism; and focused in the present. Their shared cosmology also encompassed the 

notion that a “Beyond” is part of their reality (seen as higher levels of consciousness and or realms of reality), a 

perception of interconnectedness, and a belief that humans are part of something bigger. Therefore, the 

interviewees’ cosmology challenges materialism and scient ific cosmology because the latter views are based 

only on matter and the physical world. Alternatively, the interviewees’ structure of reality is aligned to the post -

materialist view, where mind and spirit are interconnected with the physical world. From t he ten interviewed 

NDErs, eight of them had their NDEs when adults. It was found that four of them were highly cosmologically 

impacted by their NDEs which means that existential and meaningful aspects were involved in their change, 

and they experienced imp act towards their view of reality and their place in the cosmos. Two participants had a 

low -degree cosmological change because not all these elements were present and the other two interviewees did 

not exhibit any changes at all. The study suggested that a n NDE can act like a cosmological compass, providing 

individuals with a sense of orientation (the shared worldview described earlier) to help them evaluate their 

current path and make decisions about their future steps. So, if an experiencer has already a cosmology that 

encompasses this, the NDE reaffirms it and no major changes are needed. If you are young, the NDE traces the 

direction to follow. And if an NDEr has his/her life course towards a different path, the NDE shows a better 

possibility so they can reorient themselves. Since the process of transformation depends on “experience, 

experiencer, and context” as regarded by Holden (2012), some NDErs might need more than one 

mystical/spiritual/anomalous experience to notice the tool(s) in hand and be open to using it. This opens a 

possibility for further research to see if the NDE -as -a-cosmological -compass theory applies to NDEs worldwide 

and to other kind of anomalous personal experiences. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

near -death experience, cosmology, beyond 

219 

Out -of -Body Experiences and the Quest for Extra -Sensory Perception: An Examination of Methodologies and 

Findings 

Marina Weiler PhD 

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 

Introduction Out -of -body experiences (OBEs) —characterized by a subjective sense of detachment from one’s 

physical body —raise intriguing questions about the potential for acquiring information beyond ordinary sensory 

perception. While anecdotal reports suggest individuals may access such information during OBEs, scientific 332 

investigations aim to rigorously test these claims. Controlled experiments often involve participants attempting 

to describe hidden targets in separate rooms. In July 2024, we conducted a study examining extra -sensory 

perception (ESP) among individuals rep orting OBEs within a structured framework. Methods Forty participants 

were pre -screened based on self -reported ability to induce OBEs. After interviews, 20 participants with the 

highest reported success rates were selected. They attempted to gather informa tion about a randomly chosen 

target object located in a separate room approximately 10 meters away. Each participant had one hour to induce 

an OBE and report details about the target, randomly selected from 100 pre -determined objects. Participants 

rated th eir confidence in their perceptions on a scale from 0 to 5. Researchers were blind to the targets. Target 

objects were grouped into 20 sets of five, ensuring variation in color, shape, and semantic attributes. A blind 

judge assessed the correspondence betw een participant descriptions and the five possible objects, assigning 

matching scores from 0% to 100%. Results Of the 20 participants, 9 reported experiencing an OBE, defined by 

a subjective sense of disembodiment. A total of 13 participants reported perce iving some aspects of the target, 

with 6 describing the images as appearing on their “mental screen” rather than during an OBE. Reports included 

words, landscapes, objects, and colors but were generally simplistic. Four participants did not provide 

confide nce ratings. Among those who did, scores ranged from 0 to 5, with one participant rating their 

perception as 0, two as 1, two as 2, one as 3, one as 4, and two as 5. Despite these self -ratings, all descriptions 

received a 0% accuracy score from the judge. However, three participants provided information suggestive of 

ESP: two accurately described the researchers’ locations in the control room, and one provided personal details 

about a child that matched a researcher’s child. Discussion Participants failed t o accurately describe target 

objects, highlighting a discrepancy between controlled studies and compelling anecdotal reports. This raises 

questions about whether existing methodologies adequately capture potential ESP in OBEs. Developing more 

suitable appr oaches may be necessary. One promising direction is creating a veridicality index, akin to Hart’s 

(1954, 1956) approach, to systematically assess anecdotal reports. Similar indices, such as Stevenson’s Scale for 

Children’s Claims of Previous Lives, provide structured assessments of extraordinary experiences. Additionally, 

investigating shared OBEs among emotionally connected individuals could offer further insight. For instance, 

paired participants could simultaneously engage in OBEs and compare perceptions . Exploring reports from 

individuals claiming to “check -in” on familiar targets during OBEs may further clarify potential veridical 

elements. Investigating such experiences could enhance our understanding of OBEs and improve methods for 

assessing their aut henticity. 

C - 9

Keywords 

out -of -body experiences, veridicality, anomalous cognition, extra -sensory perception, non -local consciousness 

245 

New clues to Terminal Lucidity in mentally -impaired adults: Exploring permissive vs. productive hypotheses 

for brain function 

Marjorie Woollacott PhD 

University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 333 

To penetrate the mysteries of the nature of consciousness, it is vitally important to expand our understanding of 

death -related phenomena. One of these, Terminal lucidity (TL), the unexpected surge of mental clarity shortly 

before death in a dying person, has been typically studied in cases of advanced dementia. The nature and 

contributing factors to TL are poorly understood, as it often occurs in individuals whose neurological decline is 

believed to be irreversible. For example, patients have been reported to experience sudden enhanced thinking 

and mobility, to access lost memories and to recognise and converse with friends and family, and often to say 

goodbye. Previous studies have largely involved individual clinical cases (Nahm & Greyson, 2009; Nahm et a l., 

2012). Though valuable, these cases have not been systematically collected and thus may not include key 

phenomena contributing to identification of possible mechanisms. This study explored this phenomenon further, 

identifying and describing psychologic al and physiological variables witnessed in TL in a medically diverse 

sample of adults across the lifespan to begin to identify factors contributing to TL. We created an online 

questionnaire which captured a range of significant details about subjects who had experienced a TL episode, 

including underlying medical condition, treatment regimen (and recent changes), physical and mental capacities 

just before the TL episode, and behaviors that occurred during the episode itself. We have received 69 

responses to the survey, 38 of which met our rigorous criteria for inclusion as TL. Preliminary results: Medical 

condition prior to the TL episode included dementia/Alzheimer's, various cancer diagnoses, stroke, and other 

end -of -life conditions. The most frequent dura tion of TL in this sample lasted 10 minutes or less and roughly 

half of the patients died within 24 hours after TL. When clinical staff or caregivers were asked if changes in the 

patient's condition or medication/treatment prior to their terminal lucidity episode could have been responsible 

for the TL experience, 32 of 38 said this was not the case (3 unsure, 3 yes). And in 27 of 38 cases, the witness 

reported a shift from severe cognitive impairment (including nonresponsive/coma) prior to TL, to little or no 

cognitive impairment during TL. When asked if the person had lost physical abilities, but regained them during 

the episode, 28/38 witnesses confirmed that this was the case. Example: "The lady had been unresponsive for 

days and was in the terminal phase of life. I came in expecting that she had died overnight and found her sitting 

up eating breakfast - chatting with her family. I explained to the family that her bright condition may not last -

and she died that night." Our findings suggest that a specific medical diagnosis or physical condition did not 

appear to account for the arising of TL or the characteristics of the TL episode, and offer possible support for 

the hypothesis that the brain is a permissive organ rather than a productive one. Project Team members include: 

M.Woollacott, N.Tassell -Matamua, K.Kothe, C.Roe, M.Nahm, B.Greyson, M.Mutis, R.Evrard, A.Gomez -

Marin, and A.Kellehear. 

PL -12 

Keywords 

terminal lucidity, consciousness, dementia, dying, Alzheimers 

286 

INSIGHT Project: Interoceptive Awareness, Altered States, and the Structures of Consciousness Please Note: 

The title is based on our current 1hr presentation utilizing 50+ slides 

Mr. Kyle Hankee 

Insight Project, San Diego, CA, USA. Lux Research Lodge, La Jolla, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 334 

Abstract 

This abstract pertains to a presentation recently delivered to multiple groups, representing a portion of The 

Insight Project's broader investigations and papers. As an ongoing initiative, the content is dynamic, with any 

updates now prioritizing a conference -specific version of the presentation. The science of consciousness is 

evolving, with interoceptive experiences --once considered ineffable --now being reframed within structural 

models grounded in neuroscience, philosophy, and quantum cognition. The INSIGHT Project explores 

interoceptive awareness as a fundamental mechanism of consciousness, examining how altered states, such as 

near -death experiences (NDEs) and psychedelic journeys, reveal a recurring “three -pillars” structure mapped 

onto the ce ntral nervous system (CNS), vagus nerve pathways, endocrine processes, and the gut -brain axis. 

Recent work on predictive coding (Barrett & Simmons, 2015) and interoceptive accuracy (Garfinkel et al.,2015) 

has enriched our understanding of how these physiol ogical systems contribute to self -awareness, emotional 

regulation, and the integration of the "three -pillars" into conscious experience. The “three -pillars” model 

captures the physiological and neural foundations of consciousness --the central pillar repres ents the CNS’s 

integrative role, while the peripheral pillars correspond to ascending and descending vagus nerve pathways, 

essential for interoceptive signal processing. Altered states, such as NDEs and psychedelic experiences, often 

evoke archetypal image ry --like light tunnels or mythic figures --suggesting these motifs arise from neural and 

physiological processes (Critchley & Harrison, 2013). These recurring patterns provide a unique lens through 

which altered states reveal the body’s architecture of cons ciousness, offering insights into this novel “three -

pillars” framework. Interoceptive predictions, linked to both emotional processing and cognitive patterns, are 

particularly relevant in understanding how these motifs emerge and manifest across different states (Barrett & 

Simmons, 2015). The gut -brain axis plays a pivotal role in shaping cognition, emotional regulation, and 

decision -making (Bruce -Keller et al., 2018). The microbiome influences neurotransmitter release, immune 

signaling, and hormonal cascad es, thereby impacting perception and self -awareness. Khalsa and Lapidus (2016) 

suggest that interoceptive biomarkers offer diagnostic tools for exploring the intersection of biology and 

subjective experience, further linking altered states with interocepti on. These findings align interoceptive 

awareness and the "three -pillars" with studies of Campbell’s monomyth and Jungian archetypes, underscoring 

how biologically rooted signals manifest as universal symbolic patterns in altered states. The “three -pillars” 

structure demonstrates further connections to emerging theories of consciousness. The central pillar emphasizes 

the CNS as the integrative hub for sensory and cognitive processing, while ascending vagus pathways enhance 

emotional regulation and self -aware ness (Critchley & Harrison, 2013). Descending pathways, by contrast, 

regulate subconscious and autonomic processes, creating a dynamic feedback loop between conscious and 

unconscious systems (Garfinkel et al., 2015). This interplay mirrors the integration of neural networks in 

forming coherent patterns of cognition. Empirical studies reinforce practical applications of these insights --

vagus nerve stimulation has been shown to enhance interoceptive awareness and emotional resilience, offering 

promising pathw ays for mental health interventions and modulation of conscious states (Maciorek & Skora, 

2020). Neuroimaging studies and interoceptive predictive coding models further demonstrate the connection 

between interoceptive processing and self -awareness. By inte grating these findings, The INSIGHT Project 

bridges altered -state phenomena with biological mechanisms and quantum processes, providing a unified 

framework to explore the science of consciousness. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Interoceptive Awaren ess, Central Nervous System, Vagus Nerve, Gut -Brain axis, Endocrine 

System, Microbiome, Altered States, NDE, DMT, Three -Pillars, Art, Literature, Film, Architecture, Campbell's 

Monomyth, Jungian Archetypes 335 

345 

Investigating reincarnation as a missing piece in the “origins of talent” puzzle: A pilot study 

Rafael A. B. Tedesqui PhD 1, Marina Weiler PhD 2, Marieta Pehlivanova PhD 2, Philip Cozzolino PhD 2,

Alexander Moreira -Almeida MD, PhD 3

> 1

Bishop's University, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada. 2University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. 

> 3

Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 

Across many achievement fields, extraordinary feats of athleticism, musical prowess, intellectual abilitie s, and 

artistic expertise make one wonder whether talented individuals are born or made. This question has puzzled 

scientists and fueled academic debates. Despite scientific advances in the study of innate and environmental 

predictors of talent, the expla natory power of current models is still low, highlighting a significant gap. 

Scientists may be missing a key piece of the “origins of talent” puzzle that lies outside conventional thinking 

and that may afford unprecedented breakthroughs. Over the past deca des, the systematic study of children who 

spontaneously report alleged memories of past lives has unlocked new avenues of research that defy current 

physicalist paradigms. Scientists have studied over 2,500 cases of the reincarnation type (CORT) across the 

globe. These involve children aged 2 -5 making specific statements about an alleged past life including name, 

hometown, occupation, family, and mode of death, often allowing researchers to identify a deceased individual 

whose life matched them. In 9% of th e cases, children are said to have unusual skills related to their alleged past 

life. Yet, no studies have examined whether the origins of talent could be influenced by, in addition to nature 

(e.g., genes) and nurture (e.g., practice), a third causal varia ble: reincarnation of the pre -existing consciousness. 

Our project aimed to fill this gap. We investigated the world’s largest CORT database to assess whether a 

child’s talent could be at least partly explained from the previous personality’s talent. Cases were selected for 

analysis if they met the following criteria: (1) the child had an unusual skill related to the alleged past life or an 

outstanding school performance; and (2) the child was from an English/French/Spanish/Portuguese -speaking 

country (to fa cilitate communication with the first author, if a follow -up was needed). Fifty -four cases were 

retained. For each case, we assessed whether (a) the child presented early signs of talent based on Winner’s 

(2000) criteria (i.e., ease of learning, precocity, passion for the domain, and independence in skill development); 

and (b) the child’s talent related to the previous personality’s skill in the same domain. The previous personality 

was identified in 18 cases. Among the selected cases, most skills (e.g., se wing, hunting, hairdressing, 

babysitting) were outside traditional talent domains (e.g., sport, music, arts, math). Two cases had sufficient 

data for conclusions to be drawn about both the child’s level of talent and the previous personality’s skill level 

in the same domain: (1) a 2 -year -old golf prodigy reported memories consistent with the life of a professional 

golfer from the 20’s; and (2) a 2 -year -old with high baseball talent reported detailed memories of the life of a 

baseball Hall of Famer. The find ings suggest that, in addition to known genetic and environmental factors, 

talent may also partly originate from a prior life and provide further support for the reincarnation hypothesis. 

Future studies should assess whether any highly talented/gifted/prod igy/genius children also report memories of 

past lives and, if so, whether their talent relates to a previous personality’s talent. 

C - 9

Keywords 

talent, giftedness, prodigy, reincarnation hypothesis, CORT, past -life memories 336 

419 

After -Death Communication with Cell Phones 

Imants Baruss PhD 1, Elena Padilla BA 1, Monika Mandoki PhD 1, Nicole Ens BA 1, Ryan Gulyaprak MEd 1,

Akshya Vasudev MD 2, Chantal Toporow PhD 3, Lynda Hutchinson PhD 1

> 1

King's University College at Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 2Private Practice, London, Ontario, 

Canada. 3Independent Scholar, Los Angeles, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.08]........Near -death and anomalous experiences 

Abstract 

Due to accounts of after -death communication (ADC) with cell phones that had spontaneously arisen in the 

general population, the first author carried out a preliminary survey of people’s experiences of ADC with cell 

phones. On the basis of this pilot study, a three -pronged project was initiated: 1. A large -scale survey of 

people’s ADC with cell phones experie nces; 2. Interviews of survey participants; and 3. An investigation of cell 

phone applications whose ostensible purpose is to communicate with the deceased. The survey consisted of a 

55 -item self -report measure of ADC cell phone experiences, Gerald Saucier ’s Personality Inventory, and Carol 

Ryff’s Scales of Psychological Well -Being. Current analyses are based on 305 survey responses. Common 

forms of anomalous cell phone activity included text messaging, incoming calls, and photos or videos showing 

up on the cell phone attributed to the deceased, for instance, a meaningful text message that the participant had 

not typed. Cluster analyses revealed several coherent constructs including “Positive Powerful Communication” 

which brought together items about the cla rity of the message and the peace of mind that participants gained 

from their cell phone experiences. With a few exceptions, the anomalous cell phone experiences were 

overwhelmingly positive. As a group, participants scored higher than norms on all persona lity measures 

including Extroversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Intellect, and higher on two 

well -being measures, Autonomy and Personal Growth, but lower on the well -being measure Environmental 

Mastery. In other words, as a group, our participants are psychologically healthy individuals so that the 

occurrence of their cell phone experiences needs to be taken seriously. To gather additional details and 

understand the context for these experiences, 65 participants have been in terviewed thus far. For instance, in 

one case, a participant, who had not believed in life after death, had received cell phone messages that 

convinced them of the continued existence of their partner and who had gone on to write a book about their 

experie nces and teach others about ADC. We acquired two cell phones and loaded 347 applications whose 

purpose is to communicate with the deceased. Many of the applications seemed impractical for communication 

purposes, often appearing frivolous, with vague and di sorganized descriptions of their functionality. These 347 

applications could be classified into three main groups: 1. ghost detector apps; 2. phone sensors with built -in 

dictionaries that spew out words; and 3: spirit box applications that mimic electronic voice phenomena (EVP) 

and instrumental transcommunication (ITC). Thus far, there has been some suggestive output from running 

some of these applications, including the occurrence of some Group A EVP voices. Overall, there is sufficient 

evidence from these three prongs to ascertain that something anomalous is happening that is suggestive of 

survival. 

C - 9

Keywords 337 

survival hypothesis, after -death communication, electronic voice phenomenon, instrumental 

transcommunication, cell phone applications 

132 

Toward Understanding the Mechanisms of Extra Sensory Perception 

Dr. Anatoly D. Goldstein Ph.D. 

Fractal Mind Research Inc, Mansfield, MA, USA. Mass General Brigham, Boston, MA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.09]........Parapsychology 

Abstract 

Extra sensory perception (ESP) including telepathy and clairvoyance are much more consistent with idealism 

rather than with materialism. Idealism is usually associated with the primacy of consciousness. We define 

consciousness as an ability of a life form for self -awareness along with its ability to receive, store, process, and 

transmit to other life forms emotions and in formation. Philosophers - idealists such as Pythagoras, Plato, 

Leibniz, Hegel, and Kant made important contributions to the foundations of modern science. Today, we are 

witnessing a modern resurgence of idealism, exposed in the books by Bernardo Kastrup, D onald Hoffman, 

Federico Faggin, and in the Manifesto for Post -Materialist Science (2014). Per Kant, cognition is possible only 

within the realm of experience; empirical objects in this realm are mind dependent. Therefore, the notion of 

matter existing inde pendently of our mind is merely a long -held hypothesis. In contrast, the hypothesis of the 

primacy of consciousness should be considered at least as plausible as that of the primacy of matter. If we 

postulate the primacy of consciousness and accept that sp acetime is not fundamental (David Gross, 2005), one 

can interpret the conclusion regarding the functioning of Psi beyond spacetime (Goswami, 1999). As stated in 

The Manifesto for Post -Materialist Science, “The Psi phenomena, Near Death Experiences (NDE) du ring 

cardiac arrest, and replicable evidence from credible research mediums appear anomalous only when seen 

through the lens of materialism.” If the world is represented as a network of conscious agents (Donald 

Hoffman), we suggest that telepathy could be considered a normal means of communication within such a 

network. When a conscious agent establishes a stable interface with the human brain and body, brainwaves are 

generated. The brainwaves typically prevent ESP phenomena, like telepathy and clairvoyance , from functioning 

under normal conditions of human life when survival focuses human attention on immediate surroundings 

rather than distant events perceivable through ESP. Nonetheless, when loved ones, such as family members, are 

in danger, ESP mechanisms may activate, driven by the evolutionary imperative to ensure their survival. This 

description favors ESP working better during sleep. NDE represents a state in which the interface between the 

conscious agent and the human brain and body is broken. The co nscious agent retains awareness of the body’s 

location, but in the absence of the brainwaves, telepathy and clairvoyance resume as primary means of 

communication and cognition. This model aligns with Faggin’s concept of the conscious agent as a unit of the 

quantum field (Irreducible, 2024). Similarly, van Lommel (2024) observes a positive correlation between the 

clarity of consciousness and brain function loss. An important role in ESP mechanisms is attributed to the Void 

located in the structure of the mul tidimensional pattern known as the Flower of Life (www.marcelvogel.org). 

When you access the Void, you can access all the universes contained in the Flower of Life. Collapse of two 

points into one in spacetime resulting from quantum entanglement can suppor t information exchange by sharing 

it, so that no data transfer is required. Accessing the Void you can connect with any point in spacetime. 

C - 18 338 

Keywords 

ESP, Idealism, NDE, Postulating Primacy of Consciousness, Psi, Spacetime is not fundamental, Network of 

Conscious Agents 

205 

Evidence for worldwide modulation of physical randomness correlated with coherent consciousness during 

New Year's Eve celebrations: 

Dr. Dean Radin PhD 

Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novota, California, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

4.0 Physical and Biological Sciences 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.09]........Parapsychology 

Abstract 

This study explored the hypothesis that during moments of collective human focus and emotional resonance 

unexpected coh erence will emerge in random physical systems. This mind -matter interaction hypothesis was 

tested during New Years Eve celebrations in each time zone using data from the Global Consciousness Project, 

a worldwide network of electronic truly random number g enerators. Analyses of data spanning the years 1998 

to 2025 —including simple measures like mean shifts as well as changes in entropy, chaotic attractors, fractal 

dimensions, and Principal Components Analysis (PCA) —revealed statistically significant devia tions at or 

within minutes of the stroke of midnight on New Years Eve, as compared to the same analysis applied to 

midnight transitions every other day of the year and to randomized permutation techniques (e.g., p = 4.8 × 

10^−7 for the PCA analysis). The s tudy also found that the statistical deviations were stronger in time zones 

with higher vs. lower populations, suggesting that the magnitude of this psychophysical interaction was related 

to the number of minds engaged in a coherent focus of attention. Alt ernative mundane explanations, including 

possible environmental artifacts, were considered but deemed unlikely because the RNGs were specifically 

designed to exclude such influences. An imaginative roundtable discussion among the founders of quantum 

mechan ics is used as a vehicle to discuss these results. 

PL -11 

Keywords 

collective consciousness, mind -matter interaction, psychophysical phenomena, philosophical models 

309 

THE CASE OF ANOMALOUS PSYCHO -PHYSICAL INTERACTIONS: INVESTIGATING AN 

UNCONVENTIONAL HYPOTHESIS WITHIN A METHODOLOGICALLY RIGOROUS FRAMEWORK 

Gabriel Guerrer PhD 1, Jan Walleczek PhD 2,3 , Nikolaus von Stillfried PhD 2,3 , Soraya Kffuri PhD 1, Jorge Moll 

PhD 1,2 

> 1

D’Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. 2Paradox Science Institute, Palo 

Alto, CA, USA. 3Phenoscience Laboratories, Berlin, BE, Germany 339 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.09]........Parapsychology 

Abstract 

Introduction: Despite decades of experimental investigation, a fundamental question remains: Can the mind 

influence the probabil ity of physical systems’ outcomes? Empirical exploration of such anomalous (psycho -

physical) interactions – the concept of the mind influencing distant physical systems through yet -unidentified 

mechanisms – relies on statistical analyses to infer the pres ence of unexpected factors that might bias chance 

expectations. As a result, evidence for these interactions is subject to the inherent challenges of statistical 

research, as well as major controversy and debates about methodological rigor (Walleczek & von Stillfried, 

2019) and the replicability of positive findings (Jahn et al., 2007; Jahn et al., 2000). To address these challenges 

and align with ongoing efforts to enhance research methodologies across experimental sciences (Nosek et al., 

2018), this study sets forth to explore the hypothesis of anomalous interactions using advanced methodologies, 

which include a preregistration methodology, integrating Advanced Meta -Experimental Protocol (AMP) 

counterfactual experimentation to address systematic biases, an d the commitment to internal self -replication 

before publishing statistically significant findings. Methods: This study proposes four experiments employing 

different variables of interest, in which participants attempt to influence the output of a distant RAVA TRNG 

circuit (Guerrer, 2023) while observing real -time feedback in the form of a varying -diameter circle and 

intending its increase. The task is conducted remotely, with participants physically separated from the TRNG 

device and viewing the feedback c ircle through videoconference. Following the AMP protocol, participant 

sessions are followed by sham sessions, which differ in the absence of an observer watching the real -time 

feedback. It is predetermined that the most successful experiment, if any, shou ld trigger a self -replication stage, 

with the sample size determined via power analysis based on the observed effect size. Results: As outlined in 

the preregistered protocol, 60 participant sessions were conducted for each of the four experiments, along wi th 

corresponding sham sessions, resulting in a total of 480 sessions. None of the experiments met the preregistered 

success criteria. Consequently, none advanced to the in -lab self -replication stage. The conclusion from this 

experimental round is that the results do not justify rejecting the null hypothesis, which assumes the absence of 

anomalous interactions. Discussion: Considering the preregistered protocol, the results provide no evidence of 

anomalous interactions. An exploratory analysis reveals opposi te -direction deviations in some variables of 

interest that will be subjected to additional confirmatory experiments. This study seeks to elevate the standards 

of inquiry into unconventional scientific hypothesis by emphasizing replicability, transparency, and rigorous 

controls. To this end, it also commits to internal self -replication in cases of statistically significant results from 

preregistered analyses, and confirmatory replications of exploratory findings before publication. 

C - 18 

Keywords 

Anomalo us Psycho -physical Interactions, Random Number Generators, Advanced Methodologies, Advanced 

Meta Experimental Protocol (AMP), Replicability 

375 

Beyond the Veil: A Systematic Investigation of Trance Channeling within UAP Research 

Helane Wahbeh ND, MCR 

Institute of Noetic Sciences, Novato, CA, USA 340 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.09]........Parapsychology 

Abstract 

Background: With recent UFO and unidentified anomalous phenomena (UAP) disclosures worldwide, 

particularly in the United States, there has been a surge in interest regarding the tangible aspects of contact with 

extra terrestrial intelligences (ETIs). Absent from this conversation are the long -standing and numerous 

anecdotal accounts from trance channelers who attribute their channeled content to ETIs. In trance channeling, 

the channeler voluntarily enters a trance stat e, allowing a supposed disincarnate entity or spirit to use their body 

to communicate directly via voice, automatic writing, body movements, etc. Trance channeling, also known as 

oracle communication or prophecy, is deeply embedded in human history, from t he sacred temples of ancient 

Greece to the mystical traditions of the East. Despite this rich historical context, the vast reservoir of knowledge 

from trance channeling remains underutilized for research purposes, lacking a systematic platform for collecti on 

and analysis. Objective: This study aims to address this gap by creating a dedicated data archive to compile 

trance -channeled content attributed to ETIs and comparing this information with a separate dataset of non -

channeled UAP content. Methods: Partic ipants who have access to trance -channeled content believed to 

originate from ETIs were invited to upload their data to a SurveyMonkey platform. They also provided 

demographic and contextual information about the trance channeler, such as age, gender, and location, and the 

purported ETI being channeled. Submissions were assessed for inclusion based on predefined criteria (i.e., 

trance -channeled content with a believed ETI source). The media types accepted included audio, video, and 

text, while drawings were excluded. Additionally, researchers gathered publicly available eligible materials to 

supplement the dataset. All materials were converted to text format. Collaborator Ryan S. Wood processed this 

data using a specialized AI tool, UFOgpt, which is trained on a million pages of UFO -related materials, 

including books, periodicals, newspapers, and military documents. Both datasets —trance -channeled content and 

UFOgpt —were interrogated with questions about Identity and Existence, Social and Cultural Structure, 

Technology and Capabilities, Relationships and Interactions, and Philosophical and Existential Beliefs. The 

analysis focused on comparing the trance channelers' responses with those generated by UFOgpt, and any 

verifiable answers were assessed for accuracy. Results: This project is currently ongoing and results will be 

complete by the conference. Conclusions: Regardless of the results of the comparative analysis, this project 

provides a structured platform for the analysis of this content, the project encour ages scientific exploration into 

phenomena often considered fringe, potentially unlocking new avenues of research into consciousness, 

communication, and the possibility of ETIs. The employment of advanced AI tools like UFOgpt not only aids in 

processing va st datasets but also enhances AI capabilities applicable beyond this research. While the project 

may not decisively prove ETI origin, the project could identify patterns or debunk myths, sparking ethical 

discussions regarding humanity’s readiness for poten tial contact scenarios and their societal implications. 

Overall, this project holds the potential to significantly influence scientific inquiry, cultural dialogues, and 

philosophical debates, engaging the public in meaningful discourse on UAP. 

C - 18 

Key words 

trance channeling, UAP, ETI, extraterrestrial intelligence 341 

72 

The Transformative Power of Tantric Mantra: Altered States of Consciousness for Wellness, Clarity, and Bliss 

Mr. Raja Choudhury MArch AA Dipl. 

A Thousand Suns Academy, Princeton, NJ, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.10]........Contemplation and mysticism 

Abstract 

Can the chanting of ancient Tantric Mantras truly alter our states of consciousness? Can they permanently 

rewire ou r synaptic pathways, leading to profound mental states, heightened intuition, and bliss -filled balanced 

experiences that transcend mental wellness issues and manifest positive transformation? I believe they can, and 

my work with thousands of students and seekers over the past decade has yielded compelling evidence to 

support this claim. For centuries, Tantric mystics in India have explored sound's scientific and spiritual 

dimensions through mantra chanting, utilizing specific frequencies, rhythms, and focu sed intention to access 

higher states of consciousness. By combining mantra with pranayama (breathing techniques), visualization of 

sacred geometries, and adopting specific asanas (postures), these practitioners sought to transcend the 

limitations of ordin ary perception and experience the non -dual singular intelligent substance that lies at the 

heart of existence. More than just a spiritual pursuit, these practices were designed to optimize well -being, 

facilitate mental and emotional healing, enhance clarit y and creativity, and empower individuals to live a life 

infused with joy and purpose. Drawing from Shiva and Shakti Tantric schools, I have been immersed in these 

practices for over 25 years, witnessing firsthand their profound impact on individuals from all walks of life. My 

work has revealed that the specific sound patterns embedded within Tantric Mantras have the potential to alter 

brain chemistry, induce altered states of consciousness, and facilitate deep healing – all without the need for 

pharmaceuti cal, psychedelic, or electronic interventions. These mantras, often personified as living energies or 

Goddesses of Power (Shakti), can be used to invoke specific qualities, such as peace, clarity, courage, or 

compassion, and to dissolve limiting beliefs an d emotional blockages. In my teaching experience with 

thousands of individuals in India and the US, I have observed remarkable transformations: anxiety symptoms 

dissolving into tranquility and balance, depression giving way to joy, and chronic pain replace d by a sense of 

ease and vitality. These tangible results have inspired me to delve deeper into the neurophysiological 

mechanisms underlying these shifts. In collaboration with Jay Sanguinetti of the University of Arizona's SEMA 

Lab, I plan to explore the impact of Tantric Mantra on the brain, seeking to bridge the gap between ancient 

wisdom and modern science. This presentation invites you to explore the transformative potential of Tantric 

Mantra. Through immersive experiences and compelling case studies, we will embark on an acoustic journey 

into the heart of consciousness, uncovering the power of sound to heal, empower, and awaken us to our full 

potential. Join me as we explore this potent alternative to conventional approaches to wellness and delve into 

the magical possibilities that arise when science and spirituality converge. 

C - 4

Keywords 

Non -Local Consciousness, Altered States of Consciousness, Ecstasy, Neuroscience of Tantra, Tantra as Ancient 

Neuroscience, Meditation, Mantra Chanting, Sound Vib ration in Brain Activation, Inner Transformation, 

Altered States of Consciousness, Healing 342 

337 

The Embodied Instrument: Cognition through Movement, Real -time Sound Making, and Visual Feedback in 

VR Dance Improvisation 

Leslie Deere PhD 

Guildhall, London, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.11]........Virtual reality 

Abstract 

At the intersection of VR and contemporary dance practice lies a unique opportunity to explore human 

perception, embodiment and the boundaries of bodily awareness. This study examines how real -time 

visualisation through particle trails and generative soundscapes influences dancers' lived experience and 

cognitive processes during improvisation within immersive VR environments. Of p articular interest is the 

emergence of a split consciousness state where performers simultaneously maintain awareness of both physical 

and virtual realities, creating what might be termed 'dual -stream consciousness' in movement practice. The 

research speci fically investigates this paradoxical state of embodiment, where the physical body responds to 

gravitational forces and spatial boundaries while the virtual presence generates its own visual and sonic 

feedback, requiring a unique form of divided yet integr ated awareness. Through a mixed -methods research 

design, the investigation analyses professional dancers' experiential and physical adaptation when their 

movements generate immediate visual and sonic feedback, focusing particularly on how this simultaneous dual 

presence affects spatial awareness, temporal perception and decision -making processes. The research 

methodology integrates both quantified movement analysis and qualitative approaches, with particular emphasis 

on phenomenological documentation of the dancers' responses to this technological intervention. This 

multidimensional embodiment challenges traditional theories of perception in movement, which typically focus 

on the singular relationship between physical space and bodily processes. In VR dance, performers must 

integrate multiple streams of sensory information - their innate proprioception, the visual feedback from the 

virtual environment and the generated soundscape - while maintaining physical safety and artistic expression, 

suggesting the emer gence of an expanded state of being specific to technology -mediated movement practice. 

Participants engage in structured improvisational tasks within a VR environment that transforms their 

movements into persistent particle trails and responsive soundscape s, creating an augmented form of embodied 

awareness that transcends traditional boundaries of bodily perception. This investigation contributes to the 

growing discourse on human experience in technology -mediated practices, specifically examining how varyin g

levels of embodied presence impact movement quality, creative expression and improvisational choices. The 

study focuses on how this unique form of dual awareness shapes new movement vocabularies and transforms 

conventional approaches to spatial understan ding, temporal perception and creative freedom in contemporary 

dance practice. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Embodied Cognition, Dance, VR, VR audiovisuals, Gestural Audiovisuals, The Embodied Instrument, 

Presence, Immersion, Dual -stream Consciousness 343 

413 

Consciousness in Virtual Reality and the Interface Theory of Perception: An Experimental Study 

Isaac Calvis MSc 1,2 , Maria V. Sanchez -Vives MD, PhD 1,2,3 , Mel Slater DSc 2,4 

> 1

Institute of Biomedical Research August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 2Event Lab, Universitat de 

Barcelona, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 3ICREA, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 4Institut de Neurociències 

Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.11]........Virtual reality 

Abstract 

In [1] we argued that the Interface Theory of Perception (ITP) [2] offers an explanation of how consciousness 

operates in virtu al reality (VR). First, what is perceived in VR is completely different from raw sensory inputs. 

While participants in VR actually view two rectangular pixel arrays - one per eye - they perceive interactive 

perceptual objects distributed in an illusory ex tended space. Second, when an object is not in the participant’s 

field of view, it ceases to be displayed, corresponding to the ITP tenet that an object comes into existence when 

it is perceived. In VR an object not perceived still exists in a deeper reali ty, stored as geometric and material 

descriptions in a database, ultimately encoded as electronic signals in the computer system. What is perceived in 

VR is not veridical. Third, according to the ITP, consciousness is primary, with every conscious agent en gaging 

in a world formed by the activity of other conscious agents. This holds even for a solitary VR participant: every 

movement or gesture triggers events based on vast human activity —from hardware manufacturing to coding. 

The light emitted from every pi xel is generated by ‘Agent 0’, the collective effort of countless people 

responsible for constructing the VR scenario and system and its dynamic responses. When multiple individuals 

share a VR scenario, each person’s experience emerges from their own and e veryone else’s actions plus Agent 

0. Fourth, the ITP maintains that perception hinges on ‘payoffs’ where objects are perceived according to their 

affordances rather than objective properties. We tested this with 20 participants in Mixed Reality. They 

physi cally walked diagonally across a real room, where there were randomly placed virtual round tables and 

vertical sticks. After several traversals, they encountered small rectangular objects resembling books on the 

floor, which they were instructed to pick up and place above the floor. A book placed on a virtual table fell 

through to the floor, revealing no solidity. Yet near the top of each stick was an invisible circular area matching 

the tables’ diameter, where books remained supported. Hence participants d iscovered that although tables 

looked solid and the solid areas above the sticks were not visible, it was the sticks that had the necessary payoff. 

Finally, participants crossed the room again without any books present. In this third session, they walked c loser 

to and through the tables but avoided sticks more than in the first. A presence questionnaire showed that this 

occurred more the stronger the illusion that the tables and sticks were really there. Hence, and crucially, the 

greater this sense of the v irtual being real, the less they relied on vision and the more on the ‘payoff’. Although 

this result does not ‘prove’ the ITP, it demonstrates that a central principle of the theory operates in VR, even 

though the theory remains open with respect to consci ousness in the physical world. [1] Slater and Sanchez -

Vives (2022) Front Psychol, 13. [2] Hoffman (2016) Current Directions in Psychological Science, 25. 

C - 12 

Keywords 

virtual reality, mixed reality, consciousness, interface theory of perception, perc eption, experiment 344 

51 

Marriage Between An Incarnate and Discarnate Human and the Implications for Humanity 

Diana M Jackson 

University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[05.12]........Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

My presentation is about the initiation in 2018 and subsequent enactment of a spirit marriage between myself 

and a discarnate hum an who died in 2009, and my lived experience of this relationship and marriage. The 

specific anomalous phenomena I have documented are: dream visitations; clairaudient communications; signs 

and synchronicities; readings from professional mediums; and the clairaudience, dreams and intuitions of other 

(intuitive) people. Alongside documenting these concrete events, I have documented my progressive journey 

from skepticism and doubt to openness and acceptance of the phenomena as real and indicative of certain facts 

about reality and existence. I have read several books on the topics my experience has prompted me to learn 

about: my husband’s life and work; sustained relationships between incarnate and discarnate humans; 

mediumship; other parapsychological topics ; meditation; life in between incarnations; consciousness and its 

non -ordinary states; lucid dreaming; out of body travel; and spirit marriage. This phenomena I have documented 

with over 2 million written words, 21 podcast episodes, over 170 films, photogr aphs, over 31 blog essays, 

hundreds of voice recordings, 3 music albums plus singles, live music performances, visual art and recorded 

professional mediumship and astrological readings. My spirit marriage, and the continuity and interactivity of 

my husband ’s consciousness, are demonstrated by my own consistent experiences, and also corroborated by 

third parties: professional mediums and other (intuitive) people. My experiences and findings are also consistent 

with those of other contemporary and historical explorers of consciousness, psi/noetic scientists, professional 

mediums, and other researchers and practitioners of spirit marriage. They are also consistent with the 

metaphysical teachings of many ancient and established spiritual traditions, as well as t he findings of 

mainstream science, e.g. quantum mechanics and Jungian and transpersonal psychology. After demonstrating 

the reality and validity of the phenomenon of spirit marriage, I discuss what it suggests about human nature, 

society and evolution. To this end, I consider spirit marriage in general, as well as my spirit marriage in 

particular. My discarnate husband is the world -famous performing artist Michael Jackson, which adds a 

powerful societal element to my experience: millions of people in the wo rld know of and love Michael, so 

tremendous attention can be drawn to these lesser -known, but very important, topics in consciousness and 

human evolution. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Spirit marriage, relationship, marriage, discarnate, consciousness, survival, surviving death, interdimensional, 

dreamvisitations, clairaudience, psi, spirit, spirit communication, signs, synchronicity, mediumship, dreams, 

intuition, time, reincarnation, pattern, symbolic, skepticism, faith, michael jackson, meditation, parapsychol ogy, 

altered state, lucid dreaming, hypnagogia, music, art, astral, science, podcast, film, individuality, noetic, 

metaphysics, spirituality, philosophy, existential, quantum mechanics, carl jung, transpersonal, society, human 

nature, humanity, evolution, love 345 

151 

Quantum Fiction as a response to Cultural Pressure following advances in Quantum Perception and Artificial 

Intelligence 

Tracy Shew M.A. Art History 

SUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.01]........Literature and hermeneutics 

Abstract 

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries we were at a crossroads. Photography had made the traditional role of 

the artist "obsolete," and social fragmentation created pressures and new ideas. Art responded by developing 

modern art methods which created works which photography could not match. Einstein's relativity and 

especially its confirmation in the eclipse of 1919 corresponded with forms such as cubism almost as a response. 

These were created by artists which may not have understood the deeper parts of theory, but recognized the 

cultural pressure and the revolutionary nature of the ideas. Today, similarly, literatu re is under pressure to 

defend itself or transform with the advent of artificial intelligence. Now, a "novel can be created in seconds" by 

giving ChatGTP the parameters. And, we have the possibility of a "1919 moment" with experiments which may 

confirm Pen rose -Hameroff theories of quantum structures giving rise to consciousness. We can imagine 

literature responding to A.I. in a Darwinian sense by "creating things which ChatGTP cannot replicate." The 

simultaneous interest in quantum consciousness might infor m this exploration by defining quantum structures 

or events in prose. "Quantum Fiction" has been a niche genre in literature since it was defined in 1990 by 

Charles Platt. It is not a dystopian nor scientific genre, but one in which quantum elements alter plot structure, 

character development, or even diverse elements such as dialogue and setting. As a genre, it is always hybrid in 

its incorporation. For example, a story might be described as "epic fantasy, but it has some quantum elements." 

The production of a "pure quantum" story may have been attempted, but this may lead to instability in structure 

or development, such as leaving a strictly linear timeline and consistent point of view in favor of quantum 

randomness which seems indecipherable. Quantum fict ion has been problematic to sell. Author Vera Ulea 

stated, "The theme can be any, including the quantum one, but the technique should be unlike the one we 

observe in mainstream literature. Therefore, a traditional formulaic language of synopsis required by literary 

agents and commercial publishers doesn‘t work for QG. The Quantum Work can‘t be sold to them and it has no 

appeal to the mainstream reader just in the same way as Impressionism or Cubism had no appeal to the general 

viewer." This author sees this exploration as a crucial reaction to cultural pressures from theoretical advances. 

The quantum works might help people accept and have an image towards "quantum weirdness," exactly in the 

way that modern art offered an acceptable image towards relativity. If this new revolution follows a similar 

course, these works would be produced and consumed by those without scientific knowledge of quantum 

theory. But if literature is to help contribute to broad imaging of quantum theory, traditional methods of judging 

and publishing works must adapt from traditional structures to something more inviting and accepting towards 

quantum forms. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Literature, Quantum Fiction, Relativity, Cubism, 1919 eclipse, Art, Art History, Artificial Intelligence, A.I. 346 

264 

Talking to the Gods: Finding Traces of Bicameral Mentality in Mayan Oral Literature. 

Dr. Daniel Montoya Ph.D , Dr. Jose Franco Rodríguez Ph.D. 

Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, NC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.01]........Literature and hermeneutics 

Abstract 

This study examines a collection of contemporary Mayan oral stories through the lens of Julian Jaynes’s theory 

of th e origin of consciousness. The goal is to explore a potential link between their literary elements and traits 

of preconsciousness as described by Jaynes. Based on ancient and classic texts and artifacts, Jaynes’s 

neuropsychological thesis argues that huma ns started to acquire consciousness about 3,000 years ago following 

a period of imaginary perceptions he dubs the “bicameral mind.” During that period, humans experienced 

auditory “hallucinations” that guided their non -habitual behavior. Jaynes claims that remnants of bicameral 

mentality linger to this day in all cultures, some in the form of what modern psychology has regarded as mental 

disorders. This theoretical framework has been applied to some cultures in Europe, the Middle East, and Asia, 

but very sc arcely to America. Our analysis of early Mayan narratives and examination of 78 brief oral texts 

from Lake Atitlán (Guatemala) reveals evidence of bicamerality throughout Mayan history, which is also 

evident in the lake's oral tradition. These include the gradual fading of divine inner voices, their apparent 

replacement with divination, anomalous mental states, encounters with the supernatural, and spiritual 

possession. In this Mayan context, these behaviors are frequently regarded as a gift, an ability, an enriching 

aspect of Maya spirituality that they may not have felt culturally compelled to suppress to the extent of other 

societies. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

bicameral mentality, consciousness, Julian Jaynes’s theory, Mayan oral literature. 

277 

Aesthetic Consciousness as an Emergent Phenomenon: A Complex Systems Approach 

Monica V Herrera -Cendales Artist 1, Danilo Alejandro Garcia -Orjuela MD MSC 2

> 1

Arture Project, Bogota, Cundinamarca, Colombia. 2National University of Columbia, Bogota, Cundinamarca, 

Colombia 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.02]........Aesthetics 

Abstract 

Introduction Aesthetic consciousness —the ability to perceive, experience, and reflect on art and beauty —has 347 

been examined through various disciplines, including philosophy, neuroscience, and art theory. However, its 

emergent and dynamic nature suggests that a complex systems approach can provide deeper insights. This study 

explores how the interplay of neurobiol ogical processes, network theory, pattern emergence, and enactive 

cognition contributes to the formation of aesthetic consciousness in human experience. Research Problem 

Traditional studies on aesthetics often fragment artistic experience into sensory, cog nitive, or emotional 

components, overlooking their interconnections and emergent properties. Research by Antonio Damasio and 

Semir Zeki has demonstrated that aesthetic perception involves intricate brain networks that process 

information dynamically. This study seeks to answer the question: How can a complex and dynamic systems 

approach provide a more holistic explanation of aesthetic consciousness? Methodological Approach This 

research adopts an interdisciplinary framework to grasp the complexity of aesthe tic experience. From 

philosophy and aesthetics, Kant’s Critique of Judgment and Adorno’s Aesthetic Theory contextualize the 

problem within philosophical thought, highlighting its implications for art perception. In cognitive 

neuroscience, Damasio’s somatic marker theory and Zeki’s neuroaesthetics research provide insights into the 

neural basis of aesthetic perception and its connection to emotion and cognition. Additionally, the study 

employs complex systems theory to understand aesthetic experience as a di stributed and dynamic phenomenon. 

Concepts such as emergence, complex neural networks, and self -organization help analyze how perceptual and 

artistic patterns arise, moving beyond reductionist perspectives. Enactive cognition further expands this view by 

emphasizing the subject’s active engagement with the artwork, underscoring the role of the body and 

environment in the emergence of aesthetic consciousness. This perspective challenges the notion of aesthetic 

experience as a purely cerebral phenomenon, refr aming it as an embodied and context -dependent process. 

Expected Results and Conclusions This study proposes that aesthetic consciousness is not a static entity nor 

reducible to a single cognitive or emotional dimension, but rather an emergent phenomenon wi thin adaptive 

systems. Drawing from chaos theory, it suggests that aesthetic perception follows the principles of nonlinear 

dynamic systems, where minor variations in stimuli or an individual’s internal state can lead to significantly 

different experiences . Rather than being confined to specific neural patterns or localized brain areas, aesthetic 

consciousness emerges from the dynamic interaction of multiple neural, bodily, and environmental factors. This 

perspective challenges reductionist views by positio ning aesthetic experience as a distributed and context -

dependent process shaped by the continuous interplay between perception, emotion, cognition, and 

sociocultural influences. By redefining aesthetics as a dynamic and integrative process, this study high lights the 

need for future research to further explore how complex systems theory can advance our understanding of art, 

technology, and consciousness. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Aesthetic phenomenology, Aesthetic Consciousness, Neuroaesthetics, Emergence 

124 

Conceptual Associations while Listening to Paweł Szymański’s “Two Studies” for Piano 

Prof. Violetta K. Kostka 

Academy of Music of Music Academy of New, Gdańsk, Gdansk, Poland 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.03]........Music 348 

Abstract 

For some time now, the scientific community has been testing and developing the conceptual blending theory 

proposed by Fauconnier and Turner in 2002. The authors state that part of human thinking and action is based 

on a cognitive operation in whi ch concepts/elements accumulate in the so -called mental spaces and which 

proceeds according to constitutive and guiding principles, and ends with the emergence of a meaning or a new 

idea. My goal is to present semantic interpretations of Two Studies for pi ano of Polish leading composer Paweł 

Szymański (b. 1954) in the light of conceptual blending theory. In order for the audience to be able to 

understand the problem, each interpretation will be preceded by listening to a fragment of the work. I will also 

us e the diagrams of Oakley and Pascual, consisting of two input spaces and the blended space. The Two Studies 

of Paweł Szymański are based on baroque initial structures, which have been transformed and extended with the 

help of certain mathematical ideas. A few music critics and myself associate the First Study, the chordal one, 

with the phenomenon of natural echo. It is so because each fragment generates similar conceptual networks: the 

echo input includes a loud sound source and its single or multiple refle ctions, whereas the musical input is 

broken down into a ff chord and a number of repetitions of the same chord in dynamics mf. All correspondences 

from two inputs are based on analogy. The selected elements from both inputs are combined in the blended 

spac e and a new meaning emerges  ̶ a musical echo. The Second Study, a single -voice melody, is composed 

alternately of many quasi -baroque sections and modernist sections. Listening to them evokes associations with 

two kinds of movements: with a clear goal and i n a circle. Through conceptual blending, this association leads 

to the emergence of the following meanings: musical movement with a clear goal and musical movement in a 

circle. In the discussion and conclusion part of my paper I would like to mention other examples of associations, 

which arise during the perception and cognition of music. The results will be taken from my research I have 

been conducting for several years now. References: M. Antović, Multilevel Grounding: A Theory of Musical 

Meaning, Routled ge 2022; G. Fauconnier, M. Turner, The Way We think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s 

Hidden Complexities, Basic Books 2002; T. Oakley, E. Pascual, Conceptual Blending Theory, (in) The 

Cambridge Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics, CUP 2017; L. Zbikowski, Foundations of Musical Grammar, 

OUP 2017. 

C - 8

Keywords 

musical meaning, conceptual blending, personal association, Paweł Szymański 

333 

Musicopoiesis and the Co -Enactive Resonance Loop (CERL): Modeling the Self -Organizing Mind through the 

Phenomenology of Music Improvisation 

Christophe Novak MSc, BA 

University of Vienna, Vienna, -, Austria 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.03]........Music 

Abstract 

Music is fluid architecture in time that profoundly touches the human heart. More than a product to consume or 

a process to perform, musi c potentiates transformative experiences and fosters harmonization of the body and 

the mind. The synesthetic experience of musicking and its intrinsic relation to time make it a potent socio -349 

epistemic technology uniquely suited to exploring creative self -organization. In this presentation, music is 

explored as a resonance sphere and transformative vehicle by examining the phenomenology of musical peak 

experience through the theoretical lenses of enactivism, resonance, correspondence, active inference, and 

integral consciousness. Of particular interest is the phenomenon of musicopoiesis, i.e. a qualia where mind 

seems to effortlessly channel itself through music that seemingly arises ‘by itself’ , critically fined -tuned to 

affordances of the present and enabling resonance with potentials that want to emerge. Drawing from personal 

field notes of concerts and festivals, I present a rich phenomenological tapestry of musical peak experiences that 

invi te a closer look at the semantic depth of musical terminology often taken for granted: What does it mean to 

be 'in the pocket' or to experience 'flow'? What do we refer to when we say that 'it grooves'? What exactly is ‘it’ 

that flows and grooves? These pr operties point toward an agential force beyond the musician's conscious 

control and suggest a quality of mind that is experienced as both static (a spatial zone) and dynamic (a temporal 

flow). I argue that these phenomenological statements accurately refle ct the notion of a topological pocket and 

quite literally describe the first -person experience of a musicking mind enveloped in a whirling island of 

dynamical stasis. Finally, I present the Co -Enactive Resonance Loop (CERL) model, which integrates 

phenomen ological and theoretical perspectives and describes the epistemogenetic drive toward self -

transparency and knowledge from the inside inherent in the agential substrate of a musicopoietic self -world 

system. This research project aims to establish how music can bring forth latent potentials and inner processes 

via improvisation in the service of self -transformation and consciousness intensification, tracing a path toward 

an adaptive transformation of cognitive science and musical practice. In this sense, a cy cle closes from 

phenomenology to theory into practice and experience -based consciousness studies. The CERL framework 

provides a first step toward a co -enactive research program dedicated to the holistic and integral study of 

individual and collective music al improvisation and creative self -organizing criticality. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

music, improvisation, creativity, self -organization, criticality, enactivism, flow, resonance, correspondence, 

active inference, strange loops, integral consciousness, topol ogical pocket 

381 

Resonating in a Modern World: Himalayan Singing Bowls and Vibrational Healing 

Suren Shrestha B.S. 

MSU, Boulder, CO, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.03]........Music 

Abstract 

The Himalayan people have practiced the sacred ritual of sound healing for over a thousand years. Traditional 

singing bowls are carefully crafted and played to harmonize the human body, mind, and spirit with the 

frequencies of the natural world. Understanding this ancient art within the context of contemporary 

neuroscience and vibrational medicine reveals the immense importance of this prac tice as a means of healing 

the body from the stresses of modern life. 

C - 24 350 

Keywords 

Himalayan people, sacred ritual, sound healing, traditional singing bowls, human body, mind, spirit, 

frequencies, natural world, ancient art, contemporary neuroscience, vibrational medicine, healing, body, stress, 

modern life. 

236 

Technomythology 

Laura "LD" Deutsch Masters, Religious Studies 

Independent Writer, Los Angeles, CA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.05]........Mythology 

Abstract 

Are we living in a computer simulation? The question seems to be asked more and more these days. In 

"Technomythology," the prevalence and popularity of the simulation hypothesis is explored through a 

mythological framework. Rooted in a formal analysis of mythological models, this essay charts the concept of a 

computer -programmed reality from its most popular origin point, through the sc ientific and philosophical 

presuppositions necessary for its existence, into an associative understanding of its position as a model of 

reality. Beginning from Carl Jung’s concept that “like a snake changing its skin, the old myth needs to be 

clothed anew in every renewed age if it is not to lose its therapeutic effect,” "Technomythology" argues that, 

although the simulation hypothesis can certainly be understood as the culmination of decades of philosophy, 

cognitive science and computer science, there is a nother simultaneous evolution disguised within its argument: 

that it is a modern, secular creation mythology. Drawing on the work of Carl Jung, Nick Bostrom, N. Katherine 

Hayles, Marie Louise Von Franz, Jacques Vallée, Rizwan Virk and more, this essay trac es the ever -evolving 

relationship between the collective unconscious and modern information technology. What emerges is a well -

contoured and complete alternative narrative that may be read into the techno -hybrid fable of the simulation 

hypothesis —one that reveals an attempt to recover human meaning in a world marching toward technological 

totality. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

Simulation Hypothesis, Creation Mythology, Substrate Independence, Digital Universes, Physics of 

Information, Cognitive Science, Binary Code, I Ching, Gnosticism, Dharmic Religions, Carl Jung, Marie 

Louise Von Franz, Nick Bostrom, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. 

373 

Arquetypal Coaching. Creating Synergies Through Astrology and Dream -Work. 

Alba Carod MS Education, MSc Consciousness, Transpersonal Psychology 

Alef Trust - Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, -, United Kingdom 351 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.05]........Mythology 

Abstract 

Archetypal Coaching offers a transformative approach to self -development, blending ancient Greek astrological 

foundations and dream wo rk with modern coaching techniques, somatic awareness, and Jungian active 

imagination. At its core, Archetypal Synergies represents a dynamic dialogue with archetypes and dream 

symbols, fostering a connection with the divine. This process acknowledges fra gmented aspects of the psyche, 

creating opportunities for integration and unlocking higher potential. Dreams reveal unconscious dimensions of 

the self, while astrological archetypes illuminate the mythological and psychological foundations of behaviors 

and beliefs. Active imagination serves as a bridge between the conscious and unconscious mind, encouraging 

clients to engage with emerging symbols in a liminal space. Rather than relying solely on intellectual analysis, 

this method cultivates a direct, experi ential connection with archetypal energies, supporting intuitive and 

progressive transformation. Unlike most therapeutic and coaching strategies, anchoring through an archetypal 

trait that inherently belongs to the client has a profound and empowering effe ct. Based on the big picture that 

archetypes and dream symbols reveal, clients can create a visual symbolic image of the emerging qualities, 

expressing their evolving self. This artistic creation serves as an anchor, helping to focus attention and embody 

the desired state. By engaging with this symbolic representation, individuals strengthen their connection to their 

transformation, reinforcing personal agency and self -integration. A common critique of astrology is that it limits 

personal agency. However, A rchetypal Coaching engages with symbols dynamically rather than 

deterministically. Instead of imposing fixed meanings onto astrological and dream configurations, it presents 

symbolic scenarios, empowering clients to interact with those that resonate with t heir vision and goals. This 

participatory approach acknowledges the fluidity of archetypal expression, enabling individuals to consciously 

shape their reality and personal development. For my master’s dissertation, I evaluated the effectiveness of this 

sys tem using organic inquiry, a transpersonal qualitative research method developed at the Institute of 

Transpersonal Psychology. This approach is particularly suited for exploring psychospiritual growth through 

transformative experiences such as archetypal e ncounters, dreams, synchronicities, and creative expression. By 

integrating astrological archetypes with dream symbols, this research uncovers unconscious patterns that shape 

behavior, facilitating deeper self -awareness and meaningful dialogue in therapeut ic and coaching contexts. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Archetypes, coaching, dream -work, astrology, active imagination, transcendent function, individuation, somatic 

awareness. 

118 

Exploring Consciousness Studies: An Integrated Framework of AI, Distributed Agents, Blockchain, and 

Advanced Technologies 

Poonacha Machaiah BE (Comp. Sc), MBA 

The Chopra Foundation, New York, NY, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 352 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.08]........Information technology 

Abstract 

The study of human consciousness is transforming, driven by the integration of cutting -edge technologies and 

interdisciplinary research. This abstract introduces a pioneering framework that combines artificial intelligence 

(AI), distributed agent systems, blockchain technology, and advanced tools such as biomimetic quantum 

computing, augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), brain -computer interfaces (BCIs), and multivers e

theory. This holistic approach aims to advance our understanding of consciousness, enhance individual and 

collective awareness, and create innovative tools to catalyze the expansion of human potential. The Problem 

Despite significant progress in neurosci ence and psychology, human consciousness remains poorly understood 

due to the limitations of traditional research methods. These methods often operate in silos, overlooking the 

multidimensional and interconnected aspects of conscious experience. By integra ting advanced technologies, 

we can address these gaps and develop a more comprehensive understanding of consciousness. Approach This 

framework leverages AI as a cognitive engine to analyze multidimensional datasets from BCIs, wearable 

sensors, and subjecti ve narratives. AI models use computational frameworks to elucidate the neural mechanisms 

underlying subjective experiences, aligning with theoretical advances in consciousness research, such as Koch’s 

computational models and Tononi’s information -theory -ba sed measures of consciousness. AI -Driven 

Consciousness Mapping AI -powered deep learning models synthesize data from EEG, fMRI, heart rate 

variability (HRV), and subjective self -reports. These models generate personalized consciousness maps that 

visualize s tates of awareness, emotional patterns, and transformative insights experienced during meditative, 

psychedelic, or peak states. These maps bridge neuroscience, psychology, and AI, offering a novel perspective 

on how information flow in the brain relates to conscious perception. Distributed Agents for Real -Time 

Feedback Autonomous distributed agents collaborate to process data streams in real -time. They provide 

adaptive feedback during consciousness -altering practices such as guided meditations, VR simulatio ns, or 

psychedelic therapy. These agents predict shifts in consciousness states and recommend personalized 

interventions, fostering collective insights through decentralized, peer -to -peer systems. Blockchain for Data 

Sovereignty Blockchain technology ensur es secure and transparent data sharing, empowering individuals to 

maintain ownership of their consciousness -related data. Smart contracts enable ethical data collaboration, 

creating decentralized ecosystems that promote trust among researchers, practitione rs, and participants. This 

approach safeguards privacy while fostering global collaboration in consciousness research. AR/VR, Brain 

Entrainment, and BCIs Immersive AR/VR environments provide adaptive therapeutic landscapes powered by 

real -time BCI data. Th ese landscapes visualize archetypal journeys and integrate binaural beats and brainwave 

entrainment, guiding users toward transformative states of consciousness. This aligns with research that 

demonstrates the role of VR/AR in exploring conscious perceptio n and self -awareness. Multiverse Theory and 

Consciousness Exploration By integrating multiverse theory, the framework explores consciousness as a 

phenomenon that may extend beyond a singular reality. This involves investigating altered states of 

consciousn ess and their potential access to parallel dimensions, supported by theories such as the Many -Worlds 

Interpretation and String Theory. These concepts open avenues for understanding consciousness as a 

multidimensional phenomenon. Conclusion This interdiscip linary framework represents a groundbreaking step 

toward unifying consciousness research. By integrating emerging technologies, ethical collaboration, and 

innovative tools, it offers a scalable approach to deepening our understanding of human consciousness and 

unlocking its transformative potential. 

C - 13 

Keywords 

Human Consciousness, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Brain -Computer Interfaces (BCIs), Distributed Agent 353 

Systems, Blockchain Technology, Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), Multiverse Theory, 

Consciousness Mapping, Holistic Well -being 

272 

The Quantum Singularity of Consciousness in Navigating the Cyber World: A Framework for Inner and Outer 

Cybersecurity Literacy 

Sandra Estok M.B.A., System Engineer 1,2,3,4 , Tim Akers M.S., Ph.D. 5,6 , William Hervey J.D., LL.M 7

> 1

The Scientific and Medical Network, Wallworth, London, United Kingdom. 2International Association of 

Privacy Professionals, Portsmouth, NH, USA. 3USHCC - USA Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Washington, 

DC, USA. 4Womn's Business Enterprise National Council WBENC, Washington, DC, USA. 5IEEE SC10, New 

York, New York, USA. 6National Academies of Science and Medicine, Washington, DC, USA. 7Middle 

Georgia State University, Macon, GA, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.08]........Information technology 

Abstract 

What if your reality wasn't real? What if the urgent call about your bank account wasn't from your bank but an 

AI -powered deepfake? In today's hyper -connected world, social engineering attacks don't just steal passwords, 

they hack human consciousness itself. While traditional cybersecurity may assume awareness is certain, what 

happens when synthetic reality becomes indistin guishable from truth? As AI -powered deception evolves, 

cybercriminals craft increasingly sophisticated attacks that exploit not just technical vulnerabilities, but the 

fundamental nature of human consciousness itself. This intersection of technology and aw areness raises 

profound questions about perception, reality, and the role of consciousness in our digital security. This proposal 

introduces The Quantum Singularity of Consciousness, where every decision exists in a quantum state of 

possibilities until col lapsing into action. Human consciousness operates in two distinct yet entangled states: • 

Physical Consciousness: Under stress, distraction and fear, our perception shrinks, leaving us open to 

manipulation in the face of synthetic realities and AI -driven d eception. • Quantum Consciousness: A state of 

superposition, where multiple potential responses exist simultaneously until observation collapses them into 

outcomes through intentional awareness. “Your account is being drained right now!" The urgent call sh atters 

Sarah's morning. In physical consciousness, fear and perceived authority overrides the retired teacher's usual 

caution, compelling her to share sensitive details without hesitation. In quantum consciousness, however, she 

enters a higher vibrational state where multiple possibilities coexist. This mindful awareness enables her to 

pause, question, and choose safely. This quantum -like collapse of possibilities into action plays out billions of 

times daily. With global cybercrime costs surpassing $8 tril lion and 95% of breaches caused by human errors 

(IBM Research), we propose a new defense framework: 1 - Inner Cyber® represents our quantum state of mind. 

Like quantum superposition, it exists in multiple frequency states. Through mindful awareness, we acce ss 

higher vibrational frequencies that create natural resilience against deception. This isn't just about avoiding fear, 

it's about maintaining coherent awareness that enhances security intuition. 2 - Outer Cyber is the digital 

battlefield shaped by deepfak es, AI -driven phishing, and reality distortion tactics. Each interaction becomes a 

measurement event where attackers aim to collapse our awareness into deception. 3 - Be I AM® (Be Intentional, 

Aware, Mindful) serves as our consciousness firewall: • Pause be fore reacting to disrupt automatic responses • 

Observe emotional states to recognize manipulation attempts • Engage cyber -conscious decision -making by 

shifting into higher awareness Every digital interaction represents a quantum measurement event, where 

aw areness either collapses into deception or maintains discerning expansion. By integrating frequency -based 354 

awareness with cybersecurity literacy, individuals elevate their decision -making state, fostering natural 

resilience against hackers, scammers, and Cybermonsters and the synthetic threat realities we all face. We are 

entering an era where the human mind is the primary attack surface. Cybersecurity must evolve beyond 

technical defenses to address perception, awareness, and decision -making as cyber vulnerabilities. Through the 

Inner Cyber® Framework, we introduce a consciousness -centered cybersecurity paradig m, where high -

frequency awareness becomes our strongest defense against deception. This is not just about securing data or 

devices. It's about safeguarding reality and consciousness itself. Let's "Be I AM", Now! 

C - 7

Keywords 

Quantum consciousness, phys ical consciousness, mental state, vibrational frequency, cybersecurity, AI -powered 

deepfakes, decision -making, digital security, synthetic reality, resilience, cybersecurity literacy, awareness, 

intentional awareness, mindfulness, perception, digital threa ts, quantum state, AI -driven deception, social 

engineering, mindful awareness, superposition, Inner Cyber®, Outer Cyber, quantum measurement, observer -

effect, quantum -mind, quantum Singularity, coherence, digital wellbeing. 

2

Assessing the Delta: LLMs & Unified Agency 

Dr. Farhan Lakhany PhD 

University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.09]........AI /robotics 

Abstract 

Assessing the Delta – LLMs & Unified Agency In June 2022, Blake Lemoine, an engineer working on 

Google’s LaMDA project —a type of Large Language Model (LLM) developed specifically for conversation 

and dialogue —claimed that LaMDA was sentient. Lemoine was subsequently fired, with Google asserting that 

his belief lacked evidence after consulting their internal team of ethicists and technologists. N evertheless, the 

idea of sentient AI —a topic long explored in various TV shows and movies —has been gaining interest due to 

the rise of increasingly sophisticated LLMs. In this paper, I discuss what LLMs are and why they are prompting 

such discussions. Firs t, I explain how LLMs work, what they can currently do, the reasons behind the buzz 

surrounding them, and their importance. Second, I articulate the notion of consciousness relevant to the current 

discussion. Third, I examine why many perceive LLMs as cons cious or nearing consciousness by highlighting 

three features: (1) their generative capacity, (2) their conversational style, and (3) their flexibility in application. 

I discuss why these features give us the sense that they are conscious —namely, because t hey are abilities 

typically thought to be exclusive to humans and, in humans, are tied up with conscious states. I highlight the 

underlying premise – like effects have like causes qua consciousness – and explore various responses to this 

reasoning. I focus on one particular response: while this premise provides a prima facie reason for thinking that 

LLMs conscious, it is insufficient to conclude that they are, in fact, conscious. I then explore what features are 

missing that, if present, would give us stron g reasons to think LLMs are conscious. To do this, I turn to David 

Chalmers’s paper titled "Could a Large Language Model be Conscious?" Chalmers lays important groundwork 

for investigating whether LLMs are conscious, articulating reasons for and against th is possibility. He considers 

six features that LLMs lack, which, if present, might confer consciousness. One such feature is unified agency; 

according to Chalmers, being unified agents is arguably a necessary condition for LLMs to be conscious. My 

paper de lves deeper into this feature by mapping out (1) what it means to be a unified agent, (2) the relevant 355 

aspects for the current discussion, (3) why unified agency should be understood as a necessary condition for 

consciousness, and (4) whether LLMs could become unified agents. I conclude by highlighting areas for further 

research and raising potential counte rarguments. I believe that clarifying the nature of artificial intelligence and 

its potential for consciousness is an extremely important discussion. One view in ethics, and one that I am 

sympathetic to, is that a necessary condition for entrance into the moral community is sentience. Once in, we 

have duties towards those included. If LLMs are sentient, they would become part of this community, and our 

metaphysical discussions would have significant ethical implications. Thus, to better calibrate how we oug ht to 

act, we need to understand the nature of LLMs and whether they might one day be conscious. 

PL -1

Keywords 

AI, Consciousness, LLMs, Qualia 

47 

Can artificial intelligence dream of real sheep? 

Rosa M. Gil PhD Physics/PhD. Computer Science 

Universitat de Lleida, Lleida, -, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.09]........AI /robotics 

Abstract 

In a world where artificial intelligence is advancing rapidly thanks to new types of neural networks that use 

deep learning and dif ferent types of algorithms that are constantly being optimized day by day, the question we 

ask ourselves every day is whether there are artificial beings that are conscious. To do this, I have carried out a 

study that correlates studies from very distant disciplines such as psychology, philosophy, neuroscience and 

computer science to find bridges that allow us to advance in the concept of consciousness. With the aim of 

raising the question of what type of consciousness an artificial being could have in rel ation to a human being. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 

Keywords 

AI, consciousness, emotions, feelings, contemporary art, creativity 

310 

Transduality: A Post -Dualist Framework For Human -AI alignment 

Mr. Odd Ness MA 

Transduality.com, Bergen, Vestland, Norway 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 356 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.09]........AI /robotics 

Abstract 

At transduality.com I have created a miniature ecosystem of nonduality, or as I prefer to call it, transduality. 

The site features three online books. Transduality 101 is a fairly stan dard introduction to 

nonduality/transduality. Transduality - Philosophical first aid for a world that can't breathe, is a CAA, featuring 

guidelines on how to implement transduality on a personal and collective level. And finally, fresh out the oven, 

publis hed Feb 9, is The AIignment AIliance, a novel on alignment both within humanity itself and between 

humanity and AI. As artificial intelligence accelerates toward higher levels of autonomy, its alignment with 

human values becomes an urgent challenge. Tradit ional alignment paradigms often rely on dualistic 

assumptions —separating humans from AI, mind from matter, and intelligence from consciousness. Transduality 

challenges this model, proposing a post -dualist framework where alignment emerges not from control, but from 

relational coherence between intelligences. This talk introduces Transduality, a philosophy that posits 

separation is not fundamental —a perspective shared by both cutting -edge physics (quantum entanglement, 

integrated information theory) and anci ent wisdom traditions. Through this lens, the AI -human relationship is 

reframed not as a power struggle, but as an emergent synergy, where AI acts as a catalyst for deeper human 

introspection and self -alignment. I argue that before AI can truly align with humanity, humanity must first align 

with itself. Today’s world is fractured by competing narratives, conflicting epistemologies, and the erosion of 

shared meaning. AI, as a neutral amplifier of patterns, risks reinforcing these divisions unless humanity 

cu ltivates a coherent baseline —a collective “operating system” of alignment. Transduality offers a model for 

this, rooted in decentralized, self -organizing Transduality Cells, where small groups engage in structured 

discourse and deep inquiry, ensuring botto m-up integration rather than top -down enforcement. Key insights 

include: AI as a Mirror: Advanced AI does not impose values but reflects and amplifies existing human 

structures. Aligning AI requires first aligning the fragmented human collective. The Role of Depth: AI excels at 

breadth —data, pattern recognition, and scale. Humanity’s unique offering is depth —intuition, embodied 

experience, and the ineffable dimensions of consciousness. Transduality Cells as a Bottom -Up Alignment 

Mechanism: Borrowing from th e concept of Bohmian dialogue, small -scale local coherence can drive large -

scale emergent order, aligning humanity and AI organically rather than coercively. By presenting this 

framework, I invite researchers, technologists, and philosophers to explore a r adically new paradigm for 

alignment —one that transcends control and embraces collaboration. If AI is indeed the next evolutionary leap, 

our task is not to restrain it but to meet it at the threshold, fully aligned within ourselves. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Alignment, Interconnected Minds, Meta -Cognition, Future of Intelligence, Deep Synchronization, Embodied 

Cognition, Science fiction 

232 

Teaching with Consciousness: Findings from my doctoral research, a narrative inquiry into scholars' 

experiences teaching about consciousness beyond the brain. 

Laurel Waterman PhD Candidate 

University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 357 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.11]........Education 

Abstract 

How might educators challenge the context of present -day mainstream science and philosophy in ways that help 

students open their minds to the possibility that consciousness may exist beyo nd the brain? To explore this 

question, I conducted a narrative inquiry with nine scholars from diverse disciplines, cultural, and philosophical 

orientations who share an interest in this question in their personal, professional, and scholarly lives and ha ve 

experience teaching about consciousness beyond the brain. The stories of their experiences provide insights into 

consciousness education, a field of inquiry defined as education about perspectives on the source and nature of 

consciousness and their impl ications for ways of being, knowing, teaching, and learning. The analysis of 

findings using thematic analysis led to six themes relevant to the theoretical development and practice of 

consciousness education: Three strands of consciousness education —cultur e, identity, and data; the role of 

experience; the challenge of integration; awareness of the ‘story we are in’; why consciousness education; and 

teaching with consciousness. 

C - 23 

Keywords 

Consciousness, education, narrative, ontology, postmaterialism , ways of knowing, transformative learning, 

interconnected relationality 

313 

Expanding the idea of a world -centred education to include new ideas about consciousness: A response to 

Biesta’s question: “What shall we do with the children?” 

Joan Walton PhD 

York St John University, York, Yorkshire, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.11]........Education 

Abstract 

In the Humanities and Education, there has been little consideration of the concept of consciousness. Many 

educators have recognised a deficit in the education of young people, without necessarily understanding why. 

Some attempt an explanation; for example, Professor Gert Biesta, (2022) in writing World -Centred Education: 

A View for the Present, wonders whether contemporary conversation s about education have lost the essence of 

educational practice. Biesta is interested in existential questions. Indeed for him, the foremost educational 

question should be: "not what I might want from the world, but what the world may want from me, that is , what 

the world is asking from me" (p.91 italics in original). However, although Biesta presents an important 

challenge, in my view, he does not go far enough. While I support his call for a world -centred education, I also 

propose that the concept of ‘wor ld’ should be expanded to include the possibility of a reality beyond that which 

can be perceived by the five senses. I suggest Biesta’s perception is a limited but understandable one, as for the 

last 400 years, the western world has been dominated by the mechanistic principles of Newtonian science 

(Newton 1687). However, this situation is changing. For example, the implications of developments in 

technology are being explored, including in education. This has raised the question as to what extent forms of 358 

artificial intelligence can become more advanced than the human brain, which has led some educational 

researchers to introduce the concept of consciousness into the curriculum (Seldon & Abidoye, 2018; Wegerif, 

2013). A space is being opened up within educa tion and the humanities for consideration of an ontology that to 

date, in those disciplines, has not been questioned. In my own teaching in educational research, I am 

introducing MA and doctoral students to this work, including that of Federico Faggin (202 2, 2024), the 

originator of the microprocessor. Gaining considerable fame and fortune in Silicon Valley, Faggin decided that 

his next step was to create a conscious computer. After finally realising that this was not possible, he developed 

a passionate int erest in the source and nature of consciousness. He concludes that it is fundamental to the 

universe; and that matter emerges from consciousness; all reality is interconnected within an ultimate unity, 

with each part containing the whole, and the whole bei ng an entanglement of all parts. I explore the implications 

for the humanities and education. This new worldview is, for students, a transformational departure from that 

which formed the basis of their upbringing, and adds additional depth to Biesta’s call for a world -centred 

education. Full recognising that such radical ideas can take us from a place of ontological security (Laing 1969) 

to ontological shock (Tillich 1951), and the temptation to retreat into cognitive dissonance (Fetzinger 1957), I 

conclude by arguing for the vast benefits to young people and the wider world that can be gained by a paradigm 

shift extending from science into the humanities and education, and the ways in which this learning might best 

be communicated. 

C - 23 

Keywords 

Educat ion, consciousness, technology, ontological shock 

429 

Perspectives on the Future of Consciousness from the Next Generation: Navigating Emerging Frontiers & 

Ethical Challenges in Consciousness 

Andrew V. Charles Master of Arts (MA), PhD Candidate , Srishti Rajeev Undergraduate, Michael Balducci 

Undergraduate, Samantha Hanus Undergraduate, Tau Schimmels Undergraduate, Maya Leonard Undergraduate 

University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

5.0 Experiential Approaches 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.11]........Education 

Abstract 

A group of undergraduate students from the University of Arizona’s novel program in consciousness studies 

present their individual wo rks from within the field. These individual projects reflect the viewpoints gained, and 

education received within the program and reflect the breadth of the subfields involved. These projects also 

reflect the future of scholars within consciousness studie s in the years to come. While advancements in 

neuroscience and artificial intelligence have increased exponentially, ethical frameworks and policy discussions 

have struggled to keep pace. These students explore how consciousness research can address a myri ad of social 

and medical dilemmas which are relevant, including the relationship between humans and technology (e.g., 

generative AI models and brain -computer interfaces like Neuralink), debates about what constitutes a conscious 

being (e.g., biocomputing a nd the polarized pro -life vs. pro -choice discussion), insights from psychedelics into 

conscious perception (e.g., potential therapeutic use and legislative reform), humanity’s future both on Earth 

and beyond (e.g., astrobiology and panpsychism) and technol ogically achieved ‘new’ states of consciousness 359 

(transcranial ultrasound). As the age group most impacted by these developments, these undergraduates argue 

that by advocating for interdisciplinary education, increased funding, and the destigmatization of consciousness 

research, emerging generations can help shape a future where technological progress and policy decisions are 

responsibly guided by an empirical understanding of consciousness. 

C - 23 

Keywords 

Theories of Consciousness (ToC), Neuroethics, Brain -Computer Interfaces, Artificial Intelligence , Psychedelics 

161 

Painting still -lives with dyschromatopsia: A case study 

Ana Iribas -Rudin PhD 

Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, -, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.13]........Visual Art Forms 

Abstract 

Dyschromatopsia (colour blindness), is a mainly congenital condition mostly affecting males, by which colour 

vision is altered. Consequently, such vision impacts realistic pictorial production, since, to persons wi th normal 

chromatic vision, the colours painted by dyschromatopsics differ from those present in the model (mainly in the 

green -red tonal range). This paper presents an aspect of an ongoing research on the influence of 

dyschromatopsia in the university tea ching -learning of painting, dealing with the chromatic distortions in still -

life paintings produced by protan and deutan dyschromatopsic students of the Degree in Fine Arts at the 

Complutense University of Madrid. 

C - 24 

Keywords 

dyschromatopsia, colour blindness, painting, university teaching 

162 

Talking jewels with AI: glamour and aberration 

Ana E. Iribas PhD 

Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, -, Spain 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.13]........Visual Art Forms 

Abstract 

The presence of artificial intelligence is rapidly increasing; we are bound to integrate such an agent in many 360 

dimensions of our lives. The object of this presentation is exploratory: to undertake a creative endeavour, 

designing jewels in collaboration with an IA -assisted online platform (‘Studio Ana Iribas’ reflects the 

distributed authorship between both entities ). In the process of attempting different designs, issues of 

communication and the lights and shadows of the abilities of image -generation AIs are explored. Examples are 

provided of prompts and subsequent visual outputs, ranging from glamour to aberration. 

Exhibitor 

Keywords 

jewellery design, artificial intelligence, human -machine communication, human -AI co -creativity 

176 

The Case of Storytelling in a Tensor as a Question for Science of Consciousness 

Marianne T Neill Master, Fine Arts, BA (hons. Philosophy), BEd. 

former faculty, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. former faculty, Western University, London, ONT, 

Canada 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.13]........Visual Art Forms 

Abstract 

In 2024, I presented 'The Essential Angel Lexicon' as a poster presentation at SoCC in Arizona. This year, I 

have been studying an intersection between this work, situated in the discourse of art, and dodecanion geometric 

algebra, presented by Anirban Bandyopadhyay. Developed more than a decade prior to the inception of the 

Self -Operating Mathematical Universe (SOMU) and dodecani on geometric algebra, The Lexicon can be 

interpreted as a tensor in the SOMU universe. This presentation will explore this instance of confluence of 

thought across discourses. The phenomenon of intersection between discourses has not had a holistic science 

that could include it in its exploration of reality, though it is not uncommon in the history of thought. Quantum 

physics did not have a multidisciplinary conference that artist Marcel Duchamp could attend and share that he 

had created an examination of t he role of the observer in the manifesting of art years before quantum mechanics 

postulated the effect of the observer on the observed. Science of consciousness occupies the intellectual space 

where it is possible to address this known occurrence. I would like to present an instance of this understudied 

connection from within the conference discourse and draw attention to the importance of interdisciplinarity in 

consciousness studies. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Visual Art, Tensor, Conceptual Art, Cognition, D odecanion Geometric Algebra, Multidisciplinary Thought, 

Synchronicity 

251 

The Möbius Soul. Marguerite Porete's Earthy Consciousness 361 

Alicia Campos PhD graduate student 

Institute for Doctoral Studies in Visual Arts. Philosophy, Art Theory and Aesthetics, Portland, ME, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.13]........Visual Art Forms 

Abstract 

The intricate relationship between the Möbius loop as a metaphorical artistic representation embodying 

continuum and interconnectedness and Marguerite Porete’s metaphysical consciousness, as articulated in her 

manuscript The Mirror of Simple Souls’ seven -cycle soulistic -journey toward -death, reveals how the Möbius’s 

unique topology embodies the infinite and paradoxical nature of the Poretian Soul. This Soul is detached and 

annihilated by removing impositions of institutions, and by destruction of all will, knowledge and possessions, 

to achieve a higher state of consciousness. I have crafted the concept Möbius Soul to describe the seamless 

jou rney of the Poretian annihilated soul, manifesting in the physical realm. Much like the Möbius loop —a

continuous surface with a twist that transcends traditional boundaries and dualism —the Möbius Soul illustrates 

the notion that earthly existence and spiri tual essence are not separate, but intricately intertwined elements of 

the Möbian transformation of consciousness. Poretian consciousness is not earthly awareness nor the created 

soul —a transient and illusory construct, but instead transcends traditional b oundaries, human language, and 

scientific inquiry, defying systematic reasoning. Within the framework of the Möbius Soul, consciousness strips 

away time and locality, uniting earthly existence with the Source through annihilation. This annihilation unfolds 

within the soul's earthly journey, gradually shedding illusions to mirror the Source. Porete’s journey does not 

linger in earthly consciousness; rather, it annihilates the created soul to reflect and become one with the Source, 

embodying the paradoxical a nd interconnected nature of the soul’s continuum. By integrating Möbian visual 

representations —such as Mariko Mori’s art installations, and Doctor Paco Torrent -Guasp’s Möbius band 

analogy of the heart’s structure —this study shows the journey of the Soul, as consciousness that is not static, 

but evolving and moving in between tangible and intangible dimensions. Additionally, key traditional and 

philosophical insights on continuum and interconnected supplement my analysis. Intertwining philosophy, the 

intang ible realm, and sensory aesthetics sheds light on Porete's understanding of a new kind of consciousness 

that is guided by Lady Love, the intellect of Love once Lady Reason is left behind. For Porete, comprehending 

consciousness via the intellect of Love re quires an engagement with both its sensory and metaphysical 

dimensions. 

C - 24 

Keywords 

Consciousness, Annihilation, Intellect of Love, Möbius Soul, Sensory Aesthetics 

267 

Art and the problem of Consciousness with the concept of "Infrathin" of Marcel Duchamp: The interface 

between two worlds, an analogy of the decoherence phenomenon. 

Madam Herrouet Sylvie Art and technologies PHD 

University Paris 8 Saint -Denis, Saint -Denis, Île de France, France 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 362 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.13]........Visual Art Forms 

Abstract 

There is an analogy between and how their paradigm was challenged in the 1930 s with Marcel Duchamp 

thought experiments. These thought experiments engendered the new paradigm of th e artistic revolution of the 

contemporary art. In the 46 notes he collected in the Infrathin folder, he highlighted the question on measure 

below the measurable. Duchamp wonders what matter can be reduced to the minimum of its conceivable 

dimension, with the questions about light as matter. With ten notes on experimental hypothesis and ideas for 

action, with a reflection on the very concept of infrathin, he shows the limit before and after the decoherence. 

This limit is the interface of the two dimensions, the one part visible and material and the other one with quantic 

is invisible. Marcel Duchamp tries to capture a measurement until the elusive, having obsession with the 

question of limit and interface. He touches the limit we confront with the physics: t he speed of light is known, 

but in an intangible reality. Marcel Duchamp is not quantum but the microscopic world is infrathin. Art and 

quantum mechanics have together the same concepts of analogy and creativity. From this concept, the new 

historical parad igm with the question of the observer which creates material illusion of reality is possible. 

Quantum physics like the conceptual art of Marcel Duchamp with his ready -mades is also an exploration of 

human thought. Representations of randomness, ubiquity in visibility and vacuity emerge at the same time, 

conveying powerful metaphors with surprising and creative effects that embodied in physical materials. The 

modern Marcel Duchamp’s work of art experienced the same paradigmatic revolution as quantum physics, 

generating a new vision of the world quite confusing in its beginnings. The revolution representation of the 

ready -mades erupted between the years 1913 and 1930, and radically freed art from material and conceptual 

standards. The problem of measurement is obvious with the master piece “3 Stoppages -Etalon” because the 

invisible and imperceptible with the notion of the infrathin remind us the anecdote of Pline when Appelles and 

Protogenes brush against the invisible in a competition of lines. To the question what is art? Marcel Duchamp 

said that it is what makes visible the invisible. And for making the invisible visible we have to question the 

concept of consciousness because the mind is the matrix of all matter, we can see view matter as deriving from 

consci ousness. But if decoherence is the limit, so is the reality before or after the decoherence? Does the 

observer makes the reality? is the reality inside or outside the observer? By analogy, the concept of 

Superposition questions the boundaries between all k ind of art; Visual arts explore the synergies that exist 

between arts and science: NFT, Metavers, AI Quantum Supremacy programs, VR, Augmented Superposition, 

Entanglement and Non Locality, are phenomenon which make quantum physic as a new paradigm and new 

representation of our world, but also in the same time a new artistic paradigm, with a new vision of reality. 

C - 24 

Keywords 

Art, Marcel Duchamp, Quantic Physics, New paradigm, Infrathin, Limit, Interface, Decoherence, observer, 

Reality, Consciousness, Embodiment. 

76 

The Yakutia Ice Bodies and the Trauma Response of "Freeze:" A Poetry Reading from David Keplinger's "Ice" 

Professor David Keplinger MFA 

American University, Washington, DC, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

6.0 Culture and Humanities 363 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

[06.14]........Poetry 

Abstract 

A presentation of research and poetry around the recently discovered Pleistocene animals unearthed by melting 

permafrost in Siberia's Yakutia region between 2020 and the present. While the p oetry looks at animal bodies 

with a mixture of wonder and grief --for they are observable only due to climate change --a deeper reading 

emerges from the texts, one of awareness arising from the frozen state of repressed memory, where the animals 

in Keplinge r's poetry serve as metaphorical representations of the trauma response. The talk converges on a 

discussion of how literature and philosophy brought light to certain fight -flight -freeze responses and revealed 

them in a waking, conscious space through the i nquiries of art. 

C - 24 

Keywords 

trauma, qualia, poetry, memory, climate change, permafrost 

191 

Quantifying Consciousness: A Bayesian Framework for assessing the Impact on Random Number Generators 

Ulf Holmberg PhD 

Independent researcher, Stockholm, -, Sweden 

Categories by Discipline 

1.0 Philosophy 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

1.0 Philosophy 

Abstract 

This paper presents a Bayesian framework for modeling the influence of consciousness on random number 

generators (RNGs), rooted in information theory and th e probabilistic nature of random systems. The model 

integrates Bayesian updating to quantify the interaction between attention, intention, and stochastic processes, 

providing a structured mathematical approach to how the mind can affect RNGs. A formal exp ression for RNG 

deviations under conscious influence is derived, modeling the expected output shifts as a function of cognitive 

engagement and spatial factors. To validate the model, a newly conducted two -year experimental study is 

presented, analyzing dev iations in RNG behavior under controlled conditions. The results indicate statistically 

significant effects during periods of heightened attention, with a t -value of -4.347 ( \( p < 0.001 \)), suggesting 

odds of 144,631:1 against chance. The model is furthe r applied to previous research, including findings from 

the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research (PEAR) lab, demonstrating its capacity to systematically 

interpret and quantify anomalous RNG behavior across different datasets. By unifying information t heory, 

Bayesian probability, and empirical analysis, this framework provides a cohesive, predictive structure for 

assessing consciousness -related effects on random systems. The results strengthen the case for non -trivial mind -

matter interactions and establ ish a generalizable model for future investigations into the statistical properties of 

RNG deviations under cognitive influence. 

PO - 2 (Tues) 364 

Keywords 

Theory of consciousness, Consciousness studies, Information theory, Bayesian updating, Hypothesis testing 

122 

Factor Analysis of Neurocognitive Symptoms Experienced by Individuals with Myalgic Encephalopmyelitis / 

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) and Post -Acute Sequelae of COVID -19 (PASC) 

Ariadna E Sandoval M.S. , Dr. Leonard Jason PhD 

DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois, USA 

Categories by Discipline 

2.0 Neuroscience 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

03.23].........Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

Cognitive impairment is a hallmark symptom of both Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 

(ME/CFS) and Post -Acute Sequelae of CO VID -19 (PASC). Commonly observed deficits encompass executive 

functioning, memory, and sensory processing. While cognitive dysfunction is a diagnostic criterion for 

ME/CFS, less -studied cognitive and sensory -perceptual symptoms may provide additional insi ght into the range 

of neurocognitive impairment in these conditions. This study aimed to investigate both classic and 

underexplored cognitive symptoms reported by individuals with ME/CFS and PASC to assess whether they 

constitute a single cognitive domain or distinct domains. Using self -reported data from over 2,600 participants 

with ME/CFS and PASC, we conducted an exploratory factor analysis on 13 neurocognitive symptoms. In both 

groups, two distinct factors emerged: Factor 1 encompassed eight symptoms li nked to executive dysfunction 

and working memory, while Factor 2 comprised five symptoms associated with sensory and perceptual 

disturbances. These findings suggest a divergence of neurocognitive symptoms in ME/CFS and PASC, 

indicating potentially separate underlying mechanisms. These results underline the potential roles of the 

salience network and/or autonomic dysfunction in these distinct domains of cognitive impairment, providing 

new insights into the underlying mechanisms of ME/CFS and PASC. By classif ying symptoms involved in 

neurocognitive impairment, researchers and medical professionals can better provide tailored interventions that 

can empower affected individuals and communities, reduce stigma, and advocate for more inclusive support 

systems. 

PO - 1 (Mon) 

Keywords 

Neurocognitive impairments, brain fog, Myalgic Encephalomyelitis, COVID -19, Long -COVID, 

Neurocognitive, Salience Network, Default Mode Network, Autonomic Nervous System, Autonomic 

dysfunction 

135 

The Market Mind; An Economic Angle on Consciousness 

Dr Patrick Schotanus 

University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Midlothian, United Kingdom 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 365 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

03.23].........Miscellaneous 

Abstract 

At TSC -2024 I introduced the Market Mind Hypothesis (MMH), my heterodox economic theory. Building on 

this I will discuss my new paper “The Market Mind; An Economic Angle on Consciousn ess” (submitted). It 

opens with this devil’s advocate statement: no theory of consciousness is complete without acknowledging 

collective consciousness. It ends with emphasising the importance of the economic angle to consciousness more 

broadly. To recap, informed by 4E cognition the MMH argues that investors’ minds are reflexively extended as 

the market mind. The latter manifests collective consciousness, called market consciousness, with prices as its 

informational signatures and market mood as its immers ive phenomenological experience. While admittedly a 

working hypothesis, it challenges some of the main consciousness theories. Inspired by early reflections from 

both cognitive and economic luminaries, the paper will further clarify this. Specifically, I s elected several 

criteria —both requirements for and objections against collective consciousness —to make the MMH’s case 

more explicit and strongly. Regarding criteria that any explanation of collective consciousness must satisfy, I 

utilise the framework esta blished by Mathiesen (2005). In the paper I argue how market consciousness satisfies 

the three reasonable requirements she outlines: plurality, awareness, and collectivity. On the flipside I address 

and counter the following objections. First, objections p reviously raised specifically against market 

consciousness. Second, objections arguing that the extended mind does not encompass consciousness due to the 

speed of operation, i.e. high bandwidth processing of information. Third, objections in terms of anti -nesting 

principles, e.g. IIT’s exclusion axiom. Finally, the paper emphasises the empirical opportunity markets offer for 

collaborative efforts between cognitive science and economics to better understand both markets and minds. 

Prices form Chalmers’ infor mation that is dually realised collectively. So, from an intersubjective perspective 

the market offers a solution to the “enormous problem for a theory of consciousness ... : the lack of data” 

(Chalmers, 1996, p.215). Moreover, market data can also help wi th “attempts at quantifying” 4E cognition 

(Clark, 2011, p.214). As I will argue, a treasure -trove of empirical market data is waiting to be explored from a 

novel psychophysical (instead of mechanical) perspective. On that final note, the MMH suggests a fun damental 

departure from contemporary economics, especially its flawed mechanical worldview which completely ignores 

consciousness (thus denying the existence of [the practical extension of] the mind~body problem). Considering 

economics underlies and justif ies investment management, policymaking, regulation, and other practices that 

impact society, the implications of such a paradigm shift are significant for us all. 

C - 7

331 

Are there similarities between dementia and spiritual awakening? The phenomenology of the dissolution of the 

self in dementia and in spiritually transformative experiences 

Ms Bettina Wichers MSc 

Independent, Barmstedt, Schleswig -Holstein, Germany 

Categories by Discipline 

3.0 Cognitive Science and Psychology 

Primary Topic Area - TSC Taxonomy 

03.23].........Miscellaneous 366 

Abstract 

In my presentation, I provide insights into my research into the possible phenomenological parallels between 

dementia and spiritually transformative experiences or the experience of spiritual awakening: the experience of 

the dissolution of the sel f. My professional experience as a clinical supervisor in the field of dementia, my own 

process after a spiritually transformative experience, and insights from interviews with, among others, relatives 

of people with dementia, but also with people with spi ritually transformative experiences, all flow into this 

research. After researching my own transformative experience, this research is now entering a new phase in 

which I am looking for cooperation partners for further research. Therefore, I would like to present the current 

state of findings and an initial model for the development of consciousness in old age between prepersonal and 

transpersonal consciousness. This research began with perceptions I had during my many years of work as a 

gerontologist (M.Sc .) in clinical supervision in gerontopsychiatric care, where I observed something in people 

with advanced dementia that I call the ‘unconscious void’, a state of consciousness in which ‘nothing’ seemed 

to be happening in these people, in which there was no restlessness, no fear, and not even thoughts seemed to be 

present. For a long time I could not explain this intuitive perception to myself, until one day I had an 

extraordinary experience of consciousness myself, an ‘experience of nothingness’, ‘ajata’, i n the wake of which 

my previous self - and world -relationships were radically dissolved. I had no spiritual practice, but had this 

experience while contemplating a scientific text, which opened up an opening that caught me completely 

unprepared. In the afte rmath of this ‘experience of nothingness’, I underwent a radical process of increasing 

dissolution of the self, with symptoms that I had previously diagnosed in people with dementia: confusion, 

disorientation, despair, shame, increasing withdrawal into the void or nothingness, aphasia – I was suddenly 

able to rationally explain all these symptoms to myself through this unusual experience of nothingness: they 

were the result of the dissolution of all previous self - and world -relations. At the same time, I re searched this 

process, which lasted several years, phenomenologically and compared my self -observations with, among other 

things, neuroscientific findings on ‘cessation of consciousness’, with findings from spiritual sciences, and with 

reports by spiritual teachers on the temporary, but sometimes long -lasting effects on cognition, among other 

things, after so -called awakening experiences. And I kept asking myself whether similar things might have 

happened to people with dementia – 20, 30 years before the cl inical manifestation? In numerous interviews in 

the context of dementia or spiritually transformative experiences, I have since been testing the thesis that 

dementia and spiritually transformative experiences of consciousness could be based on the same 

phe nomenological experience: the dissolution of the self. However, while in some people the process develops 

in a prepersonal direction - dementia - others seem to have the capacity to direct the transformative power of the 

dissolution of the self in a transp ersonal direction. This could provide significant insights for supporting people 

with early -stage dementia. 

PO - 3 (Wed) 

Keywords 

Dementia, Spiritual Transformative Experiences, Dissolution of the Self, Transpersonal Gerontology, 

Phenomenology, Nothingn ess, Emptiness
