Title: Federal Election Commission (FEC) Office of Inspector General (OIG) Audit Manual, 2016 and Flexiplace Program Policy, 2015

URL Source: https://www.governmentattic.org/22docs/FEC-TwoManuals_2015_2016.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 10 Feb 2017 20:01:09 GMT

Markdown Content:
Description of document: Federal Election Commission (FEC) Office of Inspector General (OIG) Audit Manual, 2016 and Flexiplace Program Policy, 2015 

Requested date: 26-December-2016 

Released date: 17-January-2017 

Posted date: 13-February-2017 

Source of document: FOIA Request Federal Election Commission Attn: FOIA Requester Service Center Room 408 999 E Street, NW Washington, DC 20463 Fax: (202) 219-1043 Email:  FOIA@fec.gov 

The governmentattic.org web site (“the site”) is noncommercial and free to the public. The site and materials made available on the site, such as this file, are for reference only. The governmentattic.org web site and its principals have made every effort to make this information as complete and as accurate as possible, however, there may be mistakes and omissions, both typographical and in content. The governmentattic.org web site and its principals shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to have been caused, directly or indirectly, by the information provided on the governmentattic.org web site or in this file. The public records published on the site were obtained from government agencies using proper legal channels. Each document is identified as to the source. Any concerns about the contents of the site should be directed to the agency originating the document in question. GovernmentAttic.org is not responsible for the contents of documents published on the website. From: FOIA 

Date: Jan 17, 2017 10:18:43 PM 

Subject: Your Freedom of Information Act Request to the FEC, No. 2017-024 

Cc: Lynne McFarland <lmcfarland@fec.gov> 

This email is in response to your request for information from the Federal Election Commission (FEC) under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), dated and received on December 26, 2016. You requested the following records: 

1. A digital/electronic copy of the FEC Inspector General Investigations Manual 

2. A digital/electronic copy of the FEC Inspector General Audit (Policies and Procedures) Manual 

3. A digital/electronic copy of the FEC OIG Telework Policy 

We have searched the Agency’s records and located the requested documents. Your request has been granted in part subject to an applicable FOIA exemption. Please find attached the FEC Inspector General Audit Manual and the FEC Office of Inspector General Telework Policy. 

We are denying your request as to the FEC Inspector General Investigations Manual pursuant to FOIA Exemption 7(E). Exemption 7(E) protects from disclosure law enforcement information that "would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law." 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7)(E). The Investigations Manual includes administrative and operational procedures that are used by the OIG to investigate alleged violations of criminal and civil law, as well as administrative claims. Accordingly, pursuant to Exemption 7(E), we have withheld from disclosure all 91 pages of the manual. 

You may contact our FOIA Public Liaison, Kate Higginbothom, at (202) 694-1650 for any further assistance and to discuss any aspect of your request. Additionally, you may contact the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) at the National Archives and Records Administration to inquire about the FOIA mediation services they offer. The contact information for OGIS is as follows: Office of Government Information Services, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road-OGIS, College Park, Maryland 20740-6001, e-mail at  ogis@nara.gov ; telephone at 202-741-5770; toll free at 1-877-684-6448; or facsimile at 202-741-5769. 

If you are not satisfied with the response to this request, you may administratively appeal by writing to the Chief FOIA Officer, Federal Election Commission, 999 E Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20463, or sending an e-mail to  foia@fec.gov . Any such appeal should follow the guidelines set forth in the Commission’s FOIA regulations at 11 C.F.R. § 4.8. Thank you for contacting the FEC. 

Sincerely, 

Hina Z. Hussain 

FOIA Service Center 

_______________________ 

Hina Z. Hussain 

Attorney 

OGC - Administrative Law 

Federal Election Commission FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 

# OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR GENERAL AUDIT MANUAL July  2016 

# Approved:  ~Av-(  I/~~ 

# Date:  Sl  i1 l tLo FEC  OIG  Audit Manual FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

Revisions  Table 

Chapter 1: Purpose and Mission Chapter 2: Audit  Policy  and Standards Chapter 3:  General  Standards Chapter 4:  Staff  Qualifications and Continuing Professional Education Chapter 5:  Annual  Audit  Planning 

Chapter 6: Engagement  Planning 

Chapter 7: Supervising Engagements Chapter 8:  Internal  Controls Chapter 9: Accessing Data Reliability Chapter  10:  Compliance  with Laws and Regulations Chapter 11 : Evidence Chapter 12: Developing  Elements  of a Finding Chapter 13: Monetary Benefit Chapter 14: Electronic Workpapers Chapter 15:  Sampling  and Estimation  Plans  and Techniques Chapter 16: Considering the Work of Others Chapter 17: Reporting Audit  Resu lts 

Chapter 18: Audit  Follow-up 

Chapter 19:  Quality  Control  and Assurance  Program 

Chapter  20:  Coordination with the  IG  Counsel/Chief  Inve st igator Chapter 21:  Financial  Audits Version: July 2016 TabA Tab BTabC TabD Tab E Tab F

TabG Tab H Tab  I

Tab J

Tab KTab LTabM TabN 

TabO 

Tab PTabQ Tab R

Tab  S

TabT Tab  U

# ------ii(  1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual 

Attachments 

Attachment #1 Attachment #2 Attachment #3 Attachment  1#4 

Attachment #5 Attachment #6 Attachment #7 Attachment #8 Version:  July  2016 

Independence Certification 

OIG  Quality  Control  Audit Checklist Organization  Conflict  of Interest FEC  OIG  Contractor Security Standards FEC  OIG  Contractor Engagement Completion Checklist Non-Disclosure Agreement Cover  Sheet  for Exported Teammate Audit File Independence Reference Comment  Sheet 

TabV 

------1 · ( 2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Revisions  Table 

Date of Chapter,  Section  No., Contents Revised Revision 

9/27/11 Chapter 1:  Org.  Chart- updated for senior auditor position 12/2012  Updated  several chapters to  reflect  the December  2011  revision of 

GAO  Government AuditinQ Standards  (yellowbook) 

6/2013  Updated  attachments (edits to  follow-up  process (semi-annual meetings) (also updated attachments 1, 2, 3, 5,  10,  and 11. Attachment 3 was  replaced;  Attachment 4 was removed  all 

together,  all  other tabs were moved up a number and attachment 11 was added). The revised date (J une  2013)  was added to  al l

headers in the chapters section. 

7/2015  Updated  chapters 3 , 4, 18, 19, and Attachments 1 & 2. Removed the prior attachments IPA Checklist and Report Processing Checklist as they have been incorporated with the  Quality 

Assurance  Checklist.  Also removed  O/G  Policy on Professional Licenses, Certifications, and Related Expenses as this information is  duplicated  in the  OIG's  handbook. Added Chapter 21 to the manual. 7/26/2016  Updated  Chapter 18 section  18-40:  Recommendation Resolution Process; Revised  NOA  (Attachment 6) to include new  language.      

> -----( 1)-----FEC OIG Audit

Manual Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Purpose and Mission: 

1-00  Purpose 

10  Inspector  General  Vision and Mission 

20  Inspector  General  Authority and  Responsibility 

30  Inspector  General Activities 

40  OIG  Organizational  Structure 

50  FEC  OIG  Responsibilities  and Duties 

60  Office of Audit Function 

70  Maintaining  External  Liaisons 

Section  1-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  1

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the Office of  Inspector  General's  (OIG)  vision, mission, and organizational structure. This audit  manual  applies to audits, reviews, and  evaluation 

engagements conducted by or contracted by the  Federa l  Election  Commission (FEC)  OIG. 

Section  1-10:  Inspector  General  Vision and Mission 

OIG's  vision is to be an agent of positive change striving for continuous improvement in our agency's management and program operations and in our own office. 

OIG's  mission is to be an independent and objective voice that: 

• Conducts and supervises independent and objective audits  relating  to agency programs and operations; 

• Promotes economy, effectiveness and efficiency within the agency; 

• Prevents and detects fraud, waste, and abuse in agency programs and operations; and 

• Keeps Congress and the Commission  fully  and  currently  informed of problems in agency programs and operations. 

Section  1-20:  Inspector  General  Authority and Responsibility The  Inspector  General  Act of 1978  (IG  Act),  Public  Law 95-452, as amended, established the 

Offices  of  Inspector  General  to create independent and objective units to promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness through the detection and prevention of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. ---- -( 1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  Chapter  1

To ensure objectivity, the  IG  Act empowers  IGs  with: 

• Independence to determine what reviews to perform; 

• Access to  all  information necessary for reviews; and 

• Authority to publish findings and recommendations based on the reviews. The  IG  Act mandates that in carrying out audit responsibilities, the  OIG  will  comply  with the 

Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS), and take appropriate steps to assure that the work performed by contracted  non-federal  auditors complies with GAGAS. 

GAGAS  is commonly referred to as the  "Yellow  Book."  FEC  OIG  will  comply with the requirements of the  IG  Act of 1978, as amended, and conduct assignments in accordance with the standards set forth in  GAGAS. 

Section 1-30:  Inspector  General Activities To further this mission, the  OIG  engages in the  following  activities: 

• Conducts and supervises audits (reviews and evaluations) and investigations  relating  to FEC programs and operations. 

• Provides  leadership  and coordinates policies for activities designed to promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the administration of FEC programs and operations. 

• Provides  recommendations for FEC programs and operations to aid in detecting and preventing fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. 

• Provides  a means for keeping the Commission and Congress informed about issues and deficiencies relating to the administration of FEC programs and operations, and the necessity for, and progress of, implementing corrective actions. 

Section  1-40:  OIG  Organizational  Structure The  IG  establishes the organization's structure and manages  all  OIG  functions and activities, in accordance with the provisions of the  IG  Act. The  IG  is responsible for the  overall  direction and operation of the office; and reports  directly  to the FEC Commissioners and Congress. Whenever the Inspector General is unable for any reason to perform assigned duties, he/she may designate an individual who is authorized to serve on behalf of the Inspector General. The designated individual  will  serve as  "Acting  Inspector General." Audit activities are a major component of the  OIG.  The  OIG  audit function is comprised of auditors that operate under the supervision of the Deputy  Inspector  General  (DIG}  who reports 

directly  to the Inspector  General  (IG).  The  DIG  is  responsible  for the  overall  management and direction of  all  audits.  Specifically,  the  DIG  directly  supervises  financial,  performance, program, and information technology audits, as  well  as special purpose reviews and evaluation engagements conducted by  OIG  or contract auditors. The auditor(s) are responsible for  planning  and conducting audits and reviews of  FEC 

operations and  programs.·  The auditor(s)  shall  report audit  results  to management and recommend improvements and monitor and report on the status of open audit recommendations. 

-----( 2 )1-------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  1FEC  OIG  Organizational Chart 

Lynne A.  McFarland 

Dorothy Maddox-Holland  Inspector  General 

Special  Assistant  to the 

Inspector  General 

J. Cameron Thurber  I

Carla  Smith 

Deputy  Inspector  General 

Counsel  to the  IGf  Chief Investigator 

Shellie  Purnell-Brown 

Senior  Auditor Mia Forgy Senior Auditor FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  1Section  1-50:  FEC  OIG  Responsibilities and Duties 

FEC  OIG  performs comprehensive and independent audits of  FEC  programs and operations. 

All  audits are conducted in accordance with  GAGAS,  applicable  Office  of Management and Budget  (OMB}  circulars and bulletins, and other  legal,  regulatory,  and administrative requirements. Furthermore, audits (reviews and evaluations) are conducted to detect and prevent fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement in  FEC  programs and operations.  OIG  also identifies opportunities for improvements to efficiency, effectiveness and economy through cost/benefit analysis, effective disbursement of funds, and improved program management through the implementation of  regulatory  policy  changes and recommendations for corrective actions, including recovery of funds. 

OIG  maintains an organizational structure that makes optimum use of  available  resources. The organizational structure fosters a coordinated  balance  and integration of  OIG  mission,  goals, 

and objectives. 

FEC  OIG  conducts comprehensive audits (reviews and  evaluations)  of  FEC  programs, operations, and non-governmental organizations, such as  FEC  contractors.  In  addition, the  OIG 

has inherent responsibility for the comprehensive audit of the FE C's  financial statements. 

Finally,  OIG  provides  policy  direction and coordination within the context of an  annual  audit strategy. Section  1-60:  Audit Functions 

OIG's  major audit functions are to: 

• Provide service by performing financial, performance, program, and information technology audits, as  well  as  special  purpose reviews and  evaluation  engagements. 

• Develop  policies,  procedures, standards, and criteria for auditing and evaluating  FEC 

activities. 

• Work with other  federal  agencies on  special  or joint projects. 

• Review  legislative  and  regulatory  proposals to determine audit or  evaluation 

implications. 

• Participate in interagency cooperative efforts, such as the Council of Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency  (CIGIE)  and other initiatives that impact our understanding and management of the detection and prevention of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. 

• Evaluate  audits performed by contracted independent accounting firms. 

• Prepare and disseminate audit and  evaluation  reports or  special  purpose reviews to  FEC 

management, Commissioners, and Congress. 

• Provide  technical  assistance to  FEC  operating  personnel. 

• Accumulate data on  unresolved  audit findings. 

• Report audit results in semiannual reports to Congress. 

• Conduct follow-up audits to determine completeness and propriety of actions taken in response to reported findings and audit recommendations. 

-----( 4 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version : July  2016  Chapter  1Section  1-70:  Maintaining  External  Liaisons 

In  accordance with the  IG  Act, as amended, the primary  responsibility  for auditing the FEC rests with the  IG.  Inspector  Generals are to avoid duplication of effort to ensure effective coordination and cooperation with the Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO).  FEC  OIG  personnel  should maintain  liaisons  with  external  representatives and stakeholders, such as  CIGIE,  OMB,  and others. 

-----( 5 )t-------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Audit  Policy  and Standards: 

2-00  Purpose 10 Audit Standards, Definitions, and Requirements 

20  Audit  Policy 

Section  2-00: Purpose 

# Chapter 2 

This chapter identifies the  policies,  procedures, standards, and  technical  guidance the  FEC  OIG 

will  follow  in  planning  and conducting government audits (reviews and  evaluations). 

The standards, definitions, and requirements contained herein, are designed to assist the  OIG 

to achieve its vision and mission  goals.  This chapter is intended to be consistent with the provisions of the  Generally  Accepted Government Auditing Standards  {GAGAS)  or  0Yellow 

Book"  and to ensure that audit services conducted by or on behalf of the  OIG  are performed with competence, integrity, objectivity and independence. 1

Section  2-10: Audit Standards, Definitions, and Requirements All audits  will  be conducted in accordance with the provisions of  GAGAS.  These standards are designed to set the tone for the use of  professional  judgment towards the auditors' objectivity in performing work on a wide variety of assignments.  See  Audit  Manual,  Chapter 3,  General 

Standards, and Chapter 7, Supervising Engagements, regarding additional  GAGAS 

requirements regarding audit standards, definitions, and requirements. The Government Accountability  Office  (GAO)  establishes the provisions of  GAGAS.  The Yellow Book, as revised,  applies  to  all  audits of government activities, whether performed by federal, state, or 

local  government auditors, independent  public  accountants, or others  qualified  to perform such work. 

By reference ,  GAGAS  incorporates the auditing standards for fieldwork and reporting for financ ia l audits, issued by the Amer ic an  Institute  of Certified  Public  Accountants  (AICPA ),  and provides the basic criteria upon which the  OIG  aud it coverage and operations are based .    

> 1See GAGAS,

December 2011 revision, Chapter 1, Section  1.04  at http://www.gao.gov/assets/590/587281.pdf -----( 1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  Chapter 2 

Chapter 2 in the  Yellow  Book  classifies  audits as  financial,  attestation engagements, and performance. The FEC  OIG  conducts  financial  and performance audits.  Financial  audits  include 

financial  statements and other services covered by the  AICPA's  Statement of Auditing Standards. The FEC  OIG  monitors independent  public  accountants to perform the FEC's  annual 

financial  statement audit. Performance audits  include  an objective and systematic examination of evidence to provide an independent assessment of performance and management. These audits consist of program effectiveness and  results;  economy and efficiency;  internal  control; 

compliance;  and program audits. FEC  OIG  is guided by the: 

• Inspector  General  Act of 1978  (IG  Act),  as amended, which requires that audits  comply 

with standards  established  by the  Comptroller  General  of the  United  States  (Yellow 

Book) for audits of  Federal  establishments,  organizations, programs, activities, and functions. 

• Financial  Audit  Manual's  provisions issued and revised by  GAO/CIGIE  for  financial 

statement audits, which are performed in accordance with the Chief  Financial  Officers Act of 1990. 

• Office of Management and Budget  (OMB)  has issued various  circulars  that require audits to be conducted in accordance with GAGAS, or otherwise affect how audits of FEC programs and operations are to be conducted. Where the FEC is  specifically 

exempt from  OMB  direction, the  OIG  will  consider whether it is in the best interest of the organization to  comply  with  OMB  guidance. 

Section  2-20:  Audit Policy FEC  OIG  will  stay abreast of the procedures and practices that are  followed  in audits of FEC programs and operations.  OIG  will  initiate the necessary action as needed to ensure 

compliance  with governing standards. 

OIG  will  maintain an  internal  quality  control  and assurance system that is designed to provide 

reasonable  assurance that  applicable  laws,  regulations,  policies,  procedures, standards, and other requirements are  followed,  when conducting audits (reviews and  evaluations)  by, or on 

behalf  of, the  OIG.  See  Audit  Manual,  Chapter 19,  Quality  Control  and Assurance Program. 

-----( 2 )...------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version: July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

General  Standards: 

3-00  Purpose 

10  Audit Standards 

20  Office of  Inspector  General  Audit  Policy 

30  Independence  General  Standard  and  Policy 

40  Impairments  to  Independence 

50  Scope  Impairments 

60  Procedures for  Denial  of Access to Records 

70  Delays  to Access to Records 

80  Professional  Judgment  Standard  and  Policy 

90  Competence  Standard  and  Policy 

100  Technical  Knowledge  and Competence 

110  Financial  Audit  Qualifications 

120  Quality  Control  and Assurance Standards and  Policy 

Section  3-00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter  3This chapter identifies the  general  standards  applicable  to the  OIG  in conducting audits, reviews, and evaluation engagements. The chapter  also  provides guidance on the audit staff's criteria  relating  to  personal  impairments, recruitment, staff  development,  and continuing 

professional  education. Section  3·10:  Audit Standards The U.S. Government Accountability Office's  (GAO)  Generally  Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS), as revised in December 2011 define  general  standards. 

General  standards concern the  fundamental  requirements to ensure the credibility of the auditors' work  results.  General  standards encompass the: 

• Independence  of the audit organization and its individual auditors; 

• Exercise of professional judgment in the performance of work and the preparation of 

related  reports; 

• Competence of audit staff,  including  the need for their continuing professional education; and 

• Existence of  quality  control  and assurance systems and  external  peer reviews. Section 3-20:  Office  of Inspector  General  Audit  Policy 

-----( 1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audil  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Ch  apt er 3 The  Inspector  General Act of 1978  (IG  Act) requires  Inspectors  General  (IGs)  to adhere to 

GAGAS.  Consistent with the  requir~ments,  FEC  OIG  policy requires auditors to know the 

Yellow  Book standards and  apply  them  consistently  in performing audit work.  Title  4,  Sec. 

5(b)(1) of the Act requires  IGs  to: (A) Comply with standards established by the Comptroller General of the United  States  for audits of Federal establishments, organizations, programs, activities, and functions; ...[and] 

(C) Take appropriate steps to ensure that any work performed by non-Federal auditors complies with the standards established by the Comptroller General as described in paragraph (1). 

Section  3-30:  Independence  General  Standard  and  Policy 

This section sets forth the policies and procedures  relative  to independence. To be effective, FEC  OIG  must be independent, both in mind and appearance, from  knowledgeable  third parties. 

OIG  opinions, conclusions, judgments, and recommendations must be presented and viewed as 

impartial.  Impairments  should  be identified and explained in the scope section of the audit program and report, which  should  address their impact on the audit or  evaluation  results. 

GAGAS,  December  2011,  Chapter  3.02,  provides guidance on the standard of independence. 

It  states that: 

Jn  all  matters relating to the audit work, the audit organization and the individual auditor, whether government or public, must be independent. 

OIG  staff involved in performing or supervising audit (review and evaluation) assignments must be free from  all  impairments to their independence. They must consistently maintain independence, both in mind and appearance, and strive to avoid situations that could  lead 

knowledgeable  third parties to doubt their independence. The Deputy  Inspector  General  (DIG)  and audit staff is  responsible  for  scheduling  audits. Hence, they must avoid assigning staff, specialists, and contractors to assignments, where there is any indication that the  individuals  may have a personal impairment to independence. To ensure that  all  assigned staff are independent of each assignment, the  OIG  staff must complete an 

Independence Form  (See  attachment #1) for each audit. This form  will  be  included  as a workpaper in the planning section of each audit. 

In  situations where the  Federal  auditor, because of  legislative  requirements, or for other reasons, cannot  decline  to perform the work, the impairment(s)  will  be reported in the scope section of the report. When using the work of a  specialist  or a contractor, they are considered an  OIG  representative. Accordingly, the  DIG  or audit staff  will  assess the specialist's or contractor's  ability  to perform the work and report the  results  impartially.  In  conducting this assessment,  OIG  will  obtain assurance of independence; the  specialists  and contractors must sign an Independence Form 

(See  attachment #1) certifying that they are free from  all  personal  impairments to independence. 

-----( 2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 3 

If  the  specialist's  or contractor's independence is impaired, they  will  not be  allowed  to do the work. Section  3-40:  Impairments  to  Independence 

Auditors should  apply  the  conceptual  framework approach to Independence identified in GAS 

3.20  -3.26 at the audit organization, audit, and  individual  auditor  level  to determine if there is an impairment to independence. Government audit organizations are presumed to be free from impairments to independence for the purpose of  external  and  internal  reporting. The FEC  OIG 

reports  directly  to the Commissioners. Thus,  OIG  is considered organizationally independent as required under the  IG  Act. According to  GAGAS,  December 2011, Chapter  3.07: 

Many different circumstances, or combination of circumstances, are relevant in evaluation threats to independence. Therefore, GAGAS establishes a conceptual framework that auditors use to identify, evaluate, and apply safeguards to address threats to independence. The conceptual framework assists auditors in maintaining both independence of mind an in appearance.  It  can be applied to many variations in circumstances that create threats to independence and allows auditors to address threats to independence that result from activities that are not specifically prohibited by 

GA GAS. 

If,  at the start of an audit or any time during audit  fieldwork,  impairment to an auditor's or contractor's independence occurs, or there is a threat to independence, staff must notify the 

DIG  or  IG  immediately. Auditors, in consultation with the  DIG  or  IG,  will  take the necessary steps to  apply  the conceptual framework. The auditor  should  evaluate  the threats in accordance with  GAS  3.14  individually  and in aggregate to  apply  the appropriate safeguard  (GAS  3.16 -3.19) to  eliminate  or reduce the threat to an  acceptable  level.  In  the event no safeguards are 

available  to  eliminate  or reduce the threat to an acceptable  level,  independence is considered impaired. The  IG  or  DIG  is  responsible  for taking appropriate corrective actions when a contractor's or staff's independence is deemed impaired. 

In  the event an impairment to independence is realized after the  release  of an audit report, and the impairment  would  have an impact on the  results  presented in the audit report, the  DIG/IG 

should  communicate the impairment to those charged with governance, the auditee, and any other users of the audit report.  Publicly  released  reports  should  be removed and  replaced  with a public notification that the report was removed, citing the reason. The auditor  should  then determine if  additional  work is necessary to issue a revised report or repost the original report if the  additional  work does not  result  in a change to the report's findings or  conclusions. 

Section  3-50:  Scope  Impairments 

Scope impairments are factors  external  to the organization that restrict audit work or interfere with the auditor's  ability  to form objective opinions and conclusions. An impairment  example  might be the  refusal  to access information, such as books, records, supporting documentation, and the  denial  to interview key  officials  or  employees,  provided this 

-----( 3 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 3 information is needed to meet the audit or  evaluation  objectives.  All  reasonable  means 

available,  including serving a writ of subpoena, should be used to remove such scope impairments. 

Section  3-60:  Procedures for  Denial  of Access to Records 

Overall,  if access to information needed to perform the audit (review and  evaluation)  is denied, auditors requesting the information should immediately notify the  DIG.  The  DIG  will notify the 

IG  and  IG  Legal  Counsel for  resolution  and  legal  counsel. Audit staff that is refused access to needed records  will  prepare a summary workpaper to describe the circumstances surrounding the  refusal  of access. The summary  should  include  the 

following: 

• Date and time the records were requested; 

• Description of the records requested; 

• Date and time of refusal; 

• Title  and name of the official refusing the access and his/her justification for the  refusal, 

if known; and 

• Specific impact the  refusal  to access has on the findings,  results,  and  conclusions  being 

developed. 

Auditors  should  attempt to resolve the issue by meeting with the person in charge of the office that refused the access, and advising them of the  OIG's  authority to access needed records. Auditors  will  document results of the meeting in the workpapers, indicating whether access to records is  still  denied and describing the reasons for the continued  denial,  if applicable. 

Additionally,  the auditors must inform the  DIG  of the problem and resolution. 

If  access continues to be denied, the  DIG  will  meet with the auditor(s) to obtain a  full 

understanding of what information was requested and why it is needed to complete the assignment. The  DIG  should then first communicate by  telephone,  or in person, then  follow  with a written memorandum to the next highest  official  in the office that denied the access, advising the official of the importance for the  OIG  to access the records. 

If  the  problem  is not resolved, the  DIG  will  consult with the  IG  and  OIG  Legal  Counsel  to advise them of the denial of access to records and to coordinate the next steps in  resolving  the problem.  If  the  problem  cannot be  resolved,  the  IG  will  determine whether to advance the matter to the Commission. The  IG  may issue a  letter  to the Commission informing them of the denial of access to records. The  letter  will  include  a complete description of the actions taken to date to resolve the problem and the relevancy of the records denied to the auditors' meeting the objectives of the assignment. 

Section  3-70:  Delays  in Access to Records 

Inordinate  delays in obtaining access to records may  also  negatively  affect the continuity of an audit,  evaluation,  and review engagement. For records that should be readily  accessible, 

delays exceeding  10  calendar  days may be considered excessive. Further, in  all  delays, auditors should use their experience,  knowledge,  and audit expertise to determine the reasonableness of the  delay.  When  delays  in obtaining records, documents, or other  material 

# ------1(  4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter  3are unreasonable, auditors  will  follow  the process described in  Section  3-60,  Procedures for 

Denial  of Access to Records. 

Section  3-80:  Professional Judgment Standard and  Policy 

This section sets forth the  policies  and procedures relative to professional judgment. Professional judgment requires auditors to exercise  professional  skepticism, which is an attitude that  includes  a questioning mind and a  critical  assessment of evidence. The general standard 

related  to professional judgment is  GAGAS,  December  2011,  Chapter  3.60: 

Auditors must use professional judgment in planning and performing audits and attestation engagements and in reporting the results. 

GAGAS,  December  2011,  Chapter 3.61, provides guidance on the standard of professional judgment. The standard requires auditors to exercise reasonable care and professional skepticism. 

In  accordance with the referenced standards for professional judgment, auditors performing work under  GAGAS  will  adhere to the  outlined  standards. Auditors that perform work in accordance with  GAGAS  standards must justify departures from the standards in the scope and 

methodology  section of the audit program and report and obtain  approval  from the  IG  or  DIG. 

Auditors  will  use professional judgment in: 

• Determining the type of assignment to be performed and the standards that apply to their work; 

• Defining the scope of their work; 

• Selecting  the  methodology  for their work; 

• Determining the type and amount of evidence to be gathered; and 

• Choosing the tests and procedures for their work. Auditors  will  apply  professional  judgment in performing tests and procedures when  evaluating 

and reporting the audit or  evaluation  results. Auditors  will  gather and  evaluate  evidence throughout the assignment. Thus, auditors must exercise  professional  skepticism throughout the assignment. The FEC  OIG  will  use  professional  judgment in determining whether a non-audit service  would 

impair the  OIG's  independence. Prior to conducting a non-audit service, the FEC  OIG  will 

assess if the requested non-audit service  will: 

• Involve  performing management functions or making management decisions; 

• Cause the  OIG  to audit work produced by the  OIG;  or 

• Cause the  OIG  to perform services significant or material to the subject matter. 

Section 3-90: Competence Standard and  Policy 

This section sets forth  policies  and procedures  relative  to the standard of competence. The general standard  related  to competence is: 

-----------(  5FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 3 

The staff assigned to perform the audit or attestation engagement must collectively possess adequate professional competence needed to address the audit objectives and perform the work in accordance with  GAGAS. 

(GAGAS,  December  2011  revision, Chapter 3. 69) 

GAGAS, December  2011,  Chapters 3.69 - 3. 71, provide guidance on competence. This standard  places  responsibility on audit organizations to ensure that each audit or attestation engagement is performed by staff that collectively have the technical knowledge,  skills,  and experience necessary for the assignment.  OIG  will  adhere to the competence standard by establishing and maintaining an effective program of professional  development,  continuing 

professional  education, and training for  all  auditors.  See  Audit  Manual,  Chapter 4,  Staff 

Qualifications and Continuing  Professional  Education. The  IG  or  DIG  will  assign newly recruited staff to a project based on the needs of the office; and training attended, experience, and the  special  skills  of the new auditor.  In 

addition to the auditor's experience and qualifications, when  possible,  the  IG  or  DIG  will 

obtain and document a  list  of previously attended training by the  newly  hired auditor. 

Section  3-100: Technical Knowledge and Competence Audit management should ensure that staff members assigned to conduct an audit engagement under  GAGAS  collectively  possess the  technical  knowledge,  skills,  abilities, and experience necessary to be competent for the type of work being performed before beginning work on that assignment. FEC  OIG  511 series auditors are required to have at  least  24 semester hours in accounting (may  include  up to 6 hours in business law), or meet requirements for the 511 series as 

stipulated  by the  Office  of  Personnel  Management.  All  audits are staffed with an experienced auditor and/or adequate supervision to monitor the work product of the auditors to ensure that the audit team is competent to perform the audit assign_ ment. Refer to  GAGAS,  December  2011,  Chapter 3. 72, for additional information on the technical 

knowledge,  skills,  and experience necessary to be competent for the type of.working being performed. 

Section  3-110:  Financial  Audit Engagement Qualifications 

Staff  performing  financial  audits  should  be: 

Knowledgeable in  U.S.  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), or with applicable financial reporting framework being used, and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' (A/CPA) Statements on Auditing Standards  (SAS)  and they should be competent in applying these SASs to the audit work. (GAGAS, December  2011  revision, Chapter 3. 73) 

The  FEC  OIG  contracts with an independent  public  accounting firm  (IPA)  to conduct the FEC's annual  financial  statement audit, and may enter into contracts for other  financial 

audits. The  IPA,  under contract with the  OIG,  is required to conduct the audit in accordance with  GAGAS. 

-----( 6 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter  3The  OIG  ensures the  IPA's  compliance  of  GAGAS  throughout the audit process. The FEC  OIG  completes  the Audit Quality Assurance Checklist.  (See  attachment #2) 

Section  3-120: Quality  Control  and Assurance Standards 

GAGAS,  December  2011,  Chapter 3.82, is the general standard  related  to  quality  control  and assurance and states that: 

Each audit organization perlorming audits in accordance with GAGAS must: 

a. establish and maintain a system of quality control that is designed to provide the audit organization with reasonable assurance that the organization and its personnel comply with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements; and b. have an external peer review perlormed by reviewers independent of the audit organization being reviewed at least once every 3 years. 

In  accordance with the referenced standards for  quality  control  and assurance, the  FEC  OIG 

has established an  internal  quality  control  and assurance system and  will  undergo an  external 

peer review at  least  once every 3 years.  See  Audit  Manual,  Chapter 19. Quality  Control  and Assurance Program. 

-----( 7 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Staff  Qualifications and Continuing  Professional  Education: 

4-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Staff  Qualifications 

40  Criteria for Continuing Professional Education 

50  Training Responsibilities 

Section  4"00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter 4 This chapter sets forth the  policies  and procedures relating to the  OIG's  staff qualifications and continuing professional education  {CPE)  requirements. 

Section  4-10:  Standards 

Staff  qualifications and continuing  professional  education requirements are contained in the Government  Accountability  Office's  (GAO)  Generally  Accepted Government Auditing  Standards 

(GAGAS)  and Guidance on GAGAS Requirements for Continuing Professional Education. 

Section  4-20:  Policy 

The  OIG  staff members who are responsible for  planning,  directing, conducting, or reporting on the  results  of audits (reviews and  evaluations)  will  comply  with  GAGAS  CPE  requirements. 

All  auditors  will  adhere to the standard of competence.  FEC  OIG  will  establish  procedures for professional  development  and continuing  professional  education for  all  auditors. The primary objectives of the policy and procedures are to maintain professional proficiency and ensure compliance with the  CPE  requirements as prescribed by  GAGAS. 

Auditors  will  complete at  least  80  hours of  CPE  credits in a two year period that  directly  enhance the auditor's  professional  proficiency to perform audit engagements. At  least  24 of the  80  CPE  hours  will  be in subjects  directly  related  to government auditing, the government environment, or the specific or unique environment in which the audited entity operates. 

FEC  OIG  has adopted a 2-year period that  follows  the  calendar  year, and starts on even years (for example,  2010-2011).  Auditors  employed  with  OIG  for  less  than the 2-year reporting period are required to meet a pro-rata share of  CPE  hours. 

Section  4-30:  Staff  Qualifications 

-----( 1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Ch  apter 4

During the hiring process, the  OIG  must verify that all qualified auditors have obtained a minimum of 24  college  credit hours of accounting/auditing as required by  OPM's  511 series.  In 

addition to the minimum credit hours, the  OIG  will  in some instances require a writing sample regarding an audit issue to assess the  level  of audit  knowledge  and writing  ability. 

Auditors  will  possess the necessary  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  (KSAs) to  successfully  carry out auditing responsibilities.  KSAs  are obtained through on-the-job training  (OJT)  and experience,  formal  in-house training, training obtained from outside sources, and other professional  development  activities. The  level  of proficiency required for each  qualification  of  KSAs  is dependent upon an 

individual's  grade and specific job responsibilities. 

In  the event the  OIG  staff does not possess the necessary  KSAs  to conduct a specific  GAGAS 

audit, the FEC  OIG  will  contract with a vendor or enter an agreement with another  OIG 

possessing the necessary  skill  set and knowledge to assist or participate in the audit to ensure the staff assigned to conduct the audit  collectively  possess the  technical  knowledge  to be competent in performing the audit work. 

Section  4-40:  Criteria for Continuing Professional Education 

OIG's  professional  development,  CPE, and  OJT  training and procedures are designed to maintain and enhance  OIG  staff's knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities  in areas  applicable  to the 

discipline  where they are assigned.  GAO's  Guidance on  GAGAS  Requirements for Continuing Professional Education, April  2005,  provides specific guidance on: 

• What  qualifies  as  acceptable  CPE credits (paragraphs 15 - 23; 25-26). 

• What does not  qualify  as  acceptable  CPE  credits (paragraph 24). 

• Measuring  CPE  hours (paragraphs 27 - 32). For the purpose of meeting  GAGAS  standards, it is important to note that  OJT  training does not qualify for CPE credits. However, some mandatory agency training (i.e., Security Awareness, Hatch Act, etc.) and  Office  of  Information  Technology  (IT)  monthly  IT  training can  qualify  for 

CPE  credits if they meet the qualification categories identified in the  GAO's  Guidance on 

GAGAS  Requirements for Continuing Professional Education, April  2005. 

A more comprehensive  listing  of subjects that satisfy the  80  hour CPE requirement can be found in paragraphs 18 and 19 of  GAO's  Guidance on  GAGA'S  Requirements for Continuing Professional Education. This guidance can be found on  GAO's  websit e. 1

Section  4-50: Training  Responsibilities 

Managers and staff have a joint  responsibility  for ensuring conformity with the CPE requirements.  In  seeking  CPE  opportunities, auditors are responsible, in conjunction with the organization, for successfully  completing  CPE programs and activities, and providing documentation of the  CPE  hours completed. http://www.gao.gov/govaud/ybcpe2005.pdf 

--------( 2FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter  4The  Special  Assistant to the  IG  is responsible for recording and maintaining appropriate documentation of training for auditors. The  OIG  staff is responsible for tracking their progress toward meeting CPE requirements. 

-----( 3 )1-------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Annual Audit Planning: 

5-00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Audit  Planning  Process 

40  Flexibility and the Audit  Plan 

Section  5-00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter 5 Audit planning is the first phase of the audit engagement process. The  OIG  should  continuously 

strive to better understand the audit environment and assess risks.  Planning  should focus resources on high risk areas, while satisfying statutory and  regulatory  requirements and stakeholder requests. Planning is  critical  to accomplishing the mission of the  OIG,  as envisioned in the  Inspector  General  Act of 1978  (IG  Act), as amended. This chapter sets forth the policies and procedures used by the  FEC  OIG  to  properly  conduct the audit planning process, to  include  appropriate audit coverage, consistency, and quality. 

Section  5-10:  Standards 

GAGAS  requires the  OIG  to adhere to the overall standard for assessing risk  (GAS  6.05)  and 

adequately  planning  an audit  (GAS  6.06). The  OIG  conducts an  annual  all  day brainstorming and planning session to identify and assess the audit universe. The  OIG  conducts a risk analysis by taking the audit segments of the audit universe and rating the risk factors for each to identify high risk areas. The identified ratings and other factors (previous audits, management corrective action of prior findings, etc.) then  help  the  OIG  determine what to  include  in the annual work plan. 

Section  5-20:  Policy 

The  OIG  will  develop  a flexible  annual audit plan that focuses on the agency's risk areas identified during the  annual  OIG  brainstorming session. The  annual  planning session  will  result 

in a list of  potential  audits, inspections/reviews, projects, and investigative projects based on a risk assessment that considers risk factors. 

Section  5-30:  Audit  Planning  Process The  development  of the  annual  audit/work plan is as  follow: 

• Request input from the agency's staff for audit ideas and suggestions, and areas of potential risk for fraud, waste, and/or abuse to  include  as audit segments to the  OIG's 

audit universe 

------( 1 )1------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter  5

• Identify  any  hotline  complaints  that can be  included  as an audit segment for review. 

• Conduct the  OIG's  annual  brainstorming/planning session with the entire  OIG  staff. 

• Update  the audit universe (if needed) and identify the priority  levels  of the audit segments based on the  following  risk factors*: 

o agency  goals  and mission o materiality  to agency budget o management/Congressional  Interest 

o previous audits conducted  (internal  and  external); 

o adequacy of internal  controls  systems; o Congressional/Legal  requirements (i.e.  annual  financial  statement audit); o fraud risk o program characteristics o observations of program management; 

*Risk  factors are subject to change. 

• Collaborate  with the  OIG's  Chief  Investigator  to leverage work, ensure adequate coverage, and avoid duplication of efforts. 

• Identify  mandatory  OIG  projects/task throughout the year to ensure adequate timing for 

planned  audits, inspections/reviews, projects, and investigations. 

• The  IG  and Deputy  IG  identify resource requirements for ongoing and planned audits, 

including  staffing  availability,  scheduling,  etc., necessary to accomplish the assignments 

included  in the audit  plan. 

• The  formal  plan  is  developed  by the Deputy  IG  and prepared before the start of the new 

fiscal  year and may be revised, as necessary, during the year. The  IG  and the Deputy 

IG  finalize  the audit/work  plan.  The  plan  is issued to the Commission, posted to the 

OIG's  FECNet intranet page  accessible  to  FEC  employees,  posted to the  OIG's  Web site, and  included  in the  Semiannual  Report to Congress. 

• Planned audits, inspections/reviews, and projects are  included  in each  individual 

auditor's performance  plan  based on their  level  of risk,  OIG  priorities, and  available 

resources. 

Section  5-40:  Flexibility  and the Audit  Plan 

Factors  will  likely  arise that  result  in revisions to the  OIG's  annual  audit/work  plan.  Hence, the 

annual  audit  plan  is designed to be  flexible  and can be changed to provide for unforeseen audit priorities,  while  ensuring the  plan's  relevance,  timeliness,  and purpose. Requests for the revisions or additions to the audit/work plan  should  be coordinated with the Deputy  IG  and discussed with the  IG.  Documentation  should  be maintained to  include  a

detailed  explanation of the reason(s) why the change is needed. 

------( 2 )1------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Engagement  Planning: 

6-00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  External  Stakeholders 

40  Planning 

50  Entrance Conference 

60  Audit Survey 

70  Audit  Program 

80  Fieldwork, Data Collection, and Analysis 

90  Meetings 

100  Reporting 

Section  6-00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter  6

Planning  is  critical  to the success of the  OIG's  audits, reviews, and  evaluations,  because it allows auditors to obtain an understanding of an organization's programs and operations and 

develop  an  overall  strategy to conduct the audit. This chapter sets forth the  OIG's  policies and procedures for  planning  audits. 

Section  6-10:  Standards 

OIG  engagements are conducted in accordance with the Government Audit Standards issued by the  Comptroller  General  of the  U.S.  (the  "Yellow  Book").  These standards are referred to as the  Generally  Accepted Government Auditing Standards  (GAGAS).  These standards provide the guidance and standards for audit and attestation engagements of government entities, programs, operations, activities, and functions and of government assistance administered by contractors, nonprofit entities, and other nongovernmental entities.  GAGAS  standards incorporate professional auditing standards issued by the American  Institute  of Certified  Public 

Accountants  (AICPA). 

Section  6-20:  Policy 

The  OIG  plans  audit engagements in compliance with GAGAS requirements and standards and the  OIG's  internal  audit process.  All  work  will  be coordinated, researched, designed, and conducted to achieve the stated objectives. 

# -----ti(  1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 6 

Section  6-30: External Stakeholders 

Stakeholders  are both  internal  and  external  to the  OIG.  Stakeholders consist of Congress, the Commission, key FEC management, and any other persons within the FEC that are impacted by  OIG's  work. 

Section  6-40:  Planning 

The  GAGAS  fieldwork  standards  related  to audit  planning  are found in  GAGAS,  Chapter 6, 

"Field  Work Standards for Performance  Audits." 

Regardless of the type of audit that is preformed, the following general procedures should be 

followed: 

• Auditor Verification of Independence: Auditors  will  each sign an Independence Form to attest their independence from  personal  impairment. Please refer to  GAGAS,  Chapter 3, 

General  Standards, for detailed guidance on independence standards. 1 Also,  please 

refer to Attachment #1 for copy of the independence form. 

• Audit Program: The auditors  will  develop  an audit program based on identified audit risk, 

policies  and procedures,  applicable  laws  and  regulations,  and any additional research or survey work conducted by the auditors. 

• Notification Memorandum: Provides  official  notification that  OIG  will  begin in-depth audit work. The auditor-in-charge must ensure a notification memorandum is sent to the auditee at the beginning of each assignment. The announcement memorandum identifies the key auditor(s), and  clearly  identifies the objectives and scope of the assignment. The notification memorandum is prepared for each audit in conformance with  GAGAS.  The notification memorandum's format  will  include  the following items: o Origin  of audit issue. o Audit project title, objectives, scope, and  methodology. 

o General description of the audit project, such as the nature, timing, and ex.tent of 

planned  testing and reporting. o Names of the auditor(s) conducting the audit. 

• Planning Phase Documentation: Throughout the  planning  phase of the engagement, the audit team  will  document the planning process in the  OIG  electronic workpaper application (TeamMate). The audit documentation  should  consist of: o The Independence Form signed and dated by  all  auditors; o Notification memorandum sent to the auditee management  officials; 

o Entrance conference agenda w/ minutes {if any); and o Audit program wt supervisory  approval.  

> 1

http: // www.gao.gov/assets/590/58728 l .pdf 

# ------11(  2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter  6Section  6-50:  Entrance Conference The auditors will conduct an entrance conference meeting with  FEC  management  officials  and appropriate staff. Entrance conference meetings  enable  the audit team to discuss: 

• OIG's  role  and responsibilities; 

• Audit issue(s), objectives, and  milestones;  and 

• Key resources, such as  personnel,  supporting documentation, or data requirements. The auditor-in-charge  will  arrange the date and time of the entrance conference with the auditee's designated point of contact and/or with management  officials. 

In  the  financial  statement audit or other contracted audit, the entrance conference meeting 

would  be with the  IPA  contractors,  FEC  management, and the  OIG. 

Section 6-60: Audit  Survey 

Prior to some audits, the  FEC  OIG  will  perform an audit survey. An audit survey or preliminary survey is the process of gathering information without  detailed  verification of the auditee's organization, program, operation, activity, functions, etc. The survey is conducted at the beginning of a project, in a relatively  short period of time and is used to determine the nature and purpose of the auditee's programs, operations, activities, and/or functions, and  also  to gain an understanding of its management or  internal  controls,  etc. The audit survey is directed to identify areas of materiality or sensitivity, known  problems,  key 

operational  features that are difficult to  control,  and areas that may be subject to  possible  fraud, waste, abuse, or mismanagement.  Survey  results  are used to  develop  the audit program, estimate the time needed to  complete  the  fieldwork,  and  plan  the scope of subsequent work. Asurvey that is conducted as part of an audit engagement must  comply  with  GAGAS  and  OIG 

policy  and procedures. During the audit survey, the audit team  also  conducts research, coordinates with  internal  and 

external  organizations, obtains documentation, and reviews  regulations,  laws,  and  policy,  etc. The audit team  will  use the survey  results  to gain an understanding of the audit issue, and assist in the depth and direction of the audit test steps.  In  some instances, the survey results  could 

determine whether to conduct a full  audit, management review, program evaluation, or whether to issue a white paper report or a memorandum  letter  to management. 

In  some instances, audit surveys may be conducted during  fieldwork  by the audit team. The audit team may conduct audit surveys during  fieldwork  to verify the accuracy of documentation provided by management; or compile testing data that is not recorded or  adequately  maintained by management. Section  6-70:  Audit Program An audit program is prepared for  all  audits. The audit program documents and describes procedures an audit team  will  use to  accomplish  the engagement objectives, and summarizes the work to be performed. The procedures and steps included in the audit program are merely a guide and are not intended to be an  all  inclusive program for completion of an audit. During an engagement, the 

--------( 3FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  version:  July  2016  I Cha  pt er 6 audit program is updated to  reflect  significant changes that arise in regards to audit objectives and steps. All audit programs will be approved by the  IG  or Deputy  IG.  The audit program will be maintained with the  planning  workpapers in TeamMate. Auditors  should  develop  specific audit steps and procedures based on: 

• Auditee programs, operations, activities and/or functions. 

• Audit objectives, scope, and methodology. 

• Special  circumstances encountered during the survey. 

• Governing  laws  and  regulations. 

As appropriate, the auditor-in-charge  shall  consult  with the  IG  Counsel/Chief  Investigator during the  planning  phase of the audit for  legal  guidance, and to ensure the  Chief  Investigator  is made aware of  all  planned  audits. 

Section 6-80: Fieldwork, Data  Collection,  and Analysis The data  collection  and analysis phase of the audit focuses on conducting  fieldwork  to  collect 

documentation the audit team needs to achieve the audit objectives, and to support findings, 

results,  conclusions, and recommendations, in accordance with the Audit  Manual,  Chapter  14, 

Electronic  Working Papers and Documentation. The team  will  analyze  and verify gathered data, and where  possible  will  identify the root cause and effect of the findings. The team  will  fully 

develop  findings identified during the survey and  fieldwork  phase of the project 

Section 6-90: Meetings Prior to conducting the exit conference and drafting the audit report, the audit team and  IG  or Deputy  IG  will  meet with management  officials  to discuss the identified issues and  clarify  the tone and message of the draft report. The status meeting  helps  with the focus on the draft report's message  development.  The primary purpose of the status meeting is to confirm that management understands  all  the audit findings and receive any feedback from management regarding inconsistent or inaccurate audit information that may need to be adjusted for the development of the draft report. The use of the status meeting  should  improve the  timeliness  of the  OIG's  work product and 

result  in fewer changes to the draft report, because  all  the audit participants will have had a chance to review and discuss  all  the issues that the  OIG  has identified during the audit and that will be presented in the audit report.  One  or more  formal  status meetings  shall  be  held  during the audit, and the auditor-in-charge  should  ensure  informal  communications are  held  with the auditee throughout the audit to ensure the auditee is kept informed about the progress and findings of the audit. Before the status meeting, the audit team  will  submit to the  DIG  and/or  IG  the  detailed  audit exceptions  OR  the  developed  Notice of Findings and Recommendations (NFRs) that  include  the condition, cause, effect, criteria, and  OIG  recommendations for  all  issues identified during the audit. ------( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 6 

Section  6-100:  Reporting The reporting phase of an audit consists of the audit team  holding  periodic  informal  meetings, conducting an exit conference with management, preparing the draft report, receiving management's comments, and finalizing the audit report, in accordance with  GAGAS  and  OIG's 

Audit Manual.  See  the Audit Manual, Chapter  17,  Reporting Audit  Results. 

OIG  reports are cohesive and comprehensive documents that are written after fieldwork is 

completed  and workpapers have been prepared with supervisory review and sign-off. Team members may begin to write section summaries for the draft report, once audit steps and the summary workpapers are completed. 

Upon  the  completion  of  fieldwork  and the status meeting(s), the audit team  will  hold  a formal  exit conference (mandatory for audits  only)  with the auditee.  Typically,  prior to, or at the exit conference, the  OIG  will  provide management with a draft report for review. At the exit conference, the audit team and management  will  discuss the content of the draft report. However, the audit team should emphasize that the  OIG's  draft report is subject to change, based on the  results  of the exit conference and any further  analysis  and research conducted by the audit team based on the exit conference. 

AUDIT  REPORT FORMAT 

The  OIG's  audit reports consist of a standard structure that should be contained on  all  audit reports issued. The Deputy  IG,  or  IG  may decide on deviation(s) from the prescribed report format, depending on the type of report that is issued, i.e., memorandum report, standard report, etc.  Below  are the  typical  headings and subheading(s) that  will  be used to develop the audit reports and  comply  with  GAGAS  standards: 

• Executive  Summary 

• Background 

• Objectives,  Scope,  and  Methodology 

• Audit Findings and Recommendations 

• Conclusions 

• Summary  Table  of Findings and Recommendations with Management Response 

• Views of  Responsible  Management  Officials 

• Appendix/Exhibits (if  applicable) 

A transmittal  letter  will  be attached with each audit report. The first page of  all  reports  will  be the 

OIG's  coversheet which  includes  the name of the audit, audit assignment number, and the month and year the audit report was  released.  The page following the coversheet  will  always be the  table  of contents. The  last  page of the report  will  be the  OIG's  standard back-coversheet that  lists  the  OIG's  contact information. 

-----( 5 )--------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Supervising Engagements: 

7-00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Overview 

40  Responsibilities 

50  Inspector General/Deputy Inspector General 

60  Auditor-in-Charge 

Section  7-00:  Purpose 

# ~ Chapter 7 This chapter sets forth the  OIG's  policies and procedures for supervisory responsibilities. 

Section 7-10: Standards The  GAGAS  standards require audit staff to be  properly  supervised.  Supervision  involves 

directing the efforts of auditors and others that are  involved  in the audit,  including  internal  and external  consultants  and specialists, to ascertain whether the audit objectives are being accomplished.  Elements  of supervision  include  providing sufficient guidance to staff members, keeping informed of significant  problems  encountered, reviewing the work performed, and providing effective on-the-job training. 

Section  7-20:  Policy 

Auditors  will  fully comply with the supervisory requirements contained in  GAGAS.  OIG  operates under an integrated audit concept, in which  all  levels  of supervision are involved in ongoing audit activities. This concept, known as the team approach, requires  timely  communications, full cooperation, and professional due diligence at each supervisory level. 

Section  7-30:  Overview 

Properly  supervising the job from the planning phase to reporting phase is the most effective way to ensure the  quality  of an engagement and to expedite its progress. Supervision adds guidance to the work performed by the audit staff and facilitates on-the-job training. 

Timely  and  complete  two-way communication is the cornerstone of proper supervision. Accordingly, supervisors must  clearly  convey their expectations to their audit staff.  Similarly,  the audit staff must keep supervisors  currently  and  fully  informed of significant audit activities. Also, supervisors should  deal  with changing priorities of audit matters in a  timely  manner, and ensure the audit staff is kept apprised of these changes. Supervisory review of workpapers  should  be  timely  and thorough to ensure: 

-----( 1 )...-------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  ~ Chapter  7

• Objectives are  established  at the start of the assignment, communicated to the audit team, and adjusted based on new  developments. 

• Engagements are staffed by  qualified  personnel,  who  collectively  have the  knowledge, 

skills,  and  abilities  to perform the audit. 

• An audit program is prepared and approved. 

• The audit program is  followed,  unless  deviation(s) to the audit program is justified and authorized. 

• Audit  sampling  plans  are prepared and documented. 

• Audits are performed in accordance with  GAGAS  standards.  If  during the work, the audit team determines it is  unable  to  follow  GAGAS,  the workpapers must contain the: o (1) Reasons for not  following  GAGAS,  and o (2)  Approval  of the Deputy  IG  or  IG. 

• Workpapers must contain sufficient information to enable an experienced auditor, who has no connection with the audit, to ascertain that the evidence  reasonably  supports the auditors' significant judgments and opinions. 

• Workpapers must provide  reasonable  basis to support the findings,  results,  conclusions, and recommendations. 

Section  7-40:  Responsibilities 

Supervisory duties and responsibilities are covered in detail within the  applicable  audit staff and management position descriptions. The position descriptions  delineate  specific duties at each audit staff and management  level:  Deputy  IG,  Senior Auditor, and  Staff  Auditor. 

Section  7-50:  Inspector  General/Deputy  Inspector  General 

The  Inspector  General  (IG)  is responsible for the  overall  management and direction of audits conducted by the  OIG.  The  IG  approves the  planned  audits and reviews the draft and  final  audit products. Further, the  IG  is kept abreast of  all  audit issues via status meetings or updates from the Deputy  IG  and/or audit staff. The Deputy  IG  is responsible for audits and other engagement work performed by the audit staff. This  responsibility  includes  planning,  managing, directing, and monitoring the performance of audits and engagements from start to end (e.g., issuance of a report). This  responsibility  requires ensuring the effective, efficient, and economic  utilization  of audit staff, as  well  as the proper supervision of the staff conducting audits or other engagements. The Deputy  IG: 

• Monitors audits and other engagements in progress to ensure that the audit staff maintain professional standards and are  properly  supervised,  including  resolving 

differences of opinion concerning accounting and auditing issues among the audit staff. 

• Deals  with priority matters on an ongoing basis.   

> ------( 2)-----

FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016  I Chapter  7

• Ensures that the engagement has met the supervision standards of  GAGAS.  Evidence of supervisory review should be in the workpapers, see the Audit  Manual,  Chapter  14, 

Working Papers Documentation. 

• Ensures that all documentation has been reviewed before the report is provided to the independent  referencer, 

• Verifies that the audit workpapers have been indexed by the audit staff and cross referenced by an independent referencer. 

• Reviews draft and final audit reports for accuracy, completeness,  clarity,  and conformance to  OIG's  technical  requirements. 

Section  7-60:  Auditor-in-Charge The Auditor-in-Charge  (AIC)  is  responsible  for the day-to-day conduct of the audit or other engagement through direct oversight and  personal  involvement. This responsibility  includes 

providing guidance, instructions, and assistance to assigned staff auditors, and serving as a

point-of-contact for  individual  audit assignments. The  AIC  plays a key role in the  overall 

completeness, accuracy, and timeliness of the onsite work, as  well  as conformance with GA GAS. 

The  AIC's  responsibilities  include: 

• Providing on-the-job training, ensuring proper preparation of the audit workpapers; and preparing, reviewing and amending work in progress, and reviewing written summaries. 

• Preparing, reviewing and revising the draft audit report sections of each audit team member and  consolidating  them into one draft audit report for review by the Deputy  IG 

and  IG. 

• Ensuring the  OIG's  Quality Assurance Checklist  (See  Attachment #2) is adequate and complete. 

• Preparing the final audit report for the appropriate signature(s). 

# -----11(  3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Internal  Controls: 

8-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Definitions 

40  Internal  Controls 

50  Internal  Controls Review 

60  Reporting on  Internal  Controls 

Section  8-00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter 8 This chapter sets forth the policies and procedures for the  OIG  to follow, when reviewing internal co ntrols, in order to ass ist the FEC in meeting their responsibilities, as required by the 

Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act of 1982  (FMFIA)1;  the  Office  of Management and Budget  (OMB)  Circulars A-123, Management Accountability and  Control,  A-127, Financial Management Systems, and  A-130,  Management of Federal Information Resources. 

Section  8-10:  Standards The GAGAS provides the guidance and standards the  OIG  adheres to in conducting internal control assessments. The Amer ican  Institute  of Certified  Public  Accountants  (AICPA)  also provides internal controls assessment guidance and standards through the promulgation of the Statement of Auditing Standard  (SAS)  #55, "Consideration of  Internal  Control in a Financial Statement  Audit"  (1988), the supplemental Audit Guide (to applying  SAS  #55)  (1990),  and  SAS 

#78,  "Consideration  of  Internal  Control in a Financial  Statement  Audit: An Amendment on Auditing Standard #55  (2007  - Codification of Statements on Auditing Standards). Additionally, in prescribing the policies and standards for establishing and maintaining proper 

internal  controls in a department's or agency's programs and admin istration ,  OMB  Circul ar A-123 incorporated the guidance and requirements from  FMFIA,  t he  OMB 's  Guidelines for the Evaluation and Improvement of and Reporti ng on  Internal  Control Systems in the Federal Go ve rnment, and the Government Accountability Office's  (GAO)  Standard for Internal Control in the Federal Government. 2

With regard to the role of the  OIG,  OMB's  Circular A-123 states that: 

The Inspector General ... is encouraged to provide technical assistance in the agency's effort to evaluate and improve internal controls .... In addition, the {Inspector General] may advise the agency's head whether the    

> 1FMFIA, Pub.

L. No. 97-255 2 Green Book,  GAO/AIMD-00-21 .3.1,  November 1999 http://www.gao.gov/special.pubs/ai00021p.p df 

# ---------11(  1 )-----FEC  OIG  Aud it  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

agency's internal control evaluation pro cess has been conducted in accordance with the Internal Control Gu id elines. 

# ~ Chapter  8

Each agency is required to maintain a  financial  management system featuring reasonable 

internal  controls designed, operated, and evaluated, in accordance with  OMB  Circular  A-123. 

OMB  Circular  A-127 prescribes the  policies  and standards to be  followed ,  when developing, operating, evaluating, and reporting on financial management systems.  OIG  is responsible for provid in g technical ass istance and advice in the review and improvement of FEC's  financial 

management systems.  OMB  Circular  A-130 establishes guidance for the manage ment of 

federal  information resources. Guidance for the implementation and maintenance of effective 

internal  controls  is provided in  GAO's  Standards for Internal Control Management an dEvaluation Toof, which is based on  GAO's  Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government. 

OMB  Bulletin  14-02, Audit Requirements for Federal Financial Statements, establishes the minimum requirements for conducting  federal  financial  statements audits, and prescribes the 

policies  and procedures that are  followed  when performing internal controls testing . 

Section  8-20:  Policy 

OIG  conducts  internal  controls  reviews, in accordance with  GAGAS.  Auditors are to gain sufficient understanding of the entity's internal  controls  structure, in order to design the 

applicable  tests to meet the audit objectives, to provide a basis for determining the adequacy of internal controls, and/or to determine the nature, timing, and extent of substantive tests. 

Section  8-30: Definitions A financial audit of an entity's internal controls structure consists of implementing  established 

audit  policies  and procedures that provi de reasonable assurance that the audit objectives  will  be achieved. An entity's  internal  controls  structure consists of the: 

• Internal Controls Environment: The entity's senior management must set an appropriate 

"tone  at the  top"  that  positively  influences and encompasses the consciousness of the entity's  personnel  towards implementing, operating, and maintaining proper internal 

controls.  The internal  controls  environment  essentially  becomes the foundation influencing the placement and adequacy of  a ll  other components of  internal  controls, 

including  discipline  and organ izational struct ur e. 

• Risk Assessment: The entity must be aware of and  deal  with the risks it faces within its 

internal  controls  structure.  It  must set operational, management, and  controls 

objectives, integrated throughout  all  relevant activities, so that the organization is 

properly  operating in concert.  Once  these objectives are set, the entity must then identify the risks it may encounter to achieve those objectives, analyze them, and 

develop  ways to manage them. 

• Internal Controls Activities:  Internal  controls  po licies  and procedures mu st be  proper ly 

established and executed to help ensure th at the actions, identified by management as necessary to address and manage risks, are  effectively  performed.  

> 3

GA0-01-1  OOSG . August  2001.  http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0110089.pdf   

> -----( 2)-----

FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 8 

• Information and Communications: Encompassing the  internal  controls  activities are information and communication systems,  including  the accounting systems. These systems enable the entity's  personnel  to capture and exchange the information needed to conduct, manage, and  control  the entity's  overall  operations. • Monitoring:  Internal  controls processes must be properly monitored for compliance to 

policies  and procedures. Assessments must be performed to determine and ensure quality of performance and to ascertain implementation of corrective act io ns/changes, as a result of findings. For performance audits,  internal  controls  are defined as the strategic  planning  of the entity's mission and  goals  and the methods and procedures adopted by management to ensure that the use of  all  resources is consistent with applicable  laws,  regulations, and  policies;  that these resources are safeguarded against fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement; and that 

complete,  accurate, and  reliable  data is obtained, maintained, and fairly disclosed in reports. 

Section  8-40:  Internal  Controls 

Internal  controls  are defined as  established  organizational  policies  and procedures adhered to by the entity, in its endeavor to  properly  perform (methods and measures) its programs, operations, activities, and functions, in order to achieve its mission and  goals.  Inherent  to internal controls is  compliance  with laws,  regulations,  and provisions  applied  in the process of utilizing resources, in order to safeguard them from fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. Specifically, proper data processing and management become paramount, as complete, accurate,  available,  and  reliable  data must be obtained, maintained, and fairly  disclosed  in reports. 

GAO's  Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government provides a framework for 

evaluating  an organization's internal  controls  structure. Reviewers should refer to this publication, as  well  as  OMB  Circulars  A-123, A-12 7, and  A-130  for  internal  controls standards. 

Section 8-50:  Internal  Controls  Review An  evaluation  of the internal controls structure or  internal  controls  requires knowledge of the entity's reported  policies  and procedures, an understanding of their purposes, functions, and 

limitations,  and a  reasonable  degree of assurance that these policies and procedures are 

properly  implemented and operating, as represented. 

In  planning  an internal controls audit, auditors  should  consider characteristics  related  to  internal 

controls  features that are  managerially  significant. For example, in financial audits, the  internal 

controls  affecting accounting operations are reviewed, in order to determine the extent of testing the accounting data.  In  performance audits, the internal  controls  affecting significant program output are reviewed to determine the extent of detailed verification of program results. When reviewing the auditee's internal controls structure or  internal  controls,  as part of a 

financial  audit, aud ito rs should refer to GAGAS chapter 4 , Standards for  F in ancial  Aud it s. When reviewing the internal  controls  structure or  internal  controls, as part of a performance audit, auditors  should  refer to GAGAS chapter 6,  Fieldwork  Standards for Performance Audits,  GAO's 

-----( 3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Ch  apter 8

Standards tor  Internal  Control in the Federal Government and Assessing Internal Controls in Performance Audits. 

Section 8-60: Reporting on  Internal  Controls 

OIG  auditors  will  report all significant internal  controls  weaknesses, in accordance with  GAGAS 

for financial and performance audits. The scope section of the audit program and report  will 

contain  details  specifying the extent of  internal  controls  tests performed. Auditors  should  perform due  diligence  in identifying weaknesses that, in their judgment, warrant the designation of material weaknesses, which are deemed significant deficiency. The definition of material weakness under  OMB  Circular A-123 and  FMFIA  is: A deficiency that the agency head determines to be significant enough to be reported outside the agency (i.e.,  included  in the  annual  Integrity  Act report to the President and the Congress) 

shall  be considered a  "material  weakness." 

OMB  Circular  A-123  clearly  states that the term  "material  weakness"  should  not be confused with the same term  federal  auditors use to identify weaknesses, which, in their opinion, pose a risk or threat to the internal  controls  components of an audited entity, such as a program or operation. The  circular  states that "auditors are required to identify and report those types of weaknesses at any  level  of the operation or organization, even if the management of the audited entity  would  not report the weaknesses outside the  agency." 

-------( 4FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Accessing Data  Reliability: 

9-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Preliminary  Assessment 

40  Additional Tests 

50  Final  Assessment 

60  Reporting Data  Reliability 

Section  9-00:  Purpose 

# I Chapter  9Th is chapter sets forth the  policies  and procedures for the  FEC  OIG  in assessing the  rel i ab il ity 

of data that aud itors use to support their findings,  results,  conclusions,  and recommendations. The purpose of assessing data  re liability  is to ensure that the  available  da ta is  complete, 

accurate,  relevant,  consistent, and  re li ab le,  and can be used to meet audit objectives . 

Section  9-10:  Standards Auditors use data as evidence to support the findi ngs , results,  conclusions,  and recommendations of an audit, attestation engagement, or  evaluation.  GAGAS  requires the use of sufficient, competent  evidential  matter, hence, auditors need  reliable  data that are  complete, 

accurate, and  relevant  for the specific purposes of a review. To be  reliable,  the data  should: 

• Contain  all  the data  elements  and records needed for meeting the objective(s) of areview (completeness); 

• Reflect the information entered at the source or, if  available,  in the source documents (accuracy); or 

• Yield  similar  results  in  similar  analyses  (consistency). 

Reliable  data may conta in errors, as  long  as they are not si gn ificant enough to cause a reasonable person, who is aware of the errors, to doubt a f in ding,  result,  conclusion, or recommendation based on the result(s) of data  analysis. 

GAGAS  provides guidance on assess i ng the  re li ab ili ty  of computer-processed data for performance audits, attestation engagements, and  evaluations.  Howeve r,  GAGAS  pro vi des 

only  limited  guidance on assessing data  reliability  for  financial  audits. The refore, t he Go vernment Accountability Office's  (GAO)  gui de , Assess ing the Reliabili ty of  Computer-

Processed Data 1, supplements  GAGAS  and provides guidance on  implementing  the data 

reliability  requirements.  It  provides a risk-based framework for data  reliability  assessments that can be geared to specific circumstances.  

> 1

GA0 -03-27 30 , O ct ober  2002,  http: // www.gao.gov/new.items/d03273g.gdf 

-----( 1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  I Chapter 9 For  financial  audits and information systems review, auditors  will  not use  GAO's  Assessing the Reliability of Computer-Processed Data.  Instead,  auditors  will  use  GAO's  Federal Information System Controls Audit  Manual  for guidance in assessing data  reliability. 

Section  9-20:  Policy 

Auditors  should  not assess data  reliability ,  if the data is  only  used to support the background of a report, and the data is not to be used to support the findings,  results,  conclusions, and recommendations. However, audit staff must  reveal  the data source and  disclose  in the scope section of the report that data  reliability  was not assessed. Auditors  should  assess data  reliability,  when it is used to support their findings,  results, 

conclusions,  and recommendations. Even when a finding describes only a  single  condition, auditors should assess the data supporting that finding. Auditors  should  assess the reliability of the data by considering the source and the conditions under which it was gathered. The 

following  factors  significantly  influence an auditor's consideration on the  reliability  of data for the purpose of achieving audit objectives: 

• Data was obtained from independent sources outside the entity or from sources within the entity, independent of sources who are  responsible  for the data (being audited); 

• The data was  developed  under a  reliable  information system monitored by adequate controls; and 

• The data was subjected to audit testing in the current or prior year. 

Ultimately,  audit expectations were  developed ,  as a result  of using data from a variety of sources. 

In  assessing data reliability, first assess the risk that the data is not  complete,  consistent, or accurate, or does not satisfy the evidence requirements of an audit. To  accomplish  this, auditors should: 

• Use  existing information about the data and employ a  minimal  level  of testing required to ensure that the data can  reliably  support the audit findings,  results,  conclusions,  and recommendations . 

• Review prior audit reports that  relied  on the data, assessed its  rel iabil ity,  or  evaluated 

the effect iv eness of  general  and application controls over systems that helped produce the data. For  additional  information see Audit  Manual,  Chapter 17, Considering the Work of  Others. 

• Use  computer software to  analyze  data  files  for adequate  controls,  which include missing data  fields,  unrealistic  values  or dates, and  illogical  relationships  among data fields. 

• Assess the strength of evidence corroborating data  reliability  and the impact that inaccurate data would have on an audit.  

> 2

GAO-AIMD-12.19.6, January 1999, http://www.gao.gov/special.pubs/ai 12.19.6.pdf ------( 2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016  I Chapter  9

Section  9-30:  Preliminary  Assessment 

If  preliminary testing shows that the corroborating evidence is strong and inaccurate data  will 

have a minimal effect on the audit, then treat the data as  reliable.  There is a minimal effect on the audit, when the risk of crucial errors in using the data is minimal and  will  not  lead  to incorrect or misleading conclusions. 

If  preliminary testing shows data as too unre li able to support the findings , results, conclusions, or recommendations of the audit, then the corroborating evidence is deemed weak and unreliable.  If  the inaccurate data will have a significant impact on the audit, then consider one of the following: 

• Use  other, more  reliable  sources for the data; 

• Redefine the audit objective(s) to eliminate the need to use the data; 

• Cease the audit; or 

• Use  the data with appropriate statements of disclaimers. 

If  the auditors determine that the data is unreliable, they should consi der including this finding in the report and recommend that the data be corrected. 

Section  9-40:  Additional Test 

If  the preliminary assessment is inconclusive because limited resources did not permit extensive data testing or test results raised additional questions about data reliability, then more extensive testing is needed.  Some  additional tests are described below: 

• Tracing from Source Documents: To assess completeness of the data, trace a sample selection of source documents to the records in the  file  or the journal entries. Each 

sample  should be random and  large  enough to estimate an error rate with reasonable precision.  See  Audit Manual, Chapter 15,  Sampling  and Estimation Techniques. 

• Vouching to Source Documents: To assess the existence and accuracy of the data, take a sample  selection  of the records in the file or the journal entries and vouch to the source documents. Each sample should be random and  large  enough to estimate an error rate with reasonable precision.  See  Audit Manual, Chapter 15,  Sampling  and Estimati on Techn iques. 

• Advanced Electronic Testing: Consider this type of testing when preliminary data testing shows unexpected anomalies or  large  variances in the data.  Use  it to measure variations in the data, assess trends, and evaluate relationships among data elements. 

If  necessary, replicate the software procedures to make certain that test transactions were processed accurately and  completely . 

• Review  System  Controls:  Only  test system controls , when preliminary testing shows system controls weaknesses or source documents are not available. With information technology  (IT)  assistance, test system controls that directly affect the reliability of the data.  If  possible, have  IT  review  applicable  software source programs to document existing system controls and noted weaknesses. 

# ------11(  3 )-- ---FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016  I Chapter  9

Section  9-50:  Final  Assessment After receiving the  results  of  all  preliminary and advanced tests, reassess the  reliability  of the data intended for use during the audit. Consider the data: 

• Reliable, when assessments show that they  would  not weaken audit  analysis  nor  lead  to misleading or  unintentional  conclusion(s). 

• Unreliable, when assessments show that they are inadequate for the intended use and 

could  lead  to misleading or  unintentional  conclusion(s). 

• Of  undetermined reliabili ty , if  all  or iginal  data  files,  software programs, and source documents were  deleted  or were otherwise  unavailable  for assessment. 

If  the auditor decides to use  unreliable  data or data of undetermined  reliability,  it  should  be 

clearly  disclosed  in the survey/audit program. The  disclosure  language  should  describe significant  limitations  surrounding the use and discussion of the data, so as not to  mislead  or cause  unintentional  conclusions.  The aud it staff must secure  approval  from the Deputy 

Inspector  General  (DIG)  or  Inspector  General  ( IG ) before us ing data deemed  unreliable  or of undetermined  re li ability. 

Section  9-60:  Reporting Data  Reliability 

If  data  reliability  is important for meeting the objectives of the audit or it is used to support findings,  results,  conclusions,  or recommendations, then an assessment of data  reliability 

should  be  included  in the scope and  methodology  section of the report.  In  doing this, the auditor 

shou ld  descri be the aud it tests and procedures used to support the aud it position,  disclose 

applicable  problems  with the da ta, render a  fina l  assessment on data  reliability ,  and provide a 

rationale  for the  final  assessment. 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Compliance  with Laws and Regulations: 

10-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Planning 

40  Assessing Risk of  Illegal  Acts 

50  Testing 

60  Reporting 

Section  10-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  10 

This chapter sets forth the policies and procedures for assessing an entity's (e.g ., program, operation, activity, or function) compliance with  laws  and regulations during an audit (review and evaluation}. 

Section  10-10:  Standards The  GAGAS,  Chapters 4,  5,  6, and 7, provide guidance for financial  audits,  attestation engagements, and performance audits. Additional guidance for financial statements audits is available in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants'  (AICPA)  Codification of Statements on Auditing Standards,  AU  Section  800,  Compliance Auditing. 

In  addition, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB}  Bulletin  No. 14-02 1 provides guidance for reporting on compliance with  laws  and regulations for financial statements audits, as required by  OMB. 

Section  10-20:  Policy Auditors  will  identify re levant laws and regulations that have a direct and material impact on audit objectives. They  will  assess  compliance  with laws and regulations in accordance with GAGAS, and report instances of noncompliance. Auditors  will  consult with the  IG  Counsel, 

when appropriate, for  legal  guidance. 

Section  10-30:  Planning 

One  standard of fieldwork for audits, reviews, and evaluations, requ ires that work be adequately planned and documented. Auditors must  plan  work in a manner that  will  accomplish the audit objectives.  In  add ition , audito rs shou ld be  alert  to circumstances or transactions that  could  be   

> 1https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/bulletins/2014/b-14-02. pdf

-----( 1 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  10 

indicative of  illegal  acts. Auditors should exercise due diligence in pursuing indications of 

possible  illegal acts, so as not to interfere with  potential  investigations. For financial audits, auditors need to identify the  relevant  laws  and regulations that could have a direct and  material  effect on the  financial  statements in accordance with  AICPA  requirements. Auditors should design the audit to provide  reasonable  assurance of detecting  material 

·misstatements  of  financial  statements or other  financial  data, resulting from  noncompliance  with the provisions of contracts or grant agreements that have a direct and  material  impact on the financial statements results.  (See  GAGAS  4.06  -4.09) 2

AICPA  AU-C  Section  240, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit,  .05,  states, 

''.An auditor conducting an audit in accordance with  GAAS  is responsible  for  obtaining 

reasonable  assurance that the  financial  statements as a whole are free from  material 

misstatement, whether caused by fraud or  error."  Further, auditors  should: 

a. identify and assess the risks of  material  misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud; b. obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of  material 

misstatement due to fraud, through designing and implementing appropriate responses: and c. respond  appropriately  to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit. When performance audits are conducted, planning should include obtaining an understanding of the program or aspect of the program to be audited and the needs of the users of the report.  It 

should  also  include  designing the audit  methodology  and procedures to test compliance with legal and regulatory requirements of the program to be audited that are significant within the context of the audit objectives.  (See  GAGAS  6.06-6.12) Also, auditors  should  assess risks of fraud occurring that is significant within the context of the audit objectives. Audit team members should discuss among the team fraud risks,  including  factors such as individuals' incentives or pressures to commit fraud, the opportunity for fraud to occur, and rationalizations or attitudes that  could  allow  individuals to commit fraud. Auditors  should  gather and assess information to identify risks of fraud that are significant within the scope of the audit objectives or that  could 

affect the findings and  conclusions.  (See  GAGAS  6.30) 

Section  10-40:  Additional Test 

If  the preliminary assessment is inconclusive because  limited  resources did not permit extensive data testing or test  results  raised  additional  questions about data  reliability,  then more extensive testing is needed.  Some  additional  tests are described  below: 

• Tracing from Source Documents: To assess  completeness  of the data, trace a  sample 

selection of source documents to the records in the file or the journal entries. Each sample should be random and large enough to estimate an error rate with  reasonable 

precision.  See  Audit  Manual,  Chapter 15,  Sampling  and Estimation Techniques. 

• Vouching to  Source  Documents: To assess the existence and accuracy of the data, take a  sample  selection  of the records in the  file  or the  journal  entries and vouch to the source documents. Each sample should be random and  large  enough to estimate an   

> 2http: // www.gao.gov/assets/590/587281.pclf

# ---------t(  2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual Version: July  2016  Chapter  10 

error rate with reasonable precision.  See  Audit Manual, Chapter 15, Sampling and Estimation Techniques. 

• Advanced Electronic Testing: Consider this type of test in g when preliminary data testing shows unexpected anomalies or large variances in the data.  Use  it to measure variations in the data, assess trends, and evaluate relationships among data elements. 

If  necessary, replicate the software procedures to make certain that test transactions were processed accurately and completely. 

• Review  System  Controls:  Only  test system controls, when preliminary testing shows system controls weaknesses or source documents are not  available.  With information technology  (IT)  assistance, test system controls that directly affect the  reliability  of the data.  If  possible, have  IT  review applicable software source programs to document existing system controls and noted weaknesses. 

Section  10-50:  Final  Assessment After receiving the results of  all  preliminary  and advanced tests, reassess the  reliability  of the data intended for use during the audit. Consider the data: 

• Reliable, when assessments show that they would not weaken audit ana ly sis nor lead to mis le ad i ng or unintentional conclusion(s). 

• Unreliable, when assessments show that they are inadequate for the intended use and 

could  lead  to misleading or unintentional conclusion(s). 

• Of  undetermined reliability, if  all  original data  files,  software programs, and source documents were  deleted  or were otherwise  unavailable  for assessment. 

If  the auditor decides to use  unreliable  data or data of undetermined reliability, it  should  be 

clearly  disclosed  in  the survey/audit program. The  disclosure  language should describe significant limitations surrounding the use and discussion of the data, so as not to mislead or cause unintentional conclusions. The audit staff must secure approval from the Deputy 

Inspector  General  (DIG)  or  Inspector  General  (IG)  before using data deemed  unreliable  or of undetermined  reliability. 

Section  10-60:  Reporting Data Reliability 

If  data  reliability  is important for meeting the objectives of the audit or it is used to support findings,  results,  conclusions, or recommendations , then an assessment of data  reliability 

should  be  included  in the scope and methodology section of the report.  In  doing this, the auditor 

should  describe the audit tests and procedures used to support the audit position, disclose 

applicable  problems with the data, render a  final  assessment on data  reliability,  and provide a rationale for the final assessment.         

> ------( 3)-----FEC OIG Audit Manual Version: July 2016

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Evidence: 11-00 Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Access to Records 

40  Types of Evidence 

50  Rules of Evidence 

60  Substandard Records 

70  Sources  of  Information 

80  Reliability  of Computer-Based Data 

Section  11-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  11 

This chapter sets forth the  OIG 's  policies and procedures for obtaining evidence to support the findings , results , conclusions , and recommendations in audit reports. 

Section  11-10:  Standards 

GAGAS  provides the  following  standard: Auditors must obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a  reasonable  basis for their findings and conclusions.  (GAGAS  6.56) 

Section  11-20:  Policy 

Audit staff  will  obtain evidence for  all  audits, in accordance with  GAGAS. 

Section  11-30:  Access to Records Right of access to records is set forth in the Inspector General Act of 1978  (Section  6 (a)(1)  )1, 

as amended, which authorizes the  Inspector  General to have access to  all  records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers, recommendations , or other  materials  that relate to an entity's programs or operations. For  add itional  guidance, see the Audit  Manual,  Chapter  2, 

Audit Policy and Standards, and  Chapter  3, General Standards.          

> 1http://www.oig.lsc.gov/lscpages/igact.pdf -----( 1)-----FEC OIG Audit Manual Version : July 2016

# Chapter  11 

Section  11-40: Types of Evidence Evidence may be categorized as  physica l,  documentary, or  testimo nia l.  (GAGAS  A6.04) 2.

• Physical  ev idence is obtained by auditors' direct inspection or observation of  people, 

property, or events.  Such  ev idence may be documented in summary memos, photographs, videos, drawings, charts, maps, or physical  samples. 

• Documentary evidence consists of  already  existing information, such as  letters, 

contracts, accounting records, invoices, spreadsheets, database extracts,  electronically 

stored information, and management information on performance. 

By way of  explanation,  the  reliability  of documentary forms of evidence to support findings must  constantly  be considered. The important factor is its purpose (as primary evidence or as  preliminary  or corroborating evidence), for which the evidence  will  be used. Any significant  alterations  on a document  should  be  properly  investigated. 

• Testimonial  evidence  is  obtained through inquiries, interviews, focus groups,  public 

fo rum s, or questionnaires. By way of  explanation,  records of interviews  usually  consist of memoranda based on the notes taken during each interview.  All  documented interviews by the  OIG  will  be a memorandum to the "Audit  File". 

A department or service  official's  verbal  or written statement standing  alone,  without other corroborating ev idence, has  limited  value  as evidence.  If  the auditor determines that such statements are an important part of the audit finding(s) and  will  be  included  in the report, the auditor should consider obtaining a written statement or  clarification  from the interviewee that confirms the documented evidence. The auditor  should  consider some  general  questions when measuring the  reliability  of  testimonial  evidence: Why  would  the person misinform the auditor?  If  the person has a vested interest in what is being discussed or if the person is expressing opinions, then he or she may not be providing the auditor with objective evidence.  Accordingly,  the  reliability  of the evidence 

could  be impaired. What is the person 's  responsibility?  Testimon ial  evidence regard i ng events to which the person has no  responsibility  carri es  less  weight than if the person was the  responsible 

official.  In  most instances, testimonial ev id ence obtained from a person with no responsibility for the subject matter, operat io n, or event  should  be used as a lead  to obtain other, more  reliable  forms of evidence. What is the person's position?  It  is appropriate to interview heads of departments and 

se ctions  regarding broad,  overall  issues or views. When  deta il s are needed on a specific work process or procedure, then a first  li ne  supervisor or the staff worker  should 

be interviewed as  well.  

> 2

htto:// www .gao.gov/assets/590/5 87281 .pdf      

> -----( 2)-----FEC OIG Audit

Manua l Vers ion : July  2016  Chapter  11 

Auditors  frequently  use  analytical  processes,  including  computations, comparisons, separation of information into components, and  rational  arguments to  analyze  any evidence gathered, in order to determine whether it is sufficient and appropriate. (GAGAS  A6.04) 

Section 11-50:  Rules  of Evidence Evidence  should  be su ff icient, competent,  re levant,  valid , and  reliable  to afford a  reasonable 

basis for the auditor's findings,  results,  and conclusions. The amount and types of ev idence required to support the auditor's findings are subject to the auditor's  professional  judgment, after  careful  consideration of the circumstances surrounding the engagement. However, in the majority of cases, the auditor has to  rely  on evidence that is persuasive rather than convincing.  In  determining the sufficiency of evidence, auditors should ensure that enough evidence exists to persuade a  knowledgeable  person of the  rationale  and 

validity  of the findings . Auditors  should  cons ider such factors as to whether the e vi dence is accurate,  complete, 

authoritative,  timely,  and authentic. The  fo ll ow ing  presumptions are  useful  in j udging the competence of ev idence (GAGAS 6.60-6. 61 )3:

• Evidence obtained from independent sources outside the audited entity provides greater assurance of  reliability  than evidence secured  solely  within the entity. 

• The more effective the  internal  controls, the greater the assurance it provides about the 

reliability  of the data obtained. 

• The audit or 's di re ct  personal  knowledge , obtained through  ph ysical  examination, observation, computation, and inspection is more persuasive than information obtained 

indirectly. 

Evidence is  relevant,  if it has a logical  relationship  with, and importance to, the issue being addressed.    

> 3http: // www.gao.gov/assets/590/58728 l .pdf

-----( 3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 Chapter 11 

Section  11-60: Substandard Records When an auditee's or  evaluated  entity's records are essential to  complete  an audit, but are inadequate or not auditable, the auditor should consider  alternative  procedures or techniques to 

accomplish  the objectives of the engagement.  Some  examples  include  reconstructing records; reviewing other sources of information; and interviewing program  officials,  employees,  or participants. The use of  alternative  procedures or techniques  should  be based, in  whole  or in part, on the relationship between the cost to obtain the evidence and the benefit of the information. 

If  inadequate or unauditable records persist after attempts to conduct the  alternative  procedures or techniques, then the auditor, in consultation with the Deputy  Inspector  General  or  Inspector 

General, should consider modifying the audit program. 

Section  11-70:  Sources  of  Information 

Sources  of information to be used as evidence may include  original  data gathered by the auditors and current data gathered by the auditees, evaluated entities, or third parties,  including 

computer-based data .. 

Section  11-80:  Reliability  of Computer-Based Data The validity and  reliability  of computer-based data should be determined early in the planning phase,  especially  if the engagement is expected to  rely  on the data as evidence to support the findings. This step is important,  regardless  of whether the data is provided by the auditee or evaluated entity or are  independently  extracted by the auditor.  If  the data is not  sufficiently 

reliable  to  accomplish  the objectives,  alternative  procedures or techniques must be used.  See 

the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 8,  Internal  Controls,  and Chapter 9, Assessing Data  Reliability. 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Developing  Elements  of a Finding: 

12·00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Responsibilities 

40  Fully  Developed Findings 

50  Finding Attributes 

60  Condition 

70  Criteria 

80  Cause 

90  Effect Exhibit 12-A: Finding Synopsis  Sheet 

Section  12-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  12 

The purpose of this chapter is to describe the attributes and characteristics of findings and the need for the findings to be fully developed and presented in a  clear,  concise, and convincing format. 

Section 12-10: Standards The  GAGAS  chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 provide guidance for  financial  and performance audits and attestation engagements. The standards state that audit findings have often been regarded as containing the elements of condition, criteria, cause, and effect, to describe the problem(s) found in the audits. However, the  actual  elements needed to determine a finding depend 

entirely  on the objective(s) of the audit. The finding or set of findings is  complete  to the extent that the audit objectives are satisfied  (GAGAS  4.10  - 4.14} 1• Conclusions  and recommendations are added, as appropriate, in reporting the finding(s}. 

Section  12·20:  Policy 

The  OIG  audit staff  will  prepare and present audit findings in notice of findings and recommendations (NFRs) and audit reports, in accordance with  GAGAS.  NFRs  shall  be issued to the auditee during the audit, in order to verify the accuracy of weaknesses identified, or  allow 

the auditee the opportunity to provide clarity.  All  OIG  audit staff are expected to know and apply the policies, procedures, and standards discussed in this chapter.     

> 1http: // www. gao .gov/assets/ 590 /58728 l . pdf

# -----1(  1 )1------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  12 

Section  12-30:  Responsibilities 

OIG  audit staff is responsible for ensuring that a finding or set of findings is complete to the extent that the audit objective(s) are satisfied, and the audit report  clearly  relates  the elements of the finding(s) to the audit objectives. This is  accomplished  by ensuring that a finding: 

• Describes the condition - what situation exists? The condition is determined and documented during the audit. 

• Identifies  the criteria - what are the  laws,  regulations, contract requirements, grant agreements, standards, measures, and expectations of what  should  exist? 

• Describes the cause - why did the condition occur? Cause explains the gap between the condition (existing situation) and criteria (desired situation) and serves as the basis to describe the impact of the gap (effect) and, thereby, assists  develop  proper recommendations to  resolve  the gap. 

• Describ es and quantifies the effect - what is the result of the condition? Effect is described as an impact of the difference between the condition (existing situation) and the criteria (desired situation), in which the outcomes or consequences are identified and measured. Measures of effect serve as the basis in  developing  the proper recommendations to resolve the gap. To assist the auditors in the  development,  review, and communication of potential audit findings , a finding synopsis sheet may be used. This sheet  will  help  focus the auditor's attention on the clarification and refinement of the finding attributes.  See  the Audit  Manual,  Exhibit 12-A, for the suggested Finding Synopsis  Sheet.  The find ing synopsis sheet  shou ld  be prepared, if 

applicable,  as soon as sufficient infonnation is  available  to identify the audit finding(s) attributes. 

Section  12-40:  Fully  Developed  Finding(s) 

Fully  developed finding attributes provide management with sufficient, factual information to take prompt corrective action(s).  Sufficient,  factual,  and appropriate evidence must provide adequate support, as the basis for the  development  of finding attributes, results ,  conclusions, 

and recommendations . Evidence to support the finding may be  physical,  testimonial , 

documentary, or  analytical.  See  the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 11 , Evidence. 

Regardless  of the type of evidence used to  develop  a finding, the evidence must meet the basic tests of sufficiency, competence, and  relevance. 

• Sufficiency is the presence of adequate, factual, and convincing evidence to persuade a knowledgeable person, external to the audit, of the  validity  of the finding(s). Determining the sufficiency of evidence requires judgment, because evidence gathered during an audit can be  conflicting  between various evidentiary matter. The auditor must, to the extent  practical,  resolve  conflicting  evidence or make an  impartial  judgment as to what position  is  supported by the weight of the evidence. 

• Competent evidence is  valid,  reliable,  and consistent with fact(s).  It  is best attained through the use of  acceptable  audit methodology. Auditors must  evaluate  the accuracy,       

> -----( 2)-----FEC OIG Audit Manual

Version:  July  2016  Chapter  12 completeness, authoritativeness, timeliness, and authenticity of the evidence and 

carefully  consider whether there is any reason to doubt the  validity  or  completeness  of the evidence. 

• Relevance refers to the  relationship  of the evidence to its use in  developing  audit findings,  results,  conclusions,  and recommendations. Facts and opinions used to prove or disprove an issue must have a  logical  and relevant  relationship  to the issue. 

Information  that does not have this  relationship  becomes  irrelevant  and  should  not be used as evidence or to prove or disprove points being made in the finding(s). 

Section  12-50: Finding Attributes The  development  and refinement of the finding(s) attributes, however, is not an exact science, and the order in which the  development  of the attributes is pursued depends on the nature of the audit objectives.  In  general,  condition  should  be the first attribute  developed,  in order to demonstrate that a  reportable  problem  exists.  If  any actions or noteworthy accomplishments have been taken by management to improve the  reportable  condition during the audit, this 

should  also  be captured by the auditor in this section. Criteria  should  then be identified. Next, the cause (of the condition) should be identified to provide the basis for the  development  of corrective actions to  close  the gap between the condition and criteria.  Finally,  the effect (as a 

result  of the cause)  should  be measured and quantified to show the sufficiency and  materiality 

of the finding(s). 

Section  12-60:  Condition 

Condition  is a description of a situation that exists. Condition asks,  "what  was  found?" 

Condition  is measured against criteria. Conditions can be consistent with the  applicable  criteria or they can deviate  positively  or  negatively  from the criteria. The extent of the condition must be 

fully  demonstrated to prove  factually  that a  problem  (deficiency or achievement) does or does not exist. The potential condition discovered during the audit survey may  only  be a part of the 

underlying  problem.  Accordingly,  the audit techniques used during the  detailed  audit  should  be directed toward identifying and describing the  full  extent of the deficiency or achievement. 

Section  12-70: Criteria Criteria identify the standards and  guidelines  against which the condition is to be measured. Criteria are  established  by  laws;  regulations;  agency  policies  and procedures; contracts, grant agreements;  Office  of Management and Budget  (OMB)  circulars; Government Accountability 

Office  (GAO)  mandates; professional standards and practices; and industry standards and practices, etc.  In  most cases, sufficient criteria exist to  establish  "what  should  be,"  that is, the desired state.  In  developing  the finding, the auditor must identify and document the specific criteria, as  applicable  to the condition. The criteria identified in a finding  should  specifically  cite the authority used, that is, the  law,  regulation,  contract, standard, etc. The citation  should  also 

describe what is required to reinstate the situation to the desired state, in  compliance  to the 

applicable  criteria. 

-----( 3 )a-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  12 Section 12-80: Cause When the auditor's objectives  include  explaining  why a condition identified in the audit occurred, the reasons for that condition are referred to as the  "cause." 

Precise  identification of the cause is necessary for the  development  of a constructive recommendation(s) to avoid a recurrence of the condition.  Identifying  the precise cause is often 

difficult;  also,  multiple  causes may exist.  In  the  latter  case, the auditors  should  attempt to distinguish the  principal  causes from the attendant causes. The  principal  or root cause is 

usually  a management system weakness that,  unless  corrected, can  allow  similar  deficiencies to be prevalent. For  example,  an  individual  simultaneously ordering, receiving, and paying for goods does not provide  reasonable  assurance that the assets are being  properly  ordered, received, and 

adequately  safeguarded. Accordingly, the performance of these disparate set of duties violates the  internal  control  principle  of separation of duties and renders the performance of the  critical 

elements of an operational function  oblivious  to the prevention/detection of errors and at high risk for fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. 

Consequently,  the auditor finds that this  lack  of  internal  controls  requirement contributes to a management system weakness. The  exploration  of  all  potential  causes is important and sharpens the focus of the  development  of proper audit recommendations to correct the management system weakness.  In  all  cases, auditors  should  clearly  and  logically  establish  the 

relationship  between the stated cause(s) and their  related  recommendation(s). Section 12-90: Effect Effect identifies the  actual  or  potential  consequences/outcomes of a condition that varies (either 

positively  or  negatively)  from the criteria identified in the audit, as  well  as their impact. Auditors often use the measured  results  of effect to demonstrate the need for corrective action(s). Effect is  directly  related  to condition, because it measures the impact of the difference/gap between the condition (existing situation) and criteria (desired situation). The measured difference can be either positive (an achievement) or negative (a problem). Effect is  usually  measured in quantitative terms, such as  dollars,  number of transactions, or units of time.  Often,  auditors have  difficulty  identifying the significance of the impact of the difference(s) between the condition and criteria. The quantitative nature of the measurement of effect can assist the auditors in making this distinction. However, certain conditions may be 

reportable  with, or without, an effect. For  example,  the  lockbox  for the stock certificates were 

consistently  left  unlocked/open,  whether or not stock certificates were  stolen.  Nevertheless,  the 

potential  effect (stolen stock certificates)  establishes  the significance of the finding and can convince management to  properly  implement  corrective action(s). Measuring Effect: To demonstrate the significance of a deficiency and to encourage management to  properly  implement  corrective action(s), audit tests  should  be sufficient and adequate to show whether the condition is  isolated  or  prevalent.  Statistical  sampling  is an 

example  of an adequate audit technique to use in estimating the nature and frequency of occurrence. Even though a specific type of deficiency is not frequent nor  prevalent,  an -----( 4 )....___ ___ _FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  12 

individual  instance may be deemed significant enough to warrant  full  development  of an audit finding and reporting it. For example, an adverse condition in a  relatively  new program may not be  prevalent,  but it could have far-reaching  implications  and consequences, if not brought to management's attention. 

Costs/Benefits: To the extent  practical,  auditors should measure effect in measured terms of costs/benefits, such as cost-avoided, cost-recovered, etc.  See  the Audit Manual, Chapter 13, Monetary Benefits. This type of measurement is not  only  important in providing management with an incentive to  implement  corrective action(s), but it  also  provides sufficient data for the summary of costs/benefits that are to be reported in the  OIG  Semiannual  Report  (SAR)  to Congress. 

------(  5 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  12 

EXHIBIT  12-A: Finding  Synopsis  Sheet 

Finding Title: Condition: (What is happening) Describe the existing situation. 

Criteria: (What  should  be happening)  Identify  and describe the standards and guidelines the condition is being measured against. 

Cause:  (Why it happened) Describe why the condition, which is not consistent with the criteria, occurred. 

Effect:  (Actual  or  potential  consequences/outcomes and the impact of the difference(s} between what exists and what  should  be) Describe the  actual  result  from the cause of the condition and its underlying impact and the desired result, if the condition had been consistent with the criteria. 

Conclusions:  Conclusions are  logical  inferences about the entity or program based on the reviewers' findings and provide the basis for the  establishment  of recommendations to convince the entity's or program's management to  properly  implement  corrective actions. 

Recommendations: Effective recommendations encourage improvements in the conduct of government programs and operations. Recommendations are effective, when they are addressed to parties that have the authority to act and, when the recommended actions are specific, are  practical,  cost-effective, and measurable.  (GAGAS  8.29)2 

Views of Responsible Officials: Reviewers should report the views of  responsible  officials 

concerning the findings,  conclusions,  recommendations, and any  planned  corrective actions. Any disagreements should be  fully  and constructively  explained  in the report. 

Costs/Benefits (if applicable): Computation and recording of costs/benefits data,  including 

cost-avoidances and cost-recoveries resulting from recommendations.     

> 2http://www.gao.gov/assets/5 90 /5 87281 . pdf

-----( 6 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Monetary Benefit: 

13-00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Monetary Benefits Terms Defined 

40  Process 

50  Responsibilities 

EXHIBIT  13-A:  WORKSHEET  I,  SIDE  1& 2 

EXHIBIT  13-B:  WORKSHEET  II 

Section  13-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  13 

The purpose of this chapter is to describe the method and process for identifying and recording monetary benefits derived from the  OIG's  audits, inspections and evaluations. 

Section  13-10:  Standards The Semiannual Report to Congress provides for reporting cost-savings, cost-avoidances, questioned costs, and cost-recoveries, the results of  OIG  audit reports. 

Section  13-20:  Policy 

The auditors  should  evaluate reports to determine if they have potential cost/benefit impact. 

Savings  identified should be  measurable,  supportable,  and  attributable  to the  OIG's  work. 

Section  13-30:  Monetary Benefits Terms Defined Auditors should report  all  cost/benefit  results,  even though management  officials  responding to the report may disagree with the findings and recommendations. 

Offsets  are  all  readily  identifiable  costs associated with  implementing  the recommendation, and offsetting the savings is to be considered when computing the net monetary impact. For 

example,  if a recommendation  calls  for the elimination of two  clerks,  whose work is now automated, the savings in  salaries,  benefits, and allowances  would  have to be offset by the costs of the  technology  and any  annual  maintenance contracts associated with it. Also, the total savings figure(s) in the monetary report should  properly  reflect the corresponding  results  of the computation of the savings. 

Reportable savings are only those savings that can be reasonably determined and supported. Potential savings reported  should  align to a finding in the audit report, and the justification for 

# - ----1(  1 )..-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version  July  2016  Chapter  13 

those savings described in the workpapers. Savings that benefit the  federal  government  should 

be reported, with the portion  specifically  attributed to the  FEC  identified  separately. 

One-time savings are amounts  applicable  to  only  one year. 

Recurring savings occur when the recommendation results in savings that can be extended for more than one year. The number of years determined for a recurring savings depends on the nature of the finding .  If  the number of years is known, it  should  be reported .  If  the number of years cannot be determined, the number of savings years  should  be reported as  "unknown"  and the annual amount of the recurring savings reported . 

Section  13-40:  Process To assist reporting savings and cost-avoidances, auditors may use the  Semiannual  Data Worksheet  I,  shown in the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 13, Exhibit 13-A or 13-B. This sheet is intended to help focus the auditor's attention on the recommendations to which the questioned costs, unsupported costs, and funds put to better use relate. For audit reports that do not demonstrate any reportable savings, the worksheet should not be completed . The Deputy 

Inspector  General or  IG  will  approve th e Semiannual  Data Worksheet  I and  II.  These worksheets  will  be retained in the audit documentation for applicable audits. 

Section 13-50:  Responsibilities 

Although the full impact of  OIG  reports,  particularly  those  resulting  in enhanced effectiveness and efficiency, cannot  always  be measured in terms of cost/benefit impact, audit recommendations can produce a monetary impact that can be measured and supported.  In  this regard , auditors have a responsibility to identify monetary benefits that impact the FEC. The auditor-in-charge is  responsible  for ensuring that the monetary impact report is prepared. 

In  the case of cost/benefit-related audits performed by pr ivate contractors, the contractors should identify and  develop  all  findings that  resulted  in a monetary impact. Based on the contractor's information, the auditor-in-charge is responsible for processing and preparing a monetary impact statement. The auditor-in-charge  will  ensure that the savings reported are 

reasonable,  supportable,  and  attributable  to the audit effort. The statement must be signed by the Deputy  Inspector  General or  IG  and be retained in the administrative audit documentation. 

# ------1(  2 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version  July  2016  Chapter  13 

EXHIBIT  13-A WORKSHEET  I

Semiannual  Data - Worksheet  I

(Side  1) Audit Title--------- -------------------Report Number----------This form  should  be completed when recommendations have identified questioned costs, unsupported costs, or funds put to better use. Enter recommendat ion number and  dollar  amounts in the appropr iate  columns  below . Provide the information requested on side 2 of this form when management's response are received and 

analyzed  for each recommendation. Changes in the status of the  individual  recommendations  should  be tracked . This information is required by the  Inspector  General  Act of 1978, as amended, section 5 (a)(B) and (9) and section 5 (b)(2) and (3). Recommendation No . Questioned Costs(a)  Unsupported  Costs(b) Funds Put To Better 

Use(c) 

Total 

Approved by ________ _ _ _ Date ----------

(a) Questioned costs are costs that are questioned by the  OIG,  because of an  alleged  violation 

of a provision of  law,  regulation ,  contract, grant, cooperative agreement, or document governing the expend iture of funds .  It  is a find ing that, at the time of the audit, asserts such costs are not supported by adequate documentation or it is a findi ng that asserts the expenditure of funds for the intended purpose is unnecessary or  unreasonable. 

-------(  3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version  July  2016  Chapter 13 

(b) Unsupported costs are costs which the  OIG  questioned because the cost was not supported by adequate documentation at the time of the audit. (c) Funds put to better use are funds that  could  be applied more  efficiently,  if the  Federal 

election  Commission (FEC) management took action to  implement  and  complete  the recommendation, including: reductions in  outlays;  de-obligation  of funds from programs or operations, insurance, or bonds; savings incurred by  implementing  recommended improvements  related  to the FEC's operations; and avoidance of unnecessary expenditures noted in the pre-award reviews of contract agreements, etc. 

Note: This worksheet has 2 parts. Retain a copy of this form in the workpapers for each recommendation that has questioned costs, unsupported costs, or funds put to better use. 

# -----1(  4 )1--- --FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version July  2016  Chapter  13 

EXHIBIT  13-A: WORKSHEET  I

Semiannual  Data - Worksheet  I

(Side 2) Audit  Title  _______ ___ _______________ ___ _ _Report Number ---------------This form should be completed when recommendations have identified questioned costs, unsupported costs , or funds put to better use. Whe n fina l  actio n is  completed  on the related re co mmendations li sted  below,  please complete Wor ksheet  II .

If  Funds Put to  Better  Use  (see  side 1) 

If  Questioned  Cost or Value Agreed to by Management 

Unsupported  Cost  (see  side 1)  Baaed  on  Proposed  Recommendation  Value  Not Rec omme ndation  Disallowed  Costs Not Agreed to by 

No.  Costs  Disallowed  Total Management Action Legislative Action Management 

ITot.I 

## -----( s )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version  July  2016  Chapter  13 Approved by: ---------------- Date: --------

EXHIBIT  13-B:  WORKSHEET  I

Semiannual  Data  " Worksheet  II 

This form  should  be  completed  when final action has been taken on the audit recommendation(s) identified on both sides of  WORKSHEET  I.  This information is required by the  Inspector  General  Act of 1978, as amended, Section 5 (b)(3)(C)(i) and (ii). Disallowed Costs Funds Put to Better Use Number  Value  Recovered  Via:  Value 

Property  in Should Not or Lieu of  Written  Off  by  Completed  Would Not be Audit Rec. Collection  Offset  Cash  Other Management Rec. Completed Approved by: ------------ Date: ----------

------(  6 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Electronic  Workpapers: 

14-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Teammate Project  File 

40  Workpaper Documentation 

50  Elements  of Workpaper Documentation 

60  Supervisory Review 

70  Index  and Cross Referencing  System 

80  Required Forms and  Checklist 

90  Independent  Reference 

100  Data  Controls  and Safeguards 11  O Records Retention 

Section  14-00:  Purpose 

# IChapter 14 This chapter sets forth the  OIG's  policies  and procedures for the preparation, review, and retention of audit documentation,  also  known as workpapers. The  FEC  OIG  prepares, reviews, and maintains workpapers in an  electronic  format using TeamMate. The  OIG  maintains TeamMate project  files  for each  individual  audit (as  well  as inspections and evaluations) and any other special projects that may require supporting documentation. 

Section 14-10: Standards GAGAS, issued by the  Comptroller  General of the  United  States, provides audit documentation guidance for  financial  and performance audits engagements. 

Financial Audits: 

In  addition to the A/CPA requirements for audit documentation, auditors should comply with the following additio nal requirements when performing  GAGAS  financial audits. 

• Document supervisory review, before the report release date, of the evidence that supports the findings, conclusions, and recommendations contained in the auditors' report. Document any departures from the  GAGAS  requirements and the impact on the audit and on the auditors' conclusions when the audit is not in compliance with applicable  GAGAS 

requirements due to the law, regulation, scope limitations, restrictions on access to records, or other issues impacting the audit.  (GAGAS  4.15) 

# --------1(  1 ]---------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  14 

Performance Audits: 

• Auditors should prepare audit documentation that contains evidence that supports the findings, conclusions, and recommendations before they issue their report. (GA GAS 

6.80) 

Section  14-20:  Policy The preparation of acceptable audit workpapers is the duty and responsibility of the audit staff 

members. The  OIG  will  prepare workpapers and maintain documentation in TeamMate project 

files  for  all  audits, reviews, attestation engagements, inspections and  evaluations,  unless 

otherwise approved by the Deputy  Inspector  General  (Deputy  IG)  or  IG.  The  approval  by the Deputy  IG  or  IG  should be written and maintained in the  OIG  documentation  files. 

The audit staff is expected to know and apply the policies, procedures, and standards discussed in this chapter. The auditor-in-charge and Deputy  IG  are  responsible  for ensuring the requirements for the preparati on of the workpapers are consistently  followed  and the  related 

on-the-job training is provided, when necessary. 

Section  14-30:  Teammate Project  Files 

The TeamMate Administrator (or project owner)  will  create the project in TeamMate. The TeamMate Administrator  will  add the team members to the project. Auditors will maintain TeamMate project files that consist of workpapers and supporting evidence gathered by the auditor(s) to testify to the  completion  of the audit steps. TeamMate project files  will  consist of: 

OIG  Audits-Inspections-Reviews 

• Project name,  OIG  assignment number, and the audited entity 

• Audit notification  letter  identifying the purpose, scope, objective, and anticipated timeframe of the audit 

• Independence  statements from auditors performing audit 

• Audit program 

• Entrance conference documentation (mandatory for audits  only) 

• Detailed testing workpapers to include o supporting documentation o meetings/interviews 

• Testing summary workpapers 

• Status  meetings (if necessary) 

- ------(  2 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 14 

• Notice of findings and recommendations 

• Exit conference documentation (mandatory for audits  only) 

• Quality Assurance  Checklist 

• Draft report and independent referencing documentation 

• Final  report,  transm ittal  memoranda, and management comments 

Contract Audits  (COR  Monitoring) 

• Project  name,  OIG  assignment number, and the audited entity 

• Statement of Work and award letter identifying the purpose, scope, objective, and anticipated timeframe of the aud it 

• Independence  statements 

• Approval  of audit program(s) 

• Entrance Conference 

• OIG  review of required  deliverables 

• Status  meetings 

• OIG  review of notice of findings and recommendations 

• Draft report 

• Exit conference 

• Quality  Assurance  Checklist 

• Completion  checklist/forms  (if necessary) 

• Final report,  transmittal  memoranda, and management comments 

If  a TeamMate project  file  is used for any special projects or evaluations, the project  will  include 

the appropriate documentation  listed  above  related  to the  selected  work.  Otherwise,  a folder 

saved on the  OIG  server  will  be used to record the work performed and/or oversight of the project. 

-----( 3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  IChapter  14 

Section  14..40:  Workpaper Documentation Workpapers are the permanent records of the work performed during an aud it (t o include 

inspections and reviews/evalu at ions ). This documentation is the connecting link among the different phases of the audit process:  planning  (survey, data  collection  and  analysis ),  fieldwork 

(audit testing,  walkthroughs,  etc), and reporting. Workpaper documentation provides the support for findings,  conclusions,  and recommendations. Workpaper documentation is defined as the documents that support the work performed and the conclusions reached during the engagement. Workpaper documentation may consist of papers prepared by the auditor or obtained from the auditee or other sources. The preparation of workpapers is necessary to  illustrate  the  completion  of the audit steps in the survey or audit program. Types of workpaper documentation  include  manual,  automated, and summary. The type of supporting evidence gathered by an auditor varies according to the audit. Types of evidence, can include observation, documentary, inquiry, and testimonial,  include  laws, 

regulations,  policies, procedures, queries, database information, reports, forms, documents, correspondence, interviews, memos, schedules,  analyses,  observations, videos, and photographs. When gathering evidence, auditors  should  not guarantee confidentiality, either 

orally  or in writing, without first obtaining permission from the Chief  Investigator/Counsel  to the 

IG  and /or the Deputy  IG. 

When documenting an interview as evidence,  all  documented interviews  should  be a memorandum to the audit file and include the following information: 

• Date, time, and place of interview; 

• Name, position, and office of the  official  interviewed; 

• Names of audit staff members present; and 

• Subject discussed in the interview. Workpaper documentation  should  be  complete,  accurate, understandable,  legible,  and restricted to matters that are significant and relevant to the objectives of the audit.  If  other matters or issues are discovered during that audit that are not  directly  related  to the purpose and/or objective of the present audit, the auditor  should  document this matter and provide the information to the Deputy  IG  or  Inspector  General.  At a minimum, workpapers for detailed testing steps should contain the required elements for proper audit documentation and should be  properly  cross-referenced to supporting documentation. The required  elements  are: 

• purpose, source, scope, (as  applicable) 

• methodology, and 

• results. 

In  addition, supporting documents and deta il ed testing workpapers may requ ir e additional 

elements  to explain the  deta il ed  testing performed and/or audit testing  results  such as: 

• Legends - A legend of  all  tickmarks, symbols, and abbreviations used in the audit documentation or supporting evidence  should  be prepared. Adding machine tapes or copies of spreadsheet formulas may  also  be attached to support the computations, footings, and cross-footings. 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  14 

• Footnotes  - A listing of  all  footnotes used in the audit documentation or supporting evidence 

should  be prepared. Footnotes  should  be  consecutively  numbered or lettered. Where footnotes are added to photocopies of  original  documents, they should be  initialed  and dated by the auditor. The appropriate  OIG  staff  should  sign-off in Teammate as the preparer or reviewer of the workpapers. Audit documentation should be complete and  final  without requiring further revision or  oral  explanation  once reviewed.  In  addition, it  should  contain evidence of supervisory review.  See  the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 7, Supervising Engagements, and Chapter 11, Evidence, for additional guidance. Workpaper documentation may  also  be in the form of data stored on tapes, diskettes, or other media. The use of  electronic  spreadsheets, database systems, software programs, and automated processes (e.g., computer matching and  downloading)  should  be demonstrated in the audit documentation. The data should  also  be  validated  for  reliability,  in accordance with Chapter 9, Assessing Data Reliability. Where  practical,  automated audit documentation  should 

be saved and downloaded to the TeamMate project file. Diskettes, tapes, or other media may be  filed  in an audit binder at the  conclusion  of the audit  along  with the  finalized  TeamMate  file. 

All  media  filed  in audit binders  should  contain the required elements  (See  section  14-50). 

However, it is  generally  not feasible to maintain copies of voluminous databases from which 

samples  were  selected.  In  such instances, the database should be  clearly  identified,  including 

the date,  location,  data  elements,  and number of records. Section 14-50:  Elements  ofWorkpaper Documentation The audit documentation elements given  below  are required to be on  all  workpaper summaries covering major subject areas: 

• Title - The  title  should  present a concise, descriptive caption for the information contained in the paper. The  title  should  be a synopsis of the purpose of the paper. (Required) 

• Purpose - The purpose for the workpaper  should  be stated.  It  should  generally  correspond with the  applicable  procedural  step in the audit program or  evaluation  design. (Required) 

• Source  - The source of  all  information contained in the workpapers  should  be  clearly 

identified. This  applies  to data furnished by the auditee, as  well  as data  compiled  by the auditor. The source  should  be cited in sufficient  detail  to provide for the independent verification of the data. (Required) 

• Scope  - The scope  should  describe the  volume  of transactions, number examined, percentage tested, geographic  locations,  period under review, and sampling  methodology. 

When  external  factors impose constraints, such as data  limitations  or scope impairments, these factors  should  also  be  disclosed.  (Required) 

• Methodology  4 Identify  the steps that were implemented in the work. (Required) 

# ------11(  5 )1------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016  IChapter 14 

• Conclusion - The conclusion  should  wrap up the  results  of work performed in a clear and concise manner.  It  should  identify any findings,  including  data related to condition , criteria, cause , and effect (actual,  possible,  or potential/probable) . The conclusion must address the purpose of the paper. (Requ ired) Workpaper summaries should be prepared to summarize  deta il ed  audit testing results of significant work performed and identify and consolidate common  reportable  issues after the completion of fieldwork. The audit summary  generally  facilitates  the preparation of the notice of findings and recommendations and draft audit report. At a minimum, the notice of findings and recommendations  should  contain the required attributes (i.e., condition, criteria, cause, effect, and recommendation) and be cross-referenced to the supporting evidence.  See  the Audit 

Manual,  Chapter 12, Developing Elements of a Finding. Where quantitative data is  involved, 

schedules or tables may be prepared to summarize the  results  of the review. Section  14-60:  Supervisory Review Supervisory review is  essential  to ensure that the work was  properly  completed  and the objectives were properly  accomplished.  The workpapers prepared by an  individual  auditor should be reviewed by the Deputy  IG  or  IG .

The workpaper documentation must contain evidence of supervisory review throughout the course of an aud it, review, or  evaluation.  The depth and frequency of the supervisory review 

will  vary based on the  compl ex ity  of the project. Supervisory review is reflected in TeamMate through coaching notes and reviewer sign-offs. The reviewer is not required to provi de acoaching note for each supporting document, detailed testing workpaper, or workpaper summary.  If  the reviewer  concludes  the document or workpaper is accurate and sufficient,  only 

a reviewer sign-off is required.  Only  if the reviewer is providing comments, requesting further 

details/explanations,  and/or suggesting changes is when a coaching note is required. The Deputy  IG  should  review the workpaper documentation throughout the audit process. At aminimum, this review should be performed after the  full  completion of an audit step.  All  major 

documentation pertaining to the notice of findings and recommendations or draft report must be reviewed and signed by the Deputy  IG  or designated reviewer, before it is issued for comment to management. 

Section  14-70:  Indexing  and  Cross  Referencing  System 

Indexing : a workpaper numbering system. TeamMate automatically generates a chronolog ical numbering system (ARCs) for  all 

workpapers in the project  f il e according to their particular aud it section. 

Cross-Referencing: a method of tracing the audit work performed from the detailed testing or source documents to the audit summari es and then to the audit report. Cross-referencing is an important  tool  to ensure that (1)  all  pertinent facts and conclusions have been considered and (2) adequate support exists for the findings and recommendations. 

# -------11(  6 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  IChapter  14 

Cross-Referencing Workpapers 

Cross-referenci ng workpapers (as  applicable)  is required for each audit. Cross-referencing 

should  be performed on an ongoing basis throughout the audit to facilitate the  collection  of ev idence and the preparation of workpaper documentation. Cross -r eferencing consists of inserting a  hyperlink  in the body of the work to a supporting or source document in the  detailed  testing workpaper, summary workpaper, or memorandums to the audit  file  to  allow  a reviewer to view the supporting documentation of the audit work performed. The auditors' referenced workpapers reflect the documents that support the results, fact statements, and conclusions in a workpaper(s). At a minimum, the  following  items should be cross-referenced during an audit: 

• Audit (includes review and  evaluation)  programs to the audit workpapers; 

• Source  documents to the workpaper summary/detailed testing; 

• Detailed testing to summary workpaper; 

• Summary workpaper to the notice of findings and recommendations; and 

• Draft reports provided to the independent referencer(s) . 

Cross-Referencing the Draft Report 

The purpose of cross-referencing the draft report is to trace  all  facts, dates, figures, and assess 

critical  audit assertions to the workpapers. The references in the draft report must always provide a  link  to the strongest evidence in the project  file  (i.e.  PBC  document,  detailed  testing 

results,  etc.). The auditor  should  clearly  note the data that supports the information in the report by placing a comment next to the report statement. and where  possible,  inserting a hyperlink to the source document or supporting workpaper. 

If  the hyperlinked workpaper is supporting a figure  (dollar  amount, total count, etc.), date, quoted statement (report must  reflect  the statement in quotations)), or auditing standard, the report information and supporting workpaper should reflect identical information. For  all  other information in the report (summaries, background information, etc.) the workpaper is not required to be the  "verbatim"  language  in the report; however, the message of the content in the report and the workpaper should be the same.  In  instances where the report contains the auditors conclusion based on the work performed, the auditor  should  insert  "Auditors  Opinion"  in the comment  field  next to the appropriate statement.  In  addition, any references in the report to 

laws,  audit standards,  federal  regulations, etc ., an electronic copy of the supporting document 

should  be inserted in the Teammate project for  r~ferencing . In  the event the  electronic  copy is not available and/or too  large  of a  file  for the project, the report  should  reference the hard copy that  will  be  filed  in an audit binder. Further, the Executive Summary should be referenced to the appropriate sections in the body of the report to ensure that the content is the same. Any statements in the Executive Summary that are not  reflected  in the body of the report, or considered a  conclusion  of the auditor, the auditor must identify a WP reference to support the statement. -----( 7 )t------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 14 

Section  14-80:  Required Forms and  Checklists 

During  OIG  audits and  OIG  contract audits, there are forms and checklists that become a part of the project workpapers that are required to provide  quality  control  assurance over the engagement. These documents  should  be retained in the audit  files  to document that the engagement was conducted in accordance with  GAGAS. 

The forms and  checklists  are as  follows: 

Contract Audit 

Independence  Certification  (See  attachment #1) 

OIG  Contractor  Security  Standards  (See  attachment #4) 

Organizational  Conflict  of  Interest  Statement  (See  attachment #3) Non-Disclosure Form  (See  attachment #6} 

Quality  Assurance  Checklist  (See  attachment #2 )

OIG  Audit 

Independence  Certification  (See  attachment #1) 

Quality  Assurance  Checklist  (See  attachment #2 )

Section  14-90:  Independent  Reference The  OIG  has a Memorandum of Understanding  (MOU)  with another agency's  Office  of  Inspector 

General  who has agreed to perform independent referencing for audit work performed by the 

OIG.  The independent referencer's review provides a verification of the accuracy of the draft report, the workpaper documentation, and supporting evidence. The independent referencer  typically  receives an electronic copy of the indexed draft report with the associated  workpapers  in Teammate to verify whether the facts, figures, and statements are 

all  accurately documented in the draft report in accordance with the  OIG's  indexing  policy, 

section 14-70. The independent referencer's comments are inserted in an  Independent 

Referencer Comment  Sheet  (See  Attachment #8). Any responses, adjustments, or  clarifications 

needed from the auditor, are added to the sheet in the appropriate  column.  The independent referencer  will  clear  the comment by inserting their  initials  and the date the comment was 

cleared.  In  the event that the auditor disagrees with the referencer's comment (s) and/or the referencer does not agree that the aud itor's response is sufficient to address the comments, the Depu ty  IG  or  IG  will  provide the  final  decision regarding how the comment  will  be  cleared. 

Further, once  all  comments have  been  cleared,  the referencer must sign and date t he comment sheet to certify that they have independently referenced the draft report. The independent reference review must be  completed  before the issuance of the  final  report. 

Section  14-100:  Data  Controls  and Safeguards Workpaper documentation and supporting evidence are the property of the  OIG.  Therefore, audit staff  will  exercise reasonable care and maintain adequate safeguards over the audit doc umentation  files  at  all  times, during and after the engagement.  Such  precautions are necessary to prevent the improper use of confidential infonn at ion by unauthoriz ed  personnel. 

Special  safeguards  should  be used for the storage and protection of confidential information; Pr ivacy Act information; and other  particularly  sensitive information, such as proprietary data, 

____ _..(  8 )1--- ---FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 14 

plans  for future operations, and information obtained or  developed  to support investigations of fraud or  special  Congressional  requests. To protect the confidentiality of the information, workpaper documentation is not to be  left 

unattended or accessible to unauthorized  personnel.  Audit documentation files are to be protected from scrutiny, theft, tampering, damage , or loss at  all  times. This protection may require the use of  file  cabinets, desk drawers, or briefcases with secure  locks. 

Under  the Privacy Act, confidential information, such as personal id entifiers (i.e., names and 

social  security numbers) are protected from  di sc losure.  The  Privacy  Act prov ides penalti es for any  federal  emp loy ee , who divulges personal info rmat ion , unless that information is exempt from the Act. The auditor  should  take the necessary measures to avoid receiving  personally 

identifiable  information  (Pll)  that is not necessary for audit testing for  all  workpapers.  If  the  Pll  is necessary to conduct audit testing, the  OIG  auditor should  follow  the guidelines documented in this section to safeguard the  Pll.  If  the auditor is a contractor for the  OIG,  in addition to the procedures  outlined  in this section, the contractor must read and complete the  FEC  O/G 

Contractor Security Standards Form  (See  attachment #4) prior to the start of  fieldwork.  Further, the contractor must  also  complete  the FEC  OIG  Contractor Engagement Completion Checklist 

(See  attachment #5) at the  conclusion  of the audit if any  non-FEC  equipment  (laptop,  flash 

drives, etc.) are used during t he audit to verify that  all  equipment has been sanitized to remove 

all  FEC  data. Access to workpaper documentation by outside parties, either during or after the audit,  will  be determined by the  Counsel  to the  IG,  in coordination with the Deputy  IG  on a case-by-case basis.  In  some instances, it may be necessary to provide copies of the audit documentation to program officials, so that they may respond to the findings and recommendations or  implement 

corrective actions.  In  other instances, outside parties may request access to the workpaper documentation through the Freedom of  Information  Act  (FOIA).  The  Counsel  to the  IG  is 

responsible  for processing the  FO IA  requests and  releasing  confidential  information under the 

Privacy  Act. 

Section  14-110:  Records Retention At the  completion  of the audit, the  OIG  will  finalize the TeamMate project  file  and export the file to the  OIG  server. The audit  file  will  then be  loaded  to a disc and stored in an audit binder in the 

OIG  file  room. Audit  files  are retained for a minimum of 5 years, after the end of the  fiscal  year in which the report was issued. Thereafter, the workpaper documentation may be transferred to the  Federal  Records  Center  for storage, and marked for destruction 10 years after the  fiscal 

year in which the engage m ent was considered  closed. 

Workpaper documentation  should  be stored in a cool and dry environment. Heat and humidity may  result  in a  loss  of information stored on tapes, diskettes, or other media. When workpaper documentation is exported and stored on diskettes, they should be write-protected and  labeled 

to identify the  OIG  assignment number, project  title,  description of data, and retention schedule using the Cover  Sheet  for Exported TeamMate Audit Files. (See attachment #7) For critical data , back-up copies of the tapes, diskettes, or other media  should  be reproduced and stored in a separate  location. 

-----( 9 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Sampling  and Estimation  Plans  and Techniques: 

15-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Sampling  Plans and Estimation Plans 

40  Probe  Sampling 

50  Sample  Sizes 

60  Statistical  Reporting and Documentation 

70  Reporting Generalizations 

80  Required Audit Documentation 

90  Sampling  Definitions 

100  Stratification for Statistical Sampling 

110  Post- Stratification 

120  Multi-Stage  Sampling 

130  Sampling  and Estimation  Plans  Methods and Formats 

140  Statistical  Sampling  Plans 150 No n-Statistical  Sampling  Plans 

160  Estimation  Plans 

EXHIBIT  15-A:  SAMPLING  PLANS 

EXHIBIT  15 -B:  ESTIMATION  PLANS 

Section  15-00:  Purpose 

# IChapter  15 

This chapter  establishes  the  OIG's  policies on  calculating  and reporting estimates based on (1) 

statistical  samples,  (2) non-statistical  samples,  and (3) analyses of existing information that does not  involve  OIG  sampling  procedure(s). This policy applies to  all  audits, attestation engagements, and  evaluations,  for which  OIG  issues a report. 

Section  15-10:  Audit  Standards 

For  financial  audits,  relevant  guidance for the use of  sampling  techniques by auditors is contained in the Government Accountability  Office's  (GAO's)/President's  Council  on  Integri ty 

and Efficiency's  (PCIE's)  Financial Aud it Manual. 1 For performance audits and attestation engagements,  relevant  guidance for the use of sampling techniques by auditors is contained in 

Generally  Accepted Government Auditing Standards  (GAGAS)  and  GAO 's  Using Statistical Sampling. 2 

> 1

http://www. gao .gov/special.pubs/gaopcie/ 2 http://archive.gao. gov /t2pbat6/146859. pdf -----( 1 )t------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version : July  2016  IChapter 15 

These  publications  discuss the use of  statistical  sampling  techniques to satisfy the need to obtain sufficient, competent, and  relevant  evidence, as  well  as the requirements for reporting estimation methods and  results. 

Section  15-20:  Policy 

This  policy  addresses  OIG's  procedures used in  samp li ng , and the estimates and  conclusions 

that are either derived from  samp li ng  or from  calculations  that do not  involve  sampling,  such as the  analysis  of existing information or data. The auditor-in-charge  (AIC)  shall  consult with a statistician and/or an auditor trained in stati st ical  sampling  whenever the  AIC  decides a 

statistical  sample  is necessary to achieve the objective(s) of the audit. 

Section  15-30:  Sampling  Plans  and Estimation  Plans 

An approved sampling  plan  (statistical}  is required for audits; an approved  plan  for non-statistical  sampling  or an approved estimati on  plan  is recommended , but not requ i red for aud its . 

Sampling  plans  are approved by the Deputy  Inspector  General  (DIG)  or  IG,  as soon as  possible. 

A sampling  plan  may be required, even if the  possibility  of finding zero errors in a  sample  will 

lead  to a conclusion  that the segment under examination has no  reportable  condition. 

If  a non-statistical sample is the source of the evidence, then a non-statistical  sampling  plan  is required, even though  only  the  sample  results  are reported without the corresponding projections made to the  population.  The purpose of this  plan  is to document the  DIG's  or  IG's 

agreement that a  statistical  sample  will  not be needed to provide sufficient, competent evidence. For  example,  a decision to restrict the scope to  all  transactions above a certain  dollar  threshold 

should  be contained in a non-statistical  sampl ing  plan.  A statistical  sample  is not a requirement for a  financial  statement aud it. There are exceptions to requiring a  non-statistical  samp li ng  plan.  For  example,  a sampling  plan is not needed if a few  select  items are reviewed to gain an understanding of an  internal  controls 

system.  Similarly,  checking arithmetic  calculations  or tracing  journal  entries into  ledger 

accounts may be done on a non-statistical basis, as  long  as no  overall  opinion is inferred from the  sample  results.  Exceptions to a non-statistical  sampling  plan are based  primarily  on the auditor's judgment, in  consultation  with the  DIG  or  IG .

The auditor-in-charge conducting an audit  shou ld  meet with the  DIG  or  IG,  before the survey phase, to discuss  sampling  or estimation  plans.  If  sampling  is needed to test  internal  controls,  a

sampling  plan  for estimating the rates of occurrence is prepared, once key management 

controls  have been identified. The  plan  is approved by the  DIG  or  IG  during the survey phase. The  DIG  or  IG  will  approve a Sampling Plan (Audit  Manual,  Chapter  15,  Exhibit 15-A) or 

Estimation Plan (Audit  Manual,  Chapter 15, Exhibit 15-B), when estimating  sampling  variables (e.g.,  dollar  effects of some condition) are used. The  approval  certifies that the estimation methodology is  technically  sound and that the plan  should  result  in sufficient evidence to meet the audit objectives. FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  ICha pt er 15 

Electronic  generated signatures may be used as a substitute for the manual approval signatures.  Approval  by  all  parties  will  be obtained before testing the  sample  items. Section  15-40:  Probe  Sampling 

For statistical  samples,  during the survey phase, the audit team may take an initial probe 

sample  to estimate the mean, standard deviation, or rate of occurrence of error, in order to determine the appropriate sample size for a variable or attribute sample. A probe sample is also  useful  in determining whether additional substantive sampling is necessary. The  sampling 

plan format is used to document and obtain  approval  of the probe  sample.  By using the 

sampling  plan  format, a modification based on the  results  of the probe  sample  can be submitted for  approval.  A probe sample of 45 items for  financial  risk assessments and  50  items for other probe sampling(s) is  generally  recommended. 

Section  15-50:  Sample  Sizes 

After  establishing  the objective of an audit test, defining the universe (population), and determining the sampling unit, an adequate  sample  size is then determined to ensure the audit objective is met.  Statistical  sampling techniques provide a method, in which appropriate  sample 

sizes can be estimated by applying  statistical  sampling formulas or  tables. 

To  establish  the proper  sample  size, consider the  following  factors: 

• The  population  size the sample  will  be drawn from . 

• The desired  sample  precision. This is a determination of the  close  precision necessary to estimate the characteristic being tested (as stated within the plus or minus margin of aspecified percentage). 

• The desired  level  of confidence. This  relates  to the probability or assurance that the projected  sample  findings  will  actually  fall  within the required  sample  precision. 

• The estimated sample standard deviation or probability of the occurrence of an error within the population. 

OIG's  policy  is to report findings at a confidence level of  90  percent or higher.  In  consultation 

with the  DIG  or  IG,  the audit team determines an appropriate  level  of precision necessary to meet the audit objective. Section  15-60:  Statistical  Reporting and Documentation The following documentation may be  included  in the audit report: 

• The sample design, the reason for the  selection  of the design, and the method of estimation to apply. 

• The relationship between the target  population  and the  sampled  data. 

• The time periods covered by the  sampled  data. 

-------(  3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 15 

• Simple random samples: contains the population size,  sample  size, number of errors, and dollar  value  of errors. When  available,  include  the dollar value of the population and the  dollar  value of the sample. 

• Stratified samples: contains the population size, sample size, description of each stratum, stratum population size, stratum sample size, number of errors per stratum, and 

dollar  value  of errors per stratum. When available, include the  dollar  value  of the population per stratum and the  dollar  value of the  sample  per stratum. 

• Multi-stage samples: contains the description of stages, number of primary units, number of transactions or units in population for each stage, number of transactions or units in population selected at each stage, number of errors, and  dollar  value of errors. When  available,  include the  dollar  value  of the transactions and the  dollar  value  of the population reviewed. 

• Other  sample  designs:  should  contain sufficient detail, so that the methodology selected and applied can be reviewed and understood. 

If  a detailed explanation of the methodology is needed, include it as an appendix to the report. 

It  may be appropriate to describe, in the body of the report, the details of the sample design, if the information is integral to the finding. For example, if the sample included evidence that helped identify the cause of a finding or included other relevant evidence, the description of the sample results, related to the finding,  should  be explained in more  detail  in the body of the report. When the description of the  sample  design does not enhance the persuasiveness of a finding, but is necessary to explain how the data were accumulated and analyzed, it is appropriate to use it as an appendix.  In  some instances, a report may need a detailed description in both the body and the appendix of the report. 

Section  15-70:  Reporting Generalizations When reporting estimates, the  following  conventions are  followed: 

• Rounding, if used, is  always  conducted against one or two decimal positions, and the  actual 

figure  should  be stated in the body of the report or the appendix. 

• When reporting a rounded number to the higher  limit,  it must be preceded with the terms 

"about"  or "approximately." A phrase such as  "under  $3.7  million"  should  not be used. 

• When reporting a rounded number to the  lower  limit,  it must be preceded with the term  "at 

least."  A phrase such as "over $3.7  million"  should  not be used. 

• When reporting averages other than the point estimate, state the type of average used (median, mean, or mode), the number of items averaged, and the lowest and highest values included in the  calculation. 

Section 15-80: Required Audit Documentation The auditors should  include  the random numbers used to  select  the  sample  and their source in the audit documentation.  Also  include the details of  sample  selection, handling of missing items, and use of replacement items (if approved) in the audit documentation. The audit documentation should include the computer output, copies of the data  files  processed by the computer programs, and other supporting  materials. 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  IChapter  15 

Section  15-90:  Sampling  Definitions 

Sampling  is the process of examin in g or measuring a  sma ll er  group of items,  called  a sample,  to make es timates about a  lar ger  group of items, called a universe or  population.  There are two types of  sampling:  statistical  and  non-statistical. 

Statistical sampling or probability sampling: The  selection  of a sample  by a method based on the theory of  probability.  At any stage in  selecting  the  sample  units, the  probability  of  selecting 

any set of  sample  units must be known. However, the  probability  of  selection  does not have to be  equal.  Statistical  sampling  is the  only  general  method known that can measure the precision of an estimate. This chapter discusses  statistical  sampling  and estimates, stratified  statistical 

sampling,  multi-stage  sampling,  and post-stratified statistical  sampling. 

Non-statistical sampling or judgmental sampling: The selection of a sample  by a method not based on the theory of  probability. 

Section  15-100:  Stratification for  Statistical  Sampling 

One  method commonly used to improve  sampling  efficiency is to stratify the  population  (i.e. separate it into  sub-populations  or stratum). The  poss ibil it ies  of stratification should be explored, when choosing an appropriate  sampling  plan. 

There are various methods for allocating sample items among the st rata, including proportional and  optimal  allocation.  The  sample  sizes for the strata do not have to be identical or  multipl es 

of each other. 

Section  15-110:  Post Stratification An auditor may decide to stratify the  sample  items after  selecting  an unrestricted random sample. This is referred to as post-stratification.  If  a decision to use post-stratification is made, a modification to the  sample  plan  will  be prepared and approved. 

Section  15-120:  Multi-Stage  Sampling 

Multi-stage  sampling  can reduce the expense of reviewing transactions by reducing the number of  locations  that are to be visited by the auditors.  Multi-stage  sampling  involves  breaking the 

population  into subgroups  called  primary  sampling  units.  In  the first stage of the  sample  design, a random  sample  is taken of the primary  samp li ng  un its.  In  subsequent stages, random sub-samples of the preceding  samples  are  selected. 

When using  multi-stage  sampling  designs, the number of stages  should  be as few as  possible. 

Variability  among sampling units can greatly affect the precision of  multi-stage  sampling estimates.  Multi-stage  sampling  should  only  be used  if  the  resulting  precision  will  be  acceptable 

and no other  sampling  technique is  possible  or  practica l.  Multi-stage  sampling  should  be avoided, if possible, in audits for monetary recovery.  If  precision is poor, the recommended monetary recovery  could  be  small.   

> -----( 5)-----

FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016  IChapter 15 

Section 15-130:  Sampling  and Estimation  Plans  Methods and Formats The  sampling  and estimation  plans  both summarize a team 's  selected  methodology  related  to 

sampling  or estimati on . The  comp letion  of the format of the  samp ling  plan  depends on whether 

sampling  or estimati on is used.  Stati st ical  sampling  depends on the  principle  of random 

selection.  By  selecting  a sample  randomly,  personal  bias and subjective considerations are 

eliminated  from the  selection  process. 

Section  15-140:  Statistical  Sampling  Plans 

The format for the  statistical  sampling  plan  document is provided in the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 15, Exhibit 15-A. The key  elements  to be  included  in the  sampling  plan  are the  following. 

• Audit Objectives: The auditors describe the specific audit objective(s) to be achieved and referenced to the audit program, and  also  discuss the basis for determining the need for 

sampling  to meet the audit objective(s). 

• Population: The  population  is the group about which information is desired. There can be two  populations:  the target  population  and the test  population.  Often  the target and test 

populations  are the same. However, they may be different. For  example,  when we take a 

sample  from a subset of a large  master  file ,  the master  fi le  is the target  population,  wh i le  the subset (1 percent, 5 percent, etc .,) is the test  popu lation. 

• Sampling Frame: The  sampling  frame is the  totality  of the  sampling  units, from which the 

sample  will  be  selected.  The auditors determine and document whether the  population  of interest differs from the  sampling  frame  and,  if  so,  document what effect it  will  have on the 

conclusions  drawn from the testing. 

One  concern is when the  sampling  frame does not  reconcile  with the audit objective.  In 

these situations, a certain percentage of the  sampling  units  will  not meet the audit objective. When this happens, the undesired units cannot be  replaced.  Consequently,  any  resulting 

projection(s)  will  be understated, as the undesired units must be treated as correct for 

sample  projection purposes. This situation can occur when one of the master  files  does not contain  all  the necessary identifying characteristics, and the auditor cannot  tell  whether a 

selection  will  meet the scope,  until  other information is examined. 

• Sampling Unit: A sampling  unit is a group of any of the designated  elements  that comprise the  population  of interest. 

• Background Information: The auditor can either summarize the background section of the audit program or reference the attached workpapers contain ing this information. 

• Survey  Information: The auditors describe informati on gathered during the survey that is 

rel evant  to the  sample.  This  includes  the expected rate of occurrence, average error amount, standard deviation, extent of efforts required to  develop  and process  sample  cases, basis for stratification, and  results  of  preliminary  samples. 

-----( 6 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  15 

It  is important to  select  the proper  sampling  unit relative to the objectives of the audit, so that the information from the  initial  sampling  probe can be used in  developing  the  sampling  plan 

modification. 

• Description of Sample Design: The auditors identify the type of  sampling  design to be used. The most common designs are  simple  random  sampling,  stratified  sampling,  and  multi-stage 

sampling.  Details  about the strata, stages, and  clusters  are not required to obtain  initial 

approval.  However, once  details  about these items are obtained, a  sampling  plan 

modification is prepared to document these data for  approval. 

• Sample  Size:  The  sample  si ze is discussed. The  actual  samp le size is not needed for 

approval  of the  initial  sampling  plan;  however, once  details  are sufficient to quantify the desired  sample  size, a modification of the  sampling  plan  should  be submitted for  approval, 

before the  selection  of the  sample. 

• Source of Random Numbers and  Sample  Selection: The source for the random numbers used to  select  sample  items  will  be shown in the  sampling  plan.  The random numbers used for selecting the  sample  items must be documented. The method for  selecting  the  sample 

items  wil l  also  be  explained. 

• Review Time per  Sampling  Unit: This is the estimated time required to review a  sampled 

unit chosen from the  population. 

• Defining Characteristics to be Measured by the Sample: The purpose of a sample is to determine the extent of a characteristic, or combination of characteristics, existing in a given 

population.  Characteristics used for testing each  sample  item  will  be identified in the sampling  plan.  Th is section  will  also  include the  rules  of decision in the  plan  applied  to determine whether a  sample  item partially or entirely meets the criteria for having the desired characteristic( s ). For example, a  sample  may be taken to estimate the number (X) and value in  dollars  (Y)  of overpayments caused by  duplicate  payments. The characteristics under consideration are the conditions that must exist for a sample item to be classified as a  duplicate  payment and a description of the  sampling  technique used to measure the amount of the duplicate payments for the scope. 

• Discussion of the Treatment of Missing  Sample  Items:  At t im es,  sample  items cannot be 

located.  How  "missing  sample  items"  are handled depends on the audit objective and the characteristics of the sample items being  analyzed.  The  sampling  plan  will  inclu de  adiscussion of how the  "missing  sample  items"  will  be  handled  and the corresponding rationale. Depending on the  situation,  substituting a  replacement  item may or may not be 

allowable;  audit steps  developed  to ensure that the "missing  item"  does not occur must be properly  followed. 

• Estimation Methodology: The audit objective and the  sample  design influence the selection of the sampling methodology and the proper  calculation  of estimates.  Sampling  for attributes is used to esti mate the rate or proport io n of a characteristic, or group of characteristics , in a population.  Variable  sampling is used to estimate quantitative characteristics,  usually  dollar  amounts, in a  population.       

> -----( 7)-----FEC OIG Audit Manual Version : July 2016

# IChapter 15 A variable  amount, as  we ll  as the  total  number of items having the same characteristic, can be es ti mated using one  sample  set. The same  sample  set m ay be used to estimate both proportions and  variables,  if the size of the audit  population  of interest is known and the 

sample  has been  se lected  from a  samp li ng  frame that  accurately  represents the audit 

population  of i nte rest. The  plan  must  include  a description of the estimat es to be reported, the  rationale  for using the  sampling  methodology,  and the proper  calcul at ion  of the estimates. 

• O ther Evidence:  Although  sample  results  should  stand on their own in terms of 

completeness  and  validity,  they may be combined with other evidence to arrive at specific audit  conclusions.  The auditor must indicate and identify the other  substantial  or corroborating evidence that  will  be  developed  to be combined with the sample  results. 

• Description of How the Results are Reported: The auditors  should  be  able  to envision how the  results  of the  sample  testing are to be used and reported. For each characteristic being measured, the auditors  will  provide an  example  of how the results  will  be reported. For 

example,  'We estimate that X transactions totaling  $Y  were  duplicated."  The example must describe  all  estimates derived by the sample. There  should  be an entry in the 

"Characteristics  to be  Measured"  section of the  plan  for every estimate  listed. 

Section  15-150:  Non-Statistical  Sampling  Plans 

Non-statistical  sampling  involv es  the auditor's ju dgment in the  se lection  of  sample  items and removes the process of random  selection  from the  sampling  plan.  Statistical  sampling  methods are  usually  preferred, because they are more  likely  to result in obtaining sufficien t, compete nt ev idence. 

Under  certain conditions, it may be appropriate to use  non-statistical  sampling.  Additional substantiating information, besides testing transactions, is important to  help  support findings. For audits  involving  non-statistical  sampling,  the  additional  information  ·may  be more  complex 

and the  conclusions  may be somewhat  less  persuasive. The format for the  non-statistical  sampling  plan is the same as for a statistical  sampling  plan. 

See  Exhibit 13-A.  Usually  random numbers are not used for  non-statistical  samples.  Adescription of the non-statistical design and the method for  selecting  the  sample  items must be provided. 

Section  15-160: Estimation  Plans 

Depending on the objectives of the audit, it may be appropriate to  develop  estimates using ex isting in formation or da ta other than the aud it sampling  results .  See  the  OIG  po li cy  in the A udit  Manual,  Chapter 17, C on si der i ng the Wo rk of  Ot hers. 

If  estimates are  calculated  using data or information other than the audit  sampling  results,  an estimation  plan  is required. The format for the estimation  plan,  to be used when auditors do not perform any standard  samp li ng  techniques/methods, is provided in the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 15, Exhibit 15-B. The key  elements  to be  included  in the estimation  plan  are: 

------(  8 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  15 

• Audit Objectives: Describe the audit objective(s) to be achieved. 

• Description of Estimates to be Calculated: Give a brief narrative of each estimate to be calculated. 

• Estimation Methodology:  Briefly  describe the mathematics that  will  be used in determining the estimate. 

• Source of Data: State the source of data to be used in the estimation. 

• Validation of Data Sources:  Briefly  describe the data validation work performed by the auditors. Reports generated by  nationally  known organizations, such as the Bureau of the Census, can be accepted at face value. Reports generated by the auditee may require some  additional  validation work by the auditors. The impact of the estimate reported should dictate the extent of the  validation.  An estimate for background purposes  will  require  less  validation  effort than an estimate used to make a recommendation. 

• Reasons for  Using  Data: Describe why the estimate is needed and why  statistical  sampling 

is not used to  develop  the estimate. 

-----( 9 )t------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  15 

EXHIBIT  15-A:  SAMPLING  PLANS 

SAMPLE  PLANNING  DOCUMENT  FOR  AUDIT  NUMBER: -----

1. Audit Objectives: 2. Population: 3.  Sampling  Frame: 4.  Sample  Unit: 

5. Background Information: 6.  Survey  Information: 

Probe  sample  size: Estimated error rate: Estimated error amount: Estimated standard deviation: 7.  Sample  Design: 8.  Sample  Size: 

9.  Source  of Random Numbers: 

10 . Method of  Selecting  Sample  Items: 

11 . Review Time per  Sampling  Unit: 

12 . Characteristics to be Measured: 13 . Treatment of Missing  Sample  Items: 14. Estimation Methodology: 15.  Other  Evidence: 16. Description of How the  Results  are to be Reported: Submitted by Approved by FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  IChapter  15 

EXHIBIT  158:  ESTIMATION  PLANS 

ESTIMATE  PLANNING  DOCUMENT  FOR  AUDIT  NUMBER:  ____ _

1. Audit Objectives: 2. Description of Estimates to be  Calculated: 

3. Estimation  Methodology: 

4.  Sources  of Data: 5.  Validation  of Data Sources: 6. Reasons for  Using  Data: 

Note: This form  should  be used when estimates are calculated using data and information other than the audit  sampling  results. Submitted by Approved by FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Considering the Work of Others: 

16-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Responsibilities 

40  Assessing the Work of Others 

50  Assessing Competency 

60  Assessing Objectivity 

70  Assessing the Effects of the Work of  Others 

80  Evaluating  and Testing the Work of  Others 

90  Reporting 

Section  16-00:  Purpose 

# IChapter 16 

Th is chapter sets forth the  FEC  OIG 's  policies  and procedures for re ly ing on the work of other 

federal  auditors, external auditors,  internal  auditors, and non-auditors (consultants, experts, specialists, etc.). when conducting audits and attestation engagements of federal organizations, programs, operations, activities, and functions. Cooperation of efforts or the  reliance  on the work of others in audits of common interest can reduce the amount of audit and attestation planning and  fieldwork  and avoid duplication of efforts. This chapter is not intended to provide guidance for relying on the work performed by independent  public  accountants under contract with  OIG. 

Section  16-10:  Standards The  GAGAS,  December  2011,  Revision, sections, 6.11 c, 6.22, 6.41, 6.42, 6.46, provides guidance for relying on the work of others. 1

Section  16-20:  Policy 

OIG  auditors make maximum use of the  results  of  financial  and performance audits of agency programs performed by other auditors and  evaluators.  OIG  auditors  will  evaluate the sufficiency,  completeness ,  relevance ,  and  validity  of others' evidence by reviewing the aud it program, audit documentation, and report, and performing testing procedures when necessary that provi de suffici ent basis for that  reliance.  In  relying  on the work of others,  OIG  auditors  will 

obtain ev idence concerning the other auditors' competency, qualifications, and independence. 1 http://www.gao.gov/govaud/d07162g.pdf 

# ------11(  1 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016  IChapter 16 

Section  16-30:  Responsibilities Auditors are responsible for determining whether other entities have performed work that could be used to assist  OIG  in  accomplishing  the engagement objective(s). These entities  include 

other federal auditors,  external  auditors, other  internal  or program auditors, and non-auditors, who are considered experts in their  professional  field. Before initiating new audit/attestation work, subject to  applicable  laws  and  regulations,  the  OIG 

should  contact organizations that may have performed the related work and request information on any  recently  completed, ongoing, or planned work that  relates  to the engagement objective(s) of the new audiUattestation work. The  AICPA  Auditing Standards Board issued the Statement on Auditing  Standard  (SAS)  No. 65, 

"The  Auditor's Consideration of the Internal Audit Function in an Audit of Financial  Statements." 2

This  publication  provides guidance in determining the relevance of the  internal  auditors' activities to the independent audit, and the extent to which the work of internal auditors may affect the independent auditor's procedures.  Under  SAS  No. 65, the work of  internal  auditors may be  relevant  to the independent auditor's responsibility to understand internal  controls, 

assess risk, and perform substantive tests. 

In  determining whether the work of the  internal  auditors can be  relied  upon, five steps must be taken as  follows:  (1) understanding the  internal  audit function; (2)  evaluating  the  internal 

auditors' competency, independence, and objectivity; (3) considering the extent of the effects of 

internal  auditors' work on  OIG's  overall  audit procedures; (4) considering the effects of the 

internal  auditors' work on  OIG's  specific audit procedures; and (5)  evaluating  and testing any work in  relation  to the audit objectives. 

Section  16-40:  Assessing the Work of  Others 

The  following  guidance is  available  for use in assessing the work of others. When it is appropriate to assess the work of others, then the form in the Audit  Manual,  Chapter 17, Exhibit 17-A, Determination of Other Audit/Attestation Coverage, must be completed and maintained in the audit documentation  file. 

Section  16-50:  Assessing Competency Auditors  will  assess the competence of the auditors/specialists by obtaining information about their education, audit experience, professional certification, and continuing education requirements. 

Additional  insight into the management practices of the audit organization can be obtained by reviewing the quality of audit programs, documentation, and reports; the assignment of  internal 

auditors to specific reviews; and the supervision and review of the audit activities.  Finally, 

auditors who  plan  to  rely  on another audit organization's work  will  request a copy of the most recent peer review report for that organization. 2 http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SAS.aspx#SAS62 -----(  2 )1-------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 16 

The factors and requ irements  related  to the educati on , work ex per ience,  professional 

certification , and continu ing education for  Informati on  Technolo gy  (IT)  auditors may deviate 

slightly  from those for  non·IT  auditors. The re vi ew of  IT  audit  policy,  procedures, practices, programs, documentati on , reports, as  well  as the competency of the  IT  auditors, ma y be a new territory for  OIG  auditors to experience and chart. 

Section  16-60: Assessi ng Objectivity 

In  assessing objectivity, auditors wi  11  be concerned with the organization  al  status of the audit function and the proper presence of organizational  policies  that promotes objectivity on the part of the auditor.  In  terms of  organizational  status, auditors  should  consider whether the head of the audit function  properly  reports to an officer of sufficient stature to support organizational objectivity and independence (separation of duties) and whether the head of the audit function has direct  regular  access to the Board of Directors, entity head, or an  external  body. Work produced by  external  auditors or evaluators from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) can be considered independent and objective. Consideration must  also  be given to  organizational  policies that promote objectivity. The auditor 

should  determine the presence of any person or group  responsible  for the oversight of 

employment  decisions regard ing the position of the head of the aud it functi on . The auditor 

should  also  determine if the agency's  policies  could  imprope rl y inhibit the aud it or's objectivity and, thus , impact his performance on the job. For instance, auditors need to determine whether any  material  weaknesses were improperly omitted fro m a  fi nal  report after be i ng presented in a draft report. 

Finally,  auditors should consider the  policy  and procedures  followed  by the auditors in t he attempt to (1) gain an understanding of the  internal  control  structure of the entity; (2) assess the risk of  mate ri al  misstatement at both the  f inancial  statements  level  and the accounts  balance 

level;  and (3)  evaluate  the substantive tests performed by the auditors. 

Section  16-70: Assessing the Effects of the Work of Others Auditors  will  consider the extent of the effects of the work of others on  OIG  procedures by: 

• reviewing the scope of the systems being audited or attested and listing the system, in which the financial statements  line  item is material and the risk of error is high. Where such cases exist, determining the extent of the reliance on the work of others, if at  all; 

• determining whether audit risk can be reduced to an  acceptable  leve l,  so that direct testing is not necessary; 

• revi ew ing the work of others to determine whether the extent of  OIG's  substantive testing 

should  be adjusted; and 

• de termining whether any work of others may be utilized, as part of  OIG's  rev iew ,

including  audit programs,  SAS  No . 65 reviews, identific at ion and assessment of  critical 

internal  controls  points, and required reports. 

In  cases where material  financial  statements amounts are  involved  and the risks of misstatement are high or the related audit evidence is subjective, auditors cannot  rely  on the 

-----( 3 )1--------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July 2016  IChapter 16 

work of auditors  alone  to reduce audit risk to an  acceptable  level  or to  eliminate  the necessity of 

additional  direct testing .  In  cases where  less  material  financial  statements amounts are 

involved  and the risks of  material  misstatement are  low  or the  related  audit evidence is objective, aud itors may determine that audit risk can be reduced to an  acceptable  level  by using the auditors' work, thus  eliminating  the need to perform  additional  direct testing. 

Section  16-80:  Evaluating  and Testing the Work of  Others 

If  the work of others is determined to be  relevant,  valid,  and objective, then the auditors  will 

evaluate  its quality and effectiveness. The testing and evaluation may  involve  an examination of the same  internal  controls,  transactions, or  balances  that were examined by the other auditors to determine the appropriateness of the findings.  Alternatively,  the auditors may examine  internal  controls,  transactions, or  balances  similar  to those examined by the other auditors and compare the  results. 

Auditors  will  evaluate  and test the effectiveness of the auditors' work and consider it in  relation 

to  OIG's  review by determining whether the: 

• scope of the work is appropriate; 

• audit program is adequate and recommends any  add itional  steps, as necessary; 

• conclusions  reached are appropriate and  rational; 

• report  results  are consistent with the  results  of the work performed; and 

• aud it documentation  properly  documents the work performed and properly contains evidence of supervisory review. 

Section  16-90:  Reporting When auditors decide to assume  responsibility  for the work of other auditors, they are not to refer to the other auditors' work in their audit work  results.  However, if auditors decide not to assume responsibility, the scope section of the report  should  indicate the division of responsibility between that portion of the work conducted by  OIG  and that portion conducted by the others. Refer to  SAS  No. 64, Section 543,  "Part  of Audit Performed by Other  Independent 

Auditors." 3

In  reporting the  results  of  single  audits, auditors  should  rely  entirely  on the  internal  controls and 

compliance  work performed by independent  external  auditors and the reviews performed by cognizant other  federal  agencies.  See  the Aud it  Manual,  Chapter 17, Exhibit 17-A. Furthermore,  SAS  No. 64 provides guidance for  relying  on the work of  external  auditors, when it is  impractical  to review the other auditors' work.  

> 3

http://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/Pages/SAS.aspx#SAS62 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Reporting Audit  Results: 

17-00  Purpose 

1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Types of Reports 

40  Seven-Day Letter 

50  Terminated/ Deferred Audits 

60  Required Attributes for Reports 

70  Report Format 

80  Standardized Report Content 

90  Editorial  Guidance 

100  Report  Transmittal 

110  Final  Report Processing 

120  Report Restrictions 

Section  17-00:  Purpose 

# IChapter  17 This chapter sets forth the  OIG's  policies  and procedures for reporting the  results  of audits. A

general  framework of reporting that  includes  the  essential  elements  and  guidelines  for the proper development of reports is described in this chapter. 

Section  17-10:  Standards The  GAGAS  provides the  overall  guidance on the reporting standards, requirements, and process for  all  audits. 

Section 17 -20:  Policy 

In  general,  OIG  audit reports  will  fully  comply  with  GAGAS.  In  the event a report is not in 

full  compliance  with  GAGAS,  the scope section of the report  will  include  a statement of nonconformity. 

Section  17-30:  Types of Reports 

OIG  produces engagement (audit, review, or evaluation) reports,  Congressional  reports, and memoranda. Engagement reports are  generally  addressed to the appropriate agency  officials 

and contain the  conclusive  results of a financial or performance audit. 

-------(  1 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 17 

Financial audits' primary purpose: 

To provide an opinion about whether an entity's financial statements are presented fairly in all material respects in conformity with an applicable financial reporting framework. Reporting on 

financial  audits performed in accordance with  GAGAS  also  includes reporting on  internal  control 

over  financial  reporting and on  compliance  with provisions of  laws,  regulations,  contracts, and grant agreements that have a  material  effect on the  financial  statements. 

(GAGAS,  Chapter 2207.(a)) Performance audits are defined: 

Audits that provide findings or conclusions based on an evaluation of sufficient, appropriate evidence against criteria.. Performance audits provide objective analysis to assist management and those charged with governance and oversight in using the information to improve program performance and operations, reduce costs, facilitate decision making by parties with responsibility to oversee or initiate corrective action, and contribute to public accountability. The term  "program"  is used in  GAGAS  to include government entities, organizations, programs, activities, and functions. (GAGAS, Chapter  2.10) 

Performance audits report: 

• Internal  control weaknesses. 

• Program economy, effectiveness, and efficiency. 

• Issues  of noncompliance to  established  criteria. 

• Prospective  analyses  of future events. 

Congressional reports are written for members of Congress and provide Congress with  critical 

objective information  related  to FEC programs. These reports include the  results  of financial audits, performance audits, or inspection/review engagements. 

Memoranda are written on an ad hoc basis to address  critical  management issues, as they arise, and may be addressed to FEC, Congress, or other interested parties.  Examples  may 

include  Audit  Alert  Memos and Management Advisory Reports (White Papers). 

Section 17 -40:  Seven-Day Letter 

Under  Section 5(d} of the Inspector  General  Act of 1978, as amended, the Inspector General 

shall  issue a  "Seven-Day  Letter"  to the Commission for  particularly  serious or flagrant  problems, 

abuses. or deficiencies relating to the administration of programs and operations. The Commission  shall  transmit the report to the Congress within 7 days,  along  with a report containing any comments the Commission deems appropriate. 

Section  17-50:  Terminated/Deferred Audits When the decision is made to cease or defer an audit, before  all  the  fieldwork  is  completed,  OIG 

will  issue a written notification to the auditee. The memorandum  will  summarize the  results  of the work already completed and  explain  why the engagement was deferred or terminated. 

------( 2 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016 

Section  17-60:  Required Attributes for Reports 

Generally,  fully  developed audit findings have four  elements: 

• Condition - describes the situation as it is 

• Cr iteria - describes the situation as it  should  be , as measured 

• against prescribed standards 

• Cause - explains  the gap between the condition and criteria 

• Effect - describes the impact of the difference between the 

• condition and criteria, in which the outcomes are 

• identified and measured The table below  illustrates: 

# IChapter  17 

• the four required finding  elements,  as defined for different audits or  evaluations 

• how the mean ing of the four finding  elements,  as defined, may change, depending on the type of engagement and the objectives 

Type  of Criteria Condition  Cause  Effect 

Objective 

Retrospecti ve Situation as it Situation as Explanation of Resu  It/impact 

should be it is the gap of the between difference condition and between criteria condition and criteria Economy or  Situation  as it Situation as Explanation of Result/impact efficiency should be it is the gap of the between difference condition and between criteria condition and criteria Descriptive  NIA  Situation as  NIA  NIA 

it is Compliance Situation as it Situation as Explanation of Resu  It/impact 

should be it is the gap of the between difference 

' condition and between condition and 

-----( 3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 17 

criteria* criteria* Program Direction or size Situation as Assert Difference change/impact of intended it is or  would  program between the change have been change or  lack  situation as it 

(without the thereof as the is and what program cause  would  have intended been direction or size) Prospective Direction or size Situation as Assert no Future event analysis of intended it  will  be if no change or one  result  with or change, future change or more without event, policy, etc. occurred options  selected 

and,  also,  if  selected  as option(s) an option(s) cause of change is 

selected 

* Optional.  Depends on the objectives. 

Section 17-70: Report Format 

OIG  generally uses one standard reporting format. Contract audit reports  generally  follow  this format and  include  applicable  schedules. 

The standard reporting format  includes: 

• a transmittal  letter  signed by the  Inspector  General or Deputy  IG; 

• report cover sheet 

• a table  of contents 

• five sections of the report: executive summary; background; objectives, scope, and methodology; audit findings and recommendations; and conclusions; 

• attachements and exhibits,  including  management comments,  examples  of best practice standards,  glossary  of abbreviations and acronyms, etc. 

In  addition, another reporting format used is the memorandum, a short, condensed document. 

It  may  include  recommendations or it may just provide an opinion from an audit or review. A

table  of contents and a  glossary  of abbreviations and acronyms are  generally  not required for memorandum reporting. 

# ------1(  4 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter 17 

Section  17-80:  Standardized Report Content Any audit (review/evaluation) that is conducted in accordance with GAGAS, must contain the enti re  GAGAS  compliance  statement,  (GAS  7.30 ). Both the standard report and the memorandum m us t contain certain bas ic information,  although  the memorandum is not  a lw ays 

broken down into formatted sections. The  following  five sections comprise the body of astandard report. Executive  Su mmary 

The executive summary is a brief synopsis of the report  results.  It  should  be concise and no more than a few pages. The executive summary consists of brief sections that mirror the report as  follows: 

• Purpose: Provides the reason(s) for the audit/review and the corresponding objectives that are needed to be satisfied. This  module  addresses the subject matter of the 

audiUreview  and emphasizes the significance of the report. 

• B ackgr ound : Provides information to enhance the  overall  understanding of the subject matter under audit/review. 

• Results in Brief. Provides the  resultant  conclusions to the objectives addressed in the Purpose section.  It  is the  nucleus  of the report. 

• Principal Findings: Presents  hi gh lights  of the conclusions  outlined  in the Results in Br ief se ct ion and  lays  the foundati on for the recommendations. Objective.  Scope  and Methodology This section  should  cover in  detail  the objectives, scope, and methodology of the  audiUreview; 

the  location  where the  fieldwork  was performed; the  GAGAS  statement;  disclaimers;  limitations; and any other specific information on the audit. Background The background section  should  cover in  detail  the information needed to understand the subject matter and the purpose and  results  of the audit/review, as reported . Findings The find ings section provides the substance of the audit reports. The findings section  should 

consist of three components :  detailed  finding attributes or  elements  (ex: 7 exceptions out of  10 

noted), conclusions, and recommendations. A finding  should  be  capable  of standing  alone, 

when presented in an audit report. Appendices The appendices  will  consist of  supplemental  sections that provide support and  additional 

information for the main report. At a minimum, appendix  should  include  management -----( 5 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  17 comments; and may  also  include  glossary  of abbreviations and acronyms, exhibits, and  tables, 

etc. 

Section  17-90:  Editorial Guidance The audit staff is to ensure that the reports  reflect  proper grammar and syntax,  including  proper sentence structure and punctuation. Reports must be properly formatted and  include  the proper report sections.  Finally,  reports must be written in a  clear,  concise, and convincing manner. Discussion drafts and draft reports are to be  clearly  marked as  "Discussion  Draft"  and  "Draft 

Reports,"  respectively. 

Section  17-100:  Report Review Process The auditor-in-charge  will  send an electronic draft report to the Deputy Inspector  General  (DIG) 

and/or Inspector  General,  who, in turn,  will  review, and provide comments and revisions and submit the report back to the auditor-in-charge. The auditor-in-charge  will  make the appropriate changes. Copies of the revised draft are then given to the  DIG  and the  IG  for  final  review. To expedite the review process, when resubmitting a draft report that has incorporated the reviewers' comments, the auditor  should  include  a highlighted copy of the report that indicates where changes were made. 

Section  17-110:  Final Report Processing Audit Assignment Numbers The audit assignment numbers are assigned by the  Special  Assistant to the  IG  at the start of each audit. The number is assigned according to the fiscal year in which the audit was started and the number of audits conducted in that fiscal year. The assignment number  will  be  placed 

on the front cover of the report  along  with the month and year the report was released. Report Review Draft reports  should  be properly reviewed, in  detail,  before being transmitted to the auditee for management comments or before being issued as a final  report. The  AIC  performs the initial review of the discussion drafts, draft reports, and  final  reports, which are then reviewed by  DIG 

andlG. 

Final  Report 

Final  reports are forwarded to the  IG  for review. The  complete  report  will  include  a transmittal 

letter,  front and back  OIG  report covers, and the original management comments.  If  the report is deemed unrestricted, a copy of the audit report  will  be posted to the  OIG  Internet  and FEC Intranet websites. 

-----( 6 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  version:  July  2015  IChapter 17 

If  necessary, the  AIC  may need to  consult  with the  IG  Counsel  when the report may contain sensitive informati on not deemed for  publ ic  release,  such as in formation  technology  security matters.  In  this case, portions of the report may need to be redacted. 

Transmittal  Letter for the  Final  Report The  Special  Assistant to the  IG  is  responsible  for ensuring that the  final  reports and  transmittals 

are  duplicated,  bound, and  properly  disseminated and  filed.  The  Special  Assistant  will  transmit the final report to the six Commissioners, the agency  officials  responsible for the corrective actions of the audit findings and recommendations, and other agency  officials.  Typically,  a copy of  all  audit reports are transmitted to the  Staff  Director,  General  Counsel  (GC)  and Deputy  GC. 

The  transmittal  letter  will  document that management  will  need  to '. 

• Identify  an audit follow-up  official  (AFO)  ;

• Provide a corrective action  plan  to the  OIG  for review; and 

• Provide a  final  corrective action plan to the Commission. 

In  some cases, in the  transmittal  letter,  the  OIG  will  suggest an  AFO  for the audit. However, management is  responsible  for recommending to the Comm ission the assignment of the  AFO 

for each audit. 

Section 17-120: Report Restrictions 

A ll  reports containing rest ri cted information or are subject to restricted di sc losure  should  be 

clearly  ma rked for restri ct ion of access. These notices  should  appear on both the draft and t he final copies of the report. 

-----( 7 )1------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Audit Follow-up: 

18-00  Purpose 1O Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Definitions and  Terminology 

40  Recommendation  Resolution  Process 

50  Reporting 

60  Auditee's Response to Audit Reports 

70  OIG's  Evaluation of Management's Response 

80  Follow-up  Procedures 

Section  18-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  18 

This chapter sets forth the  OIG  policies  and procedures for  follow-up  and resolution of audit findings and recommendations. This chapter  also  describes the process and terminology used in defining the status of the resolution of audit findings and recommendations. 

Section  18-10:  Standards Standards for follow-up and resol ut ion of audit findings and recommendations are established in Off ice of Management and Budget  (OMS)  Circular  A-50,  and in FEC Directive  50,  Audit  Follow-Up. 

Audit follow-up is an integral part of good management and is a shared  responsibility  of agency management and auditors. Corrective action taken by management on  resolved  findings and recommendations is essential to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of government operations.  OIG  will  work with FEC management to  promptly  resolve and  implement  audit recommendations .  OIG  will  maintain a complete record of actions taken by management on significant findings and recommendations (both monetary and non-monetary). Aud it ors  shou ld  consider the results of the previous audits that are  relevant  to the ob jectives of current audits. Recommendations that were previously not considered significant may be significant on a subsequent audit, if the audit objectives are different or the  control  environment changes. 

OIG's  auditors  will  keep FEC management informed of findings and recommendations throughout the audit process and attempt to resolve disagreements through informal and formal meetings. 

Section  18-20:  Policy        

> -----( 1)-----FEC OIG Audit Manual Version: July 2016

# Chapter  18 

The  OIG  will  identify, track, and monitor audit recommendations, including recommendations for 

material  weaknesses, significant deficiencies in  financial  audit reports, control weaknesses in performance audits or inspections, and  potential  monetary benefits. The  OIG  will  moni tor and report on the status of corrective actions for audit recommendations in its  Semiannual  Report to Congress and  Semiannual  Report on Outstanding Audit Recommendations report to the Commission (February & August).  FEC  management  will  be informed, in writing , when the  OIG  closes  recommendations. Disagreements between the  OIG 

and management on the status of corrective actions  will  be  resolved  through the audit  resolution 

process. 

FEC  Directive  50  designates the Chief Financial  Officer  as the audit  follow-up  official  (AFO)  for the  annual  financial  statement audit. The  AFO  duties  include: 

• responding to and coordinating comments on draft audit reports; 

• coordinating a written corrective action  plan  (CAP)  within  30  days of the  final  report which  includes  specific tasks and a timeframe for completion . The  CAP  shall  be submitted to the Commission, 1

• conducting  regular  meetings with the  OIG  throughout the year to  follow-up  on outstanding findings and recommendations, and  include  reports of the meetings in the wr itten  CAP  and sem iannual reports required to be presented to the Commission; 

• submitting documentation to  OIG  supporting the  closure  of significant recommendations; 

• engaging in good faith efforts to  resolve  all  disagreements; 

• Producing a  semiannual  report to the agency head in May and November. The report 

shall  include: 

o status of  unresolved  audit reports; 

o outstanding steps or tasks required to  resolve  the recommendations raised in audit reports; 

o a timetable  for resolution of those steps or tasks; o the number of reports or recommendations resolved during the period; o the amount of  disallowed,  not  disallowed  but questioned costs, unsupported costs, and funds put to better use, for which management has or has not made a decision; and o collections,  offsets, write-offs, demands for payment and other monetary benefits 

resulting  from the audits. 

• For other audits, inspections, attestation engagements or agreed upon procedures, the 

Staff  Director  will  recommend and the Commission  shall  approve the  AFO.  This person 

shall: 

o develop  a written CAP,  including  specific steps and/or tasks to be taken to 

implement  the corrective acti on and a projected time frame for completion of each step or task, to be presented to the Comm ission within thirty days of receiving an audit report; 

o present the CAP to the Commission through t he  Staff  Director,  inc lu ding  any comments the  Staff  director may add, for information,  tally  vote or for discussion at a Commission meeting;                    

> 1FEC Directive 50 do es not specificalJy require the audit follow-up official to provide the CAP directly to the OIG for comment. However, to facilitate timely audit resolution, the AFO provides the CAP to the OTG for comment prior to su bmission to the Commission. -------( 2FEC OIG Audit Manual Version: July 2016

# Chapter  18 

o conduct regular meetings with the  OIG  or other audit officials throughout the year to  follow  up on outstanding findings and recommendations, and include reports of these meetings in the written corrective action  pl an  and the semiannual reports required to be presented to the Commission; 

o respond in a timely manner to  all  requests; 

o engage in good faith effort to  resolve  a ll  disagreements; and o produce semiannual reports to the agency head in May and November. These reports  shall  include: 

• the status of  all  unresolved audit reports; 

• the outstanding steps or tasks required to be completed in order to resolve the recommendations raised in the audit reports; 

• a timetable for resolution of those steps or tasks; and 

• the number of reports or recommendations resolved during the period. Notwithstanding the  Staff  Director's recommendation and  Commission  approval of an  AFO,  the 

OIG  will  recommend an  AFO  based on the nature of audit findings, organizational structure, and assessment of  official  most  likely  to effectively monitor implementation. The  OIG 

recommendation  will  be detailed in the transmittal letter included with the final report. 

Section  18-30:  Definitions and Terminology The  OIG  prov id es the  following  terminology, defin it ions, responsibilities, and procedures  related 

to the audit  fo ll ow-up  and recommendation resolut io n concept to ensure consistency and compliance: 

Auditee: Agency officials who are  responsible  for receiving and analyzing audit reports, providing responses on the findings and recommendations to the  OIG,  and developing and implementing corrective action  plans  to resolve the findings and recommendations. 

Audit Follow-up Official  (AFO):  Staff Director nominated management official responsible for ensuring audit findings and recommendations are acted upon by agency management.  In  the case of the annual financial statement audit, the  AFO  is the  CFO. 

Audit Resolution Process:  Formal  process for  resolving  disagreements between  OIG  and the auditee by meeting with successively higher  levels  of officials in the organization within established timeframe. 

Corrective Action: The specific measures taken by an auditee to implement the audit recommendations provided in the audit report in order to resolve audit findings. 

Corrective Action Plan (CAP): Document prepared by management in response to audit report recommendations which includes a description of specific actions to be taken, responsible management officials, timetable/proposed  completion  date for each corrective action, and a description of how management  will  demonstrate imp lementation. 

Date of Recommendation: For recordkeeping, tracking, and reporting purposes, the date of the final report is the date of the recommendation. 

Disagreement: A disagreement between  FEC  officials and  OIG  with a finding, recommendation, or status of corrective action. 

-----( 3 ).---------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July  2016  Chapter  18 

Resolved:  OIG  considers a recommendation  resolved ,  or  closed,  when the  OIG  accepts the auditee's position on the recommendation and the  OIG  verifies the finding, or  underlying 

weakness, has been addressed. 

Unresolved: A recommendation is considered  unresolv ed , or open, when  OIG  determines that FEC management has not: 

• responded to the recommendation within established timeframes; 

• provided a  reply  that is responsive to the intent of the recommendation; 

• implemented  corrective actions that  resolve  the  underlying  cause of the recommendation; 

• agreed with an  OIG  finding or recommendation, in  whole  or in part; or 

• agreed with  potential  monetary benefits in an  OIG  report. 

Section  18-40:  Recommendation  Resolution  Process A formal  recommendation  resolution  process is initiated after audit  follow-up  has been performed for a minimum of 3 years from the audit report date, and the auditee continues to: 

• disagree with an  OIG  finding and/or recommendation ; 

• provides a  reply  to a recommendati on that  OIG  considers non-responsive to the intent of the recommendation; or 

• accepts the recommendation, but  OIG  determines that  planned  corrective actions  will 

not satisfy the intent of the recommendation. The  planned  resolution process  is  chosen at the discretion of the  OIG  and can consist of: 1) Requesting management sign a Risk Acceptance Memorandum prepared by the  OIG 

which  details  the specific areas of disagreement and the risk to the agency if the recommendation is not implemented. The management  official's  signature  will  certify that management is  willing  to accept the risk(s) of not  implementing  the recommendation, and the recommendation  will  be  closed  by the  OIG  with the support of this memorandum; or 2) Present the issue to the Commission to provide a  final  decision on whether management 

will  be required to implement the  OIG's  recommendation, or corrective action by management is not required. Note: Although the  OIG  may close a recommendation based on management's decision to accept the risk or a Comm ission decision that determines management is not requ ir ed to 

implement  corrective actions. the  OIG  may conduct a detailed  review/inspection of any 

particular  closed finding/recommendation and its associated risks if the  OIG  feels  the  level  of risk acceptance presents a high likelihood of fraud. waste. or abuse to agency programs; 

violates  any federal laws or regulations, or presents a conflict of interest that negatively effects the  FEC's  business processes or  overall  agency mission. 

Section  18-50:  Reporting 

---- -( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016 Chapter 18 

OIG  reports the status of corrective actions  implemented  for significant recommendations in its 

Semiannual  Report to Congress and  Semiannual  Report on Outstanding Audit Recommendations. The monetary amounts associated with "Questioned  Costs,"  "Unsupported 

Costs,"  and  "Funds  Put to Better  Use"  is  also  reported when  applicable. 

Section  18-60: Auditee's Response to Audit Report 

Financial Audits:  FEC  management is to respond to the draft  financial  audit report with a memorandum signed by the  CFO  (or designee) presenting the agency's positi on on  material 

weaknesses and  reportable  conditions. Management's comments are presented verbatim in an appendix to the report and summarized in the body of the report.  In  addition, management must submit the corrective action  plan  for the  material  weaknesses and  reportable  conditions within 

30  days of the  final  financial  audit report issuance for the  OIG's  review. 

Performance Audits: The auditee's responses to the  OIG's  draft performance audit reports are due within  10  business days of the draft report's issuance. The  10  day  deadline  can be extended if circumstances warrant  additional  time for management to respond.  OIG's  final 

report  will  contain verbatim management comments and an  OIG  evaluation  of management's response in the report. The audi tee  should  exp li citly  state whether the agency agrees or disagrees with the  OIG's  recommendations and/or findings. 

Section  18-70:  OIG's  Evaluation  of Management's Response 

OIG  will  evaluate the reasonableness of the auditee's responses to the draft audit report findings and recommendations. An  OIG  evaluation  will  be  included  in the final audit report that characterizes  FEC  management's responses as either  "responsive"  or  "not  responsive." 

• Responsive:  In  OIG 's  opini on , the aud itee's  planned  corrective actions  shou ld  resolve 

the finding(s) identified in the report. 

• Not Responsive:  In  OIG's  opinion, the auditee's corrective action  plan(s)  will  not correct the finding(s) identified in the report.  OIG  will  publish  in the  final  audit report the reasons for their disagreement. The matter  will  also  be  resolved  through a resolution process if necessary. The  OIG  will  carefully  analyze  any written comments received in response to the draft report and determine if audit findings and recommendations  shou ld  be ma intained as written in the draft report, modified or  deleted. 

# - - ----1(  5 )-------FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version: July 2016  Chapter  18 

Section  18-80: Follow-up Procedures FEC management is responsible for addressing the reported findings and recommendations and  resolving  them. FEC management has tasked the  Office  of the  Staff  Director with coordinating with the nominated audit follow-up officials to ensure management reports semiannually to the Commission the status of outstanding recommendations.  In  addition, the 

CFO  reports to the Commission monthly regarding the outstanding recommendations for the FEC's  annual  financial statement audit. To facilitate the tracking of audit recommendations, the  OIG  will  utilize  the TeamCentral  module 

included  with the TeamMate application, to electronically capture and update the status of recommendations. To facilitate  timely  resolution of audit findings, the  OIG  will  meet with management on a semiannual basis prior to their reporting cycle to the Commission, to receive updates on the progress of implementing audit recommendations. Where appropriate. audit follow-up verification activities  will  be performed to  validate  the recommendation status and determine whether findings may be  closed.  Where verification activities support  completed  implementation and finding  closure,  the  OIG  will  update the recommendation status in  TeamCentral  and notify the  AFO  in writing of the status change.  In  addition, the  OIG  will  provide a report, Review of Outstanding Recommendations, to the Commission semiannually providing a status update on the  OIG's  follow-up  review. 

OIG  will  use the  annual  financial statement audit  planning  process to manage the status of outstanding financial  related  recommendations. A portion of the annual  financial  statement audit  planning  process  includes  identifying the status of the prior years' recommendations and their impact in the current year's audit planning. 

- ----( 6 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Quality  Control and Assurance Program: 

19-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Policy 

30  Internal Quality Control and Assurance System 

40  Internal Quality Control and Assurance Reviews 

50  Review Cycle 

60  Review Team 

70  Scope  and Approach 

80  Workpaper Documentation 

90  Reporting 

100  External  Quality  Control  and Assurance Reviews 

Section  19-00:  Purpose 

# IChapter 19 This chapter sets forth the  OIG  policies and procedures for the internal quality  control  system and the external  quality  control  reviews. 

Section  19-10:  Standards The  GAGAS  provides guidance for audits and stipulates that: 

Each audit organization performing audits in accordance with  GAGAS  must: a. Establish and maintain a system of quality control that is designed to provide the audit organization with reasonable assurance that the organization and its personnel comply with professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements, and b. Have and external peer review performed by reviewers independent of the audit organization being reviewed at least once every three years.  [GAGAS,  January  2011, 

Revision,  Chapter  3.  82]1 

The following references provide guidance for  quality  control systems: 

• Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act  (FMFIA) 

• Office of Management and Budget  (OMB)  Circular A-123 

• Council  of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency  {CIGIE)  Audit Committee Guide for Conducting External Peer Reviews of the Audit Organizations of  Federal 

Offices of  Inspector  General  (Peer  Review Guide, and accompanying checklists). 1http://www.gao.gov/assets/590/58728 l .pdf -----( 1 )1-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  IChapter  19 

Section 19-20:  Policy 

The FEC  OIG,  through its  quality  control  and assurance program,  will  have an  internal  quality 

control  system and  will  undergo an  external  quality  control  review, in accordance with  GAGAS 

standards. The  quality  control  and assurance program  is  designed to provide  reasonable  assurance, on an ongoing basis, that the  OIG  is in compliance with  GAGAS  Quality  Control  and Assurance standards. The  quality  control  and assurance program  includes  the  following  elements: 

• Ongoing supervision of assignments, 

• Annual  internal  quality  control  reviews, and 

• Periodic  external (peer)  quality  control  reviews . The  FEC  OIG  internal  control  policies  and procedures  will  be subject to  external  peer review by the appropriate  external  agency's  OIG  or peer review teams.  It  is important for the FEC  OIG  to ensure that the aud its  properly  meet  GAGAS  standards pertaining to  internal  quality  control  and assurance. The  IG  or  DIG  will  verify, on an ongoing basis, that appropriate standards and  policies 

pertaining to  internal  quality  control  and assurance have been  followed  during the conduct of audits. This verification process  will  include a review of: 

• audit programs; 

• workpapers; 

• reports; 

• cross-referenced supporting evidence to report findings,  results,  conclusions, and recommendations; and 

• completion  of the  OIG  Audit  Quality  Assurance  Checklist  (See  attachment #2). The  IG  or  DIG  will  sign-off on the  completed  internal  quality  control  and assurance checklists. 

Section 19-30:  Internal  Quality  Control  and Assurance Systems According to  GAGAS,  an audit organization's  internal  quality  control  and assurance system should  include  procedures for monitoring, on an ongoing basis, the proper design and effective 

application  of the  policies  and procedures  related  to  internal  quality  control  and assurance. 

CIGIE  also states that an internal  quality  control  and assurance system  should  be comprehensive and  suitably  designed to provide  reasonable  assurance that the audit organization has: 

• adopted and is  following  applicable  standards; and 

• established and is  following  adequate  policies  and procedures. 

-----( 2 )t-------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016  IChapter  19 The audit organization's  internal  quality  control  and assurance  policies  and procedures  should, 

at a minimum, encompass the  elements  of staffing qualifications, independence, audit performance,  internal  controls  review, data  reliability,  and independent referencing. The internal  quality  controls  and assurance system  will  ensure that  all  audits were  properly 

completed,  in conformance with  applicable  quality  control and assurance standards. The cornerstone of the  internal  quality  control and assurance system for the FEC  OIG  is the Audit 

Manua l and the  Yellow  Book, which address the required  elements  for quality  control  and assurance. Spec ifically, the Audit Manual addressing quali ty  control  is contained in the 

following  chapters as  follows: 

• Independence,  Chapter 3,  "General  Standards" 

• Staffing  qualifications, Chapter 4,  "Staff  Qualifications and Continued Professional Education" 

• Audit performance: o Chapters 6,  "Planning  for Audits , Reviews, Evaluations, and Attestation 

Engagements" 

o Chapter 7, "Supervising  Audits "

o Chapter  10,  "Compliance  with Laws and Regulations" o Chapter 11,  "Evidence" 

o Chapter 12, "Developing  Elements  of a Finding" 

• Internal  controls  reviews, Chapter 8,  "Internal  Controls" 

• Data reliability, Chapter 9,  "Assessing  Data  Reliability" 

• Independent  reference, Chapter 14 section  14-90,  "I ndependent  Reference" 

Section  19-40:  Internal  Quality  Control and Assurance Reviews The  IG  and  DIG  will  ensure that  internal  quality  control and assurance reviews are performed 

annually  to provide reasonable assurance that  OIG  auditors  properly  complied  with  applicable 

standards and established policies and procedures in the performance of their work.  Such 

periodic reviews are necessary to  evaluate  and ensure the quality of the audits, reviews, 

evaluations,  and attestation engagements. 

Internal  quality control and assurance reviews require the exercise of  considerable  professional 

judgment and should be positive and constructive in nature. These rev iew s are supplementary to the application of  OIG  internal  quality  controls  policies and procedures and are intended to provide assurance of their proper application. Section  19-50:  Review  Cycle 

The  IG  and  DIG  are  responsible  for ensuring that audits adhere to  GAGAS  standards and meet the requirements detailed in  OIG 's  policies ,  as documented in the Audit  Manua l.  The  IG  and 

DIG  will  verify, on an ongoing basis, th at the appropriate standards and policies have been properly  fo llowed  dur ing the audi ts (reviews and evaluations). Th is  will  inclu de  tracking and ensuring that  follow-up  actions are taken to address the recommendati ons made in the  latest 

-----( 3 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version : July  2016  IChapter 19 

external  peer review report, as  well  as those recommendations in the  internal  quality  control  and assurance review. 

In  addition, at the beg inning of each  calendar  year the  OIG  wi ll  revi ew and update their aud it 

manual  to ensure any changes made to audit processes throughout the previous  fiscal  year or identified during the  OIG's  annual  internal  control  revi ew is captured in the audit  manual  for consistency and  quality  control. 

Section  19-60: Review Team The  IG  or nominated staff  will  annually  conduct an  internal  quality  control  and assurance review of the  OIG's  policies  and procedures in accordance with  GAGAS  3.85. This process is conducted during the  annual  A-123  internal  control  review for the agency. The  results  of the 

annual  quality  control  review are documented in the  internal  control  review report. The  IG  may assign audit staff to perform  external  quality  control  and assurance reviews of other agencies' 

OIG. 

OIG  team members are to possess the necessary  knowledge,  skills,  and experience to perform the  internal  and  external  quality  control  and assurance reviews and must be independent of the audit reports under review. 

Section  19-70:  Scope  and Approach The audit staff and approp ri ate auditor-in-charge  (AIC)  of each audit engagement  will  exerci se due  professional  care in their work to ensure conformance with  GAGAS  standards and  OIG's 

po li cy  and procedures. The exercise of due  professional  care  involves  ensuring that the: 

• Audit is  properly  planned  and conducted with  quality  of effort. 

• Scope of the audit is appropriate in  relation  to the  overall  audit objectives. 

• Resources for the audit are  properly  assigned and  utilized  to reflect effectiveness, efficiency, and economy. 

• Findings are  properly  supported by substantive evidence. 

• Reports  properly,  completely,  and  accurately  reflect the  results  of the audit. 

AICs  will  review the  completed  internal  quality  control and assurance  checklists  prepared to provide assurance that  all  work  complied  with  applicable  standards, policies, and procedures. 

Section  19-80: Workpaper Documentation 

All  workpapers , audit reports, and  internal  quality  control  and assurance checklists  wi ll  be 

properly  filed  and made  available  for revi ew by an  external  peer review team .  FEC  OIG  will  use the Peer Review Gui de  Checklists  to document the  completion  of their review of another agency's  OIG. 

Section  19-90: Reporting 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version: July  2016  IChapter 19 

Findings on the FEC  OIG  internal  controls  standards,  policies,  and procedures  resulting  from an 

external  peer review  will  be reported  directly  to the  Inspector  General  ( IG ).  When FEC  OIG 

performs  external  peer reviews on other agencies'  OIG,  audit staff  will  also  report their findings 

directly  to the  DIG  and the  IG.  When present in g findings of  noncompliance  with  in ternal  quality 

controls  standards,  polici es , and procedures of the other agency's  OIG,  the external peer re vi ew team is to  place  the findings in proper perspective by  relating  the nature, timing, and extent of the  noncompliance  to the number of cases reviewed.  Isolated  instanc es of noncompliance are 

generally  not reported,  unless  the significance of the findings raises concerns about the internal 

quality  control  and assurance system, as a  whole.  At which po i nt , the  external  peer review team provides recommendations to  correcUresolve  the findings and improve the internal  quality 

control  and assurance system. 

Section  19-100:  External  Quality  Control  and Assurance Reviews 

External  quality  control  reviews,  also  known as peer reviews, are performed by  federal  auditors outside of FEC  OIG.  These reviews address the  general  standard for  internal  quality  control 

and assurance under GAGAS. They are to be conducted at  least  once every three years. Within the  Inspector  General  community, the  external  quality  control  and assurance review program is administered by the  CIGIE. 

The objective of an  externa l  quality  control  and assurance revi ew is to ensure and enhance the quality of audits conducted by  all  federal agencies'  OIG  through an independent assessment of the effectiveness of their internal  qua li ty  control  and ass ur ance systems in providing  reasonable 

assurance that  applicable  standards and established policies and procedures are properly being 

followed. 

The  DIG  will  appoint a trained auditor to  lead  the  external  peer revi ew team. Audit staff  will  be rotated to provide a variety of insight, experience, and perspective in their performance and to reduce the impact of the review on any  particular  audit staff. Team members  should  possess the necessary  knowledge,  skills,  and experience to perform the  external  peer review. The results of the FEC  OIG's  external  peer review of another  OIG  will  be reported in the FEC  OIG 

semiannual  report(s),  until  such time that  all  recommendations (if  applicable)  have been 

implemented  by the reviewed  OIG. 

The report on the  external  (peer) review of FEC's  OIG's  internal  quality  control  and assurance system  will  be made  available  to FEC  OIG  auditors and the Commission. The report  will  also 

be made  available  to the  public  via the FEC internet website . 

## -----( s )------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Coordination with the  IG  Counsel/Chief  Investigator: 

20-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 20  Policy 

30  Chief  Investigator  Authority 

40  Actions  Upon  Receipt of  Allegations 

50  Interchange  of  Information  on  Planned  Work 

60  Request for Assistance on  Investigative  Matters 

70  Indications  of Fraud and  Illegal  Acts 

80  Investigative  Data in Reports 

90  Distribution of Reports 

Section  20-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  20 

This chapter sets forth  policies  and procedures for coordinating possible investigative matters, 

including  planning and executing joint projects with the  Counsel  to the  Inspector  General/Chief Investigator. Audits, attestation engagements, and evaluations sometimes disclose indications of  illegal  acts, violations of provisions of contracts, and abuse involving the  FEC  programs and personnel that may require an inquiry by the  Chief  Investigator. Complaints and  a ll egations  may  also  be made 

directly  to the audit staff.  Such  matters are to be immediately brought to the attention of the 

Chief  Investigator  and  handled  in a uniform manner.  Conversely,  investigations of FEC's programs may require direct audit assistance or may  disclose  administrative controls and operational deficiencies that require audit or evaluation attention. The Audit  manual,  Chapter 

10,  Compliance  with Laws and Regulations, discusses the  Generally  Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS) guidance with respect to the coordination of audit and investigative work. 

Section  20-10:  Standards 

Section  4(a)(3) of the  Inspector  General  Act of 1978  (IG  Act), as amended, provides the 

following: 

It  shall be the duty and responsibility of each Inspector General, with respect to the establishment within which his office is established... to recommend policies for, and to conduct, supervise, or coordinate other activities carried out or financed by such es tablishment for the purpose of. .. preventing and detecting fraud and abuse in, its programs and operations. 

-----( 1 )11------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  20 

Section  20-20:  Policy 

OIG  policy  is for the audit staff and  Chief  Investigator  to  effectively  work together, as necessary, in the exchange of information  vital  to the operations of the  Office  of  Inspector  General  (OIG) 

by: 

• referring to the  Chief  Investigator  matters  involving  possible  criminal,  civil,  or administrative  violations,  as disclosed by audits, attestation engagements, reviews, or 

evaluations,  or otherwise brought to  OIG's  attention. 

• providing direct audit or other assistance to the  Chief  Investigator,  when requested. 

• providing audit, review, or other appropriate coverage of administrative controls and operational deficiencies, as requested  by,  or otherwise disclosed  as,  a result  of investigative efforts. This chapter contains guidance to auditors, in addition to the requirements in  GAGAS,  when information comes to their attention, which indicates that violations of federal  law  or regulation may have occurred.  In  any situation where there is doubt as to what procedures are to be 

followed,  the audit staff  shall  consult with the  IG,  Deputy  IG,  or  Counsel  to the  IG/Chief 

Investigator. 

Section  20-30:  Chief  Investigator  Authority The  Chief  Investigator  provides  OIG  with criminal and  civil  investigative expertise and has the authority to investigate matters involving fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement affecting 

FEC's  programs and  personnel. 

The  following  list,  which is not  all  inclusive, is indicative of matters that require  referral  to the 

Chief  Investigator: 

• Submission of false  claims,  false or fraudulent statements, concealments by vendors, contractors,  employees,  applicants for, or recipients  of,  benefits, or other payments or services. 

• Conspiracy to defraud the government. 

• Theft, damage, or conversion of government property. 

• Concealment,  removal,  obliteration,  falsification,  forgery,  alteration,  or destruction of 

official  documents. 

• Misappropriation or  embezzlement  of federal funds. 

• Bribery or attempted bribery of federal  employees. 

• Conflict  of interest or kickbacks. 

Section  20-40:  Actions upon Receipt of Allegations 

Allegations  and complaints that  OIG  receives from various sources may cover a wide array of concerns over the administration of  FEC's  programs. Many matters  disclosed  in these situations are unique and without precedent. Thus, rigid  guidelines  cannot be the appropriate measures of action(s) to  apply  to  resolve  these matters. This section sets forth the  general 

procedures to  apply  for ensuring that  allegations  and complaints are handled  properly.     

> -----( 2)-----FEC OIG

Audit  Manual  Version :  July  2016  Chapter  20 

Procedures to be  followed,  when indications of fraud and  illegal  acts are discovered during an audit (review and  evaluation)  are discussed in Section  22-70  of this chapter. Auditors receiving  allegations  of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement must immediately notify the auditor-in-charge  (AIC)  and Chief  Investigator.  The Chief  Investigator  will  immediately inform the  IG  and  DIG  of the allegation. Auditors should also prepare an investigative  referral 

memorandum to be signed by the  AIC.  The Chief Investigator  will  make a recommendation on whether the  allegation  or complaint has investigative merit. 

Section  20-50:  Interchange  of  Information  on Planned Work To prevent conflicts that could  adversely  affect audits, attestation engagements, reviews, or investigations, the  IG  or  DIG  will  be informed about ongoing significant and sensitive investigations. The  IG  or  DIG  will  also be apprised of investigations in progress or completed. 

Conversely,  the Chief  Investigator  will  be informed of the planned audit work . Care  will  be taken to avoid any action that might compromise an invest ig ation. Auditors  will  not conduct entrance conferences or interview  potential  witnesses or subjects,  until  the Chief Investigator has decided whether to accept a  referral  for inv es tigation from the audit staff for 

particular  matters wi th investigative interest. During investigations, the Chief  Investigator  sometimes obtains information that may be  helpful 

in correcting program weaknesses.  In  those cases where a  policy,  procedure, or other safeguard  fails  to prevent a program deficiency, the Chief  Investigator  will  prepare an memorandum or a management advisory  letter  to  briefly  identify the  problem  (condition) and 

related  program issue(s) (cause). These written  items  may be given to the audit staff to identify audit  leads  or  add itional  information perta ining to ongoing audits. 

Section  20-60:  Request for Assistance on Investigative Matters The Chief  Investigator  may ask the audit staff to provide audit type assistance for  OIG 

investigations. Every effort  will  be made to provide assistance to the Chief Investigator, when audit expertise is needed to complete an investigation or conduct special joint projects designed to uncover criminal activity. 

Section  20-70:  Indicat ions  of Fraud and  Illegal  Acts 

Indications  of possible fraud,  illegal  acts, violations of provisions of contract agreements, or abuse discovered during an audit, attestati on engagement, revi ew , or evaluation are to be reported  immediately  to the Chief Investigator by the auditor-in-charge. The investigative  referral  memorandum  should  explain  the indication of  possible  wrongdoing and include the  following  information, as  applicable: 

• Background information. 

• Br i ef description of  problem  found . 

• Indiv idua ls  and departments  invo lv ed .

• Contractor address (if  applicable),  phone number, and point of contact. 

• Estimated amount of misappropriated funds (if  applicable). 

-----( 3 )...------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version : July  2016  Chapter  20 

The auditor-in-charge  will  meet with the Chief  Investigator,  when they are not sure whether a matter warrants  referral  for investigation or how far the auditor  should  pursue a matter. When the  OIG  determines that  additional  audit or review steps must be performed, auditors 

should  obtain sufficient evidence to determine whether fraud,  illegal  acts,  violations  of contract provisions, or abuse has, in fact, occurred.  If  so, the  possible  impact/effect is to be  disclosed  in the report  following  GAGAS  guidelines. 

Section  20-80:  Invest igative Data in Reports 

Disclosures  in audit reports of information that might compromise an ongoing or  contemplated 

investigation or result in an unwarranted invasion of privacy are to be avoided. The Audit 

Manual,  Chapter  10,  Compliance  with Laws and Regulations, discusses GAGAS reporting standards,  applied  concurrently with investigative actions. Hence, communication with the Counsel to the  IG/Chief  Investigator  is essential.  Generally,  the  following  guidelines  and procedures are  applicable,  when  OIG  learns  that the auditee,  evaluated  entity,  related  entity, or associated  individuals  are under investigation by the  OIG  or another investigative agency or that such investigati on is  contemplated: 

• Reference to an ongoing or  contemplated  investigation is to be  excluded  from audit reports,  unless  such reference is  critical  to the findings and recommendations in the reports, in which case, consultation with the Chief  Investigator  is  critical. 

• When it is deemed  critical  to make reference to an  ·ongoing  or contemplated investigation in a report,  all  personal  identifiers, names of organizations, and any other information that may serve as a basis for identification of the subject of investigati on are to be  exc lu ded. 

Information  obtained by grand j ury process, defense  classified  infor mat ion, ta x information from the  Internal  Revenue Service,  social  securi ty numbers, and information subject to a court  seal  or protective order are never  included  in audit reports.  All  requests for grand jury process or other restricted information  will  be referred to the Chief  Investigator. 

Section  20-90:  Distribution of Reports Requests for copies of  OJG  reports covering investigative matters, such as those  disclosed 

during routine audits,  sho uld  be referred to the Chi ef  Investigator. 

Auditors are not to  release  any information,  including  reports,  involving  investigative matters, without the  clearance  of the Chief  Investigator. 

-----( 4 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit Manual Version:  July  2016 

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

AUDIT  MANUAL 

Financial  Statement Audit Monitoring: 

21-00  Purpose 

10  Standards 

20  Contracting Officer Representative Responsibilities 

30  Audit  Planning 

40  Audit Communications 

50  Workpaper Documentation 

60  Deliverables 

Section  21-00:  Purpose 

# Chapter  21 

This chapter sets forth the  policies  and procedures for a contracting officer representative  (COR)  monitoring the agency's  annual  financial statement audit conducted by an independent  public  accountant  (IPA).  The  COR's  responsibility is to monitor the contract to ensure the audit is performed in accordance with Generally Accepted Government Audit Standards (GAGAS} and  all  deliverables  and contract terms are met by the contractor. These  policies  and procedures  should  also  be followed for any another contracted audit that is conducted in accordance with government auditing standards. 

Section  21-10:  Standards 

GAGAS  4.02: 

GAGAS  establishes requirements for performing financial audits in addition to the requirements contained in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (A/CPA) standards. Auditors should comply with the additional requirements, along with the incorporated Statement of Auditing Standards  (SASs),  when citing  GAGAS  in their reports. The additional requirements for performing financial audits relate to: 

a. Auditor communication; b. Previous audits and attestation engagements; c. Fraud, noncompliance with provisions of laws, regulations, contracts, and grant agreements, and abuse; and d. Developing elements of a finding; and audit documentation. 

Section  21-20:  Contracting Officer Representative Responsibilities -----( 1 )-------FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  21 

The Contracting Officer Representative  (COR)  is responsible for  all  the  logistical  and administrative tasks in getting the  IPA  cleared  for background checks through Human Resources, and set- up onsite at the  FEC  headquarters to perform their contractual duties. 

In  addition, the  COR  will  ensure that the  IPA  has complied with  all  applicable  GAGAS 

requirements during the audit by adequately monitoring the audit timeline , reviewing  all 

required  deliverables,  and completing the  OIG's  Audit  Quality  Assurance  Checklist  (see attachment 3). 

COR  Continuing  Professional  Education Requirements: 

The  COR  responsible for oversight of the FE C's  annual  financial  statement audit contract must obtain certification as a COR  level  1, and ensure recertification every two years by earning 8 

applicable  CPE  credits. 

Section  21-30:  Audit  Planning 

During the planning phase of the audit, the  COR  must ensure that  all  applicab le  informati on and forms are completed and provided  by  the  IPA  to ensure  all  assigned audit team members can perform work on the audit: 

• Continuing Professional Education Credits 

• Organization Peer Review Report 

• Independence  Forms 

• Organizational  Conflict of  Interest  Forms 

• FEC  OIG  Computer Security Form 

Section  21-40:  Aud it Communications The  IPA  is required to provi de an engagement letter explaining their understanding of the engagement, the ir responsibilities, and the expected responsibilities of management during the audit.  In  addition, the contractor  will  hold  a planning  briefing with the  COR  to discuss their 

planning  approach to meet the contract requirements and audit standards. During audit fieldwork, the  COR  is required to conduct  regular  status meetings with the contractor and management to ensure management is being responsive to the  IPA  and the audit is progressi ng on schedule. 

Section  21-50:  Workpaper Documentation The  COR  is responsible for reviewing significant audit workpapers,  specifically  those workpapers  related  to audit findings identified  by  the  IPA,  and any  miscellaneous  issues that may arise during the audit and documented by the  IPA. 

In  addition, any workpaper review comments  by  the  COR  should  be documented and provided by to the  IPA  for response. The responses  by  the  IPA  should  also  be documented and provided to the  COR  for review.  If  responses are sufficient, the  COR  should  document that the responses provided by the  IPA  are acceptable. 

# -------4(  2 )-----FEC  OIG  Audit  Manual  Version:  July  2016  Chapter  21 Section  21-60:  Deliverables 

All  contractua l  deliverables  must be reviewed by the  COR  pr ior to the  IPA  finalizing  and providing to management. The  COR  must ensure that  all  comments and edi ts made by the 

Office  of  Inspector  Ge neral  to any draft and / or  final  documents are incorporated prior to finalization and distribution. Th is includes, but is not limited to :

• Engagement Letter 

• Planning Documents (Audit Plans) 

• Notice of Findings and Recommendations 

• Draft Audit Reports 

• Management Letters 

• Audit Workpapers 

----------(  3 )-----ATTACHMENTS 

# 1-8 Independence Certification FEC  OIG-XX-XX  [Audit  Title] 

Name Job Title: Attest to the following: 

Yes  No Government  Auditing  Standards  (GAS)  3.07 

a. Immediate family or close  family  member who is a director or officer of the audited entity, or as an employee of the audited entity, is in a position to exert direct and significant influence over the entity or the program under audit (see footnote 1)b. Financial interest that is direct, or is significant/material though indirect, in the audited entity or program) (see footnote 2)

c.  Responsibility  for managing an entity or making decisions that  could  affect operations of the entity or program being audited, for example as a director, officer, or other senior position of the entity, activity, or program being audited, or as a member of management in any decision-making, supervisory, or ongoing monitoring function for the entity, activity, or program under audit d. Concurrent or subsequent performance of an audit by the same individual who maintained the official accounting records when such services involved preparing source documents or originating data, in electronic or other form; posting transactions (whether coded  by  management or not coded); authorizing, executing, or consummating transactions (for example, approving invoices, payrolls, claims, or other payments of the entity or program being audited), maintaining an entity's bank account or otherwise having custody of the audited entity's funds; or otherwise exercising authority on behalf of the  entity,  or having authority to do so e. Preconceived ideas toward individuals, groups, organizations, or objectives of a particular program that could bias the audit f. Biases, including those induced by political, ideological, or social convictions that result from membership or employment in, or loyalty to, a particular group, organization, or level of government 

g.  Seeking  employment  durinJ?.  the conduct of the audit with an audited organization 

If  'YES'  was selected for any of the statements above, please notify the Inspector General IMMEDIATELY and refer to the policy for Impairments to Independence in Chapter 3 of the FEC OIG's audit manual. 

If  "NO"  was selected for all statements above, please certify below.  

> 1

Immediate  family  member is a spouse, spouse equivalent, or dependent (whether or not related). A  close  family  member is a parent, sib ling, or nondependent ch ild.  

> 2

Auditors are not precl uded from auditing pension plans that they participate in if (1) the auditor has no control over the investment strategy, benefits, or other management issues associated with the pension plan and (2) the auditor belongs to such pension plan as part of his/her employment with the audit organization, provided that the plan is nonnally offered  to  all employees in equivalent employment positions. 

JULY2015 I certify that I am free of any personal, external, and/or organizational impairments to my independence on this assignment3. Signature: ---------------- Date: Threats to Independence GAS 3.13 - 3.19 Auditors must also be cognizant of the broad categories of threats to independence when conducting audit work. Threats may not necessarily impair independence, but should be evaluated using the conceptual framework identified in  GAS  3.20  - 3.26. Auditors should evaluate the following potential threats to independence: 

• Self-interest 

# • Self-review 

# • Bias 

# • Familiarity 

# • Undue  influence 

# • Management participation 

# • Structural Please complete either sections A  ORB  regarding threats to independence, as both cannot apply. 

Section  A

I certify that I am free from any threats of independence in accordance with  GAS  3.14 Signature: Date: Section B: 

I certify that I have identified my threat(s) to independence to the Inspector General and/or Deputy Inspector General and applied the appropriate safeguard(s) in accordance with  GAS  3.16 

to adequately eliminate or reduce my identified threat to independence. In addition, a  detailed 

description of my threat to independence and the applied safeguards are attached with this form, including an approval signature from the  IO/Deputy  IG. 

Signature: 

Date :                  

> 3This includes those who review the work or the report, and all others within the audit organization who can directly influence the outcome of the audit. The period covered includes the period covered by the audit and the period in which the audit is being perfonned and reported

JULY  2015 FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION 

> WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20463
> Office  of  Inspector  General
> AUDIT  QUALITY  ASSURANCE  CHECKLIST
> Updated:  July 2015
> The following checklist should be completed for each audit and documented in the audit workpapers to ensure that the audit is  in
> compliance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards  (GAGAS)  and/or the  Office  oflnspector General's policies and procedures. AUDIT  TITLE: AUDIT  ORGANIZATION:
> Quality Assurance Items 1.  Plannin~
> a.  Are there completed independence forms for all audit staff  conducting fieldwork documented  in the workoapers?  (GAS  3.  02)
> b.  Did the audit staff  collectively have the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed,  in  order to  meet the objective(s) and scope  of  the audit work conducted?  (GAS  3.69,  6.45)
> c.  Does the audit planning  docmnentation  contain evidence  of  adequate preliminary work (i.e. research, survey, prior audit workpapers, etc.) prio! to  th_e  _s~  of  the audit?  (GAS  6.  06,  6.13)
> Yes  No  Comments d.  Was the audit program properly approved  and prepared (i.e. includes methodology, tasks, procedures, and/or sampling plans) to  meet  the objective(s)  and  scope  of  the audit  work conducted?  (OJG  AM  Ch.  6)
> e.  Did  the notification letter  to  management regarding the start  of  the audit clearly state the purpose, objective,  and  scope  of  the audit?  (GAS
> 6.47
> g.  Did  all contractors complete the  OIG  Contractor Security Standards  Form  (OIG  Alvf  Ch.  141
> h.  Did  the Partner/Manager  of  the contracting  finn
> complete  the  Organizational Conflict  of  Interest Form  (OIGAMCh.  14)
> i.  Did  all contracting personnel complete the Non-disclosure Agreement  Form  (OJG  AM  Ch.  14)
> J.  Did  all contracting personnel  meet  the continuing professional education requirements  (GAS  3.  76  -
> 3.81
> k.  Document  the  firm's  latest Peer  Review  Report and any  related letter  of  comment.  (GAS  3.82)
> l.  A kick-off meeting held and/or engagement letter provided  by  the contractor.  (OIG  AM  Ch. 6 &
> 21)_
> m. Submission  of  an  audit timeline  (OIG  A.M Ch. 21)
> 22. Audit  Program  (GAS 6.51  a-e)
> a.  Were all the applicable steps identified  in  the audit  nrogram  oerfonned? b.  If  an  audit step was omitted, was the reason for the omission exolained in the workoaoers? c.  Was the reason for omitting  an  audit step rational and  lo!!ical?
> d.  Was the audit program modified to include  or eliminate the applicable audit steps,  in  order  to meet the audit objectives? e.  Did the audit program include the audit steps needed  to  test additional areas  of  concern, uncovered  during  the audit? 3.  Supervision(GAS  6.53 {a-d})
> a.  Is  there evidence  of  supervisory involvement  in the audit  olanning  process? b.  Is there evidence  of  adequate supervision  of  the auditors? c.  Are suoervisory review notes maintained? d.  Were workoaoers reviewed  in  a timely manner? e.  OIG  monitored and revised milestones  as needed.
> CMtlwdA"""'
> f.  Site  visits,  if  warranted, were performed  and  in  atimely manner. g.  OIG  performed supplemental audit test  (if
> warranted}.
> h.  Deliverables were reviewed  and  issues cleared  in a timely manner. 31.  OIG  monitored other  si!?nificant  audit results. j.  Maintained  any  workpaper review comments.
> 4. Workoaners
> a.  Does the audit documentation include:
> (OIG  Alvf  Ch.  14)
> • A cross-referenced copy  of  the audit rogram?
> • Documentation  of  the notification letter/memorandum?
> • Documentation  of  the audit status report and/or meeting?
> • Docwnentation  of  the exit conference?
> • A cooy  of  the cross-referenced draft reoort?
> • A cooy  of  the final audit reoort? b.  Do the audit  wor1roaoers:
> • Contain the objectives, scope, methodology and criteria  of  the audit conducted?
> (GAS6.83al
> • Contain the conclusions that clearly address the audit obiectives?  (GAS  6.83b)
> • Explain the audit findings  and  results that lead to the conclusions?  (_GAS  7.16)
> • Identify the source  of  the data gathered for the audit?  (_OIG  AM  Ch.  14)
> • Contain the initials  and  date  of  the workoaoers' oreoarer?  (OIG  AM  Ch.  141
> • Contain the appropriate cross-references to the source docwnent(s)  or  related detailed testing workpapers?  (OJG  AM  Ch.  14)
> 4• Appear complete, clear,  and  concise?
> (GASA7.02)
> • Show  evidence  of  supervisory review?
> (GAS  6.83c)
> • Contain orooer  indexing?  (OIG  AM  Ch. 14)
> c.  Are the findings adequately supported in the workoaoers?  (GAS  7.14 l
> d.  Are the recommendations appropriate for the related circumstances described  in  the findings
> (~cm~l!J.siQns)?  _(QAS  Z.2 _8)
> e.  Are legends used  to  explain all audit symbols  or tickmarks used  on  the workpapers?
> (OIGAMCh.  14)
> f.  If  statistical sampling was used, was the sample size and methodology properly docwnented?
> (GAS6.64
> g.  Do the  workpapers contain evidence that internal controls were evaluated?  (GAS  7.19)
> h.  Do  the audit workpapers restrict themselves  to matters that are significant and relevant to the objectives  of  the audit?  (GAS  6.60  a-c)
> 5.  Audit  Renorts
> a.  Was the draft audit report properly referenced  to the audit docwnentation  by  an  independent referencer, prior to its issuance for review to the
> auditee?  (GAS  6.  79  & OIG  AM  Ch. 141
> b.  Were all  of  the independent referencer's notes and comments orooerly cleared, before dissemination  of
> 5the final audit reoort?  (GAS  6.  79  & OIG  AM  Ch. 14)
> c.  If  the audit was terminated prior  to  completion:
> (GAS6.50)
> • Was the notice  of  termination communicated in writing to the appropriate management level?
> • Was  an  explanation  of  why  the audit was terminated included in the  workoaoers?
> d.  Does the report include the complete GAGAS compliance statement  "We  conducted this audit in accordance with Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards  ...  "?  (GA  GAS
> 7.30)
> e.  If  conditions were present, which prevented the audit to be conducted in accordance with GA GAS  requirements, was  an  appropriate statement prepared explaining the nature  of conditions that required a deviation from the aoolicable  gt:i!4~!ines? _ (_GAGAS  7.31)
> f.  Does the report include a description  of  the audit objectives, scope,  and  methodology?  (GAS  7.09)
> g.  Does the report contain appropriate background information that readers need  to  understand the findings?  (GAS  7.17)
> h.  Does the report include a full discussion  of  the audit findings, the cause  of  the problem areas noted in the audit, and recommendations to correct the problem areas and/or improve
> op_erations?  (GAS  7.16)
> L Does the reoort identifv the significant intern.al 6controls that were assessed, the scope  of  the assessment work, and  any  significant weaknesses found during the audit?  (GAS  7.19)
> J.  Does the repo1t include comments  of  the agency officials responsible for the organization, program, activity,  or  function audited concerning the report's findings, conclusions, and reconunendations, and what corrective actions are planned?  (GAS  7.33)
> k.  Does the report include appropriate recognition of  any actions already taken to improve the situation  or  identify any areas  of  noteworthy accomplishments?  (OJG  AM  Ck  12)
> 1.  Does the audit report include a transmittal letter addressed to the head  of  the agency and/or the management officials  of  the auditee?  (GAS  7.44)
> m. Does the transmittal letter include a suggested Audit follow-up official?  (OJG  AM  Ck  18)
> 7

FEDERAL ELECTION  COMMISSION  - OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR  GENERAL 

ORGANIZATIONAL  CONFLICT  OF  INTEREST  (OCI) 

REPRESENTATION/DISCLOSURE  STATEMENT 

(FIRMS  MUST  COMPLETE  A OR  B,  BUT  NOT  BOTH) 

Solicitation/Contract  Number: -------

Year:  ______ _Title of Audit/Assignment: ----------------A.  OCI  REPRESENTATION  STATEMENT As a representative of my organization,  I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, no facts exist relevant to any organizational interests or activities which relate to the proposed work and bear on whether the organization has a possible conflict of interest with respect to being able to be independent and render impartial, technically sound and objective assistance or advice. Further, I agree to remain independent throughout the assignment; agree to immediately disclose any independence issues discovered; and agree to immediately notify the  COTR  if the finn considers submitting a proposal on any contract(s) involving the FEC to permit evaluation of whether independence could be impaired. Signature: ___________ _Date:------------Name : ______ _ ____ _Organization: ___________ _Title: ------------B.  OCI  DISCLOSURE  STATEMENT 

As a representative of my organization, I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, all relevant facts  concerning  any organizational interests or activities which relate to the proposed work and bear on whether the organization has a possible conflict of interest with respect to being able to be independent and render impartial, technically sound and objective assistance or advice, are  fully  disclosed in a separate document attached to this disclosure statement, along with proposed avoidance measures (e.g., exclude portions of the work, teaming arrangements, etc.) for possible organizational conflicts of interest, if applicable. Further, in addition to the attached disclosure, I agree to remain independent throughout the assignment; agree to immediately disclose any independence issues discovered; and agree to immediately notify the  COTR  if the firm considers submitting a proposal on any contract(s) involving the FEC to  pennit 

evaluation of whether independence could be impaired. Signature: _ __________ _Date: ------------Name: -------------Organization: ___________ _ _ Title: -------------FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION OFFICE  OF  INSPECTOR GENERAL 

# FEC  OIG  Contractor Security Standards 

# June 2010 FEC  OIG  Contractor Security Standards Effective Date: May 28,  2009 

Revised Date: June  16,  2010 

These Federal Election Commission (FEC) Office oflnspector General (OIG)  Contractor 

Security Standards identify the minimum security standards and procedures that must be followed when accessing or storing FEC information using either FEC or contractor systems or networks. These  OIG  standards are intended to supplement  FEC  standards; where differences exist between the FEC and the  OIG's  standards, the highest level of security standards shall prevail. The contractor is responsible for compliance with the terms of these Standards by its employees or agents. 1. Definitions The following definitions apply to these Standards: 

"agreement" means an agreement between the FEC  OIG  and a contractor under which (i) the contractor performs services for the Office of the Inspector General (e.g., service provided under contract or task order from  GSA  schedule), or (ii) is otherwise provided access to data, confidential information, network, environment system and/or  file  back-up. 

"computer"  means any desktop or laptop computer, mobile device (e.g., cellular phone, BlackBeny), server and/or storage device that (i) may be used to access a network or environment, or (ii) may access or store data or other confidential information. 

"confidential  information"  includes all environments, passwords, personally identifiable information  (PU),  and other non-public data or sensitive data. 

''contractor"  means any entity (including its employees and agents) that (i) performs services for the FEC  OIG  or as a subcontractor to a prime contractor, or (ii) is granted access to a network, FEC data or environment. 

"data"  means any information that resides on a network, in environments or on computers and includes any  Pll  or other confidential information about the FEC, FEC vendors, suppliers, and employees. 

"environme11t"  means any development, test, stage and/or production computing environments to which a contractor is provided access under an agreement. 

"network'' means any computer network to which contractor is provided access in connection 

vvith  an agreement and/or any contractor's computer networks used to provide services to the FECOIG. 

"pers011a/ly  identifiable  i1iformation"  or "Pll'' means information which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity either directly (such as their name, social security number, biometric records, etc.) or indirectly when combined with other personal or identifying information which is linked or linkable to a specific individual (such as date and place of birth, mother's maiden name, etc.). 

1FEC  OIG  Contractor  Security  Standards 2.  Use  of Networks, Computers and Environments 

Minimum  System  Security  Standards 

Effective Date: May  28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

The following are the minimum security standards accepted by the FEC with respect to computers and other mobile computing devices. 

• All laptops that access the FEC Local Area Network (LAN) will be required to employ a two-factor authentication mechanism where one of the factors is a device separate from the computer gaining access. 

• All laptops that access the FEC LAN will be required to employ whole hard drive encryption. 

• All mobile computing devices used to provide service under this agreement (i.e. BlackBerries and Palm Pilots) must be encrypted and/or password protected. 

• All mobile computing devices must use a  "time-out"  function for remote access and require user re-authentication after a minimum of  30  minutes inactivity. 

If the contractor is unable to supply its staff with computers or mobile computing devices that meet the minimum security standards above: 

• The contactor may not use the computers or other devices to access FEC systems or data. 

• The contractor may not transport, process or store any FEC data on the computers. 

• The FEC may supply computers that comply with the minimum security standards above. 

Network Protocols 

Contractor is required to take the following steps to protect its own network/computers containing FEC data or when accessing an FEC network or environments, to include the following: 

• Employ an industry standard Network lnt111sion Detection System (NIDS) to monitor and proactively block suspicious network traffic from reaching Contractor's network or environments. 

• Manage and monitor all routers and firewall logs for unauthorized access to contractor's network. 

• Use  router rules, access control lists and segmentation on any networks from which the environments or other confidential information are accessed. 

• When accessing the FEC' s network over the internet, contractor may use only encrypted network traffic via industry standard Virtual Private Network  (VPN). 

2FEC OIG Contractor Security Standards Effective Date: May 28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

• Contractor will use only authorized access methods such as  VPN  and the minimum authentication and security measures described above at all times for logical connection to the FEC networks. 

• Contractor may not permit wireless access to FEC networks, computers or environments at any time. 

• Contractor may transmit or make available confidential information over the intemet only in an encrypted format (e.g., using https or ftps). 

Access  to  Networks and Environments 

FEC networks and the environments may be accessed only: 

• if expressly permitted under the contractor's agreement with the FEC  OIG; 

• by contractor's employees and agents providing services under the agreement; and 

• on a  least-piivilege  basis for performance of services. Contractor will implement physical, administrative and technical measures that restrict the ability to download, copy and/or export data only to those authorized users who are required to process the data for the performance of the services.  Upon  termination of service, the contractor will also implement appropriate measures to restrict the ability to download, copy and/or export the one copy of FEC data retained as required by professional standards or other legal requirements regarding the service performed; access to the data, such as audit files and workpapers, must be limited to Audit Partner or other senior management personnel. 

Passwords 

Contractor must maintain the following password standards for all computers, networks and environments: 

• Passwords  must conform to strong password standards that include length, complexity, and expiration.  Passwords  must not be written down or stored on-line unencrypted. Any password stored on-line must be stored using a minimum of 128-bit encryption. 

• Passwords may not be shared. Each contractor employee or agent to whom access is granted must be provided a unique identifier and password. 

• Contractor will abide by any further requirements for passwords as described in the 

Federal Election Commission Password Standards. 

Termi11ating  Access 

Within 24 hours of termination, separation or resignation of any contractor employee or agent, the contractor must take appropriate actions to terminate his or her access to computers, networks, and environments, as well as physical access to service locations (contractor office 3FEC OIG Contractor Security  Standards  Effective Date: May 28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

environments). If termination, separation or resignation occurs during the agreement period of performance, the contractor must also notify within 24 hours the FEC  010  to ensure access to FEC systems is terminated. Further, the contractor is responsible for retrieving from the employee or agent any FEC supplied property such as: security badge, building access key (Kastle Key or other keys to rooms or storage areas), computers, and/or any other issued equipment. 

Loggi11g 

Contractor will retain security related logs for its computers and networks (including without limitation firewall,  NIDS,  operating system,  VPN,  and application logs) for at least  30  days. 3. Physical  Security 

Contractor is required to maintain the following physical security standards to prohibit unauthorized physical access at its offices at which confidential FEC information may be stored or from which FEC information, networks or environments may be accessed: 

• Access must be limited to contractor employees and authorized visitors. 

• Visitors must be required to sign a visitor's register and be escorted or observed when on the premises. 

• Contractor must monitor and properly manage the possession of keys and access cards and the ability to access the location of FEC data (i.e. computer data center). 

• When visiting or working at the FEC, contractor is required to abide by FEC building security requirements and any direction provided by FEC security staff. 

• Any after-hours access to contractor premises is monitored and controlled by security. 4. Computer protection  

> Physical Security

During the normal  workday,  whether working in a FEC office or at an off-site location, a security cable should be used to fasten FEC laptop computers to a desk, chair or other fixed object. All portable computing devices should be locked in a secured area at the end of the workday.  Portable  computing devices should not be left unattended while traveling unless stored in secure location where not visible (e.g. airport terminal locker or trunk of a locked car). 

Portable  computing devices must not be checked with other baggage when traveling.   

> Secure Key Ma1iagement

In order to meet FEC IT security standards, contractors may be assigned FEC laptop computers that use secure key protection. Contractors should remove the secure key from the laptop when leaving the work area. The secure key  sliould  not be stored with the laptop when not in use. 

> 4

FEC  OIG  Contractor Security Standards 

Computer Virus  C011trols 

Effective Date: May 28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

Contractor will employ the following computer virus controls for all computers used to provide services under its agreement with the FEC  OIG: 

• Scan all e-mail sent both to and from any recipient for malicious code and delete email attachments that are infected with known malicious code prior to delivery. 

• Use  industry-standard virus protection software.  Virus  definitions must be updated regularly (in no event to exceed 7 days). 

• Use  automated virus updates, which may not be disabled. 

Patclies 

Operating system security patches and software security patches must be applied promptly, when issued, on all computers. Computers should be configured to automatically receive security patches when issued. 5.  Storage,  Return and Deletion of Information 

> Storage

The contractor may not store PII, data, confidential information or environments on its computers unless required for the performance of se1vices under an agreement. When considering whether the info1mation is required to be stored on its computers, even on atemporary basis, the contractor should first determine whether the information can be accessed, reviewed and stored at the FEC under secure conditions. Any such information stored on computers must be  permanently  deleted (i.e. wiped) from a computer, in a manner that ensures that it cannot be accessed or read, as such storage is no longer required for the performance of services. All FEC data must be wiped from  p011able  laptops and devices no later than  60  days after contract te1mination and contractor shall provide written ce11ification when data removal is completed. 

Removable Media and  E11cryptio11 

Contractor  may not store  PII,  passwords, data or confidential information on removable media unless required for the performance of services under an agreement. Any such information on removable media must be stored using a minimum 128-bit encryption. Information must be permanently deleted from removable  media,  in a manner that ensures that it cannot be accessed or read, as soon as such storage is no longer required for performance of the services. 

Return and Deletion 

Upon  termination of services or upon request by the  FEC  OIG,  contractor must promptly (i) return to the FEC all  PII,  data, environments, and (ii) delete all  PII,  passwords, data and environments in its possession or control (on computers or in whatever other  f01m  or media) in a 5FEC OIG Contractor Security Standards Effective Date: May 28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

manner that ensures that they cannot be accessed or read. Contractor may retain a copy of the foregoing materials for so long as required by professional standards or legal requirements, provided that any such copy is kept in an encrypted and secure format and is not used or accessed for any other purpose. Contractor will dispose of documents containing  PII,  passwords, data or other confidential information only in secure shredding bins designated for sensitive or confidential information, with appropriate processes to assure that the documents are destroyed in a manner that ensures they cannot be re-created, accessed or read. 6. Business Continuity and Disaster Planning/Response 

Back-up and Retention of Data 

Contractor agrees to complete back-up and retention of all data as required for the performance of the services. Rules for frequency of back-ups and retention cycles shall be made available to the FEC  OIG  upon request. All back-ups must be stored securely. 

Incident Notification and Support 

Contractor shall notify the FEC  OIG  promptly of any incident that requires execution of the business continuity program and affects the function of computers and/or the availability or integrity of the data. Contractor  will  resume operations promptly after such an incident. 7. Confidentiality The passwords for the networks and the environments, and all  PII  and other data are FEC confidential information. Contractor will provide its employees and agents access to the networks, environments and any confidential information only on a need to know basis, and may not disclose any confidential information to any third party without the FEC  OIG's  prior written consent. 8.  Privacy  and Data Protection 

Unless  required to provide the agreed services to the FEC  OIG,  the contractor will take reasonable steps to ensure it does not accept and retain PII and confidential data in any form. Contractor agrees that it will take the following measures to assure protection of PII and/or confidential data obtained in performing the agreed service for the FEC  OIG: 

• Access, use and process PII and other data only on behalf of the FEC  OIG  and only for the purpose specified in the Contractor's agreement with the FEC  OIG,  in compliance with these Standards and such further instruction as the FEC may provide regarding the processing of such  PII  or other data. 

• Inform the FEC  OIG  promptly if contractor has reason to believe that legislation applicable to contractor (or changes in legislation applicable to contractor) prevent it 6FEC OIG Contractor Security Standards Effective Date: May 28.  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

from fulfilling the obligations related to the treatment of PII or other data under these Standards and/or contractor's agreement with the FEC. 

• To the extent pe1mitted by law, notify the FEC  OIG  promptly and act upon instruction concemmg: o Any request for disclosure of the  PII  or other data by law enforcement or other governmental authority; o Any request by law enforcement or other governmental authority for information concerning processing of  PII  or other data in connection with the agreement between the contractor and the FEC  OIG;  and o Any request received directly from an individual conceming his/her  PII. 

• Abide by all federal data privacy laws and regulations applicable to the contractor's access to  PII,  including FEC policies and procedures on protecting  PII. 

9. Reporting and Responding to Security Incidents and Breaches Contractor must immediately report to the FEC  OIG  (i) any security breach or other event that creates reasonable suspicion of unauthorized access to  PII,  data, confidential information or an environment and/or misappropriation or alteration of any  PII,  data or confidential information, and/or (ii) the loss or theft of any computer, whether issued by the FEC or belonging to the contractor but containing FEC data. Contractor will take appropriate steps to immediately address such incident, and will follow any additional instructions the FEC provides with respect to such incident and/or remediation identified in the response to such incident. 

10.  Personnel All contractor employees and agents must be required to execute written confidentiality agreements that are consistent with the confidentiality obligations in these Standards and to comply with polices designed to prevent the disclosure of confidential information. Contractor  is 

also responsible for assuring that its employee's and agent's access, use, and protect the security of service locations, computers, networks.  PII,  data, environments and other confidential info1mation in a manner consistent with the terms of its agreement with the FEC and these Standards. Contractor will employ clean desk and clear screen policies (i.e., policies and practices designed to restrict physical and logical access to confidential information on a need to know basis) to protect all data and other sensitive information. 11. Training Pursuant to the  Public  Law  100-23  5, the Computer Security Act,  "Each  agency shall provide mandatory periodic training in computer security awareness and accepted computer practices of all employees who are involved with the management, use, or operation of each Federal computer system within or under the supervision of1hat agency." The FEC applies this same security standard to its contractors. All contractor staff must complete FEC security awareness and privacy awareness training before being granted access to FEC systems and data. 7FEC  OIG  Contractor Security Standards Effective Date: May  28,  2009 

Revised Date: June 16,  2010 

Depending on the duration of the contracted services, contractor staff may also be required to attend periodic refresher training. 12. Verification, Monitoring and Audit Contractor will maintain a complete list of all individuals with permission to access the FEC and contractor network, environments and/or data. If requested, contractor will provide written response to any questions that the FEC  OIG  submits regarding the contractor's security practices. The FEC  OIG  may monitor the contractor's access to and use of the environment and networks. The FEC  OIG  may also have security audits performed upon reasonable notice to confirm compliance with these Standards. I have read the  "FEC  OIG  Contractor  Security  Standards"  attached hereto. I understand and agree to comply with them. The computer equipment proposed to perform the agreed service does/does not meet the Minimum System Security Standards described in section 2 above. Contractor Name (Typed or  Printed)  Name of Company (Typed or  Printed) 

Signature Date 8FEC  OIG  Contractor  Engagement Completion Checklist 

> Process
> Fixed  and  mobile computing devices used to provide the service to the FEC OIG  are  known  and  have been reviewed and sanitized  in  accordance with the FEC OIG Contractor Security Standards. A listing  of  the equipment  by  contractor  staff  member is included below.
> FECor
> Contractor  staff  listing#  Contactor  Item  description/  Performed by/date  Reviewed
> Supplied  serial number  by/date
> EQuioment?
> Contractor systems  and  networks have been reviewed  and  contain only one copy  of  final deliverable and associated engagement work papers in consolidated network and  fi.le  room locations. The records will be maintained  in  accordance with the FEC OIG Contractor  Security  Standards. A listing  of  staff  members with ongoing access to the records  is  included  below: Contractor  sta.IT  listing  # Read  only  Download
> #Note:  Be sure to include Engagement  Partner  or  other contractor quality asswance  staff  who may not have been physically present at the FEC  at  any time
> dwing  the engagement but who may have access to all data. I,  (name/title/organization) certify that the paper records and electronic files associated with  the  contracted service provided to the FEC and managed by the Office  of  the Inspector General  have been and  will  remain secured in accordance with the FEC  OIG  Contractor  Security  Standards and the firm's own procedures. Further,  I certify  that  the data protection practices described  in  the table above have been performed and were verified by __________  as complete. Date: ~------~

THE FEDERAL ELECTION  COMMISSION 

Office of Inspector General Washington, DC  20463    

> NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENT FOR CONTRACTORS

1. I, , understand and acknowledge that I may be granted access to sensitive, protected, and confidential information related to the Federal Election Conunission (FEC), including, but not limited to, information about individuals, including personally identifiable information, protected by the  Privacy  Act, Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended (IG Act) and other federal laws; information pertaining to the investigation, prosecution and conciliation of enforcement matters under the Federal Election Campaign Act, the unauthorized disclosure of which is a misdemeanor; proprietary or otherwise confidential commercial information owned by other third parties, such as software vendors to the FEC; and information related to the business, personnel and security practices of the FEC and FEC Office of Inspector General (OIG). I agree to use such information only in the course of my official duties in connection with the provisions of the below referenced contract. 2. Disclosure of  FEC  information. I agree to hold the FEC and FEC  OIG's  sensitive, protected, and confidential information, including personally identifiable information, in whatever form or format, in strict confidence, and to take all reasonable precautions to protect against unauthorized use or unauthorized disclosW'e of such information, including but not limited to compliance with the JG Act's confidentiality provisions and Rules of Behavior and Acceptable  Use  Standards for Federal Election Commission Information and System ResoW'ces. 3.  Duty  to  report. I agree to report inunediately to an appropriate employee of the FEC  OIG  any unauthorized use, unauthorized disclosure, or other breach of sensitive, protected, and confidential information of which I become aware, or which I suspect has occurred or may occur. 4.  Retum  of FEC material and information. At the conclusion of my work under this contract, I will return to the FEC (or destroy, upon written approval of the Inspector General [IG] or designee) all FEC material, including copies, and all records containing FEC material and information. FEC  OIG  material will be retwned only to the FEC  OIG  and not the main agency. 5. Deactivation of Access to  FEC  Information System Resources. Inunediately at the conclusion of my work (no later than 1 business day) under this contract I agree to notify the FEC Information Technology HelpDesk, in  writing~  that I no longer require access to FEC Information Resources. 6. Destr11ction  of  Personally Identifiable Information (PII).  Prior  to final payment on the contract, I will verify with the  OIG  Contracting Officer's Representative that I have destroyed  

> Page 1of2

any and all FEC and FEC  OIG  PII  that has come into my custody while working for or at the FEC  OIG.  The destruction method must be consistent with FEC IT  Security  Policies. 7. Exceptions. I understand that this Agreement shall not apply to: (1) Disclosures of sensitive, protected, and confidential information approved in advance in writing by the IG or designee; or (2) Information that is or was publicly available by means other than my disclosure; or (3) Compliance with a valid court order; provided, however, that I agree to inform the Counsel to the IG, Deputy IG, and/or IG as soon as possible after, and in no event more than one business day after, my receipt of such a court order, to provide the Counsel to the IG with a complete copy of the order, and to provide the  OIG  an opportunity to file an objection to the release of the information. 8. Appropriations Act restriction. These provisions are consistent with and do not supersede, conflict with, or otherwise alter the employee obligations, rights, or liabilities created by statute or Executive order relating to (1) classified information, (2) communications to Congress, (3) the reporting to an Inspector General of a violation of any law, rule, or regulation, or mismanagement, a gross waste of funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety, or (4) any other whistleblower protection. The definitions, requirements, obligations, rights, sanctions, and liabilities created by controlling Executive orders and statutory provisions are incorporated into this agreement and are controlling. Essentially, this Agreement does not prevent you from reporting fraud,  waste,  abuse, mismanagement, or violations mentioned above to the  010  or communicating with Congress. Further, by receiving Federal funds through a contract or agreement, an employer or contractor cannot prohibit you from reporting fraud, waste, abuse, mismanagement, or violations mentioned above to the  010  or other appropriate Federal official, even if you sign a confidentiality agreement. _ __ _______ (contract number) ___ ___ ____ (company) __________ (typed/printed name) __________ (signature) ____ (mmldd/yyyy)    

> Page 2of 2

Cover  Sheet  for Exported TeamMate Audit  File 

Title  of Engagement: Entity Audited: Assignment Number: ----------Dates: ------------ to Brief description of contents :------------------------

Staff  Person  Performing the TeamMate Export: 

Initials:  ___ _ Date: ___ _Records Retention  Instructions: 

(Check one) Temporary  file:  ___ _ Permanent  file:  ___ _Date to be: Transferred to  Federal  Records Center -----------Transferred to  National  Archives --------------Destroyed/deleted on or after ______________ _INDEPENDENT  REFERENCE  COMMENT  SHEET 

Title:  [Project  Title]  Assignment Number:  [OIG-XX-XX]       

> Comment# Referencer's Comments Auditor Responses Final
> Reference Clearance

Certification  of  Independent  Referencing 

I have  independently  referenced the draft report for the project sited above.  All 

of my documented comments have been  properly  cleared  by the auditor(s) and/or  resolution  by the Deputy  IG  or  IG  has been confirmed. Printed Name of Referencer 

Signature  of Referencer Date Updated 03/2015 1

OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL 

FLEXIPLACE PROGRAM POLICY 

PART 1 - OBJECTIVES OF THE FLEXIPLACE PROGRAM 

The Flexiplace Program (FP), commonly referred to as telework, is a voluntary program designed to permit Office of Inspector General (OIG) employees to work at a designated alternate duty station on an episodic or regular basis. The OIG is implementing FP to enable the office to use its resources more efficiently and effectively, increase job satisfaction, and improve the quality of the employees’ work and family life without diminishing the quality or quantity of the OIG work. The FP also reduces gasoline consumption, lessens the pollution and congestion caused by automobile traffic, and increases the likelihood that the OIG will be able to function if an epidemic or terrorist attack occurs. Telecommuting can also improve the OIG’s ability to recruit and retain employees, and allow the OIG to respond to the changing demands of the workplace. 

PART 2 - THE FLEXIPLACE PROGRAM 

Section 1 - Types of Flexiplace 

The OIG FP includes Episodic Flexiplace and Regular Flexiplace. Employees that participate in the program are required to perform the majority of their work at their official work station at FEC headquarters. 

Section 2 - Definitions 

A. “Alternate Duty Station” (ADS) is a specific room or specific areas within an employee’s primary residence. B. “Episodic Flexiplace” is the use of an ADS on an irregular basis for specific projects or assignments that are time-sensitive or require intense concentration. C. “Regular Flexiplace” is the use of an ADS on a regularly scheduled basis. 

Section 3 - Flexiplace Informational Sessions 

The OIG will hold an informational session(s) for potential FP participants at the inception of the OIG program, and as needed thereafter. The informational sessions will include a discussion of the program and an opportunity for prospective participants to ask questions about the program. 

Section 4 - Criteria for Eligibility 

A. Flexiplace may not be suitable for all employees or for all types of positions. Flexiplace will be allowed only when an employee is able to perform work (i.e. ability to produce a quantifiable work product during the FP) at an alternate duty station without impairing the OIG’s efficiency and effectiveness. In determining whether an employee or a position is suitable for Flexiplace, the OIG may consider factors such as the nature and content of the work and the procedures by which the work is to be performed; an employee’s past performance record, job title, type of appointment, or work schedule; the availability of equipment and technology that would make Flexiplace work practical in a given circumstance; and office coverage. Certain positions may be suitable for all types of Flexiplace arrangements. For other positions, Flexiplace would be on Updated 03/2015 2

a project type (episodic) basis, and the IG or Deputy IG reserves the right to deny or limit participation to such employees. 1. Examples of situations in which Flexiplace may be suitable: a. Employees who can function independently (that is, without close supervision); b. Employees who have a demonstrated record of dependability; c. Positions that entail significant analysis and writing and only a minimum amount of interaction with other employees; or d. Positions that entail a significant amount of computer-oriented tasks and only a minimum amount of interaction with other employees. 2. Examples of situations in which Flexiplace may not be suitable: a. Positions that necessitate frequent in-person interaction with other employees; b. Positions that necessitate frequent interaction with the public or with individuals who conduct business with the OIG; c. Positions that require frequent access to equipment or information that cannot be moved from the regular workplace; or d. Positions that would adversely affect the performance of other employees. C. To participate in the FP, an employee must have received a performance appraisal rating (if applicable) of 3 or higher on their most recent appraisal. Employees without an evaluation for their current position must serve at least 90 days and their supervisor (if applicable) must assess their performance to be at the “Fully Successful” to apply to participate in the FP. D. No employee may participate in Flexiplace if, during the year prior to the date the employee seeks to join Flexiplace, he or she has been subject to a disciplinary action or an adverse action. E. Employees must not be currently (or during the year prior to his or her applying to participate in Flexiplace) under a Performance Improvement Plan (“PIP”). F. Employees cannot participate in Flexiplace while they are working under a leave restriction letter. G. Employees must agree to abide by the terms and conditions in this policy and must sign and abide by the terms and conditions of the FP Application. ( See Form 1) H. Employees must ensure that the ADS is safe and suitable for the performance of official duties. ( See Form 3) I. Each participant must obtain and pay for a high-speed Internet connection at his or her ADS. (This requirement does not apply to employees who participate in the FP at the request of the OIG.) J. New supervisors will be required to review FP applications for concurrence. Updated 03/2015 3

Section 5 - Flexiplace Rules 

A. Rules Applicable to All Flexiplace Participants 1. Employee participation is voluntary and subject to the Inspector General (IG) or Deputy IG’s approval. 2. Work projects that are suitable for specific FP assignments are those that may be performed at least as efficiently at the ADS as at the traditional office duty station. 3. Employees must have a safe and adequate work site at home that provides the necessary level of security and protection for government property. Employees will complete a “Self-Certification Safety Checklist for Home-Based Flexiplace Participants.” (See Form 3) 4. The IG or Deputy IG may conduct periodic inspections of an ADS during the employee’s normal working hours to ensure that it conforms to safety standards and other specifications. Any inspection will occur only on days when the employee is working at the ADS and after reasonable advance notice. The IG or Deputy IG will use the Self-Certification Safety Checklist as the basis for conducting these inspections ( See 

Form 3). The IG or Deputy IG reserves the right to visit the ADS without advance notice if the IG or Deputy IG believes there is a potential violation of this policy. 5. Employees may not use duty time for any purposes other than official duties. For example, Flexiplace is not a substitute for dependent care, such as child care or elder care, and may not be used to provide dependent care during working hours. Nor may flexiplacing employees use duty time to operate a business. 6. The IG’s or Deputy IG’s reasonable discretion governs which OIG documents may be taken to the ADS. Employees will protect government records subject to the Privacy Act from unauthorized disclosure or damage at the ADS and will comply with the privacy requirements set forth in the Privacy Act of 1974, Public Law No. 93-579, codified at 5 U.S.C. § 552a. Due to the nature of the OIG’s work, employees are encouraged to discuss with the IG or Deputy IG if there is any uncertainty about the types of documents allowed to be taken to the ADS. All OIG employees have a duty to protect sensitive documents, to include, but not limited to records that may contain PII (personally identifiable information, such as social security numbers, etc.). 7. Telephone service and e-mail access are essential to the OIG’s mission. a. Program participants will not be reimbursed for e-mail and telecommunication equipment, installation, regular services and maintenance, or for their purchase of fax equipment. b. Employees must be available by telephone and simultaneously by e-mail during normal working hours and may be contacted by the OIG on an as-needed basis. The employee will immediately notify the IG or Deputy IG of any change in the location or telephone number of the ADS. When employees are working at their ADS, they will check their voicemail and e-mail messages on a regular basis during the workday. Updated 03/2015 4

c. Program participants will use government-issued telephone cards or government issued cell phones for all business telephone calls where costs in addition to those included in the employee’s regular telephone service fees are incurred (for example, long distance telephone calls). 8. Employees participating in the FP may be required to provide fax capability (both receiving and sending) at their ADS or at an alternative location. An electronic online fax capability may be considered sufficient for this purpose. In either case, the employee will provide the fax capability at his or her own expense. 9. Employees who share a household with other occupants must locate the ADS in a room that can be locked from the outside or must have a locked file cabinet or other locked container to minimize unauthorized access to OIG/FEC records and files. 10. The OIG may, at its discretion, place government-owned computers and telecommunications equipment in the ADS, but the OIG retains ownership and control of hardware, software, data ports, and data. 11. The employee will perform all work on an FEC OIG-issued laptop or other government-issued computing device ( e.g. , netbook, tablet, etc.). However, the IG or Deputy IG may grant written exceptions on a case-by-case basis. 12. Employees are responsible for and must maintain proper control of any government-owned equipment they use at their ADS, as outlined in applicable FEC procedures and directives. See , for example, “Management of Desktop and Laptop Computers.” The equipment is to be used only for authorized purposes. If any of the government-owned equipment is stolen, damaged, or lost, the employee must cooperate in any investigation conducted by the police or other authorities. The employee will promptly notify the IG or Deputy IG if government-owned equipment is stolen, damaged, or lost. 13. An employee participating in the FP will promptly inform the IG or Deputy IG whenever any problems (such as equipment failure, power outages, and telecommunications difficulties) arise that adversely affect the employee’s ADS or his or her ability to work at the ADS. 14. Employees working in a Flexiplace arrangement must adhere to established rules, practices, and procedures governing time and attendance; leave; travel; overtime; compensatory time; and credit hours. Employees are expected to adhere to their normal hours of duty for days worked at their ADS. Deviations to change hours must be made in writing to the IG or Deputy IG. 15. An employee who participates in the FP retains his or her eligibility for other programs, such as the Flexible Nine-Hour Work Week Program, the 4/10 compressed program and the Credit Hours Program. Participation also does not impinge on the employee’s ability to take annual and sick leave. With supervisory approval, participants in the 4/10 compressed program may also participate in the Flexiplace program, but will be limited to two Flexiplace days per pay period. 16. The official duty station of employees participating in the FP will continue to be their regular offices in the FEC’s headquarters building, not the ADS. Entitlement to locality-based pay, special salary rates, travel allowances, and relocation expenses is based on the official duty station. Updated 03/2015 5

17. Employees participating in the FP shall return to the official duty station as soon as possible when the IG or Deputy IG requests them to do so. The IG or Deputy IG will give the employees as much advance notice as possible of the need to return to the official duty station. Employees participating in Regular or Episodic Flexiplace are expected to come to the official duty station on their Flexiplace day(s) for meetings or other purposes based on the needs of the OIG. Employees may also be required or advised by the IG or Deputy IG to report to their official duty station. 18. Flexiplace During Closure or Dismissal Situations . When the FEC (or Office of Personnel Management (OPM)) has a delayed arrival, dismisses employees early, or closes its offices, because of an emergency or other exigency (for example, inclement weather or FEC building problem), employees scheduled to work at their ADS (Flexiplace) for the day of the announcement are not excused from work, and are expected to begin Flexiplace on-time or remain on duty (in cases of announced late arrival/early departure situations), or request unscheduled leave. The following additional provisions apply for approved Flexiplace participants: 

a. Unscheduled Flexiplace (telework) . Approved Flexiplace participants may work at their ADS when the FEC or OPM announces an “unscheduled leave/telework option” due to inclement weather or other exigency, or take unscheduled leave. Like unscheduled leave, employees must notify their supervisor, and send an email to OIG staff, of their intent to utilize the unscheduled Flexiplace option and must ensure that sufficient work can be performed through Flexiplace. Participants are expected to begin Flexiplace on-time or remain on duty (in cases of announced late arrival/early departure situations), or request unscheduled leave. The employee is to immediately add the Flexiplace time to the OIG shared calendar. b. In cases of early departure, with supervisory approval, a Flexiplace participant may depart prior to the scheduled early departure time without charge to annual leave provided the employee makes up the time later in the day by working at their ADS. This time is to be reflected on the OIG shared calendar. c. In cases where the FEC dismisses employees early due to a holiday (communicated to all FEC staff through FEC e-mail), OIG employees who are working at their ADS are also excused. In any event, if unsure, contact the IG or Deputy IG. d. In the event of inclement weather or other exigency, and FEC/OPM does not 

provide for delayed arrival, early dismissal or closing, Flexiplace participants may request episodic Flexiplace, provided the following are met: a request for episodic is submitted via email and supervisory approval is granted and sufficient work exists for the episodic Flexiplace. Once approval is granted the employee will reflect this time on the shared calendar. 19. Holidays, travel and training days that fall on a participant’s Flexiplace day(s) do not result in a “in lieu of” FP day(s). For example, if a participant’s Regular Flexiplace day is Monday of each week, and a Federal holiday occurs on Monday, the participant’s next Regular Flexiplace day would occur on the next Monday business day. 20. An employee’s violation of these rules and policies may be a basis for removal of the employee from the FP and for appropriate disciplinary or adverse action. Updated 03/2015 6

B. Rules Specifically Applicable to Regular Flexiplace 1. Regular Flexiplace may be scheduled up to a maximum of four (4) days per two (2) week pay period, except for participants of the 4/10 compressed schedule, who are limited to two Flexiplace days per pay period. Unless specifically approved, no more than two (2) Flexiplace days should occur in one week.. 2. Employees participating in Regular Flexiplace who come to the official duty station on their Flexiplace day(s) (due to a meeting or other purpose) may work with the IG or Deputy IG to try and substitute another day or days as their Flexiplace day(s) during that pay period, but an alternate Flexiplace day is not guaranteed. 3. Regular Flexiplace may be used for less than a full day in conjunction with the employee using annual or sick leave, earned compensatory time off, earned credit hours, or leave without pay, for the rest of the day. C. Rules Specifically Applicable to Episodic Flexiplace 1. The IG or Deputy IG, in consultation with the employee, will decide the appropriate duration of an Episodic Flexiplace arrangement. The decision will take into account the nature of the particular tasks or projects, the employee’s need for uninterrupted concentration, and the OIG’s work needs. ( See Section 4.A) 2. An employee who participates in Regular Flexiplace may also participate in an Episodic Flexiplace arrangement during a week or pay period when the employee is on his or her Regular Flexiplace day(s). Such occurrences are to be approved by the IG or Deputy IG. 3. Episodic Flexiplace may be used for less than a full day in conjunction with the employee using annual or sick leave, earned compensatory time off, earned credit hours, or leave without pay, for the rest of the day. 4. Episodic Flexiplace may be used to allow employees to work at the ADS on days when the Commission is operating on an “unscheduled leave” basis because of inclement weather or other circumstances. When possible , employees are expected to get prior approval for the day the unscheduled leave policy is invoked. Employees must notify their supervisor and OIG staff via email as early as possible, and no later than their normal scheduled start time, that they will be taking unscheduled Flexiplace. The employee is also expected to update the shared calendar once they have logged into Lotus Notes. 5. An employee who suddenly becomes ill or injured, but is well enough to work and has the capability for unscheduled telework (i.e., has the required technology at home and work that can be performed), may request Episodic Flexiplace in lieu of taking sick leave for all or part of a scheduled work day. The employee must email an Episodic Flexiplace request to the IG or Deputy IG as soon as practicable, but no later than the start of the employee’s scheduled work day. For example, an employee who wakes up too sick to commute but is well otherwise enough to perform work from home, or that may have a communicable illness and does not wish to expose co-workers, may request unscheduled Episodic Flexiplace before their scheduled starting time. If an employee has not received an approval or denial from the IG or Deputy IG by his or her scheduled start time, the employee may begin teleworking, but must cease work and take sick leave for the remainder of the day if the Episodic Flexiplace request is denied. The granting of Episodic Flexiplace for the purposes of this section is not automatic and remains solely the discretion of the IG or Deputy IG. The shared calendar must be immediately updated and the timekeeper notified upon approval under this section. Updated 03/2015 7

Section 6 - Flexiplace Program Applications 

A. Employees planning to participate in the FP program must submit application materials pursuant to this section. 

B. All eligible employees must participate in an orientation session (as described in Section 3). Employees who are making changes to an existing Flexiplace plan are not required to participate in another orientation session, unless changes to the program have occurred. C. Applicants who wish to participate in the Flexiplace program must fill out the Application (Form 1) and the Self-Certification Safety Check List (Form 3). Those who wish to participate in both types (Regular and Episodic) should complete both sections and all information on Form 1 must be completed for the type of Flexiplace that is being applied for. By signing and dating the Application Form, the employee signifies that he or she has volunteered to participate in the FP, has read and understands this policy, and will abide by the FP’s requirements. 

D. Employees participating in an Episodic arrangement must subsequently make an Episodic Flexiplace request to their supervisor (IG or Deputy IG) via email for each proposed episodic assignment. The email request must state the date of the episodic request. In determining whether to approve a particular Episodic Flexiplace assignment, the IG or Deputy IG may consider factors such as (a) the nature and content of the work, (b) the procedures by which the work is to be performed, (c) an employee’s work schedule, (d) the availability of equipment and technologies that would make the Flexiplace work practical in a given circumstance, and (e) office coverage. The supervisor will notify the employee of the approval or denial of the Episodic Flexiplace via email, and will copy the timekeeper on all approvals. Once the approval has been received by the employee, the employee is to immediately add their Flexiplace schedule to the shared OIG calendar. E. Employees already participating in an approved Regular Flexiplace arrangement who wish to make changes to that arrangement may either email their supervisor with the proposed change or complete a new Application (Form 1). Once the change is approved, the timekeeper will be provided with a copy of the new arrangement and all changes in the schedule will be reflected on the OIG shared calendar by the employee. F. Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of an employee’s initial Application (Form 1) or an employee’s request for changes to an approved Regular Flexiplace arrangement, the IG or Deputy IG will notify the employee whether the application has been approved or denied. The IG or Deputy IG will also respond to an Episodic Flexiplace Assignment Request as soon as practicable given the particular timing of the work to be completed in the request. The Application or Assignment Request must be approved before the employee begins to work at the ADS. 

G. If the IG or Deputy IG disapproves of any part of an employee’s Application (Form 1) or an Episodic Flexiplace Assignment Request, the reason(s) for denial will be furnished to the employee in writing in the appropriate section of the applicable form. H. The IG or Deputy IG may initiate a Flexiplace arrangement or assignment by contacting the employee either in person or via email with the date(s) and project(s) to be completed. An employee is not required to accept an OIG-initiated Flexiplace arrangement or assignment. Updated 03/2015 8

Section 7 - Participant’s Termination or Suspension from the Flexiplace Program 

A. The IG or Deputy IG may terminate or suspend an employee’s participation in the FP or a particular Flexiplace assignment or arrangement for reasons including but not limited to: failure to meet and maintain eligibility requirements during the program; diminished productivity; failure to adhere to this policy; or the needs of the OIG. 1. The employee normally will receive three workdays advance written notice of a decision. The notice will include an explanation for the decision. 2. The IG or Deputy IG will make an effort to counsel employees about specific problems before terminating their participation in the FP or a particular Flexiplace assignment. B. The IG or Deputy IG may exclude or temporarily suspend from the FP certain persons, positions, groups of positions, or organizational elements to meet the needs of the OIG. The IG or Deputy IG may take such action for reasons including, but not limited to, significant additional costs associated with the FP or new mission requirements requiring the suspension of employees’ participation in the FP. C. An employee may withdraw from the FP after written notice to the IG or Deputy IG. Once an employee has withdrawn from the FP, he or she may not participate in the program unless a new application process is completed and the employee’s application is approved. Any changes to an employee’s Flexiplace schedule will promptly be provided to the timekeeper by the supervisor. 

Section 8 - Problems and Remedies 

Employees and the IG / Deputy IG are encouraged to attempt to resolve problems with the FP through verbal and/or written communication. 

Section 9 - Liabilities and Responsibilities 

A. The FEC and OIG will not be responsible or liable for: 1. Damage to an employee’s real or personal property when the employee is performing official duties or while the employee is using governmental equipment at the ADS, except to the extent required by applicable law. 2. Accident or injury occurring at the ADS while the employee is performing official duties, except to the extent required by the Federal Employee’s Compensation Act. Employees must bring to the IG’s / Deputy IG’s and FEC’s immediate attention any accident or injury occurring while the employee is performing official duties at the ADS. 3. Operating costs, home maintenance, or any other incidental costs (for example, utilities) associated with the use of a private residence as an ADS. B. The FEC will be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all government-owned equipment placed at an ADS. If employees can feasibly do so, they will bring any malfunctioning government equipment to their official duty station for repair. Updated 03/2015 9

Section 10 - Duration and Recordkeeping 

A. This policy shall remain in full force and effect for one year from its effective date. The OIG agrees that, thereafter, the OIG’s Flexiplace Program shall be automatically renewed annually unless it is determined the FP has impacted the ability of the OIG to efficiently and effectively accomplish its mission, or other applicable reason. B. All forms, episodic email approvals, and any changes to an employee’s Flexiplace schedule will be promptly provided to the timekeeper. The timekeeper will maintain an electronic file related to all telework documentation. Updated 03/2015 10 

FORM 1 (Revised February 2015) 

FLEXIPLACE PROGRAM APPLICATION 

___________________________________ 

NAME OF APPLICANT (Please print) 

Instructions: Provide the information required for the type of Flexiplace arrangement you are requesting. If you wish to participate in both Regular and Episodic Flexiplace, fill out the entire form. If you are requesting changes to an existing Regular Flexiplace arrangement, circle the appropriate type. Please write legibly. 1. The address of my Alternate Duty Station (ADS) will be: ___________________________________________________________ 2. Describe specific room or areas within a room that will be designated as the ADS: 3. I am interested in participating in the following type(s) of Flexiplace arrangement. 

R EGULAR FLEXIPLACE 

New Arrangement Changes to Existing Arrangement I would like to participate in a Regular Flexiplace Arrangement on the following basis (per 2 week pay period): Preferred Day 1 of Week1: Preferred Day 2 of Week 1:________________ Preferred Day 1 of Week 2: Preferred Day 2 of Week 2:________________ Alternate day(s) of week: Preferred times: Frequency of work at ADS: Semiweekly Weekly Every Other Week Other 

EPISODIC FLEXIPLACE 

If I am approved to participate in an Episodic Flexiplace Arrangement, the types of work that I anticipate that I will perform at the ADS on an episodic basis are as follows: ________________________________________________________________________ ________________________________________________________________________ By signing and dating the application, I signify that (a) my participation in the Program is voluntary, (b) I have or will have high speed Internet access prior to participating, (c) I meet all the eligibility criteria contained in the policy for the Program and (d) I will abide by all the Program’s requirements. ____________________________ ______________________ APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE DATE 

___________________________________________________________________________ 

To be completed by IG or Deputy IG: 

APPROVED DENIED Reason for Denial: ____________ ___________________________ IG OR DEPUTY IG SIGNATURE DATE Updated 03/2015 11 

FORM 2 – SUPERCEDED BY POLICY – NO LONGER IN USE 

EPISODIC FLEXIPLACE ASSIGNMENT REQUEST 

(A separate request form must be completed for each assignment) 

___________________________________ 

NAME OF APPLICANT (Please print) 

1. Alternate Duty Station (ADS) Address: _______________________________ _______________________________ 2. The employee will work at his/her ADS on the specific dates and times indicated below: Date(s): Starting Time: Ending Time: 3. Description of the project/work assignment to be performed at the ADS: __________________________________ APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE DATE 

___________________________________________________________________________ 

To be completed by IG or Deputy IG: 

APPROVED DENIED Reason for Denial: __________________________________ IG OR DEPUTY IG SIGNATURE DATE 4. Flexiplace Post-Evaluation Was the project or work successfully completed in the time allowed? YES NO If the project was not completed, provide a brief explanation as to why not. __________________________________ IG OR DEPUTY IG SIGNATURE DATE Both the employee and the IG or Deputy IG should maintain a copy of this completed form. In addition, the original of the completed form should be forwarded to the IG after either (1) the IG or Deputy IG has disapproved the request for a particular Episodic Flexiplace Assignment or (2) the IG or Deputy IG has approved the request and has completed the post-evaluation section of this form. Updated 03/2015 12 

FORM 3 SELF-CERTIFICATION SAFETY CHECKLIST FOR HOME-BASED FLEXIPLACE PARTICIPANTS 

Participating employees should use the following checklist to assist them in a survey of the overall safety and adequacy of their alternate worksite. The following are guidelines, and do not encompass every situation that may be encountered. Employees are encouraged to obtain professional assistance with issues concerning appropriate electrical service and circuit capacity for residential worksites. 

Name:____________________________________________________________ Office/Division: ___________________ Work Phone Number: _______________________ Alternative Worksite Location: (Describe the designated work area in the alternative worksite). 

□ Develop and practice a fire evacuation plan for use in the event of an emergency. 

□ Check your smoke detectors regularly and replace batteries once a year. 

□ Always have a working fire extinguisher conveniently located in your home, and check the charge regularly. 

□ Computers are heavy. Always place them on sturdy, level, well maintained furniture. 

□ Locate your computer to eliminate noticeable glare from windows and lighting. Place the computer monitor at a height that is comfortable and does not produce neck or back strain. Locate computer keyboards at heights that do not cause wrist strain or place the keyboard on an adjustable surface. 

□ Install sufficient lighting in the work area. 

□ Arrange file cabinets so that opened drawers do not block aisles. 

□ Be sure to leave aisle space, where possible, to reduce tripping hazards. 

□ Always make sure electrical equipment is connected to grounded outlets. 

□ Avoid fire hazards by never overloading electrical circuits. 

□ Inspect and repair carpeting with frayed edges or loose seams. Avoid using throw rugs that can cause tripping hazards in your workspace. 

□ Locate computers, phone, and other electrical equipment in a manner that keeps power cords out of walkways. 

□ Always power down computers after the workday is over and always turn off all electrical equipment during thunderstorms. 

□ Keep your work area clean and avoid clutter that can cause fire and tripping hazards. 

□ Do not allow non-Government employees to operate or repair Government owned equipment. 

□ Always keep Government files and information in a secure place and do not advertise your home office to strangers. 

□ Always use proper lifting techniques when moving or lifting heavy equipment and furniture. 

□ Always report accidents and injuries immediately to supervisor. By completing, signing, and dating this checklist, the employee signifies that he or she understands and will adhere to its guidelines. Employee’s Signature and Date: _________________________________________________________ Immediate Supervisor’s Signature and Date: _______________________________________________ Both the employee and his or her supervisor should each maintain a copy of this completed form.
