Title: 

URL Source: https://lambtonbases.ca/uploads/2021/02/TEST-ANSWERS-Annual-Safety-Refresher-2021.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 13 Jan 2022 15:26:54 GMT

Markdown Content:
BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

The BSO Plus Safety Refresher is a checkpoint designed from the monthly safety topics. 

Completing this refresher is your way to stay current on the safety information over the 3 years 

between BSO Plus and BSR. 

# TEST ANSWERS : ANNUAL SAFETY REFRESHER 

1. A corporation that is convicted of contraventions of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 

(OHSA) can face fines of up to $1,500,000. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: The maximum penalties for a contravention of OHSA or its regulations are set out in 

the OHSA Section 66. A successful prosecution could, for each conviction, result in: 

• A fine of up to $100,000 for an individual person and/or up to 12 months imprisonment; 

• A fine of up to $1,500,000 for a corporation. 

2. Match the following list of organizations to their purpose. 

a) Ministry of Labour , Training 

and Skills Development  ____ d Includes 6 provincially funded medical 

clinics across Ontario 

b) Health and Safety Ontario  ____ a Uses trained workplace inspectors to 

enforce the law under the OHSA 

c) Workplace Safety and 

Insurance Board  ____ c Provides insurance benefits for sick or 

injured workers 

d) Occupational Health Clinics 

for Ontario Workers  ____ b

Made up of 4 provincially funded safety 

associations: WSPS, IHSA, PSHSA and 

WSN 

RATIONALE: You can find more information about these organizations and what they do at their 

websites: 

• Ministry of Labour , Training and Skills Development (ML TSD ):  http://www.labour.gov.on.ca 

• Health and Safety Ontario (HSO):  www.healthandsafetyontario.ca 

• Workplace Safety and Insurance Board (WSIB):  www.wsib.on.ca 

Occupational Health Clinics for Ontario (OHCOW):  www.ohcow.on.ca BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

3. According to the Occupational Health and Safety Act, as a worker, you have 3 basic rights. 

Match the following righ ts to an example of how that right could be exercised. 

a) Right to Know  c You notice that a scaffold is missing a tag. 

Before beginning to work you report the 

unsafe condition to your supervisor 

b) Right to Participate  b You join your Joint Health and Safety 

Committee or become a Health and Safety 

Representative 

c) Right to Refuse  a You attend regular staff meetings and safety 

talks in the workplace 

RATIONALE: The Occupational Health and Safety Act protects your right to know about health 

and safety hazards in the workplace; the right to participate in keeping your workplace safe, 

which can best be done by becoming a Joint Health and Safety Committee member or a Health 

& Safety Rep; and the right to refuse unsafe work. 

4. Every worker is responsible only for his/her own safety. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: All workplace parties have duties under the Occupational Health and Safety Act. The 

amount of responsibility assigned to each party is directly related to the level of authority they have in 

the workplace. OHSA s.28 states that workers are responsible for their own safety and actions, as 

well as for others who may be affected by their actions. You should not endanger yourself or others. 

If you see something, say something. While it is your responsibility, as a worker, to always wear or 

use the protective equipment that your employer requires, it is the duty of your supervisor to ensure 

that you are given the correct equipment and that you know how to use it properly. 

5. If you are overexposed to a hazardous material, the extent of your injury or illness may 

depend on which of the following? (Circle all that apply) 

a. Quantity and concentration of the ch emical 

b. Exposure to more than one chemical 

c. Length of exposure 

d. State of health 

RATIONALE: Both short and long -term exposure to a designated substance can have serious 

potential health hazards. Exposure to designated substances must be limited or controlled, as it may 

result in permanent damage to the human organ system, various forms of cancer, and even death. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

6. If you are likely to be exposed to a controlled product while on the job, your employer has a 

legal duty under the Occupational Health a nd Safety Act (OHSA) to educate you about that 

product and the precautions you must take to protect yourself. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Employers are required by the OHSA, s.42 (1) to educate workers who are likely to be 

exposed to a controlled product on the job. To help control exposure to designated substances, your 

employer must put in place a control program for each substa nce a worker may be exposed to. This 

control program must include a written plan, exposure control measures, air monitoring measures 

and methods of analysis, and a medical surveillance program (OHSA, Reg. 490, s. 20). 

7. Each of the 11 designated substances will have their own individual written control program 

and safe handling procedures. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: According to the Occupational Health and Safety Act, “every worker shall work in 

compliance with the work practices and hygiene practices in accor dance with every control program 

respecting a designated substance that applies to the workplace.” (Reg. 490/09, s. 26). This means 

that you must follow the control program put in place by your employer in order to help keep you 

safe. If you have any quest ions regarding how to handle a designated substance, always ask your 

supervisor before beginning work. 

8. “Latency Period” is: 

a. The 24 hours after exposure to a substance 

b. The time between exposure to a carcinogen, toxin, or disease -causing organism and 

development of a consequent disease 

c. The time between developing symptoms and when you recover from them 

d. None of the above 

RATIONALE: “Latency period” is the time it takes for an adverse health effect to develop after first 

exposure to a hazard. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

9. By cutting into a vinyl floor tile that contains non -friable asbestos, the asbestos can be 

released as friable asbestos and inhaled. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Non -friable asbestos fibres are locked or bound into the material itself but may be 

released through cutting or sanding activities. 

10. Signs and coloured metal banding are two methods for identifying asbestos in the workplace. 

What should you do if you’re not sure whether or not something contains asbestos? 

a. Try to crush a piece of materi al by hand to see if it crumbles 

b. Try to ignite it 

c. Assume it is asbestos, do not disturb it, and contact your supervisor 

d. Ask your co -workers if they know 

RATIONALE: The Asbestos Regulation 278/05 describes the activities and preparation required to 

work with this hazardous material. You must be specifically trained to work with asbestos. In the 

field, all known asbestos containing material (ACM) will be clearly identified, however, unknown ACM 

may still be present. If you are not sure whether or not something contains asbestos, assume it does 

and contact your supervisor. All plants that have ACM must maintain an Asbestos Management plan 

that documents the known ACM locations. These plans are available for your review. 

11. When working with RCFs, the greatest risk of exposure is due to inhalation of fibres and/or 

dust. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Along with the skin, eye, and respiratory effects caused by exposure to RCFs, there is 

also a concern that the individual fibres are small enough to penetrate deep into the lungs and 

possibly lead to the development of lung cancer, mesothelioma, or silicosis. When working with 

RCFs, the greatest risk of exposure is due to inhalation of fibres and/or dust. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

12. Refractory Ceramic Fibres (RCFs) may be found in: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Gaskets and seals 

b. Drywall compound 

c. Furnace liners 

d. Thermal insulation in industrial boilers 

RATIONALE: RCFs are widely used to replace asbestos in applications requiring high heat 

resistance, such as: thermal insulation in industrial boilers, high temperature pipe and vessel 

insulation, furnace liners and heating element supports, high temperature gaskets and seals. RCFs 

are commonly used in the steel, petrochemical, aerospace, and automotive industries .

13. Which of the following are properties of H ₂S? (Circle all the apply) 

a. Colourless gas 

b. Occurs naturally 

c. Rotten egg smell at high concentrations 

d. Heavier than air 

RATIONALE: H 2S is an extremely toxic colourless gas. It is highly flammable, even explosive in 

some gas/air mixtures. It has a “rotten egg” smell at very low concentrations, but this cannot always 

be detected. H 2S gas is heavier than air. It collects in low -lying areas and poorly ventilated areas 

such as trenches, basements, sewers lin es, and pits. 

14. You can trust your sense of smell to detect the presence of H ₂S. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: According to the Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (CCOHS), H2S 

takes only 100 ppm to overwhelm and deaden your sense of smell. You must never rely on you 

sense of smell to identify H2S. Signs let you know the areas where H2S is or may be present, and 

both personal and audible alarms warn you of a toxic vapour release. 

15. Benzene is a natural component of gasoline and is often held in pi pelines or tanks. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Benzene can be found on many local plant sites as it is an important component of 

gasoline, it is often held in pipelines or full tanks. It is frequently present as it is being shipped, in 

large quantities, by trucks, rail, and boats. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

16. Examples of PPE controls for benzene include: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Chemical safety goggles 

b. Chemical face shield 

c. Respiratory protection 

d. Double hearing protection 

RATIONALE: Workers can protect themselves from benzene exposures through the use of 

engineering controls and proper PPE, including w earing chemical safety goggles and face shield 

when contact is possible, chemical protective clothing e.g., gloves, aprons, boots, and proper 

respiratory p rotection. 

17. Exposure to breathable crystalline silica can cause: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Lung cancer 

b. Bronchitis 

c. Emphysema 

d. Silicosis 

RATIONALE: Long term exposure to this crystalline silica dust can result in silicosis - a lung disease 

caused by inflammation and scarring in the upper lobes of the lungs, for which there is no cure. 

Exposure has been also associated with other respiratory diseases, such as lung cancer, chronic 

obstructive pulmonary disease (including bronchitis and emphysema), as well as kidney and immune 

system diseases. 

18. Crystalline silica is the primary component of which of the following materials: 

a. Brick 

b. Iron 

c. Aluminum 

d. Topsoil 

RATIONALE: Silica is found in many materials common on construction sites, including soil, sand, 

concrete, masonry, rock, granite, and landscaping materials. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

19. 95% of lead accumulates in the bones and can be released back throughout the body over 

time, causing damage to: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Brain 

b. Bones 

c. Liver 

d. Kidneys 

RATIONALE: The most common route of entry of lead is inhalation and ingestion. It is not readily 

absorbed through the skin. Once absorbed into the body, 95% of this metal accumulates in the 

bones and can be released back throughout the body over time, causing damage to the liver, 

kidneys, brain, bones, and nervous system. Lead can affect virtually every system of the body. 

20. Personal protective equipment (PPE) to be used when lead exposure is possible includes: 

(Circle all that apply) 

a. Safety harnesses 

b. Gloves 

c. Non -permeable clothing 

d. Approved respirators 

RATIONALE:  Eliminating the hazard by substituting a safer process or material, where possible, is 

the most effective control such as a lead -free alternative (for example, using lead -free paint). Making 

physical modifications to facilities, equipment, and processes such as making enclosures away from 

lead -generating processes for workers can reduce exposure. 

Workers should wear proper personal protective equipment such as gloves, non -permeable clothing 

and approved respirators if lead exposure is possible. 

21. The following are characteristics of mercury: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Liquid at room temperature 

b. Highly flammable 

c. Heavy and dense metal 

d. Odourless 

RATIONALE: Mercury is a heavy, dense metal that is liquid at room temperature. The freezing point 

of mercury is below -38⁰ Celsius ( -36⁰ Fahrenheit). The liquid is so dense that a bowling ball would 

float i n it. Liquid mercury is quite volatile. It is odourless and will not burn however, when exposed to 

air, mercury metal vaporizes and can be inhaled. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

22. Crude oil streams can contain mercury. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Mercury is a natural component of oil and gas and may be present at high 

concentrations in some formations. Crude streams contain various levels of mercury which stick to 

the sides of vessels. Concentrations of mercury in each individual stream are not always known. 

Doing hot work inside a vessel, like grinding or welding, can produce mercury fumes. 

23. Your body may be suffering from heat stress if you experience: 

a. A red bumpy, itching rash 

b. Painful cramps in your most worked muscles 

c. Heavy sweating, nausea or vomiting 

d. All of the above 

RATIONALE: The physical conditions caused by heat stress affect the body’s ability to cool itself. 

These conditions can range from minor disorders to severe disorders, each with their own set of 

causes, symptoms and treatment. It is important to be aware o f the symptoms of heat stress so that 

you can seek immediate treatment when necessary. 

24. The Safety Partnership’s Heat Stress guidelines recommend the following controls for heat 

stress: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Issuing alerts 

b. Increasing physical activity 

c. Drinking water at regular intervals 

d. Stopping non -essential work 

RATIONALE: The Safety Partnership released their Heat Stress Guidelines on July 30th, 2013. They 

updated the guideline on April 20, 2017. These guidelines list heat stress controls for various 

humidex ranges & working conditions for un -acclimatized workers. Following a heat stress guideline 

an important measure in preventing heat stress. Different companies may use different guidelines, 

but all of them should have a policy in place. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

25. In addition to alcohol, certain medications may prevent the body from generating heat 

normally. These include sedatives, anti -depressants, tranquilizers and some heart 

medications. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: A hat can help prevent up to 50% of the body’s heat loss while clothing layers trap 

heat close to the body. Caffeine contributes to dehydration, which affects the body’s ability to 

function properly, and should be avoided. When exposed to cold temperatures you should avoid 

drinking alcohol. Alco hol increases blood flow to the outer layer of skin which leads to faster loss of 

body heat. Certain medications may prevent the body from generating heat normally. 

26. Artificial sources of radiation include: 

a. X-ray machines 

b. Nuclear gauges 

c. Minerals in the so il 

d. All of the above 

RATIONALE: If you work with x -ray equipment, radiography instruments for equipment inspection, or 

nuclear density gauges, you could be potentially exposed to radiation. Radioactive materials 

(including uranium, thorium, and radium) also exist naturally in soil and rock. 

27. If you are working with or near radiation, exposure dosages will be carefully monitored and 

recorded. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: The main ways to control radiation exposure include engineering controls, 

administrative controls and personal protective equipment. If you are working with or near radiation, 

you must receive site specific training on how to deal with that hazard. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

28. Ringing or buzzing in the ear may be a sign of: 

a. Mental health issues 

b. Muscle tension response 

c. Tinnitus 

d. None of the above 

RATIONALE: Noise is one of the most common occupational health hazards. Auditory effects 

include hearing impairment resulting from excessive noise exposure. Noise -induced permanent 

hearing loss is the main concern related to occupational noise exposure. Workers may also 

experience temporary hearing loss, acoustic trau ma, or tinnitus (ringing or buzzing in the ear). 

29. Ontario’s Noise Regulation (O. Reg. 381/15) states that over an 8 -hour workday no worker 

may be exposed to a sound level greater than: 

a. 65 dBA 

b. 75 dBA 

c. 85 dBA 

d. 90 dBA 

RATIONALE: The Noise Regulation (O. Reg. 381/15) applies to all workplaces covered under the 

Occupational Health and Safety Act (OHSA). The regulation requires that every employer shall 

ensure that no worker is exposed to a sound level greater than a time -weighted average exposure 

limit of 85 dBA measured over an 8 -hour workday . A constant exposure to 84 dBA over a 12 -hour 

period would mean that worker protection is still mandated, because the exposure limit for noise 

would be exceeded. 

30. Workers who operate hand -held vibrating tools are at risk for experiencing vibration related 

health conditions. 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Vibrating objects, such as power tools, send vibration through the hands and arms. 

Exposed occupational groups include operators of chain saws, chipping tools, jackhammers, jack leg 

drills, grinders and many other workers who operate hand -held vibrating tools. Groups exposed to 

whole -body vibration include operators of trucks, buses, tractors and those who work on vibrating 

floors. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

31. Which of the following factors may affect the severity of vibration related health effects? 

(Circle all that apply) 

a. Medical history of injury to fingers and hands 

b. Duration of exposure each workday 

c. State of tool maintenance 

d. Protect ive practices and equipment including gloves, boots, work -rest periods 

RATIONALE: Vibrating objects, such as power tools, send vibration through the hands and arms, 

which can cause changes in tendons, muscles, bones and joints, and can affect the nervous system. 

The severity of hand -arm vibration syndrome depends on several other factors, such as the 

characteristics of vibration exposure, work practice, personal history and habits. 

32. An example of indirect contact of a biological agent would be: (Ci rcle all that apply). 

a. Contact with contaminated objects and surfaces 

b. Contact with the spray of droplets from coughing 

c. Animal -to -person contact 

d. Insect bites 

RATIONALE: Direct contact occurs when infected blood or body fluid from one person enters 

anothe r person’s body at an entry site, such as infected blood splashing in the eye. Indirect contact 

occurs when a person’s skin touches an object that contains the blood or body fluid of an infected 

person, such as picking up soiled dressings contaminated with an infected person’s blood or body 

fluid and enters either through broken skin or is transferred to a mucous membrane, such as the eye. 

33. Identify the appropriate control measures for protecting workers from biological hazards. 

(Circle all that apply) 

a. Handwashing 

b. Worker training and immunization programs 

c. Proper equipment cleaning 

d. Spill cleanup procedures 

RATIONALE: Standard precautions include maintaining personal hygiene, such as handwashing, 

using PPE, engineering controls, work practice controls, worker training, and proper equipment 

cleaning and spill cleanup procedures. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

34. Ergonomics is the science of designing: 

a. Equipment and devices to fit the worker to the work 

b. Personal protective equipment that is a comfortable fit for workers 

c. Equipment and devices to fit the work to the worker 

d. Office chairs that offer various support settings 

RATIONALE: Ergonomics is the study of the kind of work you do, the environment you work in, and 

the tools you use to do your job. More specifically, it is the science of designing equipment and 

devices to fit the work to the worker. 

35. Ergonomic hazards include the following elements: 

a. Work stations, tools and equipment, physical environments, and the organization of work 

b. Tools and equipment and the physical environment 

c. Temperature, lighting, and vibration 

d. Workstations and the organization of work 

RATIONALE: Poor design of any of these elements can put physical strain on your body. 

Documenting repetitive tasks, awkward postures and the forces required to perform jobs helps to 

assess the degree of ergonomic hazards. By being alert to problems, you can help identify injury 

causes and solutions. 

36. Which of the following actions will help minimize slips, trips, and fa lls? (Circle all that apply) 

a. Pay attention to your footing 

b. Wear appropriate footwear 

c. Clean up after yourself throughout the day 

d. Do not rush 

RATIONALE: Both slips and trips result from some a kind of unintended or unexpected change in the 

contact between the feet and the ground or walking surface. This fact shows that good 

housekeeping, quality of walking surfaces (flooring), selection of proper footwear, and appropriate 

pace of walking are critical for preventing fall incidents. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

37. If you come across a housekeeping issue that you are unable to correct, you should: 

a. Cover the problem with some plywood 

b. Report the problem to your supervisor 

c. Avoid the area 

d. Leave the problem for somebody else to fix 

RATIONALE: Housekeeping is an ongoing task th at needs to be done continuously throughout the 

day, not just at the day’s end. Poor housekeeping frequently contributes to accidents by hiding 

hazards that cause injuries. Cleaning and organizing must be done regularly to prevent workplace 

hazards. Everyo ne is responsible for maintaining a clean workspace .

38. The working at heights training requirements apply to workers who are required under O. 

Reg. 213/91 (Construction Projects) to use which of the following methods of fall protection: 

(Circle all the appl y) 

a. A travel restraint system 

b. A fall arrest system 

c. A safety net 

d. A work belt or a safety belt 

RATIONALE: Ontario’s Ministry of Labour (MOL) requires that any worker operating under the 

Construction Projects Regulation (O. Reg. 213/91) must successfully complete an approved Working 

at Heights training program if they use specified fall protection systems. The working at heights 

training requirements apply to workers who are required under O. Reg. 213/91 to use any of the 

following methods of fall protection: a travel restraint system, a fall restricting system, a fall arrest 

system, a safety net, a work belt, or a safety belt. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

39. Match the colour of the scaffold inspection tag to its appropriate meaning. 

a) Green Tag  b Workers must read the tag and follow all listed 

precautions before using 

b) Yellow Tag  a Scaffold is safe to use 

c) Red Tag  d To be treated as a “red tag”, the scaffold is not safe 

to use 

d) No Tag 

c

The scaffold is unsafe to use under any 

circumstances 

RATIONALE: It is important to understand the three -tag system. A red inspection tag on a scaffold 

indicates that the scaffold is unsafe to use, and only the people who are qualified to erect and 

dismantle scaffolds may use a red -tagged scaffold. A yellow tag indicates the need for caution. 

Follow the precautions listed on the yellow tag prior to using the scaffold. The green tag means the 

sca ffold is safe to use. If no tag is present, the scaffold must be treated as if it has a red tag. 

40. Common causes of dropped objects include: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Inadequate risk assessment 

b. Well maintained tools 

c. Poor housekeeping 

d. Collisions and snagging 

RATIONALE: Many factors can contribute to a dropped object. In order to stop dropped and falling 

objects when working at height, an understanding of the primary causes of the incidents can help 

conduct more thorough risk assessmen ts and avoid overlooking some fundamental reasons why 

drops happen. Objects to consider with potential to cause accidents are hand tools, tools or 

equipment left behind after a task, or equipment mounted in an elevated location that has the 

potential to fa ll due to movement or environmental conditions. 

41. Physical controls for dropped objects include: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Staying in the moment 

b. Tool lanyards and tethers 

c. Lifting bags 

d. Storage buckets, belt straps, and backpacks 

RATIONALE: Physical controls physically stop objects from falling (or from falling very far). These 

may include tool lanyards and tethers, lifting bags, storage buckets, belt straps, and backpacks. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

42. In addition to the tagout requirements of Construction Regulation 213/91 s. 190(6), the Safety 

Partnership requires the tag to include: 

a. Your photo ID 

b. The Supervisor’s contact number 

c. The contact information of the person who installed the tag 

d. All of the above 

RATIONALE: No one is allowed to remove a lock and tag without the permission of the person who 

installed it. In the event that a worker has forgotten to remove their lock and tag upon completion of 

their work, having a contact name and number available allows for timely contact with the worker to 

confirm that they are sa fely out of the locked -out work area. 

43. In addition to electrical energy, workers may be exposed to hazards from which of the 

following: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Hydraulic energy 

b. Thermal energy 

c. Mechanical energy 

d. Pneumatic energy 

RATIONALE: Lockout/Tagout procedures apply when we perform servicing or maintenance on 

certain pieces of equipment or machinery. Most of us recognize that electricity is the primary source 

of hazardous energy we face, but it’s certainly not the only one. Hazardous en ergy is defined as any 

electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, chemical, thermal, gravitational, or other energy that 

can harm personnel.” (CSA Z460 -13) 

44. For a fully or partially enclosed space to be designated as a confined space under the 

Occupatio nal Health & Safety Act, it must meet BOTH of the following conditions: 

i. not designed and constructed for continuous human occupancy, and 

ii. in which atmospheric hazards may occur because of its construction, location 

or contents or because of work that is done in it 

a. True 

b. False 

RATIONALE: Section 1 of Regulation 632/05 for Confined Spaces states that both of these 

conditions must be met for a partially or fully enclosed space to be considered a confined space for 

most workplaces covered under that Occupational Health & Safety Act. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

45. When communicating with workers inside a confined space, if the safety attendant does not 

get a response, he should: 

a. Follow the emergency rescue plan 

b. Send a co -worker in to check 

c. Stick his head into the entry to see what’s happening 

d. Go find a supervisor 

RATIONALE: Section 15(2) of the Confined Spaces regulation states that no attendant shall enter a 

confined space at any time. The attendant’s role is to monitor the safety of the worker inside; to 

provide assistance to him or her from outside the confined space; and to summon an adequate 

rescue response if required. 

46. Examples of “Distracted Driving” include: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Texting while driving 

b. Excessive speeding 

c. Eating while driving 

d. Searching for something in the car 

RATIONALE: A driver’s first responsibility is the safe operation of the vehicle. Engaging in any 

secondary activity which takes the operator’s attention away from driving i s deemed unsafe. 

47. WHMIS provides information to workers about hazardous materials through which of the 

following method(s)? (Circle all that apply) 

a. Supplier & Workplace labels 

b. Safety Data Sheets 

c. Worker education & training 

d. Workplace inspections 

RATIONALE: WHMIS is a Canada -wide system that provides workers with information about 

hazardous materials through supplier and workplace labels, safety data sheets (SDSs), and worker 

education and training. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

48. Match the WHMIS 2015 hazard pictogram with the correct category below: 

A B C D E F G H I

F 1.1 Flammables (gases, aerosols, liquids, solids); Pyrophoric (liquids, solids, 

gases); Self -reactive substances and mixtures; Self -heating substances and 

mixtures; Substances and mixtures which, in contact with water, emit 

flammable gases, organic peroxides 

D 1.2 Oxidizers (liquids, solids, gases) 

B 1.3 Gases under pressure 

E 1.4 Health Hazards (Carcinogenicity; Germ cell mutagenicity; respiratory 

sensitization; reproductive toxicity; Specific target organ toxicity – single 

exposure; Specific target organ toxicity – repeated exposure; Aspiration 

hazard) 

A 1.5 Corrosive to metals; Skin corrosion; Serious eye damage 

G 1.6 Explosives; Self -reactive substances and mixtures; Organic peroxides 

H 1.7 Acute toxicity (fatal or toxic ; oral, dermal, inhalation) 

C 1.8 Acute toxicity (harmful ); Skin irritation; Eye irritation; Skin sensitization; 

Specific target organ toxicity – single exposure (respiratory irritation or 

drowsiness or dizziness) 

I 1.9 Biohazardous infectious materials 

49. Some benefits of TASC’s are: (Circle all that apply) 

a. Increases the communication of hazards in the workplace 

b. Effective method for identifying hazards associated with each step of the job 

c. Clearly lists all controls required to mitigate the hazards 

d. Valid for an entire shift without requiring a review 

RATIONALE: The purpose of a TASC is to provide an opportunity for all workers to discuss the key 

steps of a job, the hazards associated with the job, and methods to be used to control or eliminate 

those hazards. TASC ensures that everyone working on the job has the same understanding of risks 

and controls and is specific to the task being completed at the time. BSO Plus SAFETY REFRESHER – 20 21     

> INDUSTRIAL EDUCATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE
> 1086 Modeland Road, Suite 100N, Sarnia, ON , N7S 6L2
> Ph. 519 -383 -1222 Fax 519 -383 -1305
> www. iecp artnership.com

50. TASC’s must be reviewed: (Circle all that apply) 

a. After breaks 

b. When the scope of the work changes 

c. Every hour 

d. If a new worker joins the group 

RATIONALE: Because a variety of factors can affect the work environment throughout the day, the 

TASC should be reviewed when returning to the job site after breaks and any time something about 

the job cha nges.
