Title: state_environmental_migration_2014_0_0.pdf

URL Source: https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/state_environmental_migration_2014_0_0.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 05 Apr 2021 08:55:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 228

Markdown Content:
The State of 

# Environmental 

# Migration 2015 

# A Review of 2014 

# Edited by 

# François Gemenne 

# Caroline Zickgraf 

# Dina Ionesco 

> International Organization for Migration (IOM)
> With the support of

Chad 

Lake depletion 

Russia 

Infrastructure projects 

Nigeria 

Growing environmental vulnerability 

Bangladesh 

Floods 

Pakistan 

Drought 

China 

Pollution 

Indonesia 

Floods 

Fiji 

Sea-level rise 

Columbia 

Industrial development 

Mexico 

Tropical storm 

Bosnia and Herzegovina 

Floods Contents 

Introduction  5

Africa 

A Shrinking Lake and a Rising Insurgency  13 

Violence and Displacement in Northern Nigeria  31 

Asia-Pacific 

Floods and Rural-Urban Migration in Bangladesh  51 

Drought in Tharparkar: From Seasonal to Forced Migration  65 

Cancer Villages in China  77 

Displacement and Resettlement Following 

the Ludian Earthquake in China  89 

The Jakarta floods of Early 2014: Rising Risks in one 

of the World’s Fastest Sinking Cities  103 

From Vunidogoloa to Kenani: An Insight into Successful Relocation  121 

The  Americas 

When Mining Moves People: Development-Induced Displacement 

and Resettlement in La Guajira, Colombia  145 

The Correlation between Environmental Disasters 

and Migration Trends in Chiapas, Mexico  169 

Europe 

The May 2014 Floods in Bosnia and Herzegovina  187 

2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi: An Environmental 

and Human-Rights Disaster  203 

Biogra phies  221 SEM 2015 

4

## With the support of IMISCOE 

## and of the European project EDGE: 

## Environmental Diplomacy and 

## Geopolitics 

## Disclaimer –  IOM 

The opinions expressed in the report are those of the authors and do not 

necessarily reflect the views of the International Organization for Migra -

tion (IOM). The designations employed and the presentation of material 

throughout the report do not imply the expression of any opinion what -

soever on the part of IOM concerning the legal status of any country, 

territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning its frontiers or 

boundaries. IOM is committed to the principle that humane and orderly 

migration benefits migrants and society. As an intergovernmental orga -

nization, IOM acts with its partners in the international community 

to: assist in meeting the operational challenges of migration; advance 

understanding of migration issues; encourage social and economic 

development through migration; and uphold the human dignity and 

well-being of migrants.  www.iom.int 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 

in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, elec -

tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without the 

prior written permission of the publisher. 

The EDGE project is supported by the Horizon 2020 EU Framework 

Programme for Research and Innovation. 

IMISCOE is Europe’s largest network of scholars in the area of migration 

and integration. The network involves 36 member institutes and over 

500 scholars from all over Europe and focuses on comparative research, 

publications, the organization of events, PhD training and awards and 

communication. The network supports more than 30 research clusters 

and the IMISCOE annual conferences have become a key item in the 

agenda of most scholars in our field. Furthermore, the network publishes 

various book series (a Research Series and a Text Book Series) and the 

journal Comparative Migration Studies. SEM 2015 

5

## DINA IONESCO, 

## FRANÇOIS GEMENNE, 

## CAROLINE ZICKGRAF 

# Introduction 

# Our fifth annual publication,  The State of Environmental Migration 

2015: Review of the Year 2014 , highlights once again the growing 

importance of environmental changes as migration drivers.  The 

State of Environmental Migration  is an opportunity for Masters 

students to explore research on the topic, analyze current trends 

and to propose policy recommendations. As in previous years, 

this issue seeks to document both the major and uncovered 

environmental events that have induced migration and displace -

ment in the year 2014. The case studies presented, from both developed and devel -

oping countries across the world, shed light on the relationship between climate 

change, the environment and human mobility. 

The State of Environmental Migration  series is produced by graduate students 

enrolled in the “Environment and Migration” course at the Paris School of Inter -

national Affairs (PSIA) of Sciences Po, taught by François Gemenne and Caroline 

Zickgraf. Through the student-selected case studies, this issue presents empirical 

evidence that provides insights into the analysis of the changing dynamics of envi -

ronment and climate change-related migration and displacement. 

THE YEAR 2014: RESEARCH AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN 

REVIEW 

Increased Evidence Linking Human Mobility and Climate Change 

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2014 Report 1 stated once 

again that climate change is projected to increase the displacement of people. Yet the 

year 2014 showed once again that such displacements were already a present reality, 

and not just a future risk. Particularly vulnerable populations are those that lack the 

resources for planned migration and experience higher exposure to extreme weather 

events, especially in developing countries with low income. Rural areas are expected 

to experience major impacts on water availability and supply, food security, infra -

structure and agricultural incomes, including shifts in the production areas of food 

and non-food crops around the world. Expanding opportunities for mobility can 

reduce vulnerability for affected populations. Changes in migration patterns can be 

responses to both extreme weather events and longer-term climate variability and 

change, and migration can also be, in some cases, an effective adaptation strategy. 

1. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report SEM 2015 

> 6
> DINA IONESCO, FRANÇOIS GEMENNE, CAROLINE ZICKGRAF
> INTRODUCTION

New Data on Displacement due to Natural Disasters in 2014 

The Global Estimates Report 2 released in July 2015 by the Internal Displacement Moni -

toring Centre (IDMC) offers evidence that 19.3 million people were displaced in 2014 

by natural disasters worldwide. Of that 19.3 million, 17.5 million people were displaced 

by disasters related to weather hazards, primarily typhoons and floods. The remaining 

1.7 million people were displaced by disasters related to geophysical hazards, mainly 

earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Approximately 700 events were recorded during 

the year, 33 of which caused the displacement of over 100,000 people. In 2014, the 

likelihood of being displaced by a disaster was 60% higher than it was merely four 

decades ago. Displacement levels between 2008-2014 have been highest in the middle-

income countries of Asia and the Pacific. The urban population boom in middle-

income countries means that rapidly increasing numbers of people are exposed to 

hazards, and many of them remain vulnerable. Lower middle-income countries make 

up 36% of the world’s population, but account for 61% of displacement in 2014, high -

lighting how such countries are disproportionately affected by disaster displacement. 

Overall in 2014, Asia was worst affected by displacement associated with disasters, 

with 16.7 million people forced to flee their homes in the region. Countries with the 

highest levels of displacement in 2014 were the Philippines (5.79 million), China (3.61 

million), and India (3.43 million.) Disasters related to floods, storms, earthquakes, 

and volcanic eruptions in these three countries accounted for 15 of the 20 largest 

displacement evens in 2014. Typhoon Rammasun (locally known as Glenda) displaced 

just short of 3.5 million people across the Philippines, China, and Vietnam. Typhoon 

Hagupit (locally known as Ruby) displaced 1.8 million in the Philippines. And, the 

Odisha floods displaced just over 1 million in India. 

Future Estimates of Slow-onset Environmental Degradation’s Effect on 

Human Mobility 

While there is available data presented on sudden-onset natural disasters and displace -

ment, there is a lack of quantitative, empirical evidence showing how slow onset 

environmental disasters affect human mobility in the year 2014. However, there 

are links being studied and some projected future estimates available. For example, 

land degradation has been exacerbated by climate change and is becoming a relevant 

trigger of displacement. The UNCCD 2014 Desertification Report 3 estimates that by 

2020 about 60 million people could move from the desertified areas of sub-Saharan 

African towards North Africa and Europe. Also, UN Water estimates that by 2025, 

1.8 billion people will be living in countries or regions with absolute water scarcity, 

while two-thirds of the global population could be experiencing water stress, which 

could in turn lead to voluntary or forced migration. 

Policy developments 

The relationship between human mobility, climate change and the environment 

has seen increasing relevance in the international policy sphere in 2014. “Climate 

induced migration, displacement and unplanned relocation” have been previously 

recognized in the Decision on Adaptation 4 adopted in Cancun in 2010 and the Deci -

sion on Loss and Damage 5 adopted in Doha in 2012. In 2014, policies have continued 

to build on these agreements and increased attention has been paid to the issue, as 

witnessed across policy sectors and political levels.     

> 2. IDMC 2015 Global Estimates
> 3. UNCCD 2014: Desertification, the Invisible Frontline
> 4. Cancun Adaptation Framework (CAF) 2010, decision 1.CP/16 paragraph 14 (f)
> 5. Doha Climate Gateway 2012, decision 3.CP/18 paragraph 7 (a) (vi) SEM 2015
> 7

Advances in International Climate Policy 

The UN Secretary General Climate Summit in New York took place in September 2014. 

There was a specific event on  Climate Change, Displacement and Migration: Ensuring 

Effective Adaptation Policies and Solutions , which highlighted the increasing relevance 

of the topic.  In December 2014, the 20 th  Session of the Conference of the Parties to the 

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), COP20, was 

held in Lima, Peru. Notably in regards to human mobility and climate change within 

the Loss and Damage Agenda, the Least Developed Countries (LDC) put forth a text 

on the establishment of an “international climate change displacement coordination 

support mechanism,” for “assistance in providing organized migration and planned 

relocation” for those displaced by the impacts of climate change. The text of the Paris 

Agreement, negotiated at COP21 in December 2015, builds upon this proposal. 

Developments in Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Policy 

Migration, displacement and relocations received increased attention throughout 

the draft negotiation process leading up to the Sendai World Conference on Disaster 

Risk Reduction in March 2015. A number of paragraphs in the approved text of the 

Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 include references to 

human mobility. Migrants, both voluntary and forced, are highlighted as DRR stake -

holders and human mobility is regarded as one of the main consequences of disas -

ters. Further articulated throughout the text is the need to manage  disaster-induced 

population movements to reduce the impact of hazards and prevent long-lasting 

vulnerabilities , and  to foster migrants’ potential to build the resilience of home 

and host communities by involving them in disaster risk reduction and disaster risk 

management efforts. 

Increased Attention Paid to Migration, Environment and Climate Change 

Policy at the Regional Level 

In the European Union (EU), the relationship between climate change, the environ -

ment and human mobility received increasing attention in the year 2014. In July, 

the European Commission held a roundtable discussion in Brussels entitled,  “Inte -

grating the Migration into Development Strategies and the Post-2015 Agenda.”  The event 

addressed the links between climate change, environmental degradation and migra -

tion, and aimed to better target climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduc -

tion strategies to reduce displacement, and to promote the potential of migration 

as an adaptation strategy. In October 2014, the workshop,  “Integrating Migration into 

Development: Diaspora as a Development Enabler”  was held in Rome. The event was 

organized in the framework of the Italian Presidency of the Council of the European 

Union, by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the International Organization 

for Migration. There was a session on migrants’ initiatives for climate change adap -

tation and mitigation, and a session on facilitating migrants and diasporas contri -

butions for land-based adaptation and resilience. Also, in November 2014 the Euro -

pean Parliament passed a Resolution 6 concerning COP20 and COP21 mentioning that 

climate change is projected to increase displacement of people. 

Due to the increased attention and importance given to the nexus of human 

mobility, climate change and the environment, the European Commission has funded 

a project entitled  Migration, Environment and Climate Change: Evidence for Policy 

(MECLEP.) Beginning in January 2014, the three-year project aims to contribute to the 

global knowledge base on the relationship between migration and the environment,  

> 6. IOM Paper on COP20, December 2014 (http://www.iom.int/sites/default/files/press_release/file/What-is-at-
> stake-on-Migration-and-for-IOM-at-COP20.pdf) SEM 2015
> 8
> DINA IONESCO, FRANÇOIS GEMENNE, CAROLINE ZICKGRAF
> INTRODUCTION

including climate change. The innovative research will seek to formulate policy 

options on how migration can benefit adaptation strategies to environmental and 

climate change. The project is implemented by the International Organization for 

Migration (IOM) with a group of six research partners. 

Advances in State-led Policy Initiatives on Climate Change and Human 

Mobility 

Since 2012, the Nansen Initiative has been the primary leader in working towards 

a protection agenda for people displaced across borders in the context of disasters 

from the effects of climate change. To date in 2014, the Nansen Initiative has held 

regional consultations in Central America, the Greater Horn of Africa, the Pacific, 

and Southeast Asia. Nansen stresses the importance of  integrating voluntary migra -

tion, forced displacement, and planned relocation within national laws and policies, 

such as National Adaptation Plans, Joint National Action Plans, and National Disaster 

Management Plans. 

Beginning in 2009, the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) fosters international part -

nerships of countries that are highly vulnerable to global warming. The Forum serves 

as a South-South cooperation platform for participating governments to act together 

to deal with global climate change. In 2013, the CVF launched an Action Plan for 

the 2013-2015 period that mandates new research focused on six multi-lateral sectors, 

one of them being migration. This highlights the importance of human mobility in 

the context of climate change for the most vulnerable countries. In November 2014, 

IOM joined a group of international agencies participating in the CVF Trust Fund by 

signing the Memorandum of Understanding. This partnership aims to increase the 

capacity of affected communities to deal with migration and displacement linked to 

the impact of climate change and environmental pressures. 

Migration, environment, and climate change was also a focus at the Third UN 

Conference on Small Island Developing States (SIDS.) One event in particular 

was focused on  “Migration Partnerships and Sustainable Development in SIDS,”  with 

participation from IOM, the Asian Development Bank, and various SIDS state 

representatives. The final document from the conference, entitled the “Somoa 

Pathway,” recognizes the positive role that migrants and diaspora play in develop -

ment, the value of remittances and the importance of planning for and responding 

to displacement. 

An Increased Focus on Environmental Migration across Various Policy 

Sectors 

Climate change has been a topic of growing importance in the health sector for 

several years. In August 2014, the Word Health Organization (WHO) held a conference 

specifically on Health and Climate, and the IOM provided a statement addressing 

health in the context of environmental migration. The climate change and security 

nexus has also been of increasing relevance in 2014. In July, the  Organization for 

Security and Co-operation in Europe  (OSCE) held a conference entitled  “Enhancing 

Security through Water Diplomacy: the Role of the OSCE.”  This event highlighted that 

the issue of water is closely  linked to the concept of human security and analyzes of 

“water-related”  migration should take into account connected factors such as climate 

change, land degradation, socio-economic development and conflicts. 

In 2014 there were several briefings put on by various organizations that focused 

on the MECC nexus. In March, a Consultation on “ Planned Relocations, Natural Disas -

ters and Climate Change: Consolidating Good Practices and Preparing for the Future” 

was held in Sanremo, Italy, which was co-organized by UNHCR, the Brookings 

Institution, and Georgetown University. In July, the Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung’s study 

“TIME TO ACT – How the EU can lead on climate change and migration”  was presented 

over a lunch debate and workshop in Brussels. SEM 2015 

> 9

Specifically at IOM, major attention was paid to the climate change, environment 

and human mobility nexus in 2014, which culminated in the implementation of the 

new division of Migration, Environment, and Climate Change (MECC) in January 2015. 

In recognition of the increasing significance of the issue, as highlighted through the 

interest shown by IOM member states, the IOM 105 th  Council Session in November 

2014 included a special focus on climate and the environment. Within the framework 

of the Council, a number of high-level events were dedicated to examining the link -

ages between migration, environment and climate change with a double objective to 

i) bring climate and environment to the forefront of IOM’s institutional agenda, and 

ii) contribute to relevant global policy processes. IOM also completed two Capacity 

Building Trainings on MECC in 2014, in Moshi, Tanzania, and Santiago, Chile. 

Overall, 2014 saw environmental migration being addressed through various 

policy angles, paving the way for significant developments in 2015, related to both 

the conclusion of the Nansen Initiative and the COP21. Once again, this edition sheds 

light on some of the most insightful cases of migration and displacement related 

to various environmental changes, from natural disasters to development projects, 

highlighting the diversity of the phenomenon across the world. Africa SEM 2015 

13 

## JASON RIZZO 

# A Shrinking Lake 

# and a Rising Insurgency 

# Migratory Responses to Environmental 

# Degradation and Violence in the Lake Chad 

# Basin 

# The slow-onset environmental change occurring in the Lake Chad Basin 

(LCB) region of the Sahel is not a recent phenomenon, nor is it one that 

observers have only now begun to take note of. A bulletin published 

in June 1936 in  The  New York Times  by the Associated Press reported 

on the efforts of French General J.M. Tilho to save Lake Chad, which 

had gradually decreased in size since Europeans had first discovered 

it 112 years previously (Associated Press, 1936). Despite Tilho’s efforts 

to change the course of a nearby tributary, this shared vital resource 

has continued to dwindle over the years and today the issue has now become more 

pertinent than ever. The increased struggle for the lake’s natural resources has had 

economic, social, and health-related ramifications on a growing local population. The 

emergence of conflict since 2009 due to violent extremist groups such as Boko Haram 

can, at least in part, be seen as a result of this slow-onset environmental degradation. 

It is the convergence of several underlying drivers—the deterioration of Lake Chad, 

demographic pressure, poor governance, a high degree of social diversity, and the 

rise of violent extremism—that have accelerated and exacerbated already complex 

migration patterns in 2014. 

This paper seeks to examine the contraction of Lake Chad and the effects this 

has produced on the local population with regard to both conflict and migration. 

Section one explains the gradual evolution of the lake over the past 40 years and 

the underlying causes for this change. Section two will analyse the direct impacts 

of the lake’s deterioration and the repercussions on poverty, resource conflicts, and 

ultimately violence and migration. Section three deals with past policy responses 

that have sought to address environmental degradation, the refugee crisis, and the 

security threat. The final section will take into account lessons from the past and 

current challenges to provide policy recommendations that seek to address both the 

symptoms and underlying causes of the crisis. 

This paper draws on information from a variety of sources, including numerous 

reports, studies, conference proceedings, news articles, and online media, as well as 

on phone and e-mail interviews with field-based personnel at IOM and other human -

itarian organisations. Efforts have been made to crosscheck these different data and, 

when necessary, point out any inconsistencies or flaws. 

1. SLOW-ONSET ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION 

IN THE LAKE CHAD BASIN 

The Lake Chad Basin is a geographic expanse covering 2,434,000 km 2 in the Sahel 

and spread across eight different countries. At the centre of the basin lies Lake Chad SEM 2015 

> 14
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

itself, a shallow, freshwater lake shared between Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria. 

It provides a vital source of water for both human and animal life in the region, and 

forms the basis of several economic activities that depend heavily on its resources, 

particularly fishing, agriculture, hunting and pastoralism (Onuoha, 2010). 

Because it rarely reaches a depth of over seven meters, the overall surface area 

of Lake Chad is extremely sensitive to short and long-term climate variations as 

well anthropologic interventions. It is believed that in the 4 th  millennium BC, Lake 

Chad covered an estimated expanse of 400,000 km 2 (Onuoha, 2010). In the 1950s and 

early 60s however, its surface area covered approximately 26,000 km 2 and has since 

declined by over 90%, reaching it’s lowest point of 532 km 2 in 2004 (Onuoha, 2010). 

The northern portion of the lake is particularly sensitive and has completely dried up 

several times since 1975 (Lemoalle, Bader, Leblanc & Sedick, 2012). Today, Lake Chad 

has partially recovered from 2004 levels, now measuring around 2,500 km 2 (BGR, 

2014; Essono, 2014). In addition to declining surface area, lake level depth has become 

more volatile in recent decades. Seasonal lake level variations averaged as low as half 

a metre and as high as one metre in the 1970s and 80s, whereas today variations can 

be as high as two metres (Geerken, Vassolo & Bila, 2010). 

The Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that the two 

principle determinants of reductions in lake size are decreasing levels of precipi -

tation and/or human interference (Onuoha, 2010). In the case of Lake Chad, both 

factors have played a major role in recent decades. Coe and Foley (2001) show that 

surface area decline in from 1950s to the mid-1970s was due primarily to reduced 

rainfall, whereas in the subsequent period, human activity nearly doubled the extent 

to which the lake would have otherwise declined. A long-term drought period from 

1973-1984 not only directly reduced inflows from the lake’s primary sources, but also 

forced agricultural communities who had depended on rainwater for crop feeding to 

increasingly turn to irrigation, further depleting lake inflows (Lemoalle et al., 2012). 

In the following years, irrigation activity increased four-fold when compared to the 

previous two decades (Coe & Foley, 2001). Human activity and climate conditions 

have thus become equal contributors to the lake’s decline. 

Since the 1990s, anthropologic intervention has continued to escalate. The region 

has seen a gradual rebound in rainfall levels and thus increased inflows into Lake 

Chad, yet the lake has continued to decrease in size due to misuse and overuse of 

irrigation practices and groundwater extraction (Okonkwo, Demoz & Gebremariam, 

2014). Geerken et al. (2010) further show that groundwater extraction, in particular, 

has negatively altered the lake’s hydrologic characteristics and has contributed to 

poor biomass recovery rates which should have otherwise benefited from the higher 

precipitation of recent years. 

The anthropologic factors driving the changes in Lake Chad cannot be fully 

understood without examining the population dynamics in the region. In 1960, the 

population was estimated to number around 13 million. By 2013, it had grown to 

47 million (BGR, 2015), and is expected to increase to 80 million by 2030 (Okonkwo 

& Demoz, 2014). In conjunction with this increase, a significant rise in livestock 

numbers has occurred in order to feed the population, which has put a further strain 

on lake use (Onuoha, 2010). The northeast region of Nigeria is the most densely popu -

lated area in the LCB. It is also highly diverse, and accounts for nearly half of Nigeria’s 

300 different ethnic groups (Onuoha, 2010). Here, population density corresponds to 

excessive degrees of groundwater extraction (Geerken et al., 2010). The city with by 

far the largest population in the region, Kano, has been identified as an “anthropo -

logic hotspot”, where the detrimental effects of human interaction on Lake Chad are 

the highest in the LCB (Okonkwo & Demoz, 2014). SEM 2015 

15 

A NOTE ON EXISTING FACTS, FIGURES, AND RESEARCH 

The above figures relating to the surface area reductions in Lake Chad are those most 

prominently reported in the media. While they are effective in adequately showing 

the dramatic size decline over the years, it is worth noting that researchers and en -

vironmental experts who study this region consider the size of the lake in the 1950s 

and 60s to have been abnormally large—an observation often absent from reports in 

the media. Four generally accepted classifications exist to express the size of Lake 

Chad, ranging from Large, Normal, Small, and Dry Small (Lemoalle et al., 2012). The 

26,000 km 2 figure noted above easily falls into the “Large” classification, whereas 

18,000 km 2 is considered the size at which the lake is at a Normal state and which 

was last observed in 1973-1975 (Lemoalle et al., 2012). Further overlooked in news 

articles is the fact that Lake Chad’s shallow characteristics mean dramatic fluctua -

tions in size are not uncommon. Odada, Oyebande and Oguntola (2005) note, for 

example, that Lake Chad completely dried out four times between the years 1400 

and 1901. 

The tendency for some media outlets and environmentalists to downplay certain ele -

ments of the story is noted to give as accurate a portrayal of this slow-onset event 

as possible. A thorough perspective of this nature is helpful in determining the extent 

to which polices and corrective measures must be employed to stabilise the lake’s 

condition and restore it to a Normal state. 

The origins of the information behind widely circulated reports are also important to 

consider. One of the most often cited studies, in UN documentation and elsewhere, is 

Coe and Foley’s  Human and natural impacts on the water resources of the Lake Chad 

basin , published in the Journal of Geophysical Research in February 2001. Some re -

searchers, however, believe this study to be flawed in certain aspects, even if its main 

findings are widely accepted and reported upon. Lemoalle et al. (2012) note that Coe 

and Foley’s satellite data analysis is insufficiently documented, but suggest that their 

work has endured due to lack of ground-based observational research. Additionally, 

their argument linking overgrazing to the shrinking of Lake Chad is, according to a re -

cent FAO/LCBC conference, “difficult to substantiate” (De Young, Sheridan, Davies & 

Hjort, 2011). This suggests the importance of careful interpretations of existing data 

and the need for more high-quality research in the years ahead. 

High vulnerability in the Lake Chad Basin 

Vulnerability to the impacts of environmental change in the Lake Chad Basin is 

extremely high. All of the region’s major economic sectors are engaged in climate-

sensitive activities, and several of them, including fishing, agriculture, and livestock 

production, rely directly on the resources of Lake Chad itself (Okonkwo & Demoz, 

2014). Moreover, the local population is dependent on the lake as a source of drinking 

water, sanitation, and as a means of carrying out religious or cultural activities 

(Onuoha, 2010). Yet, the capacity to respond to threats posed by the shrinking of Lake 

Chad are extremely limited due to conditions of poverty, low levels of economic and 

political stability, weak institutions, and inadequate information (FAO, 2014). 

Low amounts of human, social, and technical capital in the region compound and 

exacerbate downward pressure on environmental capital. Poor education, health, and 

income are reflected in Human Development Index ratings in the four Lake Chad 

countries that are among the lowest in the world. Out of the 187 countries ranked in 

the 2014 UNDP Human Development Report, both Cameroon and Nigeria ranked 152, 

Chad 184, and Niger, at 187, was ranked the poorest nation in the world (Malik, 2014). 

The problem is particularly severe in northeast Nigeria, where in 2007 an estimated 

72% of the population lived in poverty (Onuoha, 2010)  . This has left inhabitants with 

limited capacity to respond to the impacts of environmental change. 

Social capital in the form of institutions is severely lacking as well. World Bank 

governance indicators for 2013, which include measurements of accountability, SEM 2015 

> 16
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and corruption control, 

show that the four Lake Chad countries rank lower than the Sub-Saharan African 

average in nearly every category (Kaufmann, Kraay & Mastruzzi, 2014). Particularly 

relevant to the region is the Political Stability and Absence of Violence/Terrorism 

indicator, where Nigeria and Niger rank very low, 9 th  and 22 nd  worst in the world, 

respectively. In terms of regional institutions created specifically to oversee Lake 

Chad and other water resources in the LCB, the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) 

was established in 1964 by the governments of Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria 

following the signing of the Fort-Lamy Convention. The Central African Republic and 

Libya have subsequently joined the LCBC. Despite a mandate to sustainably manage 

Lake Chad and other trans-border water and ecological resources while promoting 

peace and security within the region, the commission continues to lack funding, 

data, and a strategic approach to carry out its objectives (Odada, Oyebande & Ogun -

tola, 2005). Finally, even if effective institutions in the region are established, huge 

coordination challenges result in a failure to align the activities and objectives of 

local, state, national, and regional stakeholders (FAO/LCBC, 2009; Odada et al., 2005). 

As a consequence of these weak institutions and impediments to effective collabora -

tion, populations in the LCB are at a greater risk of being negatively impacted by the 

effects of environmental degradation. 

2. IMPACTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION: A CONVERGENCE 

OF FACTORS 

The environmental degradation of the LCB region, particularly the shrinking of 

Lake Chad, has impeded development and contributed to conditions of poverty 

(Okonkwo & Demoz, 2014) for several reasons. All of the region’s major economic 

activities have been adversely affected, leading to complex migration patterns in the 

past (Odada et al., 2005), which have carried through to 2014 where they have taken 

on a new, conflict-related dimension. 

Food and water scarcity that have resulted from a decline in lake size have become 

major and chronic issues—among the worst in Africa. Not only must a growing 

population make do with lower water quantities, but the quality of water has dete -

riorated as a result of people defecating or washing clothes in the lake (Onuoha, 

2010). Irrigation schemes developed in the 1970s in Nigeria that would have produced 

only a marginal negative impact on Lake Chad inflows can no longer operate as their 

intakes were designed for Normal lake conditions and not the Small or Dry Small 

states that have persisted in recent decades (Lemoalle et al., 2012). As a result, agri -

cultural activity has become less feasible in the areas where these irrigation projects 

were to be utilised. 

Reduced surface area and lake level mean that transportation and navigation 

along the lake has, to an extent, been affected as well with the emergence of a scat -

tering of small islands and a wide-spanning ridge that was previously underwater. 

Known as the Great Barrier, the ridge now divides Lake Chad into a northern pool 

and southern pool. Prolonged separation of the two pools may have further implica -

tions for the ecological development and migration patterns of fish (Lemoalle et al., 

2012). Between five and eight species of fish have died out in the region, and in one 

part of the LCB, fishing yields were reduced by up to 90% (Odada et al., 2005). In a part 

of the Sahel were 80% of the poor depend on fish as a regular and cheap source of 

protein, this development has profound implications for food security (De Young et 

al., 2011) as well as economic activity. Despite a decrease in fish stocks over the years, 

150,000 fishermen still depended on the lake for their livelihoods as of 2010 (Onuoha, 

2010). SEM 2015 

17 

Migration: Economic, Social, Demographic, Political, and Conflict-Related 

Drivers 

Some of the local population have shifted their economic activities over the years as a 

way to adapt to the progressively smaller lake. Fishermen in particular, have migrated 

in search of better fishing grounds, either temporarily, such as on a seasonal basis, 

or permanently, as near-shore stocks are depleted (De Young et al., 2011). Some have 

been attracted to the small islands that have emerged in recent years, which now 

host to several fishing communities (Coly, 2015). In many cases, this leads to length -

ening the distance fishermen must travel between their homes, fishing grounds, and 

the marketplaces where they sell their catch. Alternatively, these people may decide 

to exit the industry entirely to become farmers. Those who do often move to the 

fertile lands where the lake has receded in order to plant their crops (NASA/Goddard 

Space Flight Center--EOS Project Science Office, 2001). 

Likewise, environmental changes in other areas of the LCB have drawn many 

farming households to the vicinity around Lake Chad in order to sustain their liveli -

hoods. For example, decreased rainfall since the 1970s has resulted in once arable 

land in the northern areas of the LCB becoming unsuitable for millet cultivation. 

As a result, farmers have turned to the more fertile soil around Lake Chad, moving 

there in order to grow a different variety of crops (Lemoalle et al., 2012). Similar to 

fishermen, a large portion of farmers and pastoralists alike migrate on a seasonal 

basis in search of land better suited for agriculture or grazing (De Young et al., 2011). 

Fluctuations in the size of Lake Chad have undoubtedly impacted where they settle 

and how long they must travel in any particular season. 

Additionally, fishermen, farmers, pastoralists or others struggling to maintain 

their livelihoods based on the lake’s resources may decide to leave it altogether and 

migrate to a city in search of better opportunities. Often, it is the younger population 

who moves away and settles in urban slums where, according to an ICG report, they 

are more prone to lawlessness and violence (International Crisis Group, 2010). 

Figure 1.  Fatalities in Nigeria from Social Violence, by Category, 1998-2014 Herder-Farmer violence. We have distinguished a separate category of violence between herders (pastoralists) and farmers, witch is analytically distinct from other types of communal violence and separate from tre Boko Haram insurgency. Other category include : State-related violence apart fromthe Boko Haram insurgency; Communal Conflict (between ethnic /religious/local groups) apart from the insurgency; Political violence (i.c. attributed to partisan actors); Boko Haram, violence bymilitants or state actors linked to the insurgency          

> State (Non Boko Haram) Comunal (Non Boko Haram) 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
> 10 000 8 000 6 000 4 000 2 000 0H-F Political Boko Haram
> Source: Nigeria Social Violence Project, 2014 http://www.connectsaisafrica.org/research/african-studies-
> publications/social-violence-nigeria/

As a result of the adverse effects of environmental degradation on the region’s 

major economic activities, domestic and cross-border international migration has 

escalated in recent years (Onuoha, 2010). With this occurring in the context of a SEM 2015 

18 

AFRICA 

JASON RIZZO 

A SHRINKING LAKE 

AND A RISING INSURGENCY 

highly vulnerable, diverse population facing major threats of food and water insecu -

rity, it should come as little surprise that conflict in the region has swelled in recent 

years, beginning in 2009 and reaching unprecedented proportions in 2014. According 

to a project at Johns Hopkins University which tracks social violence in Nigeria, 

fatalities jumped by over 50% in 2014 and were highly concentrated in the north -

east – the region depending most heavily on Lake Chad and its resources (Nigeria 

Social Violence Project, 2014). The overwhelming majority of these deaths came at 

the hands of Boko Haram, the insurgency seeking to overthrow the Nigerian govern -

ment and establish an Islamic state. By some accounts, Boko Haram was responsible 

for just under 8,000 deaths in 2014 (Nigeria Social Violence Project, 2014), while other 

sources place the number closer to half that amount (Barna, 2014). 

At first glance, it may seem far-fetched to link environmental degradation in the 

LCB to the violence that has erupted since 2009. However, if the underlying deter -

minants of this violence are closely examined on the one hand, and the implica -

tions of the deterioration of Lake Chad on the other, several ways in which the two 

are interconnected become clearly apparent. Onuoha (2010), argues that conflict as a 

result of environmental degradation can occur for two reasons:  “First, by intensifying 

the frequency of contact between and among the major livelihood systems, thereby making 

them more competitive rather than complementary. Second, it intensifies the pattern of 

migration as a response to the contraction of the lake”  (p. 32). 

Figure 2.  Convergence of Environmental Degradation, Violence Inflicted by Boko 

Haram, and Migration in the Lake Chad Basin    

> Environnemental Degradation and its Implications Migration Violence and Terrorism (Boko Haram) Reduced economic output Food Scarcity Water Scarcity Reduced biodivercity and vegetation Great Barrier : Reduduced transportation and trade Demographic Pressure Climate Change Poor Governance, Public Goods Mismanagement, Corruption Social factors: Cultural/Reli-gious/Ethnic Diversity Ressource Conflicts Poverty and Inegality Human Intervention
> Source: Jason Rizzo

In the diagram above, competition among livelihood systems is represented by 

the two green arrows leading from the “Environmental Degradation and its Implica -

tions” section, on the left, to the “resource conflicts” and “poverty and inequality” 

boxes on the lower right. These factors, in turn, make up two of the four conditions 

under which Boko Haram and the violence it has inflicted have emerged. In north -

east Nigeria, where resources are scarce and not equally distributed by the State, 

competition for control of these resources is fierce (Agbiboa & Maiangwa, 2013; Inter -

national Crisis Group, 2010), all the more so with nearly three-quarters of the popula -

tion living in poverty and barely able to survive on what little they are currently able 

to secure. Noting the struggle for public resources in all areas of Nigeria, an excerpt 

from a report by the International Crisis Group (2010) states: 

Tensions have been exacerbated by policies favouring indigenous groups. In 

all parts of Nigeria, those who can claim to be original inhabitants have a dispro -

portionate share of public resources, an exclusive right to buy and sell land and 

various other privileges. This generates a huge number of disputes and often SEM 2015 

> 19

violent conflicts over competing claims, as well as over the validity of the “indige -

neity certificates” issued by local government authorities, especially in the context 

of internal migrations  (p. 11) .

Poverty in and of itself is a condition Boko Haram has found complementary to 

its empowerment; many of its recruits are poor, young and have little in the way of 

employment opportunities that would serve as effective alternatives to joining the 

insurgent group (Agbiboa, 2014; Barna, 2014). Moreover, the group has used funding 

to provide “alms to the poor and needy” (in line with the practice of zakat, one of the 

Five Pillars of Islam), and to extend basic services that the government has failed to 

adequately offer (Onuoha, 2012, p. 3). Conditions of poverty, therefore, have not only 

helped Boko Haram increase its membership base, but have also assisted the group in 

positioning itself as an organisation that is sensitive to the needs of the local popula -

tion, especially in comparison to the government. 

To visually represent Onuoha’s second point, namely that environmental degra -

dation “ intensifies the pattern of migration as a response to the contraction of the lake”,  the 

red lines along the top of the diagram show the corresponding connections. In this 

respect, environmental change is seen as both a direct driver of migration as well as 

an indirect driver of violence by way of this migration. Thus, in the LCB, migration 

is not only a consequence of violence, it is also a driving factor of violence. In 2014, 

however, causality seems predominantly to have moved in the direction of violence 

impacting migration, reflected in the fact that communal violence unrelated to Boko 

Haram was relatively minor (Nigeria Social Violence Project, 2014). 

Also apparent from the diagram is the fact that three other factors that have 

already been observed through their relation to environmental degradation and 

the vulnerability of the local populations have also played a role, either directly or 

indirectly, in creating the necessary conditions for Boko Haram’s emergence. Firstly, 

demographic pressures play an obvious role in exacerbating resource conflicts— 

more people translates to less finite resources to share among them—and thus indi -

rectly contributes to increasing levels of violence. 

Secondly, the social make-up of the local population, in this case high levels of 

ethnic diversity and a growing divide between Muslim and Christian groups, is also 

a factor that potentially serves to accelerate violence directly while also providing 

the necessary backdrop to facilitate the role of the other drivers. Collier (2009) notes 

that in poverty-stricken, resource-limited settings, people are incentivised to remain 

loyal to their ethnic group as a form of insurance. This has violent ramifications 

for regions like northeast Nigeria and the LCB as a whole, where political power is 

not always aligned with perceptions of ethnic or religious identity. As noted above, 

resources are not distributed in an equitable manner, thus the struggle to control 

them has become more prominent. In this light, it is apparent that social factors 

alone are likely exerting only limited influence on conflict in the region. Rather, it 

is through their interaction with poor governance and conflict over resources that 

ethnic and religious diversity provides, as noted by Agbiboa and Maiangwa (2013), 

“the fault line along which inter-group competition for power and resources occurs”. 

It is worth briefly noting that this social dimension is also most certainly contrib -

uting to coordination failures that have aggravated problems of increasing anthropo -

logic impact on Lake Chad. Collier (2009) argues that the provision of public goods, 

such as the management of water wells in rural villages is often better conducted 

in homogenous settings, or where efforts have been made by local governments 

to downplay social divisions and instead emphasise shared commonalities and 

a national identity. In the absence of such unifying policy measures in northeast 

Nigeria, this effect is likely contributing to the swelling anthropologic interference 

on the lake. For simplicity’s sake, this connection linking social factors to human 

intervention and thus environmental degradation has been left out of the diagram 

above. SEM 2015 

> 20
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

A third driver of violence is the central role of poor governance, weak political insti -

tutions, and corruption. As has been discussed above, poor governance can be linked 

to environmental degradation, and the resulting impacts set the stage for increased 

levels of conflict. The Nigerian government, however, can also be more directly linked 

to violence due to its failure to address issues of poverty and resource scarcity, and its 

unwillingness to reign in a provocative, violent, and hugely unpopular military and 

police force. Both these points can be seen when examining Boko Haram’s emergence 

and in its eventual turn toward violence in 2009. The group was initially founded as 

a peaceful movement in response to growing levels of corruption and poor public 

services (Barna, 2014). Its objective was to establish such services itself, including 

“mortality police” and a welfare system. In 2009, following increased tension with 

the Borno state government, Nigerian security forces extrajudicially killed the group’s 

highly popular founder and leader, Mohammed Yusuf, along with a large number of 

his followers (Barna, 2014; International Crisis Group, 2014). The military crackdown 

no doubt triggered support for the group and provoked its shift toward violence.  

> Photo 1. Refugees arriving to small islands in Lake Chad following violence in Nigeria.
> © Copyright IRC

The impact of violence on migration due to the underlying drivers of environ -

mental degradation, a growing population, poor governance, and social factors, 

reached a critical point in 2014, which was by some distance Boko Haram’s most 

violent year to date. Huge flows of forced migration were triggered in the north -

east and contributed to Nigeria having one of the highest amounts of internally 

displaced people in the world (Barna, 2014). Cross-border international migration has 

also accelerated due to the violence. Initial reports in May 2014 estimated that 61,000 

refugees had left the country for Cameroon, Chad, or Niger (UNHCR, 2014a). Of 

this figure, only 22,000 are thought to be Nigerian, with the remainder being mainly 

Niger nationals. In July, more than 15,000 people fled when Boko Haram entered and 

took control of the city of Damboa—the first time the group had succeeded in such 

an undertaking (Barna, 2014). By the end of 2014, IOM estimated that approximately 

120,000 refugees had fled Nigeria for neighbouring countries (International Organi -

zation for Migration, n.d.). 

The degree of internal displacement within Nigeria as a result of the violence 

was found to be even greater. In July, IOM implemented its Displacement Tracking SEM 2015 

> 21

Matrix (DTM) tool in order to more effectively gather and monitor information on 

internally displaced populations within the country (International Organization for 

Migration, n.d.). When figures were tallied at the end of December 2014, they were 

starkly different from initial estimates. Data gathered by the DTM in five of the 

northeast states affected by the violence placed the number of IDPs at 389,281. Borno, 

the state bordering Lake Chad where Boko Haram activity is concentrated, was not 

included in this first DTM report due to security constraints. Here, however, the 

Nigerian National Emergency Management Agency estimated 522,523 IDPs. Taking 

the two previous figures in combination with IOM’s estimate of 120,000 cross-border 

refugees, the total number of displaced people was thought to be over 1 million 

(International Organization for Migration, n.d.) in 2014. 

IOM has since released five subsequent DTM reports using a unified system of 

data collection with the Nigerian government that now includes limited coverage 

of Borno state (Daviot, 2015). The latest figures are staggering. The DTM Round VI 

Report issued in October 2015 indicates that the number of IDPs in Nigeria alone 

has swelled to over 2.2 million (IOM & NEMA, 2015). 72% come from Borno state, and 

there are most probably many tens of thousands that are still unaccounted for given 

the limited access IOM and government officials have to this region. Overall, chil -

dren make up 57% (approximately 1.25 million) of the IDP population (IOM & NEMA, 

2015). To put this figure in perspective, the number of displaced children in Nigeria is 

more than 50% higher than the  entire  refugee or migrant population accounted for in 

the on-going European crisis (UNHCR, 2015). 

3. POLICY RESPONSES 

Policy responses designed to address the combined effects of environmental degra -

dation, the refugee crisis, and the security threat have been slow to emerge, though 

awareness of the problem grew significantly in 2014 amid the escalating violence. 

Given the interconnected and multifaceted nature of the problem, no silver bullet 

will exist to tackle all of these challenges in a simple manner. Stemming the violence 

and providing humanitarian relief to the large number of refugees is of immediate 

concern, though long-term actions to address the underlying drivers of these prob -

lems must be streamlined and prioritised as well. This study will now examine the 

conditions facing refugees and IDPs, and the policy actions that have been enacted to 

respond to the crisis in terms of migration, violence, and environmental degradation. 

Many refugees find themselves separated from their families and in highly 

precarious situations, in which the need to provide them humanitarian assistance 

is especially great. Emilie Poisson (2015), Africa Regional Director of External Rela -

tions & Advocacy at ACTED, a French NGO operating in the region and working in 

partnership with the UN, indicated that many refugees arriving in Chad are in poor 

physical condition following days with little or no access to food. Furthermore, their 

psychosocial state is often fragile after having experienced acute violence, death of 

family members, and loss of homes and livelihoods, yet access to even basic assis -

tance and services in these areas is lacking (Poisson, 2015). A large portion of the 

refugee population in the region consists of unaccompanied minors or separated 

children. Women and girls are especially vulnerable to sexual and other forms of 

gender-based violence as arriving refugees. 

In Cameroon, Chad, and Niger, there have been several documented incidents 

of refugees having to move more than once as a result of unsafe or unsuitable 

initial destinations. In an effort to avoid harbouring members of Boko Haram and 

other terrorist organisations, Niger had originally forbidden the establishment of 

refugee camps along the country’s southern boarder (Barna, 2014). This forced many 

newly arriving refugees to seek temporary shelter in abandoned homes that were SEM 2015 

> 22
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

susceptible to flooding during the rainy season (UNHCR, 2014a). It was not until early 

2015, following attacks in Niger’s Diffa region, that the government allowed camps 

to be set up for refugees, returnees, and IDPs (Poisson, 2015). In the far north of 

Cameroon, initial settlement communities have also been subjected to Boko Haram 

attacks, forcing refugees to flee an additional 150km to less-volatile areas (UNHCR, 

2014a). In yet another example, several large refugee movements headed to the 

small fishing islands in Lake Chad, putting enormous pressure on host populations 

in terms of hygiene, space, and community life (Coly, 2015). According to Ibrahima 

Coly, Regional Coordinator for West and Central Africa at IEDA Relief, a UNHCR and 

IOM partner organisation, the government of Chad made concerted efforts in 2014 

to relocate refugees from the islands to areas inland that are safer and where access 

to humanitarian assistance can be provided more easily (Coly, 2015). Nevertheless, 

the islands still serve as a layover point and several refugees are tempted to stay to 

practice fishing (Coly, 2015). As a result, Poisson (2015) notes “competition for land 

and natural resources between communities could potentially intensify.” The above 

events suggest that in all destination countries, humanitarian protection and infor -

mation related to safe areas of refuge were lacking in 2014. 

The provision of assistance and services to IDPs in Nigeria was also scarce in 

2014. The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) noted that state emer -

gency management agencies have limited capacities and no clear regulatory frame -

work dictating their role in providing support to IDPs after their initial displace -

ment (Rushing & Reed, 2014). As a result, the majority of IDPs first find assistance 

through host communities before any relief that may come from state or humani -

tarian actors. Indeed, over 92% of IDPs were living with host families while only 7.6% 

where living in camps at the end of 2014, with this ratio remaining largely unchanged 

throughout 2015 (IOM & NEMA, 2014;  IOM & NEMA, 2015). Coly (2015) notes, that 

many host communities find themselves in desperate and poor conditions even 

before the arrival of IDPs, explaining why they are often unable to administer 

adequate humanitarian services to incoming people. Despite Nigeria’s ratification 

of the Kampala Convention in 2012, there appears to be little political will to push 

through IDP policy reform (Rushing & Reed, 2014), although this may change with 

the election of Muhammadu Buhari as the country’s new president. 

There are some signs of hope on the policy and intervention front with regard 

to the refugee crisis. Efforts to overcome issues of coordination among national 

and international agencies are reflected in the 2013 publication of a joint humani -

tarian action plan by Nigeria’s National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), 

which entails improved data collection and overall response efforts (Rushing & Reed, 

2014). Ms. Poisson (2015) of ACTED noted that international agencies are working “to 

strengthen collaboration with local authorities to ensure access to asylum, reduce 

the risk of refoulement and facilitate freedom of movement”. Similarly, inter-agency 

assessments of refugee areas in Cameroon, Chad, and Niger were carried out in 2014 

to identify needs and vulnerabilities of displaced populations. Child protection, 

gender-based violence, preservation of family unity, and the provision of services 

such as education and social protection were issues that were found to be most in 

need of improvement (UNHCR, 2014b). 

Regarding the security threat posed by Boko Haram, actions have been imple -

mented to stem the violence and address its underlying causes. Attacks on villages in 

all of the Lake Chad countries have prompted the governments of Cameroon, Chad, 

and Niger to intervene militarily in conjunction with the Nigerian army to more 

effectively fight insurgent forces (Coly, 2015). To confront the major issues of govern -

ment and military accountability in Nigeria, the National Human Rights Commission 

has started to become more active in recent years, and in December 2013 succeeded 

for the first time in summoning some of the nation’s top military generals to testify 

regarding allegations of unlawful violence and extrajudicial killings (Associated SEM 2015 

23 

Press, 2014). Several development projects are seeking to rectify the underlying prob -

lems of poverty and poor public services. One such example is a $100 million joint 

program between the government, the UN, the African Development Bank, and 

Nigerian business leaders that was established in May of 2014 to create safer commu -

nity and educational-based facilities in the north (Rushing & Reed, 2014). A proposal 

for a more comprehensive and long-term development programme is discussed in 

further detail in the following section. 

Table 1.  National and international agencies are continuing to engage in the following 

activities to respond to the needs of refugees.    

> Border monitoring to enhance access to asylum
> and prevent refoulement
> Creation of mechanisms to allow for family
> tracking and reunification
> Maintenance of civilian character of asylum Enhancement of procedures to identify
> newborn children before or upon camp arrival
> Refugee relocation from insecure areas Identify and manage at risk children, including
> girls subjected to early marriage
> Awareness campaigns to encourage refugees
> reluctant to move from insecure areas
> Working with local authorities to establish
> Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in the
> interest of children
> Piloting biometrics registration Establish SOPs to provide aid and community
> support to people with specific needs
> Provision of refugee
> and civilian documentation
> Establish SOPs to prevent and respond to
> gender and other forms of sexual-based violence
> (GSBV)
> Training and support of worker and refugee
> communities
> Enhance provision of support to victims of
> GSBV
> Enhancement of refugee camp safety through
> establishment of vigilance committees
> Training of women in conflict prevention and
> mediation leadership roles
> Support of social cohesion activities
> and women peace committees
> Training of humanitarian and security
> personnel, especially in women’s protection
> Counseling to provide psycho-social support
> Source: Emilie Poisson, Africa Regional Director of External relations & Advocacy, ACTED (2015)

With regards to environmental degradation, indications are starting to emerge 

that policymakers in the LCB have begun to realise the gravity of the problem and 

its implications for future migration, violence, and socio-economic development. 

Last year, Chidi Anselm Odinkalu, chairman of Nigeria’s National Human Rights 

Commission, stated that, “climate change is real, the consequences are real and it’s 

got a serious national security consequence,” though he further noted that Nigerians 

“don’t take it seriously” (Associated Press, 2014). There have been several initiatives 

launched in recent years by the LCBC in conjunction with partner organisations. In 

2008, a Strategic Action Programme (SAP) was passed by all LCBC member States, 

encompassing both short and long-term initiatives to reverse the environmental 

trends of the past half-century (LCBC, 2008). One of the most significant and relevant 

of these for 2014 is the Five-Year Investment Plan 2013-2017. In April, funding for the 

Plan was still in the process of being secured (LCBC, 2014), but part of the Plan will 

apparently include an inter-basin water transfer project (Premium Times, 2014) that 

would more than triple the size of the lake from current levels (LCBC, n.d.). SEM 2015 

> 24
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

4. POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 

Despite some of the noted policy progress in recent years, political commitment and 

concrete policy interventions still have a long way to go. Momentum must therefore 

continue to grow and future policy design should address the complex web of chal -

lenges in a holistic way. In this light, the following section details four key policy 

recommendations and the necessary preconditions that must exist for the desired 

outcomes to transpire. They should be considered as a joint package, as any of the 

following measures taken individually will have a limited impact on a problem that 

has several root causes. 

As a prerequisite to all policy recommendations, it should be noted that signifi -

cant effort must be made to ensure active stakeholder engagement at all levels. This 

issue was underscored in March 2014 by Jonathan Kamkwalala, World Bank Manager 

for Water Resources and Disaster Risk Management, who said, “the issues are chal -

lenging at the sectorial, national and regional levels. As such, they require a variety 

of stakeholders to cooperate on solutions. The ministers of water, environment and 

agriculture will have to work together to ensure coordination of policies that affect 

the lake resources” (World Bank, 2014). This implies political will and a commitment 

to inclusivity on the part of all governments. As such, the new leadership in Nigeria 

would do well to finally establish the National Climate Change Commission, which 

was approved and passed by the National Assembly in 2010, yet has been pending 

presidential approval ever since (Onemola, 2014). 

In terms of the specific policies aimed at environmental restoration and pres -

ervation, it is important to note that we are only now starting to learn of certain 

hydrologic characteristics of Lake Chad and the manner in which they are affected 

by human activity. The research conducted on the lake’s relationship with ground -

water and underwater aquifers, for example, is just a few years old. Greater aware -

ness, better data, and further research along these lines is needed in order to make 

informed policy decisions about proper resource management, especially in areas of 

dense human population that are prone to act as anthropologic hotspots. To its credit, 

the LCBC’s Five-Year Investment Plan calls for several studies that aim to improve 

understanding in the areas of water pollution controls, ground and surface water 

observation, water control for sustainable agricultural production, and exploitation 

and protection of the lake’s biological resources (LCBC, 2014). The ultimate impact of 

the proposed research, however, is contingent on sufficient provision of funds and 

proper implementation on the part of national governments and international part -

ners. The current reality is a vivid, if disappointing, case in point. Nearly three years 

into the LCBC’s Five-Year Investment Plan, its current capacity to monitor real-time 

hydrologic indicators is severely restricted due to underfunded and unmaintained 

national monitoring networks, particularly in Nigeria and Cameroon (Walbadet, 

Moutadé, Ndara & Lawan, 2015). 

Policy Recommendation #1 (Environment) – Improve water efficiency 

As noted in the previous section, several projects are now being carried out or consid -

ered as a part of the LCBC’s SAP to stem the shrinking and degradation of Lake Chad. 

One topic area that should receive more attention is water-use efficiency. In order 

to enhance water and food security in the region, LCB countries must commission 

studies, carry out pilot projects, and scale up initiatives to decrease water wastage and 

improve the means by which water is used and transported. Odada et al. (2005) state 

that water-use efficiency in the region’s irrigation systems is very low, around 11%. 

With smallholder farmers accounting for 75 to 80% of the overall farming population 

(FAO/LCBC, 2009), the difficulty will reside in designing policies and programmes 

that appeal to and are adopted by a wide selection of farmers. Small-scale irrigation 

technologies have been successfully implemented in some areas (FAO/LCBC, 2009). SEM 2015 

> 25

Additional small-scale irrigation options and pilot projects should be considered and 

then scaled up so that they are made widely available to all segments of the popula -

tion. Appropriate marketing and educational materials that are flexible and tailored 

to the needs of individual communities should be incorporated into these initiatives 

to ensure their success. 

Additionally, future large-scale irrigation schemes must take into account antici -

pated water level changes. Ideally they can be designed to allow for intake at various 

lake water levels and surface area dimensions. As previously mentioned, projects 

such as the one carried out in Nigeria in the 1970s have become irrelevant because 

their water intake was designed for Normal or Large lake conditions and not the 

Small or Small Dry conditions that have persisted since then. 

Policy Recommendation #2 (Security) – Reign in the military and hold them 

accountable 

This recommendation is specific to Nigeria and aims to tackle one of the main 

drivers of violence in the region. The military must be reigned in and held account -

able for their actions. To this end, the National Human Rights Commission must not 

only continue to be supported by the country’s new leadership, but it must also be 

given the power to enforce decisions based on its findings. Information on efforts to 

bring the military and police forces to justice should be made widely available, espe -

cially to the population in the northeast of the country. One way of accomplishing 

this would be for the government to create a transparency and local feedback initia -

tive, where people can easily receive the latest information regarding human rights 

abuses and further voice their grievances and/or contribute to public dialogue on 

security-related issues. Such a programme would also foster a gradual restoration of 

trust between locals and the government. 

Policy Recommendation #3 (Migration) – Streamline passage of migrant rights 

legal framework 

To address some of the largest challenges presented by the refugee crisis, clear indi -

cations must be established around the rights of refugees, whether they are inter -

nally displaced, foreign refugees, or returnees. Agencies and ministries must also be 

given clear and distinct roles so that the provision of aid and humanitarian assistance 

is carried out in an effective and timely manner. These institutions must also be allo -

cated the resources they need to carry out their work. Adequately trained personnel, 

funding, and access to accurate data and supplies are all obvious examples. 

While Nigeria is the most conspicuous case in which a policy of this nature is 

needed (particularly with regard to IDPs), it would be to the benefit of all migrants 

and LCB host countries alike for governments to align as best as possible the legal 

protections and regulatory frameworks necessary to respond to emergencies. As has 

been demonstrated above, cross-border international migration as a result of both 

environmental degradation and violence is always to another LCB country. With this 

in mind, Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria should consider the establishment of 

a new regional body, similar in concept to the LCBC, but designed with the specific 

objectives of aligning migration policy, gathering and disseminating data, estab -

lishing and maintaining a rapid-response fund, and better coordinating humani -

tarian efforts among national bodies. Even in non-crisis situations, this regional 

institution would play a vital role in monitoring voluntary and seasonal migration, 

and offering policy guidance to local governments to ensure equitable rights and 

services for all migrant groups. Doing so would not only help reduce the likelihood 

of migration-induced conflict between nomadic or semi-nomadic populations, but it 

would also provide an opportunity to identify in advance areas of potential resource 

or social dispute and then pre-emptively organise mitigation and response efforts. SEM 2015 

> 26
> AFRICA
> JASON RIZZO
> A SHRINKING LAKE
> AND A RISING INSURGENCY

Policy Recommendation #4 (Cross-cutting) – Improve education and employ -

ment opportunities, particularly among women 

The above three recommendations can been seen as priority interventions to be 

carried out in the short and medium terms in order to address present-day failures 

in the LCB. Here, a fourth and final recommendation is considered as a long-term 

initiative designed to tackle several of the underlying and interlinked causes found 

at the nexus between environmental degradation, migration, and violence in the 

LCB. This recommendation calls for a comprehensive development programme to 

improve access to and quality of educational and employment opportunities in the 

region, particularly among poor women. Conditional cash transfer initiatives for 

mothers with school-aged children, teacher training, construction and renovation of 

schools, micro-credit schemes, adult training and education, and the establishment 

of women’s employment associations are all examples of different components that 

could be included in the wider development programme. 

If properly funded, designed and implemented, a programme of this nature is 

likely to produce several positive outcomes. The most obvious is an increase in the 

level of income among poor families, which would serve to reduce poverty as well as 

vulnerability to climate change and environmental degradation. It has already been 

discussed how Boko Haram was born out of and continues to thrive in conditions 

of poverty, poor public services, and weak governance. A major poverty reduction 

programme that produces higher income through better provision of education 

and employment opportunities would greatly diminish Boko Haram’s rationale and 

motivational influence. At the same time, increased income levels can allow families 

to choose from a wider range of available migratory options in the event of violence, 

extreme weather events, or other life-threatening circumstances. 

While these are all positive developments in their own right, several additional 

indicators key to economic and social development could be expected to improve 

as well. Past studies, for example, have found that higher levels of women’s educa -

tion and labour force participation are two of the most effective determinants in 

producing lower fertility rates (Sen, 1999). In the LCB, lower fertility and reduced 

demographic pressure would help to correct problems of resource conflict, human-

induced environmental degradation, and migration. Higher overall educational 

achievement would also improve awareness on issues such as climate change, 

sustainable resource management, and environmentally friendly practices across 

different livelihoods. Employment initiatives that specifically target women, who 

often bear the greatest burden in situations of poverty, will also serve to reduce 

income inequality. Wilkinson and Pickett (2009), among others, have convincingly 

demonstrated that lower inequality has wide ranging positive implications on meas -

ures such as social trust, mental and physical health, life expectancy, and violence 

in both developed and developing nations. It can be further argued that increasing 

educational and economic activity among women would result in more inclusive 

social and cultural attitudes, which, in a region as diverse as the LCB, is essential in 

contributing to peaceful and cooperative co-existence among different ethnic and 

religious groups. 

Similar programmes in the LCB that have been attempted in past were too short-

term and narrowly focused to produce any lasting results. Nigeria recently concluded 

a one-year conditional cash transfer programme that, while temporarily improving 

income and educational enrolment, did little to address structural problems within 

the education system (Akinola, 2014). It is therefore important to emphasise that this 

recommendation calls for a long-term comprehensive package consisting of multiple 

component projects to address shortcomings at each stage in both the education and 

employment chains. SEM 2015 

> 27

CONCLUSIONS 

Displacement of populations in the Lake Chad region in 2014 can be explained by five 

underlying and inter-related determinants. The slow-onset degradation of Lake Chad 

due to climate change and greater degrees of human activity that have interfered with 

the lake’s natural characteristics is one key driver that has produced knock-on effects 

contributing to resource conflict and poverty in the region. These implications, in 

turn, when combined with poor governance (including corruption, and weak provi -

sion of public goods) and an ethnically and religiously charged setting have fuelled 

the rise of violent extremism, which can be seen as another key driver of migration 

in 2014. Demographic, political, and social factors are all strongly intertwined with 

environmental degradation and violence, and can also be viewed as direct drivers of 

migration in their own right. Additionally, a feedback loop can be observed between 

violence and migration. While violence contributed greatly to forced migration in 

2014, migration itself as a response to reduced lake levels led to increased conflict as 

livelihood systems compete over resources. 

Over 1 million people were displaced in the region following the events of 2014, a 

figure that more than doubled throughout 2015. Governments and aid agencies have 

had no choice but to begin to respond to the refugee crisis and its underlying causes. 

While important first steps have been taken, refugees and IDPs remain vulnerable 

and underserved, particularly in the areas of child protection, gender-based violence, 

family unification, education, and social protection. Likewise, current policy actions 

to address the root-cause issues of environmental degradation and violence are 

headed in the right directions, but are insufficient to reverse the current trends and 

ensure sustainable outcomes. As such, a comprehensive policy package should be 

considered to improve water-use efficiency, reform Nigeria’s military, establish a 

clear and unified legal framework for migrant, refugee, and IDP rights, and enhance 

educational and employment opportunities among women. Success in both the short 

and long-term in any of these areas will require strong political will and a commit -

ment to engage all stakeholders at local, state, national, and regional levels. SEM 2015 

28 

AFRICA 

JASON RIZZO 

A SHRINKING LAKE 

AND A RISING INSURGENCY 

# REFERENCES 

– Agbiboa, D. (2014). Boko-Haram and 

the Global Jihad: ‘Do Not Think Jihad 

is Over. Rather Jihad Has Just Begun’. 

Australian Journal Of International 

Affairs , 68 (4), 400-417. doi:10.1080/10357 

718.2014.891564 

– Agbiboa, D., & Maiangwa, B. 

(2013). Boko Haram, Religious 

Violence, and the Crisis of National 

Identity in Nigeria: Towards a 

Non-killing Approach.  Journal Of 

Developing Societies , 29 (4), 379-403. 

doi:10.1177/0169796x13503198 

– Akinola, O. (2014). Nigeria’s 

COPE CCT programme and its 

‘premature’ graduation strategy, 

any hope for participants’ human 

capital development?. [Blog] 

Povertics . Available at:  http:// 

vulnerabilityandpoverty.blogspot. 

fr/2014/05/nigerias-cope-cct-

programme-and-its.html 

– Associated Press, (1936). France May 

Divert River to Save Big African Lake. 

The New York Times . Retrieved from 

http://timesmachine.nytimes.com/ 

timesmachine/1936/06/30/93522684. 

html?pageNumber=13 

– Associated Press, (2014). Nigeria 

Human Rights Advocate Hails 

Progress.  The New York Times .

Retrieved from  http://www.nytimes. 

com/aponline/2014/04/09/world/ 

africa/ap-af-nigeria-human-rights.html 

– Barna, J. (2014).  Insecurity in Context: 

The Rise of Boko Haram in Nigeria .

Brussels: European Parliament Think 

Tank. Retrieved from  http://www. 

europarl.europa.eu/thinktank/en/ 

document.html?reference=EXPO-

AFET_NT(2014)536393 

– BGR, (2014).  Supraregional Africa: 

Groundwater Management of Lake 

Chad Basin . Bundesanstalt fÃ¼r 

Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe 

(BGR) . Retrieved 15 April 2015, 

from  http://www.bgr.bund.de/ 

EN/Themen/Zusammenarbeit/ 

TechnZusammenarb/Projekte/ 

Laufend/Afrika/1073_2010-2274-8_ 

Tschad_Grundwasserberatung_ 

Tschadseebeckenkommission_en.html 

– BGR, (2015).  TC Lake Chad Basin: 

Groundwater Management .

Bundesanstalt fÃ¼r Geowissenschaften 

und Rohstoffe (BGR) . Retrieved 17 April 

2015, from  http://www.bgr.bund. 

de/EN/Themen/Wasser/Projekte/ 

laufend/TZ/Tschad/tschad-II_fb_ 

en.html 

– Coe, M., & Foley, J. (2001). Human and 

natural impacts on the water resources 

of the Lake Chad basin.  Journal Of 

Geophysical Research , 106 (D4), 3349-

3356. doi:10.1029/2000jd900587 

– Collier, P. (2009).  Wars, guns, and votes 

(pp. 52-53). New York: Harper. 

– Coly, I. (2015). Phone Interview with 

Ibrahima Coly, Regional Coordinator 

for West and Central Africa at IEDA 

Relief Senegal. Dhakar/Paris. 

– Daviot, S. (2015).  RE: Requisition for 

information concerning SEM 2015 -

Information on DTM Nigeria needed .

[email]. 

– De Young, C., Sheridan, S., Davies, 

S., & Hjort, A. (2011). Climate change 

implications for fishing communities 

in the Lake Chad Basin: What have we 

learned and what can we do better?. In 

Workshop on climate change implications 

for fishing communities in the Lake 

Chad Basin  (pp.3-64). Rome: Food 

and Agriculture Organization of the 

United Nations. Retrieved from  http:// 

www.fao.org/docrep/017/i3037e/ 

i3037e.pdf 

– Essono, I. (2014). Interview: H.E. 

Issoufou Mahamadou.  LCBC News 

Magazine , p. 12. Retrieved from  http:// 

www.cblt.org/sites/default/files/ 

maquette_cblt_mag_va_13.pdf 

– FAO, (2014).  The State of World Fisheries 

and Aquaculture  (pp. 181-194). Rome: 

Food and Agriculture Organization of 

the United Nations. Retrieved from 

http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3720e.pdf 

– FAO/LCBC, (2009).  Adaptive Water 

Management in the Lake Chad Basin  (pp. 

5-25). Stockholm: Food and Agriculture 

Organization of the United Nations/ 

Lake Chad Basin Commission. 

Retrieved from  http://www.fao.org/ 

nr/water/docs/ChadWWW09.pdf 

– Geerken, R., Vassolo, S., & Bila, M. 

(2010). Impacts of climate variability 

and population pressure on water 

resources in the Lake Chad Basin. In 

Global Water System Project Conference 

of the Global Catchment Initiative 

(GCI)  (pp. 116-124). Bonn: The Global 

Water System Project. Retrieved from 

http://www.gwsp.org/fileadmin/ 

GCI_conference/Products/GWSP-

GCI%20conference%202010%20 

Proceedings.pdf 

– International Crisis Group, (2010). 

Northern Nigeria: Background to 

Conflict  (pp. 11-22). Dakar/Brussels: 

International Crisis Group. Retrieved 

from  http://www.crisisgroup. 

org/~/media/Files/africa/west-

africa/nigeria/168%20Northern%20 

Nigeria%20-%20Background%20to%20 

Conflict.pdf 

– International Crisis Group, (2014). 

Curbing Violence in Nigeria (II): 

The Boko Haram Insurgency  (p. 13). 

Abuja/Dakar/Nairobi/Brussels: 

International Crisis Group. Retrieved 

from  http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/ 

media/Files/africa/west-africa/ 

nigeria/216-curbing-violence-

in-nigeria-ii-the-boko-haram-

insurgency.pdf 

– International Organization for 

Migration,  Boko Haram May Have 

Displaced Over a Million in Nigeria .

International Organization for 

Migration (IOM) . Retrieved 10 

April 2015, from  http://www.iom-

nederland.nl/en/405-boko-haram-

may-have-displaced-over-a-million-

in-nigeria-iom 

– IOM, & NEMA, (2014).  The IDP 

Situation in North-Eastern Nigeria 

(DTM Round I Report) . IOM. Retrieved 

from  https://nigeria.iom.int/sites/ 

default/files/dtm/DTM%20Nigeria_ 

December%202014.pdf 

– IOM, & NEMA, (2015).  DTM Nigeria 

Round VI Report . Retrieved from 

http://nigeria.iom.int/sites/ 

default/files/dtm/01_IOM%20 

DTM%20Nigeria_Round%20VI%20 

Report_20151031.pdf SEM 2015 

29 

– Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., & Mastruzzi, 

M. (2014).  The Worldwide Governance 

Indicators (WGI) project . Worldwide 

Governance Indicators . Retrieved 19 

April 2015, from  http://info.worldbank. 

org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home 

– LCBC,  Interbasin Water Transfer Project 

(IBWTP) . Lake Chad Basin Commission .

Retrieved 19 April 2015, from  http:// 

www.cblt.org/en/interbasin-water-

transfer-project-ibwtp 

– LCBC, (2008).  Strategic Action 

Programme for the Lake Chad Basin: 

Agreed by the LCBC Member States of 

Cameroon, Central African Republic, 

Chad, Niger, and Nigeria . Lake Chad 

Basin Commission. 

– LCBC, (2014).  Inaugural meeting of the 

international Scientific Committee . Lake 

Chad Basin Commission . Retrieved 19 

April 2015, from  http://www.cblt.org/ 

en/node/68 

– Lemoalle, J., Bader, J., Leblanc, M., & 

Sedick, A. (2012). Recent changes in 

Lake Chad: Observations, simulations 

and management options (1973-2011). 

Global And Planetary Change , 80-81 , 247-

254. doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2011.07.004 

– Malik, K. (2014).  Sustaining Human 

Progress: Reducing Vulnerabilities and 

Building Resilience . United Nations 

Development Programme. 

– NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center-

-EOS Project Science Office, (2001). 

Africa’s Lake Chad Shrinks By 20 Times 

Due To Irrigation Demands, Climate 

Change.  ScienceDaily . Retrieved May 

9, 2015 from  www.sciencedaily.com/ 

releases/2001/02/010228080245.htm 

– Nigeria Social Violence Project, (2014). 

Social Violence in Nigeria . Connect SAIS 

Africa . Retrieved 19 April 2015, from 

http://www.connectsaisafrica.org/ 

research/african-studies-publications/ 

social-violence-nigeria/ 

– Odada, E., Oyebande, L., & Oguntola, 

A. (2005).  Lake Chad: Experience and 

lessons learned brief . International 

Lake Environment Committee. 

Retrieved from  http://www. 

worldlakes.org/uploads/06_Lake_ 

Chad_27February2006.pdf 

– Okonkwo, C., & Demoz, B. (2014). 

Identifying anthropogenic “hotspots” 

and management of water resources 

in Lake Chad Basin using GIS.  Journal 

Of Natural Resources Policy Research ,

6(2-3), 135-149. doi:10.1080/19390459.2 

014.920581 

– Okonkwo, C., Demoz, B., 

& Gebremariam, S. (2014). 

Characteristics of Lake Chad Level 

Variability and Links to ENSO, 

Precipitation, and River Discharge. 

The Scientific World Journal , 2014 , 1-13. 

doi:10.1155/2014/145893 

– Onemola, O. (2014). Why Nigeria Must 

Act on Climate Change.  Applause 

Africa . Retrieved from  http://www. 

applauseafrica.com/magazine/313-

why-nigeria-must-act-on-climate-

change 

– Onuoha, F. (2010). Climate change, 

population surge and resource 

overuse in the Lake Chad area: 

Implications for human security 

in the north-east zone of Nigeria. 

In D. Mwiturubani, J. van Wyk, 

R. Mwebaza & T. Kabanda,  Climate 

change and natural resources conflicts 

in Africa  (1st ed., pp. 23-44). Institute 

for Security Studies. Retrieved 

from  http://www.issafrica.org/ 

publications/monographs/climate-

change-and-natural-resources-

conflicts-in-africa 

– Onuoha, F. (2012).  Boko Haram: 

Nigeria’s Extremist Islamic Sect . Al 

Jazeera Centre for Studies. Retrieved 

from  http://studies.aljazeera.net/ 

ResourceGallery/media/Document 

s/2012/2/29/2012229113341793734BO 

KO%20HARAM%20NIGERIAS%20 

EXTREMIST%20ISLAMIC%20SECT. 

pdf 

– Poisson, E. (2015).  RE: Nigeria Refugee 

Inquiry.  [email] 

– Premium Times, (2014). Chad: 

Restoration of Lake Chad Will Stem 

Security Challenges in Northeast 

Nigeria - Committee. Retrieved 

from  http://www.premiumtimesng. 

com/news/154102-restoration-lake-

chad-will-stem-security-challenges-

northeast-nigeria-committee.html 

– Rushing, E., & Reed, J. (2014). 

Nigeria: multiple displacement crises 

overshadowed by Boko Haram . Geneva: 

Internal Displacement Monitoring 

Centre. Retrieved from  http:// 

www.internal-displacement.org/ 

sub-saharan-africa/nigeria/2014/ 

nigeria-multiple-displacement-crises-

overshadowed-by-boko-haram 

– Sen, A. (1999).  Development as freedom 

(pp. 189-203). New York: Knopf. 

– UNHCR, (2014a).  Refugees fleeing 

attacks in north eastern Nigeria, 

UNHCR watching for new displacement .

Retrieved from  http://www.unhcr. 

org/536ca0f79.html 

– UNHCR, (2014b).  Nigeria Regional 

Refugee Response Plan . UNHCR. 

Retrieved from  http://www.unhcr. 

org/541836c69.html 

– UNHCR, (2015).  UNHCR Refugees/ 

Migrants Emergency Response -

Mediterranean . UNHCR Refugees/ 

Migrants Emergency Response -

Mediterranean . Retrieved 9 November 

2015, from  http://data.unhcr.org/ 

mediterranean/regional.php 

– Walbadet, A., Moutadé, E., Ndara, R., 

& Lawan, A. (2015).  Hydrometeo, 2nd 

quarter 2015 . LCBC. Retrieved from 

http://www.cblt.org/sites/default/ 

files/bull_hydromet_avril_mai_ 

juin_2015_en.pdf 

– Wilkinson, R., & Pickett, K. (2010).  The 

spirit level . London: Penguin Books. 

– World Bank, (2014). Restoring 

a Disappearing Giant: Lake 

Chad. Retrieved from  http:// 

www.worldbank.org/en/news/ 

feature/2014/03/27/restoring-a-

disappearing-giant-lake-chad SEM 2015 

30 SEM 2015 

31 

## CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER 

# Violence and Displacement 

# in Northern Nigeria 

# Identifying Environmental Factors in the 

# Recent Eruption of Violence and the Associated 

# Displacement Movements 

# Over the past few decades, scholars have been paying more and 

more attention to the role of environmental factors in conflicts, 

revealing that the environment should be carefully considered 

when analysing the root causes and consequences of wars. 

Some authors have even gone farther; Jared Diamond has for 

instance argued that environmental hazards and climate-related 

changes, among other factors, were responsible for the decline 

and collapse of entire societies. Recently, it has been shown 

that environmental changes played a significant part in the build-up of the ongoing 

conflict that has been devastating Syria for more than 4 years: following unprec -

edented drought from 2006 to 2010, rural populations dependent on agriculture saw 

a substantial deterioration in their living conditions. 1.5 million of them fled to cities 

(Pandey, 2015), which contributed to the destabilisation of the political order and 

fuelled tensions. The example of Syria is interesting to consider, since it also high -

lights the impact of migration movements on States. 

Analysing the relationship between conflicts, migration and the environment 

will be a guiding principle of the following case study, which will not focus on Syria, 

but will rather examine the situation in northern Nigeria. Nigeria is a developing 

country that is now the largest economy on the African continent in terms of gross 

domestic product (GDP) (Caulderwood, 2014), with economic growth of more than 

6% in 2014 (World Bank, 2015), and the largest producer of oil in Africa. Nigeria is 

a diverse country, with more than 250 ethnic groups and languages. The country 

gained independence in 1960, and after several decades of political instability, with 

numerous military coups, civilian rule was eventually established in 1999. Nigeria is 

a federal structure, with 36 states (See Annex 1), and around 800 Local Government 

Areas (LGAs) (IDMC, 2012). 

In addition to the numerous economic, political and social challenges it has to 

cope with, Nigeria is facing environmental risks that are going to become more 

pervasive in the years and decades to come as a result of climate change. According 

to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the whole African continent 

will become increasingly exposed to the negative impacts of climate change (Ferris & 

Stark, 2012), notably including population movements. The United Nations Environ -

ment Programme has stated that by 2060, there will be around 50 million environ -

mental migrants in Africa (Afifi, 2011). The International Organization for Migration 

(IOM) defines environmental migrants as people who choose or are obliged to leave 

their homes because of sudden or progressive modifications in the environment, 

which negatively impact the living conditions of those people being displaced within 

their country or abroad (IOM, 2014). The notion of environmental migrants and the 

projections made concerning the future number of environmental migrants are, SEM 2015 

> 32
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

however, questioned. Indeed, migration movements cannot be understood solely 

through an environmental lens. The decision to migrate involves a wide range of 

factors, which can be environmental, as well as economic, social or political. It is 

thus important not to overestimate the significance of environmental issues when 

formulating projections of future migration movements. 

At the same time, underestimating the impact of environmental factors on other 

processes may lead to misunderstandings and misrepresentations. Northern Nigeria 

has attracted considerable attention over the past few years because of the conflict 

opposing the national authorities and the Islamist movement Boko Haram. This 

conflict has led to considerable population displacements, which intensified in 2014. 

But the focus on Boko Haram has tended to hide other phenomena, especially envi -

ronmental factors, which are also responsible for displacement in northern Nigeria. 

The following case study will examine the migration movements that occurred 

in 2014 in northern Nigeria, a year that witnessed a spectacular rise in the level of 

violence in the area. Its goal is to analyse the role of environmental parameters in 

conflict dynamics and the decision to migrate in order to uncover the influence of 

the environment on violence and displacement. For the purposes of the case study, 

northern Nigeria will be defined as the Muslim-majority area of Nigeria, consisting of 

the 12 states ruled by Sharia law, as well as the states of Plateau, Adamawa and Taraba 

(See Annex 2). The first section of the case study will show that northern Nigeria 

is a highly vulnerable zone because of poverty, underdevelopment and violence, as 

well as climate hazards and progressive environmental changes. The second part of 

the case study will focus on the year 2014, which saw large migration movements in 

northern Nigeria. The study will assess the humanitarian situation in the area and 

the policy responses implemented by the local, national and international author -

ities. The fourth section of the case study will analyze the 2014 migration move -

ments in northern Nigeria using the environment – migration – conflict nexus, a very 

Figure 1:  Nigeria and its 36 states 

> Source: Higazi & Brisset-Foucault, 2013 SEM 2015
> 33

interesting tool that helps to grasp the root causes and implications of the current 

events in northern Nigeria. The last section of the paper will identify several chal -

lenges that have to be addressed, and will propose a series of recommendations that 

could improve the situation in northern Nigeria. 

1. NORTHERN NIGERIA, A ZONE EXPOSED TO A WIDE RANGE OF 

PROBLEMS 

1.1. Poverty, underdevelopment and growing socioeconomic inequality 

Despite the tremendous revenues brought by oil production, which is concentrated 

in the south of Nigeria, especially in the Niger Delta, Nigerians’ quality of life has 

not significantly improved over the past decades (Werz & Conley, 2012). Corruption is 

widespread and prevents the fair redistribution of wealth in the country. As a result, 

socioeconomic inequalities are growing between the south of Nigeria, which is rela -

tively wealthy and predominantly Christian, and the north, highly disadvantaged 

with a majority of Muslims (Higazi & Brisset-Foucault, 2013). Today, Nigeria is one of 

the most unequal countries in the world in terms of income and access to social and 

economic opportunities (UNDP, 2009). The north-south divide has led to underdevel -

opment of the northern states, where poverty rates are extremely high. Indeed, 75 to 

90% of the population lives on less than US$1 a day in the northwest and northeast 

of the country (BBC News, 2012). Illiteracy levels are as high as 85% in some parts 

of the north (MacCauley, 2014), and many children find themselves outside of the 

school system. In addition, unemployment rates are very high in northern Nigeria, 

especially among young people. 

1.2. A situation of generalised violence 

Since the democratic transition and the establishment of a civilian government in 

1999, northern Nigeria has experienced more violence than the rest of the national 

territory (MacCauley, 2014). Recurrent conflicts have occurred in northern Nigeria 

for decades because of religious, ethnic and social tensions. Clashes between farmers 

and pastoralists have been consistently fuelling violence (Conroy, 2014). But since 

2009, the emergence of Boko Haram has radically changed the conflict landscape 

of northern Nigeria. Boko Haram was created in northeastern Nigeria in the early 

2000s, and was initially defined as a sect. Boko Haram is frontally opposed to Western 

civilisation, and to the secularisation of the Nigerian state. It also aims to establish 

an Islamic state (caliphate) in northern Nigeria (Adibe 2014). In 2009, it radicalised 

its actions (Adibe, 2014) and by 2011 had become a powerful insurgent organisation 

carrying out violent attacks against civilian populations (Assessment Capacities 

Project, 2015). Boko Haram differs from other organisations insofar as it indiscrimi -

nately targets Christian and Muslim populations, whereas in the past, conflicts in 

northern Nigeria were based on ethnic and religious divides (Kimenyi & al, 2014). In 

its discourse, Boko Haram has publicly required Christians to leave northern Nigeria, 

while also attacking Muslim leaders who condemn the radical Islamists’ tactics 

(IDMC, 2014). 

Since the radicalisation of Boko Haram in 2009, attacks against civilians have 

been increasingly deadly. Between 2009 and 2011, the actions carried out by Boko 

Haram militants have led to the death of over 1,000 individuals in northern Nigeria 

(Integrated Regional Information Networks, 2012). The conflict accelerated after the 

declaration of a state of emergency in 2012 in Yobe, Borno, and Adamawa (IDMC, 

2014), which form the northeastern part of Nigeria (See Annex 3). The state of emer -

gency was later confirmed in May 2013, in the same three states (Kimenyi & al, 2014). 

Despite the arrival of armed governmental forces in the region, Boko Haram killed 

around 2,000 people in 2012 (Kimenyi & al, 2014). It then managed to take control SEM 2015 

> 34
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

of some parts of Borno state in 2013 (Assessment Capacities Project, 2015). In 2014, 

the conflict accelerated once again (See Annex 4), with Boko Haram multipli -

ying large-scale abductions from the start of the year. The Islamist organisation 

proclaimed an Islamic caliphate in August 2014 in a territory including ten large 

cities in Yobe, Borno and Adamawa states (IDMC, 2014). In the second half of 

the year, attacks multiplied, with Boko Haram believed to have killed more than 

10,000 people in 2014, most of them massacred during raids carried out in the 

rural northeastern region (Alfred, 2015). This means that during 2014 alone, the 

Boko Haram killed more people than during the five previous years (IDMC, 2014). 

Violence is also now threatening to spill over into neighbouring countries such as 

Cameroon (Alfred, 2015). 

Despite the rise of Boko Haram, other forms of violence have not disappeared. 

Clashes between herdsmen and farmers also occurred in 2014, and in some cases, 

herdsmen have been suspected of collaborating with Boko Haram, thus blurring 

the distinction between the new conflict, and the more traditional ethno-religious 

tensions (Kimenyi & al, 2014). 

1.3. Growing environmental vulnerability 

Northern Nigeria is exposed to several environmental challenges, which put a great 

amount of pressure on local ecosystems and on people’s livelihoods. 

1.3.1. Desertification 

Desertification is likely to be the biggest environmental problem for northern 

Nigeria. Desertification has been defined by the United Nations as a process of land 

degradation in dry areas resulting from various factors, including human activi -

ties and climate variations (MacCauley, 2014). Desertification, which is sometimes 

called desert encroachment, has led to the disappearance of entire villages (Werz 

& Conley, 2012). It has a marked adverse effect on crop and livestock production, 

and is recognised as a driver of migration in northern Nigeria (IDMC, 2014). It 

is estimated that because of desertification, Nigeria is losing between 2,000 and 

3,500 square kilometres of land each year (Mohammed, 2015, Werz & Conley, 2012). 

The Sahara desert currently already covers a third of the national territory, and 

is advancing at a rate of 0.6 kilometres per year (Conroy, 2014). Over the past two 

decades, sand dunes have expanded by 400% (Conroy, 2014), and have started to 

cover large portions of farmland in agriculturally productive regions (Mohammed, 

2015). Desertification affects in particular the states of Sokoto, Yobe, Borno, and 

Kebbi (Ibimilua & Ibimilua, 2014). This century, two-thirds of the 11 following states 

could become desert areas: Sokoto, Yobe, Kebbi, Zamfara, Katsina, Kaduna, Kano, 

Jigawa, Gombe, Borno and Bauchi (Conroy, 2014). 

1.3.2. Deforestation and decreasing yields 

Northern Nigeria has experienced a continuous decrease in the percentage of 

forest areas, from 70% in the early 1960s to 35% today, while the surface area 

used for cropland and pasture has increased at the same time (MacCauley, 2014). 

The relationship between forests and agricultural fields is important: some 

studies have indeed revealed that the absence of vegetation cover was leading 

to a decrease in soil nutrients in the Sahel region, which was in turn threat -

ening soil productivity. Insufficient levels of soil nutrients pose a serious risk 

to crop productivity, comparable to decreasing rainfall levels (MacCauley, 2014). 

In northern Nigeria the soil has traditionally been suitable for the cultivation of 

numerous crops, such as sorghum, rice, corn, millet, cowpeas and soybeans. But 

with less and less iron in the soil, crop production will be affected. In the Sahel 

region of Nigeria, crop yields have reduced on average by 20% over the past three 

decades (Conroy, 2014). SEM 2015 

> 35

1.3.3. Degrading weather conditions 

The north of Nigeria is a semi arid zone consisting mostly of savannah, with low 

rainfall levels (Mohammed, 2015). Since the start of the 19th century, the Sahel 

region of Nigeria has witnessed a 3 to 4% drop in rainfall per decade (Conroy, 2014). 

Some studies have reported that the rain episodes in West Africa were sensitive 

to deforestation (MacCauley, 2014). Following that analysis, the decline in rainfall 

levels is likely to be related to the decrease in forest surface in northern Nigeria. 

The steady decline in annual rainfall has been accompanied by a shortening of 

the rainy season, which lasted 5 months 30 years ago, and lasts only 4 months 

nowadays (Conroy, 2014). The distinction between the dry and the rainy season is 

becoming more and more blurred, thereby destabilising agricultural cycles (Werz 

& Conley, 2012). Moreover, northern Nigeria is a drought-prone territory where 

water is scarce in many areas (Werz & Conley, 2012). Droughts are more frequent 

in the states of Kebbi, Kastina, Sokoto, Jigawa, Kano, Borno and Yobe (Ibimilua 

& Ibimilua, 2014). Throughout the whole Sahel region, overall temperatures have 

been on the rise over the past decades (See Annex 5) (United Nations Environment 

Programme, 2011). 

1.3.4. Exposure to floods 

While desertification, deforestation, decreasing yields and degrading weather condi -

tions can be labelled as slow-onset events, floods can be qualified as sudden disas -

ters. In Nigeria at least 20% of the population is at risk from flooding (Etuonovbe, 

2011), and floods occur frequently. Flood episodes result in the destruction of roads, 

bridges, farmlands and infrastructure (Etuonovbe, 2011), and also provoke large-

scale population displacements. In 2009, floods displaced around 140,000 Nigerians, 

and at least 500,000 in 2011 (IDMC, 2012). In northern Nigeria more specifically, 

floods have been more frequent and more intense (United Nations Environment 

Programme, 2011). In September 2010, heavy rainfall pushed local authorities to 

open the Challawa and Tiga dams in the state of Kano, in order to relieve the water 

pressure put on them. The subsequent flooding displaced two million people (Ferris 

& Stark, 2012). In the state of Sokoto in the same month, a massive flood submerged 

around 50 villages, and forced over 130,000 Nigerians to flee (Etuonovbe, 2011). 

In 2014, flooding was limited in northern Nigeria, only affecting southern states 

(IDMC, 2014). 

Northern Nigeria is a region characterised by endemic poverty and underdevel -

opment. Furthermore, the gap between the north and the south of the country is 

widening. Violence is widespread in northern Nigeria, in particular because of the 

conflict between governmental authorities and the insurgent group Boko Haram. 

In addition, the region is becoming increasingly vulnerable to climate change and 

environmental hazards. In 2014, the explosion of violence in northern Nigeria, asso -

ciated with underlying economic, political and environmental problems, led to 

massive population movements. 

2. 2014: A SPECTACULAR RISE IN VIOLENCE CAUSING LARGE 

MIGRATION MOVEMENTS IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 

This section does not aim at studying seasonal migration movements, which are 

traditional adaptation strategies, very common in West Africa. The following 

section will neither focus on the traditional conflicts fueled by religious, ethnic 

or regional divisions and tensions, which have regularly caused displacement 

movements across Nigeria (IDMC, 2012). Rather, the purpose of the following 

analysis is to assess the exceptional migrations that occurred in 2014 in Northern 

Nigeria. SEM 2015 

> 36
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

2.1. The difficulty of obtaining reliable and accurate information on 

displacement 

At the local and national levels, there is little capacity to collect data on displacement 

movements within Nigeria (IDMC, 2012). Functioning monitoring institutions are 

lacking in Nigeria, and no accurate figures are released regarding levels of displace -

ment in the country (IDMC, 2012). From state to state, the expertise in data collection 

regarding internally displaced persons (IDPs) varies greatly (IDMC, 2014). Independent 

estimates provided by international organisations are generally lacking (IDMC, 

2014). When data is collected, the quality of information is limited, because data on 

displacement is only occasionally disaggregated by sex, age or location (IDMC, 2014). 

Quite often, the numbers provided by non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and 

government agencies are rough estimates, which only take into account people living 

in temporary camps and shelters, or refer to very localised displacements without 

looking at the big picture (Ferris & Stark, 2012). The Nigerian Red Cross Society, for 

example, collects information through volunteers and its local branches, but is not 

able to maintain a national and centralised database (IDMC, 2014). 

Only considering the people who are living in camps after being displaced is 

problematic in northern Nigeria, because most migrants are hosted by friends or 

family (Ferris & Stark, 2012). Even though they constitute the vast majority of IDPs, 

individuals living in host communities (with relatives) are not counted, and there is 

almost no available data concerning them (IDMC, 2014). In addition, the methodology 

Figure 2.  The 12 states ruled by Sharia law in Nigeria 

> Source: Bowie, Nile. 2012 “Nigeria: Fertile Ground for Balkanization”. Infowars.com SEM 2015
> 37

of estimates can be criticised, given that the estimates provided by governmental 

agencies are sometimes obtained by simply looking at the number of damaged or 

destroyed homes in areas from where people have escaped (IDMC, 2014). Moreover, 

estimates rarely collect information on return movements, when migrants come 

back to their homes (IDMC, 2014). In the absence of comprehensive and consistent 

data, key patterns of displacement cannot be identified and understood (IDMC, 2012). 

As a result, the right policy responses cannot be designed and implemented (IDMC, 

2014). 

2.2. Quantifying the number of IDPs in Northern Nigeria in 2014 

Despite all of the aforementioned limitations, there is some available informa -

tion circulating on how many Nigerians were displaced in the northern part of the 

country in 2014. Data has to be carefully considered, and cannot be entirely trusted. 

However, numbers are useful to give an order of magnitude of what happened in 

the north of Nigeria in 2014. The number of Nigerians who had to flee is consider -

able: the National Emergency Agency of Nigeria (NEMA), which is the state agency in 

charge of disaster management in Nigeria, estimates that 250,000 people had to flee 

their homes during the first three months of 2014 in the northeast of the country. 

The number of people being displaced seems to have steadily increased in 2014. 

During the first nine months of the year, NEMA reported around 1.5 million IDPs 

in the three northeastern states of Borno, Adamawa and Yobe (Assessment Capaci -

ties Project, 2015). Christos Stylianides, who is charge of humanitarian aid and crisis 

management at the European Commission, said in December 2014 that 1.6 million 

Nigerians had been displaced because of the ongoing conflict with Boko Haram in 

2014 (Alfred, 2015). 

The migration crisis is not only internal, and has spilled over to neighbouring 

countries: Cameroon, Niger, and Chad (IOM, 2015). The Zinder and Diffa regions of 

Niger, the Lake Chad area, and the extreme North of Cameroon have faced a massive 

arrival of refugees and stranded migrants in 2014 (IOM, 2015). It is believed that 

between 90,000 and 160,000 fled to Niger in 2014 (Alfred, 2015, Assessment Capacities 

Annex 3:  Intensity of the conflict against Boko Haram across Nigeria 

> Source: Kimenyi & al, 2014

SEM 2015 

38 

AFRICA 

CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER 

VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 

Project, 2015). At the same time, at least 10,000 people migrated to Chad, and at least 

35,000 to Cameroon (Assessment Capacities Project, 2015). As a result, at least 135,000 

Nigerians sought asylum in neighbouring countries. And this trend seems to have 

continued, with more than 10,000 migrants arriving in Western Chad from Nigeria 

during the first two weeks of January 2015 (Alfred, 2015). 

Faced with huge information gaps and unreliable data, IOM has used a tool called 

the “Displacement Tracking Matrix” 11 (DTM) in northern Nigeria, in order to improve 

data collection. Originally implemented in six northern states, the DTM was then 

extended to the whole Nigerian territory at the end of 2014 (IOM, 2015). From July to 

December 2014, the DTM identified around 400,000 IDPs in five states: Adamawa, 

Bauchi, Gombe, Taraba, and Yobe (IOM, 2015). NEMA then used the DTM in Borno, 

Nasarawa, Kaduna, Kano, Plateau, and Zamfara, and discovered an additional 500,000 

IDPs (IOM, 2015). As a result, and following the IOM methodology, there were around 

900,000 IDPs in Nigeria at the end of 2014 (See Annex 6). Yet once again, the scale of 

displacement movements is likely to have been largely underestimated. For instance, 

Monique Barbut, the current Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention 

to Combat Desertification, has stated 22 that in 2012 alone, migration movements 

in northern Nigeria accounted for around 7 million people, mostly migrating east 

towards the Lake Chad region. With that number in mind, it is likely that signifi -

cantly more than 1 million, or even 1.5 million people were displaced in 2014, given 

the eruption of violence that rocked northern Nigeria.  

> 1. Displacement Tracking Matrix – Tracking and Monitoring System for Displaced Populations http://www.iom.int/
> files/live/sites/iom/files/What-We-Do/docs/DOE-Infosheet-DTM-v2-1.pdf
> 2. Speech made during the “COP21, J-200: 200 décideurs d’aujourd’hui et de demain s’engagent” conference in
> Paris on May 4, 2015

Figure 4.  Geographic impacts of Boko Haram attacks in 2014 

> Source: Assessment Capacities Project, 2015 SEM 2015
> 39

2.3. Assessing displacement patterns in Northern Nigeria 

Even though data collection is difficult, which may prevent an in-depth analysis of 

the recent displacement patterns in northern Nigeria, a few trends can be discerned: 

– The vast majority of migrants (probably more than 90%) sought refuge in host 

communities, with family, friends, or other relatives, rather than going to camps 

or other institutions (IOM, 2015). There are currently no official camps for 

displaced populations in Nigeria (Ferris & Stark, 2012) 

– Many fam ilies split up, with men staying in dangerous areas, while women and 

children were being sent to safer regions in the south. Such a trend is not new, 

and has been observed during previous conflicts, for instance when religious 

clashes occurred in 2000 (IDMC, 2012). 

– Migrants seemed to be moving from rural to urban areas (Assessment Capacities 

Project, 2015) 

– IDPs migrated from the northeastern region to the states of Gombe, Taraba and 

Bauchi, and to central Nigeria (IDMC, 2014). But many IDPs stayed in the same 

area, and families simply fled throughout northeastern Nigeria (IDMC, 2014) 

– Displacements directly induced by Boko Haram have tended to be of a longer 

duration than displacements induced by sudden climate hazards, which are 

generally temporary (IDMC, 2012) 

– Migrants from Chad and Niger, who were seeking asylum in northern Nigeria, 

had to return to their country of origin (IDMC, 2012) 

– Boko Haram’s establishment of a caliphate has trapped populations in areas 

under the strict control of the radical Islamist organisation. Several reports have 

revealed that people seeking to flee the newly established caliphate were executed 

(IDMC, 2014) 

Figure 5.  Seasonal evolution of temperatures in the Sahel region, from 1970 to 2006 

> Source: United Nations Environment Programme, 2011 SEM 2015
> 40
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

– In the northwestern part of Nigeria, where Boko Haram is less active, state 

authorities recognised that thousands had been displaced because of desertifica -

tion (IDMC, 2014) 

– Displacement resulted from attacks carried out by Boko Haram, but also from the 

counterinsurgency action led by the Nigerian military (IDMC, 2012). Indeed, many 

civilians pre-emptively fled the areas likely to be disputed both by insurgents and 

by the military (IDMC, 2014) 

– Since both Islamist militants and government soldiers are trying to control roads, 

many migrants chose to avoid those roads, and were forced into forests , where 

some of them lost their way, and suffered from hunger and thirst. Furthermore, 

in some cases, the military targeted migrants, taking them for Islamist insurgents 

on the move (IDMC, 2014) 

Despite the difficulty of obtaining accurate data on recent displacements in 

Nigeria, it appears that 2014 was marked by massive population movements in 

northern Nigeria and in the Lake Chad region. Migration patterns cannot be assessed 

in detail due to the lack of reliable information, however some key trends have been 

identified, in particular the importance of host communities, the rural-urban nature 

of movements, the existence of trapped populations, and the significant role played 

by the Nigerian counterinsurgency. Such massive population displacements have led 

to a situation of humanitarian emergency, with very limited policy responses. 

3. INSUFFICIENT POLICY RESPONSES AND THE BUILD-UP OF A 

HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCY 

3.1. Inability of national, local and international institutions to address the 

current migration crisis 

NEMA is the federal institution in charge of responding to the immediate needs 

of displaced groups (IDMC, 2012). It only started to work on a plan preparing for 

future displacements in June 2014, with the looming perspective of the 2015 presi -

dential elections (IDMC, 2014). The initiative is laudable, yet it might have come too 

late regarding the current crisis. NEMA is usually assisted by the National Commis -

sion for Refugees (NCFR), which oversees all refugee issues in Nigeria. In 2002, its 

mandate was expanded in order to include IDPs. The NCFR created a promising 

Plan of Action for resettlement and reintegration, which has still to be translated 

into concrete programmes and projects (IDMC, 2012). Nigeria ratified the Kampala 

Convention in 2012, which is the Convention for the Protection and Assistance of 

Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (IDMC, 2014). Nevertheless, the federal govern -

ment has yet to implement the Convention (IDMC, 2014). More generally, national 

responses to displacements tend to be uncoordinated and inadequate. Ministries, 

agencies, and departments involved in displacement policies tend to compete with 

each other for the same pools of money, which are moreover very limited (IDMC, 

2014). At the state level, State Emergency Management Agencies (SEMAs) are fulfilling 

the prerogatives that NEMA pursues at the federal level. The SEMAs have varying 

capabilities, and responses to displacement differ significantly from state to state, 

with an absence of coordination (IDMC, 2012). International NGOs are not really 

present in the field, given the risks in the region, and the difficulty of ensuring access 

to IDPs (IDMC, 2014). Lastly, foreign donors have been reluctant to contribute to the 

financing effort of migration policies, given the size and growth of the phenomenon 

but also the corruption characterising Nigeria. As a result, foreign financial contribu -

tions targeting the displacement crisis remain low (IDMC, 2014). SEM 2015 

41 

Figure 6.  Displacement crisis in Northeastern Nigeria according to the IOM methodology 

Source: International Organization for Migration, 2015 

CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS 

(temporite, rainfall, drought flood, sea-level rise) 

Threat multiplier 

NON CLIMATE FACTORS 

Economic Social Politacal Demographic pressure Land degradation 

Vulnerability 

Food Security Water security Health issues 

Natural resource availability Possible responses/outcomes 

Migration Ressource competition Political destabilization Conflict 

Source: United Nations Environment Programme, 2011 

Figure 7.  Conceptual framework describing the environment-migration-conflict nexus SEM 2015 

> 42
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

3.2. Underlying problems hampering the efficiency of migration policies 

Local, national and international responses to migration movements within Nigeria 

have generally proved insufficient and inadequate for several reasons. Assis -

tance has tended to be based on short-term perspectives, and has not targeted the 

medium to long-term reconstruction of livelihoods among impacted populations, 

which is nevertheless a necessary step to consider (IDMC, 2012). Both the interna -

tional community and the Nigerian authorities have focused almost exclusively on 

northeastern Nigeria, with an emphasis on emergency response. Such a short-term 

approach has prevented a precise understanding of the root causes of displacement, 

which is a necessary step in order to design and implement durable solutions for 

IDPs (IDMC, 2014). In addition, the Nigerian government has focused its responses 

on disaster management mechanisms, which do not address all aspects of the issue 

of recent displacements in northern Nigeria. Many tools implemented by the govern -

ment target migrants living in camps, but that response is inadequate, given that the 

vast majority of IDPs live in host communities (IDMC, 2012). Migration policies are 

also affected by the militarisation of the crisis, given that government counterin -

surgency operations have led to further instability and displacement in the north -

eastern part of Nigeria (IDMC, 2014). General government policies have reinforced 

the vulnerability of migrants and aggravated tensions, especially with the principle 

of “indigenisation”, which discriminates against those unable to prove their ties to 

the original populations of a given area. Those “non-indigenes”, who are likely to 

be migrants, are excluded from already limited resources, such as land, education, 

public sector jobs, and participation in political affairs (IDMC, 2014). 

3.3. A situation of humanitarian emergency that is worsening 

The northeastern region of Nigeria, which hosts the largest number of IDPs, is in 

desperate need of additional support given the dire humanitarian situation. NEMA 

has recently stated that 3 million Nigerians are affected by serious humanitarian 

problems (MacGroarty & Akingbule, 2014) . These problems are multidimensional, 

with several overlapping crises: 

– Food crisis: food security is a crucial concern for migrants. Given that federal 

and state authorities have restricted access to roads and have implemented many 

security measures, rural transport and markets have been disrupted, which has 

exacerbated food insecurity (IDMC, 2014). In some areas of northern Nigeria, 

there has been no harvest and no planting for the past 3 years (Alfred, 2015). Cases 

of malnutrition have increased in zones affected by displacement (IDMC, 2014). 

Without substantial humanitari an support, it is believed that up to 3 million 

people will have to cope with food insecurity in Nigeria in July 2015 (Assessment 

Capacities Project, 2015) 

– Disease outbreaks: diseases have proliferated in areas where IDPs are concen -

trated. Cholera cases among migrants and host populations in northeastern 

Nigeria reached 26,000 cases and led to more than 400 deaths between January 

and July 2014, which can be compared to less than 200 cases over the same period 

of time the previous year (IDMC, 2014). In addition, most healthcare facilities 

located in the northeastern region were closed in mid-2014, because of the 

ongoing conflict (IDMC, 2014) 

– Education crisis: displaced children are often unable to pursue their education, 

especially since many schools throughout the north of Nigeria are used as shelters 

for IDPs, and also because schools are a favoured target for Boko Haram. Many 

schools have been shut down (around 100 schools in Taraba state, for example), 

and those schools that remain open are quite empty, since many children do not 

go to school any more, for fear of attacks and abductions (IDMC, 2014) 

– Housing crisis: displaced populations often stay with family, friends, or people 

they pay. But some IDPs seek shelter in camp-like places such as stadiums, schools, SEM 2015 

> 43

mosques, churches and university campuses. Makeshift camps are quickly over -

crowded and become inadequate. In some extreme cases, migrants with no access 

to safe shelter have to take refuge outside, in the bush (IDMC, 2014). In other situ -

ations, Nigerian soldiers have expelled migrants from public buildings and used 

the facilities for military purposes (IDMC, 2014). At the same time, the homes of 

displaced populations are at risk of being damaged, occupied by other people, or 

destroyed (IDMC, 2014) 

– Safety issues: displaced populations mostly consist of women and children, who 

are the most vulnerable groups. Their physical safety is endangered on a daily 

basis, with risks of various types of violence, including sexual violence. A signifi -

cant number of women, and even girls, have been forced to resort to prostitution 

to meet their basic needs (IDMC, 2014) 

– Assistance crisis: given  that the majority of migrants are hosted by relatives, those 

migrants do not receive humanitarian assistance. Therefore, their resources and 

those of the host communities have to be shared, which makes both the IDPs and 

their hosts more vulnerable (IDMC, 2012). Migrants are highly exposed to further 

shocks. They often have to sell their belongings, reduce their food intake, and 

accumulate debts in order to survive (Assessment Capacities Project, 2015). They 

cannot rely on their past livelihoods, because migration implies a loss of farm -

land, livestock and tools (IDMC, 2014). As a result, IDPs and their host commu -

nities are sometimes forced into further displacement, because of sustained 

violence and a lack of basic resources. Community resources tend to deplete over 

time, and coping strategies are adversely impacted with each displacement cycle 

(IDMC, 2014). 

The current humanitarian crisis in northern Nigeria is multidimensional and 

extremely serious. Local, national, and international institutions have thus far been 

unable to resolve the problems faced by IDPs, and have established ineffective poli -

cies that do not target the root causes of the crisis. In order to better understand how 

and why violence erupted in 2014, followed by associated migration movements, it 

is necessary to examine the crucial but underestimated impact of environmental 

factors in this complex process. 

4. EXPLAINING THE 2014 CRISIS USING THE ENVIRONMENT-

MIGRATION-CONFLICT NEXUS 

The environment-migration-conflict nexus is highly relevant in order to analyze the 

contemporary dynamics characterising West Africa (Werz & Conley, 2012). Climate 

change, migration and security are three issues that intersect in northern Nigeria, 

and the next section will reveal how the recent migration movements have to be 

considered in light of the links between these three phenomena. 

4.1. A theoretical approach that has garnered attention 

The root causes of population displacement are complex, multi-faceted, and often 

overlapping (IDMC, 2014). Researchers have been working on the connection 

between migration, conflict and climate change for years (Conroy, 2014), and there 

is growing evidence that these three phenomena are interrelated (Werz & Conley, 

2012). Climate change and environmental factors have been increasingly taken into 

account when analysing wars and population displacement. It is now widely recog -

nised that environmental factors play a significant role in conflicts and migration, 

along with social, cultural, economic and political parameters (Conroy, 2014). Of 

course, climate change and environmental factors do not act as a single and isolated 

cause of conflicts and migration movements, and causal relationships cannot be high -

lighted with certainty between these three processes (United Nations Environment SEM 2015 

> 44
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

Programme, 2011). However, the connections between these issues suggest that the 

approach of analysing and addressing them as separate topics is no longer relevant 

(Werz & Conley, 2012). Furthermore, climate change, conflict and migration are 

embedded in a web of factors with environmental, economic, social and political 

dimensions (See Annex 7). In 2015, the importance of climate change impacts on 

other domains goes well beyond the academic sphere. The U.S. administration itself 

has called climate change a “threat multiplier” (USDOD, 2014) with broad impacts on 

security and global affairs. In 2010, the Nigerian government labelled climate change 

as the “greatest environmental and humanitarian challenge facing the country” for 

the 21 st  century (Werz & Conley, 2012). 

4.2. An agricultural sector at risk of collapse 

Nigeria’s agricultural sector is concentrated in the north of the country, and accounts 

for a significant share of national GDP, estimated between 20 and 40% (Caulder -

wood, 2014, Werz & Conley, 2012). At the national level, agriculture employs around 

70% of the workforce (Kimenyi & al, 2014). In northern Nigeria, the figure rises to 

80% (MacCauley, 2014). The vast majority of this area consists of rural communi -

ties involved in pastoral farming, crop production and nomadic pastoralism, who 

are thus highly dependent on the use of the land (MacCauley, 2014). Today, Nige -

ria’s agriculture is seriously endangered by a combination of factors: firstly, climate 

change and environmental hazards such as desertification, soil degradation and low 

rainfall have a direct impact on natural resources, and threaten the livelihoods of 

all Nigerians using those resources in the agricultural sector. It appears that climate 

change intensifies the risks posed by environmental hazards, which gives rise to 

major employment and food security concerns (Mohammed, 2015). Climate change 

does not have a uniform impact on local populations, and tends to have a more 

pronounced influence on groups who are already highly dependent on resources, 

and who are economically and socially marginalised (Conroy, 2014). Climate change 

does not only affect natural resources, but also threatens infrastructure, such as 

water supply (Conroy, 2014). Secondly, environmental risks facing the agricultural 

sector have been exacerbated by the negative impacts of Boko Haram’s activity in 

northern Nigeria (Alfred, 2015). The whole agricultural value chain is under the threat 

of attacks by insurgents (Caulderwood, 2014). As a result, many people have been 

pushed outside of the conflict zone, therefore reducing agricultural labour avail -

ability (Kimenyi & al, 2014); it is harder to find people ready to work in the fields 

due to the fear of attacks, leading to improperly timed harvesting (Kimenyi & al, 

2014). Insurgents have destroyed the production of some farmers, attacked livestock 

markets, and seized food supplies and livestock (Alfred, 2015). Widespread insecurity 

has led to the shutting of many farms and markets. Suppliers of pharmaceuticals for 

animals have closed their operations in the northeast (Kimenyi & al, 2014), and trans -

portation costs have also significantly increased. 

As a result, the combination of environmental and security factors led to huge 

increases in food prices in 2014 (Caulderwood, 2014). When comparing current price 

levels to the levels at the end of the 2000s (just before Boko Haram started to carry out 

large scale attacks on civilians), a 45 to 130% difference can be observed (Kimenyi & al, 

2014). Yields have also suffered, and in 2014, many areas were undercultivated or not 

harvested at all (Assessment Capacities Project, 2015). Poverty and unemployment have 

risen, which is quite worrying, given that those two factors have been associated with 

higher recruitment opportunities for radical movements such as Boko Haram (Higazi & 

Brisset-Foucault, 2013). In addition, demographic factors reinforce the pressure on both 

the agricultural sector and the environment. The median age in the country is only 

19, and Nigeria’s population will probably double by 2040 (Werz & Conley, 2012). Food 

security is thus gravely threatened, with a population growing at a rate of 3% per year, 

while food production has so far increased at a rate around 1.5% (Mohammed, 2015). SEM 2015 

> 45

4.3. Rising migratory pressure: the role of environmental factors 

In 2014, the eruption of violence in northern Nigeria caused massive population 

displacement. Displacement appears to be a result of widespread insecurity, yet 

the environmental dimension of the phenomenon must be taken into account. It 

is possible to argue that the conflict has precipitated migration movements, which 

were also triggered by environmental factors, and would have probably occurred 

even without the influence of Boko Haram’s activities. In northern Nigeria, deci -

sions to migrate are often linked to visible economic and social elements such as 

poverty and unemployment. However, when examining the root causes of migra -

tion, environmental factors are often present in the decision to migrate (Afifi, 2011). 

Environmental factors play a role in the decision to migrate, since environmental 

degradation threatens the livelihoods of people relying on natural resources in their 

everyday life, such as cattle herders and farmers, who form the majority of people 

living in northern Nigeria (Afifi, 2011). Desertification, deforestation, and unfavour -

able weather patterns lead to soil depletion, crop failure and the death of animals, 

which in turn cause impoverishment and then displacement (Ibimilua & Ibimilua, 

2014). In northeastern Nigeria, herdsmen have been forced to move further south in 

order to graze their cattle (Conroy, 2014). Many poor farmers and pastoralists respond 

to diminishing land fertility by moving to another piece of land for grazing and 

cultivation, and by expanding the surface of land they use (MacCauley, 2014). Many 

herders and farmers have also been driven into cities (Werz & Conley, 2012). This 

urbanisation process is highly challenging, because peri-urban areas tend to expand 

into traditional agricultural zones, with the process of urban sprawling (Conroy, 

2014). The arrival of people in cities puts more pressure on urban centres, and espe -

cially on the social services that the authorities are supposed to provide (Conroy, 

2014). Farmers are crucial for Nigeria’s stability, thus the migration of farmers poses a 

significant risk for the national food supply (MacGroarty & Akingbule, 2014). NEMA 

underlined in 2012 that the displacements of thousands of farmers could lead to 

a massive food crisis (IDMC, 2012). Of course, migration is only one response for 

people whose living conditions are threatened by climate change, and environ -

mental dimensions are unlikely to constitute the only “push factor” that encourages 

the decision to migrate (Conroy, 2014). However, environmental issues represent a 

key factor in that decision. 

4.4. Growing tensions over increasingly scarce resources 

The connection between environmental issues, migration and conflict is deeply 

related to a process of increased competition over resources (Conroy, 2014). As has 

been underlined above, climate change and natural hazards reinforce existing vulner -

abilities, lead to greater water and food insecurity, and modify the availability of 

natural resources. These impacts increase migratory pressure, but they also give rise 

to greater competition for resources, growing tensions, and levels of conflict (United 

Nations Environment Programme, 2011). It has been shown that in Sub-Saharan Africa, 

a proportional modification of 5% in rainfall compared to the previous year increased 

the likelihood of conflict the following year by 50% (Kimenyi & al, 2014). Climate 

change and environmental risks intensify resource scarcity for everyone, and deplete 

natural capital (Conroy, 2014). In northern Nigeria, more and more people are seeking 

access to land and natural resources (Olufemi & Samson, 2012). In that perspective, it 

is especially relevant to focus on the pastoralist-farmer tensions in northern Nigeria: 

herders migrate to the south, and some of them are even adopting a sedentary life -

style, resulting in competition between herders andlocal farmers for local resources 

and farmlands, which result in violent conflicts (United Nations Environment 

Programme, 2011). Because of changing weather patterns, cattle are now migrating 

not only during the dry season, but also throughout the whole year. Farmers accuse 

herdsmen of trampling recently planted seeds, preventing them from germinating, SEM 2015 

> 46
> AFRICA
> CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER
> VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA

causing significant losses (Conroy, 2014). At the same time, pastoralists lack access 

to grazing lands, especially because farms are getting bigger and grazing routes are 

not protected (Conroy, 2014). As a result, land degradation and land expansion are 

leading to conflicts between farmers and pastoralists in northern Nigeria, who 

are fighting for the same pool of resources: pasture, land, livestock routes, crop-

residue, and water points (MacCauley, 2014). Fair resource management is more 

and more difficult, and land use is becoming a highly disputed space. 

Migration driven by environmental and security issues is exacerbating tensions 

in northern Nigeria (Werz & Conley, 2012). Large-scale movements of people fuelled 

by resource scarcity, population growth, and socioeconomic inequalities are likely 

to increase the risk of violence in host communities and in cities (Conroy, 2014). 

Increased displacement movements have been recognised as triggers for ethno-

religious violence among communities (Werz & Conley, 2012). And it is extremely 

interesting to highlight that some of those communities are proving susceptible 

to the arguments put forward by Boko Haram (Werz & Conley, 2012). This is an 

important point, as it shows that in northern Nigeria conflicts are often misrepre -

sented as religious or ethnic clashes, whereas their root causes are related to strug -

gles over the control of land and to the tensions created by population displace -

ment (Conroy, 2014). When addressing the issue of the 2014 migration movements 

in northern Nigeria, land is a parameter that cannot be underestimated. 

Using the environment-migration-conflict nexus to analyse the 2014 migra -

tion movements in northern Nigeria is very instructive, since it reveals certain 

key elements that would not otherwise be obvious, especially regarding the role 

played by environmental factors. Climate change and natural risks have a visible 

and direct impact on the agricultural sector and on the livelihoods of the majority 

of the population. However, their influence on stability and security is more 

distant, even though it exists (Conroy, 2014). In northern Nigeria, environmental 

issues exacerbate violence and cause migration movements, underlining the fact 

that natural factors have massive consequences in terms of security, and have 

to be taken into account when addressing violence and migration in northern 

Nigeria in 2014. 

5. IMPROVING THE SITUATION IN NORTHERN NIGERIA: 

CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR POLICYMAKERS 

The number of migrants in northern Nigeria continued to increase in 2015 (IOM, 2015). 

In the same year it was also estimated that 9 million people were affected by violence, 

with 3 million in urgent need of humanitarian assistance (Assessment Capacities 

Project, 2015). The adverse effects of climate change became more pronounced, and 

environmental degradation worsened. At the same time, Boko Haram does not seem 

to be collapsing, and continues to carry out deadly attacks in the region. With an 

increasing population, massive urbanisation, growing climate change impacts, and 

the persistence of violence and migration, the Nigerian government will be called 

upon to provide more social services, despite its limited capabilities (Werz & Conley, 

2012). As a result, improving the humanitarian situation in northern Nigeria repre -

sents a daunting task for the Nigerian authorities. In this perspective, a few sugges -

tions could be considered: 

– Given the gravity of the humanitarian crisis, basic services have to be provided 

in northern Nigeria as soon as possible: food, water, healthcare, and education. 

Educati on is necessary, especially given that children and young adults who 

are not educated are more likely to be recruited by violent groups (Assessment 

Capacities Project, 2015). Education is also key in terms of raising awareness about 

environmental issues (Afifi, 2011) SEM 2015 

> 47

– Displacement has to be addressed in a more holistic manner, which targets among 

other aspects host communities (IOM, 2015). Supporting host communities could 

be especially helpful in preventing further displacement, and reducing the possi -

bility of conflict between migrants and host populations. Improved data collec -

tion is crucial in order to better understand displacement patterns and to design 

appropriate policy responses (IOM, 2015). More durable approaches that do not 

solely focus on the short term are necessary in order to promote the sustain -

able reintegration of displaced groups. Moreover, more dialogue has to take place 

with neighbouring countries at the regional level, given that displacement move -

ments in northern Nigeria cross national borders (United Nations Environment 

Programme, 2011). Lastly, the potential positive role of migration must be recog -

nised, especially as a climate change adaptation strategy. 

– The socioeconomic development of the north should become an absolute priority 

for the newly elected Nigerian government. Alleviating poverty, providing jobs, 

and building infrastructure is essential. There is a sizeable opportunity for the 

government in northern Nigeria to implement green growth programmes (United 

Nations Environment Programme, 2011). Green growth implies a comprehensive 

framework, where economic growth, the reduction of socioeconomic inequali -

ties, human well-being, and the protection of the environment are reconciled. In 

this perspective, climate change adaptation can be used as a programme to favour 

socioeconomic development 

– Climate change adaptation should not only be a policy priority, but should also 

be translated into co ncrete programmes and projects. Disaster risk reduction 

programmes must be implemented, given the extent to which disaster prepared -

ness is lacking in Nigeria (Werz & Conley, 2012). The Nigerian Ministry of Envi -

ronment has, for example, promoted the Great Green Wall project, an initia -

tive proposed by the African Union, aiming to limit desertification through the 

planting of 1,500 kilometres of vegetation in the Sahel region (Conroy, 2014). The 

project seems promising, however only a fraction of the funds pledged have been 

delivered thus far (IDMC, 2014). Climate change adaptation strategies have to be 

conflict and migration-sensitive, which means that adaptation programs have 

to mitigate the drivers of conflict and migration (United Nations Environment 

Programme, 2011) 

– Climate change adaptation, migration policies, and conflict management 

programmes require increased funding. At the national level, better redistri -

bution of oil revenues is necessary, with a reduction of corruption in order to 

free up additional funding. At the international level, Nigeria could appeal to 

financing mechanisms such as the Green Climate Fund, which is supposed to be 

endowed with $100 billion per year starting in 2020, in order to finance climate 

change adaptation in developing countries, among other elements. SEM 2015 

48 

AFRICA 

CLÉMENT MÉTIVIER 

VIOLENCE AND DISPLACEMENT IN NORTHERN NIGERIA 

# REFERENCES 

– Diamond, Jared. 2011. Collapse: How 

Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. 

Penguin Books, Revised Edition. 

London. 

REPORTS 

– Assessment Capacities Project. 2015. 

Nigeria: Boko Haram Insurgency. 

ACAPS Briefing Note . Geneva. 

– Conroy, Stone. 2014. Land conflicts 

and Lethal Violence in Nigeria: 

Patterns, Mapping and Evolution (2006 

– 2014).  IFRA-Nigeria Working Papers 

Series  38. 

– Etuonovbe, Angela Kesiena. 2011. 

The Devastating Effect of Flooding 

in Nigeria.  FIG Working Week 2011 .

Marrakech. 

– Ferris, Elizabeth & Stark, Chareen. 

2012. Internal Displacement in West 

Africa: A Snapshot.  Brookings-LSE 

Project on Internal Displacement .

Washington, DC. 

– Gemenne, François, Brücker, Pauline 

& Ionesco, Dina. 2014. The State 

of Environmental Migration 2014 

– A Review of 2013.  International 

Organization for Migration . Geneva. 

– Internal Displacement Monitoring 

Centre. 2014. Multiple displacement 

crises overshadowed by Boko Haram. 

Geneva. 

– Internal Displacement Monitoring 

Centre. 2012. NIGERIA: Increasing 

violence continues to cause internal 

displacement. Geneva. 

– International Organization for 

Migration. 2014. IOM Outlook on 

Migration, Environment and Climate 

Change. Geneva. 

– Kimenyi, Mwangi & al. 2014. “The 

impact of conflict and political 

instability on agricultural investments 

in Mali and Nigeria.”  Brookings, Africa 

Growth Initiative Working Paper 17. 

– United Nations Environment 

Programme. 2011. Livelihood Security 

– Climate Change, Migration and 

Conflict in the Sahel. Geneva. 

– United Nations Development 

Programme. 2009. Human 

Development Report Nigeria 2008-

2009: Achieving growth with equity. 

New York. 

– United States Department of 

Defense. 2014. Climate Change 

Adaptation Roadmap. Washington 

DC. 

– Werz, Michael & Conley, Laura. 2012. 

Climate Change, Migration, and 

Conflict – Addressing complex crisis 

scenarios in the 21 st  century.  Center 

for American Progress . Washington 

DC. 

– Werz, Michael & Conley, Laura. 

2012. Climate Change, Migration, 

and Conflict in Northwest Africa – 

Rising Dangers and Policy Options 

Across the Arc of Tension.  Center for 

American Progress . Washington, DC. 

SCHOLARLY ARTICLES 

– Adibe, Jideofor. 2014. “Explaining 

the Emergence of Boko Haram”. 

In  Africa in Focus, Brookings .

Washington, DC. 

– Afifi, Tamer. 2011. Economic or 

Environmental Migration? The 

Push Factors in Niger.  International 

Migration  49 (S1): 95-124 

– Higazi, Adam & Brisset-Foucault, 

Florence. 2013. Les origines et la 

transformation de l’insurrection 

de Boko Haram dans le Nord du 

Nigeria.  Politique Africaine . 130 (S2): 

137-164 

– Ibimilua, Fokeye Omoboye & 

Ibimilua, Adewale Festus. 2014. 

Environmental Challenges 

in Nigeria: Typology, Spatial 

Distribution, Repercussions and 

Way Forward.  American International 

Journal of Social Science  3 (S2): 246-253 

– MacCauley, Babajide. 2014. Land 

degradation in Northern Nigeria: 

The impacts and implications of 

human-related and climatic factors. 

African Journal of Environmental 

Science and Technology  8 (S5): 267-273 

– Mohammed, Ngozi Thelma. 2015. 

Desertification in northern Nigeria: 

Causes and implications for national 

food security.  Peak Journal of Social 

Sciences and Humanities  3 (S2): 22-31 

– Olufemi, Fatile Jacob & Samson, 

Adejobi. 2012. Climate Change, 

Environment and Conflicts in Nigeria. 

British Journal of Arts and Social Sciences 

6 (S1): 11-20 

PRESS ARTICLES AND PRESS 

RELEASES 

– Alfred, Charlotte. 2015. “How Boko 

Haram Has Left Northeast Nigeria In 

Ruins.” In  The Huffington Post . New 

York. 

– BBC News. 2012. “Nigerians living in 

poverty rise to nearly 61%.” London 

– Caulderwood, Kathleen. 2014. “Boko 

Haram And Nigeria’s Economy: 

Why The Poorest Suffer Most.” In 

International Business Times . New York 

– Integrated Regional Information 

Networks. 2012. “Migrants fleeing 

Boko Haram violence await aid.” 

Nairobi. 

– International Organization for 

Migration. 2015. “Boko Haram May 

Have Displaced Over a Million in 

Nigeria: IOM.” Geneva. 

– International Organization for 

Migration. 2015 “IOM Highlights Need 

for Regional Response to Boko Haram 

Displacement”. Geneva 

– MacGroarty, Patrick & Akingbule, 

Gbenga. 2014. “Hundreds of 

Thousands of Nigerians Flee Boko 

Haram, Seek Sanctuary.” In  The Wall 

Street Journal . New York. 

– Pandey, Avaneesh. 2015. “Syrian 

Drought, Triggered By Man-Made 

Climate Change, Spurred Civil War : 

Study”. In  International Business Times .

New York Asia-

# Pacific SEM 2015 

51 

## PIERRE WALTER 

# Floods and Rural-Urban 

# Migration in Bangladesh 

# In Bangladesh, about 3.5 million people were affected by major floods in 

August and September 2014, among whom more than 325,000 people were 

displaced (IFRC 2014). The country is highly vulnerable to natural hazards of 

all types – cyclones, tornadoes, storm surges, droughts, floods, earthquakes, 

riverbank erosion, and landslides. Floods are the most common natural 

hazard affecting Bangladesh, with about 20 million people present in zones 

subject to flooding (Gemenne  et al.  2011, p.59). Indeed, the majority of Bangla -

desh is made up of low-lying floodplains, and the country is crossed by more 

than 230 waterways which bring water from the Himalayas in the north to the Bay 

of Bengal in the south. 

Natural hazards and extreme climatic events are becoming more and more 

frequent as a result of climate change, making Bangladesh an “impact hotspot” 

(IDMC 2015). For instance sea-level rise, caused by global warming, is already threat -

ening major urban areas, infrastructure, livelihoods, food production and access to 

drinking water (PIK 2013). Combined with the country’s political and socio-economic 

challenges, this high exposure to natural disasters makes Bangladesh particularly 

vulnerable to the long-term effects of climate change, including migration (IDMC 

2015). 

As this study will examine, environmental factors – natural disasters and slow 

onset events – are a major cause of migration from rural to urban areas, which can be 

qualified as a coping strategy in a context of high economic hardship in rural Bang -

ladesh. When taking into account climate change and the growing urban economy 

in the country, continued rural-urban migration – both temporary and permanent 

– seems inevitable (Walsham 2010, p.20). Today, Bangladesh has one of the highest 

rates of urbanization and rural-urban migration is the most important factor behind 

it (Uddin and Firoj 2013, p. 90). Massive migration to urban areas leads to rapid and 

unplanned urbanization in cities such as the capital Dhaka, and has emerged as an 

important subject of concern because of its negative economic, social, environ -

mental and human health impacts. 

This paper aims to analyse the phenomenon of rural-urban migration in Bang -

ladesh, using the 2014 floods as a case study. The objective is first to describe the 

floods that occurred in August and September 2014 in the country, and to examine 

their consequences, notably in terms of rural-urban migration. The paper will subse -

quently evaluate the features of rural-urban migration in Bangladesh, the impacts it 

triggers and the policies that could be implemented to cope with this phenomenon. 

1. THE AUGUST-SEPTEMBER 2014 FLOODS IN BANGLADESH 

1.1. A brief overview of floods in Bangladesh 

On average, at least one fifth of Bangladesh’s territory is flooded every year, and this 

proportion may increase to almost three quarters in the event of catastrophic floods 

(Agarwala et al. 2003) (table 1). Flooding is the result of a complex series of factors, 

the two most important of which are the increased inflow of water from upstream 

catchment areas caused by heavy monsoon rainfall, and the low floodplain gradient. 

In addition, the congestion of drainage channels, tides and storm surges in coastal SEM 2015 

> 52
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> PIERRE WALTER
> FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH

areas, and polders – land reclaimed from a body of water, such as a lake or the seabed 

– increase the intensity of floods outside protected areas. Different combinations of 

these factors give rise to different types of flooding (Ahmed and Mirza, 2000). 

Table 1.  Major floods in Bangladesh and their impacts (1974-2014)                                    

> Area inundated
> (square
> kilometers)
> Proportion
> of total
> area (%)
> Cost
> of damage
> (million Taka)
> Population
> affected (million
> persons)
> Deaths
> (number of
> persons)
> 1974 52,720 35 28,490 30 1,987
> 1984 28,314 19 4,500 20 553
> 1987 57,491 38 35,000 30 1,657
> 1988 89,970 62 > 100,000 47 2,379
> 1998 > 100,000 74 > 120,000 55 1,050
> 2004 > 58,000 40 > 200,000 36 750
> 2007 32,000 21 > 75,000 14 649
> Sources: Choudhury et al. 2003; Government of Bangladesh 2008; Dewan 2015.

Flooding usually begins in flashy rivers – rivers which respond “very quickly to 

rainfall, the flow of water rising rapidly to a high peak before receding similarly” 

(Scottish Natural Heritage 2015) – in the hilly areas during the pre-monsoon months 

of April and May. Called “flash floods”, they may occur several times a year and are 

caused by waters from the hilly upstream rushing to the plains with high velocity. 

These flash floods are sudden and last only from a few hours to a few days. On a 

slightly longer time scale, when local rainwater is increasingly accumulated on the 

land by the rising water levels in adjoining rivers, so-called “rainwater floods” may 

occur. They typically occur between June and August, and vary from year to year 

depending on the water levels in the rivers that control drainage from the land. For 

instance, the major flood in 1987 in northwest Bangladesh was mainly caused by 

excessive rainfall occurring throughout the monsoon season, and was aggravated at 

times by flash floods passing down the Teesta River as well as other rivers entering 

Bangladesh from the northwest (Ahmed, A.U. 2006). 

According to projections, climate change is very likely to increase the level of 

rainfall during the monsoon season (IPCC 2014). Such an increase will undoubtedly 

lead to more frequent and more severe flooding (Ahmed, A.U. 2006). In addition, 

more frequent flooding will aggravate already existing drainage problems, including 

the diminution of river gradients over time, as more and more sediments are brought 

down and accumulate. Consequently, the conveyance capacity of these rivers will 

diminish significantly, this in turn increasing the frequency and duration of flooding. 

According to Ahmed (2006, p.23), “[t]he ‘best-estimate’ scenario for the year 2030 is 

that monsoon rainfall could increase by 10 to 15 per cent. For the scenario year 2075 

the average rainfall in monsoon will increase by about 27 per cent with respect to the 

base year. In the coastal areas there will be stronger-than-usual backwater effect due 

to sea level rise induced high oceanic stage, resulting into retardation of discharge 

flow, particularly along the confluence points of the major rivers. As a consequence, 

the risk of riverine and rainfall-induced high intensity floods with prolonged dura -

tion, as in the case of flood 1998, will increase significantly”. SEM 2015 

53 

Map 1.  North western part of Bangladesh on August 29, 2014 

Map 2.  North western part of Bangladesh on September 8, 2012 

Source: http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=84299 

Source: http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/IOTD/view.php?id=84299 SEM 2015 

> 54
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> PIERRE WALTER
> FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH

1.2. Description of the August-September 2014 floods 

From the middle of August 2014, a combination of the arrival of meltwater from the 

Himalayas and heavy monsoon rainfall in the country’s main river basins triggered 

severe flooding in north-western Bangladesh. The districts of Lalmonirhat, Kuri -

gram, Nilphamari, Rangpur, Gaibandha, Bogra, Sirajganj, Jamalpur, and Sherpur were 

affected. This was followed some days later by another episode of heavy rain, which 

provoked flooding in the districts of Sunamganj, Sylhet and Netrokona in the north-

east of the country, and later in districts in the centre of the country (Munshiganj, 

Tangail, Faridpur, Manikganj, Rajbari). The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrora -

diometer (MODIS) of NASA’s Terra satellite captured map 1 on 29 August. It shows 

flooding along the Brahmaputra River and Tanquar Haor, a large wetland region in 

the north-western part of the country. For comparison, map 2 shows the same area 

on 8 September 2012, a more typical year (NASA 2014). 

Between 19 September and the end of the month additional flooding hit several 

districts in the country, affecting 400,000 more people and increasing the plight of 

the people already affected by floods in August (IFRC 2014) (map 3). 

Map 3.  Areas affected by the August-September 2014 floods 

> Source: http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/MDRBD014OU1.pdf

1.3. Policy response 

In Bangladesh, managing such natural disasters is the responsibility of the Ministry 

of Disaster Management and Relief. Within the Ministry, the Department for 

Disaster Management (DDM) has a policy and advisory role. When the govern -

ment declares an emergency, the Local Consultative Group Mechanism (LCG) is 

one of the key the structures through which the government engages in dialogue 

with development partners, which are able to provide a humanitarian response 

(The JNA Consolidation Project 2014). In addition to the LCG Plenary, there are 

eighteen thematic LCG Working Groups, including the Disaster and Emergency 

Relief (DER). The DER, which is co-chaired by the UN Resident Coordinator and 

the Ministry of Disaster Management, is mandated to ensure the effective coordi -

nation of national and international stakeholders around all aspects of the disaster 

management process. DER membership consists of senior decision makers from 

UN agencies, donors, and NGO representatives. Within the DER, the Humanitarian 

Coordination Task Team (HCTT) is a working group that provides an operational 

level forum for coordinated disaster preparedness, response, and recovery across 

sectors. 

Clusters have been constituted, with government approval, to address disaster 

preparedness. They bring together international organisations, NGOs, and donor 

organisations. There are currently eight different clusters, which are coordinated SEM 2015 

55 

by the HCTT: WASH (Water Sanitation and Hygiene), food security, early recovery, 

health, nutrition, education, logistics, and shelter. 

Graph 1:  Disaster management coordination in Bangladesh 

> Links to Gob Bodies: NDMC, IMDMCC, NDRC, LGIs

Disaster Coordination Bangladesh     

> STRATEGIC / DEVELOPMENT Ag. & Food Education Health WATSAN Poverty

LCGs plenary HCTT Nutrition Food Security Education Health WASH Early Recovery Logistics Sheiter HCTT composition - Co-Chairs - DDM and RCD - 7 Cluster leads - 3 INGO representatives - 1 NGO representatives - 2 Donor representative DER HUMANITARIAN WORK 

> Source: The JNA Consolidation Project 2014

In response to the August-September 2014 floods, the HCTT conducted a Joint 

Needs Assessment (JNA) in the nine districts that were the most affected (Kuri -

gram, Sirajgonj, Gaibandha, Jamalpur, Bogra, Lalmonirhat, Rangpur, Sherpur and 

Nilphamari). This JNA consisted of an initial assessment of the number of people 

affected and the relative accessibility of water, food, sanitation, education, markets 

and health facilities. It mobilised 183 staff from 28 organisations, who visited about 

300 locations in four days (from 25-28 August). Assessment teams in the field trans -

mitted data to the team in Dhaka, which established a 50-page report by 8 September. 

This report established the scale of the disaster, the number of people affected and 

the worst affected areas, as well as their immediate and ongoing needs. Due to its 

time frame, many limitations could be found in this report, which were highlighted 

in the document itself: “While it does provide an overall quantitative picture of the 

disaster and the key priorities as identified by Union officials, it does not give voice 

to affected communities” (p.5). 

Following the release of the JNA, a coordinated emergency response plan was 

implemented by the UN and the different clusters, in support of the Government of 

Bangladesh’s relief operations. Responding agencies reached approximately 75,000 

households with emergency cash and food assistance, in addition to the 4,650 metric 

tonnes of food and over 10 million Taka of assistance provided by the Government in 

the five worst affected districts (Bogra, Gaibandah, Jamalpur, Kurigram and Sirajgonj). 

1.4. Impacts 

According to Government reports and the IFRC, in total about 3.5 million people 

were affected by the August-September floods across the country, of whom more 

than 325,000 people were displaced (IFRC 2014). A total of 56 people were reported 

dead and more than 100 people injured. About 34,000 homes were destroyed and 

approximately 200,000 damaged. The climatic situation was returned to normal at 

the beginning of October, but it has been described as “the worst flooding since the 

‘mega floods’ in 2007”, when more than 10 million people were affected (IRFC 2014). 

The socio-economic impacts of these floods were significant, particularly because 

they struck poor and rural regions of the north-western and central-northern parts 

of the country. Populations in these areas are especially vulnerable to the effects SEM 2015 

56 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

PIERRE WALTER 

FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH 

of infrastructure destruction and crop losses, and will therefore take longer to 

recover. The floods caused widespread damage to croplands and destroyed much 

of the in-ground rice harvest in the five most affected districts (Bogra, Gaibandah, 

Jamalpur, Kurigram and Sirajgonj). The Government has estimated that over 86,000 

ha of cropland and seedbed were been damaged across the five districts (Bangladesh 

Food Security Cluster 2015), with significant implications for the concerned districts’ 

food security. These impacts were aggravated by the fact that the same regions were 

hit by floods during both the 2012 and 2013 cropping seasons, and by the relatively 

high domestic rice prices that have limited access to food for the poorest people 

(FAO 2014). In addition, the decline in agricultural production has caused a drop in 

agricultural employment opportunities and wages (Bangladesh Food Security Cluster 

2015). The combination of declining wages and lack of employment meant that for 

several months the average monthly income was below the average monthly food 

expenditure. Many households decided to take out loans in order to cope with the 

situation, therefore increasing their debt; for instance, in Bogra district, average loans 

reached almost 8000 Taka ( ibid ). Indebted households are even more vulnerable since 

their capacity to invest in livelihood recovery or to cope with unforeseen shocks 

is significantly reduced. According to a survey conducted in the districts of Bogra, 

Gaibandah, Jamalpur, Kurigram and Sirajgonj, other coping strategies consisted of 

livelihood change, support from relatives, selling of advanced labour or of house -

holds assets, and recourse to savings ( ibid ). Migration (to both surrounding areas 

and further afield) was only cited as a coping strategy by 4 per cent of households 

(table 2). However, according to the report, “men were increasingly migrating to seek 

employment opportunities elsewhere”. Also, it is possible that the combination of 

debt levels and sustained economic hardship will cause more migration, particularly 

rural-urban migration, as demonstrated by previous cases (see section 2.1). 

Table 2:  Coping strategies adopted by 324 households surveyed in affected areas                                

> # of Household Percent
> Taking loan at high interest 85 26
> Livelihood change 70 21,5
> Support from relatives 48 15
> Selling of advance labour 41 12,5
> Spending savings 26 8
> Selling houssehorld assets 16 5
> Migrated to surrounding areas 93
> Reminttance from relatives 72
> Making children work 52
> Selling productive assets 41
> Migration 41
> Making other members work 31
> Tempory work 31
> Other 31
> Total 324 100
> Source: Adapted from Bangladesh Food Security Cluster 2015, <http://foodsecuritycluster.net/document/
> food-security-nutrition-shelter-and-early-recovery-assessment-flood-affected-areas-north>. SEM 2015
> 57

2. CONTEXTUALIZATION: RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN 

BANGLADESH 

In Bangladesh, current urban population growth rate is around 4 per cent per year 

(World Bank 2015). Major urban areas have experienced a tremendous increase in size 

and population since the 1970s: in 1974, 1.6 million people were living in urban areas, 

rising to 22.3 million in 1991, 32.5 million in 2001, and 47.7 million in 2011. Today, more 

than 53 million people live in urban areas, representing about 34% of the total popu -

lation (World Bank 2015) (graph 2). 

Graph 2:  Evolution of urban and rural populations in Bangladesh (1985-2014) (% of 

total population) 100 80 60 40 20 0 1985 1991 1997 2003 2009 2015  

> Urban population ( % of total) Rural population ( % of total)
> Source: Author, using data from the World Bank (2015)

The capital and largest city, Dhaka, is home to almost 15 million people and is one 

of the most densely populated cities in the world (Zaman  et al.  2010), with a density 

of about 20,000 inhabitants per square meter. Rapid urbanisation in Bangladesh is 

seemingly inevitable, notably due to the extremely unfavourable land-population 

balance in the country. Thus, “[t]he question is not whether Bangladesh should 

urbanize; the question is how Bangladesh will handle the challenges of urbaniza -

tion” (Hussain 2013). While in the majority of the world’s countries the growth of 

the urban population is mostly due to natural population increase (the net excess 

of births over deaths) (Tacoli 2009), in Bangladesh the combined re-classification of 

settlements from rural to urban and rural-urban migration plays a major role (Alam 

and Rabbani 2007; Uddin and Firoj 2013). It has been estimated that rural-urban 

migration accounts for about two-thirds of total urban growth (Bhuyan et al. 2001; 

Hermman and Svarin 2013), and that since the end of the 1990s Dhaka has received 

between 300,000 and 400,000 rural migrants annually (Bangladesh Bureau of Statis -

tics 2001; Friedman 2009). As such, it is necessary to analyse and to understand the 

patterns of and the reasons behind rural-urban migration, the key driver of urbanisa -

tion in the country. 

2.1. Factors: Why do people migrate from rural areas to urban centres? 

Rural areas in Bangladesh, where agriculture is the dominant sector, are characterized 

by an increasing lack of economic opportunities. As stated by Zaman  et al.  (2010, p.9), 

“the agriculture sector is no longer able to absorb the surplus labor force entering the 

economy every year”, therefore encouraging people to seek employment in urban 

areas. The high population/land ratio and the growing phenomenon of landlessness 

contribute to this lack of economic opportunities in rural areas (Ullah 2004; Uddin SEM 2015 

> 58
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> PIERRE WALTER
> FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH

and Firoj 2013). In contrast, urban areas and particularly the two largest cities, Chit -

tagong and Dhaka, concentrate economic activities such as garment industries, finan -

cial and banking services, administrative headquarters and civil employment (Islam 

1999). More importantly, around 80 per cent of all employment in a city like Dhaka 

is in the informal sector (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 2010), which plays a central 

role in the rural-urban migration context given – as will be examined below – the fact 

that it constitutes the best opportunity for new migrants to rapidly find a job. Thus, 

in urban areas, migrants can find diversified job opportunities, regardless of skills 

(Hossain 2001). Finally, in the famous model of rural-urban migration theorized by 

Todaro (1969), migration is directly linked to the wage differentials between rural and 

urban areas and the probability of finding a job in the city. In Bangladesh, the rural 

wage rate has been lower than the urban wage rate for several decades (Herrmann 

and David 2009), even if the differential has been decreasing significantly over the 

last few years (IFPRI 2013). Of course other factors, such as marriage and dependency 

relations, also cause rural-urban migration, but they are much less important than 

economic factors. 

In addition, natural disasters play a significant role in explaining rural-urban 

migration in Bangladesh. According to Herrmann and David (2009, p.1), “[t]he prin -

ciple factor that encourages people to leave their homes in the country side is the 

frequent recurrence of natural disasters, which undermine agricultural development 

and cause food crisis”. Indeed, the average yields of the main crops have been stag -

nating and sometimes declining over the last 20 to 30 years ( ibid ). Migration to cities 

can therefore serve as a coping strategy for households that have lost their income 

and/or place of residence because of a natural disaster (The Government Office for 

Science 2011). Sudden natural disasters, like the August-September 2014 floods, are not 

the only issues at stake. Slow onset environmental events, such as saline intrusion in 

the southern part of the country or riverbank erosion, may significantly affect rural 

life and agricultural productivity, therefore playing an important role in the decision 

to move (IOM 2010; Uddin and Firoj 2013). 

FOCUS: FLOODS AS A FACTOR OF RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION  

> According to the International Organization for Migration (IOM), ‘’while there is good
> data on initial displacement as a result of floods there is less evidence on longer-term
> impacts of floods on migration decisions. Evidence from India suggests that flood -
> plains are characterized by a variety of migration dynamics, including periodic move -
> ments to high ground for shelter and temporary work as well as permanent migration
> where people’s livelihoods are more severely affected’’ (Walsham 2010, p.10). In
> that sense, a real “flood-migration nexus” has been identified in Bangladesh, “both
> at the national level with an increasing displacement of rural populations to urban
> areas and at the international level with important migration to India” (Gemenne et al .
> 2011, p.62). For instance, a 2007 study demonstrated that in rural areas of northern
> Bangladesh affected by floods in 2005 the majority of migrants relocated to urban
> areas. In this case, rural-urban migration proved to be an effective coping strategy,
> enabling “potentially vulnerable households to avoid a debt cycle” (Rayhan and Grote
> 2007, p.82). In the same vein, the phenomenon of “landless farmers” migrating to ur -
> ban centres is increasingly reported (Rahman and Manprasert 2006; IRIN 2010). In
> such cases, floods reoccurring year after year reduce the quality and the yields of the
> crop fields. When farmers start to struggle to make a living, they sell their field, thus
> becoming “landless farmers”. As the financial situation of these landless farmers be -
> comes worse and worse, many of them permanently migrate to urban centres in order
> to find other sources of revenues. In Bangladesh, areas that are particularly prone to
> flooding are often also home to the poorest – and thus more vulnerable – populations
> (map 4), making the “flood-migration nexus” particularly important in such areas. SEM 2015
> 59

It is important to emphasise that a distinction between rural-urban “environ -

mental migrants” and rural-urban “economic migrants” is obviously not relevant 

since social, demographic, economic and environmental factors are highly inter -

twined. What is clear is that on top of economic, social and/or demographic factors, 

natural disasters create the conditions for migration to occur (Hagerly 2008). 

2.2. Impacts of rural-urban migration 

Rural-urban migration is traditionally regarded as a natural process of economic 

development, allowing urban industrial growth to benefit from the surplus 

manpower released from the rural sector (Bhuyan  et al.  2001). In a country like Bang -

ladesh, where appropriate policies to govern rural-urban migration are lacking, this 

process generates many negative impacts on the development of both cities and 

villages. 

2.2.1. Slums 

As stated by Jahan (2012, p.189), “urban benefits fail to touch the majority of the poor 

migrants”. The first problem is that because the majority of rural-urban migrants are 

particularly poor, many of them cannot afford to live in the formal residential areas 

of the host city. Therefore, a large proportion of rural-urban migrants end up in 

slums (Uddin and Firoj 2013). For instance, it has been estimated that in Dhaka about 

3.4 million people live in 4,966 different slums (Ishtiaque and Mahmud 2011), and that 

in the middle of the 1990s 93 per cent of slum dwellers in Dhaka were from rural areas 

(Majumder  et al.  1996). In these slums, social, sanitary and environmental conditions 

are extremely poor: solid waste management is almost inexistent, and people often 

lack access to clean water, making them vulnerable to water borne diseases (Alom 

and Khan 2014). It is striking to note that in Bangladesh’s urban areas the percentage 

of the population using improved drinking water sources and improved sanitation 

facilities have been stagnating over the last two decades (see tables 3 and 4), due to 

the fact that the majority of urban growth is located in slums where sanitary condi -

tions are very poor. 

Table 3:  Percentage of population using improved drinking water sources in 

Bangladesh (1990-2012)                      

> Year Total Urban Rural
> 1990 77 87 77
> 1995 78 87 75
> 2000 79 86 77
> 2005 81 85 79
> 2010 81 85 80
> 2012 85 86 84
> Source: McInerney and Magar 2014, http://pages.uoregon.edu/aweiss/intl442_542/2014%20Bangladesh%202.pdf SEM 2015
> 60
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> PIERRE WALTER
> FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH

Table 4:  Percentage of population using improved sanitation facilities in Bangladesh 

(1990-2012)                      

> Year Total Urban Rural
> 1990 39 58 34
> 1995 42 58 37
> 2000 47 58 43
> 2005 51 57 49
> 2010 56 57 55
> 2012 57 58 55
> Source: McInerney and Magar 2014, http://pages.uoregon.edu/aweiss/intl442_542/2014%20Bangladesh%202.pdf

2.2.2. Job opportunities 

Even if Bangladesh’s fast-growing urban economy strongly relies on rural-urban 

migrants, the development of the non-agricultural sector is not sufficient to absorb 

the large number of migrants relocating to cities (Herrmann and Svarin 2009). There -

fore, many rural-urban migrants end up working in the informal sector, especially 

those with the lowest levels of education. Migrants who find jobs in the informal 

sector of urban areas typically work as drivers, rickshaw pullers, mechanics, hawkers, 

carpenters, barbers, daily labourers or personal servants (Jahan 2012). These jobs are 

low-paid and as a result migrants working in the informal sector are often not able 

to break free from the cycle of poverty and to afford housing in the formal sector 

(Mohit 2012). 

In parallel, rural-urban migration may be a factor of “brain drain” from rural 

areas to urban centres. Indeed, when considering Bangladesh as a whole, rural-urban 

migrants tend to be relatively young and more educated than the average national 

educational level (Bhuyan et al. 2001). Thus, rural-urban migration contributes to the 

draining of individuals who could have had a positive impact on the rural economy, 

and has therefore been identified as a factor that impedes rural development ( ibid ). 

2.2.3. Environmental risks 

Finally, when discussing the general impacts of rural-urban migration, it is impor -

tant to note that in many cases, rural-urban migrants find themselves in situations 

not only of social and economic vulnerability, but also of environmental risk. In 

the country’s two main cities, Dhaka and Chittagong, which are highly prone to 

flooding, most of the slum dwellings are built with non-durable materials, such as 

bamboo, wood, thatch, straw and scraps, which are not resistant to extreme climatic 

events (floods, cyclones, rapid erosion, etc.) (Jahan 2012). In addition, slums are usually 

located in zones that are particularly dense and prone to flooding, such as low lying 

areas along riverbanks in the case of Dhaka ( ibid ). This increased vulnerability caused 

by environmental factors exacerbates the process of circular poverty in which rural-

urban migrants are trapped. 

Thus, given the sustained flux of rural-urban migration in Bangladesh and its 

negative consequences in social, economic and environmental terms, improved 

urban planning and rural-urban migration management is clearly of the utmost 

importance. The final section of this paper will therefore try to provide some policy 

recommendations. 

2.3. Policy recommendations 

In Bangladesh, international and internal migration has significantly increased 

over the past three decades (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 2008). While the SEM 2015 

> 61

Government intervenes quite strongly in international migration management, 

policy-makers pay scant attention to internal migration (National Food Policy 

Capacity Strengthening Programme [not dated]). As such, many recommenda -

tions have been proposed by various experts and organizations so that all parties 

concerned by the process of rural-urban migration – migrants, source communi -

ties and destination communities – can benefit. These recommendations may be 

grouped around two main ideas: (1) ensuring well-balanced development between 

rural and urban areas, which takes into account rural-urban migration; and (2) 

thoughtful urban planning. 

2.3.1. Ensuring well-balanced development between rural and urban areas 

In 2011 the Government of Bangladesh published a draft of the country’s national 

urban policy for the coming years, entitled “National Urban Sector Policy” draft. 

This document mentions that, “[t]he policy recognizes the existing spatial or 

regional imbalance in the pattern of urbanization in the country and also the rapid 

pace of urban population growth, particularly of Mega City Dhaka and other large 

cities”. It also indicates that, “rural to urban migration plays a key role in urbanisa -

tion and that it has both positive and negative consequences. To achieve balanced 

urbanisation rural urban migration [should] be properly guided to avoid over 

concentration of population in one or few cities”. As argued by Momen (2012, p.64), 

“properly guided” rural-urban migration is hardly feasible “given the constraints 

of the macroeconomic policy environment”. However, several paths of action do 

exist. 

Given that rural-urban migration mostly arises due to the lack of economic 

opportunities in rural areas, it appears that “the policy of stopping out-migration 

and inducing reverse migration becomes equivalent to the policy of poverty allevia -

tion through the creation of employment and income generating activities in the 

rural areas” (Bhuyan et al. 2001, p.14). The investment in rural areas should thus take 

two complementary forms. Firstly, the government should continue to support the 

modernisation of the agricultural sector, with the purpose of increasing agricultural 

productivity (Herrmann and Svarin 2009). According to the International Fund for 

Agricultural Development (IFAD), while rice is the dominant crop an increase in its 

production is “limited by farmers’ lack of access to critical production tools such 

as high-yielding rice seeds” (IFAD 2014, p.2). In the same vein, the fishing industry 

is “under-utilised”, and fishermen should be provided with more resources such as 

“technologies for farming nutrient-rich small fish and better access to open bodies 

of water, in order to expand production, which will improve incomes and nutri -

tion” ( ibid ). Increasing agricultural productivity will also require more efforts to 

be made in terms of adaptation to natural hazards and diversification of agricul -

tural production (Herrmann and Svarin 2009; IFAD 2014). For instance, farmers 

should be encouraged to use crops that are more tolerant to floods, drought and/or 

salinity, and more research should be conducted on these topics. Secondly, Bang -

ladesh should aim to develop rural industries and rural infrastructure, as well as 

improving health and education facilities, so that people do not need to go to cities 

to find such services (Bhuyan 2001). 

In parallel, the development of secondary cities should be encouraged. Indeed, 

regionalization (i.e. decentralization) of economic growth is necessary to ensure 

a balanced development of the country (Jahan 2012). This could be achieved by 

establishing industrial estates and educational facilities and by encouraging private 

investment in semi-urban centres (Bhuyan 2001). 

Finally, in addition to these measures that are meant to act on the root causes 

of rural-urban migration, an integrated policy on internal migration remains essen -

tial. Such a policy should adopt a proactive approach and address existing chal -

lenges but also anticipate future ones (Herrmann and Svarin 2009). SEM 2015 

> 62
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> PIERRE WALTER
> FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH

2.3.2. Thoughtful urban planning 

Concerning urban centres, action must first be taken with regard to slums. As a 

priority, slums should be legally recognized and slums dwellers should be provided 

with a legal identity, so that they can benefit from utility services, social security and 

safety net programmes (Herrmann and Svarin 2009). Subsequently, incentives should 

be provided to facilitate housing for migrants, with an emphasis on private sector 

housing initiatives (Zaman et al. 2010). Slum upgrading programmes should also be 

encouraged, as they present several advantages over sites-and-services projects – 

such as the preservation of existing economic systems and community structures 

(Mohit 2012). An important part of the strategy should be directed towards job crea -

tion, because it would allow slum dwellers to move into formal housing. As stated 

by the IFAD (2014, p.2), “[w]ith most of the labour force engaged in low-income, low-

productivity jobs in the informal sector, the challenge will be to boost income and 

productivity, and to transfer labour to the formal sector”. More generally, urgent 

improvement is needed in land use planning, as well as in property valuation and 

taxation when slums are transformed into private real estate (Zaman et al. 2010). 

In order to address the sanitary issues and the environmental risks discussed 

above, health services and basic infrastructure should be developed in urban areas 

that lack them. A possible short-term solution to provide better health services in 

slums is the implementation of Public-Private Partnerships (PPP). Indeed, contracting 

out health service delivery to the private sector or NGOs has already been tested in 

Bangladesh, with relatively positive results (Mohit 2012). Concerning natural disaster 

prevention and management, the short-term needs entail the creation of more 

drainage systems that could diverge the surplus of water and therefore avoid floods 

(World Bank 2005). Moreover, the improvement of flood prevention in major urban 

areas is an urgent priority. Notably, the government should create a hierarchal chain 

of command that would be under a single, regulatory department, in order to put a 

stop to the current level of disorganisation in flood prevention and reduction (McIn -

erney and Magar 2014). 

CONCLUSION 

In Bangladesh, rural-urban migration is a critical phenomenon whose magnitude 

and consequences for both rural and urban areas are significant. The factors behind 

such a phenomenon are multiple and complex, being, as demonstrated in this article, 

economic, demographic, social and environmental in nature. Flooding is one of the 

major causes of rural-urban migration in Bangladesh, as shown by the above discus -

sion of the characteristics and consequences of the floods that occurred in August 

and September 2014. While only some of the people in affected areas decided to leave 

the affected zones in the immediate aftermath of the disaster, its impacts have to be 

considered in the broader context which characterizes Bangladesh, namely a country 

which is recurrently affected by natural disasters, whose rural economy is struggling 

and whose urban areas have to deal with multiple risks. 

In this particular context, cities in Bangladesh can be considered to be faced with 

a “double jeopardy future: they must respond to swelling populations, whilst also 

experiencing increased threats from future environmental change” (The Govern -

ment Office for Science 2011, p.149). As such, the focus of policy makers should be on 

addressing both the causes of rural-urban migration – because they are evidence of 

the problems that exist in rural areas – and its negative consequences. Rural-urban 

migration should therefore not be seen as an inherently negative phenomenon, 

but rather as a an effective coping strategy that can ease people out of situations of 

vulnerability when properly managed and planned. SEM 2015 

63 

# REFERENCES 

Books, reports and presentations 

– Agarwala, S.  et al.  2003,  Développement 

et changement climatique au Bangladesh 

: accent sur l’inondation des côtes et la 

région des sundarbans , OCDE, Paris. 

– Ahmed, A.U. 2006,  Bangladesh. Climate 

Change Impacts and Vulnerability. 

A Synthesis . Climate Change Cell, 

Department of Environment, Dhaka. 

– Ahmed, A.U. and Mirza, M.M.Q . 2000, 

“Review of Causes and Dimensions 

of Floods with Particular Reference 

to Flood ’98: National Perspectives”, 

In Ahmad, Q .K., Chowdhury, 

A.K.A., Imam, S.H. and Sarker, M. 

(Eds.),  Perspectives on Flood 1998 , The 

University Press Limited, Dhaka. 

– Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 2010, 

“Measuring the informal employment 

in Bangladesh”, presented at the 

Regional Workshop on MAP on 

Decent work in ASIA, Bangkok, 

Thailand, 28-30 June 2010, <http:// 

www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/ 

public/---dgreports/---integration/ 

documents/meetingdocument/ 

wcms_144767.pdf>. 

– Bangladesh Food Security Cluster 

2015,  Food security, nutrition, shelter 

and early recovery assessment in 

flood affected areas of north-west 

Bangladesh August 2014 , <http:// 

foodsecuritycluster.net/document/ 

food-security-nutrition-shelter-and-

early-recovery-assessment-flood-

affected-areas-north>. 

– Bhuyan, A.R., Khan, H.A.R. and 

Ahmed, S.U. 2001,  Rural Urban 

Migration and Poverty: The Case for 

Reverse Migration in Bangladesh ,

Centre on Integrated Rural 

Development for Asia and the Pacific, 

Dhaka, Bangladesh. 

– Food and Agriculture Organization 

(FAO) 2014,  GIEWS Country Brief. 

Bangladesh , accessed on 22 March 2015, 

<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb. 

int/files/resources/BGD_6.pdf>. 

– Gemenne, F., Brücker, P. and 

Ionesco, D. (Eds.) 2012,  The State of 

Environmental Migration 2011 , Institute 

for Sustainable Development and 

International Relations (IDDRI) 

/ International Organization for 

Migration (IOM). 

– Guha-Sapir, D., Hoyois, P. and 

Below, R. 2013,  Annual Disaster 

Statistical Review 2012: The Numbers 

and Trends , Centre for Research 

on the Epidemiology of Disasters 

(CRED), Brussels. 

– Herrmann, M. and Svarin, D. 2009, 

“Environmental pressures and 

rural-urban migration: The case of 

Bangladesh”, MPRA Paper No. 12879. 

– Hossain, M.Z. 2001, “Rural urban 

Migration in Bangladesh: A micro 

Level Study”, paper presented at 

the Brazil IUSSS Conference, 20-25 

August 2001. 

– International Displacement 

Monitoring Center (IDMC) 2015, 

Bangladesh: comprehensive response 

required to complex displacement 

crisis , accessed 28 February 

2015, <http://www.internal-

displacement.org/south-and-

south-east-asia/bangladesh/2015/ 

bangladesh-comprehensive-

response-required-to-complex-

displacement-crisis>. 

– International Federation of Red 

Cross And Red Crescent Societies 

(IFRC) 2014,  Emergency appeal 

operations update. Bangladesh: 

Floods , accessed 8 March 2015, < 

http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb. 

int/files/resources/MDRBD014OU1. 

pdf>. 

– International Fund for Agricultural 

Development 2014,  Investing in rural 

people in Bangladesh , accessed 29 

March 2015, <http://www.ifad.org/ 

operations/projects/regions/pi/ 

factsheets/bd.pdf>. 

– IPCC 2014,  Climate Change 2014: 

Synthesis Report. Contribution 

of Working Groups I, II and III to 

the Fifth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 

Change  [Core Writing Team, R.K. 

Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)], 

IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. 

– Islam, N. 1999,  Urbanization, Migration 

and development in Bangladesh: recent 

Trends and Emerging Issues , Paper I, 

Centre for Policy Dialogue, Dhaka. 

– Majumder, P.P., Mahmud, S. and 

Afsar, R. 1996,  The squatters of Dhaka 

city: dynamism in the life of Agargaon 

squatters , University Press Limited, 

Dhaka. 

– National Food Policy Capacity 

Strengthening Programme [not 

dated], Research proposal, accessed 

12 April 2015, <http://www.nfpcsp. 

org/agridrupal/sites/default/files/ 

file/12%23ToR%20FS%20and%20 

Migration%20FINAL.pdf>. 

– Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact 

Research and Climate Analytics (PIK) 

2013,  Turn Down the Heat: Climate 

Extremes, Regional Impacts, and the Case 

for Resilience,  World Bank, Washington 

DC. 

– The Government Office for Science 

2011,  Foresight: Migration and Global 

Environmental Change , Final Project 

Report, London. 

– The JNA Consolidation Project 2014, 

“Pre-Disaster Secondary Data”, accessed 

15 March 2015, <http://www.acaps. 

org/img/documents/p-pre-disaster-

secondary-data---river-flooding---

march-2014.pdf>. 

– United Nations Conference on Trade 

and Development (UNCTAD) 2006,  The 

Least Developed Countries Report 2006: 

Developing Productive Capacities , New 

York and Geneva. 

– Walsham, M. 2010, “Assessing the 

evidence: environment, climate 

change and migration in Bangladesh”, 

International Organization for Migration 

(IOM) Report , International Organisation 

for Migration, Dhaka, pp. 1-70. 

– World Bank, Human Development 

Unit 2005,  Bangladesh: Attaining 

the Millennium Development Goals 

in Bangladesh , accessed 10 April 

2015, <https://openknowledge. 

worldbank.org/bitstream/ 

handle/10986/8627/318460rev. 

pdf?sequence=1>. SEM 2015 

64 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

PIERRE WALTER 

FLOODS AND RURAL-URBAN MIGRATION IN BANGLADESH 

– Zhang, X., Rashid, S., Ahmad, K., 

Mueller, V., Lee, H.L., Lemma, S., 

Belal, S. and Ahmed, A. 2013, “Rising 

Wages in Bangladesh”, International 

Food Policy Research Institute 

(IFPRI), accessed 11 April 2015, <http:// 

www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/ 

publications/ifpridp01249.pdf>. 

Articles 

– Alam, M. and Rabbani, M.D.G. 

2007, “Vulnerabilities and responses 

to climate change for Dhaka”, 

Environment & Urbanization , Vol. 19, 

No. 1, pp. 81-97. 

– Alamgir, J. 1993, “Rural-Urban 

Migration in Bangladesh: Theoretical 

Approaches to Understanding Internal 

and External Dynamics”,  The Journal of 

Social Studies , Vol. 59. 

– Alom, M. and Khan, Z.H. 2014, 

“Environmental and Social Impact 

Due to Urban Drainage Problems in 

Dhaka City, Bangladesh”,  International 

Journal of  Engineering and Advanced 

Technology (IJEAT) , Vol. 3, pp. 128-32. 

– Braun Van, J. 2004, “Towards 

a renewed focus on Rural 

Development”,  Agriculture & Rural 

Development , Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 4-6. 

– Dewan, T.H. 2015, “Societal impacts 

and vulnerability to floods in 

Bangladesh and Nepal”,  Weather and 

Climate Extremes , Vol. 7, pp. 36-42. 

– Friedman, L. 2009, “A city exploding 

with climate migrants”, In  Bangladesh: 

Where the Climate Exodus Begins ,

Environment & Energy Publishing, 

Washington D.C. 

– Hagerly, D.T. 2008, “Bangladesh in 

2007: Democracy interrupted, Political 

and Environmental challenges ahead”, 

Asian Survey , Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 177-183. 

– Harris, J.R. and Todaro, M.P. 1970, 

“Migration, Unemployment, and 

Development: a Two-sector Analysis,” 

The American Economic Review , Vol. 60, 

pp. 126-142. 

– International Organization for 

Migration (IOM) 2009, « Changement 

climatique et déplacement au 

Bangladesh – Une crise silencieuse? », 

accessed 22 February 2015, <http:// 

www.iom.int/cms/fr/sites/iom/ 

home/news-and-views/feature-

stories/feature-story-listing/climate-

change-and-displacement-in-bangl. 

html>. 

– IRIN 2010, “BANGLADESH: Landless 

numbers on the rise”, accessed 20 

March 2015, <http://www.irinnews. 

org/report/89399/bangladesh-

landless-numbers-on-the-rise>. 

– Ishtiaque, A. and Mahmud, M.S. 

2011, “Migration Objectives and their 

Fulfillment: A Micro Study of the 

Rural-Urban Migration of the Slums 

of Dhaka City”,  Malaysian Journal 

of Society and space,  Vol. 7 No. 4, pp. 

24-29. 

– Jahan, M. 2012, “Impact of rural 

urban migration on physical and 

social environment: The case of 

Dhaka city”,  International Journal of 

Development and Sustainability , Vol. 1, 

No. 2, pp. 186-194. 

– McInerney, B. and Magar, R.T. 2014, 

“Urban Environmental Challenges 

and Poverty Alleviation. Bangladesh”, 

accessed on 25 March 2015, <http:// 

pages.uoregon.edu/aweiss/ 

intl442_542/2014%20Bangladesh%202. 

pdf>. 

– Mohit, M.A. 2012, “Bastee Settlements 

of Dhaka City, Bangladesh: A 

Review of Policy Approaches and 

Challenges Ahead”,  Procedia - Social 

and Behavioral  Sciences, Vol. 36, pp. 

611-622. 

– Momen, S. 2012, “Questioning the 

Paradigms and Theories Underlying 

the New Urban Sector Policy of 

Bangladesh”,  Journal of Bangladesh 

Institute of Planners , Vol. 5, pp. 59-67. 

– Rahman, M.D.H and Manprasert, S. 

2006, “Landlessness and its Impact 

on Economic Development: A Case 

Study on Bangladesh”,  Journal of 

Social Sciences , Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 54-60. 

– Rayhan, I. and Grote, U. 2007, Coping 

with Floods: Does Rural-Urban 

Migration Play any Role for Survival 

in rural Bangladesh?,  Journal of 

Identity and Migration Studies , Vol. 1, 

No. 2. 

– Tacoli, C. 2009, “Crisis or adaptation? 

Migration and climate change in a 

context of high mobility,  Environment 

& Urbanization , Vol 21, No. 2, pp. 

513-525. 

– Todaro, M.P. 1969, “A Model of Labour 

Migration and Unemployment in 

Less Developed Countries,”  The 

American Economic Review , Vol. 59, No 

1, pp. 138-148. 

– Uddin, N. and Firoj, M. 2013, “Causes 

and Consequences of Rural- Urban 

Migration in Bangladesh: An 

Empirical Study in Chittagong City”, 

International Journal of Ethics in Social 

Sciences , Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 89-104. 

– Ullah, A.K.M.A. 2004, “Bright City 

Lights and Slums of Dhaka city: 

Determinants of rural-urban 

migration in Bangladesh”,  Migration 

Letters , Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 26-41. 

– Zaman, A.K.M, Alam, K.T. and 

Islam, J. 2010, “Urbanization in 

Bangladesh: Present Status and Policy 

Implications”,  ASA University Review ,

Vol. 4 No. 2, pp. 1-16. 

– Press articles 

– Hussain, Z. 2013, “In Bangladesh, 

the Alternative to Urbanization is 

Urbanization”, accessed 25 March 

2015, <http://blogs.worldbank. 

org/endpovertyinsouthasia/ 

bangladesh-alternative-urbanization-

urbanization>. 

Websites 

– Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 

accessed 10 April 2015, <http://www. 

bbs.gov.bd/home.aspx>. 

– National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration (NASA) 2014,  Earth 

Observatory , accessed 1 March 2015, 

<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/ 

IOTD/view.php?id=84299>. 

– Scottish Natural Heritage 2015,  Rivers 

and their catchments: an overview ,

accessed 27 October 2015, <http:// 

www.snh.org.uk/publications/on-

line/advisorynotes/18/18.htm>. 

– World Bank 2015,  World DataBank ,

accessed 20 March 2015, <http:// 

databank.worldbank.org/data/home. 

aspx> SEM 2015 

65 

## CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES 

# Drought in Tharparkar: 

# From Seasonal to Forced 

# Migration 

# Pakistan is ranked in the top ten countries most vulnerable to 

climate change (National Disaster Management Authority -

NDMA). According to the Global Climate Risk index, Pakistan, 

together with Haiti and the Philippines were the most affected 

countries in 2012 (Zofeen, 2014). Due to its geography, it is greatly 

exposed to climate-change-related risks. Pakistan’s fresh water 

resources are provided by monsoon rainfalls and the melting of 

glaciers from the Himalayas, which are retreating faster than in 

any other part of the world due to rising temperatures (Sattar, 2014). This is likely 

to cause not only glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs) but also increasing water 

flows into rivers. In addition, according to the Director of the Pakistan Meteoro -

logical Department, monsoon patterns are also changing partly as a result of the 

well-known “Asian brown cloud 1” derived from air pollution. Proof of this change of 

pattern might be found in the 2010 floods in Pakistan, when monsoon rains occurred 

in the northern part of the country, which is normally monsoon free. Had this level 

of rainfall occurred in arid zones, the rainwater would have been absorbed by rivers, 

thus avoiding the devastating consequences of the floods. On the whole, Pakistan’s 

climate is arid, with levels of precipitation that are low (average rainfall in below 240 

millimetres) and uneven, as 81% of river flow and 65% of precipitation take place in 

the 3 months of the monsoon season (Sattar, 2014). As a result, the country is prone 

to droughts, which have been increasing in number and intensity over the past few 

decades. In a country highly dependent on agriculture (as well as on natural resources 

such as natural gas from the desert zone of Baluchistan) all these extreme environ -

mental situations are having severe impacts on this sector, and thus on food security, 

but also on migration patterns. Historically, Pakistan has been a country with high 

levels of migration, both internal and international, linked to both its geography and 

environmental changes. For instance, during the colonial period, the British intro -

duced canal irrigation in what is now Punjab province, bringing farmers from the 

East; and in the post-colonial period, following the construction of the Mangla Dam 

the British offered to relocate the population displaced from the project to Britain 

(Sattar, 2014). 

This paper will analyse the drought that occurred in the region of Tharparkar, 

in Sindh province starting in 2013 and reaching its most devastating point between 

March and August 2014. The region of Tharparkar is traditionally prone to droughts, 

and its population, which is dependent on agriculture and livestock, has long suffered 

from extreme environmental conditions that have led to problems of food insecurity 

1. “Asian brown cloud, a large atmospheric brown cloud that occurs annually from about November through May 

over eastern China and southern Asia. The Asian brown cloud is caused by large amounts of aerosols (such as soot 

and dust) produced in the combustion of fossil fuels and biomass across the region. It has been linked to decreases 

in summer monsoon rainfall in India since 1930, the southward shift of the summer monsoon in eastern China, 

declines in agricultural production, and increases in respiratory and cardiovascular problems in the people inhabiting 

the region”. http://global.britannica.com SEM 2015 

> 66
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES
> DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION

and chronicle malnutrition, increasing neo-natal mortality and diseases and death 

among livestock, all causing an increasing degree of forced migration. This paper 

will focus on the development of the drought and its consequences for the popu -

lation, both in terms of migration and livelihood. It will also analyse the response 

and measures undertaken by the Government and will attempt to set out a series of 

recommendations to address the problem. 

1. RAINFALL AND DROUGHT CONDITIONS IN PAKISTAN 

Rainfall variability in Pakistan is high. While the northern half of the country is 

semi-arid to very humid, the southern part, in which Tharparkar is located, is arid 

to hyper-arid. Drought is a slow onset event: its effects can be less obvious as they 

usually accumulate slowly over a long period of time. Consequently droughts 

normally affect a higher number of people than other natural hazards  (Pakistan 

Meteorological Department). According to the Pakistan Meteorological Department 

a drought “is an extended period of months or years when a region notes a defi -

ciency in its water supply. Generally, this occurs when a region receives consistently 

below average precipitation. It can have a substantial impact on the ecosystem and 

agriculture of the affected region”. Droughts can be meteorological – defined by the 

dryness and duration of the dry season; agricultural – mainly affecting food produc -

tion and farming; hydrological – associated with the effects of low levels of precipi -

tation on the water supply; and socio-economic – occurring when the demand for 

an economic good exceeds supply, due to weather-related water shortages (Pakistan 

Meteorological Department). 

According to the Jaggarta organization, the worst drought that has taken place in 

Pakistan in the last 50 years is that of 1998-2002, of which the El Ni ño 2 phenomenon 

in 1997 was an important starting point. The Meteorological Department of Paki -

stan has also established a link between El Ni ño and instances of drought, as over a 

period of 100 years (1871-1988), 11 out of 21 droughts occurred in El Nino years. It also 

associates droughts with factors such as the prevalence of high-pressure systems, 

winds that carry continental instead of oceanic air masses, deforestation, and global 

warming. Climate change is part of the causes of drought, as can be seen in both 

the changing patterns of precipitation (the monsoon occurring in September rather 

than in July and August) and in the intensity of events (waves heat, floods cyclones, 

etc…). But are other factors have also been identified (United Nations Pakistan, 2014), 

such as the demand for natural resources and institutional apathy. A growing popu -

lation increases the demand for natural resources, which are largely non-renewable 

such as groundwater or land among others. The use of and drilling for groundwater 

increases salt contamination and thus reduces the amount of fresh water. Population 

growth also increases the exploitation of other natural resources such as minerals, 

present in the region of Sindh, further reducing the amount of available land and 

water, and urbanisation and the growth of urban areas affect the supply of water to 

the surrounding region. 

Public institutions do not, however, seem to actively respond to these issues. As 

the Pakistan Meteorological Department recognises, “no organisations dealing with 

the drought issues exist in Pakistan and the responses to drought for the distressed 

economic and social sector, whenever such situation arose, are taken on emergency 

> 2. “A climatic event occurring every two to seven years, characterized by warming of surface waters and reduced
> upwelling of cold, nutrient-rich water off the western coast of South America, causing die-offs of plankton and fish
> and influencing jet stream winds, altering storm tracks and affecting the climate over much of the world”.
> http://www.thefreedictionary.com SEM 2015
> 67

and on ad hoc basis”. There is also a lack of communication and coordination between 

institutions (Di Nunzio, 2014) as well as limited budgets for mitigation, or even devel -

opment. The Government of Pakistan controversially classified the 2014 drought in 

Tharparkar as socioeconomic (Hashim, 2014), and it was only when different media 

and NGOs started to report infant mortality and loss of livestock due to disease that 

the Government began to recognis”e the seriousness of the situation (Pakistan Water 

Partnership, 2014). 

1.1. Tharparkar: description of the drought 

According to the Sindh Relief Department, the district of Tharparkar has been 

declared calamity-hit in 1968, 1978, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1995, 1996, 1999, 2001, 2004, 2005, 

2007 and 2012. The desert of Tharparkar covers more than 22.000 km² and is the 

largest in Pakistan and the 18 th  largest in the world. Its population numbers 1.5 

million people, living in 2300 villages and urban settlements. It is composed of six 

talukas  – Mithi, Islamkot, Chachro, Dihly, Diplo and Ngarparkar – each of which 

receive different levels of rainfall. The land, although arid, is highly fertile but 

depends on the July to September rainfall. Unfortunately, Pakistan’s rainfall pattern 

is known to be highly variable and this variability seems to be increasing as a result 

of global warming (Sattar, 2014). Rainfall in the desert varies between 100mm and 

700mm (Pakistan Water Partnership, 2014), of which the summer monsoon (July to 

September) accounts for 60% to 70% of the annual rainfall (Pakistan Meteorolog -

ical Department). This is illustrated by a comparison of monthly rainfall levels in 

2013 versus average levels in the province of Sindh: March -89%, April +82%, May 

-100%, June +292%, July - 83%, August +50% and September -41%. The figures for 2014 

> Source: Sindh Provincial Disaster Management Authority

Map 1.  Map of deserts in Pakistan SEM 2015 

> 68
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES
> DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION

highlight the worsening of the drought: March -17%, April -18%, May -98%, June 

-40%, July - 84%, August -17% and September -99% (Pakistan Meteorological Depart -

ment). This translates into a rainfall deficit of around 30% between March 2013 and 

February 2014 with some towns barely receiving a drop of water (JSWO, 2014). The 

vastly reduced monsoon season is thus the main cause of droughts in Pakistan, in 

an area already prone to droughts. And pollution and climate change are making 

of them a common phenomenon in the area (JSWO, 2014). For the preceding three 

years Tharparkar had been faced with a drought-like situation, but it was not until 

October 2014 when the Provincial Disaster Managing Authority (PMDA) declared the 

zone as an “impending emergency” (WFP, 2014). Interestingly, the zone would usually 

be declared as a disaster area as of mid-August if rainfall is below normal levels 

and consequently some assistance in terms of water, food, fodder and medicines is 

provided. But in 2014 this only happened when the spiral of deaths of humans and 

animals became too alarming (Shaikh, 2014). In fact, in 2014 the monsoon season, 

which arrived towards September, brought an insignificant quantity of rain leading 

to a worsening of the already severe drought-like conditions prevailing in the area. 

In the monsoon season of 2014 Tharparkar received an estimated 124mm of rainfall, 

compared with 190mm in 2013 and 220 mm in 2012 (WFP, 2014). 

2. THARPARKAR: LIFE AND THE IMPACTS OF DROUGHT 

The people of Tharparkar live on agriculture, livestock and daily wages. Estimates 

suggest that 30% to 40% of population is dependent on agriculture and cattle respec -

tively, with the remainder dependent on daily wages from services, local trading and 

transportation in urban settlements (Consortium Management Unit, 2014). 

2.1.  Impact on agriculture 

Agriculture is largely dependent on monsoon rainfall as there are few zones in Paki -

stan where irrigation is practiced (United Nations Pakistan, 2014) and high yields are 

only possible with a significant amount of rain, in spite of the fact that rural commu -

nities have adapted over time by using water stress resistant and efficient crops such 

as millet or sugar. Given that Tharparkar, unlike other areas, has only one crop season 

(Sattar, 2014) three years of drought-like conditions have meant three years of crop 

failure for some families, leading to lower incomes and malnutrition. According to 

an assessment carried out by the Thardeep Rural Development Programme (TRDP, 

2014), 28% of the families interviewed (holders of land) were able to cultivate their 

land, and the majority (54%) bought their seed on credit. Around 30% purchased in 

cash and only 15% had seed stock already available. The study also indicates that for a 

good crop four to five periods of rainfall are required. In the case of the majority of 

the farmers (86%), their seed was completely destroyed before the first rains. 

2.2.  Impact on livestock 

Livestock also falls victim to droughts in various ways: water shortages and their 

impact on grazing make animals weaker and more prone to disease. The consump -

tion of herbs mixed with sand causes digestive problems, metabolism disorders 

(Khangharani,  2014) and viral infections that are highly contagious. As such, prices of 

livestock fall and farmers are either unable to sell their animals or do so at prices that 

jeopardize their income. Seeing as there is barely any kind of veterinary service in 

Tharparkar, the final outcome of disease is often death, and given that the population 

depends on livestock for milk and meat, this inevitably increases their vulnerability 

to malnutrition and reduces their resilience. In 2014 a serious sheep pox outbreak 

occurred, causing a large culling of herds and significantly reducing farmers’ income 

and further deteriorating the already tough situation facing the population (United SEM 2015 

> 69

Nations Pakistan, 2014). The sheep pox outbreak reportedly led to at least 42,000 

deaths (Di Nunzio, 2014). 

According to a Hands assessment (Hands Pakistan, 2014) the livestock mortality 

rate due to the 2014 drought reached 70%. More than 300,000 animals died from 

different diseases caused by the unavailability of fodder, the quasi-inexistent water 

supply and sheep pox. Another survey indicates that the livestock death ratio during 

the three-month period from July to September was recorded at 14% in sheep and 

goats and 4% in cows and large domestic animals (TRDP, 2014). Finally, another 

assessment (Consortium Management Unit, 2014) showed that part of the popula -

tion lost one third of their cows and camels, while for others two thirds of small 

ruminants (sheep, goats) were lost to diseases that were unable to be treated because 

of lack of capital to buy vaccines coupled with their limited availability. In 2014, the 

sale of livestock, which is generally turned to as a strategy of last resort to cope with a 

lack of resources and famine, decreased significantly as the weak conditions of herds 

caused prices fall (Consortium Management Unit, 2014). 

2.3.  Impact on nutrition 

Tharparkar’s drought undoubtedly greatly affected and deteriorated its population’s 

sources and levels of income and had a direct and debilitating impact on food inse -

curity, malnutrition, which mostly affected women and children, and deaths. Many 

media reports indicate that the alarm regarding the 2014 drought was only sounded 

when the child death toll had reached around 120, a figure which ultimately reached 

400 (Khangharani,  2014). According to the Thardeep Rural Development Programme, 

82% of the population surveyed in their assessment (TRDP, 2014) were found to suffer 

from food insecurity (food available for a maximum of 15 days), 17% had food security 

for up to six months and only 1% had food security for one year. This situation was 

exacerbated due to the indebtedness of families, which according to the same study 

reached 69% at the moment of the assessment. 

Indebtedness has a significant impact on the ability to cope with these situations 

of distress. In 2013, 70% to 80% of families surveyed had decided to go into debt in 

order to buy seeds for cropping and land preparation for the monsoon season as 

well as vaccinations for livestock; a similar situation was observed in 2014, between 

the monsoon seasons. As no rainfall occurred in either of the two seasons, the situ -

ation of families inevitably became even more delicate, being unable to pay back 

their debt (Consortium Management Unit, 2014). This cycle is further exacerbated 

when higher castes or families with greater socioeconomic resources give food 

loans to lower income families in exchange for the gains from future harvests: as 

drought results in crop failure, these families become further indebted, and start to 

have to cut food and medical expenses, thus worsening their food insecurity as well 

as their health. The spiral becomes fatal where those most vulnerable to droughts 

and famines become even more vulnerable when revenues from harvests or other 

sources of income shrink due to drought. 

2.4.  Impact on migration 

The latest population census of Pakistan in 1998 indicates that during the 1980s and 1990s 

the region of Sindh witnessed around 10% of the internal migration in the country while 

accounting for 23% of the country’s population. Punjab, another arid region, accounted 

for more than 50% of the country’s internal migration (Sattar, 2014). These figures illus -

trate that the larger part of internal migration occurs in areas where there is significant 

pressure on land and resources, and zones where there are low levels of industrialisa -

tion. The historical lack of mobility has prevented social networks from developing 

within urban centres, resulting in urban migration due to linkages to be more limited. 

Yet this seems to be changing as a result of the drought-like conditions from which the 

region has been suffering in the last decades (Sattar, 2014), as is illustrated in this case. SEM 2015 

> 70
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES
> DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION

Both the sale of livestock and migration have been reported as coping strate -

gies to deal with situations of drought. According to a senior official in the Provin -

cial Disaster Management Authority of Sindh (PDMA), approximately 175,000 fami -

lies have fled the drought-blighted region (Shaikh,  S. & Tunio , S., 2014). Temporary 

or seasonal migration is a recurrent phenomenon in Tharparkar, but whether or 

not this migration was seasonal was not assessed. During the dry winter months 

(December to February) or during years of drought, families migrate to barrage 

areas in the province of Sindh to harvest sugar crops, wheat, and rice, and to feed 

their livestock. But in normal years migration takes place in April and May, which is 

when the wheat is harvested (Sattar, 2014). According to Care and the Relief Founda -

tion (Khangharani,  2014) in a normal year seasonal migration is practised by 15% to 

20% of families, a figure that increases to 35-45% in years of drought. In 2014 it was 

estimated that an additional 25% of families resorted to migration, both with and 

without livestock. But not all inhabitants migrate: a recent study shows that families 

with livestock are more inclined to migrate to look for grazing and water for their 

animals, while owners of land are more reluctant to do so, due to fears of losing 

their land (Kolhi, 2014). And there are also those who do not migrate for socioeco -

nomic reasons. In some cases the family does not have sufficient means to travel 

long distances in search of irrigated areas. During such long distances the chances 

of livestock survival are low due to either a lack of water or to their weak condition. 

This inevitably makes migration a worse solution. Some families do not view defini -

tive migration as possible either, as their degree of poverty is such that they do not 

have the means to relocate (Rahma Islamic Relief, 2015). In some cases of this nature, 

only one member of the family migrates to cities or urban settlements in search of 

alternative sources of income. 

According to a survey from the Thardeep Rural Development Programme (TRDP, 

2014) carried out in 74 villages in Tharparkat and Umerkot at the end of 2014, 73% of 

migration to barrage areas for livestock grazing or in search of agricultural labour 

involved a single family member (partial migration), while in 27% of the cases the 

whole family migrated. There are more than 20 different communities in Tharparkar, 

a mixture of Muslims (64%) and Hindus (36%), the largest denominations being the 

Bheel, Kolhi and Meghwar. The Bheel and Kolhi, pertaining to the Hindu religion, 

have been the most affected, according to different surveys. These communities 

are used to migrating every year, during the harvest season, but not from August to 

September as they did in 2014. One of the surveys carried out (Consortium Manage -

ment Unit, 2014) revealed that a large portion of the people that had migrated with 

their entire family in 2014 came from the Bheel and Kolhi communities (64% in total), 

the next largest community being the Meghwar (6%). The first people to migrate 

often move to nearby districts (Sanghar, Badin, Umerkot and Mirpurkhas) in search 

of work opportunities and available fodder. The later ones usually have more means 

and are more inclined to migrate with only one member of the family, to irrigated 

areas to search of in-farm and out-farm labour, and the head of the family sends 

back remittances to support the rest of the family that remained at home. Indeed, 

of those partially migrating, the majority come from the Meghwar (25%), followed 

by the Bheel (21%) and the Kolhi (11%). The rest (42%) are from 22 other, mainly 

Muslim communities. Muslims usually migrate to urban centres such as Karachi and 

Hyderabad, but do not leave their houses, and send their earnings back home. Many 

other families indicated that they were ready to leave in the following weeks as they 

saw their sources of income, including the sale of livestock, shrink. It goes without 

saying that if no measures are taken by the authorities before the next monsoon, the 

situation of the population will deteriorate even further, provoking more migration. 

Partial migration is basically associated with livestock grazing, and, as mentioned, 

in Tharparkar this kind of seasonal migration takes place every year during the dry 

period (April and May). In 2014, according to the same survey (TRDP, 2014), 19% of the SEM 2015 

> 71

existing livestock accounted for in the assessment was taken to barrages areas versus 

12% that perished and 4% that was sold. 

3. POLITICAL RESPONSE 

Whenever rainfall is below normal levels in mid-August, the authorities of Thar -

parkar declare the zone a disaster area and as such assistance to the population in 

the form of food, fodder, water, and medicines is provided. Tharparkar had been 

facing a drought-like situation since 2011, but in the estimation of the authorities, it 

was only the lack of rainfall during the 2013 monsoon season that led to the drought-

like situation in December 2013/January 2014 (Pakistan Nutrition Coordination 

Working Group, 2014). The Meteorological Department had stated that even with a 

30% lower level of rainfall in 2013, the situation did not qualify as a drought. Instead, 

as mentioned above, it was declared a “socioeconomic disaster” (Hashim, 2014), and 

it was only in March 2014 after domestic and international media and NGOs increas -

ingly reported a state of famine and a significant increase in infant mortality as well 

as diseases and deaths among livestock, that the provincial authorities declared the 

area “calamity-hit” (Hashim, 2014). And it was not until October 2014, after another 

three months’ (July, August and September) rainfall levels below normal, and an 

“alarming” level of human deaths and animals (Shaikh, 2014) – some figures point to 

400 to 500 deaths – that the zone was declared an “impending” zone and the drought 

was recognised as such (WFP, 2014). Over a period of one year, a zone traditionally 

prone to drought where rainfall levels had been below normal levels and where 

chronic malnutrition and poverty affects many households, was initially treated as 

“drought-like conditions”, followed by the status of “calamity-hit” and “impending 

zone” to finally be declared as suffering from drought. As such, there was a clear and 

founded consensus amongst journalists, researchers, NGO’s and other civil society 

groups about the negligence and the lack of governance that the authorities of Paki -

stan, both central and provincial, had displayed in the classification and handling of 

the drought (Di Nunzio, 2014). This lack of governance and coordination was particu -

larly apparent in the accusation from certain critics of the National Disaster Manage -

ment Authority (NDMA) that in Sindh province 60,000 bags of wheat intended for 

the relief of the population were not distributed at the end of March due to an 

administrative error (Di Nunzio, 2014). The same institution had already been the 

subject of criticism during the 2010 floods, as it had been unable to coordinate aid 

between international NGOs and other agencies (Di Nunzio, 2014). The reality is that 

the authorities themselves demonstrated negligence when referring to the issue: 

local officials placed the blame on higher level authorities’ lack of response, claiming 

it had considerably worsened the unbearable living conditions of Tharparkar’s 

population, while the higher authorities blamed district officials for alerting them 

to the situation too late (Shaikh,  S. & Tunio , S., 2014). Furthermore, the Tharparkar 

Deputy Commissioner’s office claimed that in mid-August they had advised the 

Sindh provincial government about the risk of famine and advised that the district 

of Tharparkar be declared a disaster zone, but that they received no response (Shaikh, 

S. & Tunio , S., 2014). Such contentions clearly show the lack of response and the 

inability to compromise on the part of the authorities regarding the problem of the 

drought. Immediately after these incidents, in a context of a “flurry of visits by polit -

ical leaders” (Hashim, 2014), two separate emergency relief aid packages totalling $10 

million and $1 million were approved. Following some dismissals and changes in the 

provincial government, a former Pakistani senator agreed that the government had 

failed to distribute food to part of the population on time, acknowledging that there 

were cases of malnutrition especially among mothers and infants. But he in turn 

blamed the media for inaccurately reporting the nature of a seasonal phenomenon, SEM 2015 

> 72
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES
> DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION

namely migration, and described the situation as a “media made disaster”. He went 

further stating that the delay of government’s response did not cause any loss of 

life nor migration (Hashim, 2014). According to the NDMA, in one week after recog -

nising the area as calamity-hit at the beginning of March, 3,582 tons of wheat (worth 

approximately $2.5m), 201 tons of rice, and 1,484 tons of emergency food packs and 

other food aid were distributed in Tharparkar. In addition, 58 medical staff were 

deployed on emergency duty and 5,318 people treated at emergency medical relief 

camps. Other measures announced were investments in health facilities of around 

Rs 30m ($302,000) and compensation of Rs 200,000 ($2,000) to the families of each 

of the 70 infants who had died in the district of Tharparkar from December onwards 

(Hashim, 2014). The latest data provided by the NDMA in 2014 indicates that a total 

of 126,790 bags of wheat (100kg/bag), 320 bags of rice (50kg/bag) and the equivalent 

to 231 tons of food items had been distributed to mitigate the consequences of the 

drought. Mineral water and fodder was also provided. In terms of medical assistance, 

around 50 medics, paramedics and doctors from neighbouring cities were deployed 

with medicines for emergency duty; 6 medical camps were established by the Army, 

and other mobile medical teams and dispensaries were in evidence. In total 153,385 

people were treated, evenly split between men, women and children. In addition, 17 

mobile veterinary teams were deployed to vaccinate and treat a total of 4,2 million 

cattle. The latest drought situation report released by the NDMA, with provisional 

data up to January 2015 sets the number of wheat bags distributed at 625,849, and the 

number of people treated at 446,596. These figures show that despite the fact that 

the situation was addressed belatedly, with a delay of at least one year, assistance has 

improved since initial action was taken in March 2014. 

4. PAKISTAN’S MIGRATION POLICY 

According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre, the majority of the Inter -

nally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Pakistan are related to environmental disasters or 

to the lack of appropriate mechanisms to deal with such disasters. A figure illustrates 

this: between the 2010 and 2011 monsoon floods, a total of 15 million persons (out of 

a population of 182 million) were displaced across the country (Shaikh, 2014). And 

yet Pakistan still has no environmental migration policy. Pakistan’s main challenge 

in addressing environmental migration is thus to develop a national policy, covering 

both internal and international migration. The only current legislation related to 

these issues is the Emigration law passed in 2009 (Sattar, 2014), which does not deal 

with internal migration or displacement, nor does the National Climate Change 

Policy, developed by the Ministry of Environment and approved in September 2012. 

Indeed, Pakistan seems to deny the existence of human displacement due to envi -

ronmental events, as shown in the response to the Tharparkar drought. The impor -

tance of implementing a policy on migration instead of the reactive actions that the 

Government of Pakistan currently carries out when natural disasters take place rests 

on the need to get to the roots of the problems and avoid migration taking place as 

a solution of last resort. The policy debate should thus be oriented towards avoiding 

forced migration, and ensuring that migration should be perceived and employed as 

an adaptive measure. Climate change-induced migration should be framed within 

the context of a development policy (ADB, 2012). 

4.1. Approaches for a migration policy 

In general terms, policies on environmental migration can be addressed through 

two different angles that can be complementary. The first would cover the scope of 

protection of migrants (communities of origin) and the second that of adaptation to 

climate change through migration (Sattar, 2014). In the case of Pakistan, a complete SEM 2015 

> 73

comprehensive and holistic approach needs to be implemented. In the absence of 

a migration policy, the first step should be to create the necessary data system to 

discern migration patterns: Pakistan latest census is that of 1998, and the motives 

for migration considered within it are education, marriage, business, employment/ 

transfer, returning home, health and others 3. Interestingly enough, environmental 

migration is not included. 

4.1.1. Measures of protection for communities of origin 

Several measures can be taken to reduce the vulnerability of communities to envi -

ronmental risks and are related to: 1) disaster risk management, 2) poverty reduction 

policies 3) resilience and social protection (ADB, 2012). 

1) Disaster Risk Management 

This is a crucial matter for Pakistan in order to reduce the impacts of climate change. 

The risk of being affected by disasters is essentially a function of the degree of vulner -

ability, the exposure to damaging hazard events, and the frequency and severity of 

hazards (National Disaster Management Authority, 2013). As developing countries’ 

vulnerability to natural disasters increases, an effective national risk management 

policy is essential. Up until 2005, when an earthquake hit the country, the natural 

disaster risk reduction policy in Pakistan was a reactive policy, based on emergency 

relief. This derived from the “Calamity Act” of 1958. As a consequence of the earth -

quake’s impact on the country and population, and in response to the need for an 

appropriate policy and of more institutional coordination, the National Disaster 

Management Authority (NDMA) was created in 2006. The Provincial Disaster Manage -

ment Authority (PDMA) and the District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) 

are under the jurisdiction of the NDMA. The DDMA is the first port of call on the 

alert chain, but it is the responsibility of the PDMA to implement the policies and 

plans elaborated at the national level, and to coordinate the response in the case of a 

natural catastrophe. Up until 2012, there was no coordination between the different 

levels of authority and the response to natural disasters such as the 2010 and 2011 

floods were anything but planned. Natural disaster risk was thus not well managed. 

Indeed, the mismanagement of the flood crises and the unsustainable losses that they 

caused to the country are at the origin of the Risk Reduction Policy approved by the 

government in 2013, a policy which was formulated with a broad base of different 

stakeholders: national and international consultants, relevant federal ministries 

and departments among others (NDMA, 2013). According to the NDMA: “The policy 

shall promote priority measures to ameliorate existing vulnerabilities to hazards and 

ensure that future development initiatives add resilience. The policy also seeks to 

provide guideline for timely, dedicated and adequate investment on hazard mitiga -

tion and preparedness interventions at all levels which will not only substantially 

reduce the disaster risk but also the consequential damages and economic cost asso -

ciated with response, recovery and rehabilitation” (NDMA, 2013). 

But this policy has encountered certain challenges that have been visible in the 

Tharparkar drought crisis. The first is the low level of risk awareness and knowledge. 

The knowledge of risk of Pakistani institutions is limited, both in terms of mapping 

but also in terms of its dynamics. Models of risk assessment, vulnerabilities, multi-

hazard risks, and loss and damage assessments all have to be developed. There is a 

clear need to ensure the capacity to compile sound data that will help to prevent, effi -

ciently manage and mitigate the effects of natural disasters, such as forced migration. 

A second issue is the necessity of capacity building at all levels. As has been illustrated   

> 3. Retrieved: http://www.pbs.gov.pk SEM 2015
> 74
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES
> DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION

by the present case study, the lack of coordination between the different levels of 

public authorities seems to have been part of the problem in the delay in recognising 

the drought and in taking the necessary emergency relief action to prevent displace -

ment. The decentralisation of the aforementioned natural disaster management 

authorities needs to be well coordinated. The NDMA has a policy-making role and 

should have the capacity to provide support and assistance to the other authorities 

to implement risk reduction action; and the provincial and district levels also need to 

have the capacity to carry them out. For this decentralisation to be effective it is also 

crucial that information flows efficiently between levels, so that the district authori -

ties that are normally the closest to the event sound the alarm as soon as possible to 

reduce the risks of crisis situations and to activate the necessary measures. Finally, 

a third challenge is the lack of integration of natural disaster risks assessment into 

development planning and policies due, again, to a low level of awareness but also to 

institutional commitment and capacity to undertaking it (NDMA, 2014). 

2) Poverty reduction policies 

It is essential that policies to reduce poverty take a long term stance not only for the 

sustainability of people’s living conditions and development but also for the sustaina -

bility of the climate. In the same way that climate change and environmental migration 

can increase people’s level of poverty, a poverty reduction policy can address climate 

change and thus induce environmental migration. A clear example is that of China, 

where economic development has significantly increased rural to urban migration. 

But in several Chinese megacities, that same economic development is now causing 

environmental problems that are translating into environmental migration: those 

who now leave the city to avoid the negative effects of the deteriorating environment. 

3) Resilience and social protection measures 

Considering Tharparkar is one of the most vulnerable regions to drought in Pakistan, 

long term measures must be taken in order to increase the resilience of its communi -

ties, make the lives of the people sustainable and avoid forced migration. The need to 

invest in water infrastructure seems to be inevitable, such as establishing water treat -

ment plants or irrigation systems. Improving peoples’ financial resources can also 

alleviate their hardship in seasons of low rainfall or crop failure, through measures 

such as low interest rate loans or grants, or conditioned loans that would be returned 

only if there is no crop failure due to low rainfall; social protection measures such 

as conditioned cash transfers could also help to increase their means of living as 

well as human capital (cash transfer dependent upon a medical appraisal and school 

attendance). Investment in health facilities seems to be necessary in Tharparkar. 

New sources of income also need to be found, and given that agriculture is the main 

means of earning income, new varieties of crops that are more resilient to dry areas 

or suitable for saline water could be promoted (TRDP, 2014). 

4.1.2. Migration as an adaptation measure 

When discussing migration, due to socio-economic linkages or other reasons, it is 

necessary to consider at least two types of migrants within this spectrum: those 

who are forced to migrate and those who want to migrate. But when addressing 

climate change, planned migration should also be considered as an adaptive strategy. 

According to several studies (ADB 2012, Sattar 2014) planned migration is barely 

considered in any climate change policy as an adaptive strategy, and more specifically 

it is not in Pakistan’s Climate Change Policy (Sattar, 2014). But there are certain cases 

that may shed light on this, and possibly enhance planned migration as a form of 

adaptation in zones that are extremely and recurrently vulnerable to climate change. 

This is the case of Fiji, in the South Pacific Ocean, where rising seas are contami -

nating fresh water and agricultural land rendering some coastal areas uninhabitable. SEM 2015 

> 75

When adaptation measures such as building seawalls no longer worked, others like 

planned migration and relocation of the affected population to new land did. An 

illustration of this is in the relocation of the village of Vunidogoloa where the sea 

had breached the seawall barriers causing daily flooding and saltwater degrading the 

soil and destroying crops (UNFCCC). The government undertook a process to move 

150 people to a different site and build new houses. Plans for relocation only went 

ahead after the community had given its consent, and villagers actively participated 

in the relocation process. Public authorities contributed with funding for the provi -

sion of basic services and new livelihoods, and the community also received assis -

tance in re-establishing agriculture and capacity building for alternative initiatives to 

generate income. 

But in the case of Tharparkar, planned migration action seems to be a far off 

prospect. As has been illustrated, the management of the 2013-14 drought was all but 

planned. Pakistan’s response to droughts has in some cases been “stop gap arrange -

ments” (Consortium Management Unit, 2014), and established contingency plans 

have not been effective. The usual cycle of drought relief operations starts with a 

declaration of emergency, which leads to an analysis of the situation that is in turn 

transformed, if deemed an emergency, into an urgent and immediate provision of 

wheat, followed by a provision of other relief goods (Provincial Disaster Manage -

ment Authority, 2014). No permanent action is undertaken in addition to these 

ad-hoc relief plans. After this crisis, there seemed to be a certain degree of awareness 

of the fact that the paradigm of crisis management had to be changed from “stop gap 

arrangements” to a strategy that tackles the problem at its root and that promotes 

sustainable solutions, from response to resilience. As such, a proposal for the crea -

tion of the Thar Development Authority was presented by the Provincial Govern -

ment of Sindh with the objective to revolve around policies in the water, livestock 

and health sectors, and the empowerment of people to alleviate perpetual poverty. 

These policies should be subject to legislative review and approval and may add to 

the drafting of a draft policy that the government has initiated (Khangharani,  2014). 

CONCLUSION 

Pakistan has many challenges to face. The country was ranked 146 out of 187 in the 

2013 Human Development Index (UNDP). It is one of the most vulnerable countries 

to natural disasters, and yet, it has only recently approved, in 2013, a risk reduction 

policy. The majority of its internally displaced persons are due to environmental 

events, and yet Pakistan has no environmental migration policy. It is ranked in the 

top ten countries most vulnerable to climate change, and yet the National Climate 

Change Policy approved in 2012 was only enforced in 2013 and does not deal with 

environmental migration. But one of the main challenges facing Pakistan in order to 

efficiently and effectively address all these problems is institutional capacity, which 

contributes to determining the level of impact that climate change in general and 

environmental events or natural disasters in particular will have on the population. 

Since the flooding in 2010 and 2011 and its consequences, the Government of Pakistan 

seems to have taken certain steps to formulate policies that will address these issues, 

but now it has to go a step further and integrate environmental migration in these 

policies. In Tharparkar, the Government has the opportunity to start doing so by 

implementing measures that will increase the population’s resilience and livelihood 

and thus reduce their vulnerability to climate change, which will help to mitigate 

forced environmental migration. SEM 2015 

76 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES TORRES 

DROUGHT IN THARPARKAR: FROM SEASONAL TO FORCED MIGRATION 

# REFERENCES 

Articles 

– Sattar, Adnan. 2014. Climate Change 

and Migration. Exploring the Linkage 

and what needs to be done in the 

context of Pakistan. Lead Pakistan. 

Occasional Paper Series 29. 

– Shaikh, Sana F. 2014. Internally 

displaced persons: citizens’ rights in a 

world at the mercy of climate change. 

Human Rights Review . Retrieved: 

https://uclhumanrightsreview. 

wordpress.com/volume-i-student-

articles/internally-displaced-persons-

citizens-rights-in-a-world-at-the-

mercy-of-climate-change  (consulted 

on April 4 th , 2015) 

– World Food Programme. 2014. Alert 

on Alarming Food Security and 

Nutrition situation. Special Focus: 

Worsening Thar Drought 

Press Articles 

– Di Nunzio, Jack. 2014. “Malnutrition 

and Chronic Water Scarcity Persist 

in Pakistan’s South-East.  Future 

Directions International” . http://www. 

futuredirections.org.au/publications/ 

food-and-water-crises/28-global-

food-and-water-crises-swa/1704-

malnutrition-and-chronic-water-

scarcity-persist-in-pakistan-s-south-

east.html  (consulted on April 8 th , 2015) 

– Hashim, Asad. 2014. “Pakistan’s 

Thar residents living on the 

edge”.  http://www.aljazeera. 

com/indepth/features/2014/03/ 

pakistan-thar-residents-living-

edge-2014315121120904102.html 

(consulted on April 4th, 2015) 

– Khangharani, Sono 2014. “Drought in 

Thar: some more broken promises”. 

http://www.dawn.com/news/1132994 

(consulted on April 4th, 2015) 

– Kolhi, Chander. 2014. “Drought 

and migration: A brief story of 

Tharparkar”.  http://www.dailytimes. 

com.pk/opinion/24-Mar-2014/ 

drought-and-migration-a-brief-story-

of-tharparkar  (consulted on April 

4th, 2015) 

– Shaikh,  Saleem and Tunio , Sughra .

2014. “Slow response to famine 

claiming lives in Pakistan’s Sindh 

province”.  http://www.trust.org/ 

item/20140314115423-0fxy2/  (consulted 

on April 8 th  2015) 

– Zofeen T., Ebrahim. 2014. “Migration 

seen through the prism of climate 

change”. http://www.dawn.com/ 

news/1129428/migration-seen-

through-the-prism-of-climate-change 

(consulted on April 8 th , 2015) 

Reports 

– Asian Development Bank. 2012. 

Addressing Climate Change and 

Migration in Asia and the Pacific .

Mandaluyong City 

– Consortium Management Unit. 2014. 

Drought Assessment Report. Districts 

Tharparkar and Umerkot. 26th October 

1st November 2014 

– Hands Pakistan. 2014.  1st  Situation 

Analysis Survey Report, District 

Tharparkar. March 2014. 

– Jaggarta Social Welfare Organization 

(JSWO). 2014.  Tharparkar Drought 2014 .

– National Disaster Management 

Authority. 2013.  National Disaster 

Reduction Policy .

– Pakistan Water Partnership. 2014.  Aide 

Memoire. Fact Finding Mission and 

Drought Master Planning Appraisal 

Mission. April 16– April 21, 2014. 

Tharparkar Drought 

– Pakistan Nutrition Coordination 

Working Group. 2014.  Nutrition, 

Food Security and Livelihood 

Emergency Tharparkar District, Sindh 

ProvincePakistan . Briefing Note – 20 th 

March 2014. 

– Provincial Disaster Management 

Authority. 2014.  Drought status, actions 

taken and future initiatives . Sindh 

Coordination Meeting. 

– Rahma Islamic Relief. 2015 . Tharparkar. 

Situation Assessment. February 2015. 

– Thardeep Rural Development 

Programme (TRDP). 2014.  Situation 

Assessment on Drought. Tharparkar and 

Umerkot.  Monitoring and Evaluation 

Section. 

– United Nations Pakistan. 2014.  “The 

predicament of governance: drought in 

Sindh province”.  UNRCO Mission report 

9 –11 December. One UN Programme II 

(2013 – 2017) 

Web pages 

– National Disaster Management 

Authority:  http://www.ndma.gov.pk 

– Provincial Disaster Management 

Authority:  http://www.pdma.gov.pk 

– Pakistan Meteorological Department: 

http://www.pmd.gov.pk 

– United Nations Framework Convention 

on Climate Change:  http://unfccc.int SEM 2015 

77 

SEM 2015 

77 

## LINH NGUYEN 

# Cancer Villages in China 

# In recent decades, China has achieved rapid growth with an annual increase 

in GDP of 8 to 9 percent, turning this country into one of the biggest and 

most powerful economies in the world (World Bank, 2007). However, this 

process of rapid industrialisation was also developed at the expense of 

nationwide environmental degradation; from the smog in big cities to land 

and water chemical contamination. Furthermore the benefits and profits of 

industrialisation are mostly reaped by a small urban population while at the 

opposite end of the spectrum, are “cancer villages” with some of the most 

helpless populations in China. 

This study will serve as one of the first investigations into cancer villages in the 

migration field and provide an initial understanding of the combination of envi -

ronmental, economic and political factors that influence the aspiration and action 

of migration/non-migration of the concerned populations. It does so while noting 

that migration is not a long-term solution for cancer villages as it does not solve 

the problem of pollution. Instead, migration can be considered as a kind of short-

term pain-relief for vulnerable groups while waiting for the clean-up process to be 

realised. Understanding migration/non-migration aspects of cancer villages contrib -

utes to the understanding of strategies and reactions of the local residents and helps 

policy makers to provide support structures for both migrants and non-migrants to 

reduce the short-term and long-term impacts of environmental destruction. 

Part 1 will deal with the cause and development of the “cancer village” phenom -

enon. Part 2 gives arguments for considering this phenomenon as a migration issue; 

villagers are divided into different groups based on their aspiration and ability to 

migrate. Part 3 will focus on the group that aspires to move, and explore the economic 

and political factors that limit people’s capacity to do so. 

1. THE “CANCER VILLAGE” AS A RISING PHENOMENON 

There is no official definition and scientific diagnosis of a “cancer village” due to 

the lack of data and research (Yu and Zhang, 2009). With the increasing concern 

and interest in this subject, the typical definition of such a phenomenon is simply: 

communities with greater rate of cancer than the expected rate (e.g. Liu, 2010; Lora-

wainwright, 2015a; McBeath et al., 2014). Cancer villages are considered to be a result 

of the “grow (pollute) first, clean up later” approach of Chinese leaders without 

considering the environmental and social impacts such as health, poverty, equality, 

and justice (Liu, 2013b). This development strategy is embedded in the famous and 

debateable theory of the environmental Kuznets curve (1955), which claims that 

pollution rises during the initial industrialisation period and automatically falls as 

a country reaches post-industrial levels due to a change in the composition and 

techniques of production (Grossman and Krueger, 1995). This theory has been criti -

cised as it would undermine policy makers’ focus on environmental law, which may 

lead to serious ecological and social damage (Dasgupta et al, 2002; Panayotou, 1997). 

China is not the only example proving the failure of this theory; such crises have also 

been experienced in many other countries during their development process such 

as Eastern European States and republics of the former Soviet Union or some Asian 

economies like Malaysia, Thailand and Korea ( Economy , 2004; Perout, 1995). 

Research and reports on cancer linked to pollution in China started to emerge 

in the 1970s but it was only from the end of 1990s and early 2000s that cases of SEM 2015 

> 78
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> LINH NGUYEN
> CANCER VILLAGES IN CHINA

cancer villages, such as Shangba or  Xiaojizhuang , caught the attention of media and 

NGOs (Liu, 2010; McBeath et al, 2014; Watts, 2010; Watts, 2008). Cancer villages are 

mostly linked with the chemical industry, paper factories, or resource extraction and 

processing (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015). Since available official information is 

rather limited, there have been varied attempts by researchers and activists to map 

the cancer villages such as those undertaken by Deng Fei and Lee Liu (Watts, 2010; 

Liu, 2010). Their maps show a concentration of cancer villages lying in Eastern China, 

with a strong correlation between the high percentage of cancer villages downstream 

and large industrial activities upstream. 

One famous example is the Huai River Delta, home to tens of thousands of small 

factories, which freely dump their waste into the river causing large-scale health 

issues, damage to fisheries and crop failures, thus affecting the lives of over 150 

million people in Henan, Anhui and Jiangsu Provinces (Economy, 2004). In Huang -

menying village along the Huai River, around 80% of young people are ill all year 

round (Liu, 2013a). The problem is worsened by the poor management of dams 

and reservoirs along the river, creating flooding and limiting the river’s capacity to 

dilute the pollutants (Economy, 2004). Heshan village in Hunan Province is another 

example: the water is heavily polluted by arsenic, listed as carcinogenic to humans 

by the World Health Organisation, from mines and chemical plants (Lee, 2014). In the 

past two decades, 157 villagers have died of cancer and another 190 have developed 

cancer due to arsenic poisoning out of a population of about 1,500 (Lee, 2014). Water 

and soil contamination also destroy local agriculture. Rice can no longer be grown 

and other plants also die when rain washes airborne pollutants into the fields (Lee, 

2014). Longling villagers suffer from air pollution from nearby fertilizer and steel 

Figure 1.  The cancer village phenomenon by province, China, 2009. (Liu, 2010) SEM 2015 

> 79

factories (Liu, 2010). With a population of 154, only four out of thirty families have not 

had a cancer victim while cancer killed four entire families (Liu, 2010). In Dongjing 

village, where a chemical industry is located, which produces phloroglucinol and 

o-chlorophenol, villagers stated that “the air became smelly, thick and unbearable, 

fish and prawns died, the water tasted strange and turned red” (Lora-Wainwright and 

Chen, 2015, p.16  ). The water tests showed that the amount of chloride was as high as 

2000 times above the safety standard (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015). 

After years of public speculation by local populations, international media and 

Chinese activist groups, the Chinese government first acknowledged the existence of 

the cancer village phenomenon in a report of the Ministry of Environmental Protec -

tion in 2013 (MEP, 2013; BBC, 2013).  The report stated that the toxic chemicals have 

caused many environmental emergencies linked to water and air pollution and there 

are even some serious cases of health and social problems like the emergence of 

cancer villages in individual regions.  However, two months later, health and environ -

mental officials of China refused to validate the report’s wording, claiming that the 

acknowledgement of the environmental ministry was a mistake and restricted the 

usage of the “cancer village” term in local media (Kaiman, 2013). Yet, the government 

continuously displays efforts to address the pollution problem. In April 2014, the first 

amendments to the country’s environmental protection law in 25 years were passed, 

promising greater power for environmental authorities, harsher punishment for 

polluters and encouragement of non-government groups in environmental manage -

ment (Kaiman, 2014; Bloomberg News, 2014). However, the gap between government 

policy and its implementation will still prove a major challenge for China over the 

coming years due to the top-down policy design, lack of political will, lack of capacity 

at the local level, and civil society’s limited power to speak out. 

2. THE NECESSITY OF CONSIDERING CANCER VILLAGES AS A 

MIGRATION ISSUE 

There have been studies on the possible impact of migration on the creation of cancer 

clusters (e.g. Contreras, 2008; Admin et al., 2010) but none of them ha s analysed the 

influence of cancer clusters on the residents’ migrational aspirations and ability to 

migrate. In the case of cancer villages in China, resident relocation is often briefly 

mentioned as a solution alongside pollution mitigation, factory relocation and alter -

native sources of natural resources, which in most cases is drinking water (e.g. Yu and 

Zang, 2009). Clearly, reallocation is not the first choice for the government due to its 

costliness, the complication in planning for the relocation itself as well as supporting 

a post-relocation programme and the risk of other villages demanding similar treat -

ment. Additionally, it is fair to say that relocation is only a short-term measure, as it 

does not solve the root cause of problem in a way that environmental restoration 

and environmental policy enforcement would do. However, it is hard to ignore the 

existing and urgent demands of residents in cancer villages to be relocated, espe -

cially where alternative distribution of critical resources such as farming soil, clean 

water or clean air is difficult. Furthermore, the involuntary migration of villagers, 

without support from the government or other parties, usually lacks the capacity 

and skill to help people to sustain themselves financially. This will create a social 

burden and instability in the destination. This is especially true for many villagers 

in cancer villages, who were previously farmers with limited education. Yet, there 

are also villagers who do not move despite suffering from environmental hazards, 

due to their lack of capacity to migrate. Considering the scale and the possibility 

of an increase in the number of cancer villages, both cases are undesirable for the 

long-term development of the country. As a result, cancer villages and migration 

issues require better understanding by policy makers in order to provide appropriate SEM 2015 

> 80
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> LINH NGUYEN
> CANCER VILLAGES IN CHINA

support structures and to minimise individual (both migrants and non- migrants) 

and societal costs. 

In slow onset cases of environmental degradation in cancer villages, popula -

tions can be categorised by their willingness and their ability to move, which is 

the result of various factors involving their economic and political situation (Bates, 

2002). Aspiration for resettlement does not only depend on the pollution level but 

also on their perception of the possibility to win over polluters, which is largely 

based on the support of government and non-government actors such as the media, 

NGOs, educated leaders as well as the economic reliance of villagers themselves on 

the industries in question (Lora-Wainwright et al., 2012; Yang and Lennon, 2010; Tilt, 

2013). In cases with support from third parties and some of the leading villagers -

usually involving the most educated individuals – villages actually did continuously 

fight to put a stop to pollution (for example, the cases of Qiugang and Shangba 

villages). As a result, they were more willing to stay in their polluted village with the 

hope of obtaining justice, and waiting for the recovery of their land. Others might 

decide to stay even without the hope of improving their living standards, usually 

older people who have an emotional connection to their homeland (Horn, 2013), or 

because their status and privileges in the village would drop significantly were they 

to relocate to a city, especially for elderly males (Carr, 2005). Such cases can be listed 

as “voluntary immobility”. On the other hand, previous experiences of unsuccessful 

protests could also dampen villagers’ faith in the possibility of state protection, and 

discourage their attempts to stop pollution (Lee, 2014; Liu, 2011; Liu, 2013a). Addition -

ally, the difficulties in proving a causal link between cancer and a specific pollutant 

in court also motivated villagers to reframe their demands to polluting firms and 

the local government, shifting from demands for a cleaner environment and better 

health, to demands for financial compensation for losses incurred (Lora-Wainwright 

et al, 2012). Both cases might lead to the wish to move as an escape from pollution. 

However, the aspiration to migrate does not necessary lead to the act of migra -

tion due to differences in the ability to move from villager to villager. Migrants from 

cancer villages can be categorised as one type of environmental refugees: “people 

affected by the gradual deterioration caused by anthropogenic alteration of their 

environment” (Bates, 2002 p. 473; El – Hinnawi, 1985). Two categories of environ -

mental displacement can be discerned: temporary displacement due to disasters or 

permanent displacement due to drastic environmental changes (El – Hinnawi, 1985). 

Among cases of migration from cancer villages, resettlements were mostly self-organ -

ised and rarely received any state support. Meanwhile, remaining cases, who “wish 

to move but remain in situ”, find themselves in a situation of “involuntary immo -

bility” (Jónsson, 2011, Black and Collyer, 2014). According to Bates (2002), the poor are 

normally the most vulnerable to environmental disruption which leads to migration. 

In many cancer villages, the poorest and most vulnerable groups are usually those 

that do not have sufficient means to relocate, locking them into a downward spiral 

of poverty and health crises. 

3. STRUGGLING TO MOVE 

3.1 Environmental refugee: the absence of official reports 

Large-scale centrally organised evacuation due to a toxic environment has been 

recorded in other countries as well as in China. In the U.S., 950 families in Love 

Canal were permanently relocated using government funds due to toxic waste 

disposal in 1980 (Brown, 2011). More recently, the 2,000 or so residents of Tuzköy 

have been re-settled by the Turkish government since 2010 due to widespread cancer 

and lung disease linked to erionite, a rare and highly toxic mineral present in local 

rock (Christie-Miller; 2013). Relocation due to environmental degradation in China SEM 2015 

> 81

is rather rare and action undertaken is usually slow and belated, following years of 

public and media speculation and the revelation of serious consequences. In 2009, 

150,00 residents in Jiyuan, Hebei Province were relocated after more than 1,000 chil -

dren had tested positive for lead poisoning (BBC, 2009; Liu, 2010). In 2009, the project 

was expected to cost 1bn Yuan ($146m) and was to be paid for by the lead company 

(BBC, 2009; Liu, 2010). However, no clear timetable for relocation was set nor any 

official report published on the movement provided. 

In the cases specifically related to cancer villages, however, there are no official 

reports relating to relocation. This may be due to the sensitivity and widespread 

nature of the issue. As 499 villages have been identified as “cancer villages”, clearly 

relocating each and every member of the affected communities is an enormous chal -

lenge for the government (Liu, 2010). Furthermore, the relocation of one village may 

lead to increasing demand for similar treatment from other villages, which would 

potentially increase existing tensions and social instability. Such reasons may moti -

vate the government to refuse to acknowledge the problem of cancer villages and 

prevent related information from being published. Many media outlets, researchers 

and NGOs reporting on cancer villages mention the obstruction of the local govern -

ments regarding their efforts to approach villagers and collect data (e.g. Yang and 

Lennon, 2010; Brown, 2012). 

Another challenge for data collection related to environmental refugees from 

cancer villages is that, due to the lack of a centralised relocation programme, most 

of the movement is self-organised. It can be either totally self-financed by villagers, 

or partly financed by the government or by compensation from polluters in cases 

where villagers successfully gained government recognition of pollution or launched 

a successful lawsuit, even the amount of such compensations is usually extremely 

low (such as the case of Qingpuling village – Li, 2014; Liu, 2010). In the context of 

slow onset environmental degradation like the situation in cancer villages, envi -

ronmental hazards largely influence local economies, especially for farmers whose 

livelihoods are more sensitive to natural conditions. This also infers difficulty as to 

data collection since the decision to move will rarely be exclusively due to environ -

mental factors, but also due to economic reasons (Bates, 2002). Moreover, the rapid 

and unprecedented process of urbanisation in China has attracted a large flow of 

labour from rural to urban areas, which makes it extremely difficult to distinguish 

between environmental and economic factors leading to migration. This difficulty is 

especially true for the young and educated groups, who usually have a greater ability 

to move and are the most likely to move irrespective of the pollution issue. In the 

case of Heshan, where the environment has been intoxicated by mines and chemical 

plants, young individuals have moved out of the village while old and retired people 

remained (Lee J., 2014). On the other hand, in the cases of farmers who are forced to 

leave their hometown without the necessary transferable skills to find employment 

in their destination, such relocation may provide a better living environment, but 

it is unlikely to elevate migrants out of poverty. Unplanned large-scale rural-urban 

migration due to environmental issues will add to the existing tension around urban -

isation issues such as food security, health, education, already facing China (Chen, 

2007; Gong et al, 2012; Quan, 1991). 

Finally, the absence of data might reflect the absence of relocation itself, 

suggesting the existence of a broad category of involuntary immobility. 

3.2 Involuntary immobility or the “cancer village” dilemma 

The lack of migration flows in the context of a heavily polluted environment raises 

the issue of involuntary immobility. This phenomenon is not only an environmental 

health problem but is also deeply rooted in social, cultural and political issues. People 

are trapped in a toxic and hazardous living environment due to their poverty, their 

lack of power to speak out and the deep-seated inequality in the fast developing SEM 2015 

> 82
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> LINH NGUYEN
> CANCER VILLAGES IN CHINA

economy. Tragically, the three factors are both initially the cause of the cancer village 

phenomenon and also the reasons that lead to the prolongation of the issue. These 

self-propagating problems have locked cancer village victims in a downward spiral 

of poverty and health crisis without the ability to relocate. The following sub-section 

will analyse the different barriers and constraints that prevent people from having 

recourse to migration. It is important to mention that that these barriers are rarely 

separate but rather intertwined and have a cause and effect relationship. 

Poverty and social inequality 

Poverty in rural areas coupled with the socio-economic policies of the Chinese 

government, which deepen social inequality, partly cause the widespread pollution 

in villages. The imbalanced environmental policy and clean-up programmes which 

focused on protecting citizens in cities and the lax implementation and monitoring 

of pollution in rural areas created the movement of toxic plants from the municipal 

districts of modern cities to nearby rural areas (Liu, 2013a; Watt, 2010). Liu (2013a) 

described how the 1996 “Developing Model Cities Programme”, introduced by the 

Chinese government as a response to the environmental crisis, did not stop pollu -

tion but instead drove the movement of polluting factories from urban to rural 

areas. The thirst for development of both local government and residents and the 

lack of monitoring capacity allowed for an extremely limited enforcement of envi -

ronmental regulation in villages (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Liu, 2013). This 

enabled factories to pollute and avoid investment in waste management. When 

the consequences of their pollution are revealed, local governments have their 

hands tied due to their dependence on industrial tax revenues, while the residents 

struggle with health problems, lose their livelihoods, and thus suffer from increasing 

poverty (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Liu, 2001). In some cases, the livelihoods 

of local villagers also greatly depends on the polluting plants, either directly through 

employment, or through compensation, which will be discussed in greater detail 

below (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Van Rooij B. et al, 2012). These factors also 

discourage victims from taking action to either stop pollution or relocate. 

The ramifications of pollution have also weakened the financial capacity of 

villagers to relocate. Commonly, a high proportion of residents in cancer villages were 

farmers whose income suffered significantly in the polluted areas as their agricul -

ture resources, such as water and soil, were destroyed (Liu, 2015). These residents are 

also most exposed to pollution due to their lack of knowledge, their limited finan -

cial capacity to protect themselves – for instance by buying clean water, or migrating 

given that their daily life requires more contact with contaminated water and soil. In 

many families, cancer victims were the main source of income, a fact which signifi -

cantly reduced household incomes and was exacerbated by the need for expensive 

treatment and extra care from others (Philips, 2015; McKenzie, 2013; Wolf, 2014; Horn, 

2013). The cost of treatments can as amount to the equivalent of several years’ income 

for villagers, forcing them to sell land, borrow money or use up their savings (Liu, 2015; 

Watts, 2010; Lee, 2014; Brown, 2012). Even comparatively wealthy households experi -

enced financial difficulties after paying for their family members’ treatment, leaving 

them with no ability to pay back debts, and thus facing the risk of having to sell their 

property (Brown, 2012; Lee, 2013; Watts, 2010). Due to the lack of medical care, sanita -

tion, financial wherewithal, and environmental awareness in rural areas, many victims 

are diagnosed with cancer at a very advanced stage, which increases both medical costs 

and the mortality rate (Liu, 2013a; Yang and Fang, 2006). Health damages coupled with 

financial crises deepens households’ povert levels. Furthermore, residents in rural 

areas are also less likely to have formal education and skills that can be transferred 

to other sectors, which could enable them to find jobs in cities. Their illness, serious 

poverty and lack of transferable skills in turn magnify their vulnerability to environ -

mental deterioration without the capacity to relocate (Black and Collyer, 2014). SEM 2015 

> 83

Little power to speak out and a lack of government support 

Villagers that are struggling to finance their relocation also face challenges in gaining 

acknowledgement and support from the government as well as from polluters to 

facilitate their relocation to a new area. This is firstly due to the lack of knowledge and 

difficulties in providing valid scientific evidence that would demonstrate the corre -

lation between pollution and health problems. As previous studies show, villagers’ 

data collection methods are rather simple: listing the number of deaths diagnosed 

as being due to cancer, keeping pictures of their dead livestock and crops, collecting 

samples of contaminated water and soil (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Sant, 2013). 

Such practices were described by Lora-Wainwright and her colleagues (2012)  as being 

of a politically sensitive nature which serves to attract attention and demand redress, 

and which earns villagers attention from the media and activist groups and, in turn, 

provides them with a degree of political capital which they otherwise be unlikely to 

have. However, they have no scientific evidence that links the illness to pollution, 

which is a major obstacle for villagers in gaining recognition by the government and 

the courts (Lora-Wainwright et al, 2012; Phillips, 2015). Furthermore, the villagers also 

face the problem of collecting data from industrial sites. In Dinbang, for example, 

villagers are not legally entitled to enter the factory or to demand full records of a 

factory’s emissions (Lora-Wainwright et al, 2012). 

Identifying which pollutants lead to cancer, and the factories from which they 

are emitted in regions where there are multiple polluters, is yet another challenge 

for villagers. Huai River is an extreme example where there are tens of thousands 

of factories along the river basin freely dumping both treated and un-treated waste 

into the river (Economy, 2004). This makes it extremely difficult to identify specific 

cancer-causing agents in amongst the various disease-causing agents (Yang and 

Zhuang, 2014). Similarly, Wuli village in Zhejiang province, the centre of China’s 

textile industry, and Xinglong village in Luliang County, both suffer from waste 

dumping by more than one polluter (McKenzie, 2013). The challenge of proving the 

correlation between cancer and a particular pollutant is not only faced by villagers 

but also by scientists and professors. Song Weimin, a specialist in environmental 

health at Fudan University in Shanghai, has stated that as the list of physical, chem -

ical and biological factors continues to grow, the connection between cancer and 

pollutants has become, against all obvious logic, harder to prove (Horn, 2013). 

Secondly, victims do not always receive support from the local authorities, who 

play an important role in the success of villagers in claiming governmental recogni -

tion and compensation from polluters for their relocation. China has created over 

100 national environmental laws and regulations but enforcement is mostly left to 

local officials, who are faced with a potential conflict of interest due to corruption 

and the tax revenues that local authorities receive from polluters (Yang and Lennon, 

2010). Lora-Wainwright and Chen (2015), in their study of nine cancer village sites, 

concluded that the amount of government support to villagers’ campaigns varies 

between different levels of government. For other cases, village leaders can also 

prevent bottom-up regulation (Liu, 2010). 

In many cases, village leaders protect industries and prevent local protests due 

to the fear of losing tax revenue from polluting factories and in order to maintain 

order (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Liu, 2001). As mentioned above, factories 

have moved to poor rural areas and many of them have become the main source 

of revenue for local governments as well as providing employment for residents. 

Corruption has been reported by villagers. The village leader in Tazu initially organ -

ised a joint petition to the town government complaining about the pollution from 

Linchang, a state-own factory; but villagers subsequently claimed that he received 

gifts from the factory to stop pursuing the petition (Van Rooij et al, 2012). Sometimes, 

village officials are owners or managers of the polluting enterprises thus creating a 

conflict of interest (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015). At the township and county SEM 2015 

> 84
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> LINH NGUYEN
> CANCER VILLAGES IN CHINA

level, Lora-Wainwright and Chen (2015) claimed that there are mostly always nega -

tive responses to the villagers’ complaints at the initial stage. The most common 

outcome, as they pointed out, is the avoidance of responsibility and placement of 

pressure back on to local governments to maintain social stability and to deal with 

pollution. In the case of Qiugang, the village Party Secretary received an order to 

stop the villagers from reporting about pollution to Beijing and the protestors faced 

violent threats from factory owners and the local government (Yang and Lennon, 

2010). Villagers’ protests were blocked by the authorities and deemed a threat to the 

peace and stability of the community (Watts, 2010; Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015). 

Support of third parties such as the press, NGO and researchers is an impor -

tant force empowering cancer village victims to claim for compensation and reloca -

tion. Lora-Wainwright (2010) claimed that it is only when an intensive level of press 

coverage does threaten the status quo of a region and potentially damages its attrac -

tiveness to investors and tourists, that pressure and funding exerted from a higher 

level enable and require the township and counties to take action, such as in the 

case of Shangba and Huangmengying. There are an increasing number of reports on 

cancer villages in well-known Chinese media, which are mostly State-controlled, as 

well as in the international media, especially in the first half of 2013 after the official 

citing of cancer villages in the Ministry of Environment’s document (Liu, 2010; Lora-

Wainwright and Chen, 2015). NGOs, such as Greenpreace, also support villagers both 

indirectly, by running campaigns or raising awareness, and directly, by supporting 

data collection and defence in court. The recent victory of Qingpuling villagers in a 

legal battle against a local waste processing plant was achieved after 5 years thanks 

to continuous support from a volunteer environmental lawyer from the Center for 

Legal Assistant to Pollution Victims (Philips 2014). In the case of Qiugang, villagers 

received support and advice from Green Anhui, an NGO founded in 2003 by 17 

students, to bypass the barriers and threats of polluters as well as local government 

and to push for the relocation of toxic plants. Cancer villages have also received 

attention from Chinese and foreign researchers, which helped to greatly improve the 

standard of research concerning the phenomenon and to bring cancer village issues 

into formal discussions. Researchers such as Lora-Wainwright, Ajiang Chen and Lee 

Liu spent years in the field to follow up different cases, collect data and bring a better 

understanding of cancer villages to light (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 2015; Liu, 2010). 

However, such successful cases are few and far between as local governments largely 

prevent the involvement of third parties. Mostly all media, researchers and NGOs 

reporting on cancer villages talk about the obstruction from local governments 

with regard to approaching villagers and collecting data (e.g. Yang and Lennon, 2010; 

Brown, 2012). Local media was barred from reporting an accident by order of the 

local government (Van Rooij et al, 2012; Economy, 2004). It is especially difficult for 

foreign organisations or individuals to carry out research in highly sensitive cancer 

villages, and this has generated significant controversies (Lora-Wainwright and Chen, 

2015; McBeath et al, 2014). Not only outsiders but also activists from the villages have 

been closely monitored by the State’s and factories’ security officers to prevent them 

from reporting to the central government or providing information to third parties. 

In Qiugang, villagers were not allowed to send their complaints to Beijing and a 

protester was violently threatened (Yang and Lennon, 2010). Famous activists such as 

Wei Dongying or Hou Daishan have been threatened and prevented from interacting 

with outsiders (Wolf, 2014; Sant, 2013). 

In cases where villagers won lawsuits against polluters, the difficulties in proving 

the correlation between cancer and pollutant made villagers limit their redress to 

only economic damages, putting aside health damages (Liu, 2011, Lora-Wainwright et 

al, 2012). This resulted in a very low level of compensation, which does not provide 

them with the sufficient financial capacity to move. In the case of Qingpuling village, 

for example, the successful legal proceedings against a toxic plant only led to the SEM 2015 

> 85

payment of 6 million yuan ($976,626) by the factory shared among 600 villagers - a 

mere 6,000 yuan per person - and no concrete link has been established between 

the villagers’ illnesses and the pollution (Phillips, 2014; Li, 2014). In Zhumuzu village, 

the requirement for relocation of villagers after 10 years was met with a payment of 

200,000 yuan from the government to each family (Global Times, 2015). However, 

this amount is far from enough for villagers to purchase an apartment elsewhere 

(ibid.). Furthermore, while such successful legal proceedings may lead to relocations 

or the closing-down of polluting enterprises, they do not necessarily require such 

enterprises to clean up the effects of pollution. The documentary on the situation 

in Quigang village is a case in point; after years struggling with the population and 

fighting against industries as well as their local government, Quigang villagers were 

finally successful in having polluting factories move out of their area but then faced 

the new challenge of resolving the problem of chemical residues, which may require 

a new court case (Yang and Lennon, 2010). Similarly, villagers in Heshan are still 

suffering from cancer and agricultural damages caused by the poisoning of water 

and soil by arsenic left behind by mines and chemical plants that had been operating 

in the area since the 1950s and which closed down in 2011 due to their pollution levels 

(Lee, 2014). In such cases, villagers may end up becoming increasingly dependent on 

the compensation provided by polluting companies as their source of income, which 

dampens their courage to fight to put a stop to pollution, trapping them in a spiral of 

health problems and economic poverty that increasingly undermines their ability to 

move (Van Rooij et al., 2012). 

CONCLUSION 

Due to the degradation of the living environment and to the lack of power to speak 

out, the strategies of populations in cancer villagers are not a simple matter of 

whether to move or to stay, also including the murky issue of whether or not to 

continue fighting for a clean environment. Their aspiration and ability to migrate 

are largely formed by their expected outcomes from protest, which is influenced 

by the support of internal parties, such as village leaders or educated villagers, or 

external parties, such as the media and NGOs. Among migration groups, the respec -

tive economic and environment-related aspirations to relocate are difficult to 

untangle. Moreover, many environmental refugees from cancer villages are farmers 

whose education and skills are too limited to earn a stable living in their new desti -

nations. The most vulnerable group is the population left behind, forced to bear 

the health damage and heightened poverty due to its inability either to move or to 

obtain alternative resources, which in turn worsens the situation of such villagers. 

Both cases are undesirable due to the potential to increase inequality as well as to 

create social strain and instability. To address this issue, integration between envi -

ronmental and migration policy is critical. This means that, besides the ongoing 

improvement of environmental policy and its enforcement, more attention should 

be paid to protecting the basic needs of immobile populations in cancer villages and 

also to enable relocation for the most vulnerable cases while the pollution problem is 

being addressed. Facilitating the participation of civil society and enabling the collec -

tion, publication and dissemination of information will moreover strengthen the 

victims’ power to speak out. SEM 2015 

86 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

LINH NGUYEN 

CANCER VILLAGES IN CHINA 

# REFERENCES 

Books: 

– Lester R. Brown, 2011, Chapter 6. 

Environmental Refugees: The Rising 

Tide. World on the Edge: How to 

Prevent Environmental and Economic 

Collapse. US: W.W. Norton & Company 

– Economy E.C., 2004,  The River Runs 

Black . USA: Cornell U. Press 2004. 

– J.R.Contreras, 2008,  Cancer Clusters: 

Challenges in Rural Areas. The 

Effectiveness of Current Policies, Methods, 

Resources, and Impact on Small Area 

Analysis . USA: U. of Utah. 

– Liu L., 2013,  Environmental policy is Social 

Policy – Social Policy is Environmental 

Policy.  USA: Wallimann, Isidor ed: 2013. 

Ch.9.  Chinese Model Cities and Cancer 

Villages: Where Environmental Policy Is 

Social Policy. 

– Yang & Dafang Zhuang, 2014,  Atlas of 

the Huai River Basin Water Environment 

: Digestive Cancer Mortality.  PRC: Yang, 

Gonghuan, Zhuang, Dafang. 

– Articles: 

– Admin et al., 2010, Epidemiologic 

Mapping of Florida Childhood Cancer 

Clusters. [online] Available at:  http:// 

uwf.edu/ramin/pediatric%20blood%20 

and%20cancer%20article.pdf  (viewed 

April, 2015) 

– Bates D.C., 2002, Environmental 

refugees? Classifying Human 

Migrations Caused by Environmental 

Change,  Population and Environment, 

23(5), p. 465-477 

– Black and Collyer, 2014, Populations 

‘trapped’ at times of crisis,  Forced 

Migration Review , 45 

– Carr E.R., 2004, Placing the 

environment in migration: 

environment, economy, and power in 

Ghana’s Central Region,  Environment 

and Planning , 37(5), p. 925-946 

– Chen J., 2007, Rapid Urbanization 

in China: A Real Challenge to Soil 

Protection and Food Security, CATENA, 

69(1), p. 1-15. 

– Chuanmin Y. and Qianhua F., 2006, A 

Village of Death and Its Hopes for the 

Future,  China Rights Forum , 1, p. 25-29 

– Dasgupta S. et al, 2002, Confronting 

the Environmental Kuznets Curve,  The 

Journal of Economic Perspectives , 16 (1), 

p.147-168 

– El – Hinnawi, E., 1985, Environmental 

Refugees. Nairobi, Kenya: United 

Nations Environmental Programme 

– Gong P. et al, 2012, Urbanisation and 

Health in China,  The Lancet , 379 (9818), 

pp. 843-852 

– Grossman and Krueger, 1995, 

Economic Growth and the 

Environment,  The Quarterly Journal of 

Economics,  110(2), p. 353-377 

– Jonsson G., 2011, Non-migrant, 

sedentary, immobile, or ‘left behind’? 

Reflections on the absence of 

migratioin.  International Migration 

Institute , 39 

– Kuznets, S., 1955, Economic growth 

and income inequality . American 

Economic Review , 49, p. 1-28 

– Liu L., 2010, Made in China: Cancer 

Villages.  Environment Science and 

Policy for Sustainable Development. 

[online] Available at: < http://www. 

environmentmagazine.org/Archives/ 

Back%20Issues/March-April%202010/ 

made-in-china-full.html > (viewed 

April, 2015) 

– Liu L., 2013, Geographic approaches 

to resolving environmental problems 

in search of the path to sustainability: 

The case of polluting plant relocation 

in China.  Applied Geography  45, p. 

138-146 

– Lora-Wainwright A., 2010, An 

Anthropology of ‘Cancer Villages’: 

villagers’ perspectives and the politics 

of responsibility,  Contemporary China ,

19(63), p. 79-99 

– Lora-Wainwright A., 2015, Health, 

illness and welfare in rural China, 

School of Interdisciplinary Area 

Studies, Social Sciences Division, 

[online] Available at: < http://www. 

area-studies.ox.ac.uk/health-illness-

and-welfare-rural-china-anna-lora-

wainwright > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Lora-Wainwright A. and Chen, 2015, 

China’s cancer villages: contested 

evidence and the politics of pollution 

(unpublished manuscript) (on file 

with author) 

– Lora-Wainwright A., Zhang Y., Wu Y. 

and Van Rooij B. (2012),  Learning to 

live with pollution: the making of 

environmental subjects in a Chinese 

industrialized village . The China 

Journal , 68(July 2012), p. 106-124 

– McBeath J.H. et al, 2014, 

Environmental Pollution, Cancer 

Villages and the State’s Response. 

American Association for Chinese 

Studies,  [online] Available at: < http:// 

aacs.ccny.cuny.edu/2014conference/ 

Papers/Jenifer%20McBeath.pdf >

(viewed April, 2015) 

– MEP, 2011, The 12th Five-Year Plan for 

the Environmental Health Work of 

National Environmental Protection. 

Ministry of Environmental Protection of 

the People’s Republic of China . [online] 

Available at: <http://english.mep. 

gov.cn/Plans_Reports/12plan/201201/ 

P020120110355818985016.pdf> (viewed 

April, 2015) 

– Panayotou T., 1997, Demystifying 

the Environmental Kuznets Curve 

: Turning a Black Box into a Policy 

Tool,  Environment and Devvelopment 

Economics,  2 (4) 

– Perout A., 1995, Environmental 

Refugees: Defining Environmental 

Migrants and Long-Term solution to 

Deal with Environmental Migration. 

Concordia University. [online] 

Availble at:  http://spectrum.library. 

concordia.ca/114/1/MM05105.pdf 

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Quan Z. X., 1991, Urbanisation in 

China,  Urban Studies , 28 (1), p. 41-51 

– Tilt B., 2013, Industrial Pollution 

and Environmental Health in 

Rural China: Risk, Uncertainty 

and Individualization,  The China 

Quarterly , 214, p.283-301 

– Van Rooij B. et al, 2012, The 

compensation trap – The 

limits of Community Based 

Pollution Regulation in China, 

Pace Environmental Law Review ,

31(3). [online] Available at: 

< http://digitalcommons. 

pace.edu/cgi/viewcontent. 

cgi?article=1703&context=pelr > 

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Watts J., 2008, China’s Environmental 

Health Challenges,  The Lancet ,

372(9648), p. 1451-1452 

– Yu J., Zhang S., 2009, The Chinese 

Cancer Village Phenomenon and SEM 2015 

87 

Its Reflection of Health-Related 

Environmental Pollution Problems. 

Proceedings of China Environmental 

Science Society Annual Conference  3: 

880–889. [online] Available at:  http:// 

www.kadinst.hku.hk/sdconf10/ 

Papers_PDF/p166.pdf  (viewed April, 

2015) 

Newspaper articles: 

– BBC, 2009, “China to move 15,000 

from smelter”. In  BBC . London UK 

[online] Available at: <  http://news. 

bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/8313711.stm 

> (viewed April, 2015) 

– BBC, 2013, “China acknowledges 

‘cancer villages’”. In  BBC . China 

[online] Available at: <  http:// 

www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-

china-21545868  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Bloomberg News, 2014, “China 

takes on pollution with biggest 

changes in 25 years”. In  Bloomberg 

News . [online] Available at: <  http:// 

www.bloomberg.com/news/ 

articles/2014-04-24/china-enacts-

biggest-pollution-curbs-in-25-years  >

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Christie-Miller A., 2013, “Turkey: 

End in Sight for “Cancer Village”. 

In  eurasianet.org.  Turkey [online] 

Available at: <  http://www.eurasianet. 

org/node/66982  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Horn, 2013, “Recovery is slow in 

rural China’s ‘cancer villages’”. 

In  McClatchyDC.  Washigton DC 

[online] Available at: < http://www. 

mcclatchydc.com/2013/08/19/199714/ 

recovery-is-slow-in-rural-chinas. 

html > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Jingyang L., 2013, “Study confirms 

cancer village fears in east China”. In 

chinadialogue.  China [online] Available 

at: <  https://www.chinadialogue.net/ 

blog/6551-Study-confirms-cancer-

village-fears-in-east-China/en  >

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Kaiman J., 2013, “Inside China’s 

“cancer villages””. In  The Guardian. 

Yanglingang [online] Available at: 

<http://www.theguardian.com/ 

world/2013/jun/04/china-villages-

cancer-deaths  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Kaiman J., 2014, “China strengthens 

environmental laws”. In  The 

Guardian.  Beijing [online] Available 

at: <  http://www.theguardian.com/ 

environment/2014/apr/25/china-

strengthens-environmental-laws-

polluting-factories  > (viewed April, 

2015) 

– Lee J., 2014, “Arsenic pollution sows 

despair in Chinese cancer village”. In 

Reuters  [online] Available at: <  http:// 

in.reuters.com/article/2014/06/23/ 

uk-china-environment-health-

idINKBN0EY16S20140623  > (viewed 

April, 2015) 

– McKenzie D., 2013, “In China, ‘cancer 

villages’ a reality of life”. In  CNN. 

[online] Available at: <  http://edition. 

cnn.com/2013/05/28/world/asia/ 

china-cancer-villages-mckenzie/  >

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Philips, 2015, “Inside China’s 

toxic Village of Windows”. In  The 

Telegraph , UK [online] Available at: < 

http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/ 

worldnews/asia/china/11416830/ 

Inside-Chinas-toxic-Village-of-

Widows.html  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Phillips T., 2014, “Chinese ‘cancer 

village’ scores rare victory over 

polluters”. In  The Telegraph  [online] 

Available at: < http://www.telegraph. 

co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/ 

china/11061201/Chinese-cancer-

village-scores-rare-victory-over-

polluters.html > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Qian L., 2014, “Villagers unhappy 

with toxic plant compensation”. In 

ShanghaiDaily.com  [online] Available 

at: < http://www.shanghaidaily.com/ 

national/Villagers-unhappy-with-

toxic-plant-compensation/shdaily. 

shtml > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Qian, 2014, “Villagers unhappy 

with toxic plant compensation”. 

In  ShanghaiDaily.com  Shanghai 

[online] Available at:<  http:// 

www.shanghaidaily.com/national/ 

Villagers-unhappy-with-toxic-plant-

compensation/shdaily.shtml  >

(viewed April, 2015) 

– Sant S.V., 2013, “Wei Dongying, the 

‘Erin Brockovich’ of China, says 

in spite of gov’t vow to address 

pollution, her ‘cancer village’ is still a 

killer”. In  CBS News  [online] Available 

at: <  http://www.cbsnews.com/news/ 

wei-dongying-the-erin-brockovich-

of-china-says-in-spite-of-govt-vow-to-

address-pollution-her-cancer-village-

is-still-a-killer/  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Souvid Datta, 2015, “Photographs of 

China’s ‘Cancer Villages’”. In  Vice 

[online] Available at: <  http://www. 

vice.com/read/photographs-of-

chinas-cancer-villages  > (viewed April, 

2015) 

– Watt J., 2010, “China’s ‘cancer 

villages’ reveal dark side of economic 

boom”. In  TheGuardian . Xinglong 

[online] Available at: <  http://www. 

theguardian.com/environment/2010/ 

jun/07/china-cancer-villages-

industrial-pollution  > (viewed April, 

2015) 

– Watts, 2010, “China’s ‘cancer villages’ 

reveal dark side of economic 

boom”. In  TheGuardian . Xinglong 

[online] Available at: <  http://www. 

theguardian.com/environment/2010/ 

jun/07/china-cancer-villages-

industrial-pollution  > (viewed April, 

2015) 

– Yingying Z., 2011, “The shadow 

over rural China”. In  chinadialogue 

[online] Available at: <  https://www. 

chinadialogue.net/article/4098-The-

shadow-over-rural-China  > (viewed 

April, 2015) 

Videos: 

– Brown A., 2012, In  SBS One  [online] 

Available at: <  http://www.sbs.com. 

au/news/dateline/story/chinas-

cancer-villages  > (viewed April, 2015) 

– Wolf E., 2014, In  DW  [online] Available 

at: <  http://www.dw.de/chinas-

cancer-river/av-17371227  > (viewed 

April, 2015) 

– Yang R. and Lennon T., 2010, [online] 

Available at: <  https://www.youtube. 

com/watch?v=NeYGHpyJKK4&list 

=PL87D6049346C9C735&index=1  >

(viewed April, 2015) 

Interview: 

– 1. Lican, 2015, Discussion by email. SEM 2015 

89 

## SHUYU JIANG 

# Displacement and 

# Resettlement Following the 

# Ludian Earthquake in China 

# While the memory of the Wenchuan earthquake is vivid in 

Chinese people’s memory, on 3 August 2014, a 6.5-magni -

tude earthquake devastated Ludian County in Yunnan 

Province in southwest China. According to the central 

government’s calculation (Government of the PRC, 

November 2014), 617 people were reported dead, 112 

missing and 318,000 people were displaced. The earth -

quake was the largest natural disaster in China in 2014 

and caused economic losses amounting to US$6 billion (ESCAP, 2014). 

This paper concentrates on displacement after the Ludian earthquake and the 

relevant solutions to it. The first part provides the background information as to 

why this area is vulnerable to natural disasters. The second reviews the impacts of 

the earthquake and how rescue and temporary migration were subsequently imple -

mented. After analysing the short-term action, the third part focuses on long-term 

resettlement and rehabilitation in order to explore feasible solutions to different 

flows of migrants in the longer term. 

The paper notably establishes connections between environmental and 

economic factors before and after the migration process. On the one hand, an exten -

sive thriving economy would exacerbate environmental risks, thus inducing more 

natural disasters and migration problems. On the other hand, given existing prob -

lems, environmental migration could represent a proactive solution for this under -

developed area to obviate the vicious circle regarding its development and accelerate 

economic growth. 

1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 

1.1. Country Profile – China 

As shown in Figure 1, China is prone to droughts, floods, cyclones, earthquakes and 

various other types of natural disasters. Droughts are the most influential natural 

disaster and almost 100 million people are under threat from it. Next come cyclones, 

which mainly affect coastal areas, and then earthquakes and floods, which also 

touch about 10 million people. More seriously, rapid economic development and an 

expanding population bring about more environmental problems. All these factors 

aggravate the frequency of natural disasters and the subsequent difficulties regarding 

resettlement. It is estimated that “since 2008, China has experienced three disasters 

in which more than 3 million people were displaced, five disasters that 1 to 3 million 

people were displaced” (Lavell & Ginnetti, 2014). SEM 2015 

> 90
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> SHUYU JIANG
> DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN
> EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA

Even though earthquakes threaten fewer people than droughts or cyclones, their 

impact should not be underestimated. China is vulnerable to earthquakes because it 

is located in both the circum-Pacific seismic belt and the Alpine-Himalayan orogenic 

belt. The deformation between the Pacific plate, the Indian plate and the Philip -

pine plate jointly influence China’s tectonic features. The complexity of its tectonic 

makeup therefore results in the significant density, high frequency and wide range 

of earthquakes in China: “In all the continental areas around the world, about 1/4 

to 1/3 big earthquakes took place in China in the 20th century” (China Earthquake 

Administration, 2013). 

A further observation regarding the regions which are frequently affected by 

earthquake (Figure 2) displays another difficulty in risk reduction. Besides the area 

around Beijing and Bohai Sea in north China, people in the middle and western 

part of Mainland China are more exposed to earthquakes. Meanwhile, the social 

and economic development of this area lags behind that of the costal area, hence 

funding and resources for risk reduction in the area are limited. This also adds to 

the difficulty in resettlement and rehabilitation after hazards and potentially hinders 

further development of these areas. 

1.2. Ludian County as a vulnerable area 

Like many other areas in western China, this area is prone to natural disasters as a 

result of its natural conditions, as well as the absence of a sustainable and concrete 

development plan. 

First of all, Ludian County suffers from harsh natural conditions. Located in a 

fault zone, the area is frequently affected by earthquakes. “Since 1900, there have 

been 15 earthquakes with a magnitude higher than level 6 in this area” (Government 

Figure 1.  Absolute population 

exposure to hazards: China (Lavell & 

Ginnetti, 2014) 

Figure 2.  Population exposed to earthquakes in China (Lavell & 

Ginnetti, 2014) 

> source: UNEP/GRID-Geneva PREVIEW SEM 2015
> 91

of the PRC, November 2014), The geological configuration is complex in this moun -

tainous area with precipitous slopes, deep canyons and fragmented stratum. More -

over, its changeable climate results in many natural disasters. In dry seasons, people 

must rely on cisterns for their daily provision of water. Yet it so happened that the 

earthquake occurred during the rainy season in the basin of the Jinsha River so there 

is a high possibility of a series of secondary disasters in the wake of the earthquake. 

It has allegedly been reported that compared with the earthquake itself, more people 

died as a result of landslide, rocks, as well as flows of debris. 

Moreover, the unfavourable natural conditions impede economic development 

in this area. Yet, tough as the conditions are, agricultural productivity is low in this 

county. Regarding industrial development, the inauspicious natural conditions 

pose a threat to development, which requires strategic planning to minimise envi -

ronmental impacts. However, in reality, overpopulation and overexploitation have 

contributed to serious soil-erosion, which has worsened environment problems. 

Firstly, an important source of economic revenues is the quarrying industry, and 

while this industry expands without sound regulation, it will inevitably have negative 

consequences for the environment. Secondly, the population density is 277 people 

per square kilometre (Ludan County Government, 2014) , which is twice the average 

density in Yunnan Province. As the population has already exceeded the ecological 

carrying capacity, management alone cannot solve all environmental problems. 

This area suffers from poverty. In the city of Zhaotong, “Within 11 districts and 

counties in this city, 10 are recognised as extremely poor based on national stand -

ards” (Bai Wenxue, 2014). In Longtoushan Town, which is the settlement most seri -

ously effected by the disaster, “there are 51214 people, of which 6910 people are under 

poverty, 2650 people are under extreme poverty, 4360 are with low incomes” (Ludan 

County Government, 2014). The city cannot thus be expected to solve all of its devel -

opment problems itself, as in a state of poverty, expenditure on more resilient infra -

structure and other risk reduction measure is limited. For instance, most houses here 

are made from wood or adobe, which cannot resist strong earthquakes. 

Consequently, impoverished areas are more exposed to disasters and disasters 

exacerbate poverty. The economic development of Ludian County thus falls into a 

vicious circle: the underdeveloped economic and environmental conditions hamper 

development so that accessible water power and mineral resources are particularly 

important for economic growth, yet the reliance on these recourses potentially 

destroys the environment. 

1.3 Absence of pre-existing disaster reduction measures 

A UN ESCAP disaster review warned of the potential danger of “slow-onset disasters”, 

which are “less visible, as they are spread over time with multi-sectoral impacts” (UN 

ESCAP 2014). Such disasters constitute a major problem in this area, where stony 

desertification is gradually undermining livelihoods and threatening the safety of the 

population. The problem is accentuated by the lack of risk reduction measures on 

the one hand, and by the impracticability of conventional measures (such as consoli -

dating houses or improving living conditions) on the other hand; migration could 

thus be a more realistic option. 

Figure 3 indicates two major problems in this affected area. Firstly, there is little 

coverage of forest to alleviate the negative consequence caused by overexploitation, 

and secondly, the absence of roads, railroads and other basic infrastructure would 

hinder any attempted rescue following the occurrence of a natural disaster. 

Certain funding has been devoted to both environmental management and migra -

tion. Ludian county launched a comprehensive management scheme concerning 

stony desertification from 2008 to 2013, “277.96 square kilometers of karst areas have 

been managed, which accounts for 34.5% of the total area”(Junyi Chen, 2013). As 

the project is particularly costly and time-consuming, progress has been relatively SEM 2015 

> 92
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> SHUYU JIANG
> DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN
> EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA

slow. Moreover, in 2012 in Ludian County, 60 households migrated to other places 

as a result of the fragile ecological environment and poverty and 1.5 million Yuan 

has been devoted to this project (Yanquan, 2013). By way of comparison, in Qiaojia 

County in Zhaotong, 600 people benefited from this policy and 10 million Yuan was 

allocated in the same year (Yanquan, 2013). 

At the provincial level, in 2014 the Yunnan government started to rebuild houses 

in rural areas and began resettlement. However a mere 24.14% of programmes have 

been started and only 13.79% of them have been finished in Ludian County (Junli 

Zeng, Yongqin Yang, 2015). Consequently, poor disaster mitigation and the reluctance 

of environment migrants represent other underlying causes of the large casualties 

and economic losses provoked by the earthquake. 

2. RESCUE AND EVACUATION AFTER THE EARTHQUAKE 

2.1 Impacts of the earthquake 

The intensity of the earthquake was high (Figure 5), reaching level IX 1 in intensity at 

its epicentre in Ludian County. Qiaojia County and Huize County were also seriously 

affected, and the earthquake also had an impact on Guizhou and Sichuan Provinces, 

and, reportedly “in 10350 square kilometers of areas, the intensity exceeded level 

VI” (People’s Daily, August 2014). According to the data updated on the 4 th  August by 

the International Federation of the Red Cross (Figure 4), the earthquake has already 

resulted in 398 deaths, with a great deal of destruction, most of which was in Ludian 

County. 

Figure 4.  Death toll after the earthquake                  

> Prefecture country/District Death Missing Injured
> Zhaotong Ludian 319 0
> Qiaojia 55 0
> Zhaoyang 10
> Qujin Huize 122 3
> Total 398 31,801
> Source: IFRC, August 2014

As discussed above, the fragile ecological environment in the affected area also 

contributed to many secondary disasters. A barrier lake was formed when the river 

was blocked by huge landslides caused by the earthquake, and the rising water level 

submerged the village in that area, which would have greatly endangered the lives 

of the 800 inhabitants had they not been evacuated beforehand (Earthquake Report, 

August 2014). 

Besides huge casualties, another feature of the earthquake was the tremendous 

damage to infrastructure: large amounts of basic infrastructure were destroyed, 

sealing off the affected area. Up to the 20 th  of August 16,158 machines and 8,951 

personnel were involved in restoring transportation links, water supply, and elec -

tricity and telecommunications (Yan Wang, August, 2015).  

> 1. In China, the intensity of an earthquake is measured from level 1 (weakest) to 12 (strongest). Signs of de -
> struction of buildings occur when the level is higher than 6 (Author ’s note).

SEM 2015 

93 

On the 4 th  August, the first dispatch of resources was sent to victims. However, 

floods, aftershocks and many other secondary disasters further debilitated the state 

of the already fragile infrastructure. Many repaired roads were damaged afresh, thus 

preventing other rescue forces and resources from entering the disaster area. Some 

resources were transported through aerial delivery by helicopters, and others were 

delivered by the army. 

2.2 Organisation of the rescue process after the Ludian earthquake 

At the central level, the Chinese government has established an overarching legal 

framework and coordinated work at different levels regarding the disaster response 

system: the “Law of the People’s Republic of China on Protecting Against and Miti -

gating Earthquake Disasters” was passed in 1997. It covers monitoring, protection 

against potential hazards, as well as emergencies and reconstruction after an earth -

quake. In 2012, the Chinese government enacted the “National Earthquake Emergency 

Response Plan”, which is composed of a hierarchical system, from level I(highest) to 

IV (lowest). The level can be upgraded to a higher level if an earthquake strikes a 

border area, an area inhabited by ethnic minorities and other particular areas. 

Figure 6.  Response levels of the National Earthquake Emergency Response Plan       

> Level Standards Major Participants
> (From central to local level)
> IDeath toll (including missing) > 300;
> Directeconomic loss > 1% of the total
> GDP in the affected area last years;
> Magnitude > 7.0 (or >6.0 in densely
> populatedareas )
> State Council (Guidingrescue and coordinating
> assistancenationally) Commanding Headquarter
> in response to disasters in the rovidencial level
> (Leading emergent response in the affected area)
> II Death tool (including missing) 50-300;
> Magnitude 6.0-7.0 (or 5.0-6.0 in densely
> populated areas
> State Council (When necessary); Providencial
> cammandig headquarter in responce to disasters
> III Death toll (including missing) 10-50;
> Magnitude 5.0-6.0 (or 4.0-5.0 in densely
> populated)
> Municipal commanding Headquarter in responce
> to disasters with the support from the providencial
> level
> IV Death toll (including missing) < 10;
> Magnitude 4.0-5.0
> County commanding headquarter in response to
> disasters with the support from the providencial
> and municipal level
> Source: Author ’s summary based on the National Earthquake Emergency Response Plan

This kind of top-down approach is widely adopted in risk reduction and regarding 

emergencies, and the case of the Ludian earthquake was no exception. Each level 

provides for a a division of tasks and typically every bureau has a corresponding 

office at the local level. After the Ludian earthquake, a level I emergency response 

was launched. The China Earthquake Administration organised a team composed of 

six working groups: disaster monitoring and forecast; investigation and inspection of 

disasters; media coverage; comprehensive management; scientific support and logis -

tical support (Shifang He et al, 2014). In addition, as stipulated in the law, “the Chinese 

People’s Liberation Army, the Chinese People’s Armed Police Forces and the People’s 

Militia shall carry out the tasks of protecting against and mitigating earthquake disas -

ters” (Government of the PRC, 1998). As such, rescue teams were deployed to the area 

immediately after the earthquake — “One minute after the disasters, 115 soldiers in 

the emergency rescue team have been deployed to the area and 5 hours after the 

earthquake, the first rescue resources have arrived” (Junli Zeng, Yongqin Yang, 2015). 

In addition to the central government working group, the earthquake administration SEM 2015 

94 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

SHUYU JIANG 

DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN 

EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA 

Figure 5.  Impacts of the earthquake 

> Source: Government of the PRC, November 2014 SEM 2015
> 95

in Yunnan Province also dispatched a 30-member working team to the county to 

assist with and implement orders from the central government (IFRC, August 2014). 

While the various levels of government institutions have played a leading role 

in the rescue process, the role of non-governmental actors should not be neglected. 

Due to the deployment of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, many social workers arrived 

in the disaster areas and assisted the rescue effort. They mainly interacted with those 

people who were displaced, particularly assisting victims who lost relatives. Their 

contribution compensated for the absence of basic community services and organi -

sation after the evacuation. 

To improve the organisation of the relief effort, the “National Earthquake Emer -

gency Response Plan” also includes social mobilisation as an effective approach after 

an earthquake. It requires the local headquarters to identify specific organisations 

and personnel to regulate the voluntary work, and to publish information about the 

needs of the disaster area to ensure the safety and efficient organisation of all volun -

teers. This combination of government resolution backed up by participative social 

organisation has become an emerging trend in China and the discussion below will 

further elaborate on this phenomenon. 

2.3 Emergent resettlement 

Temporary resettlement is mainly organised in two ways: collective resettlement 

and voluntary migration. According to Article 35 of the “Law of the People’s Republic 

of China on Protecting Against and Mitigating Earthquake Disasters”, concerning 

post-earthquake relief and reconstruction, the Ministry of Civil Affairs is primarily 

in charge of the arrangement and resettlement of victims, including the establish -

ment of temporary shelters, the provision of daily necessities, and so on. Consid -

ering the difficulty of resettling such a huge population, victims are also encouraged 

to voluntarily move to other places and live with their relatives. Up to the 15 th  August, 

342 collective resettlement shelters had been established, about 126,600 people had 

been resettled collectively and 113,100 people had been resettled separately (Bureau of 

Civil Affairs in Yunnan Province, August 2014). 

2.3.1. Temporary settlement in centrally located camps 

In the temporary camps, there are centralised provisions of food, water and other 

daily necessities. People living in temporary camps receive benefits for daily life— 

“every citizen could obtain 25 Yuan every day during an emergency resettlement 

period of 10 days. Then in the interim period of three months, everyone could obtain 

15 Yuan per day” (Bureau of Civil Affairs in Yunnan Province, August 2014). 

Several departments are jointly in charge of the well being of victims. When 

selecting the locations for resettlement, the Ministry of Land and Resources under -

took a scientific examination and evaluation to rule out geological threats. In these 

shelters, local centres for disease control conducted disinfection and supervised 

epidemic diseases. As for basic social services, medical centres, epidemic prevention 

centres, fire-fighting points and public security regulations were established to mini -

mise risks within a clustered population. 

2.3.2. Self-organised resettlement 

Alternatively, a large number of victims chose to seek assistances from their rela -

tives and migrated to other areas by themselves. Like most underdeveloped areas in 

China, many young people in Ludian County have already left their hometown to 

become migrant workers in cities. In 2010, the whole county had exported 114, 300 

migrant workers (Hongxin Nian, 2014). Elderly people and children thus comprised 

the majority of the population in the county. After the earthquake, they had the 

option to move with young workers to cities. A major problem of this type of reset -

tlement lies in the Hukou System in China: in China, everyone is officially registered SEM 2015 

> 96
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> SHUYU JIANG
> DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN
> EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA

in one place and the social well-being is associated with the location of the Hukou. 

As Hukou in cities are difficult to acquire, the subsequent problem is the issue of how 

these victims can gain access to social welfare if they move. 

2.3.3. Involvement of civil society 

Notably, the aftermath of the earthquake was the first time that the Chinese Ministry 

of Civil Affairs devised a social work service assistance plan. Five social service 

teams were deployed to the collective resettlement tents and schools from Beijing, 

Shanghai, Guangdong, Sichuan and other Provinces at the end of August. Under the 

coordination of the social service centre for the Ludian Earthquake, these social 

service teams directly assisted corresponding social service centres and focused on 

establishing local social organisation in the resettlement area. 

Once the social service team had concluded their mission after three months, a 

considerable proportion of the volunteers continued to participate in the resettle -

ment process. In one of the resettlement spots, “Huijiezi”, volunteers were expected 

to live with migrants for one year. Their daily job mainly included providing resources 

and offering psychological counselling after the crisis. Compared with disaster 

rescue in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, this long-term voluntary work 

is more targeted at the needs of the local society and improving the efficiency of the 

whole migration process. 

A wider range of civil society engagement facilitated the resettlement process. 

Firstly, many services had not been fully rehabilitated in the face of increasing 

demand for them after the disaster. Secondly, it improved the efficiency of assistance 

from other provinces because participation at the grassroots level can better target 

the needs of displaced people. For instance, volunteers organised recreational activi -

ties to accelerate the rehabilitation and integration of local communities. Lastly, they 

shared experiences and best practices about social services and voluntary participa -

tion, which have not previously been popularised in this underdeveloped area. Such 

activity further cultivates local voluntary organisations and volunteers, which could 

constitute the backbone of the future development of local civil society. 

3. FROM TEMPORARY EVACUATION TO STABLE RESETTLEMENT 

Given that more than 300,000 people were displaced after the earthquake, a serious 

question was posed regarding how these migrants would resettle in the longer term. 

An overarching objective was established on the national level: within three years, 

basic living conditions and social-economic development should have returned to or 

exceeded levels in the region prior to the earthquake. 

Compared with post-disaster temporary migration, long-term rehabilitation not 

only involves resettlement of victims, but also their integration into new communi -

ties and the cultivation of their self-sufficiency. 

3.1. National planning and policies on rehabilitation 

Three months after the earthquake, the State Council published an overall plan 

about the reconstruction an9d rehabilitation following the earthquake. It contains 

some similarities to the ongoing resettlement process. The plan also emphasised a 

combination of decentralised and centralised settlement, and mobilizes other viable 

social resources to ease the financial burden. 

Aside from the common feature of flexibility, it blueprinted a more specific reset -

tlement plan, summarising forms of resettlement into 3 categories: 

A.  Decentralised settlement: those residents who still have contracted land could 

voluntarily build their houses under the guidance of an overarching planning 

authority. Farmers who formerly lived in areas with high geological hazards SEM 2015 

> 97

should also be migrated to a safer area and resettled in a dispersive way; 

B.  Centralised settlement: designed for the farmers who lost their contracted 

land. In the event of sufficient, people would also be resettled in order to avoid 

geological hazards. 

C.  Monetary compensation: distributed to those farmers who have migrated to 

work in cities whose houses were damaged in the earthquake. Moreover, subsi -

dies were also offered to those who wished to buy houses in cities. 

The plan also introduces a new spatial arrangement for the resettlement, 

composed of three parts: 

A.  Restoration in original zones, mainly comprising the valley plain where the 

natural environment is secure and economic conditions are sound. This area 

has mainly attracted migration inflows from the severely affected areas; 

B.  Reconstruction near the original zones. This area has also been designed for 

inflows of migrants from the old town in Ludian County and the displacement 

caused by landsides and flooding; 

C.  Zones under comprehensive management. These places are in danger of 

destruction, mainly because of geological hazards. The process requires the 

improvement of ecological resilience so unlike the two previous categories, it is 

the major area in which migration outflows have occurred. 

3.2. Flows of migrants following the evacuation 

Combined with the above spatial arrangement and trends, major flows of 

displaced people can generally be divided into the following groups: A. returnees; B. 

migrants to nearby areas; C. potential environmental migrants to other areas. This 

paper will analyse these three types of migrants in turn to identify their current situ -

ation and the problems facing them. 

A.  Returnees:  Due to cultural and social reasons, most migrants are reluctant to 

move great distances to different parts of China, a fact that is magnified consid -

ering that many victims are elderly people. Traditional Chinese people value 

places where they have lived for generations, hence reconstruction of original 

sites is frequently the preferred option. After returning, these people usually 

resettle in a decentralised fashion. Although a considerable number of people 

decided to return, the chronic problems have not been solved. As mentioned 

above, this area is exposed to numerous natural hazards, and given the poor 

economic conditions, farmers are unable to rebuild houses in a manner which 

makes them resilient to natural disasters. Moreover, difficulties in the restora -

tion of basic infrastructure may hamper the restoration of economy. As a result, 

the whole restoration process is blighted by uncertainty and proved extremely 

costly. 

B.  Migrants to nearby areas:  Due to the severity of the earthquake, in the inhabit -

ants of the most severely affected areas cannot return. It is thus imperative that 

they migrate to another area. One frequently adopted option was to set up reset -

tlement points near to the original location. In order to ensure the efficient and 

scientific selection of a new site, this category of migrants have mainly reset -

tled in centralised settlements. One of the representative areas is Longtoushan 

Town, where the severity of the earthquake was most pronounced; almost the 

entire town was destroyed by the earthquake. On top of that, the population 

in the old town had already exceeded the ecological carrying capacity, meaning 

that rebuilding the original site was not a rational option. Consequently, a 

new settlement site was selected near the area called “Luoyingkou-yingpan” 

district. This settlement is a site of about 200 hectares (Government of the PRC, 

November 2014) to house migrants from the old town. 

C.  Potential environment migrants to other areas:  the national plan also identi -

fied zones under comprehensive management, where people exposed to high SEM 2015 

> 98
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> SHUYU JIANG
> DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN
> EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA

natural risks should migrate to other places. There had not been any concrete 

plan regarding this flow of migrants up until this point. Nonetheless, it marks 

a transition from passive disaster response to a more proactive means of 

addressing disaster mitigation and preventive efforts. 

4. THE EXISTING SITUATION AND DIFFICULTIES 

OF MIGRATION IN THE LONG TERM 

Unlike traditional migration, resettlement after disasters such as earthquakes 

involves more difficulties. 

Typically, in the categories of environmental migration for the purpose of project 

construction or ecological protection, ex-ante research of the feasibility is carried 

out, both a well-organised plan for the whole process and a socio-economic survey 

regarding the willingness of migrants are drawn up, and compensation is attributed 

to migrants before implementation. In contrast, disaster-induced migration requires 

an instant response as soon as possible. Meanwhile, with the losses of homes or even 

relatives, migrants have to endure huge psychological pressure. 

The difficulties and possible policy operations vary according to different target 

groups. The following section will examine the challenges faced by different flows of 

displaced people and how they attempt to recover from the effects of the earthquake. 

4.1. Willingness to move 

In the affected area previous migration has mainly been driven by economic factors. 

Young people move to cities in search of better job opportunities, with their family 

members (mainly children and elderly people) remaining in the county. Migrant 

workers save and send back much of their income to support their family in the 

counties. However, migrants driven by other factors, such as environmental migra -

tion, are less welcomed by the local people even though in many case the areas that 

the migrants left are no longer suitable for life. The previous section highlighted the 

cultural factors in this problem. In fact, even though there are currently no accurate 

official data regarding migrant flows, it can be deduced from media coverage and 

previous experience that most people returned to their area of origin or somewhere 

nearby. In 2015, the expected target was to establish 46 settlements, 139 educational 

programmes and 28 sanitation programmes (Houyou Cai and Xunshen, 2015). Among 

these settlements, more than half of the sites were in Ludian County: 24 in Ludian 

County, 10 in Qiaojia County and 12 in Zhaoyang District in Zhaotong (Bureau of 

Housing and Urban-Rural Development of the PRC). As shown in the Figure 5, all of 

these settlements are located near the earthquake’s epicentre. 

4.2. Restoration of the economy 

Given that willingness to move is limited, many residents relocate in or near to the 

original area. Recovery of the economy is a central element in the rehabilitation of 

these areas. In order to facilitate it, the first step that must be taken in affected areas 

is to recover agricultural production by supporting traditional agriculture in the area. 

For instance, cultivation of pepper is the major source of income for many farmers 

but many mature peppers could not be harvested in time after the earthquake. 

Additionally, 20,000 mu 2 of pepper land was destroyed , 160,000 mu was partially 

destroyed and 30,000 mu were slightly damaged (Ministry of Agriculture of the PRC, 

2014). The Ministry of Agriculture organised purchasers for the affected areas and  

> 2. Mu is the measurement in China. 1 mu is equal to 666.67 square meters. Author ’s explanation. SEM 2015
> 99

promoted direct marketing channels with local farmers. It also organised online sales 

so that companies in other provinces could purchase peppers. 

Nevertheless, rehabilitation near the original area may not be a sustainable solu -

tion. On the macro level, following the disaster, 322 geological hazard points were 

found, of which 139 are new (Yanling Liu, August 2014). This underlines the fact that 

previous environmental risks still exist. On the micro level, the income of most 

victims mainly comes from agriculture, thus people’s loss of land as a result of the 

earthquake raises the question of the adaptation to the economic structure in the 

places to which they have been relocated because of their lack of skills. 

4.3. Reconstruction of houses 

While the central government established a framework for resettlement after the 

earthquake, the local government dealt with the details and the implementation 

of the rehabilitation process. A central aspect of rehabilitation is fund raising for 

rebuilding houses in the new settlement site. According to the national plan, subsi -

dies were allocated for the reconstruction of houses by victims. The standard sum 

was 40,000 Yuan per household for reconstruction of a house with an additional 

10,000 Yuan for impoverished households (Yongfeng Zhao, 2014). Moreover, the local 

government designated a centralised management system, according to which resi -

dents’ houses were rebuilt communally with funding managed collectively. 

At the local level, a series of rules 3 were proclaimed. Firstly, residents had to 

submit an application to the neighbourhood committee (“Juweihui”, a self-govern -

ance entity in China based on people living in nearby areas). After approval by the 

leader of the committee, the neighbourhood committee must report the fact to the 

government of Ludian County and sign a contract with the resident. 

Secondly, funding is composed of two elements: A. A public payment: a special 

subsidy for rebuilding houses in the collective resettlement areas which is allo -

cated by the municipal authorities. The residents are required to submit a “power 

of attorney for the payment”. After examination of the submission, the money is 

directly paid for units of construction during each phase of the construction. B. 

Money contributed by residents: in the event that these special subsidies are not 

sufficient, residents are required to collect the remaining funding themselves and 

pay it to the county government. Both of these lines of funding are eventually allo -

cated to a special account by the office of finance in the county. To make the process 

more transparent, a supervision group, which includes residents, monitors the whole 

process of management, utilisation of funding, as well as the quality of the houses. 

This combination of public and self-raised money helps to significantly alleviate the 

burden of a county, which has to deal with extreme poverty. 

4.4. Selection of the new site 

While resettlement near the area of origin may not be a long-lasting solution, migration 

to other places may also prove difficult. First and foremost, Yunnan Province is home 

to a broad range of ethnic minorities, meaning that resettlement must take the habits 

of ethnic minorities into consideration. Fourteen different ethnic minorities live in 

Ludian County, the largest proportion of which are Hui (16.6%) (Ludian County Govern -

ment, 2014). Prior to the earthquake the same minority groups lived in close proximity 

to but separately from each other because of the inconvenience of transportation in 

the mountainous area. They thus developed their respective individual cultural atmos -

pheres and lifestyles. Consequently, it is better that the relocated area has a similar  

> 3. For details, see: Ludian County Government: Management of funding for rebuilding houses in settlements in
> Ludian County. 2015. http://www.ludian.gov.cn/defo_Show.asp?InfoId=2256&ClassId=54&Topid=31. Accessed:
> 15th April, 2015. SEM 2015
> 100
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> SHUYU JIANG
> DISPLACEMENT AND RESETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE LUDIAN
> EARTHQUAKE IN CHINA

social and economic structure. Additionally, the low transferability of skills also makes 

it difficult for most farmers to integrate in new economic and social conditions. 

Besides the issues concerning those people to be relocated, problems focusing 

on the host communities should also be recognised. Counties with newly estab -

lished settlements were already densely populated and had exceeded their ecolog -

ical capacity. An influx of migrants thus puts additional strain on the environment, 

increasing environmental pressure in the area. Thus, if the capacity of the new host 

community is not carefully evaluated, relocation is merely a transfer of problem 

from one region to another, perpetuating the vicious circle. 

Meanwhile, the possibility of relocating the people displaced by the earthquake 

to more developed areas in the west of China is also unlikely. In addition to transpor -

tation costs, there are evident differences in lifestyle, culture and many other social 

factors. Indeed, the inequality of development among the different regions in China 

makes the selection of relocation sites problematic. 

5. CONCLUSION 

Migration in the wake of the earthquake is not merely a passive response to the 

disaster. On the one hand, if migration is associated with the transition of liveli -

hoods and progress towards poverty reduction, victims could overcome the limi -

tations imposed by environmental conditions. If migration policy helps to reduce 

the pressure that human activities put on the environment, the recovery process in 

ecologically fragile zones will be more effective. 

As a consequence, the transition from relying on outside assistance to self-suffi -

ciency is a key issue in the long term. As Balakrishnan Rajagopal contends, devel -

opmental displacement should include “rights to life and livelihood” (in McDowell 

Gareth Morrell, 2010). This right requires “adequate standards of living for the whole 

family”, as well as protection of “the sustainability of the local environment”(in 

McDowell Gareth Morrell, 2010). 

After the restoration of farmland and equipment, some agricultural measures 

could be initiated in order to make production more intensive and better organised. 

The value chain could be further extended by developing the processing industry. 

In addition to agriculture, other industries should also be looked to to contribute to 

the economic recovery. For instance, in some areas, social workers have launched 

several entrepreneurship programmes (online businesses, traditional artefacts) to 

equip displaced people with skills to broaden sources of economic income in new 

settlements. Moreover, development of the tourism and service industries could also 

facilitate economic development in a more sustainable way. 

Furthermore, environmental migration could also represent an essential solu -

tion to the prevention and mitigation of natural disasters, in addition to sustainable 

development in this region. The introduction of and increasing recourse to environ -

mental migration in the region could facilitate transformation from passive disaster 

reaction to positive environmental mitigation and adaptation, and a combination of 

environmental migration and poverty reduction could pave an innovative path for 

rural development in China and other developing countries. 

In Chinese, the world “crisis” (Wei ji) is composed of two words: danger and 

opportunity. This earthquake is undoubtedly a severe calamity, yet it also presents an 

opportunity for the transition of the economy. Thus, following the completion of 

the resettlement process, the long-term approach must entail not only recovery from 

the earthquake, but also implications for sustainable future development. SEM 2015 

101 

# REFERENCES 

Books and reports 

– Christopher McDowell and Gareth 

Morrell. 2010. Displacement beyond 

conflict. Berghahn books. P. 69. 

– IFRC. August 4, 2014. Information 

bulletin China: Ludian Erthquake. 

p. 2. 

– Chris Lavell and Justin Ginnetti. 

2014. The Risk of Disaster-Induced 

Displacement in South-East Asia and 

China, P.32. Oslo: IDMC & NRC. 

– ESCAP. 2014. Disasters in Asia and 

the Pacific: 2014 Year In Review. 

Thailand: ESCAP. 

– Yanquan. 2013. Introduction to cities. 

Yunnan Yearbook 2013. Yunnan. 

Articles 

– Hewei: the Model of Ludian: a new 

milestone for the social work after 

disasters. China Society Periodical, 

2014(30). 

– Junli Zeng, Yongqin Yang. 2015(5). 

Local government’s response to 

natural disasters—A Case of Ludian 

Earthquake. Journal of Anhui 

Agricultural Sciences. 

– Shifang He et al. 2014(5). An overall 

introduction to the emergency work 

after the Ludian Earthquake. China 

emergency Rescue. 

Press articles 

– Bai Wenxue. 7th August, 2014. Poverty 

exaggerates natural disasters. In People’s 

Daily. 

– The distribution and intensity of the 

Ludian earthquake. 7th August, 2014. 

People’s Daily. 

– Yan Wang. 20th August, 2015. 

Preparation for the rehabilitation by 

Ludian County in Xinhua News Agency. 

– Houyou Cai and Xunshen. 28th April, 

2015. Half of the reconstruction of 

houses have been finished in Yunnan 

Daily. 

– Yongfeng Zhao. 11th November, 

2014. Rethinking Ludian earthquake, 

solutions to disasters and poverty in 

Yunnan Information Paper. 

– Yanling Liu. 11th August, 2014. Checking 

potential geological risks in Ludian 

county in China News. 

Government bulletin 

– The central people’s government of 

PRC. Law of the People’s Republic 

of China on Protecting Against and 

Mitigating Earthquake Disasters. 

Adopted since 1st March 1998. 

– The central people’s government of 

the People’s Republic of China (PRC). 

23th November 2014. Notification 

of the overall plan about the 

reconstruction after the Ludian 

earthquake. 

– News office of Ministry of Agriculture 

of PRC. 28th August 2014. http://www. 

moa.gov.cn/zwllm/zwdt/201408/ 

t20140828_4027615.htm. 

– Office of bureau of Civil Affairs in 

Yunnan Province. 14th August 2014. 

http://yunnan.mca.gov.cn/article/lddz/ 

gzdt/201408/20140800685894.shtml. 

– Report of the reconstruction of 

houses after the Ludian Earthquake 

(Mid-April). 29th April 2015. Yunnan: 

Bureau of Housing and Urban-Rural 

Development of PRC. 

– Junyi Chen. 2013. The trail project of 

comprehensive management of stony 

desertification in Ludian County. 

Development and reform bureau in 

Ludian County. 

– China Earthquake Adminisration. 

2013. http://www.cea.gov. 

cn/publish/dizhenj/467/ 

490/20131127151858836596174/index. 

html. 

– Ludian County Government: A Brief 

Introduction of Ludian County. 2014. 

http://www.ludian.gov.cn/info_Show. 

asp?InfoId=365&ClassId=62&Topid=31. 

– Ludian County Government: 

Longtoushan Town. 2014. http:// 

www.ludian.gov.cn/ info_Show.asp?I 

nfoId=290&ClassId=84&Topid=82. 

– Ludian County Government: 

Management of funding for 

rebuilding houses in settlements in 

Ludian County. 2015. http://www. 

ludian.gov.cn/ defo_Show.asp?InfoId 

=2256&ClassId=54&Topid=31. 

Websites 

– GSI International Steering Committee 

for Global Mapping, http://reliefweb. 

int/map/china/global-mapand-

around-zhaotong -yunnan-china-

land-use-a ugust-05-2014. 

– Earthquake report, http://earthquake-

report.com/2014/08/03/very-strong-

earthquake-sichuan-yunnan-guizho 

u-rg-china-on-august-3-2014/. 

– Hongxin Nian. Everyone has 25 

Yuan everyday during the emergent 

resettlement in affected areas 

in Zhaotong. 6th August, 2014 in 

Yunnan.cn.  http://society.yunnan.cn/ 

html/2014-08/06/content_3316043. 

htm .SEM 2015 

103 

# STEPHANIE LYONS 

# The Jakarta floods of Early 

# 2014: Rising Risks in one of 

# the World’s Fastest Sinking 

# Cities 

INTRODUCTION 

# In January and February 2014, the Indonesian megacity of Jakarta was hit by 

heavy rainfall and flooding that caused the deaths of 23 people and displaced 

more than 60,000  others (Setiawati 2014; OCHA 2014). This was not the first 

time that Indonesia’s capital and economic centre had experienced the severe 

consequences of floods. Jakarta is one of the largest coastal cities in South -

east Asia, with a long history of exposure to natural hazards and disasters 

and high vulnerability to climate change (Firman et al. 2011). Floods inundate 

Jakarta at least annually and are projected to worsen as a result of climate 

change; in fact, flooding represents the greatest climate- and disaster-related risk to 

the city, and its most severe floods on record have all occurred within the last twenty 

years (World Bank 2012b, 1; Douglass 2010, 45). 

Situated around a large bay on rapidly subsiding land and floodplains, Jakarta is 

intrinsically vulnerable to floods and other projected climate change impacts, and 

this vulnerability is compounded by human activity. The city’s large population of 

poor residents is especially at risk, with communities concentrated in dense, often 

unstable settlements in some of Jakarta’s most flood-prone areas near the bay, rivers, 

lakes and floodwater retention areas. These risks have been exacerbated by the rapid 

growth of Jakarta’s economy and population, uncontrolled and poorly planned urban 

development, and long-term environmental degradation, all of which accelerated 

over the second half of the twentieth century and is continuing today. Many Jakarta 

residents face both temporary and longer-term displacement each time floods hit 

the city, and as flooding becomes more frequent, it poses immense challenges for 

both Jakarta’s and Indonesia’s governments and a range of non-government actors. 

From an environment and migration perspective, Jakarta is an example of a context 

in which natural hazards are  already  displacing communities, while, at the same 

time, increasing population growth and migration are adding to local environmental 

degradation, thereby further increasing the risks from both floods and displacement. 

This case study examines the floods and resulting human displacement that 

occurred in Jakarta in early 2014—in the context of the broader, long-term flooding 

risks posed by climate change—and reviews some of the responses and solutions that 

have been proposed and employed to date. While there is substantial data available 

on Indonesia’s and Jakarta’s environmental vulnerability to floods—and extensive 

media reporting on communities’ experiences of both floods and displacement—it 

appears that as yet there has been limited explicit or in-depth analysis of the connec -

tions between flooding and displacement in Jakarta. While national and local author -

ities regularly release official data on the number of people affected and displaced 

by individual flood events in Jakarta, the availability and accessibility of longer-term 

data and estimates are variable and sometimes inconclusive. This study therefore SEM 2015 

> 104
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

draws from a range of secondary evidence provided by international organisation 

reports (such as from the International Organization for Migration and the World 

Bank), academic research, Indonesia’s national- and city-level government authori -

ties, and local and international news media accounts. 

An analysis of the implications of floods and displacement in Jakarta is timely for 

those actors involved in addressing these problems at the city level, and is also perti -

nent from national and global policy perspectives. Over recent years, Jakarta’s govern -

ment has been increasingly engaged in measures to mitigate floods and reduce the 

risks of displacement. Minimising flood impacts was a central election commitment 

of Jakarta’s previous governor, Joko “Jokowi” Widodo, and remains a central focus 

of his successor, Basuki “Ahok” Tjahaja Purnama, who became governor in October 

2014 after Jokowi was elected president of Indonesia (Purnamasari 2013). (In exam -

ining action undertaken in Jakarta to date, this study focuses primarily on the Jakarta 

government, which has provincial-level status and encompasses five smaller author -

ities, each with local mayors.) With flooding due to worsen as a result of climate 

change, Jakarta faces an increasingly urgent task in reducing flood risk and avoiding 

severe consequences for its citizens, including displacement, injury and death. These 

imperatives are relevant throughout Indonesia and Asia more broadly, where popula -

tions and cities are burgeoning. Asia’s urban areas are the fastest growing regions in 

the world; by 2025, Asia will be home to ten of the world’s twenty most highly popu -

lated urban agglomerations (IOM 2014b). 

This study therefore offers insights on flooding and displacement in Jakarta as 

a rapidly developing, densely populated, climate change-exposed city. It begins by 

examining the environmental vulnerability and risks faced by the city of Jakarta and 

its residents. The study then explores experiences of flooding and displacement in 

Jakarta’s recent history, including the floods of early 2014, before investigating key 

policies and response measures to date, including both flood mitigation measures 

and community relocation efforts. The study concludes by highlighting key areas 

for action by governments and other actors to improve the integration, delivery and 

design of flood-related policies and measures. 

1. BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 

Environmental vulnerability 

As the world’s fourth most populous nation and largest archipelago, Indonesia has 

always been vulnerable to natural hazards (Randall 2013; IOM 2013). Comprising more 

than 17,500 islands to the north and south of the equator, it is exposed to severe 

earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and dry mass movements, and suffered devastating 

human and environmental loss and displacement from the 2004 Indian Ocean 

tsunami (World Bank 2015b; IOM 2014). Floods comprised almost a third of more 

than 1,500 disasters recorded in Indonesia in 2014, and have been by far the most 

frequently occurring type of natural hazard in Indonesia since 1980 (Jakarta Post 

2014a; IOM 2013). 

Jakarta is one of Indonesia’s most disaster-threatened provinces and encapsu -

lates many of the challenges the country faces from climate change and urbanisation 

in degraded, vulnerable environments (Elyda 2014). “Greater Jakarta”, designated as 

Jabodetabek, is a rapidly growing “mega-urban region” of around 28 million people, 

located on the northwest coast of the island of Java, which is home to around 54  per 

cent of the country’s total population of almost 230 million (Tarrant 2014; World 

Bank 2015b). Current population statistics for Jakarta’s primary urban area vary 

depending on how broadly the area is defined, ranging from over 10 million (Sentana 

2014) to around 16 million people (Hill 2013). It has been estimated that at least an 

additional 2.5 million people from surrounding areas commute into Jakarta for work SEM 2015 

> 105

every day (Firman et al. 2011). Having grown from around two million people in 1960, 

Jakarta has undergone significant uncontrolled urban development over the past few 

decades, leading to expanding unstable settlements, water shortages, and increased 

traffic due to rising car ownership (Douglass 2010, 47; Maclean 2014). It is now one 

of the ten most densely populated cities in the world, comprising rich residential 

communities and high-rise developments, as well as dense neighbourhoods of low-

and middle-income residents (known locally as  kampungs ) and informal settlements 

(Tarrant 2014; HRW 2006). As Jakarta is Indonesia’s capital and economic hub—gener -

ating more than 20 per cent of national GDP and also comprising a large informal 

sector—disasters in the city have significant consequences for local residents and 

the country as a whole (Tarrant 2014; McKinsey Global Institute 2012, 14; World Bank 

2009). 

Figure 1.  Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital and economic hub, is situated on subsiding land 

and floodplains around Jakarta Bay, which opens out to the Java Sea. 

> Image: Creative commons.

Located on a swampy plain around the Bay of Jakarta, the city is, in effect, a 

“sinking bowl” (Tarrant 2014) and is highly exposed to flooding from heavy rainfall 

and seawater and river water inundation. Much of the ageing technical infrastruc -

ture for flood mitigation—including floodgates, canals and a sea wall—has been SEM 2015 

> 106
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

unable to accommodate the floods of recent years. As the impacts of climate change 

worsen, Jakarta’s rainfall and flooding are projected to become increasingly frequent 

and intense (World Bank 2014a). Indeed, floods and flood-related dangers pose the 

greatest risk to Jakarta of any type of natural hazard: while their occurrence may be 

predictable, they can be extremely hazardous and hit the city at least annually, typi -

cally in January and February at the peak of the rainy season (Tarrant 2014; Maclean 

2014; Douglass 2010). 

Jakarta’s environmental vulnerability to floods can be understood as the product 

of intersecting natural and human-influenced activities and characteristics (Ekuato -

rial 2014). Most of the northern part of Jakarta is a floodplain: a lowlying area that 

should hold and channel water during floods, but cannot safely function due to 

over-development (Ekuatorial 2014). This is exacerbated by the severe degradation 

and blockage of the thirteen rivers that flow through the city, along which many of 

the poorest residents are settled (Hill 2013; Ekuatorial 2014; World Bank 2010). Jakarta 

is also said to be the world’s fastest sinking city: the highly porous land has subsided 

by around four metres over the last three decades and is now sinking around seven 

centimetres on average each year as a result of groundwater extraction, concrete-

heavy load construction, natural consolidation and tectonic activity (Tarrant 2014; 

Firman et al. 2011). Due to rapid land use change and development, Jakarta has very 

few natural drainage sites: its water tables cannot adequately absorb rainfall, and 

floodwaters and concrete settlements create blockages (Ekuatorial 2014). 

Rainfall and sea-level rise compound this vulnerability. In the last decade, 

extreme rainfall in Jakarta has grown markedly during the peak months of January 

and February. Rainfall in these months averaged 193 millimetres per  day  in 2013, 

compared with a recorded average of 400 millimetres per  month  between 1879 and 

2002 (Ekuatorial 2014).  Forty per cent of Jakarta already lies below sea level, and 

projections indicate sea levels could rise from 18–59 centimetres by 2100 (Tarrant 

2014). A 50centimetre rise in sea level, combined with subsidence in Jakarta Bay, could 

permanently inundate densely populated city areas that are home to over 270,000 

people (Ward et al. 2012, 523; World Bank 2015b). 

Much of Jakarta’s physical infrastructure and human activity exacerbate these 

risks. Urban waste is a major problem; most neighbourhoods use local septic tanks or 

dump waste into sewers that flow into the canals, which have lost up to 75 per cent of 

their capacity (Tarrant 2014). From everyday garbage to mattresses and refrigerators, 

overwhelming quantities of human waste clog various canals, floodgates and urban 

spaces, especially within the kampungs, where embankments have been known to 

trap floodwaters (Ekuatorial 2014; Maclean 2014; World Bank 2010). 

1.2. Groups most vulnerable to displacement in Jakarta 

Although flooding is increasingly affecting all Jakartans (the presidential palace was 

famously flooded in 2013), it is the city’s poorer residents who are the most vulner -

able, given their location in densely packed, flood-prone areas. While some of these 

people are migrants to the city and others have lived there for generations, poorer 

communities are mostly concentrated in low-lying areas near the rivers, canals, reten -

tion lakes and bay (Firman et al. 2011). Jakarta’s governor said in 2014 that more than 

600 community units are prone to flood. According to the Jakarta Disaster Mitigation 

Agency (BPBD), the most flood-prone areas include seven sub-districts comprising 

more than 20 smaller community units (Elyda and Dewi 2014). 

The majority of people who migrate to Jakarta come from other parts of Indo -

nesia—especially poor and rural regions—in search of better living conditions, and 

often work in informal sector jobs, such as in food stalls and boatyards (Firman et 

al. 2011; Tarrant 2014). The World Bank estimated in 2010 that an additional 250,000 

people come to Jakarta each year in search of work. Some migrants settle illegally or 

semi-legally in informal settlements on the precarious edges of rivers and floodwater SEM 2015 

> 107

retention lakes (Tarrant 2014). Workers, such as those in the construction sector, have 

been known to move around the city, living wherever work is available (Wilhelm 

2011, 130). Studies indicate that some rural-urban migrants follow friends or family 

to the city, while others migrate alone and send remittances back to their families, 

and may relocate frequently to find the cheapest accommodation possible (Wilhelm 

2011). Some migrants are seasonal and have been known to remain in Jakarta for up 

to ten months per year, but are often omitted from official figures (UNHabitat 2003, 

212). The instability and fluidity of these types of income, employment and housing 

arrangements suggest that migrants can be acutely vulnerable to floods. 

Of course, many flood-vulnerable Jakartans are not migrants, but rather perma -

nent or long-term residents—in kampung Muara Baru, for example, 90 per cent of 

respondents to a 2007 survey had lived there for more than ten years (Nurlambang 

2012, 80). While reliable data on kampungs are scarce, as they do not constitute formal 

administrative entities, many host a combination of poor, near-poor, working- and 

middle-class residents, with unstable shelters constructed alongside more resilient 

permanent buildings (UN-Habitat 2003, 211–212). Since the 1970s, swift urbanisation, 

increasing land prices and speculation have shrunk these settlements while reducing 

available land for low-income housing, increasing population density within and 

around the kampungs (UN-Habitat 2003). Flooding is therefore another type of 

displacement pressure faced by many kampung residents, along with commercial 

development and corrupt activities that have forced some residents out of their 

homes over the past few decades (UN-Habitat 2003; HRW 2006). Kampung Muara 

Baru offers one example of these communities’ vulnerability: located just inside 

Jakarta’s seawall, it is home to more than 100,000 people and already sits almost two 

metres below sea level (Tarrant 2014). For local residents who must look upwards 

from their homes to view the sea, daily high tides and enduring high-water marks 

from past floods are stark reminders of how evacuation and permanent displace -

ment threaten their everyday lives. 

The people most threatened by floods in Jakarta are therefore likely to face over -

lapping circumstances that increase their overall vulnerability. From long-term resi -

dents to temporary migrants, communities’ inherent environmental vulnerability 

can be compounded by factors such as residents’ levels of income, type of work, 

residency status, shelter, and the extent of their social connections and ties to their 

district and community. These people may have multiple experiences of displace -

ment by flooding, whether temporary or long-term, within their lifetimes; the 

implications of this for their physical and mental health and social wellbeing can be 

profound (Maclean 2014). By reviewing floods in recent history and the 2014 flooding 

event, the following section examines the environmental and displacement implica -

tions in greater detail. 

2. FLOODS OF 2014 AND RELATED DISPLACEMENT 

2.1. Floods in recent history 

Jakarta’s annual floods have become more intense, frequent and widespread in recent 

decades. Following decades of swift population growth in the latter half of the twen -

tieth century, Jakarta’s most destructive floods on record have occurred within the 

last 20 years: in 1996, 2002, 2007, 2013 and 2014 (Douglass 2010, 45; Tarrant 2014). 

The 2007 flood was Jakarta’s worst on record, and was the first time that a large 

storm surge—originating from a huge monsoon storm and high tide—flooded the 

city (Tarrant 2014). As much as 75 per cent of Jakarta was flooded, at least 76 people 

were killed, disease outbreaks affected more than 200,000 people, and damages 

amounted to more than USD 900 million (Tarrant 2014; Douglass 2010; World Bank 

2014a; World Bank 2015b). It is estimated that at least 1,500 homes were destroyed SEM 2015 

> 108
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

(World Bank 2012b). Displacement estimates from the 2007 flood vary from around 

340,000 (Douglass 2010; World Bank 2014a) to up to 590,000 (Tarrant 2014). In the 

neighbourhood of Muara Baru alone, more than 4,000 houses were inundated by at 

least two metres of water (Nurlambang 2012, 79). Fisheries and businesses lost up to 

50 per cent of their incomes, and up to 90 per cent of the local population was unable 

to go to work (ibid.). In a survey of almost 200 residents after the flood, only around 

30 per cent of respondents said they had received flood warnings, and that these had 

come from neighbours, relatives or friends, rather than the government (Susandi 

et al. 2011, 5; Nurlambang 2012, 79). After the flood, 24 per cent of survey respond -

ents reported having received government assistance, and 30 per cent said they had 

received support from non-governmental organisations (NGOs) (ibid.). 

The floods of early 2013 were Jakarta’s worst since 2007: heavy rainfall broke 

riverbanks, sending torrents of water into the city centre and inundating the iconic 

Hotel Indonesia traffic circle (ABC News 2014; Jakarta Post 2015c). While the reported 

total death toll from the 2013 flooding varies, data from United Nations OCHA (2013) 

suggest at least 41 people were killed and 120,000 were displaced (Hill 2013; Jakarta 

Post 2015c). 

2.2. Floods of 2014 

The Jakarta floods of 2014 underscored residents’ vulnerability to displacement and 

the significant challenges involved in confronting increasingly common and wide -

spread flood events. 

On 12 January, after several days’ torrential rain led to river overflows and 

flooding, the Indonesian Government declared a 30-day emergency readiness phase 

(ABC News 2014; International Federation of the Red Cross 2014). A range of govern -

ment actors were mobilised: the Jakarta BPBD coordinated the process in conjunc -

tion with its national-level counterpart, the BNPB, with further assistance from 

the military, police and several other agencies that supported evacuation and relief 

efforts (IFRC 2014). 

By 19 January, more than 30,000 residents had been forced to evacuate and at least 

seven people had died from drowning, electrocution or flood-related illnesses (ABC 

News 2014; Sentana 2014). Two days later, five more residents had been killed, and 

the number of displaced people had more than doubled to almost 63,000; many took 

shelter in more than 250 makeshift displacement centres close to the affected areas, 

such as mosques and schools (OCHA 2014). At this point, it was estimated that nearly 

135,000 people from 100 different urban villages in Jakarta had been directly affected 

by the flooding (ibid.). 

As January drew to a close, the floods had killed 23 people; the majority of deaths 

occurred in eastern Jakarta, though people were also killed in the north, west, central 

and southern parts of the city (Setiawati 2014). While thousands of evacuees returned 

to their homes to recover and clean up, more than 18,500 people were forced to 

re-evacuate to shelters following more rain and flooding on 3–4 February (ReliefWeb 

2014). Some neighbourhoods had already been evacuated nine separate times during 

the month of January alone, underscoring the instability and unpredictability of 

many residents’ circumstances (Maclean 2014). Some communities, including thou -

sands of residents of Kampung Pulo, were evacuated again later in February due to 

floods that reached depths of almost three metres (Jakarta Post 2014d). 

The floods overwhelmed much of Jakarta’s infrastructure and posed major 

immediate and longer-term risks to safety and health. Flood levels were recorded 

at between 20 centimetres and 1.2 metres in low-lying areas near the rivers, and 

reached up to two metres at the riverbanks and up to four metres in some homes 

(IFRC 2014; Maclean 2014). Hundreds of kilometres of road were made inaccessible 

by inundation, drainage systems and bridges were damaged or destroyed, and local 

power was cut in some areas for at least two days, though phone and electricity SEM 2015 

> 109

services remained intact in other areas (IFRC 2014; ABC News 2014). Many residents 

fled their homes by wading through the floodwaters or using rubber or makeshift 

boats. As the death toll implies, strong currents in the floodwaters were particularly 

dangerous, as the majority of residents did not know how to swim (Maclean 2014). 

Thousands of houses and buildings were flooded—and some half submerged—by 

black water containing sewage and waste (IFRC 2014; Maclean 2014; ABC News 2014). 

This had serious sanitation and health implications, including skin infections, diar -

rhoea (particularly in children under five years old), and the risk of severe condi -

tions such as leptospirosis, an animal-borne disease that is spread through bacteria in 

water and can be fatal (Maclean 2014). Following this flood and others, residents said 

the floodwaters inside their homes took up to two weeks to subside (Maclean 2014). 

After the February floods had abated, the BNPB estimates they had incurred 

around USD 407 million in damages to the city and led to a 0.4 per cent spike in infla -

tion, which reached 1.07 per cent (Ekuatorial 2014; Elyda 2014). 

Additional floods that hit Jakarta in the ensuing months of 2014 provide further 

examples of how flooding is becoming a more frequent event throughout the year in 

Jakarta. For instance, three months later, in May 2014—just before the start of Jakar -

ta’s traditional “dry season”—parts of the city were flooded once again. In Kampung 

Pulo, heavy rainfall burst the banks of the Ciliwung river, and, although residents’ 

homes were inundated by up to two metres of water, no deaths or evacuations were 

reported (Wardhani and Elyda 2014). Several months afterward, following the city’s 

brief dry season, the flood season was said to have started early, when unexpect -

edly heavy rainfall and floods hit the city in November (Elyda and Dewi 2014). On 

this occasion, more than 20,000 people were affected and at least 1,000 evacuated to 

temporary shelters (ibid.). 

These flood events offer additional insights into how residents responded and 

adapted in 2014 to increasing incidences of flooding, and the resulting implica -

tions for evacuation and displacement. Recent accounts suggest that some residents 

are reluctant to evacuate their homes during floods, preferring instead to remain 

and employ various methods to cope and adapt. In Kampung Pulo in May, it was 

reported that many residents had not left their homes, but had simply moved onto 

the second floors of their houses to avoid the floodwaters (Wardhani and Elyda 2014). 

It is common for locals to prepare by moving their belongings above the anticipated 

flood lines, with some residents stowing valuable household items and chickens on 

the elevated railroad tracks that run parallel to their districts (Ika 2014; Maclean 2014). 

Media reports suggest that Jakartans who have lived in such districts for years are 

highly aware of the floods’ increasing frequency, and some have developed their own 

methods of preparing for floods, including sharing information and tips with neigh -

bours and packing their own “survival kits” (ibid.). They are also accustomed to post-

flood clean up and recovery, which can take weeks (Jakarta Post 2013a). 

However, it should not be assumed that such approaches to coping with or 

adapting to floods can guarantee residents’ safety or necessarily reduce the likeli -

hood of displacement. A media interview with one local resident suggests that some 

people may believe they are “safe” to remain at home as long as the flood levels have 

not reached two metres; another local resident said her children swam in the flood -

waters after school and “enjoyed” the floods (Wardhani and Elyda 2014). Given the 

significant inherent health and safety dangers of Jakarta’s floodwaters, these anec -

dotes highlight the importance of distinguishing suitable adaptation measures from 

risky practices and behaviours that may arise where locals have come to view severe 

flooding as routine or even banal events (ibid.; Maclean 2014; Zein 2015). SEM 2015 

> 110
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

3. RESPONSES TO FLOODS AND DISPLACEMENT 

Having outlined Jakarta’s vulnerability and the complexity and scale of the implica -

tions of floods in the city, this case study now examines some of the policy frame -

works and response measures that have been proposed and employed in recent years. 

As Jakarta’s flooding implicates several complex policy areas, this study does not seek 

to provide an exhaustive account of all pertinent measures at the local, provincial, 

national and international levels. Instead, it highlights some of the notable policies 

that have been established and key efforts that have been undertaken in recent years 

to address Jakarta’s flooding and related displacement problems. The proliferation 

of such measures over the last decade suggests that people in Jakarta—from leaders 

and government officials to NGOs and local residents—are broadly aware of these 

challenges and the need to address them, yet many efforts to date have not been well 

designed or coordinated (World Bank 2012b). 

3.1. Overarching government frameworks and policies 

Indonesia and Jakarta have a number of overarching strategies and policies in place 

on climate change adaptation (CCA), disaster risk reduction (DRR) and urban plan -

ning, each with implications for managing the short-, medium- and long-term risks 

from floods. 

Following the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, the Indonesian government adopted 

a more comprehensive national approach to DRR, devoting attention to disaster 

prevention, preparation, emergency response and post-disaster recovery (World Bank 

2012a, 40). Indonesia has also been active at the regional and global levels within the 

Hyogo Framework for Action—developing national action plans on disaster manage -

ment and DRR—and has ratified the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) 

Agreement on Disaster Management and Emergency Response (IOM 2013, 244; World 

Bank 2012b). As noted above, since 2008, disaster management has been coordinated 

at the national level by the National Disaster Management Agency, known as BNPB, 

which since 2010 has also had counterpart agencies at the provincial level known as 

BPBDs (ibid.). Jakarta therefore has a provincial-level BPBD agency. While Indonesia 

is clearly conscious of the need for comprehensive DRR policies, a representative 

from the national BNPB suggested in 2014 that some parts of the government still 

viewed disaster mitigation as primarily a matter of emergency response, rather than 

as a long-term process of planning and investment (Elyda 2014). 

In 2013, Indonesia developed its National Action Plan for Climate Change Adap -

tation (known as RAN-API) which includes short-term priorities and intends to 

“harmonise and operationalise” all of Indonesia’s national and sectoral adaptation 

plans (Republic of Indonesia 2013, i). The RAN-API reflects an effort to synthesise 

CCA planning with related policies: recognising the links with growth and devel -

opment, the government has expressed an aim to integrate adaptation action into 

Indonesia’s third National Medium-Term Development Plan, for the period 2015-19 

(ibid.). Notably, as of 2014, Indonesia did not have a specific funding mechanism 

for CCA; instead, implementation was financed by “overall development” funds at 

the national, provincial and district levels, drawing on both domestic and interna -

tional funding sources (ibid., 17). It is unclear whether these funding arrangements 

have the capacity to ensure sufficient long-term funding for CCA at every level 

of government. In addition, Firman et al. (2011, 5) observed that much of Indone -

sia’s climate change expertise had traditionally been concentrated at the national 

level—such as in the National Council of Climate Change and ministries—and that 

there was still limited climate change expertise at the Jakarta government level. 

Any provincial-level CCA plans developed in recent years have mainly been ad-hoc, 

occurring as part of the individual actions of different government agencies (World 

Bank 2012b, 7). SEM 2015 

> 111

In the context of strategies such as Indonesia’s National LongTerm Development 

Plan 2005-2025, in 2010 Jakarta created a Spatial Plan for 2030, which integrated climate 

change to a minor extent and highlighted the areas of the city at greatest risk from 

flooding (World Bank 2012b, 7). Nurlambang (2012, 82) notes that the Spatial Plan does 

not address the displacement issues from climate change, nor meet broader equity 

imperatives. The boom of private sector developments in Jakarta and the resulting 

emphasis on private sector interests over recent decades has not been resolved (ibid.; 

World Bank 2012b). 

While the need to synthesise DRR, CCA and urban development plans is widely 

acknowledged at the international level and noted by the Indonesian government, 

the existing separate frameworks are not well integrated or coordinated (UNDP 2015, 

xiii; UNISDR 2015; World Bank 2012b; Republic of Indonesia 2013; Firman et al. 2011). 

This applies at both the national and provincial levels, and is also reflected in the 

large number of government agencies responsible for different aspects of flood and 

climate change-related actions, which must collaborate on planning and mobilise 

quickly to confront hazards and disasters (World Bank 2012b; Firman et al. 2011; Ward 

et al. 2012, 521–22). The establishment of the Jakarta BPBD at the end of 2010 signalled 

the government’s recognition of the need for a designated disaster agency, though 

the BPBD’s precise powers and role were not clearly delineated within government, 

and coordination problems persist (World Bank 2012b, 7; Elyda and Dewi 2014). 

Despite Indonesia’s significant numbers of rural-urban migrants and the displace -

ment potential of natural hazards both in Jakarta and elsewhere in the country, there 

is no specific national policy or legislation on internal displacement (Randall 2013; 

IDMC 2013). According to the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) 

(2013), the national BNPB is accountable for people displaced by both natural hazards 

and “social conflicts”, while the Ministry of Social Affairs is responsible for relief 

during emergencies. Relevant legislation includes a disaster management law (2007) 

and another on handling social conflicts (2012), which empowers local authorities 

and the military to decide how to manage social unrest and conflict (ibid.). This lack 

of detailed directives, coordination and oversight from the national level means that 

displacement policies are largely ad-hoc, and this may in fact increase the potential 

for internally displaced people’s rights to be violated, especially with regard to the 

return to and protection of their property (ibid.). Moreover, IDMC has highlighted 

that a number of relevant European Union-funded programs run by NGOs ended in 

2013 because no major crises had caused mass internal displacement in Indonesia in 

recent years. This suggests that current policy settings on relocation and displace -

ment may be unclear, incomplete and possibly under-prioritised at both the national 

and local levels. 

Policy settings at the national and Jakarta levels therefore do not demonstrate 

strong conceptual or practical connections between the challenges of environmental 

degradation, migration and displacement. However, it should be noted that while 

Jakarta does not have an overarching displacement policy, in recent years its govern -

ment has taken a number of decisions and measures on community relocation due 

to flooding. 

3.2. Flood mitigation plans and projects in Jakarta 

After Jakarta’s devastating floods in 2007, Indonesia’s president formed a taskforce 

to expedite urgent technical interventions and address the flooding challenge over 

the long term (Tarrant 2014). The taskforce considered two dramatic possibilities that 

would have directly confronted Jakarta’s inherent flood and displacement problems, 

yet entailed huge consequences. These options included abandoning the northern 

part of the city around the bay, or moving the capital to another location at a higher 

elevation in southeast Java or on another island (ibid.). Both ideas were rejected 

because of Jakarta’s established role as Indonesia’s capital and economic centre, and SEM 2015 

> 112
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

the according cost and upheaval: the cost of abandoning north Jakarta alone was 

estimated at USD 220  billion in assets (ibid.). According to media reports, the task -

force decided to focus initially on strengthening Jakarta’s existing canals as well as 

its coastal defences, triggering the acceleration of various technical measures as well 

as the creation of the National Capital Integrated Coastal Development (NCICD) 

Master Plan, a major infrastructure and urban development programme supported 

by the Dutch government (ibid.; Tarrant 2014). 

The NCICD plan has the potential to reduce both flood and displacement pres -

sures on Jakarta by constructing a “Giant Sea Wall” and reclaiming land, but was facing 

an uncertain future as of 2015. Expedited following the 2013 floods, the USD 40 billion 

project would build a new 35-kilometre seawall and 17 artificial islands in the shape of 

Indonesia’s national symbol, the garuda bird (Tarrant 2014). The islands would close 

off Jakarta Bay and include new residential and business developments for up to 

one million residents and workers, aiming to reduce pressures on Jakarta’s existing 

land area (ibid.; Japan Times 2014). The project would also create one large storage 

lake for floodwaters in Jakarta Bay, fed by onshore pumping stations. While this 

plan ostensibly aims to address both flooding and displacement by fundamentally 

transforming Jakarta’s urban layout and creating new settlement areas, it has stirred 

long-held concerns about the continued prioritisation of private interests in Jakarta’s 

planning and disregard for the needs and circumstances of poorer residents (Elyda 

2015). Indonesia’s outgoing economic minister launched the first phase of the plan 

only days before his government left office in October 2014, and in early 2015 the 

project was proceeding (Dewi 2014; Jakarta Post 2015a; Jakarta Post 2015b). However, in 

April 2015, the Indonesian government called for the suspension and review of land 

reclamation efforts under the NCICD (Elyda 2015). This followed objections from 

certain neighbouring regional administrations which said they were unwilling to 

supply sea land for the project, as well as revelations that the Jakarta government had 

already granted building permits to large private developers (ibid.). While Jakarta’s 

government subsequently indicated the project may proceed regardless, its future 

appears uncertain (Wardhani 2015). 

Although a detailed exploration of Jakarta’s myriad other infrastructure improve -

ment plans is beyond the scope of this case study, the city has been expediting a range 

of notable other measures to reduce the risks of flooding and displacement. The height 

of Jakarta’s existing sea wall was raised in 2008, but is today almost subsumed by high 

tides in some sections, due to the combined impacts of subsidence and sea-level rise 

(Tarrant 2014). The World Bank is also supporting a USD 190 million project to address 

urgent flood issues through dredging, embankment fortification, and restoration of 

priority canals, flood ways and water retention ponds, led by the Ministry of Public 

Works in Jakarta (World Bank 2014a). The project includes an explicit commitment to 

provide adequate housing and transitional support to locals required to relocate due 

to the project (World Bank 2012c). In February 2015, the project was reported to be 

around one year behind schedule (World Bank 2015). Jakarta’s former governor previ -

ously stated that these measures will be effective during “normal” heavy monsoons, 

but are unlikely to prevent floods under extreme conditions (Hill 2013). The govern -

ment is also trying to address land subsidence in multiple ways. A moratorium on the 

construction of new malls was introduced as part of an attempt to ease traffic and 

reduce the number of unnecessary large concrete developments that are currently 

contributing to subsidence, though this has not been comprehensively applied or 

enforced (Tarrant 2014). Concurrent efforts to convince residents to stop extracting 

groundwater and instead use the city’s piped water system have also been difficult 

to enforce, as many people access free groundwater illegally and perceive Jakarta’s 

piped water as expensive, dirty and unreliable (ibid.). 

While Jakarta faces a tremendous long-term challenge in implementing suit -

able technical infrastructure for floods, there is also a central role for early warning SEM 2015 

> 113

systems and community-based approaches to information sharing and disaster 

education, which are helping Jakarta residents to better understand, prepare for 

and respond to floods. The city’s existing early warning systems use mobile phone 

messaging to warn district representatives about imminent floods. In recent years, 

NGOs, researchers and the Jakarta government have been developing smart phone 

applications that use government and community-provided data to help residents 

monitor risks during floods and become more resilient over the long term (Peta 

Jakarta 2015; PMI 2015). These innovative solutions build on extensive efforts to 

increase local communities’ capacity to respond to flooding—including community-

based risk assessments, disaster response teams, contingency planning, and training 

in how to act safely during floods and clean homes to reduce health and sanitation 

risks (ARC 2015; Maclean 2014). Local Jakartans’ experiences during the 2014 floods (as 

noted above) underline the continuing need to widely disseminate such community-

focused measures and training. 

The overarching difficulties encountered to date in establishing adequate infra -

structure and systems to address flooding reflect broader underlying governance 

issues in Jakarta and at the national level, especially poor implementation, enforce -

ment and—as noted above—inadequate coordination between agencies and other 

actors. After becoming Jakarta’s governor in October 2014, Ahok publicly called for 

improvements in all three areas to expedite flood mitigation, and said in November 

2014 that “[a]ll agencies and working units actually know what they have to do when 

a flood comes. But they are not well managed and coordinated” (in Elyda and Dewi 

2014). World Bank analysis suggests these issues also apply at the national level; in 

2012, it observed there had been an insufficient focus on DRR and prevention meas -

ures, and that BNPB lacked the confidence of line agencies in coordination efforts 

(2012a, 40). It suggested that existing fiscal capacity and legal frameworks could 

adequately support effective disaster risk management, but that the Indonesian 

government needed to prioritise the implementation and enforcement of regula -

tions and improve its operational capacities (ibid.). 

3.3. Response measures during the floods 

Beyond the policy frameworks and ongoing infrastructure interventions in Jakarta, 

authorities and supporting organisations implement a range of practical response 

measures during floods. During the floods of early 2014, the Indonesian government 

announced it had the existing capacity “to respond to both short and longer-term 

needs created by the floods including emergency shelter” (IFRC 2014, 1–2). As part of 

contingency planning, the Jakartan authorities had already distributed emergency 

response supplies in villages before the rainy season began, including food, non-food 

items and water (ibid.). Further supplies were deployed as needed during the floods. 

A range of actors provided evacuation and relief assistance, including NGOs, which 

helped to establish shelters, open field kitchens, and distribute hygiene supplies and 

other emergency kits (IFRC 2014; USAID 2014). Temporary displacement from evacu -

ation was thus relatively well managed through the preparation of temporary evacu -

ation shelters, which were used multiple times by some residents (ReliefWeb 2014). 

The government also carried out cloud seeding: a process whereby substances are 

inserted into incoming clouds from military planes, with the aim of causing heavy 

rains to fall over the ocean  before  they reach Jakarta (Ika 2014). The government later 

claimed that this process reduced rainfall by up to 32  per cent during the 2014 floods ,

though scientists have questioned the accuracy of reported results of cloud seeding 

in general (Elyda 2014; Rochmyaningsih 2013). 

In addition to the flood mitigation policies and measures outlined above, Jakarta’s 

government and municipal administrations have started to remove settlements and 

relocate people in some of the city’s poorest and most flood-prone areas. Authorities 

have cited flooding as the central reason for the measures, arguing that people cannot SEM 2015 

> 114
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

live in the highly exposed, informal or unstable settlements that currently encroach 

on the edges of rivers and waterways. Apart from being repeatedly flooded, such 

settlements can also inhibit floodwaters from flowing, draining and receding effec -

tively. The relocation measures may thus be seen as an effort to avoid future flood-

induced displacement and rehabilitate flood-prone areas (Wardhani and Elyda 2014). 

At the same time, the relocations constitute a form of permanent displacement for 

local people who have well-established lives and livelihoods in these areas. For some 

city dwellers, the relocation process has been coercive and raised long-standing 

land rights issues (Maclean 2014; Wilson 2014). It has triggered numerous contro -

versies about the government’s consultation processes and relocation methods, the 

number of people implicated, the livelihoods of affected communities, the state of 

alternative housing, and access to suitable compensation, resettlement and work 

opportunities (Maclean 2014; Purnamasari 2013). 

Given the highly dense and commonly informal living arrangements of many 

of Jakarta’s most flood-vulnerable communities, it is difficult to identify precisely 

how many people have been affected by the relocation measures to date, and 

unclear exactly how many have been excluded from or judged ineligible for alter -

native housing by the government. The Jakarta Residents Forum has suggested that 

the government removed more than 19,000 people from their homes in 2013, and 

fewer than 40 per cent were offered alternative accommodation (Wilson, 2014). 

Indonesia’s land tenure, ownership and access rights are complicated and have long 

been compromised by corruption; furthermore, up to 80 per  cent of all housing in 

Indonesia is “informal or self-help based”, meaning many communities’ housing 

arrangements are insecure (ibid.; HRW 2006). It is not possible within this case 

study to closely examine broader links in the context of Jakarta’s land and prop -

erty issues. Yet these relocation measures clearly compound long-standing housing 

uncertainty for many poor communities, and other political, social and economic 

interests have likely driven government relocation efforts, in addition to flood risks 

and environmental vulnerability. It is notable that large commercial buildings and 

luxury housing estates in the same areas (such as near the highly vulnerable Pluit 

dam) have reportedly remained “untouched by the administration’s policy inter -

ventions”, even though such developments are known to exacerbate flood hazards 

(Wilson, 2014, 2). 

The government stepped up its latest relocation efforts in 2013 with a particular 

focus on high-risk, low-income areas around rivers, dams and retention ponds 

(Jakarta Post 2013a; Maclean 2014). Authorities have removed settlements and other 

structures from around the waterways to clear out sedimentation and debris, 

increase the depth and width of rivers, and create more “green” space (Jakarta 

Post 2014c). Government approaches to community consultation and the removal 

of homes have varied significantly. In 2013, Jakarta’s then-governor, Jokowi, was 

reported to have consulted personally with residents from near the Pluit dam, and 

said that authorities should be taking a “softly-softly approach” and initiating a 

dialogue with communities (Dewi 2013b; Dewi 2013c). Yet residents facing reloca -

tion in 2014—such as those from Condet in east Jakarta—said they had not been 

informed or consulted about their relocation, and that their land rights were being 

violated (Jakarta Post 2014c). Similarly, some residents in Pela Mampang in south 

Jakarta said in August 2014 that they had received only two days’ notice that their 

properties would be removed, while the mayor maintained that the communities 

had been consulted one week before the demolition (Kelety 2014b). In addition to 

short consultation periods, residents also reported that authorities had proceeded 

with the demolitions despite locals’ continued protests and concerns (ibid.). Some 

residents sought assistance from Indonesia’s National Commission on Human 

Rights, which argued that far more people were facing eviction and relocation than 

the government data suggested (Pernamasari 2013; Dewi 2013b; Wilson 2014). SEM 2015 

> 115

While certain residents have welcomed the opportunity to move from the flood-

prone areas into alternative housing, some have found the settlements unsafe or 

poorly suited to their everyday needs. For example, some apartments are too small 

for relocated families, leak regularly due to inadequate construction or maintenance, 

or lack access to sufficient amounts of clean water (Jakarta Post 2014b; Kelety 2014a). 

One government official noted some buildings were in a poor condition before they 

were transferred to the city administration (Jakarta Post 2014b). Some residents must 

travel over 20  kilometres daily between their new homes and work or school; while 

Jakarta’s government committed in 2013 to providing free boat services to connect 

these areas, such arrangements are not universally available to resettled communities 

(Jakarta Post 2013a; Wilson 2014). Some residents have indicated that these issues are 

still outweighed by the safety the new settlements provide from frequent floods and 

evacuation (Jakarta Post 2014b). 

Uncertainty persists for people that have been unwilling or unable to move from 

high-risk areas or resettle in alternative housing as part of the relocation measures. 

As noted above, many locals settled in Jakarta’s most flood-prone areas because of 

the readily available work opportunities in the city’s centre. Some are reluctant to 

move because they have strong familial, cultural and economic ties to these areas, 

and therefore insist they can continue to live with the floods (Maclean 2014; Tarrant 

2014). Many also say they cannot afford the deposits or rents for alternative housing, 

or have suggested that the compensation amounts offered by the government for 

previously occupied land and property are too low (Jakarta Post 2013a; Wardhani and 

Elyda 2014). The government has emphasised that people who do not hold Jakarta 

residency cards are ineligible for government-supported resettlement (Tarrant 2014; 

Kelety 2014c; Wardhani and Elyda 2014). In 2014, the government evicted illegal street 

vendors from several areas, despite acknowledging their role in meeting the needs of 

low-income workers (Kelety 2014c). The governor stated that only registered Jakarta 

residents were eligible for low-cost apartments and vendor licences, and said the 

government was working with neighbouring jurisdictions of Java to discourage 

migration to Jakarta (ibid.). 

These accounts show that relocation efforts to date have been fraught. In some 

cases, the relocation measures have left poor communities with limited options and 

arguably higher vulnerability to floods, and have failed to offer equitable and inclu -

sive solutions for improving communities’ resilience to floods and other climate 

change impacts. 

CONCLUSION 

By examining the policies and measures adopted in recent years to mitigate flooding 

and displacement in Jakarta, this case study illuminates a number of areas for further 

work and improvement by both government and non-government actors. 

It is clear that governments at each level should better integrate relevant policy 

frameworks to improve Jakarta’s ability to respond to environment-induced displace -

ment and migration. Given the hitherto limited integration of Indonesia’s current 

DRR, CCA and urban planning frameworks and the absence of a formal national 

policy on internal displacement, there is scope for Indonesia to review and synthe -

sise its policies relating to environment-induced displacement and migration. The 

implications of existing national migration policies and practices should also be 

considered. This also applies at the Jakarta level, where holistic decision-making is 

needed on city planning, flood mitigation infrastructure, community resettlement, 

and overall migration patterns. Natural hazard- and disaster-induced displacement 

and permanent relocation already occur regularly in many parts of the country, and 

therefore merit a concerted policy framework that supports national consistency SEM 2015 

> 116
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> STEPHANIE LYONS
> THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE
> WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES

and protection of human rights in the event of flooding and displacement. The 

Indonesian government has already acknowledged the need to integrate and “main -

stream” climate change throughout its policies, and this should support coherent 

links between measures to mitigate flooding (along with other extreme weather 

events) and flood-induced displacement at the national, regional and local levels. 

Jakarta’s government should review and address gaps in policy coordination, 

enforcement, and implementation of flood mitigation and flood response measures. 

As outlined above, actors involved in managing flooding and displacement in Jakarta 

broadly agree on the need for improvement in each of these areas. This applies to 

both the planning and implementation of flood mitigation measures and response 

strategies during severe flooding. Jakarta’s government could improve coordination 

by more clearly delineating and communicating the roles and responsibilities of 

agencies and other organisations (such as NGOs that regularly support flood relief), 

and improving these actors’ capacity to fulfil their mandates and work together. As 

the World Bank (2012a, 40) has highlighted, the BNPB should be clearly empowered 

to coordinate line agencies during flooding. The delay of the NCICD Master Plan also 

suggests a need for stronger coordination between the Jakarta government, regional 

governments and the national government as well as private sector actors and inter -

national donors. 

Measures to relocate residents in highly flood-prone areas should be conducted as 

part of a long-term strategy that prioritises consultation, equity and social inclusion. 

As the approaches and experiences described above demonstrate, Jakarta’s relocation 

efforts to date have been ad-hoc and exclusionary for many communities. While 

the measures may have removed some residents from immediate flood risks, they 

have included inconsistent and rushed consultation methods, placed some commu -

nities in problematic alternative housing, and have actually increased uncertainty 

and instability for some of Jakarta’s poorest and most vulnerable residents, including 

migrants. People who are removed from their homes in high flood-risk areas but 

are not assisted in finding alternative housing face grave social and economic inse -

curity and—without secure shelter and access to basic social services—are likely 

to remain highly vulnerable to floods. As noted above, while resettled populations 

may no longer live in flood-exposed homes, many have had to abandon their old 

communities, face unsafe conditions in their new housing, and continue to return 

daily to flood-prone areas in order to work. One particularly crucial issue is the lack 

of conclusive, accessible data on how many people may need to move; these data 

are needed to support evidence-based decision-making on relocation and resettle -

ment. The government should engage communities in relocation proposals from 

the outset, to support their resettlement in safe housing and protect their access 

to income and employment opportunities. Relocation efforts must also account for 

poor and unregistered people to ensure they are not left behind. These principles— 

while certainly challenging and complex to fulfil—are not new; they are included in 

the involuntary resettlement policies of existing flood mitigation programs, such as 

the World Bank project outlined above (World Bank 2012c), and could in fact form a 

useful basis for extending and improving Jakarta’s overall approach to relocation and 

displacement issues. 

Governments, NGOs and international organisations should also urgently focus 

on building residents’ knowledge and capacity to respond safely to flooding, particu -

larly where relocation is not an immediate or feasible option. The 2014 floods showed 

that many Jakartans still face major health and safety risks from flooding, and many 

have a limited understanding of appropriate adaptation and resilience strategies. 

There is thus an urgent need to build on the important and often innovative methods 

that are being used in Jakarta—from community-based information gathering and 

dissemination, to training in DRR and CCA concepts and practices—to strengthen 

the capacity and resilience of Jakarta’s hundreds of thousands of vulnerable residents. SEM 2015 

> 117

This is particularly important in the context of continuing relocation efforts, which 

are in danger of creating perverse incentives for some residents to remain in unsafe 

housing for fear of losing their homes, communities or livelihoods. While not all 

residents may be able to move, there is also scope for smaller-scale, more immediate 

measures that increase the technical resilience of communities (such as renovation 

of existing housing structures to make them safer and more resistant to storms and 

floods). 

The events of early 2014 underlined the risks posed by floods and displacement 

in Jakarta, which are becoming an increasingly frequent and severe problem due to 

the intersecting processes of climate change, ongoing environmental degradation, 

and poorly planned urban development. Even in the event of immense interven -

tions to ease progressive land subsidence, the megacity’s geographic position means 

it will remain acutely exposed to sea-level rise, flooding and other extreme weather 

events in the coming years. Fundamental changes to human activity and behaviour 

are required if the city is to remain and continue to grow. This demands the urgent 

design and implementation of effective infrastructure measures and other mitiga -

tion solutions, as well as measures that can help to reduce both short- and long-term 

displacement from flooding. 

The experiences of 2014 also demonstrate that many of the city’s most vulner -

able residents have low resilience to floods and climate change, and remain at high 

risk of displacement. While the task facing Jakarta is clearly immense and requires a 

strategic approach over the long term, there are also important immediate opportu -

nities to expand and intensify existing measures that build local residents’ capacity to 

respond to floods, and thereby reduce the number of people that are killed, injured 

and displaced by major flood events. SEM 2015 

118 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

STEPHANIE LYONS 

THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE 

WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES 

# REFERENCES 

Books and reports 

– ARC. 2015. ‘Indonesia’.  American Red 

Cross . http://www.redcross.org/what-

we-do/international-services/where-

we-help/asia/indonesia. 

– HRW. 2006.  Condemned Communities: 

Forced Evictions In Jakarta: III. 

Background . Human Rights Watch. 

http://www.hrw.org/reports/2006/ 

indonesia0906/3.htm. 

– IFRC. 2014.  Information Bulletin: 

Indonesia: Floods . International 

Federation of the Red Cross and Red 

Crescent Societies. https://www.ifrc. 

org/docs/Appeals/rpts14/IDfl300114.pdf. 

– IOM. 2013.  Disaster Risk Reduction 

Compendium: Asia . IOM. http:// 

publications.iom.int/bookstore/ 

index.php?main_page=product_ 

info&cPath=1&products_id=977. 

– IOM. 2014b.  Human Rights, Climate 

Change, Environmental Degradation 

And Migration: A New Paradigm .

Issue In Brief. IOM. http:// 

publications.iom.int/bookstore/ 

index.php?main_page=product_ 

info&cPath=49&products_id=1067. 

– McKinsey Global Institute. 2012. 

The Archipelago Economy: Unleashing 

Indonesia’S Potential . McKinsey & 

Company. http://www.mckinsey.com/ 

insights/asia-pacific/the_archipelago_ 

economy. 

– Nurlambang, T. 2012. ‘Public Policy 

Matters On Climate Change And 

Migration In Indonesia: The Case 

Of Jakarta City’. In  Climate Change, 

Migration And Human Security 

In Southeast Asia , 1st ed., 74-83. S. 

Rajaratnam School of International 

Studies. http://www.isn.ethz.ch/Digital-

Library/Publications/Detail/?id=151217. 

– OCHA. 2013.  Monthly Humanitarian 

Bulletin: Indonesia . OCHA. http:// 

www.un.or.id/documents_upload/ 

newsletter/2013%2001_%28EN%29_ 

Humanitarian%20Bulletin.pdf. 

– OCHA. 2014.  Update On Jakarta Floods 

As Of 21 January 2014 . http://reliefweb. 

int/map/indonesia/indonesia-update-

jakarta-floods-21-january-2014. 

– ReliefWeb. 2014.  Indonesia - Jakarta 

Flooding (ECHO Daily Flash 5 February 

2014) Report . ReliefWeb. http:// 

reliefweb.int/report/indonesia/ 

indonesia-jakarta-flooding-echo-

daily-flash-5-february-2014. 

– Republic of Indonesia. 2013.  National 

Action Plan For Climate Change 

Adaptation (RAN-API) Synthesis 

Report . Republic of Indonesia. 

https://gc21.giz.de/ibt/var/app/ 

wp342deP/1443/wp-content/ 

uploads/filebase/programme-info/ 

RAN-API_Synthesis_Report_2013. 

pdf. 

– UNDP. 2015.  Strengthening Disaster 

Risk Governance: UNDP Support 

During The HFA Implementation 

Period 2005-2015 . UNDP. http://www. 

undp.org/content/undp/en/home/ 

librarypage/crisis-prevention-and-

recovery/strengthening-disaster-

risk-governance.html. 

– UN-Habitat. 2003.  The Challenge 

Of Slums: Global Report On 

Human Settlements 2003 . UN-

Habitat. http://mirror.unhabitat. 

org/pmss/listItemDetails. 

aspx?publicationID=1156. 

– USAID. 2014.  Indonesia: Disaster 

Response And Risk Reduction . USAID. 

– Wilhelm, M. 2011.  Approaching 

Disaster Vulnerability In A Megacity: 

Community Resilience To Flooding In 

Two Kampungs In Jakarta . https:// 

opus4.kobv.de/opus4-uni-passau/ 

frontdoor/index/index/docId/175. 

– World Bank. 2009.  Climate 

Resilient Cities: A Primer On 

Reducing Vulnerabilities To 

Disasters . World Bank. http:// 

siteresources.worldbank.org/ 

INTEAPREGTOPURBDEV/ 

Resources/Primer_e_book.pdf. 

– World Bank. 2012a.  FY2013-2015 

Country Partnership Strategy For 

Indonesia . World Bank. http:// 

documents.worldbank.org/curated/ 

en/2012/12/17559441/indonesia-

country-partnership-strategy-

period-fy13-fy15. 

– World Bank. 2012b.  Jakarta Case 

Study Overview: Climate Change, 

Disaster Risk And The Urban Poor .

http://siteresources.worldbank. 

org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/ 

Resources/336387-1306291319853/ 

CS_Jakarta.pdf. 

– World Bank. 2012c.  World Bank 

Supports Flood Mitigation Efforts In 

Jakarta . http://web.worldbank.org/ 

WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,con 

tentMDK:23088802~menuPK:34466 

~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSite 

PK:4607,00.html. 

– World Bank. 2015a.  Jakarta Urgent 

Flood Mitigation Project (P111034) 

Implementation Status & Results Report .

World Bank. http://www.worldbank. 

org/projects/P111034/jakarta-urgent-

flood-mitigation-project?lang=en. 

Articles 

– Douglass, M. 2010. ‘Globalization, 

Mega-Projects And The 

Environment: Urban Form And 

Water In Jakarta’.  Environment 

And Urbanization Asia  1 (1): 45-65. 

doi:10.1177/097542530900100105. 

– Firman, Tommy, Indra M. Surbakti, 

Ichzar C. Idroes, and Hendricus A. 

Simarmata. 2011. ‘Potential Climate-

Change Related Vulnerabilities In 

Jakarta: Challenges And Current 

Status’.  Habitat International 

35 (2): 372-378. doi:10.1016/j. 

habitatint.2010.11.011. 

– Susandi, A, D Pratiwi, T Suwarto, 

and M Tamamadin. 2011. ‘Adaptive 

Behavior Assessment Based On 

Climate Change Event: Jakarta’S Flood 

In 2007’. http://www.eepsea.org/o-k2/ 

view-item/id-410/Itemid-385/. 

– Ward, P. J., W. P. Pauw, M. W. 

van Buuren, and M. A. Marfai. 

2012. ‘Governance Of Flood Risk 

Management In A Time Of Climate 

Change: The Cases Of Jakarta And 

Rotterdam’. Environmental Politics  22 

(3): 518-536. doi:10.1080/09644016.201 

2.683155. SEM 2015 

119 

Press articles 

– ABC News. 2014. ‘Tens Of Thousands 

Displaced In Deadly Jakarta Floods’. 

ABC News . http://www.abc.net. 

au/news/2014-01-20/an-tens-of-

thousands-displaced-by-deadly-

floods-in-jakarta/5207586. 

– Dewi. 2013a. ‘Kampung Project A 

Test For City To Provide Housing 

For Urban Poor’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2013/05/06/kampung-project-

a-test-city-provide-housing-urban-

poor.html. 

– Dewi. 2013b. ‘Jokowi Sits At Same 

Table With Pluit Dam Residents’. 

Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2013/05/22/ 

jokowi-sits-same-table-with-pluit-

dam-residents.html. 

– Dewi. 2013c. ‘Jakarta Prepares 

To Move Squatters To Allow For 

Flood-Prevention Work’.  Jakarta 

Post . http://www.thejakartapost. 

com/news/2013/01/25/jakarta-

prepares-move-squatters-allow-flood-

prevention-work.html. 

– Dewi. 2014. ‘Ahok Skeptical About 

Giant Sea Wall Project’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/11/03/ahok-skeptical-

about-giant-sea-wall-project.html. 

– Ekuatorial. 2014. ‘BNPB : Seven 

Culprits Of Jakarta’S Oods’. 

Ekuatorial . http://ekuatorial.com/ 

en/disaster/bnpb-seven-culprits-of-

jakartas-floods#!/story=post-9572. 

– Elyda. 2014. ‘BNPB Wait For Governor 

To Act On Flooding’.  Jakarta 

Post . http://www.thejakartapost. 

com/news/2014/11/29/bnpb-wait-

governor-act-flooding.html. 

– Elyda. 2015. ‘Central Govt Halts 

Jakarta Reclamation’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2015/04/13/central-govt-halts-

jakarta-reclamation.html. 

– Elyda and Dewi. 2014. ‘Red Alert: 

Jakarta Hit With Early Flooding’. 

Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/11/21/ 

red-alert-jakarta-hit-with-early-

flooding.html. 

– Hill, E. 2013. ‘Indonesia’S Ambitious 

Plans To Reduce Jakarta Flooding’. 

Floodlist . http://floodlist.com/asia/ 

plans-reduce-jakarta-flooding. 

– Ika, A. 2014. ‘Flooding In Jakarta: The 

Numbers’.  Wall Street Journal . http:// 

blogs.wsj.com/briefly/2014/11/28/ 

flooding-in-jakarta-the-numbers/. 

– Jakarta Post. 2013a. ‘Residents In 

Flood Prone Areas Ready To Be 

Relocated’.  Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2013/02/01/ 

residents-flood-prone-areas-ready-be-

relocated.html. 

– Jakarta Post. 2014a. ‘566 People 

Killed By Natural Disasters In 

2014: BNPB’.  Jakarta Post . http:// 

www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/12/31/566-people-killed-

natural-disasters-2014-bnpb.html. 

– Jakarta Post. 2014b. ‘Relocated 

Riverbank Squatters Gripe About 

Apartment Conditions’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/02/17/relocated-riverbank-

squatters-gripe-about-apartment-

conditions.html. 

– Jakarta Post. 2014c. ‘Ciliwung 

Riverbank Residents Protest Eviction 

Plan’.  Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/06/07/ 

ciliwung-riverbank-residents-protest-

eviction-plan.html. 

– Jakarta Post. 2014d. ‘Flood 

Displaces Kampung Pulo Residents 

Again’.  Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/02/24/ 

flood-displaces-kampung-pulo-

residents-again.html 1/2. 

– Jakarta Post. 2015a. ‘S. Korea Offers 

$10M Aid For Giant Seawall’.  Jakarta 

Post . http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2015/01/23/s-korea-offers-10m-

aid-giant-seawall.html. 

– Jakarta Post. 2015b. ‘Tender Begins For 

Sea Wall’.  Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2015/02/14/ 

tender-begins-sea-wall.html 1/2. 

– Jakarta Post. 2015c. ‘The Week In 

Review: Drowning Jakarta’.  Jakarta 

Post . http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2015/02/15/the-week-review-

drowning-jakarta.html. 

– Japan Times. 2014. ‘‘Great Wall Of 

Jakarta’ Planned To Combat Floods 

In Sinking Capital’.  Japan Times .

http://www.japantimes.co.jp/ 

news/2014/10/16/asia-pacific/science-

health-asia-pacific/great-wall-jakarta-

planned-combat-floods-sinking-

capital/#.VSt8ExOUfXE. 

– Kelety. 2014a. ‘Clean Water A Luxury 

At Pluit Low-Cost Apartments’. 

Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/07/12/ 

clean-water-a-luxury-pluit-low-cost-

apartments.html. 

– Kelety. 2014b. ‘Mampang Squatters 

Evicted To Widen River’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/08/19/mampang-squatters-

evicted-widen-river.html. 

– Kelety. 2014c. ‘Illegal Vendors Face 

Ongoing Expulsions, Confiscations’. 

Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/08/09/ 

illegal-vendors-face-ongoing-

expulsions-confiscations.html. 

– Maclean, D. 2014. ‘Flooding and 

Jakarta’s Urban Poor’.  The Diplomat .

http://thediplomat.com/2014/05/ 

flooding-and-jakartas-urban-

poor/?allpages=yes&print=yes. 

– Purnamasari, D. 2013. ‘Human Rights 

Activists To Monitor Pluit Flood 

Relocations’.  Jakarta Globe . http:// 

thejakartaglobe.beritasatu.com/news/ 

jakarta/human-rights-activists-to-

monitor-pluit-flood-relocations/. 

– Rochmyaningsih. 2013. ‘Is Cloud 

Seeding Preventing Further Flooding 

In Indonesia?’.  Scidevnet . http://www. 

scidev.net/global/earth-science/news/ 

is-cloud-seeding-preventing-further-

flooding-in-indonesia-.html. 

– Sentana, M. 2014. ‘Flooding In 

Jakarta Displaces Thousands Amid 

Continuing Rain’.  Wall Street 

Journal . http://blogs.wsj.com/ 

indonesiarealtime/2014/01/19/ 

flooding-in-jakarta-displaces-

thousands-amid-continuing-rain/tab/ 

print/. 

– Setiawati, I. 2014. ‘Flood Death Toll 

Rises To 23 People’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/01/27/flood-death-toll-

rises-23-people.html. 

– Tarrant, B. 2014. ‘Special Report: 

In Jakarta, That Sinking Feeling Is 

All Too Real’.  Reuters . http://www. 

reuters.com/article/2014/12/22/ 

us-sealevel-subsidence-jakarta-sr-

idUSKBN0K016S20141222. 

– Wardhani. 2015. ‘Jakarta Insists Coastal 

Reclamation Will Go Ahead’.  Jakarta 

Post . http://www.thejakartapost. 

com/news/2015/04/30/jakarta-insists-SEM 2015 

120 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

STEPHANIE LYONS 

THE JAKARTA FLOODS OF EARLY 2014: RISING RISKS IN ONE OF THE 

WORLD’S FASTEST SINKING CITIES 

coastal-reclamation-will-go-ahead. 

html. 

– Wardhani and Elyda. 2014. ‘Flood Hits 

Kampung Pulo, Again’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2014/05/24/flood-hits-kampung-

pulo-again.html. 

– Wilson. 2014. ‘Floods, Housing 

Security And Rights Of Jakarta’S 

Poor’.  Jakarta Post . http://www. 

thejakartapost.com/news/2014/02/08/ 

floods-housing-security-and-rights-

jakarta-s-poor.html. 

– Zein. 2015. ‘The Danger Of Floods 

Becoming Routine’.  Jakarta Post .

http://www.thejakartapost.com/ 

news/2015/02/11/the-danger-floods-

becoming-routine.html 1/4. 

– Websites 

– IDMC. 2013. ‘Indonesia: Internal 

Displacement In Brief’.  IDMC . http:// 

www.internal-displacement.org/ 

south-and-south-east-asia/indonesia/ 

summary. 

– IOM. 2014a. ‘Where We Work: 

Indonesia’. http://www.iom.int/ 

cms/en/sites/iom/home/where-we-

work/asia-and-the-pacific/indonesia. 

default.html?displayTab=latest-

news&v=1392752313000. 

– Peta Jakarta. 2015. ‘Petajakarta.Org/ 

Banjir’. http://petajakarta.org/banjir/ 

en/. 

– PMI. 2015. ‘Ready To Face Disaster 

With #Siagabencana Applications’. 

PMI . http://www.pmi.or.id/index. 

php/component/k2/item/474-

siap-hadapi-bencana-dengan-

aplikasisiagabencana.html. 

– Randall. 2013.  Moving Stories: Indonesia .

UK Climate Change and Migration 

Coalition. http://climatemigration. 

org.uk/moving-stories-indonesia/. 

– World Bank. 2015b. ‘Indonesia 

Dashboard’.  World Bank .

http://sdwebx.worldbank. 

org/climateportalb/ 

home.cfm?page=country_ 

profile&CCode=IDN. 

– World Bank. 2014a. ‘Jakarta Urgent 

Flood Mitigation Project/Jakarta 

Emergency Dredging Initiative 

Project’.  World Bank . http://www. 

worldbank.org/en/results/2014/09/10/ 

jakarta-emergency-dredging-

initiative-project. 

– World Bank. 2014b. ‘Reducing 

Extreme Poverty In Indonesia’. http:// 

www.worldbank.org/en/country/ 

indonesia/brief/reducing-extreme-

poverty-in-indonesia. 

Visuals 

– (Figure 1.) Wikipedia. 2009. Jakarta 

subdistrict. Creative commons 

Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 

Unported. http://en.wikipedia.org/ 

wiki/Jakarta#/media/File:Jakarta_ 

subdistrict.png 

– World Bank. 2010.  Jakarta Flood .

Video. https://www.youtube.com/ 

watch?v=UjzeW5BtgNA. SEM 2015 

121 

## CLOTHILDE TRONQUET 

# From Vunidogoloa to 

# Kenani: An Insight into 

# Successful Relocation 

“Today, we launch the first project in Fiji to save an entire village from the rise in sea 

levels caused by climate change. It is real. It is happening now .” (Bainimarama, 2014). 

# With this forceful introduction, Commodore Josaia Voreqe 

Bainimarama, Prime Minister of Fiji began his opening 

speech on the 16 th  January 2014 for the inauguration of the 

brand-new village where the residents of Vunidogoloa 

were about to move, 8 years after their initial request 

to relocate. This was a day for celebration, with colorful 

balloons, traditional outfits and ceremonial rituals, the 

Vunidogoloa people welcomed the Prime Minister, offi -

cials and journalists that had come to officially open their  kenani  (promised land) (PM 

Bainimarama opens Vunidogoloa Village Relocation Project - 2014, 2014). A far cry 

from the negatively connoted representations of environmental migration as being 

emergency-driven and compelled by humanitarian concerns, the Vunidogoloa relo -

cation is the result of a well-thought-out, multilateral and participative process that 

lasted nearly a decade. 

Climate change is a crucial issue for the 30 000 Pacific Islands, especially the 

smallest and low-lying ones. The intrinsic characteristics of small islands make them 

highly vulnerable to climate change, sea-level rise and extreme events. Floods, land -

slides, coastal erosion and storms are expected to increase in frequency and intensity, 

as a consequence of sea-level rise, thus putting at risk housing, facilities, infrastruc -

ture, and also crops and vegetated wetlands. Most of the settlements and infrastruc -

ture are located in coastal areas: the IPCC estimates that more than 50% of the popu -

lation of the islands in the Pacific lives within 1.5 km of the shore, exacerbating the 

adverse effects of climate change. The small islands’ vulnerability also raises concerns 

related to water resources, reef, agriculture and forest, biodiversity and energy. This 

high degree of vulnerability is in stark contrast to the emissions produced by these 

islands: while they only emit an estimated 1% of global greenhouse gases (0.006% for 

the Pacific Islands only), they are among the most exposed regions to the effects of 

climate change. They are thus required to dedicate their limited resources to adapta -

tion strategies, representing elevated costs relative to their Gross Domestic Product 

(IPCC, 2007) (Wilson, 2014). 

Faced with sea-level rise and increasingly extreme events, Pacific islanders have 

no choice but to develop resilience strategies, such as climate risk management 

programmes. Shore protection measures have been progressively replaced by more 

flexible strategies: trying to adjust to sea-level rise or backing off, while putting 

an emphasis on water stress, energy security etc. Permanent relocation, although 

considered as a last resort, seems inevitable following both slow-onset and disas -

trous events, although the number of people that will be affected in both the short SEM 2015 

> 122
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

and long-term is difficult to estimate. Relocation is a multifaceted process, requiring 

exhaustive preparation, addressing logistical, construction and economic matters, 

but also having to take political and social aspects into account. 

In this context, the successful relocation of Vunidogoloa has taken on an exem -

plary dimension. Located on Vanua Levu, the second largest island of Fiji, the small 

village of Vunidogoloa suffered from a high exposure to sea-level rise and extreme 

events. The residents took up the challenge of adaptation to climate change, and 

engaged in a process of relocation that officially started in 2006. Headed by two 

ministries and the inhabitants of Vunidogoloa, the relocation project involved a 

wide range of actors: from the funding provided by international organisations to 

the support given by non-state actors. The resettlement followed a comprehensive 

approach with housing, economic, and cultural factors all successfully taken into 

account. 

Based on that experience, this study is an attempt to answer the following ques -

tions: How did a 150-inhabitant village in Fiji cope with climate-related risks? How did 

the people from Vunidogoloa manage the relocation process? What levers and actors 

were mobilised to implement the project? And finally, what lessons can be drawn 

from this experience for future adaptation to climate change in low-lying islands? 

The first part will consider contextual elements of the case, and then examine the 

various aspects of the project. The next part will examine social and cultural aspects 

of the relocation, before finally analysing the value of the Vunidogoloa experience 

for adaptation policy making. 

The present study is based on the examination of Fijian governmental and local 

administration press releases and articles in local and international newspapers; 

blog publications; reports and documentation issued by the International Labour 

Organization (ILO), the Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC), the Nansen Initiative, 

and academic literature on climate change and adaptation. On top of this literature, 

exchanges were conducted by email with a member of the PCC, who held work -

shops in the village before the relocation, with a member of ILO that took part in the 

Cash for Work Program, and finally with Brook Meakins, a Californian attorney who 

visited the village before, during and after the relocation. 

1. CONSCIENTIZED INHABITANTS FACING CLIMATE CHANGE 

FIJI : 

> The Republic of Fiji is located in Melanesia, in the South Pacific Ocean. It is composed
> of 333 islands, among which approximately 100 are inhabited. 70% of the barely one
> million inhabitants live on the largest island of the country, Viti Levu, which hosts
> the capital city of Suva. Sixty kilometres northeast of Viti Levu lies Vanua Levu, the
> second largest island with an area of some 5 400 km² and a population of more
> than 130 000 people . Fiji mainly relies on economic revenue from tourism, but the
> country also exports sugar, textiles, copra, gold and silver, which make it one of the
> richest and most developed countries in the Pacific zone. Fiji is also endowed with
> timber and fish resources. The country has had a military government since 2006
> following the coup instigated by the current Prime Minister Commodore Bainimarama
> and the country was suspended from the Commonwealth in 2009 in the absence of
> the elections requested by the intergovernmental organisation. The suspension finally
> ended in 2014. Fiji is highly vulnerable to natural disasters and particularly prone to
> cyclones, earthquakes and tsunamis, floods and droughts, and landslides.

1.1. traditional village relying on a subsistence economy 

The former village of Vunidogoloa is located in the province of Cakaudrove (see 

Figure 2: Vanua Levu (United Nations)), in the district of Koroalau, 40 kilometers SEM 2015 

> 123

from Savu Savu (the second largest city on Vanua Levu) and 100 kilometers from 

Labasa, the main city of Vanua Levu. The main road of Saqani, alternatively called 

the Natewa Bay road or Savusavu road is situated more than a kilometre away from 

the village  (Figure 3: Vunidogoloa and Kenani before construction (author based on 

Google Maps) thus obligating the people from Vunidogoloa to travel more than one 

kilometre to reach the road in order to go to school, hospital etc. 

The village is made up of 26 houses in the Natewa Bay (se e Figure 2: Vanua Levu 

(United Nations), with the population cited at between 122 and 150 depending on the 

sources, 140 inhabitants being the most oft-quoted estimation. Tradition, culture and 

religion are crucial to the rural community of Vunidogoloa. The inhabitants form 

a cohesive and homogeneous group: they all share indigenous Fijian origins, they 

speak the iTaukei language along with English and mostly belong to the Methodist 

Church, with one or two exceptions of other Christian families. The village is tradi -

tionally organised with subcommittees in charge of every single aspect of community 

life, such as agriculture, religion, and health (Sorowale, Vunidogoloa: climate change 

induced relocation, 2011). Vunidogoloa’s organisation is embedded in the traditional 

indigenous Fijian organisation, based on chief-ruled hierarchy, with a stratification 

of chiefs starting from the level of the provinces  (yasana),  to  districts  (tikina cokavata), 

sub-districts  (tikina vou),  and the village community  (koro)  (Mills, 2014). 

On the island of Vanua Levu, where Vunidogoloa is located, economic revenues 

mainly come from the sugar industry, the copra crop and tourism, but, as in the 

rest of Fiji, the economy is still largely a subsistence economy. Vunidogoloa is no 

exception, relying on fishing and agriculture for its livelihood. Fishing provides the 

main economic revenues and the villagers used to grow taro roots, malanga (tubers 

that resemble sweet potatoes) and potatoes, before the sea destroyed the crops. The 

villagers also raise pigs. Home gardens containing local crops are essential to the live -

lihood of small islands. The reliance on ecological resources is widely acknowledged 

in the Pacific Islands; a report by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) cited 

Fiji’s level of dependence on plant resources at 65%, compared to 37% in Vanuatu, for 

example (IPPC, 2007). 

More anecdotally, the village is known for an alleged gift shared by two families 

to heal broken bones (Biumaiono, Mysterious gift of bone healing, 2013). 

Figure 1.  Fiji’s main 

islands: Viti Levu and 

Vanua Levu (Google 

Maps) 

Figure 2.  Vanua Levu (United Nations) SEM 2015 

124 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

CLOTHILDE TRONQUET 

FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL 

RELOCATION 

Figure 3.  Vunidogoloa and Kenani before construction 

Figure 4.  Former village of Vunidogoloa 

New location of the village 

Saqani main road 

Tabia River 

Former village of 

Vunidogoloa 

> Source: author based on Google Maps.
> Source: author based on Google Maps. SEM 2015
> 125

1.2. village exposed to the elements 

The village was formerly located between the Natewa bay and the Tabia river (see 

Figure 3: Vunidogoloa and Kenani before construction (author based on Google 

Maps)), exposing it to floods when high tides coincided with heavy rains, increasing 

the level of the river. In interviews in local media, inhabitants attest to the recurrent 

flooding in the village. Floods are not a new phenomenon, but their number and 

intensity have markedly increased in the past decade and the inhabitants observed 

the rise in sea level. Sea-level rise, flooding and erosion had considerable impacts on 

the livelihood of community: 

– The encroachment of the land by the sea and consequent erosion had already 

forced the village to partially move: there used to be houses located on the point 

where the river currently flows into Natewa Bay. The village used to cover a larger 

area and at that time it sat well above the sea level (Biumaiono, Rebuilding Vuni -

dogoloa, 2013). Even before the relocation of the village, many houses had already 

had to be moved several times (Sovaraki, 2014). 

– The construction of the houses had to be revised: the houses that were destroyed 

by the encroachment of the village and repeated floods were not rebuilt in the 

same way. The villagers recall the former houses being bigger and well built in 

the 1950s (Biumaiono, Rebuilding Vunidogoloa, 2013). Houses were placed on stilts 

(Meakins, 2012), but the elevation was not sufficient and the houses were system -

atically flooded. 

– The extreme weather even affected the way the villagers sleep. As Julia Edwards 

explains, the floods have made the floors of houses distorted and irregular, 

preventing the inhabitants from sleeping on the floor where they found a little 

freshness (Edwards, Bula Bulletin: Relocation of Vunidogoloa Village, 2012). 

Figure 5.  Vunidogola’s new location before construction 

> Source: author based on Google Maps.

SEM 2015 

126 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

CLOTHILDE TRONQUET 

FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL 

RELOCATION 

Figure 6.  Weathered of wood of the stilts houses 

Figure 8.  Stunted breadtree in Vunidogoloa 

Figure 7.  Repeatedly destroyed makeshift walkway 

> Photo by Simi Sorowale)
> Photo by Simi Sorowale
> Photo by Julia Edwards SEM 2015
> 127

– Access to facilities was also complicated. The walking path going up to the main 

road was systematically destroyed when waves swept through the village and 

the inhabitants had to repeatedly rebuild it (Sorowale, Vunidogoloa: The Clear 

and Present Danger, 2012) (See  Figure 7: Repeatedly destroyed makeshift walkway 

(Photo by Simi Sorowale). 

– The distance from the main road forced them to use bamboo rafts to get to the 

hospital (Edwards, Relocation revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 

2014), which the inhabitants were unable to access at high tide. 

– Food security was also challenged with a decline in agricultural productivity and 

the consequent disappearance of home gardens: the floods destroyed the crops 

the Vunidogoloa people used to grow, and made the soil saline and thus unpro -

ductive. Vegetation no longer grew in the salty soil (Meakins, 2012) and only with -

ered fruits grew on the few breadtrees that subsisted (Edwards, Bula Bulletin: 

Relocation of Vunidogoloa Village, 2012). Moreover, severe drought also affected 

the yields (Sorowale, Climate Change and Relocation: Vunidogoloa and Nuku -

damu , 2012). 

In addition to flooding and erosion, Vunidogoloa, like the rest of Fiji, is also 

exposed to other natural risks such as tropical cyclones, an example of which is the 

intense cyclone Tomas that struck Vanua Levu in 2010. In 2012, the Cakaudrove prov -

ince was cited as the worst affected by climate change in Fiji during the National 

Summit for Building Resilience to Climate Change (Fiji Times - PACNEWS, 2012). 

Vunidogoloa is a traditional Fijian village, with a small and homogeneous popu -

lation both in ethnic and religious terms. The village relies on subsistence activities 

mainly based on fishing and, to a lesser extent, agriculture. In the last decade the 

environmental degradation caused by sea-level rise, storms and erosion – exacerbated 

by the village’s remote location – affected the villagers’ livelihood and living condi -

tions, causing them to think about relocation. The fact that relocation seems to be 

fully driven by environmental factors makes the residents “environmental migrants”, 

although this term was rarely used in the media. The existence of other intertwined 

social and economic circumstances as catalysts for the relocation can also be consid -

ered; for instance, the remoteness of the village from the main road and the thus 

complicated access to medical and educational facilities may also have contributed 

to the residents’ request to move. Although exact data on fishing resources is unavail -

able, it is also possible that overfishing or climate change have made them scarcer, 

enhancing the inhabitants’ desire to move. 

2. RELOCATION: A LONG-TERM AND COSTLY PROCESS 

2.1. Relocation as a last resort: from the necessity to adapt to relocation 

The idea of relocation dates back to the 1950s. Quoting the headman, Sailosi Ramatu, 

the journalist Ana Sovaraki recalls in the Fiji Sun that the first instance of reaction to 

extreme climatic events occurred in 1956, when talks put the idea of relocation on the 

table, even though it was not carried out at that time. According to Mr. Ramatu, the village 

was not resettled because, unlike today, the villagers were not well-informed with regard 

to climate change and environment-related risks; the elders were reluctant to relocate 

(see part III.A.); and the necessary funds to put a relocation process in place were not 

available (Sovaraki, 2014). 

Adaptation to new climatic patterns was first implemented with the inner 

resources of the village. Firstly, as mentioned above, the most threatened houses 

were moved, but the sea kept gaining ground. A second strategy consisted in building 

a seawall in order to keep the high tides at bay. According to the Fiji Times, a wall was 

funded by the Japanese government (Biumaiono, Rebuilding Vunidogoloa, 2013). In SEM 2015 

> 128
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

fact, the still visible seawall was not the first one to be built: as noted in a fieldwork 

study carried out in the village, the remnants of a former sea wall are located under 

water 60 meters away from the current shoreline (Sorowale, Vunidogoloa: The Clear 

and Present Danger, 2012). Even though the seawall was protective for a time, the sea 

progressively overtook the wall and progressively broke it down. Worse still, the wall 

now has a detrimental effect on the village, holding water within the village area, 

preventing it from receding to the sea. 

Figure 9.  Broken seawall 

> Photo by RCommuser on FlickR

Having noted the inadequacy of moving houses to different but equally precar -

ious sites within the village and building seawalls, the inhabitants strongly consid -

ered relocation as a last resort. Relocation was discussed for years before the village 

finally resolved to ask for the government support. The villagers approached the 

government and formally asked for relocation assistance in 2006, at a time when 

the impacts of floods and erosion were becoming harsher. With this request, Vuni -

dogoloa set a precedent, as it was the first village to ask to relocate due to climate 

change related-events. The government accepted the proposed relocation but the 

project did not start straight away. Numerous discussions and consultations were 

held among the villagers and the project commenced once the inhabitants had given 

their consent. During the discussion process, the 2010 cyclone Thomas had a marked 

impact on the debates by making climate-related events more visible, raising aware -

ness both in the village and within the government (Datt, 2014). 

Indeed, the awareness raising process was not only occurring at the village level, but 

also at the government level as evidenced by the holding of the first National Summit 

for Building Resilience to Climate Change in October 2012. The meeting illustrated 

new concerns and political will to address the impacts of climate change. It also had 

an educational dimension, seeking to inform the population about their changing 

environment. The manager for the Provincial Services iTaukei Affairs Board, Timoci 

Namotu, reported that provincial officers had launched a training programme and 

information work targeting the population of Cakaudrove (Vunidogoloa’s province) SEM 2015 

> 129

at the district and village level (Fiji Times - PACNEWS, 2012). The dissemination of 

information most probably contributed to the growing awareness of the population, 

including in Vunidogoloa. Indeed a striking feature in the interviews transcribed in 

the press from 2012 onwards, is the fact that inhabitants were clearly aware that the 

slow-onset events and extreme natural disasters that struck them were caused by 

climate change, a feature that was confirmed by Brook Meakins. 

2.2. The relocation project: location and progress 

In 2012, Vunidogoloa officially received the support of the government and was 

selected to be the first village to relocate. As such, the relocation process had an 

experimental element. The relocation plan initially covered the building of 30 houses 

and water and energy facilities, with government assistance focusing on funding, 

technical support and advice. 

2.2.1. Kenani, the chosen and promised land 

The selection of a site for the relocation was crucial in the process. The fact that 

the site was chosen rapidly by the inhabitants certainly constituted a factor of the 

success of the relocation. Newspaper reports make no mention of any other poten -

tial site that might have been considered for the relocation, and, as reported in the 

Fiji Times, the site had first been identified as early as 1952 in the perspective of a 

potential relocation (Biumaiono, Rebuilding Vunidogoloa, 2013). 

The site lies on higher ground, nearly two kilometres inland from the original 

village site, but still within Vunidogoloa boundaries (see  Figure 5: Vunidogola new 

location before construction (Google Maps). One house already stood alongside the 

new site (Meakins, 2012). It is a 5-acre parcel, which belongs to one of Vunidogoloa’s 

residents: Mataqali Nadawa and it was apparently donated without compensation 

(Taleitaki, 2014). The absence of land-related issues greatly facilitated the project; as 

a member of the national disaster management office stated, the acquisition of a 

new land would have extended the relocation process and involved far higher costs 

(Wilson, 2014). 

The villagers named it Kenani, after the Fijian word for Canaan, the Biblical 

Promised Land. As the headman declared to the Methodist mission partner Julia 

Edwards “after many years our prayers have finally been answered”; “God has allo -

cated a special place for us” (Edwards, Climate justice and the Pacific Conference of 

Churches: moving the relocation agenda in the Pacific, 2014). The religious dimen -

sion of the relocation of Vunidogoloa should not be underestimated; the fact that 

the villagers consider their new village as a place given to them by God imbues the 

relocation process with meaning in the eyes of villagers and highly contributed to 

their approval of and commitment to the project (see part III.B.). 

2.2.2. A delayed but successful implementation, based on local participation 

The project was only officially launched in 2012, when Vunidogoloa received the 

government confirmation that they had been selected for relocation. The relocation 

plan covered the building of 30 identical houses, in accordance with the choice of 

the villagers that everyone would be treated equally. All houses were to be equipped 

with their own separated kitchen, with running water, provided by a natural system 

through gradient drainage, requiring the construction of a water source and tanks. 

The houses were also planned to have a proper bathroom with inside toilets and a 

shower, which was not the case in the former village. Finally, the plan included an 

energy supply with solar panels for each house. It also planned to implement income-

generating activities to ensure the livelihoods of the community. From the begin -

ning, the relocation process has been driven by equality concerns and has been based 

on a consensual and participative decision-making process. The provision of basic 

facilities and economic opportunities demonstrates the comprehensive character of SEM 2015 

> 130
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

the relocation: it is not simply about moving people from one place to another, but 

also aims to ensure better living conditions and to serve the community’s livelihood. 

Due to a lack of evidence, it is very hard to distinguish the elements of the 

project which directly stemmed from the villagers’ will from those which arose 

from government input, as well as the changes that were made to the project during 

its implementation. It should be noted that all reviews of the project emphasise its 

participative and inclusive aspects, underlining the fact that villagers had a central 

role in the decision-making process. It was decided, seemingly by the villagers, that 

each married couple would have its own house; the former village only had 26 houses 

and some married couples used to share their house with up to three families (see 

part I.A.) (Edwards, Relocation revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014). 

Although not greatly commented upon in the media, the implementation of the 

project was delayed in several regards, firstly from its confirmation in 2006 to an 

official launch in 2012. Subsequently, the construction of the houses was due to be 

completed by the end of 2012 (Silaitoga, Sea level woes, 2012), but was only finished 

at the beginning of 2014. In August 2012, the divisional planning officer north Alipate 

Bolalevu justified the delays in the local press by citing the time needed to fulfil all 

of the requisite procedural stages before the construction could actually start: “ The 

villagers will inform government through district and provincial council meetings of the 

situation they face in their villages as a result of climate change. Then they will have to iden -

tify a new piece of land for relocation and liaise with the mataqali for consent. When that is 

done, the villagers together with the consent from the mataqali will inform their provincial 

council offices and then it will come to the Ministry of Provincial Development where assis -

tance and other relocation details would be attended to .” (Silaitoga, Sea level woes, 2012). 

An initial delay can be attributed to the earthwork the parcel required. The site 

was located on the top of a hill, which needed to be lowered and earthen tiers 

were constructed (Silaitoga, Works delay village relocation, 2012). After heavy rain, 

the recently levelled ground was then found to be prone to erosion and landslides, 

which gave rise to new work. The villagers planted long-rooted vetiver grass – locally 

known to stabilise the soil – on the advice of agricultural officers (Silaitoga, Villagers 

put down roots, 2012). Then, the delivery of the building material was planned for the 

beginning of September 2012 (Silaitoga, Sea level woes, 2012), but 

by the end of 2012, the soil had not yet been sufficiently stabi -

lised ,and timber had been cut for only two houses (Edwards, 

Climate-induced relocation: a first for Fiji, 2013). 

Contradictory information arises from the different press 

reports, government press releases and international organi -

sations concerning the tempo of construction of the houses, 

which research work for the present study did not manage to 

clarify. In March 2013, according to the Fiji Sun, 3 houses were 

reported to have been built in the new village (Tuimoala, 2013). 

In September 2013, according to the Fjii Times, 14 houses had 

been built thus far and 16 others had been planned (Moceiwa, 

2013). This affirmation closely corresponds to ILO information 

of September 2013, according to which 16 houses had been built 

in 7 months (ILO, 2013). But in December 2013, the government 

stated in a press release that only 10 had been built, including 8 

completed with 24 still to be completed (Fiji government, 2013). 

The construction resumed at high speed with 4 houses being 

built in 15 days (ILO, 2014). The houses were finally completed 

by the very end of 2013 (New homes to open soon with income 

generating provisions for Vunidogoloa residents, 2013). 

One thing that is certain is that the lack of materials was 

at least partially responsible for the slow progress of the work 

Figure 10.  Villagers planting grass 

at the new village 

> Photo by Serafina Silaitoga SEM 2015
> 131

and its suspension for 4 weeks in August and September 2013. As was confirmed by a 

member of ILO, the volunteers that built the houses had to share the same building 

tools, which considerably slowed down construction; although a few months before -

hand a journalist suspected that the delays were caused by the recurrent stability 

problems of the ground (Pareti, 2013). 

Figure 11.  Houses under construction in April 2013 

> Photo by Julia Edwards

Figure 12.  Houses under construction in August 2013 

> Photo by RCommuser -Flickr

The houses were built according to the initial plan, and were effectively endowed 

with a supply of water and renewable energy, and although the construction 

suffered some delays, the postponement of the move does not seem to have caused 

any kind of conflict. On the contrary, Reports bear witness to the enthusiasm of 

the villagers and their gratitude regarding the government involvement at all stages 

of the construction process (Silaitoga, Villagers put down roots, 2012). Although the 

houses were built gradually, the villagers moved together to the new site of Kenani 

over a three-day period in January 2014. SEM 2015 

> 132
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

The question of property rights has not been addressed in the media, but as 

confirmed by a member of ILO, the inhabitants not only benefit from the usufruct 

of the houses, they also own them. 

2.2.3. Shared costs revised upwards 

As of 2012, it was acknowledged that the Fijian Government would cover two thirds of 

the relocation costs, corresponding to the building materials, the construction of the 

houses, the construction of the infrastructure related to income-generating activities 

and labour. It was planned that the villagers would contribute the remaining third 

of the cost that would be provided through wood supply and labour (Meakins, 2012). 

This division of the financial burden, suggested by the government, seemingly won 

unanimous approval. 

It is hard to establish an exact estimate of the costs of the relocation, as the figures 

communicated varied a great deal depending on the stage of the relocation and the 

source, but it can be clearly asserted that the actual expense exceeded the expected 

costs. Thus the 2/3-1/3 equation was exceeded, turning into a 75% governmental 

25% local split according to the media, and in truth the governmental part probably 

exceeded 75% of the costs. The landscaping work was not planned at the beginning 

of the project and generated new expenses. In March 2013, the director of environ -

ment of the Commissioner Northern’s office, Jope Davetanivalu indicated to the 

press that the FJD 310,000 made available by the government had to be increased by 

an additional FJD 50,000, mostly because of the irregularities of the location site. In 

2013, the director treaties of the Foreign Affairs Ministry, Esala Nayasi, evoked a FJD 

200,000 surplus for the excavation work of both Vunidogoloa village and Narikoso 

(another village engaged in a relocation process), without giving any detail on the 

precise sharing of the costs by each village (PCC, 2013). In another article, the plan -

ning officer north Alipate Bolalevu explains that the cost of the Kenani site levelling 

was about FJD 130,000, which would match the figures of Esala Nayasi with 65% of 

the earthwork expenses for the two villages dedicated to Vunidogoloa. 

At the launch of the project, in 2012, the estimated cost of each house was around 

FJD 15,000 (Rawalai, Village relocation begins, 2013), amounting to FJD 450,000 overall 

for the 30 houses, with two thirds (FJD 300,000) supposedly covered by the govern -

ment. In 2013, the press communicated that the allocated budget for the relocation 

amounted to $360,000 (Pareti, 2013). But, despite the fact that the infrastructure for 

income generating activities has to be added, this figure is far below the actual cost. 

By the end of the process, in January 2014, the government communicated that it 

had spent FJD 879,000 (some USD 432,206) on the whole relocation process (Silai -

toga, Villagers to move into new homes, 2014). However, according to the IPS news 

agency, the cost of the relocation process reached FJD 978,000 (Wilson, 2014). Finally, 

at the Conference of the Parties in December 2014 in Lima, the figure was put at FJD 

988,228.89 (SPEREP, 2014). It can thus safely be said that the actual cost of the reloca -

tion amounted to nearly three times the original cost planning. 

The village contribution, as mentioned above, was provided in the form of 

timber and labour. A logging license was issued by the government for the village 

to cut down part of the forest on their own territory, with the logging handled 

by a local company, Vitiana Timber Limited, owned by the recently deceased local 

businessman Bhadur Ali (Edwards, Relocation revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua 

Levu, Fiji, 2014) (Biumaiono, Rebuilding Vunidogoloa, 2013). The financial contribu -

tion corresponding to the timber was estimated at FJD 250,000 (Edwards, Relocation 

revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014), namely 22% of the total project 

(excluding the valorisation of the labour). 

Beyond the financial distribution between the government and the villagers, 

the distribution reflected a process of task sharing: the villagers were in charge of 

logging the wood and were expected to take part in the construction process and the SEM 2015 

> 133

government covered the remainder of the expenses. The access to timber resources 

within the community was therefore a key element of the relocation’s success. 

3. A COMPREHENSIVE PROCESS REQUIRING MULTILATERAL 

MOBILISATION 

3.1 Relocating: from construction to economic empowerment 

As observed above, the relocation process went hand-in-hand with an improvement 

in living conditions thanks to the provision of basic facilities and through the devel -

opment of income-generating activities, building a true comprehensive framework 

for the relocation. From the construction of the houses to the establishment of new 

economic activities, a wide range of actors were mobilised in the relocation process. 

The villagers undoubtedly played a fundamental role in the relocation but they were 

closely supported by the local and national governments and they also benefited 

from assistance from international organisations. 

The project was a joint venture between the villagers, the local government with 

the support of the Commissioner Northern’s office, the national government with 

the assistance of the Ministry of Provincial Development, National Disaster Manage -

ment and the Ministry of Labour, in particular through the participation of volun -

teers from the National Employment Centre (Vunidogoloa cashes in, 2013). 

3.1.1. Construction of the houses 

The construction of the houses was undertaken by volunteers identified by the 

Ministry of Labour among the unemployed people registered at the National 

Employment Center (NEC). After a selection process, 12 qualified unemployed people 

were selected out of 28 to work on clearing the parcel, crop planting and construc -

tion of the village. All of them followed an Occupational Safety and Health training 

course and attended a session on the traditional values and good practices and behav -

iour (ILO, 2014). For the work completed, they received a weekly allowance from 

the Ministry of Labour in addition to board and lodging. Observing that construc -

tion was advancing at a slow pace due to the lack of tools, the Ministry of Labour 

requested the support of the ILO within the framework of an adapted Cash for Work 

Plus Programme. After the conclusion of an agreement in November 2013, the ILO 

provided safety equipment and additional tools to the volunteers, which sped up the 

construction of the houses, with 4 houses being built in 15 days. 

3.1.2. Installation of solar panels 

Figure 13.  Solar panel in Kenani 

> Photo by Julia Edwards SEM 2015
> 134
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

The use of solar power systems is part of a wider energy policy to which Fiji has 

committed. With the aim of reducing emissions and in pursuit of energy independ -

ency, Fiji has already become a “renewable energy island” with more than half of its 

electricity being produced by renewable energy sources (IPCC, 2007). In the case of 

Vunidogoloa, the installation of solar panels was facilitated by the existence of a UN 

Women-funded rural empowerment programme, which trained 10 Fijian women in 

solar engineering at the Barefoot College in India for 6 months in 2012. Thanks to this 

capacity-building programme, trained women took responsibility for the electrifica -

tion of the new houses, as was the case for a dozen Fijian villages, and the villagers 

could benefit from up to 3 solar lights, for the price of the wiring (Edwards, Reloca -

tion revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014) (Rawalai, Woman lights up 

homes, 2014) (Fiji Government, 2014). 

3.1.3. New economic opportunities 

The development of income-generating activities was included in the project 

from the beginning but elements of the economic activities to be developed in 

the new village changed over time, such as the modalities of support. As recalled 

by a member of ILO, it was initially planned that the inhabitants would receive a 

cash grant amounted to FJD 200 per family for their own economic development, 

however it was later decided that the income generating activities would be devel -

oped at the community level jointly with the assistance organisations. The activity 

of rice farming, mentioned in 2012 (Kumar, 2012), disappeared from the project later 

on, aquaculture and pineapple farming were mentioned from the beginning and 

remained in the project, and finally, the installation of copra drier and the planting 

of banana shoots was added by the end of 2013. These different activities were imple -

mented through close cooperation between the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry 

of Fisheries, and the ILO. 

Figure 14.  Pineapple tops and ponds in Kenani 

> Photo by Julia Edwards. SEM 2015
> 135

After surveying the area, the Ministry of Agriculture recommended the planting 

of banana and pineapple tops, which were provided by the ILO, and staff from the 

Ministry of Agriculture assisted the villagers with the planting of the crops and 

advised them on farming practices. Finally, the ILO also provided copra dryer (ILO, 

2014). 

Considering the extended distance to the sea, the promoters of the project also 

considered aquaculture as a complementary activity to fishing. Four fish and prawn 

ponds (out of the 8 initially announced in 2013) were built by the Ministry of Fisheries 

(Silaitoga, Villagers to ready eight new ponds, 2013). During the visit of the Methodist 

church in November 2014, only one pond had been stocked with fish (Edwards, Relo -

cation revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014). Cattle farming infra -

structure, such as paddocks have also been built (Wilson, 2014). 

The Vunidogoloa relocation was not a mere population movement; it was accom -

panied by structural changes aiming to improve living conditions and make the 

community more sustainable and more resilient to climate changes. The Govern -

ment and the ILO supported the relocation so that Kenani would offer new economic 

opportunities, supporting a transition from fishing-based revenues to agricultural-

related activities more broadly speaking and creating new economic opportunities. 

The villagers received material assistance, technical advice, and training in order for 

them to tackle the new activities. A lack of information precludes an evaluation of 

the actual appropriation of the agricultural crops and aquaculture infrastructure and 

the effective economic benefits derived from them. 

3.2. Post relocation observations: improved quality of life in an on-going project 

The move to Kenani has taken place and the available reviews of community life in 

the new village are very positive. The villagers seem very grateful to the government 

for having funded and managed the relocation. As summarised in the report under -

taken by the Methodist church in November 2014: “ life is easier ”. The relocation has 

facilitated an alleviation in the daily life of the villagers: the proximity of the road 

has simplified access to facilities; now the children are able to go to school by bus and 

the hospital can be reached easily. Fishing activities have continued in conjunction 

with the new activities, the only drawback being that the fishermen are now forced 

to commute back and forth to the sea to go fishing. No trace seems to remain from 

the concerns evoked in 2012 about children’s safety arising from the proximity of the 

new site to the main road (Edwards, Bula Bulletin: Relocation of Vunidogoloa Village, 

2012). The village has even become an attraction on the island and school children 

frequently visit it (Edwards, Relocation revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, 

Fiji, 2014). This pedagogical role of the village could potentially turn Kenani into a 

tourist attraction. 

However, in January 2014, the relocation was still not complete. The exposure 

to landslides and erosion necessitated the implementation of a second phase of the 

project, as further landscaping was needed, in conjunction with the installation of 

waterways, drains and footpaths. An evacuation centre was also built during this 

second part of the project. The second phase has further increased the overall cost of 

the relocation: in September 2014, the government estimated that the additional cost 

amounted to FJD 200,000 (Fiji Government, 2014). 

4. COPING WITH THE SOCIAL CONCERNS RELATED TO RELOCATION 

4.1. Leaving home: acceptance and memory work in a traditional society 

Leaving home is never an easy process and Vunidogoloa was no exception to that 

rule, as the headman confirmed in 2014: “ It was not easy for the village community to 

relocate ” (UNOCHA, 2014).The vast majority of the villagers took part proactively in SEM 2015 

> 136
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

the relocation process and, as mentioned above, the residents consider the new 

site to be a holy land. But the move was particularly difficult to accept for others, 

as highlighted by Brook Meakins who visited the village before its move in 2012, 

and who observed that the relocation process aroused various issues ranging from 

property rights 1, lack of financial means, to cultural loss (Meakins, 2012). The elderly 

were particularly sensitive to this loss, as they had spent their entire lives in the 

village and felt it to be part of their existence and identity: “ This was especially true 

for older people that had lived in the village all their life, because the land is part of their 

culture and identity .” said the headman. He described the relocation process as “ a

very emotional period for us as there was a lot of waiting, insecurity, and questioning .” 

(UNOCHA, 2014). 

Distancing themselves from their home village raised significant concerns 

among the inhabitants, especially in the traditional Pacific context, where ties to 

the land are especially close, strong and meaningful. Indeed, the concept of land 

(vanua  in Fijian) is imbued with traditional significance that goes far beyond the 

economic value of the land.  Vanua  refers to the profound link between the people 

and the land, the land steeped in cultural heritage, transmitting identity to the 

people through their ancestors. This connection rules as a leading principle in the 

management and sustainable use of natural resources (IPCC, 2007). Understanding 

the vanua concept makes the trauma of leaving one’s homeland more intelligible, 

as relocation may be understood as a threat to the villagers ‘identity and cultural 

heritage. This approach also makes the concerns that were raised regarding the 

cemetery of Vunidogoloa more understandable: the inhabitants refused to leave 

the remains of their ancestors in a place vulnerable to the sea and chose to move 

them to the new location, which finally seemed to suit the villagers: “The new ceme -

tery is now more convenient, and we save time going to visit there compared with 

accessing the old site” said an elder, quoted by Julia Edwards (Edwards, Relocation 

revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014). 

However, the relocation of a community to a nearby site, in the case of Vuni -

dogoloa a site on the community’s own land, remains the least disruptive type of 

migration (Campbell, 2010): the community moved altogether, preserving their 

identity, tradition and even the structure of their neighbourhood, with neighbours 

from the former village remaining neighbours in the new one (Edwards, Reloca -

tion revisited: Vunidogoloa village, Vanua Levu, Fiji, 2014); and the move was made 

within village-owned land boundaries. The old village was not removed and still 

stands where the river Tibia and the Natewa Bay meet. As some articles report, the 

villagers still regularly visit it. As stated in the reports made by visitors, the vast 

majority of the population accepted the move, often with enthusiasm. Nonethe -

less, Vice mentions a striking anecdote in a photo report published in March 2015: 

the case supposedly recounted by the headman, Sailosi Ramatu, is the story of an 

old man who reportedly returned to the old village to be left to die there (Tan, 2015). 

An awareness-raising workshop was held in Vunidogoloa before the relocation 

took place in 2012. It was organised by the Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC) 

and the Nansen Initiative. The workshop provided an opportunity for the oldest 

villagers to tell their stories and discuss the history of Vunidogoloa. The villagers 

also reported the progressive environmental changes that had occurred over the 

past few decades and were able to voice their fears and hopes regarding the relo -

cation process. Despite the fact that research for this study did not unearth any 

villager feedback on the workshop, it can be confidently stated that this forum for  

> 1. Indeed, the customary tenure of 80% of the land in the Pacific did not make the relocation any easier as it renders
> any land transaction at the community level almost impossible (Anderson & Lee, 2010) SEM 2015
> 137

dialogue and exchange was valuable for the villagers, as a communal act to discuss 

and come to terms with a major change in the life of the community. 

Lastly, it should be recalled that migration and displacement in general are not 

new features for Pacific Islanders. The case of the Banabans, forced to migrate to Fiji 

in 1945 (Edwards, Phosphate mining and the relocation of the Banabans to northern 

Fiji in 1945: lessons for climate change forced displacement, 2014) is only one of a 

number of examples in the history of Pacific mobility; mobility runs in the Pacific 

islanders’ veins (Hau‘Ofa, 1994). This tradition of mobility is also present in Vuni -

dogoloa. Indeed, during the 2012 awareness-raising workshop, a previous displace -

ment of the community was evoked: their ancestors had already had to move from 

the inland mountain of Vanua Levu to the coastal area when their settlement was 

flooded (Edwards, Bula Bulletin: Relocation of Vunidogoloa Village, 2012). The recol -

lection of a past experience of displacement may also have enhanced the adaptive 

capacity and resilience of the community. 

4.2. Religion and the role of the Pacific Conference of Churches 

Christianity is the main religion across the Pacific, but the region offers a multi -

tude of syncretism. At the regional scale, the Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC) 

brings togther the Christian churches of the region and has a membership of 6.5 

million people. In Fiji, 80% of the population are Christian and most of them belong 

to Methodist churches, which corresponds to Vunidogoloa’s case where the whole 

population is Christian and the vast majority belonging to Methodist Church (see 

part I.A.). 

Religion is a major feature in the life of Pacific islanders and Vunidogoloa is 

no exception. The faith of the villagers accompanied them all along the relocation 

process. As early as 2007, when the relocation had just been confirmed by the govern -

ment, the villagers devoted the first Friday of each month to prayers and fasting for 

the relocation process (Edwards, Climate-induced relocation: a first for Fiji, 2013). 

The choice of the name Kenani, meaning “promised land” is also very indicative of 

their Christian devotion. 

The significance of religion in the life of the Pacific islanders confers a primary 

role to the churches in terms of day-to-day support. In light of the environmental-

related events suffered by the Pacific Islands, it seems obvious for the church to take 

up the issue of climate change. At the regional level, the PCC is a recognised actor and 

expert on climate change. The Conference has developed advocacy work to frame 

environmental displacements, in conjunction with governments, civil society and 

regional organisations. It has also developed assistance programmes to help Pacific 

communities and their local churches to cope with climate change (UNOCHA, 2014). 

In the case of Vunidogoloa, the PCC became a key stakeholder regarding the social 

aspects of relocation. According to the Climate Change Officer of the PCC, Peter 

Emberson, the villagers asked for spiritual guidance in 2012: “ Basically they wanted to 

know where the church stood in relation to their displacement ”, “ They wanted to hear from 

someone in authority in the church, so we helped facilitate that for them .” (Pareti, 2013). 

The Methodist Church General Secretary, Reverend Dr Epineri Vakadewavosa then 

visited the village and reassured the inhabitants. 

The PCC first heard about the relocation of the village through local news. They 

contacted the Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma (a member of the PCC), who 

arranged a first visit in March 2012. Later in 2012, the PCC organised a 3-day aware -

ness-raising workshop in conjunction with the Nansen Initiative in order to brief the 

villagers on climate change issues, and undertook work on the community history 

(see III.A.). In April 2013, the PCC returned to Vunidogoloa with the assistant general 

secretary of the Methodist Church, and held a learning exchange session that pursued 

the historical work started the previous year. Three other visits were subsequently 

organised, the latest of which took place in February 2015. During the whole process, SEM 2015 

> 138
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

the PCC provided expertise to the villagers and helped them to prepare for reloca -

tion. The Church acted as a forceful cohesive stakeholder and a substitute for public 

social services in the process. A particularly remarkable facet of the Church’s contri -

bution to the process was its ability to directly interact with the community but also 

to interact with superior authorities; indeed, the PCC was asked by the government 

to run the Climate Change related discussion group in national conferences. 

Lastly, a year and a half after the move, a project to build a church is now 

underway, with the crowdfunding campaign Indiegogo Vunidogoloa, led by the 

Californian attorney Brook Meakins, who visited the village several times, following 

requests from the villagers for this kind of assistance. 

5. POLICY IMPLICATIONS: THE LESSONS LEARNT FROM 

VUNIDOGOLOA CASE 

5.1. Appraising the Vunidogoloa relocation 

Although the relocation of the village of Vunidogoloa was successful in the sense 

that the inhabitants moved under favourable circumstances with a good level of 

support and that they themselves are happy about the relocation, some elements 

of the process itself may be questioned and also with regard to the way in which it 

could be replicated. 

The presence of land and timber resources was a crucial aspect of the reloca -

tion. The villagers had internal resources that meant they were able to move within 

their own land boundaries, avoiding major concerns regarding land property rights. 

These resources also considerably reduced the financial cost of relocation, and the 

principal contribution on the part of the villagers was the provision of timber that 

they already owned. It is difficult to say what might have happened had the commu -

nity not owned a sufficient and appropriate area of land, especially in the context 

of customary tenure that complicates land transactions and often make them 

impossible. It is unclear whether the government would have been able to assist the 

community in land transactions or contribute to the purchase of timber. It is hard 

to say if a community deprived of resources, even one as exposed as Vunidogoloa, 

would have succeeded in moving. The sustainability of the timber resource can also 

be questioned; there is no information on how the wood was cut, if sustainability 

standards were applied and if – in the hypothesis of a multiplication of relocations on 

the island – the constructions standards, involving land clearing and wood cutting, 

would ensure sustainable management of land and forests. 

Moreover, the issues of erosion and landslides that were discovered late in the 

process of Vunidogoloa’s relocation call into question the planning of the reloca -

tion: should geographical and biophysical considerations not have been taken into 

account earlier in the project, and, in the case of a risky choice of location, to what 

extent should the will of the inhabitants prevail? In this sense, the Narikoso case 

provides another example of a relocation site exposed to environmental-related risks 

(see part IV.B.). 

Last but not least, the social concerns of the relocation were addressed through 

the voluntary assistance from religious organisations. Although they are highly 

implicated on climate change-related matters, the sustainability and durability of 

such arrangements can be questioned, and it could be argued that the State should 

incorporate the role currently assumed by the church? 

The timeline and cost of the relocation are also matters of concern. The project 

was confirmed in 2006 but only implemented in 2012, with the actual move taking 

place in 2014, a period of at least 8 years for the project to come to fruition. Even if 

relocation seemed to be the most appropriate and, in fact, the only solution left for 

Vunidogoloa, the question of what can actually be offered to other communities in SEM 2015 

> 139

emergency situations should be posed. The government’s administrative ability to 

concurrently lead various projects of this kind is questionable, especially regarding 

its financial capability. From an initial 2/3 governmental-1/3 local division, the 

government ended up covering more than three quarters of the costs of the relo -

cation, which in all probability were three times higher than the original estimate. 

More than 1 million Fijian dollars were spent on the Vunidogoloa relocation, and this 

substantial cost casts doubt on the viability of the project to be replicated elsewhere. 

5.2.  Narikoso and other future relocations in Fiji 

Vunidogoloa is not a unique case in Fiji. The mean sea level has risen by an average of 

4.6mm per year since 1993 according to the Lautoka tide gauge in western Fiji, putting 

numerous communities at risk. As early as 2012, the Vunidogoloa villagers reported 

visits of other village leaders seeking advice in the perspective of their own possible 

relocation (Meakins, 2012). 

Other relocation projects have taken place, such as those in Narikoso and 

Denimau. Narikoso is located on Ono Island, about 280km from Vunidogoloa, 

and shares similar characteristics with Vunidogoloa: a population of more than a 

hundred inhabitants, about 30 houses, a location in a coastal area that was flooded in 

the case of high tides, with a seawall that no longer helped to limit the damage. The 

village requested assistance for relocation from the Government in 2011. A site has 

been designated for relocation, and here again, the land is owned by locals. But the 

Narikoso villagers have not been as lucky as their counterparts in Vunidogoloa: the 

lowering and stabilisation of the land was not sufficient to make the site hospitable 

and the Government provided an engineering team to help stabilise the site. Just as 

in the case of Vunidogoloa, the process was consensus-based and participative, and 

the relocation was a multilateral process: the government supported the relocation 

in conjunction with the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) – an intergovern -

mental organisation - and the German development agency GIZ (UNOCHA, 2014). 

The PCC also assisted the process of relocation. 

Other villages in Fjii are concerned by relocation processes. In this regard, the 

Vunidogoloa relocation has acted as a catalyst for other processes and helped to raise 

awareness; in its wake the Government has conducted assessments of the impact 

of climate change on the island, and it was announced at the beginning of 2015 that 

about 800 communities had already been affected by the impacts of climate change 

in Fiji. From this assessment it was evaluated that some 45 villages need to be relo -

cated over the next 5 to 20 years (Naivua, 2015) (Susu, 2015). 

5.3.  Fiji’s guidelines for relocation: leading the adaptation debates at the 

local and international level 

The perspective of multiple relocations in a short time period has been accompa -

nied by the drafting of guidelines on climate change adaptation and relocation in 

particular. The adaptation plan has evolved over time in Fiji and relocation is now 

a preferential adaptation strategy. As has been observed above, the Fiji government 

is working to disseminate information in the communities. The formerly feted 

seawalls are no longer considered as an effect means of combating sea-level rise, and 

are thus now only regarded as temporary facilities (PCC, 2013). 

Since the Vunidogoloa relocation, the Fijian Government has been developing a 

relocation policy in order to be able to respond to community requests in a system -

atic and ordered way. The German agency GIZ is assisting the Fiji government with 

this effort. General guiding principles on community ownership, participation, 

equity and equality should be established. Climate change concerns will be inte -

grated into national government planning and thus budgeted for. It is also expected 

that relocation guidelines will be drawn up to complement the 2012 national climate 

change policy. The guidelines are still to be formally discussed, and as far as their SEM 2015 

> 140
> ASIA-PACIFIC
> CLOTHILDE TRONQUET
> FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL
> RELOCATION

legislative implications are concerned, no appropriate legal framework addressing 

environmental-related displacement has been established as of yet (Wilson, 2014). 

This legislative and governmental ambition is at risk of being confronted with 

limited resources in terms of human capital, and technical and financial capabilities. 

This is especially the case due to the low accessibility to international funds, and in 

particular to the Climate Change adaption fund due to the complexity of the applica -

tion procedures and an overall lack of funding. This concern is shared by all Small 

Islands Developing States (SIDS) that are on the front line of the impacts of climate 

change and sea-level rise. The national relocation strategy is closely linked to the 

UNFCCC process and its discussions related to environmental migration. 

The Fijian Government has already integrated relocation as an adaptation tool 

to deal with climate change, but anticipation is not sufficient, especially consid -

ering the uncertainty related to climate change projections. Increasing the resilience 

of small islands should be considered as a comprehensive process, and a holistic 

approach should be favoured, taking into account cross-sector considerations, from 

socio-economic concerns to environmental systems. In the case of Fiji and Vuni -

dogoloa in particular, the creation of alternative economic activities was crucial, 

especially considering the adverse impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems 

and therefore on traditional fishing activities (IPCC). Numerous challenges remain 

to be overcome, particularly the financial burden that relocation represents: finding 

sustainable funding for future relocations is key to the development of the adaptive 

capability of Fiji and other small islands. 

CONCLUSION 

The example of the Vunidogoloa relocation highlights the viability of internal and 

international migration as an adaptation policy, disavowing the negative image that 

is often associated with it. The village of Vunidogoloa in Fiji has set an exemplary 

precedent in climate-related relocation. Suffering from slow-onset and disastrous 

events, the residents engaged in a relocation process supported by the Fijian authori -

ties after a long period of internal discussion. 

The project was undertaken with the successful ambition of ensuring better 

living standards for the population. The success of the relocation was based on: i) a 

proactive and participative attitude of the population, facilitated by the procedures 

followed by the government; ii) a comprehensive approach increasing the resilience 

of the community, improving its living conditions but also offering new economic 

opportunities, ensuring both food security and new income-generating activities; 

iii) social support provided by the local and regional religious authorities. Neverthe -

less, as with all experimental projects, the relocation of Vunidogola has encountered 

obstacles: the project was delayed, the projected budget for the relocation tripled and 

the biophysical characteristics of the new site necessitated further work. 

At the time of the request for relocation, the project was the only one of its kind; 

it was not the result of an adaptation policy, but, quite on the contrary, initiated one. 

What was a first time innovative experiment turned out to be a basis for framing 

permanent voluntary internal displacements in the country. Indeed, the multilateral 

and inclusive experience of Vunidogola served as a catalyst for a national adaptation 

policy. As a result, Fiji has become one of the voices for the cause of low-lying islands 

for relocation and an advocate for international mechanisms to facilitate relocation 

processes. SEM 2015 

141 

# REFERENCES 

Books 

– Anderson , T., & Lee, G. (2010). 

Understanding Melanesian customary 

land. In AID/WATCH,  In defense of 

Melanasian customary land  (pp. 2-4). 

Sydney. 

– Campbell. (2010). Climate Change 

and Population Movement in Pacific 

Island Countries. In Burson,  Climate 

Change and Migration: South Pacific 

Perspectives  (pp. 29-50). 

– Edwards, J. (2014). Climate justice and 

the Pacific Conference of Churches: 

moving the relocation agenda in the 

Pacific. In L. Andrianos, J.-W. Sneep, 

& G. Kerber,  Sustainable Alternatives 

for Poverty Reduction and Eco-Justice ..., 

Volume 1  (pp. 208-224). 

– Edwards, J. (2014). Phosphate mining 

and the relocation of the Banabans 

to northern Fiji in 1945: lessons for 

climate change forced displacement. 

Le Journal de la Société des Océanistes ,

121-136. 

– Hau‘Ofa, E. (1994). Our Sea of Islands. 

The Contemporary Pacific .

– Mills, I. (2014).  Fiji 408 Success Secrets 

408 Most Asked Questions. 

Reports 

– Edwards, J. (2012, april-may).  Bula 

Bulletin: Relocation of Vunidogoloa 

Village.  Retrieved from Methodist 

Church: http://www.methodist.org. 

uk/downloads/wcr-julia-edwards-

fiji-newsletter-aprilmay2012.pdf 

– Edwards, J. (2013, january).  Climate-

induced relocation: a first for Fiji. 

Retrieved from Methodist Church: 

http://www.methodist.org.uk/ 

media/757401/wcr-pcc-relocation-

policy-fiji-jan13.pdf 

– Edwards, J. (2014, november). 

Relocation revisited: Vunidogoloa 

village, Vanua Levu, Fiji.  Retrieved 

from Methodist Church: 

http://www.methodist.org.uk/ 

media/1395086/relocation-revisited_-

vunidogoloa-village-fiji-nov14-je.pdf 

– ILO. (2013, september 13).  Fiji: A 

village forced to move by rising seas. 

Retrieved from ILO: http://www.ilo. 

org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/ 

features/WCMS_221135/lang--en/ 

index.htm 

– ILO. (2014).  Cash for Work: Pilot 

Programme 2013-2014 Fiji and Solomon 

Islands Experience. 

– UNOCHA. (2014, september 11).  Fiji: 

Building resilience in the face of climate 

change.  Retrieved from http://www. 

unocha.org/top-stories/all-stories/ 

fiji-building-resilience-face-climate-

change 

Press Articles 

– Biumaiono, S. (2013, december 15). 

Mysterious gift of bone healing. 

– Biumaiono, S. (2013, december 15). 

Rebuilding Vunidogoloa.  Fiji Times .

– Datt, H. (2014, january 17). Climate 

Change forces villagers to relocate. 

Fiji One .

– Fiji Times - PACNEWS. (2012, october 

24). Evidence of climate change in 

Fiji: Chief. 

– Kumar, R. (2012, june 27). Rising seas 

prompt move.  Fiji Times .

– Meakins, B. (2012, september 17). An 

Inside Look at the One of the First 

Villages Forced to Relocate Due to 

Climate Change.  Alternet .

– Moceiwa, S. (2013, september 10). 

Construction of new homes to 

resume.  Fiji Times .

– Naivua, S. (2015, february 9). More 

villages to relocate due to rising sea 

levels.  FBC .

– Pareti, S. (2013, May). Climate 

Refugees?  Islands Business .

– PCC. (2013, August 13). International 

community accused of selfishness, 

$34million needed for climate 

change in Fiji.  Islands Business .

– PCC. (2013, april 3). Seawalls are not 

an option to stop rising sea levels. 

Islands Business .

– Rawalai, L. (2013, may 21). Village 

relocation begins.  Fiji Times .

– Rawalai, L. (2014, january 18). Woman 

lights up homes.  Fiji Times . Retrieved 

from Fiji Times. 

– Silaitoga, S. (2012, august 29). Sea level 

woes.  Fiji Times .

– Silaitoga, S. (2012, march 5). Villagers 

put down roots.  Fiji Times .

– Silaitoga, S. (2012, march 21). Works 

delay village relocation.  Fiji Times .

Retrieved from Fiji Times. 

– Silaitoga, S. (2013, november 7). 

Villagers to ready eight new ponds. 

Fiji Times .

– Silaitoga, S. (2014, January 2014). 

Villagers to move into new homes. 

Fiji Times .

– Sorowale, S. (2011). Retrieved from 

Vunidogoloa: climate change induced 

relocation: http://simisorowale. 

blogspot.fr/ 

– Sorowale, S. (2012, may 1). 

Climate Change and Relocation: 

Vunidogoloa and Nukudamu  .

Retrieved from Climate change 

and relocation in Fiji: http:// 

climatechangeandrelocationinfiji. 

blogspot.fr/ 

– Sorowale, S. (2012, may 8). 

Vunidogoloa: The Clear and Present 

Danger.  Retrieved from Climate 

Change and relocation: http:// 

climatechangeandrelocationinfiji. 

blogspot.fr/ 

– Sovaraki. (2014, august 20). 

Vunidogoloa relocation mooted in 

the 50s.  Fiji Sun .

– SPEREP. (2014, december 5).  Upheaval 

of Fiji communities as climate change 

impacts are felt .  Retrieved from 

SPEREP: http://www.sprep.org/ 

climate-change/upheaval-of-fiji-

communities-as-climate-change-

impacts-are-felt 

– Susu, A. (2015, february 12). 800 

Communities Under Threat.  Fiji Sun .

– Taleitaki, S. (2014, january 2014). 

Vunidogoloa relocation praised.  Fiji 

Sun .

– Tan, J. (2015, march 17).  Photographing 

Fiji’s Sinking Island Communities. 

Retrieved from Vice: http://www. 

vice.com/read/photographing-fijis-

sinking-island-communities SEM 2015 

142 

ASIA-PACIFIC 

CLOTHILDE TRONQUET 

FROM VUNIDOGOLOA TO KENANI: AN INSIGHT INTO SUCCESSFUL 

RELOCATION 

– Tuimoala, J. (2013, March 16). More 

money for Vunidogoloa relocation. 

Fiji Sun .

– Vunidogoloa cashes in. (2013, 

december 13).  Fiji Sun .

– Wilson, C. (2014, May 25). Fiji Leads 

Pacific Region on Climate Adaptation 

Efforts.  IPS News Agency .

– Government press-releases 

– Bainimarama. (2014, january 16). 

Speech at the launch of the Vunidogoloa 

village relocation project.  Retrieved 

from Fijian government, Public 

Service Commission : http://www. 

psc.gov.fj/index.php/psc-news/ 

speeches/829-prime-minister-

commodore-j-v-bainimarama-speech-

at-the-launch-of-the-vunidogoloa-

village-relocation-project 

– Fiji government. (2013).  New homes for 

Vunidogoloa residents. 

– Fiji Government. (2014, march 28). 

Solar engineer shares skills.  Retrieved 

from Fijian Government: http:// 

www.fiji.gov.fj/Media-Center/Press-

Releases/SOLAR-ENGINEER-SHARES-

SKILLS.aspx 

– Fiji Government. (2014, September 

1).  Vunidogoloa relocation 2nd phase 

underway.  Retrieved from Fiji 

Government: http://www.fiji.gov. 

fj/Media-Center/Press-Releases/ 

VUNIDOGOLOA-RELOCATION-2ND-

PHASE-UNDERWAY.aspx 

– New homes to open soon with income 

generating provisions for Vunidogoloa 

residents.  (2013, december 12). 

Retrieved from Fiji Government Blog: 

http://fijiblog.gov.fj/blog/2013/12/12/ 

new-homes-to-open-soon-with-

income-generating-provisions-for. 

html 

– PM Bainimarama opens Vunidogoloa 

Village Relocation Project - 2014.  (2014, 

January 16). Retrieved from Fijian 

Government: http://www.fiji.gov.fj/ 

Photos---Video/Photo-Gallery/PM-

Bainimarama-opens-Vunidogoloa-

Village-Relocatio.aspx?imagepath=/ 

Photos---Video/Photo-Gallery/PM-

Bainimarama-opens-Vunidogoloa-

Village-Relocatio/ The 

# Americas SEM 2015 

145 

## PIA VAN ACKERN 

# When Mining Moves 

# People: Development-

# Induced Displacement and 

# Resettlement in La Guajira, 

# Colombia 

# Colombia is after Syria the country with the highest number of 

internally displaced people in the world – amounting to over six 

million according to records of the United Nations High Commis -

sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Internal Displacement Moni -

toring Center (IDMC) (UNHCR 2015; IDMC 2015). Around 300,000 

people are newly displaced each year, most of them because of the 

impacts of the internal armed conflict (IDMC 2014). 

Yet, it is not only conflict that displaces people in Colombia; 

development projects such as large-scale resource extracting projects are also forcing 

people to leave their homes. It is ironic that the initiation of massive development 

projects that endeavor to increase national wealth have the potential to create new 

poverty in the case of those displaced (Price 2009: 267). Oliver-Smith describes this 

paradox as such: 

“[a]imed at generating economic growth and thereby improving general 

welfare, these projects have all too often left local people displaced, disem -

powered, and destitute. Resettlement has been so poorly planned, financed, 

implemented, and administered that these projects generally end up being 

‘development disasters’” (2009: 3). 

In Colombia, mining is an important segment of the national development 

strategy designed to stimulate the Colombian economy, increase its competitiveness 

on the international market and create “more social, regional and intergenerational 

equality” (Teherán Sanchez 2014: 44). In the 1970s, the open-cast mining of coal was 

given a special role within the development strategy as it was prioritised by national 

policies, and has grown considerably over the last 40 years (Teherán Sanchez 2014: 

44). The biggest open-cast coal mines are located in the César and La Guajira depart -

ments in the northeast of Colombia and have led to the displacement and resettle -

ment of the local population (Teherán Sanchez 2014: 45, 52). 

This paper seeks to provide a review of the recent displacement and resettlement 

processes in the context of the Cerrejón mine in the department of La Guajira. Given 

that multinational corporations are the main stakeholders of this mining project and 

their yield supplies the world market, these displacements are not only of national 

but also of international concern. Since the beginning of the Cerrejón mining opera -

tion in 1976, different displacement processes have taken place. People have had to 

move because of infrastructure construction or the expansion of extraction activi -

ties. The violent displacement of the community of Tabaco, which attracted interna -

tional attention in 2001, marked a turning point as Cerrejón subsequently introduced 

a resettlement policy. Currently, the planned resettlements of five communities are SEM 2015 

> 146
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

under way – the four rural and partly afro-Colombian communities Roches, Patilla, 

Chancleta and Las Casitas and the indigenous Tamaquito II community. The reloca -

tion of families to the new sites is at an advanced stage, yet some individual families 

remain at the original resettlement site – except for Tamaquito II where all families 

have moved. In 2014, international attention was drawn to the mine as the residents of 

Las Casitas and the Cerrejón company could not reach an agreement on resettlement 

and the international media and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) underlined 

the possible expropriation of the community (Willis 2014; Suhner 2014; Indepaz 2014). 

First of all, this paper will provide background on the department of La Guajira 

and the history and structure of the Cerrejón mine. Secondly, mitigation measures 

for mining-induced displacement and resettlement at the international, national and 

Cerrejón company level will be presented and assessed. Migration patterns in the 

influence zone of the Cerrejón mine will then be outlined, with a separate section for 

each of the five recent resettlement processes. The conclusion will provide a compar -

ative perspective of the five cases and an outlook, giving rise to recommendations 

concerning the resettlement processes. 

The paper is based on primary and secondary sources. The primary sources 

comprise two interviews conducted with experts of the Colombian NGO Indepaz, 

which is accompanying the resettlements of Roche, Tamaquito II and Las Casitas, and 

the Swiss NGO Arbeitsgruppe Schweiz Kolumbien (Ask!). 

Available secondary material concerning the resettlement processes was partly 

lacking and partly contradictory. The paper cannot therefore guarantee that all details 

of the resettlement processes are included but it aims to represent the views of 

different stakeholders. Thus, the material was derived from various sources: academic 

articles, the Cerrejón website which includes a section on the resettlement processes 

(updated until mid-2012) and further information concerning the company, the Cerre -

jón’s progress reports on its social commitment from April 2009 to April 2015 which 

contain detailed but fragmentary information, a fieldwork study conducted by Hora 

on the resettlements of Roche and Tamaquitos II (2014), NGOs reports by Indepaz and 

Ask!, newspaper articles and other material. 

1. BACKGROUND: THE DEPARTMENT OF LA GUAJIRA AND THE 

CERREJÓN COAL MINE 

In order to grasp the full extent of the resettlement processes linked to the extrac -

tive activities of the Cerrejón coal mine, a brief understanding of the geographical 

location and its socio-economic and political situation as well as of the history and 

structure of the Cerrejón mining operation is necessary. 

1.1 La Guajira: Colombia’s Wild West 

The department of La Guajira is located in the northeastern part of Colombia, 

bordering with Venezuela to the east. The department is a peninsula, surrounded 

by the Caribbean to the north and west. On the southwestern land border with the 

Colombian departments César and Magdalena is Colombia’s highest mountain range 

– the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. Due to its location, La Guajira is geographically 

relatively separated from the rest of the country. Figure 1 gives an overview of the 

department. 

The department has a semiarid to arid climate with two natural ports (Teherán 

Sánchez 2014, 47). According to the 2005 general census, 44.9 percent of the La Guajira 

population identifies itself as indigenous while another 14.8 percent considers itself 

of afro-Colombian origin (DANE 2010). 

La Guajira is one of the poorest departments in Colombia as about 60 percent 

of the population lives in poverty and 28 percent in extreme poverty (DANE 2012). SEM 2015 

> 147

Despite the economic hardship, indigenous communities relying on subsistence 

agriculture can maintain a decent standard of living (Hora 2014: 42). In 2014, parts of 

the region were facing such a severe drought that water had to be delivered by the 

State and humanitarian organisations on trucks with water tanks (Semana 2014c). 

However, these economic and water-related difficulties are not the only problems 

facing the region. The leading Colombian weekly  Semana  states: 

“There are villages in La Guajira which smell like petrol. Because 

in some of them, especially in the north, there is more illegal petrol 

than water. … The combination of these two problems is a ticking time 

bomb: this department forgotten by the rest of the country is on the 

verge of collapse” (2014a, translated by the author). 

Several persistent public governance problems characterise La Guajira. The 

regions’ authorities lost control over large parts of the border. The British newspaper 

The Guardian  reports: “Over the years, the state has earned a reputation as Colombia’s 

Wild West”, neglected by State authorities (Balch 2013).  Almost 200 illegal crossing 

points along the border with Venezuela allow flourishing criminal activities such as 

petrol smuggling and drug trafficking (Semana 2014b). This is firstly because of the 

small number of border police forces, some of whom are corrupt, secondly because 

the territory is under the control of armed groups, so-called Bandas Criminales, and 

Figure 1:  Mining operation of Cerrejón in the south of La Guajira SEM 2015 

> 148
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

thirdly because of the presence of two fronts of the guerilla group FARC (Semana 

2014b). 

The situation in La Guajira is highly complex as a result of its isolated geograph -

ical location and a difficult socio-economic and political context, and is character -

ised by a number of multifaceted problems. The department does not provide an 

easy environment for the establishment of a large industrial mining business which 

demands huge spatial capacity and the displacement of the local community. 

1.2 The Cerrejón Coal Mine: A Multinational Enterprise 

The mining sector in Colombia has grown significantly over the past few decades. 

The most important resources are coal, oil, natural gas, emeralds, gold and nickel 

(Hudson 2010: 158). 25.7 percent of Colombian exports were generated by the mining 

sector in 1995, increasing to 56.9 percent in 2012 (DANE 2013). 

The output of coal grew substantially from 4 million tons in 1981 to 65.5 million 

tons in 2006, comprising 1.4 percent of the world’s coal production (Hudson 2010: 

158). Coal has been Colomb ia’s second largest export product since 2001 (Hudson 

2010: 158). The largest and most productive coal mines are located in the northern 

departments of Colombia, in La Guajira and César. The Cerrejón open-cast coal mine 

is situated in the southern part of La Guajira and is considered as one of the largest 

of its kind in the world (Hudson 2010: 158; see figure 1). 

The Cerrejón mining project started in 1976. After an international competitive 

bid for 32,000 hectares suitable for coal mining, Intercore (a subsidiary of U.S.-based 

company Exxon) and the Colombian State-owned Carbocol (Carbones de Colombia 

S.A.) were contracted to develop the mining project. The creation of the mining 

infrastructure was carried out between 1980 and 1986, including the construction of 

the Bolíva port, a 4km-long channel, and a 150km train track connecting the mine, 

the port and the residential unit Mushaisa, constructed to accommodate the mining 

personnel (Cerrejón 2015 d). This settlement has good infrastructure consisting of a 

school, recreational facilities (e.g. a swimming pool, tennis courts), restaurants and 

hotels (Suhner 2015, see figure 1). 

In the context of this construction work more than 1,000 indigenous Wayuu were 

displaced (Leech 2009: 203). At the same time, the villages and settlements of the area 

experienced an increase in population as people moved there in search of the new 

jobs the mine would offer (González Perafán 2015). As it was one of the first open-

cast coal mines in Colombia, people were unaware of the potential negative impacts 

that a mine of such magnitude could bring about, such as environmental pollution 

or displacement. 

Mining activities began in 1985. Coal production grew progressively, from 4 

million tons in 1985 to 32.8 million tons in 2012, amounting to a total of 540 million 

tons since extraction commenced. Most of the Cerrejón coal (58 percent) is exported 

to Europe, 12 percent goes to Central and Latin America, 9 percent to North America 

and the remaining 21 percent to Asia and other countries in the world (Cerrejón 

2012c). In 1999, the contract was renewed, granting an extension of the concession 

contract until 2034 (Cerrejón 2015d). 

As part of the economic reforms required by the International Monetary Fund, 

the Colombian government sold its 50 percent share of Carbocol to a multinational 

mining consortium of Anglo American, BHP Billiton and Glencore in 2000. Two 

years later, the consortium bought Exxon’s remaining 50 percent share (Leech 2009: 

202). Glencore sold its shares to Xstrata in 2006, but six years later Xstrata merged 

with Glencore (Brinded 2013). In 2013, Glencore was the biggest mining company 

worldwide with $200 billion in revenue from its activities in metals, minerals, coal 

and oil extraction; BHP Billiton was the second largest player with $67.83 billion in 

revenue from coal, metal and minerals; and Anglo American the fifth biggest with 

$33.06 billion in revenue in the same sectors (Spence 2014). The three multinational SEM 2015 

> 149

companies are active worldwide with headquarters in the United Kingdom, Switzer -

land, Australia and South Africa (Spence 2014). 

The Cerrejón mine is operated independently through the two subsidies Carbones 

del Cerrejón Limited and Cerrej ón Zona Norte S.A. , which have registered addresses 

in the British West Indies and Colombia. Each of the consortium’s three companies 

holds a 33 percent share of the mine (Hora 2014: 53; Cerrejón 2015f). Figure 2 provides 

an overview of Cerrejón’s development and indicates major resettlement events that 

are addressed in the following chapters. 

2. MEASURES FOR MITIGATION: GUIDELINES AND LEGAL 

FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED RESETTLEMENT 

Before assessing the current resettlement processes related to the Cerrejón mine, it 

is important to understand the internationally acknowledged standards for develop -

ment-induced resettlements, the Colombian legal framework for mining and reset -

tlement, and Cerrjón’s resettlement policy. 

2.1. International standards: World Bank and IFC policy guidelines 

From the 1980s onwards, the World Bank had to deal with public concerns about 

displacements caused by development projects which it fully or partly financed 

(Price 2009: 274). Consequently, anthropologists and other social scientists within 

the World Bank, led by the well-known expert on development-induced displace -

ment and resettlement Michael Cernea, drew on the body of existing case studies 

documenting displacement disasters to develop guidelines for the Bank’s operational 

manual (Price 2009: 274). In 1988, Cernea published the book “Involuntary Resettle -

ment in Development Projects. Policy Guidelines in World Bank−Financed Projects” 

which was henceforth used to address social issues in involuntary resettlement 

worldwide. Price highlights that these guidelines conceptualised 

“displaced people as a group temporarily victimised by develop -

ment – to be treated with special measures that recognised their losses, 

as well as the importance of their social organization and identity, in 

the form of involuntary resettlement” (2009: 275). 

The World Bank’s policies require efforts to avoid and minimise displacement 

wherever possible. In cases where displacement has to take place despite such 

efforts, the policies require mitigation measures, deployed through time-bound 

action plans which address the social and economic losses caused by the displace -

ment using the methods of baseline social census and survey work. The World Bank’s 

Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP) 4.12 (2001, updated 2007, para -

graph 2c) underlines that 

“[d]isplaced persons should be assisted on their efforts to improve 

their livelihoods and standards of living or at least to restore them, in 

general terms, to pre-displacement levels or to levels prevailing prior 

to the beginning of project implementation, whichever is higher”. 

Therefore, compensation alone is insufficient; restoring standards of living after 

resettlement can be considered as a minimum objective. Yet, successful resettlement 

should achieve substantial improvement in the living conditions of those displaced 

(Cernea 2008: 3). 

The World Bank guidelines influenced policies of other institutions around the 

world and within short time, the Organization for Economic Development and SEM 2015 

> 150
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

several regional banks developed similar policy principles (Price 2009: 275). The Inter -

national Finance Corporation (IFC) established a Safeguard Policy on Involuntary 

Resettlement in 1990, which was replaced by the Performance Standard for Land 

Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement within the broader framework of the 

IFC’s Environmental and Social Performance Standards (IFC 2015a). The IFC’s Perfor -

mance Standard has several objectives (IFC 2015b): 

– “To avoid, and when avoidance is not possible, minimize displacement by 

exploring alternative project designs. 

– To avoid forced eviction. 

– To anticipate and avoid, or where avoidance is not possible, minimize adverse 

social and economic impacts from land acquisition or restrictions on land use by 

(i) providing compensation for loss of assets at replacement cost and (ii) ensuring 

that resettlement activities are implemented with appropriate disclosure of infor -

mation, consultation, and the informed participation of those affected. 

– To improve, or restore, the livelihoods and standards of living of displaced persons. 

To improve living conditions among physically displaced persons through the 

provision of adequate housing with security of tenure at resettlement sites.” 

In the case of mining activities, such international standards are of special impor -

tance because these activities are rarely national businesses, but often of a multi -

national nature. Yet, they have three obvious limitations. Firstly, they are not very 

detailed and cannot be applied to all local realities as there are huge differences 

between development projects and the environment and communities in which they 

are deployed. Secondly, it is not easy to assess whether “substantial improvement” in 

the living conditions of the displaced persons has been achieved and to what extent. 

Thirdly, the IFC standards have no binding character and there is no international 

agency that monitors and ensures these processes. 

2.2. Colombian legislation 

At the national level there are several separate laws and regulations which deal 

with resettlement in a broader frame and address rights concerning property and 

land acquisition, compensation, health, territory and ethnic communities, and pre-

consultation of communities in Colombia (González Perafán 2011: 10). This body of 

regulation protects the rights of displaced and resettled persons and communities to 

a certain extent, but there is no comprehensive legislation regulating resettlement in 

sufficient detail (González Perafán 2011: 7, 10). Different national laws and rulings are 

essential to the discussion around development-induced resettlement and demon -

strate the dilemma between development projects for the common good and the 

welfare of the individual. 

Article 1 of the Colombian constitution of 1999 states that “Colombia is a social 

state under the rule of law, […] based on the respect of human dignity […], and the 

prevalence of the general interest”. Article 2 furthermore underlines that “[t]he 

essential goals of the State are to serve the community, [and to] promote general 

prosperity”. These first two constitutional articles establish the importance of the 

general interest and the promotion of national prosperity as well as the protection of 

human dignity and the community, hinting at the balancing act between these some -

times contradictory principles. Article 58 of the constitution stipulates that “[p]rivate 

property and the other rights acquired in accordance with civil laws are guaranteed 

and may neither be disregarded nor infringed by subsequent laws”. Yet, the article 

also specifies that “[w]hen in the application of a law enacted for reasons of public 

utility or social interest a conflict between the rights of individuals and the interests 

recognized by the law arises, the private interest shall yield to the public or social 

interest” and gives priority to the common good. It the case of expropriation because 

of this reason, the same article underlines that “compensation will be determined by 

taking into account the interests of the community and of the individual concerned”. SEM 2015 

> 151

Regarding the protection of vulnerable communities, special legislative provi -

sions have been determined. The Constitution of 1991 recognised the plurality of 

the Colombian nation (article 1) for the first time and stipulates the adoption of 

affirmative measures for discriminated or marginalised groups (article 13). Indig -

enous people and afro-Colombians enjoy a higher degree of protection (González 

Perafán 2011: 27) 

The Colombian Mining Code (Law 685 of 2001, modified by Law 1382 of 2010) 

complements the possibility of land expropriation for mining activities. Article 5 

(Law 685 of 2001) establishes that all minerals in the soil and subsoil are exclusive 

properties of the State, regardless of the ownership of the territory in which the 

minerals are located. In accordance with Article 58 of the Constitution, the mining 

industry is declared as being of public utility and of social interest by Article 13 (Law 

685 of 2001). Article 22 (Law 1382 of 2010) stipulates the procedure of land easement 

and expropriation, also in the case of objection to the expropriation. However, 

Article 168 (Law 685 of 2001) claims that land easement for extraction activities is legal 

or obligatory, meaning that expropriation can take place even against the will of the 

concerned owner. Article 27 (Law 1382 of 2010) bought about an important modifica -

tion to the 2001 version of the Mining Code, which determines the social responsi -

bility of mining companies (corporate social responsibility policies). Companies are 

called upon to act voluntarily to improve the quality of life of the residents of the 

mining region as well as to prevent and compensate environmental damage. 

Additionally, Law 56 of 1981 and its decrees provide guidelines for dealing with 

expropriations due to infrastructure projects and therefore provide a legal basis for 

involuntary resettlement at the legislative level. However, the effectiveness of the 

law is fairly limited as it does not establish proceedings for the design and execution 

of resettlement programmes, nor does it define eligibility criteria for resettlement 

and the commitments and responsibilities of the parties to the resettlement process 

(González 2011: 9). 

2.3. Cerrejón’s resettlement guidelines 

Partly under State ownership up until 2000, the company had no resettlement scheme 

in place but instead a compulsory land acquisition scheme, i.e. the company bought 

the necessary land and the previous owner had to move – mostly to urban areas in 

the surroundings of the mine (Hora 2014: 68). In 1983, more than 1,100 indigenous 

Wayuu were displaced in such a fashion (Leech 2010: 203). During that time affected 

person stated that neither government authorities nor non-governmental organisa -

tions assisted the people who were forced to leave. They mostly moved to the bigger 

towns in the area and many of them fell into poverty (Hora 2014: 68). 

In August 2001, more than 25 families of the rural and mostly afro-Colombian 

community of Tabaco were expropriated and forcibly evicted from their homes 

by State security forces and the private guards of the Cerrejón mine without prior 

warning (Leech 2010: 203). This incident attracted broad public attention and marked 

a turning point in Cerrejón’s human rights and resettlement policy, leading to the 

introduction of a human rights office in 2006. One year later, Cerrejón and its stake -

holders requested an independent review of its social responsibility practices and of 

its relation with the communities in the mining area (Harker/Kalmonovitz/Killick/ 

Serrano 2008: 2). This third party review was conducted by a panel of four experts, 

supported by a team from an international consulting firm, which had no links to 

the Cerrejón mine (Harker et al. 2008: 14). The result of this review was the estab -

lishment of a visible corporate social responsibility policy (CSR), in accordance with 

Colombia’s legislation. Cerrejón included the introduction of human rights training 

for soldiers of the Colombian army and private security forces employed to protect 

the mine and its infrastructure, the creation of complaints office, and a foundation 

system (Hora 2014: 61-65). SEM 2015 

> 152
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

The third party review recommended that resettlements should be based on inter -

national standards and implemented not only when physical resettlement is neces -

sary but also if a community regards itself as strongly impacted by the proximity of 

mining activities. Cerrejón was thus advised to establish a broader conception of 

“affected communities” (Harker et al. 2008: 5-6). Cerrejón subsequently introduced 

guidelines for resettlement which correspond to the World Bank standards and the 

International Financial Cooperation (IFC) guidelines for resettlement, including the 

stipulation that resettlement may be appropriate when a community is affected by 

the indirect impacts of the mine that result in a decrease in living standards. Further -

more, the company promised to develop indicators measuring the living standards 

of each community and to identify key actions to improve them (Cerrejón 2008). 

Since 2008, Cerrejón has published a progress report on its social commitments up 

to twice per year. 

Additionally, Cerrejón implemented a four-phase resettlement scheme (Cerrejón 

2015h). These phases are described quite roughly and not much detail is given. The first 

phase, entitled “community engagement and strengthening of social capital”, includes 

the disclosure of the social and environmental impact studies which substantiate 

resettlement, as well as the organisation of preliminary actions to initiate a participa -

tive resettlement process. The second phase, “designing a participative resettlement 

action plan with the community, following IFC guidelines”, implies socio-economic 

baseline studies (population census and an asset inventory), the characterisation of 

the population living in the community to be resettled, a formal valuation of all 

assets, an outline of the compensation plan, an assessment of the assets and people 

affected, the selection of a new site, the identification of income generating projects 

which are created in conjunction with the community, and finally the formulation 

of the resettlement action plan. Cerrejón does not publish the criteria that establish 

whether a person or family is eligible for resettlement. The third phase consists of 

“executing the resettlement action plan”, entailing the design and construction of the 

resettlement site, an agreement on relocation details (e.g. individual compensation 

scheme and productive projects for resettlement entitled families) and the actual 

preparation for relocation. The respective resettlement actions plans for the five 

communities are not publicly available. The fourth and final phase of “relocation and 

stabilisation in the new location” contains the implementation of the productive and 

income generating projects, ongoing involvement by Cerrejón in social matters and 

“psycho-socioeconomic support” to assist the families while they familiarise them -

selves with their new location. According to Cerrejón’s scheme, all phases should be 

accompanied by a communication programme, social programmes and an evalua -

tion and monitoring programme. 

It is remarkable that to date, no State authority has issued a resolution or other 

policy directive to regulate or at least to guide resettlements in the area surrounding 

the Cerrejón mine. González Perafán states that the resettlement processes depend 

heavily on the voluntary commitment of Cerrejón (2015). 

4. POST-TABACO RESETTLEMENT PROCESSES: THE CASES OF 

ROCHE, PATILLA, CHANCLETA, LAS CASITAS AND TAMAQUITOS II 

The following sections will examine the resettlement projects that were initiated 

after the forced eviction of the Tabaco community and the introduction of the new 

resettlement guidelines. Each of the resettlements will be assessed against the back -

ground of the four phases established by Cerrejón and the IFC standards.  Currently, 

Cerrejón is carrying out five resettlement processes (see figure 3). The commu -

nities of Patilla, Chancleta and Roche are located in proximity to the Comunidad 

pit and potential sites for an extension of the pit. The communities, including the SEM 2015 

153 

Figure 3.  The Cerrejón open-cast mine and its surroundings, including settlements and resettlements 

> Source: Hora 2014: 58 SEM 2015
> 154
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

community of Las Casitas, are rural communities, partly of afro-Colombian descent. 

The indigenous Tamaquito II community is located further east close to the NAM 

dump and the Las Casitas community’s original location is south of the Oregenal pit, 

also in the area of potential expansion of the pit (Willis 2014). Tamaquito II does not 

lie within the area of potential expansion of the mine but is affected negatively by 

other impacts of the mine such as air and noise pollution, limited freedom of move -

ment, decreased quality of the water and health problems (Gutierrez Torres 2013; 

González Peráfan/Valenzuela 2013). 

The new sites of Patilla, Chancleta, Roche and Las Casitas are located in close 

proximity to one another next to the highway Ruta Nacional 88, only 1.5 km away 

from the city of Barrancas, which has around 200,000 inhabitants (Hora 2014: 76; see 

figure 4). The proximity to the highway allows for easy access to Barrancas and other 

cities in La Guajira, which contrasts greatly with the remote locations of the original 

communities. The new resettlement areas of the four communities are identically 

designed with small terraced houses built from cement or bricks with a small inner 

courtyard. The houses in the original settlements were detached and had around 200 

meters between them, leaving space for agricultural activities (Suhner 2015). 

The indigenous community of Tamaquito II is located elsewhere as well as 

being designed in a specific way, closely coordinated with the community. It is 3.5 

km away from the other resettlement sites and only accessible via a dirt road (Hora 

2014: 76). 

The baselines for resettlements defined by Cerrejón are shown in table 1. 

Roche has 25 families defined by Cerrejón as eligible for relocation and their new site 

comprises a total area of 33 hectares. In Patilla 73 families were eligible for relocation 

and the new site has a total area of 69 hectares. 57 families were eligible for resettle -

ment in Chancleta and their settlement comprises 52 hectares. There are currently 31 

families defined as eligible for resettlement by Cerrejón in Las Casitas, but the size 

of the new site is still unknown. In Tamaquito II 31 families were eligible for resettle -

ment to a 300-hectare lot. 

Table 1.  Characteristics of the communities participating in the recent resettlements                                

> Roche Patilla Chancleta Las Casitas Tamaquito II
> Family units eligible for
> relocation 25 73 57 31 31
> Ethnic or population group Rural communities, partly afro-descendent Wayuu
> indigenous
> Relocation beginning 2011 2012 2012 2014 2013
> Community area (ha) in
> resettlement 25 48 43 TBC 300
> Area for agricultural projects
> (ha) in resettlement 568TBC 93
> Area for livestock projects
> (ha) in resettlement 315 1TBC wood
> pasture
> Source: Compiled from Hora 2014: 71; Cerrejón 2012: 55

Each of the processes followed a different sequence and no coherent strategy is 

discernable. The resettlement processes are currently at different stages; the pace 

of operations varied greatly and none of the resettlements (i.e. the relocation of 

the eligible families to the new site) is fully completed – except for the Tamaquito 

II resettlement. The following section of the paper presents and evaluates the five SEM 2015 

155 

Figure 4.  Locations of the five resettlements 

> Source: Hora 2014: 77 SEM 2015
> 156
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

resettlement processes, considering the situation of the village prior to resettlement, 

the resettlement negotiations and process, and the situation at the new site for the 

relocated families. 1

3.1 The resettlement of the Roche community 

The community of Roche is of afro-Colombian origin (González Perafán 2015). Prior 

to the mining activities in the region, the original settlement of Roche had around 

400 inhabitants, a primary school and a health care unit (Ramirez 2010; Hora 2014: 

78). The inhabitants were predominantly subsistence farmers. From 1997 onwards, 

Cerrejón started to buy land in and around the Roche community (Hora 2014: 78). 

Prices for the purchased land were negotiated on an individual basis and not publicly 

available (Hora 2014: 78-79). Many inhabitants of Roche sold their properties and 

moved to  nearby communities (see figure 5). As a result of this rural to urban move -

ment, they often faced indebtedness (as they could not afford new housing with 

the money they received for their former dwelling), unemployment, and margin -

alisation in their new location (Hora 2014: 79). It only became apparent in 2006 that 

Cerrejón would implement a group resettlement, initially designating 15 families for 

relocation and compensation. 374 families of the original Roche community were 

not included in this resettlement scheme and therefore founded the association 

Asoroche to have a stronger voice in claiming their right to be included in Cerrejón’s 

resettlement and social schemes (Ramirez 2010; González Perafán/Valenzuela 2013). 

Figure 5.  Process of the depopulation of Roche Viejo 

> Source : Hora 2014 : 81.
> 1. Due to a lack of material on the resettlement processes of Patilla and Chancleta, both communities are examined
> in the same section. SEM 2015
> 157

The available online documentation of the resettlement process reports activities 

up to June 2012 (Cerrejón 2015j). The following events of the process are derived from 

Cerrejón’s progress reports on its social commitment, material published by NGOs, 

and the interviews undertaken in the framework of this study. 

The first phase of “community engagement and strengthening of social 

capital” stretched from 2003 to 2012 and comprised according to Cerrejón a socio-

economic census (conducted by the Interdisciplinary Center for Regional Studies 

of the University of the Andes), an inventory of public goods and several trips of 

the Roche community to cities in Colombia in 2011 and 2012 as community building 

measures (Cerrejón 2015j). Since 2009, the NGO Indepaz has been assisting and 

advising the community (González Perafán 2015). 

For the second phase, “designing a participative resettlement action plan with 

the community, following IFC guidelines”, Cerrejón states that an agreement on 

the new settlement site, meeting the needs of agricultural land, was reached in a 

“participatory and systematic way” in 2007 (Cerrejón 2015j). After several community 

meetings in 2008, ten additional families were included in the relocation process, so 

that the official number of 25 families eligible for relocation was established. In the 

same year, a formalised agreement between the community, Cerrejón, and the repre -

sentatives of the Town Hall and the Barrancas Ombudsman was concluded to rubber 

stamp the resettlement process (Cerrejón 2015j). 

During the third phase of “executing the resettlement action plan”, the Barrancas 

municipality authorised the construction of the new location in 2009, with construc -

tion subsequently beginning (Cerrejón 2015j). Ten final relocation agreements were 

signed in January 2011 of which eight had already been resettled to the new Roche site 

before April 2011 (Cerrejón 2011a). 

Figure 6.  A street in the new settlement site of Roche 

> Source: Ask! 2014: 6

Cerrejón states that for the fourth phase of “relocation and stabilization in the 

new location” 16 families moved to the new site up to January 2011 (Cerrejón 2011b) 

and that in August 2011 the first agricultural project showed results. Another family 

moved to the new site in October 2012, while no agreement could be reached with 

the remaining eight families. Cerrejón set an initial deadline in February for the 

end of March 2012 which expired without results. Cerrejón states that it wanted 

to petition the Ministry of Mines to declare the property plots of public use and 

social interest to pave the way for expropriation but highlights its willingness to 

negotiate further (Cerrejón 2012a). In October 2012, the Ministry of Mines and 

Energy issued the declaration of public use and social interest of the Roche plots 

(Cerrejón 2012b). SEM 2015 

> 158
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

Parallel activities carried out by Cerrejón to implement income generation 

projects in 2011 and 2012 included the provision of educational software, a training 

session for mothers on educational matters, the support of the creation of a motor -

bike garage, training in early childhood care for some women of the community, and 

the planned development of handicraft projects. Up to May 2013, Cerrejón reports 

the implementation of productive projects for 17 families at the new site. New nego -

tiations with the remaining families started without results; yet no expropriation 

was carried out (Cerrejón 2013). Up to May 2014, Cerrejón contends that agreements 

with the remaining eight families were reached and that six of them moved to the 

new site (Cerrejón 2014a). In April 2015, the two remaining families were still rejecting 

resettlement, arguing that they raise livestock and therefore cannot accept alterna -

tives. Cerrejón is not seeking eviction (Cerrejón 2015a). 

Although not all the families eligible for resettlement have moved to the new 

site, 23 families now permanently live there. The houses at the new settlement are 

all of similar style (see figure 6), built out of bricks and cement, comprising two 

bedrooms, one bathroom and a living room combined with a kitchen. All houses 

are equipped with electricity, air-conditioning and a natural gas oven (Hora 2014: 

83). There are several community buildings: an assembly hall, a Catholic church, a 

primary school and a small health centre (Hora 2014: 84; see figure 7). The community 

has an area of 25 hectares for agricultural activities. Only 2.5 hectares are used for 

agricultural production, farmed by seven families (Hora 2014: 86). Some inhabitants 

of the new settlement complain that their properties are not big enough for horticul -

ture and the raising of small livestock (Hora 2014: 89). The tap water has a salty taste 

and is not of drinking quality; therefore water has to be delivered by trucks. 2

Figure 7.  Resettlement of Roche including area designated for agricultural production 

> Hora 2014: 83; González Perafán/Valenzuela 2013.
> 2. Due to a lack of material on the resettlement processes of Patilla and Chancleta, both communities are examined
> in the same section. SEM 2015
> 159

The proximity to the highway and the city of Barrancas has both advantages and 

disadvantages for the community. On the one hand, public services such as a hospital 

and a high school as well as other everyday necessities are reachable within a few 

minutes by taxi. On the other hand, there have been incidents of burglary, presum -

ably originating from the city, which have caused anxiety among the residents of the 

new settlements (Hora 2014: 85).In addition to the lack of space for horticulture and 

small livestock and the security and water issues, the residents of the new commu -

nity are critical of the fact that the productive projects are not satisfying, that early 

child care is lacking, and that school is too small (González Perafán/Valenzuela 2013). 

The NGO Ask! adds that the lack of functioning productive and income generating 

projects distresses the residents of the new site all the more given that the four-

year period of post-resettlement subsidies from Cerrej ón will run out in 2015 (Suhner 

2015).  However, the community is satisfied with the higher education programme. 3

(González Perafán/Valenzuela 2013). 

3.2 The resettlement processes of La Patilla and Chancleta 

There is no exact information available concerning the number of families living in 

the Patilla and Chancleta communities before the mine arrived or when the mining 

activities started. In both communities, people were notified in 2003 that Cerrejón 

had intentions to resettle their villages because of a potential expansion of the pit 

(Harker et al. 2008: 24). None of the communities wanted to be assisted by the NGO 

Indepaz, they preferred instead to negotiate on their own or through a representa -

tive (González Perafán 2015). Also in 2003, the University of the Andes’ interdiscipli -

nary research centre produced a socio-economic report on the Patilla and Chancleta 

communities, including a population census (Cerrejón 2015g). In 2006, as part of the 

first phase of resettlement, round table dialogues were established (Cerrejón 2015g). 

For the second phase two years later, a new resettlement site was chosen and the 

assessment defining the families to be resettled was undertaken (Cerrejón 2015g). In 

2011, the construction of the houses and infrastructure for both new settlements 

began, starting the third phase of “execution of the resettlement” (Cerrejón 2011a). 

Up to October 2011, 40 relocation agreements out of 46 had been signed for the 

Patilla community. In April 2012, the housing construction was completed in Patilla 

and the 45 families that had agreed to resettle started to relocate (Cerrejón 2012a). 

In May 2014, 33 livelihood projects were implemented at the new site and seven 

families were showing good progress in developing these projects, while six fami -

lies demonstrated minimal progress (Cerrejón 2014a), showing some involvement 

in the fourth phase of stabilisation. In April 2015, Cerrejón stated that it had addi -

tionally reached agreements with 28 out of 35 families which were originally not 

entitled to resettlement, and that negotiations were ongoing with the remaining 

13 families. At the new site, 38 projects have been implemented of which 25 are 

active. Six families still remain at the original site and negotiations are continuing 

(Cerrejón 2015a). 

Up to October 2011, 40 out of 57 Chancleta families had agreed on resettlement 

(Cerrejón 2011b) the first 28 of which had moved to the new site by October 2012 

(Cerrejón 2012b). Long negotiation processes followed, resulting in the inclusion of 

some families that had not originally been defined as eligible. In the first quarter of 

2015, 47 out of the 57 originally eligible families had agreed on relocation and moved 

to the new site, six out of nine originally ineligible families had been moved to the 

new site and five families remained at the old site, still in the process of negotiating 

with Cerrejón (Cerrejón 2015a). 

> 3. Households in the urban centers in the region obtain their drinking water the same way (Hora 2014: 83). SEM 2015
> 160
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

The NGO Ask! states that the refusal of some families in Patilla and Chancleta 

to accept relocation is due to the fact that the new settlement is not rural enough 

(Suhner 2015). Indepaz explains that an additional reason is the changing nature of the 

family structure (e.g. people marry or have children) during the prolonged resettle -

ment process (González Perafán 2015). This protracted resettlement process, internal 

community conflicts and non-transparent individual negotiations have harmed the 

social fabric of the two communities (González Perafán 2015). Information on the 

living situation at the new sites of Patilla and Chancleta is not available, yet their 

structure is similar to Roche’s and therefore comparable conditions can be expected. 

3.3 The Resettlement of Las Casitas: Negotiations in process 

The original Las Casitas site was founded in 1905 and was characterised by the agricul -

tural and livestock activities of its residents (Cerrejón 2015e). In 2008, Cerrejón docu -

mented the decision to resettle the community because of the expected worsening 

of the air quality due to dust particles (Cerrejón 2015e). Yet, in 2014, it transpired that 

the residents of Casitas had to be moved because of the planned expansion of the pit, 

attracting the attention of international media and NGOs (Willis 2014; Suhner 2014). 

The first phase of “community engagement and strengthening of social capital” 

included the formal process initiated in June 2009, followed by a census of the popu -

lation that identified all residents at that time and several community activities and 

excursions in 2011 and 2012 (Cerrejón 2015e). The NGO Indepaz carried out an addi -

tional census in the same year with different results (González Peráfan/Valenzuela 

2013). 

In the second phase of “participative design of the resettlement”, a consultative 

committee for the relocation of Las Casitas was formed in January 2010 and some 

months later the property for the new settlement was selected (Cerrejón 2015e). 

The company states that “Cerrejón and the community agreed that the criteria for 

determining the right to compensation for resettlement were: (1) being a permanent 

resident in Las Casitas from before June 16 of 2009, (2) owning a house or property, 

and (3) being an independent household”. Due to the request of the community of 

Las Casitas nine families were additionally included even though they did not meet 

the initial criteria (Cerrejón 2014c). The families eligible for relocation at this stage 

numbered 31 (Cerrejón 2015e). In July 2012, the community voted on the design of the 

new village. 

Concerning the third phase of “execution of resettlement”, Cerrejón highlights 

in its online documentation of the resettlement process that community members 

entitled for resettlement participated in training and education programs and that 

income generating projects were in planning in 2011 and 2012 (Cerrejón 2015e). 

In March 2012, all Cerrejón activities concerning the resettlement of Las Casitas 

were suspended, as some persons related to Las Casitas wanted the resettlement 

process to be reviewed (Cerrejón 2012a). Yet, the construction of houses started in 

October 2012 and impact identification meetings were carried out with 17 out of 

the 31 selected families (Cerrejón 2012b). In 2014, Cerrejón states that nine agree -

ments were reached with families at the original site and that the dialogue with 55 

remaining families was ongoing (Cerrejón 2014a). The NGO Indepaz started advising 

the community in 2012 (González 2015). In a joint letter by the Las Casitas community 

action board in July 2014, the community proclaimed several points of dissatisfaction 

and disagreement with the current resettlement process (Indepaz 2014). They made 

complaints about the negotiation process which they consider to be neither fair nor 

transparent, deteriorating the social fabric of the community (Indepaz 2014). 

The construction of the new site was concluded prior to April 2015 and 11 of the 15 

families that had already reached an agreement have moved to the new site (Cerrejón 

2015a). Five of the relocated families have implemented their productive projects. 

Agreements (although their nature is unclear) have been reached with 11 of 13 families SEM 2015 

> 161

that were not eligible for relocation and negotiation talks with the remaining fami -

lies and ten additional rural families are continuing (Cerrejón 2015a). In July 2014, 

Cerrejón issued a demand for expropriation (Cerrejón 2015a). However, it remains to 

be seen how the resettlement negotiations will unfold and whether Cerrejón will in 

fact expropriate the remaining families. 

The Las Casitas resettlement process seems to be even more unsystematic and 

conflictual than the previously discussed cases. The negotiation process is proving 

very lengthy and it seems that the positions of the negotiating parties have become 

more and more entrenched. The majority of the population still lives at the original 

site and only 11 families have moved to the new settlement. The conditions at the 

new site are similar to those in the new settlements of Roche, Patilla and Chancleta 

(Suhner 2015). 

3.4 The resettlement process of the indigenous community Tamaquito II 

The original settlement of Tamaquito II was founded in 1965 and was home 31 fami -

lies prior to the resettlement carried out by Cerrejón in 2013. The residents of the site 

used up to 5,000 hectares – owned by the Colombian government but available for 

public use – for their livestock and hunting. Besides these activities, their livelihoods 

depended on subsistence horticulture, fishing and handicraft production (Hora 2014: 

92). The mining operations would not have affected the old site directly, yet the 

depopulation of the neighbouring communities such as Tabaco and Roche and the 

air and noise pollution had severe negative impacts on Tamaquito II (Hora 2014: 92). 

Because of these changed conditions, the community collectively decided to resettle 

(Gutierrez Torres 2014). 

The resettlement of Tamaqutio II was handled differently from the other reset -

tlements as it is the only community officially recognised as being of indigenous 

origin. The Ministry of Interior and Justice granted this status through Resolution 

0047 in 2008 (Cerrejón 2015j). 

The online published documentation of the resettlement process by Cerrejón 

covers three of the four resettlement phases of Cerrejón’s resettlement scheme. 

According to the documentation, the phases run in parallel. 

Regarding the first phase of “community engagement and strengthening of social 

capital”, Cerrejón highlighted certain points. In April 2007, Cerrejón announced the 

official start of the resettlement process to the Tamaquito II community. Shortly 

afterwards, Cerrejón held a meeting with the state agency Incoder (the Colombian 

institute for rural development), the Municipal Ombudsman and the Tamaquito II 

community in which the latter explicitly expressed the wish to be relocated to a place 

which can be recognised as an indigenous reserve (Cerrejón 2015j). Later that year, 

Incoder proposed a site for the new settlement which was refused by the commu -

nity because it was too small and did not meet their expectations. The community 

preferred to search on their own for an adequate resettlement location (Cerrejón 

2015j). In the first quarter of 2012, Cerrejón reported several community events (New 

Year’s celebration, painting workshop, excursion, radio workshop for teenagers) and 

the training of two women in early childhood education (Cerrejón 2015j). 

The second phase “participative design of the resettlement action plan” began in 

April 2008 with the proposal of a suitable site for resettlement by the community. 

The Tamaquito II community initially demanded a territory of 1,000 hectares, and 

then lowered its demand to 500 hectares (Ramirez 2010). Eleven workshops were held 

between the community, Cerrejón and the municipality to negotiate the details. In 

February 2009 the community accepted a terrain of 300 hectares for the new loca -

tion (Cerrejón 2015f). Between September and October 2009 a population census 

was carried out to define the families eligible for resettlement. In 2010, the Social 

Capital Group prepared the resettlement action plan and updated the baseline for 

resettlement. The NGO Indepaz carried out an additional baseline study in the same SEM 2015 

> 162
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

year (Cerrejón 2015j). The two studies were compared and compromise between the 

two was reached. The specific design of the new community housing and facilities 

began in October 2010 and an agreement on the final design was reached in May 2011. 

Cerrej ón bought  the property for the new site in July 2010 (Cerrejón 2015j). 

Figure 8.  Overview of the Tamaquito II resettlement 

> Source: Hora 2014: 96

During the third phase “execution of the resettlement plan”, a constructor for the 

new site was hired with the consent of the representatives of Tamaquito II, and the 

construction licence was granted until February 2012. In May 2012, a so-called impact 

response plan was negotiated with the support of Indepaz and community members 

of Tamaquito II were involved in the fabrication of construction material (Cerrejón 

2015j). 

In May 2013, Cerrejón states that a general agreement was reached, resolving minor 

issues on specific compensation (Cerrejón 2013). The construction of the dwellings 

was finished shortly afterwards. In August 2013, all 31 families of Tamaquito II reset -

tled collectively to the new site and the first three livelihood projects were put in 

place (Cerrejón 2014a). One year later, Cerrejón reports that ten families had started 

a collective cattle project and that six families had developed projects in trade and 

services. In February 2015, Tamaquito II received the land titles for their new settle -

ment site (Cerrejón 2015b). 

The new site consists of 31 residential units, each with an adjoining three-hectare 

parcel of land, houses with public functions, a primary school and a park like area for 

community events (Hora 2014: 96, 98; see figure 8). The majority of the site is tropical 

dry forest and is used for cattle farming. There is enough fertile land for agricultural 

activities. Between each house there is a distance of more than 80 meters (Hora 2014: 

97). One residential unit consists of three brick-made houses with an iron roof and 

one mud-wall house, comparable to the standard buildings in the old Tamaquito II 

site (Hora 2014: 97; see figure 9). Unlike the original site, the new residential units 

have bathrooms and are equipped with electricity, water pipes, gas ovens, fridges 

and televisions but not air-conditioning as in Roche (Hora 2014: 97; Gutierrez Torres SEM 2015 

> 163

2014). The residents still have to get used to these new features, which also give rise 

to additional dependency on income generation and support from Cerrejón, as they 

previously lived relatively  autonomously (Gutierrez Torres 2014; Hora 2014: 100). 

Figure 9.  Houses in the new settlement of the Tamaquito II community 

> Source: Gutierrez Torres 2014, photo credit: Luis Ángel

Residents remain unsatisfied because of the poor water quality, insufficiency of 

income generation projects and the infrastructure of the houses (Cerrejón 2015a). 

Cerrejón addressed some of these issues by digging a new underground well, 

conducting water tests, hiring members of the community to carry out maintenance 

work at the new settlement site and ordering maintenance work on the houses. Yet, 

these are temporary solutions that do not respond to the full range of problems. 

4. COMPARING THE RESETTLEMENT PROCESSES: 

WHAT CAN BE LEARNT? 

In this section, the five resettlement processes will be compared and evaluated. It is 

evident that mining-induced planned resettlements are long-term, complicated and 

for each community singular processes that need time to be negotiated, carried out 

and established. Yet, there are some clear differences between the cases of Roche, 

Patilla, Chancleta and Las Casitas on the one hand and Tamaquito II on the other. 

The indigenous community of Tamaquito II was the only community out of the 

five that managed to reach agreement on collective resettlement to a new site, which 

corresponds to many of the Tamaquito II residents’ needs, and can be considered as 

the most successful resettlement project out of the five. One reason for this relative 

success is that the community had a strong leader, stayed firm and united and negoti -

ated as a collective (González Perafán 2015). They were moreover assisted in negotia -

tions by the NGO Indepaz. A second reason is that the community received special 

treatment because of its status as a vulnerable indigenous group – although the other 

communities are partly of afro-Colombian decent and therefore belong to an ethnic 

minority, they were not regarded as such a group. Yet, the resettlement created a state 

of dependency as the community is no longer self-sufficient, instead now having to 

rely on Cerrejón’s subsidies. The implementation of productive projects has not yet 

been successful. SEM 2015 

> 164
> THE
> AMERICAS
> PIA VAN ACKERN
> WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT
> AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA

The resettlements of the afro-Colombian and rural communities of Roche, 

Patilla, Chancleta and Las Casitas have proved more problematic. Individual negotia -

tions resulting in lengthy and fragmented resettlement processes are characteristic 

of these cases. The resettlement processes depended heavily on the individual nego -

tiation skills of the families. This shows that the implementation of the second phase 

of Cerrejón’s resettlement process “designing a participative resettlement action plan 

with the community, following IFC guidelines” is especially challenging in these 

cases. Conflicts and uncertainty over the entitlement for collective resettlement and 

the lack of transparency during that phase of the process are the main concerns of 

the people of the four communities. Careful pre-studies of the sites and populations 

as well as publicly negotiated criteria for resettlement eligibility is necessary and 

the maintenance of a transparent dialogue during the whole process is of particular 

importance. 

Another common experience for these four communities is that the collectively 

resettled families moved from a rural to semi-urban environment, a fact that signif -

icantly changed their lives. Although the new settlements are well equipped with 

electricity, air conditioning and gas, the residents’ financial independence through 

productive projects is guaranteed merely in individual cases and subsistence agri -

culture is only possible to a limited extent. These observations demonstrate that 

the implementation of the fourth phase of “relocation and stabilization in the new 

location” has also proved problematic. The sufficient development and provision of 

income generation measures is essential to decrease vulnerability and dependency of 

the already resettled and soon to be resettled communities. Therefore, such projects 

should be a top priority. In cooperation with local authorities the resettlement itself 

could become a community development undertaking, improving the overall situa -

tion of the inhabitants of the affected region. 

In addition to the issues concerning all four communities, a particularity for 

Roche is that Cerrejón started to buy land from the Roche families prior to the imple -

mentation of a corporate resettlement strategy. The vast majority, around 375 out of 

400 people, originally living in Roche have moved individually to urban centres in the 

surrounding area, many of them becoming impoverished. It was only in 2006, almost 

ten years later, that Cerrejón offered a collective resettlement to the remaining 25 

families, out of which 23 have accepted to move to the new site. Two families remain 

at the previous site because they are cattle farmers who need more land than that 

offered by Cerrejón. The group of people who moved on an individual basis before 

2006 formed the association Asoroche to demanding further compensation from 

Cerrejón and the NGO Indepaz began to assist them as well as the resettled collec -

tive. The situation of the former has nonetheless shown no improvement to date. 

The Las Casitas case is specific because 20 of the 31 families eligible for resettle -

ment still reside at the original site of the village, along with 55 families who were 

not deemed eligible. Although Cerrejón conducted a population census and estab -

lished criteria for resettlement, these were not accepted by most of the Las Casitas 

families. There was no compromise reached between the census conducted by the 

NGO Indepaz which supports the Las Casitas community and Cerrejón’s results. 

This entrenched situation might be the result of a deficient participatory process, or 

due to the fact that the residents of Las Casitas were aware of the shortcomings of 

the new settlements for the Roche, Patillla and Chancleta residents, and therefore 

demanded better conditions from Cerrejón. 

Under Colombian law, it is the responsibility and legal duty of a consortium that 

belongs to the world’s biggest and economically most successful mining companies to 

conduct thoughtful long-term planning and to demonstrate a strong social commit -

ment towards the people living in the area of the mine. These two qualities can 

certainly be developed further. Yet, the insufficient involvement of the Colombian 

State in the resettlement process is evident. The lack of comprehensive legislation SEM 2015 

> 165

should be resolved by a precise and coherent law or regulation. Additionally, more 

executive involvement of the State is required. An administrative authority – prefer -

ably at the local level – should be tasked with monitoring the entire resettlement 

process and thus safeguarding the affected people. It is evident that State control 

in La Guajira as “Colombia’s Wild West” is lacking not only in regulating mining 

industries but in other respects as well. However, if the national government allows 

such development projects for the sake of the national interest, it should offer more 

support to the affected local people. 

5. OUTLOOK: ROUND TABLE MEETINGS 

To resolve some of the issues connected with resettlements and the sustainable 

establishment of the communities in their new sites, Cerrejón, the Barrancas munic -

ipality and the leaders of the five communities set up regular round table meetings 

at the beginning of 2014 (González Perafán 2015; Cerrejón 2014a). The different topics 

of discussion are: “productive projects (emphasis on the water irrigation system and 

water reservoirs for agricultural use), educational support, drinkable water and infra -

structure, employability and income generation, equal treatment for all communi -

ties, and change in the public stratification level of the houses and the villages to 

reduce amount of public utilities charged” (Cerrejón 2014a). Up to April 2015, 46 meet -

ings had been held. The agreement on an education aid programme was reached and 

a local consultant was hired to assess livelihood projects for the resettled families 

(Cerrejón 2015a). Whether the round table meetings can contribute to an integral 

improvement of the communities’ situations remains to be seen over the coming 

years. It is thus overall fair to conclude that although Cerrejón improved its resettle -

ment strategy after the third party review in 2008 some clear shortcomings remain. SEM 2015 

166 

THE 

AMERICAS 

PIA VAN ACKERN 

WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT 

AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA 

# REFERENCES 

Books 

– Cernea, Michael (1988):  Involuntary 

Resettlement in Development Projects 

– Policy Guidelines in World Bank− 

Financed Projects.  Washington D.C.: 

The World Bank. 

– Hudson, Rex A. (2010):  Colombia: a 

country study,  US Government edition, 

Federal Research Division, Library of 

Congress, 5 th  edition. 

– Leech, Garry M. (2009): Beyond 

Bogotá: Diary of a Drug War 

Journalist in Colombia. Boston: 

Beacon Press. 

– Oliver-Smith, A. (2009) (Ed.): 

Development & Dispossession: The Crisis 

of Forced 

– Displacement and Resettlement.  Santa 

Fe: School for Advanced Research 

Advanced Seminar Series. 

Articles 

– Cernea, Michael (1997): The Risks and 

Reconstruction Model for Resettling 

Displace Populations. In:  World 

Development , Vol 25, No. 10, 1569-1587 

– Cernea, Michael (2008): Reforming 

the foundations of involuntary 

resettlement: Introduction. In: 

Cernea, Michael/Mathur, Hari 

Mohan (eds.): Can Compensation 

Prevent Impoverishment? Reforming 

Resettlement Through Investment 

and Benefit-Sharing. New Delhi: 

Oxford University Press, 1-10. 

– González Perafán, Leonardo (2011): 

Desalojo Forzado, Reasientamientos 

Involuntarios y Derechos de las 

Comunidades. In:  Megaminería y 

Reasentamientos Forzados . Indepaz 

– Hora, Benedikt (2014): Mining-induced 

displacement and resettlement in 

Colombia. Socio-economic and 

cultural consequences of resettlement 

of campesions and indigenous people 

– The case of the Cerrejón open pit 

mine in La Guajira. Master’s thesis, 

University of Innsbruck,  http://diglib. 

uibk.ac.at/ulbtirolhs/download/ 

pdf/202154?originalFilename=true 

(consulted on 18 March 2015) 

– Price, Susanna (2009): Prologue: 

Victims or Partners? The Social 

Perspective in Development-Induced 

Displacement and Resettlement. In: 

The Asia Pacific Journal of Anthropology ,

Vol. 10, No. 4, 266-282 

Reports and press releases 

– Ask! (Arbeitsgruppe Schweiz-

Kolumbien) (2014): Jahresbericht 2014. 

– Cerrejón (2008): Response to the 

independent panel’s assessment 

of Cerrejón’s social engagement 

practices,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=566 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2009a): 2nd Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

April 2009,  http://www.cerrejon.com/ 

site/Default.aspx?tabid=561  (consulted 

on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2009b): 3rd Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

October 2009,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=563 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2010a): 4th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

April 2010,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=564 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2010b): 5th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

October 2010,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=562 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2011a): 6th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

April 2011,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/english/sustainable-

development-%E2%80%A2-social-

responsibility/performance/third-

party-review-of-social-programs/ 

sixth-report.aspx  (consulted on 5 May 

2015) 

– Cerrejón (2011b): 7th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

October 2011,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/english/sustainable-

development-%E2%80%A2-social-

responsibility/performance/third-

party-review-of-social-programs/ 

seventh-report.aspx  (consulted on 5 

May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2012a): 8th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

June 2012,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=1368 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2012b): 9th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

October 2012,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=1543 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2012c): Sustainability 

Report 2012,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Portals/1/Documents/pdf/ 

sustainability_reports/Cerrejon_ 

Sustainability_Report_2012.pdf 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2013): 10th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

May 2013,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=1707 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2014a): 11th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

May 2014,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=1946 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2014b): 12th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

November 2014,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=2075 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2014c): Cerrejón’s 

Declaration on the Statement of the 

Las Casitas Community Action Board 

in September of 2014,  http://business-

humanrights.org/sites/default/files/ 

documents/CERREJ%C3%93N’S%20 

DECLARATION%20ON%20 

THE%20STATEMENT%20OF%20 

THE%20LAS%20CASITAS%20 

COMMUNITY%20ACTION%20 

BOARD%20IN%20SEPTEMBER%20 

OF%202014.pdf  (consulted on 20 April 

2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015a): 13th Progress Report 

on Cerrejón’s Social Commitments, 

April 2015,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Default.aspx?tabid=2190 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) SEM 2015 

167 

– DANE (Departamento Administrativo 

Nacional de Estadística) (2010): Boletín 

Censo General 2005, Perfil La Guajira, 

13 September 2010 (consulted on 5 

May 2015) 

– DANE (Departamento Administrativo 

Nacional de Estadística) (2012): La 

Guajira: Pobreza Monetaria 2012, 

http://www.dane.gov.co/files/ 

investigaciones/condiciones_vida/ 

pobreza/Guajira_Pobrez 

– a_2012.pdf (consulted on 15 April 2015) 

– DANE (Departamento Administrativo 

Nacional de Estadística) (2013): Anexos 

estadísticos 

– 2013 Colombia, exportaciones totales, 

según CIIU Rev. 3 1995 – 2013, October 

2013, http://www.dane.gov.co/files/ 

investigaciones/comercio_exterior/ 

exportaciones/2013/a 

– nexos_export_oct13.xls (consulted on 

15 April 2015) 

– González Perafán, Leonardo/ 

Valenzuela, Diana Paola (2013): 

Informe de visita y reuniones con 

comunidades a reasentar en La 

Guajira, 28-30 May 2013. Indepaz 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Harker, John/Kalminovitz, 

Saloman/Killick, Nick/Serrano, 

Elena (2008): Cerrejon Coal 

and Social Responsibility: An 

Independent Review of Impact 

and Intent,  http://www.cerrejon. 

com/site/Portals/1/Documents/ 

pdf/FinalPanelReportFebruary.pdf 

(consulted on 22 April 2015) 

– IDMC (Internal Displacement 

Monitoring Centre) (2014): Colombia. 

Displacement continues despite 

hopes for peace, 16 January 2014. 

– IFC (2015b): Guidance Note 5 Land 

Acquisition and Involuntary 

Resettlement,  http://www.ifc.org/ 

wps/wcm/connect/4b976700498008d 

3a417f6336b93d75f/Updated_GN5-2012. 

pdf?MOD=AJPERES  (consulted on 15 

April 2015) 

– Suhner, Stefan (2014): Las Casitas 

droht gewaltsame Enteignung, 30 

September 2014, ASK! (Arbeitsgruppe 

Schweiz-Kolumbien) 

– Teherán Sanchez, Sandra (2014): 

Impactos socioterritoriales de 

la explotación minera en los 

departamentos del César y La 

Guajira. In: La minería de carbón a 

gran escala en Colombia: impactos 

econnónimcos, sociales, laborales, 

ambienmentales y territoriales, 

Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, Análisis 

1/2014, 44-67 

Newspaper articles 

– Balch, Oliver (2013): Cerrejón mine in 

Colombia: can it address its human 

rights risks? In: The Guardian, 25 July 

2013,  http://www.theguardian.com/ 

sustainable-business/cerrejon-mine-

colombia-human-rights  (consulted on 

23 March 2015) 

– Brinded, Lianna (2013): Timeline and 

Factbox: Glencore and Xstrata Merger. 

In:  International Business Times,  3

May 2013,  http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/ 

glencore-xstrata-merger-shares-

trading-qatar-sovereign-464122 

(consulted on 18 April 2015) 

– Gutierrez Torres, Carolina (2014): 

“El pueplo wayuu que el carbón 

desterró” In:  El Espectador , 24 February 

2014,  http://www.elespectador. 

com/noticias/medio-ambiente/ 

el-pueblo-wayuu-el-carbon-desterro-

articulo-477081  (consulted on 18 April 

2015) 

– Spence, Robert (2014): Top 10 Mining 

Companies Based on Revenue. In: 

Mining Global , 12 August 2014,  http:// 

www.miningglobal.com/top10/1069/ 

Top-10-Mining-Companies-Based-on-

Revenue  (consulted on 17 April 2015) 

– Semana (2014a): ¿Estamos perdiendo 

La Guajira? In:  Semana,  19 July 2014, 

http://www.semana.com/nacion/ 

articulo/estamos-perdiendo-la-

guajira/396289-3  (consulted on 17 April 

2015) 

– Semana (2014b): Frontera con 

Venezuela, tierra de nadie, In:  Semana, 

19 July 2014  http://www.semana. 

com/nacion/articulo/frontera-con-

venezuela-tierra-de-nadie/396291-3 

(consulted on 19 April 2015) 

– Semana (2014c):  ¿Quién se robó el 

agua de La Guajira?, In:  Semana , 4 

August 2014.  http://www.semana. 

com/nacion/articulo/quien-se-

robo-el-agua-de-la-guajira/398006-3 

(consulted on 19 April 2015) 

– Willis, Andrew (2014): BHP Coal 

Mine Meeting Relocation Resistance 

in Colombia, In: Bloomber 

Business, 11 November 2014. http:// 

www.bloomberg.com/news/ 

articles/2014-11-11/bhp-coal-mine-

meeting-relocation-resistance-in-

colombia?formatrss2012-08-02.html 

(consulted on 19 April 2015) 

Interviews 

– Interview with Stephan Suhner, 

Arbeitsgruppe Schweiz-Kolumbien, 

conducted on 24 April 2015 via Skype 

– Interview with Leonardo González 

Perafán, Indepaz, conducted on 4 May 

2015 via Skype 

Websites 

– Cerrejón (2015b): Cerrejón Handed 

Donation Deed to Wayuu Community 

of Tamaquito II, 11 February 2015, 

http://www.cerrejon.com/site/ 

english/press-room/news-archives/ 

cerrejon-handed-deed-to-tamaquito-

ii.aspx  (consulted on 20 April 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015c): Chancleta  (consulted 

on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015d): History,  http:// 

www.cerrejon.com/site/english/our-

company/history.aspx  (consulted on 

16 April) 

– Cerrejón (2015e): Las Casitas, 

http://www.cerrejon.com/site/ 

english/sustainable-development-

%E2%80%A2-social-responsibility/ 

resettlements/las-casitas.aspx 

(consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015f): Our Company, 

http://www.cerrejon.com/site/ 

english/our-company.aspx  (consulted 

on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015g): Patilla,  http:// 

www.cerrejon.com/site/english/ 

sustainable-development-

%E2%80%A2-social-responsibility/ 

resettlements/patilla.aspx  (consulted 

on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015h): Resettlements, 

http://www.cerrejon.com/site/ 

english/sustainable-development-

%E2%80%A2-social-responsibility/ 

resettlements.aspx  (consulted on 15 

April 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015i): Roche,  http:// 

www.cerrejon.com/site/english/ 

sustainable-development-

%E2%80%A2-social-responsibility/ 

resettlements/roche.aspx  (consulted 

on 5 May 2015) 

– Cerrejón (2015j): Tamaquito II, 

http://www.cerrejon.com/site/ SEM 2015 

168 

THE 

AMERICAS 

PIA VAN ACKERN 

WHEN MINING MOVES PEOPLE: DEVELOPMENT-INDUCED DISPLACEMENT 

AND RESETTLEMENT IN LA GUAJIRA, COLOMBIA 

english/sustainable-development-

%E2%80%A2-social-responsibility/ 

resettlements/tamaquito-ii/phase-i. 

aspx  (consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– IDMC (2015): Global Overview 2015, 

http://www.internal-displacement. 

org/global-overview/  (consulted on 18 

April 2015) 

– IFC (2015a): Environmental and 

Social Performance Standards 

and Guidance Notes,  http:// 

www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/ 

topics_ext_content/ifc_external_ 

corporate_site/ifc+sustainability/ 

our+approach/risk+management/ 

performance+standards/environment 

al+and+social+performance+standard 

s+and+guidance+notes  (consulted on 

15 April 2015) 

– Indepaz (2014): Carta de la Junta de 

Acción Comunal vereda Las Casitas, 

2 July 2014,  http://www.indepaz.org. 

co/?p=4363  (consulted on 5 May 2015) 

– UNHCR (2015):  2015 UNHCR country 

operations profile – Colombia,  http:// 

www.unhcr.org/pages/49e492ad6. 

html  (consulted on 20 April 2015) 

– Ramirez, Nilson (2010): Interview 

with Nilson Ramirez, teacher of 

Tamaquito II, condicted on 19 and 

20 November 2010 by Stephan 

Suhner, NGO Ask !,  http://www. 

askonline.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/ 

documents/Thema_Wirtschaft_und_ 

Menschenrechte/Bergbau_Rohstoff/ 

Glencore_Kolumbien/Interview_ 

Nilson_Ramirez.pdf  (consulted on 20 

April 2015) 

Legal sources and guidelines 

– Colombian Constitution 

(English version),  https://www. 

constituteproject.org/constitution/ 

Colombia_2013?lang=en  (consulted on 

20 April 2015) 

– Colombian Mining Code 

– Law 685 of 2001,  http://www. 

alcaldiabogota.gov.co/sisjur/normas/ 

Norma1.jsp?i=9202#285  (consulted on 

20 April 2015) 

– Law 1382 of 2010,  http://www. 

alcaldiabogota.gov.co/sisjur/normas/ 

Norma1.jsp?i=38863  (consulted on 15 

April 2015) 

– Law 56 of 1981,  http://www.minminas. 

gov.co/documents/10180/670382/ 

Ley56de1981.pdf/7431ad3d-dcbf-4f1b-

9a3d-20e949c30954  (consulted on 20 

April 2015) 

– World Bank (2001): The World Bank’s 

Operational Policy on Involuntary 

Resettlement (OP) 4.12,  http://web. 

worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/ 

PROJECTS/EXTPOLICIES/EXTOPMA 

NUAL/0,,contentMDK:20064610~me 

nuPK:64701637~pagePK:64709096~piP 

K:64709108~theSitePK:502184,00.html 

(consulted on 20 April 2015) SEM 2015 

169 

## ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX 

# The Correlation between 

# Environmental Disasters 

# and Migration Trends in 

# Chiapas, Mexico 

# In 2014, the state of Chiapas, Mexico was affected by tropical storm Boris 

and other strong rainfall events causing river over flow, landslides and floods 

that affected at least 30,000 people throughout the year. For more than a 

decade the state of Chiapas has experienced the second largest precipitations 

level in Mexico, just below that of neighbouring state Tabasco, with around 

2,000 mm per year (CONAGUA, 2015). Moreover, Chiapas is Mexico’s poorest 

region, with 74.7 per cent of its population living in poverty (CONEVAL, 2012). 

The combined effect of critical socioeconomic conditions in Mexico and the 

increasing frequency and intensity of natural hazards caused by shifts in tempera -

ture, rainfall, and soil degradation, lead to the destruction of arable land, reducing 

food resources and sources of income opportunities that eventually encourage popu -

lations to migrate in the search of better living conditions elsewhere (FAO, 2015). 

Indeed, since the end of the 1990’s, studies have reported the critical degrada -

tion of Mexican soil, although environmental degradation and natural disasters only 

started to be linked to migratory movements by scholars during the second half of 

last decade (Albo&Ordaz, 2011). ‘ Chiapanecos ’1, for their part, have been more reactive 

to this situation as they started to feel the negative impacts of natural hazards with 

the floods of 1998 and subsequently Hurricane Stan in 2005, both of which caused 

catastrophic infrastructure destruction, environmental damage, and human losses. 

The consequences of by these two events were so pronounced that  chiapanecos  live 

with the fear that the worst is yet to come. The fear of once again experiencing a 

natural disaster is present in daily life, and yet the Mexican government’s climate 

change adaptation and mitigation policies have been inadequately formulated and 

seem insufficient to help communities to cope with strong rainfall and natural 

hazards. 

The purpose of this paper is to examine the argument that internal and interna -

tional migration patterns in Chiapas have been shaped by the increased frequency of 

natural disasters. 

In the latest national census in 2010, Chiapas, which in the past was not one of the 

traditional migration states in Mexico, appeared for the first time in the list of the 15 

Mexican states with the highest level of international migration, and is the state in 

Mexico with the fourth most negative net migration rate 2 (INEGI, 2015). Furthermore, 

between 1995 and 2014 Chiapas jumped from 27 th  to 17 th  place of the national ranking 

of states to receive the largest amount of remittances per annum, a common tool to 

monitor migration movements in Mexico (Jungehülsing, 2010; Banxico, 2015). Studies 

1. Chiapanecos is the common name given to people from the state of Chiapas. 

2. Net migration rate is the number of emigrants minus the number of immigrants in the studied area. (INEGI, 2015) SEM 2015 

170 

THE 

AMERICAS 

ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX 

THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND 

MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO 

investigating the link between environmental hazards and the factors behind migra -

tion movements are still scarce in the region. 

This paper will start by presenting a brief description of climate change and envi -

ronmental degradation in the state of Chiapas. This will be followed by a review of 

the natural disasters that occurred in 2014, particularly tropical storm Boris which 

exacerbated the environmental degradation caused by the 1998 floods and Hurricane 

Stan in 2005, and how this provides evidence of environmental factors acquiring 

an important role as drivers of emigration in Mexico. Subsequently, statistical 

data relating to migration movements and remittances received by Chiapas along 

with evidence from several case studies will be analysed to demonstrate the corre -

lation between environmental degradation and emigration. The paper will end 

by presenting the manifest policy gaps when responding to natural disasters and 

contend that the government’s persistent failure to develop medium and long-term 

adaptation and mitigation strategies, instead focusing in the aftermath of disasters 

on immediate temporary solutions , perpetuates the high level of vulnerability of 

the population of Chiapas. 

1. CLIMATE CHANGE IN CHIAPAS 

Chiapas is considered to be the second least resilient state in Mexico (Alscher, 2009:8). 

This can be explained by the mix of poor socioeconomic conditions – Chiapas is 

Mexico’s poorest state, with 74.7 per cent of its population living in poverty condi -

tions (CONEVAL, 2012) – and the increasing frequency of floods caused by meteor -

ological phenomena. According to the Mexican National Commission for Disaster 

Prevention and the National Meteorological Service 3, Chiapas will experience an 

increase in the number of hurricanes and tropical storms in the coming years, and it 

will become more vulnerable to sea-level rise (Image 1) (Diario Official de la Federa -

cion, 2014). 

Current environmental challenges are the consequence of unplanned demo -

graphic growth and the lack of regulation of the exploitation of natural resources 

for economic purposes (Ruiz, 2010). According to data from the Mexican National 

Ecology Institute, in 1990, 52 per cent of Mexico’s territory was covered with forests; 

this figure had decreased to 34 per cent by 2011, with average losses of 600 thousand 

hectares each year 4 (Alscher, 2009:9; Camacho, 2014). Furthermore, the expansion of 

agriculture has also caused widespread soil erosion: in 2014, 63 per cent of Mexican 

territory presented some degree of soil erosion (123.3 million hectares) (CONAFOR, 

2014). Deforestation, land use and soil erosion increase the impact of hydrological 

phenomena in the region during the rainy season given that forests serve as precipi -

tation regulators by absorbing and rerouting water slowly into rivers, lakes and 

streams, reducing the size of the flood peak. 

In Chiapas, around 76 per cent of forest cover is degraded but the Mexican 

government has not implemented any measures to prevent this situation. Indeed, 

only 0.11 percent of the national budget is allocated to forest conservation and resto -

ration (Castro, 2005). The areas most affected by water erosion are the Istmo-Costal, 

Soconusco, Sierra de Chiapas and Border regions, where rainfall ranges from 1,400   

> 3. The Mexican National Commission for Disaster Prevention and the National Meteorological Service have underta -
> ken a series of studies to identify the different risks and climate change conditions to which the different regions of
> Mexico will be exposed in the coming years. Their assessments have contributed to the establishment of the National
> Program for Climate Change Mitigation 2014-2018. (Diario Official de la Federacion, 2014)
> 4. Mexico is the second Latin American country with the highest deforestation levels, just behind Brazil. (Alscher,
> 2009:9) SEM 2015
> 171

mm in the coastal and downstream zones to 4,500 mm in the middle and upstream 

zones of the watersheds. Furthermore, the decline in both water quality and quantity 

is starting to cause conflicts among the population (Ruiz, 2010). 

Non-governmental organisations such as Greenpeace have also highlighted 

forest and wetland degradation as the main factors increasing Chiapas’ vulnerability 

to floods and related hydrological phenomena. Chiapas is facing a vicious circle of 

illegal deforestation for agriculture practices that increase the risk of flooding and 

landslides, which subsequently affects the poorest communities, forcing them to 

relocate in search of better living conditions. The current situation in Chiapas is 

critical as it is estimated that floods and droughts will affect at least 75 per cent of 

Chiapas’ territory in the coming years (Ibarrarán & Rodríguez, 2007). 

2. THE RECCURENCE OF NATURAL DISASTERS IN CHIAPAS 

2.1. 2014: Another year of heavy rainfall and flooding in chiapas 

Each year from March to October, Chiapas’ population fears that the rainy season 

may cause worse natural disasters than the ones experience the year before (Narvaez, 

2006). Emergency evacuations of vulnerable regions and the opening of temporary 

shelters have become common practices as soon as tropical storms are announced. 

According to the Mexican National Water Commission (CONAGUA) precipitation 

levels continue to rise each year (Table 1), while environmental degradation persists 

and, combined with the failure to repair infrastructure damage caused in previous 

years, increase the risk of moderate rainfall causing severe damage in the region. 

Figure 1.  Flood risk (blue = areas highly vulnerable to flooding) 

> Source: Special Program for Climate Change 2014-2018. (Diario Oficial de la Federación, 2014)

SEM 2015 

172 

THE 

AMERICAS 

ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX 

THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND 

MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO 

Table 1 . Average Annual Precipitation (in millimetres)                                 

> 2004 205 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
> Chiapas 1,713.8 2,190.7 2,354.2 2,302.6 2,354.9 1,953.1 2,730.3 2,381.6 1,885.3 2,278.6 2,056.5
> National 872.2 788.1 808.0 812.2 900.7 723.4 962.1 697.2 742.3 920.5 830.8
> Source. CONAGUA (2015).

MEXICO’S MIGRATION BACKGROUND 

Mexico has a long history of both internal and international migration. Analysts con -

sider the roots of Mexican migration to the United States to be located around the 

1840s, after the Mexican-American war when Mexico lost about 40% of its territory. 

It was then that the first cross-border social networks were created as thousands of 

Mexican families remained in former Mexican territory. Nevertheless, it was not until 

the first half of the twentieth century that people started to leave their rural com -

munities in response to the economic and social instability caused by the Mexican 

Revolution (1910-1920) (Alscher, 2009). Initially, migration flows consisted mainly of 

internal migration towards cities, especially to Mexico City, or towards industrial man -

ufacturing and agricultural cities in the northern part of the country and coastal tour -

ist destinations. International migration towards the United States intensified around 

the 1940s with the implementation of the Bracero Program under which more than 

4.6 million Mexicans moved to the U.S. under labour contracts (Jungehülsing, 2010). 

Towards the end of twentieth century, the Mexican debt crisis caused economic stag -

nation, which, in addition to demographic growth led to labour market saturation 

and the increased attractiveness of migration to the north. (Ruiz, 2010) Migration 

specialists consider the international migration flow that originated from the Bracero 

Program as ‘traditional migration’ in Mexico. After the 1980s, migration specialists 

believed there was a ‘new migration era’ in the country as migration flows started 

to emerge in every Mexican region, rather than just in the central and central-west 

regions, where the Bracero Program was first focused (Jungehülsing, 2010). Policy 

makers viewed migration a means of reducing pressure on the labour market and 

a source of additional financial flows generated by Mexicans working in the United 

States sending remittances to their families in Mexico. Alscher (2009) estimates that 

the income of households receiving remittances is between 20 to 25%, and in some 

cases even as much as 40% higher than households without cross-border ties. 

In 2014, rainfall affected Chiapas’ population from the beginning of the year. 

Starting from January, when the rainfall caused by six cold fronts affected 11,086 

people in 11 municipalities in the northern part of Chiapas, 380 temporary shelters 

had to be opened according to the Civil Protection Regional Institute. Furthermore, 

8,183 hectares of crops and 4,175 houses were affected (Henriquez, 2014). CONAGUA 

declared that this was the first time in more than 50 years that Chiapas had witnessed 

such heavy rainfall at this time of the year. 

In June, tropical storm Boris hit Chiapas. Boris lasted 48 hours and, according to 

CONAGUA, its maximum precipitations amounted to 550mm. Nine municipalities 

were declared in a state natural disaster. On average, the region experienced the 

equivalent of 60 days’ rainfall in the space of twenty four hours. Official numbers 

state that during this tropical storm, 11 rivers reached their maximum capacity, 16,000 

people were evacuated, and after the rainfall 943 people had to stay in 5 temporary 

shelters, with houses suffering total or partial damage in 31 municipalities 

(CENAPRED, 2015). There were also 14 landslides along federal roads and a bridge was 

destroyed in Villacorzo municipality. Two other landslides left two communities 

isolated for a several days (ICOSO Chiapas, 2015). SEM 2015 

> 173 ü ü

In September, two tropical waves put 8 municipalities in a state of emergency 

and 3 municipalities of the northern and mountain regions of Chiapas in a state of 

disaster (ICOSO Chiapas, 2014). The over flow of the Chalaca river in Villa Comatitlan 

municipality, causing flooding ranging from 30cm to 1 meter deep, led to the death 

of a woman, and more than 2,000 people had to be lodged in temporary shelters 

following damage to around 850 houses (CNN Mexico, 2014). Furthermore, the over 

flow of the Santa Marta river damaged 11 houses in Osctuacan municipality, where 

234 families had to be transferred to temporary shelters. 42 roads where damaged, 

causing the total or partial isolation of more than 3,000 families (Henriquez, 2014). 

In October, a cold front caused landslides, floods, and the loss of crops, affected 

6 municipalities. At least 12 houses where declared uninhabitable and families had to 

evacuate and move in with relatives. Furthermore, more than 650 families suffered 

severe damage to their houses and material losses, forcing them to relocate to tempo -

rary shelters (Lopez, 2014). Nonetheless, there is no information available confirming 

the relocation of these families with their relatives, the status of reconstruction work, 

or whether people were able to return to their homes after the flooding subsided in 

all of the aforementioned cases. 

In 2014, Chiapas did not experience one singular catastrophic hydrological 

phenomenon causing massive human and material damage in the space of several 

days, as had been the case in previous years, but the effect of annual rainfall exac -

erbated the already vulnerable situation of the Chiapas population, with unofficial 

data accounting for more than 30 thousand people having been affected by flooding 

during the year. 

2.2. 1998 Catastrophe caused by floods 

Natural disasters started becoming critical in 1998, when the region experienced 

forest fires that lasted for 3 months, causing the deforestation of almost 200 hectares 

including natural protected areas. Deforested land became highly vulnerable to soil 

erosion, which increased the impact of the tropical storms caused by hurricane Mitch 

in Central America that hit Chiapas’ territory on 6 th  September of the same year. Rain -

fall was intense and abundant for 7 days throughout the Coastal and Sierra de Chiapas 

regions. The lack of forest cover meant that the high levels of precipitation caused 

landslides, which displaced large amounts of rock, vegetation and soil blocking the 

sewage system, causing rivers to overflow, flooding of villages and the accumulation 

of sediments along floodplains, estuaries and coastal lagoons (Parra, 2011). 

Regional ecosystem characteristics completely changed after the 1998 floods. 

Erosion marks became visible at middle and upstream sites where all vegetation had 

disappeared. The populations living next to rivers were covered with the debris and 

mud washed down during landslides (SEMARNAT-CNA / UNAM-IG, 1999). Villages 

were completely flooded, with no access to drinking water or food. According to offi -

cial numbers, more than 400,000 hectares of agriculture land were damaged, mainly 

coffee and corn crops, around 500,000 people lost their homes, and 400 people died 

during the disaster (Arellano, 2005). 

The number of victims estimated by non-governmental organisations and civil 

associations is higher than official numbers, suggesting that the environmental 

disaster caused by the 1998 hydrological phenomenon affected around 1.2 million 

people in 36 of the 122 municipalities of the state of Chiapas. This number represents 

around 35 per cent of the total Chiapas population at the time. 50 rivers burst their 

banks, 20 bridges were destroyed, 450 km of national roads had to be reconstructed 

and 833 rural roads were destroyed. Rainfall in 1998 was three times higher than 

the previous year’s precipitation levels, and it was estimated that 24 per cent of the 

average yearly rainfall occurred during the space of 7 days (Castro, 1998). A consider -

able number of the victims were isolated as the Panamerican highroad was destroyed 

during the meteorological event (SIPAZ, 1998). Analysts at the time estimated that SEM 2015 

> 174
> THE
> AMERICAS
> ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX
> THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND
> MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO

the reconstruction of damaged zones would take more than 25 years, and national 

authorities calculated that around 800 million U.S. dollars would be needed to repair 

the damages caused (Castro, 1998). 

In 1998, former Mexican President Zedillo (1992-2000) believed this catastrophe to 

be the worst meteorological disaster that the state of Chiapas had suffered. According 

to geophysical studies carried out by the National Autonomous University of Mexico 

(UNAM), disasters of similar magnitude occurred on average three times every 100 

years in the region, at intervals of 30 to 40 years. Nevertheless, an even greater catas -

trophe occurred only 7 years later. 

2.3. Hurricane stan 2005 

Hurricane Stan hit the Yucatan Peninsula from the 3 rd  October to the 6 th  October 

6th  2005, moving across the Gulf of Mexico and through the Sierra Madre. It was 

the 6 th  hurricane that touched land during the hurricane season of 2005, setting a 

new record after 1999 when five hurricanes directly impacted the coastal regions of 

Mexico (Parra, 2011). Intense rainfall caused by Hurricane Stan had a marked effect 

the already highly vulnerable communities in the southern part of Mexico, causing 

flooding and landslides in the states of Chiapas, Veracruz, Oaxaca, Puebla y Quin -

tana Roo, and to a lesser extent in the states of Yucatán, Campeche and Tabasco. 

Hurricane Stan eclipsed the 1998 floods as the worst natural disaster experienced by 

Chiapas (CENAPRED, 2005). 

By the time Hurricane Stan reached the central east coast of Mexico, it had been 

classified as a category 1 hurricane according to the Saffi-Simson scale. Chiapas was 

the worst affected state, with 86 of the 98 fatalities and around 15 million U.S. dollars 

of the estimated total of 21 million U.S. dollars-worth of damage in the whole country 

(CENAPRED, 2005). Official Mexican government sources state that Hurricane Stan 

greatly affected 41 municipalities of the state of Chiapas. Tapachula, the second largest 

city of the state was the worst hit municipality due to flooding caused by the Coatan 

river overflowing. The sectors that were most affected were transportation, agricul -

ture, water infrastructure, housing and environment (CENAPRED, 2005). For the first 

time in Mexican history, an official report of the socio-economic impact of the disaster 

included the damage caused to the environment and its impact on livelihoods (Parra, 

2011). This report clearly demonstrated the link between the landslides caused by 

Hurricane Stan and the destruction of middle and upstream watershed vegetation that 

severely affected the habitat and human settlements in which the rainfall occurred.            

> Migration (Indice)
> 00.5 11.5 22.5 Migration (Indice) 00.5 11.5 22.5 2.50 2.00 1.50 1.00 0.50 ------0.50 -1.00 -1.50 3,00 2.50 2.00 1.50 1.00 0.50 ------0.50 -1.00 -1.50 Land degradation Land degradation y = 0,561 x -0,917 R² = 0.143 y = 0.283 x 0.267 R² = 0.026
> Source: BBVA Bancomer (Albo & Ordaz, 2011)

Figure 2.  Correlation between land degradation 

and migration in Mexican states with medium, 

low and very low poverty rates. 

Figure 1.  Correlation between land degradation 

and migration in Mexican states with high poverty 

rates. SEM 2015 

> 175

Hurricane Stan caused the isolation of around 700 thousand people due to the 

destruction of 1,800 federal roads, 530 rural roads and 27 bridges. 31,000 families were 

left homeless, while another 12,000 households suffer partial damage. To date there 

are still families waiting for their houses to be rebuilt (Briones, 2010) and there is 

no record of where homeless people moved. Likewise, 305 schools were damaged 

and 96 were completely destroyed, and more than 2,000 businesses operations were 

affected (Informador, 2010). 70 per cent of coffee crops were damaged, causing 

around 185 million U.S. dollars of losses according to unofficial estimates (Ruiz, 2010). 

3. HOW DO FLOODS IN CHIAPAS RELATE TO ENVIRONMENTAL 

MIGRATION? 

3.1. Environmental migration studies in mexico 

migration studies in Mexico are well documented, especially during the last few 

decades in response to the estimated 500,000 people migrating to the United States. 

Nevertheless, analysts have mainly focused on studying the different economic and 

social factors pushing migration flows, commonly failing to recognise the impor -

tance of environmental degradation as one of the growing drivers of out-migration 

due to its impact on social and economic migration (Foresight, 2011). Since the end 

of the 1990s studies have reported the critical degradation of 

Mexican soil. But it was not until the second half of the last decade that environ -

mental degradation started to be directly linked to migration flows in Mexico, as 

deforestation and unfertile areas have pushed rural communities to emigrate in 

search of livelihood opportunities (Albo & Ordaz, 2011). 

The Mexican Migration Project 5 states that the vast majority of migration 

communities are characterised by a lack of possession of any kind of land or posses -

sion of land that has been degraded and is no longer fit for agriculture practices. 

To support this argument Albo and Ordaz (2011:7) compared the land degradation 

with CONAPO’s migration index charting migration movements. They created two 

groups, one of Mexican states with high and very high poverty rates and another 

containing states with medium, low and very low poverty rates. They found that 

there was a positive correlation between land degradation and migration in both 

groups, though this correlation was more significant in the group with high and very 

high poverty rates, suggesting that where the land is less fertile and communities 

experience economic hardship, migration rates tend to be higher (Graph 1 & 2). 

Furthermore, the Environmental Change and Forced Migrations Project in 

Mexico, also concludes that there is a link between environmental degradation and 

migration in certain regions of Mexico, as soil erosion and rainfall changes have 

contributed to migration flows (Alscher, 2009). 

3.1. Correlating chiapas migration with environmental degradation 

Temporary migration has been quite common in the state of Chiapas since the 1970s 

due to the coffee industry’s demand for a workforce. Yet the state was not consid -

ered part of the ‘traditional migration’ to the North, particularly when talking about 

migration to the United States, as the region was not part of the  Bracero Program 6, and 

also due to the fact that international migration requires a certain amount of finan -

cial investment that low level income communities cannot afford (Jungeh ülsing,   

> 5. The Mexican Migration Project a bi-national research effort to understand the complex process of Mexican migra -
> tion to the United States. It is co-directed by the University of Guadalajara (Mexico), and Princeton University (US).
> (MMP, 2015)
> 6. See box about Mexican Migration Background SEM 2015
> 176
> THE
> AMERICAS
> ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX
> THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND
> MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO

2010). Nevertheless, this trend drastically changed after the 1998 floods and increased 

even more after hurricane Stan in 2005. Since then, the frequency of tropical storms 

and hurricanes has considerably increased (Alscher 2009), generating agricultural 

and socio-economic crises that have contributed to the growing stream of people 

emigrating to both the United States and other regions of Mexico (Ruiz, 2010). 

The 1998 floods and hurricane Stan in 2005 are of particular importance in under -

standing the relation between migration movements in Chiapas and environmental 

degradation as it was not until the last decade that studies of migration movements 

have started to correlate mobility with environmental disasters. In the past, emigra -

tion from Chiapas was mainly to nearby destinations, but trends since the early 

2000s show how that  chiapanecos  have started to emigrate to northern states with 

the intention of subsequently emigrating to the United States (Anguiano, M.E., 2008). 

The national census of 2010 confirms the persistence of the aforementioned 

trend as Chiapas figured for the first time in the list of the 15 states with the largest 

portions of emigration flows towards the United States. Furthermore, in terms of 

internal migration, Chiapas is the Mexican state with the lowest proportion of non-

native population and it ranks 4 th  on the list of states with the most negative net 

migration rate (- 1.4 with more than 105,858 people leaving Chiapas between 2005 

and 2010 to migrate internally). It is interesting to note the destinations of migratory 

outflows from Chiapas. Data from the 2010 census show that 21 out of every 100 

chiapanecos  that emigrated went to Quintana Roo, the state receiving the second-

most immigrants in Mexico, mainly in search of better livelihoods given the pres -

ence of Cancun and other touristic destinations in the state. The second most 

popular destination for  chiapanecos  is Baja California: 13 out of every 100 Chiapas 

emigrants head there, mainly to the border city of Tijuana (8 out of 10), a relevant 

fact when related to the growing trend of international migration from the state. 

The remaining internal migration from Chiapas is directed to neighbouring states 

with better socio-economic conditions such as Tabasco, Veracruz, Mexico State and 

Mexico City (INEGI, 2015). 

Furthermore, it is important to note that one of main indicators used by the 

Mexican government to quantify the number of people migrating is the amount of 

remittances received by families in the different states of Mexico from their rela -

tives in the United States. Based on this data, migration flows in Chiapas have visibly 

increased as remittances to Chiapas in 2005 amounted to four times the value of 

coffee production, the most important export product of the state. In the national 

ranking of states that receive the most remittances, Chiapas has risen from 27 th  place 

in 1995 to 11 th  place in 2005 and then to the 17 th  place in 2014 (Jungeh ülsing, 2010; 

Banxico, 2015). The recent decrease in the amount of remittances received by Chiapas 

could be explained by the fact that the trend of men migrating alone to work with 

the rest of the family remaining at home is giving way to one of relocation of the 

whole family (Ruiz, 2010). 

Another way to demonstrate the correlation between migration in Chiapas 

and hydrological phenomena, is to compare the amount of remittances received by 

the state over the course one year. Graph 3 shows that remittances increase during 

the 2 nd  and 4 th  trimester of each year, which corresponds to the annual rainfall season 

in the state of Chiapas. More specifically, in 2004 the remittances received by the 

state of Chiapas amounted to 587.5 million U.S. dollars, and in 2006, total remittances 

reached 940.8 million U.S. dollars (Banxico, 2015) eclipsing the remittances received 

by other ‘traditional migration’ states. The increase in remittances received by the 

state after Hurricane Stan in 2005 serves as proof of the correlation between the 

decision to migrate and the environmental vulnerability of the region (Jungeh ülsing, 

2010). In 2005, 40% of the population of Chiapas that was living in the United States 

came from the Istmo-Costal, Soconusco, Sierra de Chiapas and Border regions, which 

were the regions most affected by both the 1998 floods and Hurricane Stan in 2005 SEM 2015 

177 

(Ruiz, 2010: 8). It is, however, important to point out that remittances have not been 

converted into investment or employment opportunities for Chiapas; their function 

has been limited to directly helping to alleviate environmental damage and extreme 

poverty. They have moreover contributed to social inequality, separating households 

that receive remittances and those that do not (Alscher, 2009). 

In 1998, the manufacturing industry of the north Mexican border cities of Tijuana, 

Mexicali and Monterrey offered employment to the victims of the floods. Compa -

nies were even willing to pay for the transportation costs of the people from 

Chiapas willing to migrate for work, shedding light on how around 35,000 people 

from Chiapas emigrated to the North to work. Since then, the transportation busi -

nesses operating from the southern Mexican border with Guatemala all the way to 

the United States have vastly expanded (Castro, 2005). 

Testimonials also support the correlation between the 1998 catastrophe and the 

increase in migration flows from the state of Chiapas: 

“Everything started right after the strong rains of 1998 stopped. 

These rains destroyed 200 thousand hectares of agriculture lands 

and caused the death of 400 people in the south of Chiapas. The 

Government repaired and rebuilt rural and federal roads, but 

their help was not enough to bring back hope to the habitants of 

the Soconusco region. The coffee industry crisis had already gener -

ated critical survival circumstances. So, when this tragedy happened, 

huge amounts of people started to leave towards the United States.” 

(Castro, 2005:2) 

According to the Migration Survey of the Northern Border of Mexico, between 

1995 and 1999, the number of emigrants deported back to Chiapas by the United 

States increased from 6,129 to 13,372 people, while from 1999 to 2000, the number of 

emigrants deported back to Chiapas was 30,523 people, more than doubling the 1999 

numbers (Ruiz, 2010: 8). 

> 300 250 200 150 100 50 0
> Jan-Mar 2003 Jul - Sept 2003 Jan - Mar 2004 Jul -Sept 2004 Jan-Mar 2005 Jul - Sept 2005 Jan - Mar 2006 Jul -Sept 2006 Jan-Mar 2007 Jul - Sept 2007 Jan - Mar 2008 Jul -Sept 2008 Jan-Mar 2009 Jul - Sept 2009 Jan - Mar 2010 Jul -Sept 2010 Jan-Mar 2011 Jul - Sept 2011 Jan - Mar 2012 Jul -Sept 2012 Jan-Mar 2013 Jul - Sept 2013 Jan - Mar 2014 Jul -Sept 2014 Jan - Mar 2018

Graph 3.  Remittances received by Chiapas from January 2003 to January 2015 

> Source: The Bank of Mexico SEM 2015
> 178
> THE
> AMERICAS
> ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX
> THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND
> MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO

In the case study report “Environmental Change and Forced Migration Scenarios” 

regarding the case of Chiapas and Tlaxcala states in Mexico, Alscher (2009) also 

supports the correlation between problems of environmental degradation and 

migration in Chiapas. He illustrates his argument with the example of Motozintla 

municipality, one of the most affected populations by the strong rains of 1998 and 

Hurricane Stan in 2005. Alscher states that from 2000 to 2005 the total population of 

Motozintla decreased by 3%, while the male population decreased by 5%. He corre -

lates demographic decline with emigration motivated by natural disasters based on 

the fact that other municipalities of the state of Chiapas that were not affected by 

the natural disasters in 1998 and 2005, experienced regular population growth during 

the same period. Other municipalities that experienced a male population decrease 

of more than 5% were the municipalities in the Socunusco and Sierra de Chiapas 

regions, which, as mentioned above, were the regions most affected by Hurricane 

Stan (Alscher, 2009:16). 

Alscher’s (2009:16) case study compared statistical population information collated 

by the Mexican National Institute of Statistic and Geography (INEGI) from the years 

2000 and 2005. Furthermore, it verified this information through 39 in-depth inter -

views with both emigrants and non-emigrants. The author was able to conclude that 

emigration was more significant among the communities that were most affected 

by natural disasters. The majority of people interviewed stated that their lives had 

been affected by environmental degradation, which had played a crucial role in their 

decision to emigrate. 

Image 4.  Recovery efforts have not reached most of forestlands destroyed by Hurricane Stan in 2005. 

> Source. CNN Mexico (2011) SEM 2015
> 179

4. THE QUESTIONNABLE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE MEXICAN 

GOVERNMENT’S ADAPTATION AND MITIGATION POLICY RESPONSES 

It has been almost 10 years since Hurricane Stan and much of the environmental 

and infrastructure damage that it caused has not been addressed, making the popu -

lation extremely vulnerable during the annual rainfall season especially giving the 

increasing levels of precipitation. 7 A large swathe of Chiapas’ forest lands continue to 

deteriorate, with the National Forest Commission stating that it prefers to “let nature 

do its work”. The authorities have declared that the intensity of Hurricane Stan was 

unexpected and that the government was not prepared to face such huge reconstruc -

tion challenges in order to repair the environmental damage suffered mainly by the 

Istmo-Costal, Sierra de Chiapas and Socunusco regions (CNN, 2011). 

The problem is that the adaptation and mitigation strategies of both the Govern -

ment of Chiapas and the Mexican National Government are based on a reactive 

strategy, meaning that they focus on alleviating post-disaster situations instead of 

implementing preventive policies and developing adaptation plans to reduce the 

population’s vulnerability. The report “Socioeconomic Impact of Disaster in Mexico 

of 2013” estimated that the damages caused by hydro meteorological and natural 

phenomenon had cost the state of Chiapas around 156 million U.S. dollars during that 

year (CENAPRED, 2014), a figure that makes the 1.2 million U.S. dollars promised by 

the Government of Chiapas at the beginning 2015 to develop the necessary adaptation 

and mitigation strategies and infrastructure seem largely insufficient (ICOSO, 2015). 

Briones (2010) criticises the Mexican mitigation strategy due to the fact that its 

actions are based on future potential environmental risks instead of taking social 

vulnerabilities into account in the policy formulation process. To date, Mexican poli -

cies are a medium-term solution that overlook the fact that the worst consequences 

of natural disasters are long-term as they are caused by the increase in the social 

vulnerability of poor populations in the face of environmental disasters. 

After the 1998 floods, the Housing Project of the state of Chiapas estimated 

that 7,000 families needed to be relocated, but the construction of new houses was 

undertaken without any technical assessments and in areas that also experienced 

high vulnerability to landslides and floods. Another big failure of the reconstruc -

tion programme is the fact that they do not cover basic public services: houses have 

intermittent electricity access, bad drainage and drinking water systems, there are 

not enough schools available and communities are more exposed to crime and health 

problems (Alvarado 2011). 

In 2013, the Mexican National Civil Protection System declared that the post 

natural disaster evaluations of Hurricane Stan where not conducted accurately. They 

thus did not provide a clear panorama of the destruction caused in 2005, a potential 

explanation for the fact that there are destroyed bridges and roads that have not been 

repaired, and displaced families who still have not recovered their home 10 years 

after the disaster (Romero, 2013). Similarly, information regarding the damage caused 

each year by floods, landslides and other hydrological phenomena is hard to find 

and controlled by the Chiapas government’s media agency. In 2005 action was taken 

to accomplish the government’s promises to the population, houses were given to 

those who lost everything after Hurricane Stan, but they were poorly constructed. It 

is thus unsurprising that by 2008 many of the houses in the different settlements had 

been abandoned (Briones, 2010). 

The poor conception and implementation of adaptation strategies is mainly due 

to conflicts of interests in Chiapas that have facilitated the diversion of funds. Each  

> 7. Data provided at the beginning in section 2.1 of this text. SEM 2015
> 180
> THE
> AMERICAS
> ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX
> THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND
> MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO

year victims of Hurricane Stan and the yearly rainfall season continue to organise 

public demonstrations to demand government action. Several lawsuits have been 

filed wtih the General Attorney Office of Mexico, but they have not proved successful 

(Romero, 2013). It seems that the new government administration is trying to address 

the situation and has undertaken reconstruction and house distribution processes. 

Nevertheless, it seems that the lack of integral long-term adaptation and mitigation 

planning persists. 

CONCLUSION 

The different data and studies presented throughout this paper demonstrate how 

migration has become an individual adaptation strategy for the population most 

affected by environmental disasters in Chiapas. A comparison of the case of Chiapas 

with the conclusions provided by the 2011 Foresight “Migration and Global Environ -

mental Changes: Future Challenges and opportunities” report, show many similari -

ties. Firstly, it is evident that environmental events have a significant impact on the 

economic, social and political drivers behind migration in the region. The damage 

caused by the 1998 floods and Hurricane Stan in 2005 illustrates how environmental 

disasters influence migration movements, underlined by the correlation between 

increased levels of precipitation and migration movements. Secondly, recent migra -

tion trends in Chiapas show that environmental degradation may be playing a major 

role as a driver of migration, as reconstruction work has been poorly planned, satis -

fying the promises of the Chiapas government but overlooking long-term social 

vulnerability, and exacerbating the social and economic conditions of the already 

extremely at risk communities in Chiapas. Thirdly, based on the recent severe 

damage caused by less intense environmental events such as tropical storm Boris and 

other hydrological phenomena in 2014, it is clear that the impact of environmental 

change will increase in the future. Fourthly, the vulnerability of the Chiapas popula -

tion can be directly linked to the poor socio-economic conditions in the region and 

the lack of targeted public policies by the government. No long-term strategies are 

being formulated to halt the decline of the population’s resilience, meaning that the 

population of Chiapas is left without assistance to confront and adapt to the impacts 

of meteorological disasters. This could lead to internal and international migration 

in the search of better opportunities. In the case of extremely poor populations, 

who do not possess the minimum level of income needed to migrate, the situation 

is particularly critical as they remain trapped in highly vulnerable areas, attempt to 

cope with and recover from yearly damage with their own meagre means, contin -

uing to live with the high risk of new environmental disasters. Environmental degra -

dation will increase its role as a main driver for internal and international migration 

as long as the Government of Chiapas continues to ignore the critical importance of 

developing mid and long-term adaptation and mitigation strategies that reduce the 

vulnerability experienced by the majority of  chiapanecos  and concretely increase their 

resilience capacity, moving away from immediate temporary post-disaster solutions. SEM 2015 

181 

# REFERENCES 

Articles 

– Arellano, José L. 2005. Apropiación 

territorial, deterioro ambiental y 

gestión de recursos hídricos en la 

cuenca superior del río Custepec, 

Chiapas.  Universidad Autónoma 

Chapingo. San Cristóbal de Las Casas, 

Chiapas . Retrived from:  http://www. 

inecc.gob.mx/descargas/cuencas/ 

cong_nal_06/tema_03/18_jose_ 

arellanos.pdf 

– Briones, F. (2010). Inundados, 

reubicados y olvidados: Traslado del 

riesgo de desastres en Motozintla, 

Chiapas.  Revista de ingeniería. 

Universidad de los Andes . Bogotá, 

Colombia. 132-144. 

– Cuevas, J. (2005). Las inundaciones en 

la costa de Chiapas 1998: reflexiones 

sobre el posdesastre.  Revista de la 

Universidad Cristobal Colon.  Mexico. 

20. p.61-71 

– Ibarrarán, E., M. Rodríguez. (2007). 

Estudio sobre Economía del Cambio 

Climático en México.  Instituto 

Nacional de Ecología y Universidad 

Iberoamericana Puebla . México. 

Retrived from: http://www.inecc.gob. 

mx/descargas/cclimatico/e2007h.pdf 

– Parra, M., (2011). Inundaciones y 

Vulnerabilidad Diferencial en el 

Municipio de Pijijiapan, Chiapas, 

Mexico.  Temas de Coyuntura.  61. 33-62 

Reports 

– Albo, A., J.L., Ordaz (2011), Migración 

y Cambio Climático. El caso 

mexicano. Servicio de Estudios 

Económicos del Grupo BBVA. 

México. 11(27). Retrieved from: 

https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-

content/uploads/migrados/WP_1127_ 

Mexico_tcm346-267325.pdf 

– Alscher, S. (2009). Environmental 

factors in Mexican migration: The 

cases of 

– CENAPRED. (2006). Características 

e impacto socioeconómico de 

los huracanes Stan y Wilma en la 

República Mexicana en el 2005. 

Centro Nacional de Prevención de 

Desastres 

– Chiapas and Tlaxcala. Mexico Case 

Study Report; Environmental Change 

and 

– Fetzek, Shiloh. 2009. Impactos 

relacionados con el clima en la 

seguridad Nacional de México y 

Centroamérica. Primer Informe. 

Instituto Real de Servicios Unidos / 

FUNDAECO. Gran Bretaña. 

– Forced Migration Scenarios (EACH-

FOR). Retrived from:  https://www. 

ehs.unu.edu/file/get/7745.pdf 

– Foresight. (2011). Migration and Global 

Environmental Change: Final Report. 

The Government Office for Science. 

London. Retrieved from: https:// 

www.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 

system/uploads/attachment_data/ 

file/287717/11-1116-migration-and-

global-environmental-change.pdf 

– NU. CEPAL. Subsede de México. 

Retrieved from:  http://www. 

cepal.org/es/publicaciones/25801-

caracteristicas-e-impacto-

socioeconomico-de-los-huracanes-

stan-y-wilma-en-la 

Newspaper Articles 

– Alvarado, I. (2011). ‘Stan’ desencadena 

huracan politico. Periodico El 

Universal. Mexico. Retrieved from: 

http://www.eluniversal.com.mx/ 

estados/81081.html 

– Camacho, E., (2014). Tasas de 

deforestación anuales en Chiapas 

afectan a la biodiversidad. Sin 

Embargo MX. Retrieved from: 

http://www.sinembargo.mx/07-10-

2014/1136539 

– CNN MEXICO. (2011). Chiapas “dejó 

a la naturaleza” el trabajo de la 

recuperación por ‘Stan’. CNN Mexico. 

Retrieved from:  http://mexico.cnn. 

com/planetacnn/2011/06/09/chiapas-

dejo-a-la-naturaleza-el-trabajo-de-la-

recuperacion-por-stan 

– CNN MEXICO (2014). Al menos 848 

viviendas resultaron afectadas en 

Chiapas por las lluvias. CNN Mexico. 

Retrieved from: http://mexico.cnn. 

com/nacional/2014/09/22/al-menos-

848-viviendas-resultaron-afectadas-

en-chiapas-por-las-lluvias 

– Excelsior. (2014). Comienzan las 

evacuaciones preventivas en Chiapas 

por lluvias. Periodico Excelsior: 

Temporada de Huracanes. Mexico. 

Retrieved from: http://www.excelsior. 

com.mx/nacional/2014/06/03/962994 

– Henriquez, E. (2014) Chiapas: lluvias 

invernales han afectado a 11 mil 

personas de 83 comunidades. La 

Jornada. Retrieved from:http://www. 

jornada.unam.mx/ultimas/2014/01/08/ 

lluvias-invernales-han-afectado-a-11-

mil-personas-de-83-comunidades-345. 

html 

– Henriquez, E. (2014) Al menos siete 

municipios afectados por lluvias 

en Chiapas La Jornada. Retrieved 

from: http://www.jornada.unam.mx/ 

ultimas/2014/09/29/al-menos-siete-

municipios-afectados-por-lluvias-en-

chiapas-6194.html 

– Informador. (2010) Chiapas recuerda 

la tragedia que dejó el huracán 

‘‘Stan’’. Periódico El Informador, 

Jalisco. México. Retrieved from: 

http://www.informador.com.mx/ 

mexico/2010/238605/6/chiapas-

recuerda-la-tragedia-que-dejo-el-

huracan-stan.htm 

– La Jornada. (2014). Chiapas: desalojan a 

16 mil por Boris. Periodico La Jornada. 

México. Retrieved from: http:// 

www.jornada.unam.mx/2014/06/05/ 

estados/028n1est 

– Lopez, N. (2014). Derrumbes e 

inundaciones en municipios de la 

zona norte. Portal oficial del Grupo 

Noticias Voz e Imagen de Oaxaca, 

Tuxtepec, Chiapas. Retrieved from: 

http://www.noticiasnet.mx/portal/ 

en/node/239268 

– Romero, G. (2013). Chiapas a 8 años 

del Huracán Stan. Imagen Radio. 

Mexico. Retrieved from:  http://www. 

imagen.com.mx/chiapas-8-anos-del-

huracan-stan 

Non-Governmental 

Organisations & Civil 

Associations Publications 

– Castro, G. (1998). El Tiro de SEM 2015 

182 

THE 

AMERICAS 

ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX 

THE CORRELATION BETWEEN ENVIRONMENTAL DISASTERS AND 

MIGRATION TRENDS IN CHIAPAS, MEXICO 

Gracia Las Inundaciones: La Peor 

Cat ástrofe Natural en Chiapas 

(Primer parte/II). Otros Mundos 

Chiapas. Retrived from:  http://www. 

otrosmundoschiapas.org/analisis/ 

TIRODEGRACIANATU.pdf 

– Castro, G. (2005). Las remesas de 

los migrantes. La migración en 

Chiapas; San Cristóbal de las Casas, 

Chiapas, México. Otros Mundos 

Chiapas. Retrived from:  http://www. 

otrosmundoschiapas.org/analisis/ 

LAREMEAII.pdf 

– Castro, G. (2010). Cambio climático: 

los impactos ecológicos en Chiapas. 

Eco Portal. Mexico: Retrieved 

from: http://www.ecoportal.net/ 

Temas_Especiales/Cambio-Climatico/ 

cambio_climatico_los_impactos_ 

ecologicos_en_chiapas 

– Jungeh ülsing, J. (2010). Las que se van, 

las que se quedan: reacciones frente 

al cambio climático. Un Estudio 

de caso sobre migración y género 

en Chiapas. Heinrich Böll Stiftung 

Foundation México, Centroamérica y 

el Caribe. Retrived from:  http://www. 

boell-latinoamerica.org/downloads/ 

MIGRACION.pdf 

– SIPAZ (1998). Enfoque III: Desastre 

en el Sur de Chiapas. Servicio 

Internacional para la Paz. Retrieved 

from: http://www.sipaz.org/es/ 

informes/43-informe-sipaz-vol-iii-no-

4-noviembre-de-1998/82-enfoque-iii-

desastre-en-el-sur-de-chiapas.html 

Government Publications 

– CONAGUA. (2005). Resumen del 

Huracán Stan. Comisión Nacional del 

Agua. México. Retrieved from:  http:// 

smn.cna.gob.mx/ciclones/tempo2005/ 

atlantico/stan.pdf 

– CONEVAL. (2012) Resultados de 

pobreza en México 2012 a nivel 

nacional y por entidades federativas. 

Consejo Nacional de Evaluación de la 

Política de Desarrollo Social. Retrived 

from: http://www.coneval.gob.mx/ 

medicion/paginas/medici%C3%B3n/ 

pobreza%202012/Pobreza-2012.aspx 

– CENAPRED. (2014). Impactos 

Socioeconomicos de los desastres 

en Mexico 2013. Comision Nacional 

para la Prevencion de Desastres. 

Retrieved from: http://www. 

cenapred.unam.mx/es/Publicaciones/ 

archivos/21072014Resumen_ 

Ejecutivo_Impacto.pdf 

– Diario Oficial de la Federacion  http:// 

biblioteca.semarnat.gob.mx/janium/ 

Documentos/Ciga/agenda/PPD02/ 

DO3301.pdf 

– SNPC. (2006). Caracter ísticas e 

impacto socioecon ómico de los 

principales desastres ocurridos en la 

Rep ública Mexicana en el a ño 2005. 

Sistema Nacional de Protecci ón Civil 

Centro Nacional de Prevenci ón de 

Desastres. México. Retrieved from: 

http://www.proteccioncivil.gob. 

mx/work/models/ProteccionCivil/ 

Resource/375/1/images/no_7.pdf 

Web Pages 

– Bank de Mexico. (2015). Ingresos por 

remesas familiares, distribución por 

entidad federativa. Banco de Mexico. 

Mexico. Retrieved from:  http:// 

www.banxico.org.mx/SieInternet/ 

consultarDirectorioInternetAction.do 

?accion=consultarCuadro&idCuadro= 

CE100&sector=1&locale=es 

– CONAGUA. (2015). Temperaturas 

y lluvia. Comisión Nacional del 

Agua. México. Retrieved from: 

http://smn.cna.gob.mx/index. 

php?option=com_content&view=a 

rticle&id=12&Itemid=77 FAO. (2015). 

La Agricultura y el Desarrollo Rural 

en México. Organizacion de las 

Naciones Unidas para la Alimentacion 

y la Agricultura. Retrived from: 

https://coin.fao.org/cms/world/ 

mexico/InformaccionSobreElPais/ 

agricultura_y_des_rural.html 

– ICOSO Chiapas. (2015). Insituto de 

Comunicación Social del Estado de 

Chiapas. Gobierno del Estado de 

Chiapas. México. Retrieved from: 

http://www.icosochiapas.gob. 

mx/2014/06/05/tras-saldo-blanco-

por-boris-instruye-mvc-a-iniciar-

reconstruccion/ 

– ICOSO Chiapas. (2015)  Sesiona Consejo 

Estatal de Protección Civil ante el paso 

de la onda tropical 31 y 32.  Insituto 

de Comunicación Social del Estado 

de Chiapas. Gobierno del Estado de 

Chiapas. México. Retrieved from: 

http://www.icosochiapas.gob. 

mx/2014/09/30/sesiona-consejo-

estatal-de-proteccion-civil-ante-el-

paso-de-la-onda-tropical-31-y-32/ 

– MMP. (2015). What’s the MMP? The 

Mexican Migration Project. Mexico & 

United States. Retrieved from: http:// 

mmp.opr.princeton.edu/home-en. 

aspx 

Workshops 

– Ruiz, L. (2010). Ponencia presentada 

en GURN – ITUC Workshop “Climate 

Change Impact on Employment and 

the Labour Market. Responses to the 

Challenges”. 25 y 26 de marzo de 2010. 

Bruselas. 

Blogs 

– Narvaez, H. (2006). El ayer, a 8 años 

del desastre de 1998 en Chiapas. 

Periodistas en Linea. Mexico. 

Retrieved from:  http://www. 

periodistasenlinea.org/12-09-

2006/8779 SEM 2015 

183 Europe SEM 2015 

186 

> Source: huffingtonpost.com

Photo 1.  Landslide in the village of Topcic Polje, near Zenica (central Bosnia), 15 May 2014 SEM 2015 

187 

## ELISE HAUMONT 

# The May 2014 Floods in 

# Bosnia and Herzegovina 

# May 2014 will probably be remembered for decades in Bosnia 

and Herzegovina. Never in living memory had the country 

been struck by such a large and destructive natural disaster, 

as record-breaking levels of rainfall led to gigantic floods, 

and numerous landslides. Tens of thousands of people had 

to urgently flee the rising water levels, while others had to 

leave their homes for good as they were destroyed or buried. 

As is often the case when such a disaster occurs, some popu -

lations proved more vulnerable than others; in this particular case, the Roma minori -

ties and the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) from the Balkan war were worse 

affected. The evacuation of flooded areas was not planned beforehand and proved 

extremely chaotic. Temporary accommodation facilities were created  ad hoc  in 

buildings that were not designed to house people. The vast majority of those evacu -

ated and displaced sought shelter with relatives, yet there is very little information 

about them. International aid proved crucial in reconstruction efforts, especially 

for rebuilding houses and recovering livelihoods, while the Bosnian public authori -

ties, divided among numerous administrative levels demonstrated a weak response 

capability. 

1. AN UNPRECEDENTED NATURAL DISASTER WITH ENORMOUS 

DAMAGE 

1.1. Extraordinary levels of rainfall lead to mass flooding and landslides 

Bosnia and Herzegovina is largely a mountainous country, except for its northern 

part which reaches into the Pannonian basin. The Sava River, the largest in the 

country, forms a natural border with Croatia to the north. To the east, the Drina 

River follows the border with Serbia. 

A low-pressure area designated “Yvette” or “Tamara” affected a large area of 

south-eastern and central Europe. Continuous, heavy rainfall, commencing on 13 

May, resulted in extensive flooding in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), and 

Croatia. Three months’ worth of rain fell in the space of only three days; the heav -

iest rainfall in BiH since records began in 1894 (ACAPS, 2014). “Given the country’s 

topography, a vast number of rivers descend from higher elevations and feed into 

the Sava downstream. This caused sudden flash floods and extended inundations in 

the vast lower plains, where much of the country’s food and agricultural production 

is concentrated. Water moved downstream and upon reaching the River Sana, which 

also received flows from its tributaries to the east, remained above normal levels for 

many weeks; this impeded the normal discharge and recession in the flooded areas” 

(BiH Floods – Recovery Needs Assessment, 2014). In some places, the water reached 

the second floor of houses. SEM 2015 

> 188
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

In BiH, between 1 and 1.5 million people are estimated to have been affected (out 

of a total population of 3.8 million). Affected areas cover approximately one-third of 

the country: Tuzla canton, Sarajevo canton, Zenica-Doboj canton, Bosnia-Podrinje 

canton, Una-Sana canton, Brčko district, and the regions of Banja Luka, Doboj, 

Bijeljina, Odžak, Bosanski Šamac and Srebrenica. The most affected were Bosanski 

Šamac, Odžak, Orašje, Doboj, Bijeljina, Brčko, and Maglaj. 

Floodwaters persisted for a number of weeks across a large portion of the 

affected area, restricting aid access, and impeding the return of the population and 

the resumption of agricultural and economic activity. As such, a full inspection 

that would have enabled a prompt estimation of the damage, effects and needs was 

further complicated and delayed. 

1.2. Damage, casualties and immediate threats 

These floods are considered to be the most serious natural disaster in the country in 

the past 120 years. Houses endured various forms of damage, depending on the level 

that waters reached and on the solidity of the construction. Moreover, heavy rains 

caused over 3,000 landslides which in some areas completely covered dwellings. Data 

provided by the Government of BiH on 28 May 2014, account for 852 completely 

destroyed houses, 47,745 damaged, and 6,109 at risk of being affected by landslides 

(IOM, June 2014). At the UN Head of Missions meeting in September, the number 

of damaged housing units was estimated to be 38,000, while Reliefweb, on its page 

on the Balkan floods,  Overview , cites 75,000 damaged houses, of which 25,000 were 

> Source: IOM, June 2014, Overview on IOM activities, Humanitarian Situation Report Rapid field assessment carried out on 3-4 June 2014

Figure 1.  Deadly flood across souhest Europe SEM 2015 

> 189

severely damaged. Naturally, electricity and communications were cut off, many 

roads, bridges and transport facilities rendered unusable, sanitation facilities were 

damaged and the water supply polluted. Livestock were severely affected as well 

as crops and yields. The total economic impact of the disaster is estimated to have 

reached 2.04 billion EUR or 15% of BiH’s GDP in 2014 (Delegation of the EU to Bosnia 

and Herzegovina). 

According to official statistics, 25 people died as a result of the disaster 11. As of 19 

May, it is estimated that more than one million people did not have access to drink -

able water or other basic needs including food, especially for babies, clothes, medi -

cines, and construction materials. The temperature rose to 30 degrees Celsius in the 

days following the disaster, and the risk of outbreaks of disease was high due to the 

large number of rotting animal carcasses. 

As this paper will explore, the extent of the damage caused by the May 2014 floods 

was aggravated by BiH’s civil war heritage. This 3 and a half-year conflict that ended 

less than 20 years ago caused around 100,000 casualties in total, and displaced over 

2,2 million people.  Another consequence of the civil war, constituting an additional 

security threat, is the fact that 70% of the flood-affected zone is landmines-contam -

inated (BiH Floods – Recovery Needs Assessment, 2014). Landslides and flooding 

caused some landmines and unexploded ordnances to move. Mine warning signs 

were also washed away or displaced. A mine exploded in Brčko district but nobody 

was injured. The issue of shifting minefields also affected the provision of assis -

tance, since the government warned against the use of roads without prior clearance 

(ACAPS, 2014). Securing these affected areas will take years. 

Bosnian foreign minister Zlatko Lagumdzija did not hesitate to compare the 

damages caused by the floods to those caused by the 1992-1995 war: “The physical 

destruction is not less than the destruction caused by the war. […] During the war, 

many people lost everything. Today, again they have nothing.” A large number of 

Bosnians also made the comparison, as their distress revived traumatic memories 

from the civil war (characterised by mass bombings of towns, ethnic cleansing and 

mass rape), which explain why psychological support was such a priority in relief and 

recovery assistance programmes. 

1.3. New floods in August and September hit already weakened areas 

This paper will focus on the May 2014 floods and their consequences in terms of 

displacement because they were exceptionally huge in size. However, it is worth 

noting that two other episodes of heavy rainfall led to floods and landslides in the 

following months. In affected regions, they considerably slowed the recovery efforts 

and caused further damage to already weakened areas. 

From 5 to 8 August, heavy rainfall caused flooding and landslides in Croatia, Serbia 

and central and northern Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Government of the Federa -

tion of BiH, Brcko District, Banja Luka, Celinac, Kozarska Dubica, Petrovo, and Kosta -

jnica declared a state of natural and other disasters. Some areas that were hit by the 

May floods were flooded again (i.e. Zenica, Topcic Polje, Zepce, Zeljezno Polje, Banja 

Luka, Srebrenik, Tuzla, Celic, Lukavac, Gračanica, Doboj Istok, Celinac, Bijeljina, and 

Brcko District). As in May, houses were submerged or buried, bridges destroyed, 

roads blocked and communications cut off. The worst reported situation was in the 

Lukavac and Gračanica regions. In the latter, several hundred people were evacu -

ated from their homes (UN, August 2014; JUKIC, August 2014). The September rains 

affected neighbouring countries more than Bosnia itself. Only in Bosanske Gradiške, 

in the north, were houses flooded (EUROPEAN COMMISSION, September 2014). 

> 1. Number found in main sources, but an undated IOM report cites 32 casualties... SEM 2015
> 190
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

2. MASSIVE DISPLACEMENT FOLLOW SOCIO-ECONOMIC PATTERNS 

2.1. Unreliable data 

Several sources evoke “a local media, quoting government sources” 2 to advance a 

total of 950,000 people who had to evacuate their homes at some point following the 

beginning of the floods (articles and reports written around 20-25 May). On 20 May, 

CNN cited “Bosnian officials” to give the figure of 30,000 people displaced. On the 

same date, abc.net cited Assistant Security Minister Samir Agic to posit 500,000 people 

having left their homes (GEARIN, May 2014). The needs assessment endorsed by the 

UN, the European Union and the World Bank cites a total of 89,981 people displaced, 

with 49 822 people taking refuge in either official or alternative private accommoda -

tion at the peak level of displacement. In June, IOM cautiously evoked “tens of thou -

sands” of displaced people, among which 90% found themselves in temporary living 

arrangements with relatives. In an article written in September 2014, IDMC stated 

that “the exact number of those displaced by the floods is unknown. Those who seek 

shelter with families and friends have not been included in displacement estimates 

and the figures for those living in the temporary accommodation facilities fluctuate 

as family members return home.” 

2.2. Belated and chaotic evacuation and rescue 

What is certain is that the magnitude of the catastrophe was not envisaged by public 

authorities beforehand and that the population was taken by surprise. Evacuation 

measures began only when people were trapped on their roofs. In total, more than 

40,000 people were been evacuated (IOM, undated), in some areas that were only 

reachable by boat or by helicopter. The BiH Armed Forces, EUFOR, NATO and the 

U.S. were engaged in rescuing people by helicopter over the space of several days. 

In Zeljezno Polje, a village in central Bosnia, around 1,000 people, including 

babies, pregnant women, invalids and the elderly were evacuated. Among them, the 

local imam stated to Reuters “I think we’ll never be able to return to our village. It has 

disappeared” (DJURICA, May 2014). 

2.3. An emergency solution that lasted: Temporary Accommodation Facilities 

(TAFs) 

Temporary accommodation included mostly public buildings, as shown in the 

following graphic. At this date, there were 55 TAFs across BiH (26 in RS, 25 in FBiH 

and 4 in Brcko District), hosting 1,531 people (1,125 in FBiH, 314 in RS and 92 in Brcko 

District) (IOM, June 2014). According to IOM, 7 TAFs faced health issues, 6 faced food 

issues and 6 water and sanitation issues. The latter typically arise from the use of 

ad-hoc temporary accommodation facilities. 60% of those in temporary accommoda -

tion were women, with around 25% children (0-17 years old) and 25% of elderly people 

(over 60 years old), two particularly vulnerable groups of the population. 

On 3 September 2014, the UN Heads of Missions Meeting stated that: 

“While some of the TAFs have been closed (even forcibly), 

others are being re-opened; a total of 1495 persons have been 

registered while in TAFs, with an increase of some 100 beneficia -

ries over the past 60 days. The number is likely to increase with 

the coming heating season. Situation is further exacerbated by 

the forced closing of collective centres located in schools due 

> 2. Apparently Vjekoslav Bevanda, the Prime Minister, cited by Elvira Jukic in her article “Transparency Urged in Bosnia
> Humanitarian Aid”, 30/05/14, Balkan Insight

SEM 2015 

191 

to the start of the school year. Situation in the Federation is 

particularly dire with no solution in sight for victims of land -

slides whose homes will need to be relocated.“ 

This statement is based on an Individual Needs Assessment conducted in TAFs 

in late August by UNHCR and the Bosnian Ministry of Human Rights and Refu -

gees. Concerning their expectation to return home, 13% of the interviewees said 

> Schools 57% Shopping mail 1% Hospital 2% Hotel 2% Collective Centre for Dsiplaced 3% Public building 3%
> Elderly home 6%
> Center for people with special needs 9% Military barracks 17%

Source: AFP 

Figure 2.  Rapid field assessment carried out on 3-4 June 2014 

Source: IOM, June 2014, Overview on IOM activities, Humanitarian Situation Report 

Photo 2.  IOM cautiously evoked “tens of thousands” of displaced people SEM 2015 

> 192
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

in September 2014 that they expected to return within a month, 28% in 2-3 months 

and 26% in the following six months. 31% said they cwere unable return at all. 61% 

of damage caused to the houses of the interviewees were due to floods and 34% to 

landslides. 25% of the houses in question were completely destroyed, 62% partially 

destroyed, 9% located in zones at risk of landslides and 2% in a mine-suspected area. 

However, many households were increasingly ready to return. It was observed that 

very often, the family was hosted in TAFs while men went back to the houses to 

repair them and render them habitable again. Another category which was not quan -

tified consists of people hosted by relatives but who came to TAFs to obtain food and 

non-food items. This study concludes that there were no significant health concerns 

within existing TAFs and that the supply of drinkable water, food and sanitary items 

was adequate. Psychological support was provided, notably by four IOM expert 

teams in coordination with the BiH Centre for Mental Health. It is estimated that 

50% of the people hosted in TAFs needed psychological support. Finally, no security 

issues within TAFs, including gender-based violence, were reported. 

Considering the high number of public buildings transformed into TAFs to 

respond to the urgent need, it was crucial to find sustainable solutions for those 

persons whose displacement was prolonged in order to free up public buildings for 

their intended use. As of September 2014, some TAFs were closed without the provi -

sion of alternative accommodation for residents. While TAFs were closed, other new 

TAFs were opened, as households previously accommodated with friends and family 

were forced to find alternative accommodation (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, 

September 2014). 

2.4. Unequal exposure to risk: Roma and conflict IDPs proved the most 

vulnerable 

2.4.1. Roma 

Roma populations  constitute the largest minority in BiH. They  are particularly 

exposed “due to their extremely vulnerable economic situation, limited employ -

ment prospects, the poor quality of construction materials used for their houses 

and houses located in areas not meant for solid housing construction”(BiH Floods 

– Recovery Needs Assessment, 2014). Some even live in makeshift homes or in the 

streets. Indeed, almost all of them do not have regularly paid jobs, but rather live 

on daily-obtained income. More often than not their activity consists of collecting 

secondary raw materials (IOM, June 2014). It is thus unsurprising that their traditional 

income generating assets were destroyed or made unavailable. The particular social 

status of the Roma families as well as different procedures in the local level of govern -

ance results in the fact that many of them do not receive any form of social assis -

tance. Among those who received some kind of grant, in June 2014, some were “expe -

riencing delays or absence in receiving the grants, while numerous Roma families 

affected by floods/landslides have not received a single visit from the social welfare 

centre responsible for the area they live in. Further, the floods/landslides have wors -

ened the already weak health state within the Roma community. More people are 

now affected by various health problems, whereas those with a history of chronic 

illness and psychological disturbances are experiencing difficulties in receiving the 

necessary therapies” (IOM, June 2014). In addition, households are largely made up 

of a relatively high number of children and elderly people who are naturally more 

vulnerable. In early June, 67 Roma persons were being accommodated in temporary 

accommodation facilities; 25 in Vogosca and 42 in Tuzla (IOM, June 2014). 

Due to its experience in working with these communities and relying on a 

network of partner NGOs, IOM conducted interviews with 343 Roma families. 

“Out of those interviewed, 40% had to leave their homes and seek temporary 

accommodation elsewhere, while 45% of the total number of interviewed households SEM 2015 

> 193

had their houses completely destroyed (no longer habitable) by the flooding/land -

slides. Of the interviewed families 80% had experienced complete or partial destruc -

tion of their furniture and other household belongings, 11% had no time during the 

evacuation to take their personal IDs (which were left in the flooded area), 21% had 

no income whatsoever and 61% were self-employed (collection of raw secondary 

material, agriculture and cattle breeding). Their income generation activities were 

severely affected with little prospect of being renewed without assistance from a 

third party.” 

BiH Floods, 2014 – Recovery Needs Assessment , conducted by Bosnian authorities at 

all level, with the support of the UN, the European Union and the World Bank, from 

25 May to 17 June 2014. 

In certain places such as Tuzla, displaced Roma preferred to install their own 

tents rather than use temporary accommodation facilities offered by the munici -

pality, believing that conditions were better there, and they refused to go far from 

their damaged properties for fear that their remaining belongings might be stolen. 

This created tensions with the municipality which signalled its intention to recover 

the areas spontaneously occupied by Roma (TURNER, 2014). 

2.4.2. Internally Displaced Persons by Conflict 

Conflict IDPs were also disproportionately affected. According to IDMC, 20 years 

after the Dayton agreement, around 103,400 people remain displaced, with more 

than 7000 IDPs still living in collective centres. 10% of home and land repossession 

cases remain unsolved. 

“In the period 1999-2005, many municipalities allocated plots of land as donations 

in order to alleviate the pressure of housing needs for IDPs and refugees wanting to 

integrate locally. Furthermore, the economic vulnerability of this population forced 

them to buy the cheapest plots of land. In many cases, these were located in lowlands 

near to riverbanks prone to flooding or on hillsides that were prone to landslides. 

Building new housing for that population group represented a huge issue due to lack 

of financial resources and so many constructions were built using poor construction 

materials and/or minimum experience construction workers. Moreover, over 75% of 

all housing units built before and after the war were constructed without building 

permits, which means that they are not properly registered.” 

BiH Floods, 2014 – Recovery Needs Assessment 

2.5. Reconstruction whenever possible, relocation for thousands 

Many houses will have to be relocated, either because they were destroyed by land -

slides or because they are located on unstable slopes. The authorities will issue decla -

rations of inhabitability, and have to inform citizens about the risks and encourage 

them to rebuild in safer areas to avoid similar damage and casualties in the future. 

As of September 2014, the process of identifying construction companies to 

assist in the re-construction of the housing of those families residing in TAFs was 

at its final stage and the reconstruction was about to commence. Thus, assistance 

to returnees was prioritised in both entities, with 1,200 units targeted (UN Heads 

of Missions Meeting, September 2014). However, donor assistance is mainly geared 

towards flood victims due to the complexity and cost of landslide-related recovery: 

the recovery of landslide-affected homes is estimated to be 50% more expensive, 

on average, than repairing flood-affected houses (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, 

September 2014). On 30 October 2014, the EU and UNDP estimated that around 250 

families (around 700 people) remained homeless, mostly in the towns of Doboj, 

Zenica, Tuzla, Kalesija, Zivinice and Brcko, the places worst hit by landslides (JUKIC, 

October 2014). 

As stated above, it is very common in BiH not to hold a building permit. In Tuzla, 

one of the most affected areas, 90% of the affected dwellings are illegal (UN Heads of SEM 2015 

> 194
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

Missions Meeting, September 2014). And throughout the country, almost no one has 

property insurance, meaning that affected residents lost virtually everything. 

In the short term, reconstruction efforts will offset job losses, with some 

5,000 jobs created in the reconstruction industry (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, 

September 2014). 

3. DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT AND POLICY RESPONSE 

3.1. Surprisingly pronounced private solidarity proved indispensable 

Solidarity among people was highlighted in press articles and witness reports. Buses 

and truck companies made their vehicles available for transporting aid, students 

organised volunteer teams for clean-up, hotel owners provided free accommodation 

for the displaced, households offered shelter for those in need through social media 

(PASIC, 2014), and even Airbnb waived charges in the affected region (KUMPARAK, 

2014). People from various parts of former Yugoslavia sent clothes, food and medi -

cine to those in need. It is particularly notable that people helped each other regard -

less of ethnicity in a region that was devastated by ethnic war only twenty years 

ago. Identity belonging played a role however, since the diaspora proved reactive in 

sending money from abroad. 

3.2. Poor response from national and local authorities 

3.2.1. Emergency response 

The risk of flooding was well known. In December 2010, heavy rain had already 

caused the Drina River to overflow, leading to widespread flooding and landslides. 

Apparently, no lessons were learnt in terms of risk prevention and management, 

> Source: AFP

Photo 3.  Flooded area near Brcko (northern Bosnia) on 18 May 2014 SEM 2015 

> 195

since the affected areas in 2010 were affected again in 2014. For example, three people 

died in Tuzla in 2010 following a landslide engulfing a home (IFRC, 2010), a phenom -

enon that reoccurred three years later with even more devastating results. 

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutional setting directly results from the Dayton 

agreement and is extremely complex, with multiple layers of administrative and 

political structuring. Under emergency circumstances, the Ministry of Security is 

supposed to take the lead. Civilian protection is by default under the jurisdiction 

of the Ministry of Justice, which thus hosted the coordination centre for assistance 

and rescue operations. However, BiH has multiple layers of government. In Repub -

lika Sprpska, civil defence is also a responsibility of the entity channelled through 

the municipalities. As for the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is an 

additional level, with the extra cantonal level between the entity and the munici -

pality. Administrative layers are thus so numerous that confusion rapidly reigned: 

“With 14 governments, a dozen municipalities, the two entities and the state, no one 

really knows who is authorized for what and who is responsible” (DIALOGUE BiH). 

No national state of emergency was declared, precisely to avoid parallel decision-

making, but FBiH, RS and Brcko District declared their own state of emergency. 

The re-flooding of early August highlighted the continued vulnerability of local 

communities and the increased inadequacy of existing flood protection measures. 

UN Heads of Missions stated in September that “Governments must develop and 

deploy policies for dealing with populated areas that are at an unacceptably high risk 

from flooding and landslides” and regretted that “no budgetary allocation was made 

for dealing with this issue”. As mentioned above, several hundred people were again 

displaced in Gracanica region (UN, August 2014) and many more elsewhere. 

3.2.2. Longer-term recovery 

As for the recovery phase, in September, no national or entity recovery programme 

had been deployed, leading to an  ad hoc  and uncoordinated approach by individual 

agencies (international and local) (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, September 2014). 

Local governments were still yet to receive substantial assistance from higher levels 

of government, several of which were threatened with insolvency as debts were 

mounting. Solidarity funds were established and housing assistance was prioritised 

by both entity governments, but no comprehensive enterprise recovery or employ -

ment retention program was launched outside of the donor community, while 

damage and displacement gravely threatened the livelihoods of many households. 

International and local donors accounted for the bulk of assistance provided (UN 

Heads of Missions Meeting, September 2014). General elections were held on 12 

October, with the campaign dominated by economic and social issues. The newly 

elected politicians did not implement new measures or programmes to recovery 

from the flood. 

3.2.3. Some clues for explaining such inefficiency 

Did the obstruction arise from the complex structure which paralysed action, or from 

the people who govern? The debate opposes advocates of the two positions. The 

present study is not the place to go into the details of Bosnian politics, but the poor 

response capacity of the governments seems obvious, and it is probably aggravated 

by limited resources. Srecko Horvat defends another thesis, arguing that neolib -

eral influence is to be blamed. He depicts the crisis as a “social disaster” and accuses 

Balkan states of privatising water management companies and their gradually dimin -

ishing investment in the construction and maintenance of dams and embankments 

(HORVAT, 2014 . This proposition is contested by Florian Bieber, who argues that very 

little privatisation has in fact occurred. According to him, the lack of public invest -

ment and maintenance of infrastructure is due to ongoing reconstruction following 

the war, the reduced professionalism of politicians because of party appointments SEM 2015 

> 196
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

and favouritism, and hierarchical power-structures leading to slow response in times 

of crisis. 

Indeed, there is suspicion that the money supposedly allocated for flood preven -

tion was not correctly allocated. The Prime Minster of Republika Srpska, Zeljka 

Cvijanovic, recognised in late May that the damage caused by the flood, and resulting 

displacement, could have been lessened had everything been done by the rules: “That 

does not mean that the catastrophe could have been prevented but the consequences 

could have been reduced to a minimum” (JUKIC, June 2014). 

“Areas around the river Sava in northern Bosnia suffered severe flooding because 

the embankments were not large enough or broke during the flooding. […] A Federa -

tion Audit Office report from January 2013, which dealt with the system of flood 

defences, said responsibility for managing possible floods was fragmented and 

that institutions were uncoordinated and divided. All the activities needed to bring 

the system of protection into a functional state were not taken. […] From the total 

money collected from water taxes, only 25 per cent was used for flood protection. 

The [previous] water-protection facilities were destroyed in the last war and as such 

cannot ensure an efficient protection from flooding in endangered area. The report 

noted also that while the Federation entity’s cantons obtained more than 10 million 

euro for flood protection, they spent only 16 per cent of the money on that task.” 

Elvira Juvik, 3 June 2014, “Bosnia Probes Missing Flood Prevention Funds”  Balkan 

Insight 

Photo 4.  A man cleans mud from his home in Maglaj, BiH. 

> Source : Velija Hasanbegovic/Radio Sarajevo SEM 2015
> 197

3.3. Prompt international emergency response 3

Given the poor resources of Bosnia and Herzegovina, international aid proved 

crucial in both the emergency and recovery phases. The country requested imme -

diate support from the EU, and asked the UN Resident Coordinator to take the lead 

in coordinating international donor efforts. International Community Coordination 

Meetings were held daily from 18 May onwards. Almost 40 individual countries sent 

relief items, rescue teams or financial aid. 

UN agencies provided a total of 9.7 million USD for emergency humanitarian 

aid and for immediate recovery support. The first UN plane with emergency equip -

ment landed on 19 May, followed by 5 more and a series of truck convoys. The UN 

network of field offices enabled the provision of urgently needed assistance to some 

40 affected municipalities (UN Mission in BiH). 

On 15 May, the EU Civil Protection Mechanism was activated, for both BiH and 

Serbia, which was also badly affected by flooding. Bosnia & Herzegovina notably 

requested helicopters and motorboats to evacuate people and to transport water, 

medicine and food, as well as pumps, generators, tents, humidity dryers, water puri -

fication sets, gas heaters for tents and sanitation items. 23 Member States partic -

ipated, and over 800 relief workers were deployed in the two countries. In BiH 

alone, these teams directly rescued over 1,700 people. The European Commission 

co-financed the transportation of relief material and personnel, and the European 

Commission’s Emergency Response Coordination Centre (ERCC) was responsible for 

matching the incoming offers of assistance with needs on the ground. In addition, 

more than 80 satellite maps were produced by the Commission to support both the 

affected countries and those providing assistance. The EU also provided €3 million 

in humanitarian aid on 6 June 2014 (EC Decision ECHO/-BA/BUD/2014/01000) (for 

the two countries), channelled through the Red Cross – Red Crescent as well as 

other partner organisations (ECHO factsheet, July 2014). Kristalina Georgieva, the 

European Commissioner for International Coordination, Humanitarian Aid and 

Crisis Response, visited Sarajevo on 21 May. As BiH is not a candidate country for EU 

membership, it cannot apply for aid from the EU Solidarity Fund. 

3.4. International multi-faceted recovery aid 4

From 22 May to 1 June, four teams were deployed on the ground to conduct a rapid 

needs assessment, which served as a basis for the International Donors’ Conference 

“Rebuilding together ” which was held on 16 July in Brussels. In total, BiH received 

€139,775,743 in grants and €670,700,000 in loans (EUROPEAN COMMISSION page on 

International Donors’ Conference). 

3.5. The UN floods recovery programme “Danas Za Nas” 

This programme, entitled “today, for us”, started on 1 July 2014 and ran until 30 

June 2015. It aimed to “re-establish normal living conditions, preserve jobs, support 

local economies and increase disaster resilience in more than 25 communities most 

affected by floods” (UN BiH). This USD 14,8 million programme was financed by 16 

bilateral donors and implemented by UN agencies. It targeted 8 areas for assistance: 

1. Livelihood support: The  Cash for work  programme delivered grants to the most-

affected municipalities to enable them to quickly employ locals to clean and repair 

public areas and infrastructures. 

2. Livelihood support: Livestock feed concentrate, greenhouses and non-financial aid 

to improve the value-chain production were delivered to the most vulnerable farmers. 

> 3. For an overview of foreign aid during the humanitarian phase, see UN in BiH’s interactive map: Floods Response
> Map – Humanitarian phase. http://ba.one.un.org/content/unct/bosnia_and_herzegovina/en/home/what-we-do/
> joint-projects/floods-recovery/floods-recovery-map0.html SEM 2015
> 198
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

3. Water Sanitation Projects ( WASH ): restoring the water, sanitation and sewage 

facilities. 

4. Rehabilitation of health centres, notably through the provision of medical 

equipment and vehicles. 

5. Support for centres for the elderly: reconstruction, equipment and staff 

training. 

6. Stabilisation of landslides using drainage pipes. 

7. Rehabilitation of the central heating system in Doboj. 

8. Support for infrastructure rehabilitation, notably concerning bridges and 

access roads (UN BiH). 

3.5.1. The EU Floods Recovery Programme 

This programme was launched on 15 August 2015 and ended on 31 October 2015, 

providing a total aid package of €43.52 million out of which the EU contribution was 

€42,24 million, with UNDP providing the remaining €1.28 million. “The Programme 

consists of different components all of which aim to assist with the normalization of 

peoples’ lives in flood-affected areas and communities in 24 most-affected munici -

palities. The activities focus on the immediate restoration of vital public sector infra -

structure and reinstatement of key public services, the emergency reconstruction of 

private dwellings for the most vulnerable and marginalized people, the revitaliza -

tion of local economy and agriculture production and rehabilitation of communal 

infrastructure in selected municipalities. […] The Programme is being implemented 

by the  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Chil -

dren’s Fund (UNICEF) and the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) until 

October 2015” (UN BiH). The Programme aimed to rehabilitate 4,000 dwellings for 

approximately 14,000 people, 100 local roads and bridges, 90 educational institutions 

(including pre-school facilities), 10 water and sanitation facilities, three municipality 

buildings, four Centres for social welfare, and four healthcare facilities (EUROPEAN 

DELEGATION to BiH). In addition, the EU funded the retention and generation of 

up to 2,000 jobs in small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), including in the agri -

cultural sector (UN BiH). As of September 2014, the governments were not imple -

menting any job retention programmes, meaning that the impact of this programme 

will likely remain limited (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, September 2014). 

An Advisory Panel was established in October 2014 to maximise collaboration 

between the EU and domestic authorities on all levels, also serving as an information 

exchange forum. By April 2015, the programme had helped some 1,500 families to 

return to their homes. 

3.5.2. Various other country-led or NGO-led projects 

The UN and EU relief efforts were by far the biggest, but other country-led or 

NGO-led projects were also implemented. For example, the Austrian Development 

Agency launched a project helping agricultural producers to recover livelihood secu -

rity. According to the BiH agency for statistics, around 50 percent of agricultural 

holdings are less than 2 ha and over 80 percent less than 5 ha. Thus, familial agricul -

ture on small plots is widespread, and when land, crops or livestock are devastated, 

those households lose all sources of income. These people are the most vulnerable 

to environmental hazards. Through donations of seeds, seedlings, beehives, poultry 

and small and large cattle, this programme had assisted 2,424 agricultural producers 

as of April 2015 (SUNJE, 2015). 

3.6. Controversy around the use of international funds 

Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Prime Minister regretted in late July that many donors 

bypassed Bonsia’s institutions when distributing aid because they do not trust them 

(JUKIC, July 2014). Indeed, international assistance actors are concern with possible SEM 2015 

> 199

corruption and chose to implement projects directly by themselves. Part of the 

money passed through public authorities at different levels, though. Confusion 

lingered with regard to the availability of those funds and governments were slow to 

disburse them (UN Heads of Missions Meeting, September 2014). 

4. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The widespread severe flooding and landslides in May 2014 certainly could not have 

been avoided, but it was possible to anticipate their occurrence, to prepare for such 

an event and to limit the damage. These events starkly shed light on the fact that 

socially vulnerable populations were living in flood-prone zones and are less resilient 

to such events. Evacuation was poorly managed and longer-term consequences of 

displacement were not tackled effectively. The following is a list of lessons learnt 

and recommendations to reduce Bosnians’ exposure to disasters: 

4.1. Invest in prevention and preparedness 

The May 2014 floods and landslides took local authorities by surprise. This means that 

meteorological data were either not good enough, or that the implications of such 

heavy rainfall had not been accurately envisaged or taken seriously. It furthermore 

suggests that the Bosnian authorities were not sufficiently aware of the vulnerability 

of the population and did not deal with it accordingly. Of course, natural hazards 

cannot be avoided, but, if with the correct preparation, the damage they cause can 

be limited. In the case in question, disaster risk reduction measures were clearly 

inadequate: fragile embankments, poor water management, especially concerning 

transboundary waters, dwellings built in banned zones, and weak capacities for early 

Photo 5.  Landslide rehabilitation in Vares by the “Cash for Work” programme. 

> Source: UNDP SEM 2015
> 200
> EUROPE
> ELISE HAUMONT
> THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA:
> EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT

warning and alarm (HUSEINBASIC, 2014). The scale of this disaster should push poli -

ticians and administrations to implement much more goal-oriented measures in the 

near future. 

Concerning evacuation and displacement more specifically, it is striking that 

no preventive evacuation was planned. As such, along with better meteorological 

forecasting, a system of alert and organisation of evacuation before floods occur is 

needed. This goes hand in hand with better identification of vulnerable populations, 

namely people who will need special help to move and people who are most endan -

gered should such a natural disaster occur. 

In addition, as discussed above, many buildings were transformed into  ad hoc 

temporary accommodation facilities but were not adapted to be used as emergency 

shelters. It would certainly be too costly to build dedicated centres, but existing 

buildings that could serve as TAFs can be identified beforehand and an assessment 

of their characteristics would probably lead to better orientation of the prospective 

evacuees and displaced populations. 

4.2. Coordinate all efforts 

As for the humanitarian emergency phase, Samir Huseinbasic, from the Bosnian 

Ministry of Security, acknowledged before the Council of Europe in June that 

communication and information management have to be improved, as well as inter -

agency coordination (be it vertical or horizontal). The Bosnian political and adminis -

trative structure is extremely fragmented, and improving the way the whole system 

works is another debate entirely. However, knowing who is responsible for what and 

facilitating information sharing is a minimum requirement. 

Furthermore, it is essential that international and local bodies should be able 

to trust each other. Foreign assistance delivered by international organisations 

and non-governmental organisations often bypassed local authorities. The former 

were concerned about a lack of efficiency and the misuse of aid, notably because 

of fears over corruption, while the feelings of the latter were hurt. This reciprocal 

mistrust prevents further improvements because it maintains Bosnia’s dependence 

on foreign aid, and international actors are generally less connected to the realities 

on the ground. Closer partnerships must thus be forged, so that local government 

cans improve their way of functioning under international influence, progressively 

diminishing the need for a foreign presence in BiH. 

4.3. Making courageous and future-oriented choices in the recovery phase 

Quick reconstruction after the war led to poor-quality housing being built in risky 

areas. Rebuilding after the disaster should take this into account by making the 

quality of the new dwellings a priority. Building robust houses in safe places may be 

costly in the short term, but doing so means much greater costs can be avoided in the 

long run. Closely linked to this issue are the disastrous consequences of the lack of 

property titles and housing insurance. Here again, the incentives for implementing 

strict legislation are not obvious for politicians seeking to be elected, but such action 

protects the safety of citizens, and the fact that houses are legally recognized and 

properly registered, also greatly facilitated the planning of risk-reduction measures. SEM 2015 

201 

# REFERENCES 

Reports 

– Assessment Capacities Project (ACAPS), 

22 May 2014,  Briefing Note 

– BiH Floods, 2014 – Recovery Needs 

Assessment , conducted by the Bosnian 

authorities at all levels, with the 

support of the UN, the European Union 

and the World Bank, from 25 May to 17 

June 2014 

– European Commission, 11 July 2014, 

“Floods in Serbia and Bonsia and 

Herzegovina – Humanitarian Aid and 

Civil Protection”,  ECHO factsheet 

– European Commission, 16 September 

2014,  Eastern Europe: Floods 

– IFRC, 13 December 2010,  Bosnia and 

Herzegovina: Floods 

– IOM, June 2014,  Overview on IOM 

activities, Humanitarian Situation  Report 

(Not available online. Transmitted by 

IOM Sarajevo) 

– IOM, “Humanitarian situation report”, 

unknown date (end of May at the latest) 

– UN Heads of Missions Meeting , 3 

September 2014 (Not available online. 

Transmitted by IOM Sarajevo) 

– UN, 11 August 2014,  Bosnia and 

Herzegovina – Flood Disaster Situation 

Report 

– World Health Organization, 25 May 

2014,  Floods in the Balkans: Situation 

Report 

– HUSEINBASIC Samir, 12-13 June 2014, 

« Floods 2014 in BiH – Lessons to 

learn », presentation at the  Council of 

Europe , Strasbourg 

– Articles 

– TURNER Wesli, September 2014, 

« Floods cause new displacement in 

Bosnia and Herzegovina » in  IDMC 

blog 

– http://www.internal-displacement. 

org/blog/2014/floods-cause-new-

displacement-in-bosnia-and-

herzegovina 

Press articles 

– AFP, 18 May 2014,  “Serbia and Bosnia 

flooding forces thousands to flee 

homes” in  The Guardian 

– http://www.theguardian.com/ 

world/2014/may/18/serbia-bosnia-

flooding-thousands-flee-river-sava 

– BIEBER Florian, 28 May 2014, “What 

the floods reveal: consequences of a 

disaster” in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/ 

en/blog/what-the-floods-reveal-

consequences-of-a-disaster 

– DJURICA Marko, 17 May 2014, “Balkan 

Floods Force Mass Evacuation, Bodies 

Pulled From Homes” in  World Post ,

from  Reuters 

– http://www.huffingtonpost. 

com/2014/05/17/balkan-

floods_n_5343187.html 

– GEARIN Mary, 20 May 2014, “Bosnian 

flood devastation ‘on scale of Balkan 

war’, foreign minister says” in  abc.net 

– http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-05-

20/devastating-floods-affect-quarter-

of-bosnian-population/5463586 

– HORVAT Srecko, 22 May 2014, « Under 

the surface of the Balkan floods lies a 

social disaster » in  The Guardian 

– http://www.theguardian.com/ 

commentisfree/2014/may/22/ 

balkan-floods-social-disaster-former-

yugoslavia 

– KUMPARAK Greg, 22 May 2014, 

“Airbnb now waiving charges for 

those displaced by the floods in 

SouthEast Europe” in  TechCrunch 

– http://techcrunch.com/2014/05/22/ 

airbnb-now-waiving-charges-for-

those-displaced-by-the-floods-in-

southeast-europe/ 

– JUKIC Elvira, 30 May 2014, 

“Transparency Urged in Bosnia 

Humanitarian Aid” in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/ 

article/transparency-urged-in-bosnia-

humanitarian-aid 

– JUKIC, 3 June 2014, “Bosnia Probes 

Missing Flood Prevention Funds” 

Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/ 

article/bosnia-tackles-flood-damage-

responsibility 

– JUKIC Elvira, 28 July 2014, “Bosnia 

Prime Minister Bemoans Donors’ 

Mistrust” in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/ 

en/article/bosnia-prime-minister-

bemoans-donors-mistrust 

– JUKIC Elvira, 7 August 2014, “Freak 

Floods Wreak More Havoc in Balkans” 

in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/ 

article/balkan-floods-demolished-

houses-roads-bridges 

– JUKIC Elvira, 30 October 2014, 

“Hundreds Still Homeless After 

Bosnia Floods” in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/ 

article/hundreds-still-homeless-after-

bosnia-floods 

– JUKIC Elvira, 30 October 2014, 

“Hundreds still homeless after Bosnia 

floods” in  Balkan Insight 

– http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/ 

article/hundreds-still-homeless-after-

bosnia-floods 

– NARDELLI  Alberto , DZIDIC 

Denis  and JUKIC Elvira,  8 October 

2014, “Bosnia and Herzegovina: the 

world’s most complicated system of 

government ?” in  The guardian 

– http://www.theguardian.com/ 

news/datablog/2014/oct/08/ 

bosnia-herzegovina-elections-the-

worlds-most-complicated-system-of-

government 

– NIKOLAIDIS  Andrej, 20 May 2014, 

“Floods have united the people of the 

Balkans” in  The Guardian 

– http://www.theguardian.com/ 

commentisfree/2014/may/20/floods-

people-balkans-yugoslavia 

– PASIC Lana, 20 May 2014, “After the 

Balkan floods: Unity and compassion” 

in  Aljazeera.com 

– http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/ 

opinion/2014/05/balkan-floods-

bosnia-201452073456580374.html 

– SUNJE Aida, 7 April 2015, “Many 

families affected by last year’s floods 

are still in need of help” in  World 

Vision SEM 2015 

202 

EUROPE 

ELISE HAUMONT 

THE MAY 2014 FLOODS IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA: 

EVACUATION AND DISPLACEMENT 

– http://www.wvi.org/bosnia-and-

herzegovina/article/many-families-

affected-last-year%E2%80%99s-floods-

are-still-need-help 

– YAN Holly and SANTIAGO Kisa Mlela, 

20 May 2014, Epic flooding in Balkans 

raises fears about landmines surfacing 

in CNN 

– http://edition.cnn.com/2014/05/19/ 

world/europe/balkans-flooding/ 

index.html# 

Websites 

– Delegation of the EU to Bosnia and 

Herzegovina, page on EU Floods 

Recovery Programme (consulted 2 May 

2015) 

– http://europa.ba/FloodsRecovery. 

aspx?lang=EN 

– Dialogue BiH, page on the floods 

(consulted 15 April 2015) 

– www.dialoguebih.net/index.php/special-

report-floods2014/ 

– European Commission, page on the 

International Donors’ Conference 

(consulted 2 May 2015) 

– http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/news_ 

corner/floods/index_en.htm 

– Reliefweb, page on Balkan floods 

(consulted 15 April 2015) 

– http://reliefweb.int/disaster/ff-2014-

000059-srb 

– UN in Bosnia and Herzegovina, page 

on floods recovery (consulted 2 May 

2015) 

– http://ba.one.un.org/content/unct/ 

bosnia_and_herzegovina/en/home/ 

floods-recovery.html 

Interviews 

– Interview with Mladen Kakuca, from 

IOM Sarajevo, conducted by phone 

on 1 May 2015 

– Legal texts 

– European Commission, 6 June 2015, 

Decision ECHO/-BA/BUD/2014/01000 

Maps 

– ECHO and AFP: Deadly flooding 

across Southeast Europe 

– European Commission: 4 June 2014: 

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Flood 

situation & UCPM and bilateral 

assistance 

– European Commission: 23 May 2014: 

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Flood 

situation & UCPM assistance 

– Politheor.net: Bosnia and 

Herzegovina’s administrative 

structure 

– UN in BiH: Floods Response Map – 

Humanitarian phase (interactive) 

– http://ba.one.un.org/content/unct/ 

bosnia_and_herzegovina/en/home/ 

what-we-do/joint-projects/floods-

recovery/floods-recovery-map0.html 

– UN in BiH: Floods Recovery Map 

(interactive) 

– http://ba.one.un.org/content/unct/ 

bosnia_and_herzegovina/en/home/ 

what-we-do/joint-projects/floods-

recovery/floods-recovery-map.html 

Acknowledgements 

– I am very grateful for the help 

of Mladen Kakuca, from IOM 

Sarajevo, who provided me with 

crucial documents for my study, 

especially regarding the analysis of 

displacement patterns. Despite being 

very busy and frequently on the 

move, he also kindly agreed to answer 

some questions over the phone. Many 

thanks also to Daria Mokhnacheva, 

from the Migration, Environment 

and Climate Change Division at IOM, 

who facilitated the contact. SEM 2015 

203 

## MOLLY O’HARA 

# 2014 Winter Olympics in 

# Sochi: An Environmental 

# and Human-Rights Disaster 

# Typically when we think of environmental migration, what comes to 

mind is the forced displacement of a certain population as a result 

of a natural disaster, such as a hurricane, earthquake, etc. However, 

with the term ‘environmental migration’ itself constituting a fairly 

new kind of migration categorization, the parameters are not entirely 

fixed. While migration in the wake of natural disasters is perhaps the 

most explicit form of environmental migration, forced displacement 

can also be a result of slow onset climate change, such as sea-level rise 

or drought. In addition, although political, social and economic factors already make 

it difficult enough to assess traditional migration, the situation is further complicated 

when climate change and environmental factors enter the equation. As research in 

this field continues to grow, this paper seeks to shed light on yet another facet of 

environmental migration. In addition to natural disasters and slow onset climate 

change, migration can result from anthropogenic impacts or, in other words, human 

interference. Therefore, let us draw our attention towards one event in particular 

that has a history of creating situations of environmental degradation and forced 

displacement, namely the Olympics. 

Ever since the environmental destruction that took place during the 1992 Albert -

ville Winter Olympic Games, awareness has grown concerning the environmental 

degradation that can result from construction and preparation of such ‘mega-

events’. Subsequently, in 1994, the issue of environmental influence was presented 

for the first time at the XII Olympic Congress in Paris, followed by the International 

Olympics Committee (IOC) recognizing environmental protection as it became offi -

cially included in the general principles of the Olympic Charter (Popelarova and 

Janiga 2008). As a result, the IOC Sport and Environment Commission was created 

in 1995, and the concept of sustainable event management was born. According to 

the Official Website of the Olympic Movement (2015), “The IOC has acknowledged 

its particular responsibility in terms of promoting sustainable development, and 

regards the environment as the third dimension of Olympism, alongside sport and 

culture.” However, if the results from the most recent 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi 

are any indication of how successful this Commission on the environment can be, 

the future for ecosystems, biodiversity and local populations affected by the Olym -

pics does not look so bright. 

This report will analyse the 2014 Sochi Olympics in order to discern the envi -

ronmental damage and forced displacement that have occurred and to offer a more 

transparent picture of what has actually taken place than what the Russian govern -

ment has been willing to disclose. Not only has preparation for these Olympics 

directly forced families to relocate, but the environmental destruction itself has also 

affected the living situation among the local population. Furthermore, when other 

political, social and economic factors are taken into account, from corruption to 

poverty, the gravity of the situation becomes even more apparent. However, since 

the Olympic Games are unlikely to be postponed or cancelled in the near future, 

understanding the complexities of such situations will be crucial in preventing their 

reoccurrence in future mega-events. SEM 2015 

> 204
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

Following the introduction and methodology, the first section of this report will 

analyse the background of the Sochi Winter Olympics, starting with the steps to elect 

Sochi as the host city, followed by a discussion of the environmental impacts during 

and post preparation for the event. The second section will examine the forced 

displacement that took place from evictions imposed by the government, as well 

as assess the situation for the population that was trapped and unable to relocate. 

The third section will evaluate the various responses from the Russian government, 

organisations and local populations in order to more thoroughly tackle issues related 

to political, social and economic factors. Finally, the report will conclude with a 

brief recap of the situation in Sochi, followed by a suggestion for how similar issues 

should be dealt with in upcoming mega-events. 

1. BACKGROUND 

1.1 Sochi’s Winter Olympic Bid 

On July 4, 2007, Sochi was announced as the host city for the 2014 Winter Olympics. 

This was the result of the IOC’s two-year preparation process that assesses each city’s 

capacity to host the Games in a transparent process (Official Website of the Olympic 

Movement 2015). In 1994, Sochi officially bid to host the 2002 Winter Olympics but 

was ultimately rejected for economic reasons. The situation changed, however, when 

Russia experienced economic growth during Vladimir Putin’s presidency from 2000 

onwards, and to the possibility of transforming Sochi into a world-class ski resort 

became much more feasible (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

Following Putin’s accession to the Presidency, a series of events took place: in 

2003, the Russian state gas company, Gazprom, began construction in the Sochi 

National Park to develop their own ski resort; in 2005, the Gornaya Carousel began 

development in Sochi National Park without an environmental impact assessment; in 

February 2006, the Russian government ordered a change in the functional zoning of 

the Sochi National Park; in 2006, the coerced seizure of land and property from inhab -

itants began; and, in January 2007, a road to the Pslukh ranger station in the Caucasus 

reserve began illegal construction. Finally, in July 2007, Sochi won the bid, despite 47 

Russian environmental organisations appealing to the IOC to avoid inflicting irrevers -

ible damage by not choosing Sochi. This was the first time a host city was chosen that 

had none of the venues completed (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

1.2. Reactions 

As previously mentioned, 47 Russian environmental organisations pleaded with the 

IOC to not choose Sochi as the host city since all Olympic venues were planned 

on valuable protected natural territories. Consequently, once Sochi was officially 

chosen, the IOC had to make numerous statements to justify its choice (Gazaryan 

and Shevchenko 2014). At this point, it was already becoming clear that this project 

would face considerable challenges and fervent opposition. Furthermore, today it 

is widelt recognised that the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi have been the most 

expensive Games in history. According to the Environmental Watch on North 

Caucasus (EWNC), “It was clear that no amounts of money would be spared for the 

project” (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

With a bill totalling around $51 billion, some may wonder  why  so much money 

went into these particular Games. According to The Economist (2014), “[Vladimir 

Putin] spends much of his time at his Sochi residence and intends the games to be 

seen as proof of his mastery over nature and a symbol of his international legiti -

macy.” As Figures 1 and 2 illustrate, Russia’s Olympics were anything but cheap, 

costing more than twice as much as the Winter Games held in Nagano in 1998 (Busi -

ness Insider 2014). SEM 2015 

205 

Figure 1.  Cost of Past Olympic Games        

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 Sochi 2014 Beijin 2008 Athens 2014 Nagano 1998 Barcelona 1992 London 2012 Vancouver 2010 Seoul 1988 7.69 8.33 13.98 15.4 17.59 18.22 49.96 42.58 Cost in Billion (USD)

Source: Business Insider, 2014 

Figure 2.  Cost of Olympic Venues in Sochi 

Source: Vanity Fair, 2014 

Given that Sochi is the warmest part in Russia, the fact that it is located in a 

war zone in the Northern Caucasus, and it is known for attracting shady visitors 

and organised crime, the cost was always expected to be significant simply in order 

to make the necessary arrangements. According to Russian opinion polls, nearly 

50% of Russians believe that the main reason for these exorbitant costs is political SEM 2015 

> 206
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

corruption, whereas 15% believe that the cost was genuinely due to the complexity 

of the project. Furthermore, an opinion poll by the Levada Center, an independent, 

Russian polling and research organisation, found that 38% of Russians feel that the 

real goal behind hosting the Winter Olympics in Sochi was to dispense state funds 

since less than 25% of the Russian population has felt any of the benefits (The Econ -

omist 2014). However, another poll by The Associated Press and NORC Center of 

Public Affairs Research (2015) found that 78% of Russians think the Olympics had a 

positive effect on Russia’s international image, and 51% reported that it had a positive 

economic effect. Having established the background into the context of the Sochi 

Winter Olympics, this study will seek to further understand the state of the environ -

ment as plans for the mega-event progressed. 

1.3. Environmental Assessment 

1.3.1. Zero Waste 

When Sochi was chosen as the host city, the Russian government was well-aware of 

the Zero Waste standard imposed by the IOC, which uses the three “R’s” – reduce, 

reuse and recycle – to determine the Olympic city’s waste management policy. 

Although the Sochi 2014 Organizing Committee boasts on their website of having 

turned Sochi into a ‘city without landfills,’ the EWNC has questioned those cited 

figures, as well as Russian officials’ ability to understand the fundamental principles 

of the Zero Waste policy in the first place (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). This 

report will provide evidence that this policy was, in fact, disregarded and has ulti -

mately been a complete failure. 

1.3.2. More Detailed Timeline 

The first section of this study provided a brief timeline of events that took place 

leading up to the Sochi bid for the 2014 Games, which illustrated multiple activities 

that were undertaken without proper environmental assessment reports. The present 

section will explore these events more carefully and bring to light other environmen -

tally damaging, sometimes illegal, activities that were supported by the government. 

The city of Sochi, which has a population of 400,000 people, is situated in the 

region of Krasnodar, the third largest in Russia. As illustrated in Figures 2 and 3, 

the Games were split into a coastal cluster and a mountain cluster in the Krasnaya 

Polyana Mountains. The first cluster, which consisted of all the ice venues, was built 

in the Imeretinskaya Valley along the coast of the Black Sea, whereas the second 

cluster, which was home to the skiing and sliding sports, was located in a compact 

area with only about 4 kilometres between the venues and the mountain village 

(Official Website of the Olympic Movement, 2015). 

The series of choices that represent the ongoing pattern of environmental neglect 

began in 2003 when the Prime Minister signed a Government Decree allowing valu -

able wilderness and lake areas in the Sochi National Park to be rented out for the 

construction of the sports resort and downhill ski projects. At the same time, plans 

were made for completing the reconstruction of an existing road from Adler to 

Krasnaya Polyana and bringing gas to the mountain village. Subsequently, Gazprom 

became the first beneficiary of the decree, and they began the construction for their 

ski resort before obtaining a completed environmental impact assessment. Despite 

the fact that the resort illegally encroached on the territory of the Caucasian State 

Biosphere Reserve, federal authorities never stepped in. Furthermore, regarding 

the gas line to Krasnaya Polyana, Gazprom used threats to pressure authorities to 

provide a positive environmental impact assessment and did not even bother waiting 

for necessary construction paperwork before destroying a protected area, a natural 

monument known as Kudepstinsky Canyon and about 2,000 protected box trees 

(Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). SEM 2015 

> 207

Figure 3.  Location of the venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi 

> Source: ABC, 2015

In 2004, another major player entered the picture named Vladimir Potanin, who 

announced plans to build the Rosa Khutor ski resort, adding that construction would 

require very little excavation and zero logging. However, as we see in Figure 4, this 

promise could not be kept due to the fact that the territory of the resort was actually 

covered in forest (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

Photo 1.  Clearing of Aibga for the Rosa Khutor Ski Resort 

> Source: Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014

Still in the early stages of planning, the Sochi authorities created a plan in 2005 to 

develop the mountain-sea complex, 84% of which would fall within the Sochi Natural 

Park and Sochi State Natural Reserve. This project would include new ski complexes 

near the Krasnaya Polyana and Aibga villages, recreational facilities in the lower 

area of Sochi’s Adler district, resort construction in the Imeretinskaya lowland and 

infrastructure development. About a year later, the Russian government changed the 

zoning plan of the Sochi National Park so that area previously under strict protection SEM 2015 

> 208
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

became available for Olympic preparation. In the image below, all of the zones in 

yellow were released from strict protection. Consequently, since they were entirely 

removed from the strictly restricted zone and subject to Gazprom construction, the 

virgin forests on the Psekhako ridge made up the most environmentally sensitive site 

(Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

Subsequently, the Russian government continued to plan the construction of 

resorts and venues in environmentally susceptible areas and approved these plans 

without first obtaining the necessary environmental impact assessments, which 

constitutes illegal behaviour. In addition, a large portion of the social infrastructure 

that was planned, including an illegal road, was located in the Caucasus and Caucasian 

reserves. Moreover, the combined railroad and highway that would link the coastal 

and mountain clusters became the largest and most expensive Olympic site, totalling 

around $9 billion (West 2014). Its construction began without a positive conclusion 

from the environmental impact assessment and, thus, led to the following results: 

the road violated environmental legislation; it led to illegal deforestation; 1.5 million 

tons of gravel were illegally seized from the Mzymta River, leading to the degrada -

tion of the natural landscape and risk of floods and erosion; it contaminated the 

river with chemicals such as arsenic; and, lastly, it led to illegal soil dumping, which 

resulted in irreparable damage to aquifers and the disappearance of water from the 

Akhshtyr wells (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

1.3.3. Coastal Cluster 

First, since the subtropical, Imeretinskaya lowland of the Northern Caucasus Black 

Sea was home to approximately 200 bird species, scientists attempted to develop a 

Natural Park conservation project in 2004. Instead, with Olympic construction in 

mind, officials promised to conserve the lakes and habitats of protected bird and plant 

species, as well as to construct an Ornithological Park. However, when construction 

for this park began in 2009, there was no room for the promised 300-hectare park due 

to the fact that the lowlands had already been allocated for construction and lakes 

had already been filled. As a result, the park was reallocated to storm drainage ponds, 

Northern wetlands and, most absurdly, abandoned farmland that was not even located 

within the borders of the Imeretinskaya lowland. Furthermore, although some of the 

area around the drainage ponds could have still become stopovers for migratory birds, 

the land that was allocated for the Ornithological Park was also used for an amuse -

ment park. Other promised compensation measures were also unfulfilled, such as the 

planting of 13,000 arboreal specimens and 28,000 bushes, given that these areas of the 

lowlands had been already destroyed (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

1.3.4. Mountain Cluster 

Within the mountain cluster, the area targeted for construction consisted of the 

Sochi National Park and the Caucasian State Biosphere Reserve, which together make 

up the largest protected area in the Caucasus. Results of the construction include 

the 60 square kilometres of Caucasian Reserve that were estimated to have suffered 

from fragmentation, the confirmed destruction of rare species due to the main road 

that was built to the Rosa Khutor resort and committed acts of deforestation for 

natural habitats of wild plant species. In addition, although the 2014 Sochi Organ -

izing Committee claims that 1.1 million trees were planted in Sochi, the EWNC Envi -

ronmental Assessment found that the actual number of trees planted is closer to 

200,000. Additionally, while large mammals, amphibians and reptiles were all nega -

tively affected, it was the brown bear population that was most intensely impacted, 

given that it has seemingly disappeared altogether from the Sochi National Park area 

since 2013 (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

Finally, it is important to note the impact that the construction and deforesta -

tion had on rivers and geological processes. Results from monitoring the Achipse, SEM 2015 

> 209

Laura and Mzymta Rivers have shown that pollution has led to complete fish loss, 

erosion and mudslides. Geologists also warned ski resorts of potentially hazardous 

geological processes, such as erosion, landslides, mudslides and landslips, as seen 

in Figure 6. Furthermore, reports have concluded that such exogenous geological 

processes are not the result of natural factors but, rather, have resulted directly from 

cutting slopes, reconstructing motorways and building service lines. Unfortunately, 

instead of diminishing with time, the number of hazardous geological developments 

continues to grow (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). 

Photo 2.  Ecological Effects 

> Source: Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, 2014

2. MIGRATION 

2.1. Forced Displacement by the Government 

The following section of this report will begin an assessment of the families that 

were displaced during and after preparation for the 2014 Olympics. Unfortunately, 

forced displacement is not necessarily unusual for the Olympics, given that around 

1.5 million people were moved during the 2008 Beijing Games, many against their 

will (Golubkova and Akin 2012). As we have already seen, some of the first reports of 

the coerced seizure of land and property from Sochi locals took place in 2006, once it 

had been decided that the land that had already been allocated for construction was 

insufficient (Gazaryan and Shevchenko 2014). Consequently, under legislation known 

as Law 301, the government had the right to seize and demolish privately owned land 

and buildings for the Olympics (Loiko 2014). This section seeks to provide more detail 

into the process by which Sochi residents were displaced, compensated and treated 

by the Russian government. 

2.1.1. Examples from Sochi families 

In order to better understand the types of situations Sochi locals found themselves 

in, we will look more closely into several stories from families who have been force -

fully evicted, as they speak for many. To begin with, Human Rights Watch (HRW) 

(2012) defines forced eviction as follows: SEM 2015 

> 210
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

“Forced eviction, or the coerced or involuntary displacement of indi -

viduals from homes or lands that they occupy or depend on, without provi -

sion of and access to appropriate forms of legal or other protection as well 

as provision of reasonable compensation, is a serious violation of interna -

tional law.” 

HRW (2015) has concluded that approximately 2,000 families have been 

evicted from their homes due to preparation for the Olympic venues and infrastruc -

ture. Furthermore, fair compensation was not provided for many families, while 

some families did not receive any compensation at all. 

The following two examples recount the stories of 63-year-old Nina Toromonyan 

and a 42-year-old real estate developer named Angela Zilberg. To begin with, 

Toromonyan and her 13 family members were thrown out of their home to make 

way for the Games. When officers arrived, armed and wearing black masks, they 

dragged Toromonyan’s older sister by the hair, attacked her husband for interfering 

and terrified the children into believing they would be killed. Despite Toromon -

yan’s legal proof of land-ownership since 1970, officials and judges concluded that 

Law 301 applied in this case and that her house and land were, in fact, interfering 

with the new highway. Of course, officials asserted that residents were offered 

either fair compensations or other housing. Yet, the three families that make up the 

Toromonyan clan could not even buy a house with the $152,000 in compensation, so 

they have been renting cheap apartments in Sochi. Nevertheless, Toromonyan still 

returns to the ruins of her old home every day to feed her family’s dogs and cats that 

are still there (Loiko 2014). 

Photo 3.  Nina Toromonyan crying in the remains of her home 

> Source: Loiko, 2014

Similarly, when Zilberg found out that her two apartments in central Sochi were 

somehow in the way of the Olympics, she made the mistake of thinking she could 

challenge the ruling. Although the apartments were built in 2010 and were home to SEM 2015 

> 211

more than two-dozen families, officials claimed that they violated the building code. 

When the police and demolition teams arrived, they threw as much furniture as 

they could out into the pouring rain without even waiting for the conclusion of the 

appeal period. Moreover, when Zilberg met with the judge, he confessed to her that 

he would have been ‘rolled into concrete and asphalt’ if he had ruled in her favour. 

Zilberg later discovered that documents used against her in court were falsified, and 

neither she nor her tenants ever received compensation. Moreover, Zilberg was fined 

$100,000 per house for demolition, but she refused to pay (Loiko 2014). 

The third example involves Sergei Khlistov, who learned on September 14, 2012 

that his home of 16 years in the Adler region of Sochi would be demolished for the 

construction of Olympic infrastructure. Furthermore, the Sochi administration sued 

the family on claims that the land and home were illegally used and refused to recog -

nise the evidence proving otherwise, even though the regional prosecutor’s office 

did not agree. Because the court repeatedly failed to inform Khlistov about his hear -

ings, he went back and forth with appeals for about a year until the court finally 

decided to move forward with the demolition. As a result, Khlistov and his wife, 

daughter, son-in-law and two grandchildren were evicted from the house and forced 

to watch as it was demolished. The family did not receive any compensation whatso -

ever (Human Rights Watch 2012). 

Although these stories hold true for approximately 2,000 families, not everyone 

is displeased with their forced evictions. In fact, some consider their situation to have 

improved thanks to the Olympics. The final example introduces Viktor Altunyan, an 

employee in the Sochi department of culture, who was forced out of his small house 

that he built himself and had lived in for fifteen years. However, he claims that the 

new village to which he moved with his mother, wife and young child was more than 

twice the size of his old house and better in terms of location, utilities, electricity 

and water (Golubkova and Akin 2012). According to Altunyan, “The president’s words 

came true for me…It’s only positive” (Golubkova and Akin 2012). 

2.1.2. Government housing 

The next section will examine in greater detail the villages provided by the govern -

ment in greater detail in order to assess how fair they really are. 

Evidently, the Russian government defends its actions on the grounds that the 

residents subjected to forced evictions were offered either fair compensation or 

appropriate housing (West 2014). However, according to the article by Angus West 

(2014), “HRW also found that those who did receive new houses, in some instances, 

were relocated to buildings that lacked proper heating and had structural problems.” 

As a result, one might begin to wonder which reality is true: the reality for Altunyan, 

who could not be more pleased with his new housing, or the reality observed by 

HRW, in which living conditions in the new buildings were/are simply insufficient. 

In all probability both realities exist. 

While this is good news for those who are truly content with the outcome of these 

forced displacements, we must now turn our attention towards the other reality. 

According to Nils Bøhmer (2015), managing director and nuclear scientist at the Bellona 

Foundation, squatters currently occupy the majority of the new houses that were built 

for the displaced Sochi locals. For example, the villa community in Veseloye-Psou in the 

Adler district is made up of 79 houses, yet only 20 are occupied. The houses have never 

been guarded since construction work was finished in 2011, so they have been regularly 

plundered. Furthermore, the administration continues to claim that there is no vacant 

housing in the city (English Russia 2015). Above are a series of images from these ‘new,’ 

‘non-vacant’ houses. One can only assume that the government did not intend for such 

conditions to befall these homes when they were originally built. However, as Bøhmer 

(2015) suggests, the reality for many evicted locals is to either accept living in an unse -

cure, looted area, as the photos portray, or to move somewhere else. SEM 2015 

> 212
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

When the Savelyev family, comprising Alexey and his wife Natalya, their two chil -

dren and his mother Lyudmila, were evicted from their home due to construction on 

the new highway, they were denied adequate compensation. For the family of five, 

they were offered a temporary two-bedroom apartment with a shared kitchen. As 

compensation, they accepted a plot of land where they planned to eventually build 

another house. However, although Alexey owns a construction firm and has built 

a handful of schools in Sochi, officials refused to provide the family with a plot in 

Sochi. Even after 72 court appearances in the past four years, the family still does not 

know where they will be living in the future (West 2014). 

Photos 4-7.  Villa Community in Veseloye-Psou 

> Source: English Russia, 2015

Another facet of this situation is the question of priority. In Russia, welfare bene -

fits like monetary payments and land first go to those in the government, followed 

by the military and families with at least three children. After losing their home and 

their land, Alexey and Natalya were told by the mayor that if they had wanted to be 

given land, they should have had a third child (West 2014). Furthermore, according to 

Natalya, “We wanted to take our children to the mayor, but he told us, ‘don’t bother, 

it leaves me cold. Your children leave me cold’” (West 2014). Unfortunately, no matter 

how many similar stories arise, the evicted families in Sochi have not seen, and most 

likely will not see, their situation improve, especially not thanks to the government. 

2.2. Trapped Population 

Although HRW has suggested that around 2,000 families were displaced, it is uncer -

tain whether this approximation only takes into account the families that were SEM 2015 

> 213

directly evicted by the government or if it includes all displacements, including those 

that occurred indirectly, such as from environmental damage. Nonetheless, what we 

know for certain is that this number most likely does not include families whose 

living conditions were negatively impacted by the Games, or even destroyed, yet 

have nowhere else to go. This group can be referred to as ‘trapped’ individuals or 

families. 

2.2.1. Runaway Homes 

The following section will examine the cases of families that became trapped as 

a result of environmental disruptions and damages caused by preparation for the 

Olympics. Many of the following cases will demonstrate why the trapped popula -

tion would have preferred forced evictions to the helpless conditions in which they 

have found themselves.Due to the economic situation of the Sochi locals, unless the 

government had offered compensation or other housing, moving was not an option 

for those whose living conditions deteriorated as a result of the changes inflicted 

on the environment. As discussed above, environmental degradation from prepara -

tion for the Olympics includes biodiversity loss, deforestation, exogenous geological 

processes and pollution. For the Abzhan family, such forms of degradation became 

their reality when their home started to fall apart due to a landslide that was trig -

gered by illegal dumping on a slope above their street (see Figure 12 below). Addition -

ally, although the family was entitled to compensation through a court ruling, the 

compensation never arrived (Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty 2014). According to 

Abzhan, “There should be some future ahead, but the fact is we – local residents who 

were born here and grew up here – have effectively been left homeless” (Radio Free 

Europe Radio Liberty 2014). 

Next door to Abzhan lives an 85-year old woman named Polina Kalayzhan, whose 

home is slowly sliding down a hill. Although she shares her home with her 89-year 

old husband and 8 other relatives, Kalayzhan has been unable to obtain the compen -

sation she has been promised. Despite writing to the President, Prime Minister and 

administration, all decisions remain in the hands of local authorities, a state of affairs 

that has left her feeling completely powerless (Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty 2014). 

2.2.2. The Highway that Cost More than the Entire Vancouver Winter Olympics 

Another major cause of ecological degradation has been the famous $9 billion, 

50-kilometer combined railroad and highway, cited above due to the fact that it 

was the cause of many forced evictions. In addition, construction work around 

the highway has created a thick cement dust that has reached the nearby village of 

Akhshtyr. As a result, farming has been disturbed to such an extent that residents have 

been unable to sell their home-grown persimmons (Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty 

2014). According to HRW (2015), “Many resettled residents lost a portion of their live -

lihoods because they depended on agriculture or income from seasonal rentals in 

their seaside homes.” Consequently, a similar phenomenon can be observed – the 

only difference being that, in the village of Akhshtyr, this phenomenon is happening 

among trapped, rather than resettled, residents. 

Furthermore, locals in the Akhshtyr village have lost access to public transporta -

tion to the Adler district of Sochi because authorities failed on their promise to build 

an access road to the new, expensive highway (Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty 2014). 

As stated by Alec Luhn (2014), “…Russian Railways had…built only a twisting footpath 

surrounded by barbed-wire fences and a crosswalk that Human Rights Watch has 

called unsafe.” Without a road out of the city, residents have become burdened with 

many concerns. For example, 65- year old Viktor Kolenin worries about how he will 

get to the hospital if need be, given that he was disabled from the Chernobyl nuclear 

disaster and now has a stain on his lungs from the construction dust. Kolenin is 

especially angered by the fact that his village, which used to be the cleanest in the SEM 2015 

> 214
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

Adler region, has been turned into a garbage dump. Additionally, 53-year old Yelena 

Runovich worries about how she will support her family since she had to quit her 

job in order to walk her young daughter through construction sites and across two 

highways simply to get home from school (Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty 2014). 

Photo 8.  Dmitry Abzhan’s Family Home 

> Source: Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, 2014

Photo 9.  Mr. and Mrs. Kalayzhan 

> Source: Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, 2014

Finally, the highway construction has caused extended electricity cuts within 

the regions of Sochi and interrupted the water supply to many villages. Concerning 

the electricity shortages, one resident wrote in her blog that the moon in Sochi has 

taken on a new significance ever since it became the main source of light in many 

villages. Residents claim that, for two months, local authorities have turned off elec -

tricity for twelve hours or more – sometimes even for two days (Radio Free Europe 

Radio Liberty 2014). In terms of water supply, as discussed above, illegal dumping and 

unsustainable construction have caused serious damage to aquifers, and this study 

will now examine how this damage has affected Sochi locals. SEM 2015 

> 215

Since most of the noticeable damage to wells and water supplies has been reported 

in the village of Akhshtyr, this village will serve as the point of reference to assess 

the situation more closely. In 2009, it was reported that Akhshtyr had already been 

without water for a year due to Olympics-related construction. As a result, the village 

depended on five remote, public wells that ran through the village for their water 

supply. However, construction on the combined railroad and highway caused four 

out of the five wells to be completely covered, while pollution, runoff and dirt from 

traffic rendered the fifth one unsafe. For months, the local population was without 

any kind of water supply (Human Rights Watch 2009). According to Bøhmer (2015), 

since the authorities failed to settle the problems with drinking water, people had to 

buy drinking water and transport it by car. Accordingly, when the locals in Akhshtyr 

were finally able to procure a truck, each resident was limited to 200 litres per week 

(Human Rights Watch 2009). 

3. OTHER FACTORS 

The environmental damage, forced evictions and trapped populations caused by the 

Sochi Olympics have been exacerbated by political, social and economic factors. The 

next section, explore these three factors in greater detail and study the way in which 

they have impacted the case of environmental migration in Sochi. 

3.1. Political Factors 

As the previous examples have suggested, Sochi residents have been the victims 

of political corruption, a lack of transparency and outright injustice. The Russian 

government’s attitude to even the most protected, valuable parts of the environment, 

has proved just as deplorable. According to the report by the EWNC, “Under the 

pretext of realization of this ‘national project,’ lawmakers amended numerous laws 

that now allow practically any type of construction in a national park” (Gazaryan and 

Shevchenko 2014). While this statement specifically refers to the fact that the Russian 

government altered the zoning of the Sochi National Park in order to continue 

construction, it also alludes to the idea that, in the name of a ‘national project,’ laws 

do not have to be binding. Through illegal actions, such as undergoing construction 

without the legal paperwork, the government has repeatedly abused its power by 

using coercive measures to obtain cooperation. As Bøhmer points out (2015), a tech -

nical difference between a national park and a national reserve is that, in a national 

park, the government can do whatever it wants. He also suggests that the problem 

is not just that the government has relaxed controls over nature but that it is still 

doing so by cutting down natural forests to expand downhill slopes in the mountains 

(Bøhmer 2015). 

In addition, the system of compensation and forced evictions lacks transpar -

ency and is blighted by corruption. Concerning the example of Mrs Toromonyan, 

although her home was demolished after it was considered to be in the way of the 

new highway, one may wonder why her home was singled out, given that the two 

houses on either side of hers were not demolished nor even considered to be in the 

way (Loika 2014). Other non-transparencies by the local courts include their blatant 

disregard of official papers, the falsification of certain documents and the failure to 

disclose pertinent information, such as when a person’s court hearing will take place. 

The government is also guilty of unjust treatment towards its migrant workers. 

When HRW interviewed many of these migrant workers, the organisation found 

that the living situation was anything but sufficient. According to an HRW report 

(2013), “In all cases, housing and meals were provided to workers as a component of 

compensation… Often several dozen workers were living in one single-family house 

with one bathroom or outhouse.” Despite the government’s obligation under both SEM 2015 

> 216
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

national and international law to protect all workers from abuse, these obligations 

have been simply ignored (Human Rights Watch 2013). As Bøhmer (2015) points out, 

while the government has refused to make any policy changes, organisations’ scope 

for assistance is also limited in that, any attempts on their part to fix anything will 

lead to them being labelled enemies of the state. In some cases, migrant workers 

never received their wages at all. For example, when one private construction 

company was mysteriously liquidated and the man posing as general director disap -

peared, a total of 108 workers were deprived of their wages. One man so desperate 

for his wages even sewed his mouth shut in an act of protest (Radio Free Europe 

Radio Liberty 2014). 

3.2. Social Factors 

From deporting foreign migrant workers to imprisoning activists, the social situation 

in Sochi around the time of the 2014 Olympics was not especially positive. Some -

times, in addition to not being paid, foreign migrant workers were deported after 

completing their jobs, despite having legal working papers. As a result, thousands 

of migrants were detained in police stations and deported, while many others went 

into hiding or fled the country in order to avoid the risk of being caught (Radio Free 

Europe Radio Liberty 2014). In addition, the possibility of being harassed, beaten, or 

even arrested has become quite commonplace for anyone speaking out against what 

was taking place in Sochi; and activists, in particular, became targets. 

For instance, the leader of the EWNC, Andrei Rudomakha, was detained on his 

way to Sochi and prohibited from leaving the Krasnodar region because, a year 

earlier, he was quoted criticizing a judicial decision. Alexander Valov, the editor of 

a blog that features local activists, was also targeted and charged with fifty hours of 

corrective labour for allegedly planning a protest that never actually happened. The 

EWNC geologist, Yevgeny Vitishko, was accused of vandalism during a protest and 

convicted with a three-year suspended sentence (Luhn 2014). 

Photo 10.  Nadya Tolokonnikova whipped and thrown to the ground by militiamen 

> Source: Bellona, 2014

During the same protest as a result of which Vitishko was arrested, – a protest 

that exposed an illegally built mansion in the Sochi National Park – Suren Gazaryan 

became a suspect of attempted murder and was forced to flee the country in 2012 and 

seek political asylum in Estonia. Gazaryan was not only an EWNC zoologist but also 

a co-author of the EWNC environmental assessment frequently cited in this report. 

For years, Gazaryan worked tirelessly with his colleagues to expose the political SEM 2015 

> 217

corruption, environmental devastation and human rights violations by the Russian 

government. They also exposed the IOC for their neglect in overseeing environ -

mental sustainability through their “Zero Waste” policy and their neglect in taking 

action against other human-rights violations that were reported to them. In fact, as a 

result of his hard work, Gazaryan received the Goldman Environmental Foundation 

$175,000 award in 2014, which is essentially equivalent to an ‘environmental Nobel 

Prize.’ However, Gazaryan has been explicit in his desire to share the credit of his 

achievements with his colleagues at the EWNC. Furthermore, despite the sum of 

money bestowed with his award, Gazaryan’s life has not been easy post-asylum. 

Soon after the Sochi Winter Olympics officially began, Gazaryan’s colleague 

and friend, Vitishko, was arrested and imprisoned for allegedly swearing in public. 

The image above shows Nadya Tolokonnikova being whipped with horsewhips for 

performing a protest song in support of Vitishko. Consequently, Vitishko’s arrest 

came after both he and Gazaryan filed to have their suspended sentences overturned 

on the grounds that they were disproportionate punishment for spray-painting a 

construction fence during the protest. Conversely, rather than simply turning down 

the appeal, the court sentenced Vitishko to three years in a penal colony, while 

Gazaryan was not sentenced because he had not been in court that day (Bellona 

2014). Currently, Vitishko remains in jail – or in Bøhmer’s words in a ‘labour camp’ – 

with little hope of a reprieve (Bøhmer 2015). In his last interview before going to jail, 

Vitishko said the following: 

“If going to a prison colony helps show the international community, 

or at least the International Olympic Committee, that they should give the 

Olympics to countries that can actually handle them responsibly, then I have 

succeeded in sending part of the message I want to send” (Bellona 2014). 

Although it goes without saying, Gazaryan has been left feeling angry and power -

less, as are the countless others who have selflessly attempted to expose the injustices 

that have transpired. 

Photo 11.  Vitishko and Gazaryan “in better times” 

> Source: Bellona, 2014

3.3. Economic Factors 

The last section of this report will evaluate the economic factors that have affected 

the situation in Sochi, starting with the the current economic situation, particu -

larly in terms of how the $51 billion was allocated in preparation for the Olympic 

Games. Despite possible alternative motives by the government, many Russians were SEM 2015 

> 218
> EUROPE
> MOLLY O’HARA
> 2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI:
> AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER

optimistic that the Olympics would have a positive effect on the country’s economy 

(AP NORC 2015). Furthermore, these opinions were supported by the Russian Presi -

dent, himself, when he made a promise in 2007 to turn Sochi into a ‘world-class 

resort’ for a ‘new Russia’ and the rest of the world. Rather than a mere sporting event, 

President Putin considered the Olympics as a way to rejuvenate the entire Caucasus 

region (Yaffa 2014). 

Yet, many became suspicious as they scrutinised the overall budget in greater 

detail. Anti-corruption blogger and opposition politician, Alexei Navalny, asserted 

that there was a total cost over-run of 150-250%. He also suggested that the level of 

spending was ‘all the more extraordinary,’ given that some of the hotels have not 

yet been finished (The Economist 2014). Another report claims that building the new 

Olympic Stadium in Sochi would cost $19,000 per seated fan, whereas the average 

cost in previous games was only $6,000 (Koba 2013). In support of these assertions, 

Bøhmer (2015) further criticises the government for destroying valuable wetlands in 

order to build ‘economy-boosting hotels,’ all of which are currently empty except for 

one, which only welcomes around 40-50 guests at a time. Moreover, the $9 billion 

combined railroad and highway – that led to habitat destruction, biodiversity loss, 

depletion of water sources and the eviction from and demolition of countless homes 

– is reportedly used only once a day (Bøhmer 2015). 

Concerning the current economic situation in Sochi, it is important to under -

stand that the city was not extremely affluent in the first place, and many Sochi 

locals made their living from farming. Therefore, losing access to their land not only 

left many families homeless, but it also left them jobless. Since residents have not 

received any support from the government, some have no choice but to restore to 

creative means in order to make a living and have even resorted to making moon -

shine (Bøhmer 2015). According to Vasilyeva (2015), the government has also begun 

imposing more taxes on residents now that the oligarchs (i.e. rich business men with 

political influence) want their money back. Subsequently, by taking into account the 

possible tax increases with a possible lack of transportation, drinking water, elec -

tricity, jobs and homes, it is safe to conclude that the economic situation in Sochi is 

declining, with little hope for improvement in the future. 

4. CONCLUSION 

The present case study has closely examined the kind of environmental destruc -

tion, social injustices and environmental migration that can result from a manmade 

event. The first section of this report detailed the background of the Sochi Winter 

Olympics, including the process of electing Sochi and a discussion of the environ -

mental impacts in preparation for the event. The second section analysed the forced 

displacement that took place from evictions imposed by the government, as well 

as the population that remained trapped and unable to relocate. The third section 

assessed the various responses from the government, organizations and locals 

to more thoroughly tackle issues related to political, social and economic factors. 

Finally, the conclusion provides a brief overview of the current situation in Sochi 

and suggests how similar issues should be dealt with in upcoming mega-events. 

In February 2014, HRW submitted a series of suggestions for policy changes 

and reforms to the IOC. These proposals suggested that the IOC take the neces -

sary steps to strengthen the Olympic Host City Bid process, ensure that future host 

city contracts with governments include specific human rights pledges and amend 

Principle 6 of the Olympic Charter that prohibits discrimination so as to include 

sexual orientation and gender identity (Human Rights Watch 2014). Subsequently, in 

another document submitted to the IOC in April 2014, HRW called for more detailed 

policy changes. For example, the following human rights benchmarks should be SEM 2015 

> 219

included in host city contracts: media freedom, labour rights, freedom of expres -

sion and association, liberty and security and non-discrimination. As stated more 

explicitly under the liberty and security benchmark, the IOC should ‘guarantee that 

there will be no unlawful forced evictions of host city residents’ and ‘guarantee that 

there will be no arbitrary detentions and/or forcible removal from the host city of 

any population groups or individuals deemed undesirable on various grounds by the 

authorities’ (Human Rights Watch 2014). 

Consequently, the IOC has since introduced a specific anti-discrimination clause 

to the host city contract (Gibson 2014). However, the IOC has not been as successful 

in terms of overseeing the cleanup in Sochi. According to Bøhmer (2015), following 

meetings between the local organising committees and the IOC to discuss the issues 

remaining and organise a cleanup, 70 illegal dumpsites have been uncovered. Yet, 

because the local authorities have been inactive and there has been no follow-up 

by the IOC, the dumpsites still remain. Additionally, Bøhmer (2015) is critical of 

the impact that the upcoming 2018 World Cup will have in Russia, stating that the 

country already has a ghost stadium from the Olympics, and is now building another 

one for the World Cup. 

While the host city changes every four years the legacy of the Olympics will 

endure. According to Popelarova and Janiga (2008), “In some way all Olympics profit. 

Unfortunately the profit is often not felt by the residents in the area the Olympics 

touched; it is felt only by a narrow circle of interested corporations.” Although there 

is still much work to be done in Sochi, it is crucial that those who are responsible for 

overseeing such mega-events take note of the loopholes and mistakes. Concerning 

the environmental degradation, human-rights violations and environmental migra -

tion documented by this report, it would not be naïve to assume that such injustices 

may be repeated in the future unless serious, concerted action is taken to prevent 

them. Therefore, it is crucial that everyone, from sports fans to non-profit organ -

izations to private businesses, media and governments, is not just aware of what 

happened in Sochi but is dedicated to creating a more environmentally compatible 

and beneficial experience. 

Photo 12.  “The Rosa Khutor resort may be finished, but other venues slog toward 

completion.” 

> Source: Vanity Fair, 2014

SEM 2015 

220 

EUROPE 

MOLLY O’HARA 

2014 WINTER OLYMPICS IN SOCHI: 

AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND HUMAN-RIGHTS DISASTER 

# REFERENCES 

– ABC, 2015, http://www.abc.net.au/ 

news/2014-01-22/venues-for-the-2014-

sochi-winter-olympics-map/5213616 

(consulted on 9 May 2015). 

– AP NORC. 2015.  Public Opinion in 

Russia: Attitudes Toward Hosting The 

2014 Olympics And 2018 World Cup .

The Associated Press-NORC Center 

for Public Affairs Research. Retrieved 

from: http://www.apnorc.org/PDFs/ 

Russia%20Poll/Olympics%20%20 

World%20Cup%20Brief%20_Draft%20 

to%20DTP_FINAL.pdf 

– Bellona, 2014, http://bellona.org/ 

news/russian-human-rights-

issues/2014-04-sochi-olympic-

protestor-gazaryan-wins-

environmental-nobel-ambivalent-

impact (consulted on 10 May 2015). 

– Business Insider, 2013, http://www. 

businessinsider.com/sochi-olympics-

cost-russia-51-billion-2013-2?IR=T 

(consulted in 9 May 2015). 

– English Russia, 2015, http:// 

englishrussia.com/2015/04/15/a-

new-villa-community-in-sochi-gets-

plundered/ (consulted on 10 May 

2015). 

– Gazaryan, S. and Shevchenko, D. 2014. 

Sochi-2014: independent environmental 

report . Environmental Watch on 

North Caucasus. 

– Gibson, Owen. 2014.  Olympic anti-

discrimination clause introduced after 

Sochi gay rights row . The Guardian. 

Retrieved from: http://www. 

theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/25/ 

olympic-anti-discrimination-clause-

sochi-gay-rights-row. 

– Golubkova, Katya and Akin, Melissa. 

2012.  Sochi Olympics 2014: Construction 

and Forced Evictions Mark Olympic 

Showcase in Russia . The World 

Post. Retrieved from: http://www. 

huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/04/sochi-

olympics-2014_n_2070784.html. 

– Human Rights Watch, 2009, http:// 

www.hrw.org/news/2009/10/01/ 

letter-international-olympic-

committee-human-rights-concerns-

related-sochi-games (consulted on 10 

May 2015). 

– Human Rights Watch, 2012, http:// 

www.hrw.org/news/2012/09/19/ 

russia-forced-eviction-tramples-

olympic-ideals (consulted on 9 May 

2015). 

– Human Rights Watch, 2013, 

https://www.hrw.org/print/ 

reports/2013/02/06/race-bottom 

(consulted on 10 May 2015). 

– Human Rights Watch, 2014, https:// 

www.hrw.org/news/2014/02/21/ 

russia-sochi-highlights-need-olympic-

reforms (consulted on 11 May 2015). 

– Human Rights Watch, 2014, https:// 

www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/ 

related_material/HRW-submission-

to-Olympic-Agenda%202020-Apr-2014. 

pdf (consulted on 11 May 2015). 

– Human Rights Watch, 2015, https:// 

www.hrw.org/russias-olympian-

abuses (consulted on 9 May 2015). 

– International Office for Migration, 

http://www.iom.int/cms/envmig 

(consulted on 22 April 2015). 

– Interview with Nils Bøhmer, Bellona 

Managing Director/Nuclear Scientist, 

conducted on 24 April 2015 over 

Skype. 

– Koba, Mark. 2013,  Olympics: Going for 

the gold, spending in the red . CNBC. 

Retrieved from: http://www.cnbc. 

com/id/101163701. 

– Loiko, Sergei. 2014.  Sochi Olympic 

Winter Games at root of resident’s 

housing woes . Los Angeles Times. 

Retrieved from: http://articles.latimes. 

com/2014/feb/06/world/la-fg-sochi-

dark-side-20140207. 

– Luhn, Alec. 2014.  The Hidden 

Environmental and Human Costs 

of the Sochi Olympics . The Nation. 

Retrieved from: http://www. 

thenation.com/article/178051/hidden-

environmental-and-human-costs-

sochi-olympics?page=0,1. 

– Official Website of the Olympic 

Movement, 2015, http://www.olympic. 

org/content/the-ioc/bidding-for-the-

games/past-bid-processes/2014-host-

city-election/ (consulted on 8 May 

2015). 

– Official Website of the Olympic 

Movement, 2015, http://www.olympic. 

org/sochi-2014-winter-olympics 

(consulted on 9 May 2015). 

– Official Website of the Olympic 

Movement, 2015, http://www.olympic. 

org/sport-environment-commission 

(consulted on 8 May 2015). 

– Popelarova, S. and Janiga, M. 2008. 

Winter Olympic Games as environmental 

problem . Oecologia Montana. 

Retrieved from: http://www.vuvb. 

uniza.sk/ojs2/index.php/OM/article/ 

viewFile/406/328. 

– Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty, 

2014, http://www.rferl.org/ 

contentinfographics/sochi-outside-

the-arena-olympics-russia/25229471. 

html (consulted on 9 May 2015). 

– The Economist, 2014, http://www. 

economist.com/blogs/economist-

explains/2014/02/economist-

explains-2 (consulted 8 May 2015). 

– Vanity Fair, 2014, http://www. 

vanityfair.com/news/politics/2014/02/ 

sochi-olympics-russia-corruption 

(consulted 9 May 2015). 

– Vasilyeva, Nataliya. 2015.  Sochi’s costly 

legacy: A year after Olympics, Russian 

oligarchs unload toxic assets on state 

as taxpayers pick up the bill . National 

Post. Retrieved from: http://news. 

nationalpost.com/sports/olympics/ 

sochis-costly-legacy-a-year-after-

olympics-russian-oligarchs-unload-

toxic-assets-on-state-as-russian-

taxpayers-pick-up-the-bill. 

– West, Angus. 2014.  Sochi residents 

‘paved over’ by Olympic construction 

remain displaced and unpaid . Global 

Post. Retrieved from: http:// 

www.globalpost.com/dispatches/ 

globalpost-blogs/rights/Olympics-

leaves-sochi-residents-displaced-and-

unpaid-part-1. 

– Yaffa, Joshua. 2014.  The Waste 

and Corruption of Vladimir Putin’s 

2014 Winter Olympics . Bloomberg 

Business. Retrieved from: http:// 

www.bloomberg.com/bw/ 

articles/2014-01-02/the-2014-winter-

olympics-in-sochi-cost-51-billion#p1. SEM 2015 

221 

# Biogra 

# phies SEM 2015 

> 222

FRANÇOIS GEMENNE 

François Gemenne 

is the executive 

director of the 

interdisciplinary 

research programme 

Politics of the Earth 

at Sciences Po 

(Médialab) in Paris. 

A specialist of environmental geopoli -

tics and migration dynamics, he is also a 

FNRS senior research associate at the 

University of Liège and at the University 

of Versailles ( CEARC ). He also lectures 

on environmental and migration 

policies in various universities, 

including Sciences Po and the  Free 

University of Brussels .

He has been involved in a large number 

of international research projects on 

these issues, including  EACH-FOR ,

HELIX  and  MECLEP , for which he is 

the global research coordinator. He also 

coordinated the  DEVAST  project, one 

of the first international projects to 

examine the social and political conse -

quences of the Fukushima disaster. In 

2015, he was recipient of a  Fulbright 

scholarship  to pursue research at 

Princeton University .

He holds a joint doctorate in political 

science from Sciences Po Paris and the 

University of Liège (Belgium). He also 

holds a Master in Development, Envi -

ronment and Societies from the Univer -

sity of Louvain, as well as a Master of 

Research in Political Science from the 

London School of Economics. 

DINA IONESCO 

Dina Ionesco is the 

Head of the Migra -

tion, Environment 

and Climate Change 

(MECC) Division at 

the International 

Organization for 

Migration (IOM). In 

this capacity she develops and oversees 

the institutional policies, programmes 

and publications on migration, environ -

ment and climate change and coordi -

nates IOM’s contributions to policy 

processes, such as the climate change 

negotiations. Dina joined IOM in 2004 

taking up different responsibilities, 

dealing with migration policies, 

research, development and diasporas. 

Since 2011 she has developed IOM’s 

environmental migration engagement 

and has written and overseen numerous 

articles and publications on this topic. 

Prior to joining IOM, Dina worked with 

the OECD in Paris from 1998 to 2004 

as an Administrator on local develop -

ment, job creation, social capital and 

entrepreneurship. Additionally, she 

has worked a university assistant, in an 

international non-governmental human 

rights organization, as an independent 

consultant and as a coach writer, in the 

UK, Switzerland and Denmark. 

CAROLINE ZICKGRAF 

Dr. Caroline 

Zickgraf is FNRS 

Postdoctoral 

Research Fellow at 

the University of 

Liège in Belgium 

and a lecturer at 

Sciences Po Paris in 

environment and migration. Her 

research focuses on the migratory 

impacts of environmental degradation 

and climate change, transnationalism, 

and immobility. 

Since 2013, Dr. Zickgraf has worked 

on the EU FP7 project ‘HELIX’(High-

End cLimate Impacts and eXtremes), 

for which she conducted fieldwork on 

climate-related migration in Northern 

Senegal. She has also consulted for the 

World Bank, the Nansen Initative and 

the International Center for Migra -

tion Policy Development (ICMPD) on 

the links between climate change and 

migration in West Africa. 

In 2015, she was awarded the post of 

Postdoctoral fellow with the National 

Fund for Scientific Research. In this 

position, Dr. Zickgraf is conducting 

the project ‘IMMOBILE’ (Immobility 

and the Environment), which analyzes 

populations ‘trapped’ or who choose to 

stay in areas affected by environmental 

> Editors SEM 2015
> 223

changes and their relationships with 

those who go. For this project, she is 

conducting case studies in Senegal, 

Japan and Vietnam. 

Beginning in 2016, she leads the Univer -

sity of Liège in their partnership 

with Sciences Po-Paris and University 

of Economics Bratislava within the 

Horizon 2020 project ‘EDGE’ (Environ -

mental Diplomacy and Geopolitics). 

Dr. Zickgraf holds a doctorate in 

political and social sciences from the 

University of Liège as well as degrees 

from Leiden University (MPhil) in the 

Netherlands and Michigan State Univer -

sity (BA) in the United States. 

CEMENT MÉTIVIER 

Clément Métivier is 

a graduate from 

Sciences Po Paris, 

where he completed 

a Master degree in 

International Affairs 

and Environmental 

Policy. He also 

studied at the University of California, 

Los Angeles (UCLA), and worked in the 

United States in order to promote 

French-American cooperation on 

environmental issues. In 2015, he is 

involved in the youth-led think and do 

tank CliMates, where he is the 

co-director of the COP in MyCity 

project, an international initiative 

aiming at raising awareness about 

climate change issues among youth and 

encouraging local environmental 

actions. In the next few years, Clement 

is planning on pursuing a career in the 

environmental sector. More specifically, 

he would like to work on the establish -

ment and promotion of successful 

environmental policies. He is particu -

larly willing to create and maintain 

connections among key stakeholders, 

including civil society, NGOs, busi -

nesses, local governments, states, and 

international organizations, in order to 

encourage the development of sustain -

able and decarbonized societies. 

PIERRE WALTER 

Pierre Walter is 

pursuing a Dual 

Master’s Degree in 

Environmental 

Science and Policy at 

the Paris School of 

International Affairs 

(PSIA / Sciences Po) 

and at the Université Pierre et Marie 

Curie (UPMC). Passionate about 

environmental and poverty reduction 

issues, Pierre is currently completing a 

six-month internship at the Agence 

Française de Développement (AFD, 

France’s bilateral development bank), 

where he has worked primarily on the 

assessment, management and moni -

toring of the environmental and social 

impacts of projects financed by AFD. As 

a student, he has been engaged in a wide 

range of activities, including volun -

teering for a sustainable farming project 

in Thailand. Upon graduation Pierre 

wishes to gain more work experience in 

the field of environment and develop -

ment in France or abroad. 

CLOTHILDE TRONQUET 

Clothilde Tronquet 

works at the 

Institute for Climate 

Economics (I4CE) on 

the contribution of 

forest and agricul -

ture to climate 

change and on the 

policy and economic instruments related 

to mitigation and adaptation. Her 

expertise areas also include international 

climate negotiations, policy evaluation 

and energy policies. Before joining I4CE, 

she worked in an agribusiness company, 

at the French Embassy in Madrid and for 

the non-profit sector in Brazil. She is 

particularly interested in agricultural and 

forestry systems; issues related to 

sustainable consumption and environ -

mental health. She aspires to new 

international experiences as a project 

manager. Clothilde holds an Environ -

mental Policy Master of the Paris School 

of International Affairs of Sciences Po. 

> Contributors SEM 2015
> 224
> BIOGRAPHIES

CRISTINA ALVAREZ-QUINONES 

After 17 years of 

working in the stock 

markets, Cristina 

decided to change 

her professional 

career to work in 

the International 

Development field. 

In her opinion, the financial crisis that 

started in 2008, whose consequences are 

still taking place worldwide, has 

destroyed a tremendous amount of 

wealth and human values. This altered 

her personal and professional interests, 

now focused on creating value, not for 

investors, but for the needy. Before 

enrolling in Sciences Po’s Master in 

Development Practice, a cross-discipli -

nary program addressing the challenges 

of sustainable development, Cristina 

spent four months in Nepal, volun -

teering for several NGO’s concerned 

with orphan children and education. 

Extremely sensible to the difficulties 

that developing countries have to access 

the financial markets, she is now 

leveraging on her financial experience 

to serve these. She has recently started 

to work for a micro-finance institution 

to analyze and manage projects that will 

bring renewal energy solutions to 

developing countries. 

STEPHANIE LYONS. 

Before graduating 

with a Master’s 

degree in Develop -

ment Practice 

(Summa Cum Laude, 

PSIA/Sciences Po), 

Stephanie Lyons 

worked as an analyst 

and policy adviser on climate change 

and sustainable development issues. She 

spent five years with the Australian 

Government, working primarily on 

climate, environment and water policy 

reforms in the Prime Minister’s depart -

ment and the Department of Climate 

Change. She went on to work in the 

NGO sector in Vietnam, where she 

managed and advised on projects aimed 

at building urban communities’ resil -

ience to the impacts of climate change. 

Stephanie also holds a bachelor’s degree 

in communication and received the 

University of Canberra Medal (2008) for 

her First Class Honors thesis analyzing 

media discourses on climate change. 

She is currently working as a consultant 

on climate and energy projects based in 

Southeast Asia and Europe. 

PIA VAN ACKERN 

Pia van Ackern is a 

Dual Degree 

Master’s student in 

International Public 

Management/ 

Political Science at 

the Paris School of 

International Affairs 

(PSIA/Sciences Po) and the Otto Suhr 

Institute of Political Science (Freie 

Universität Berlin), where she is 

specializing in migration, the relation -

ship between natural resources and 

conflict as well as international public 

policy-making. She holds a Bachelor’s 

degree in Social Sciences from Heinrich 

Heine University in Düsseldorf 

(Germany), with a special focus on 

empirical research methods. Pia has 

interned at the German Federal Ministry 

for Economic Cooperation and Devel -

opment in the division for refugees and 

migration, at the German Embassy in 

Bogotá (Colombia), where she has 

worked primarily on human rights and 

peacebuilding, and at an environmental 

advocacy organization in Australia, 

where she has been engaged in 

campaigning and communications. In 

the future, she hopes to further 

enhance her academic and professional 

experiences in the fields of migration, 

environment and diplomacy and wishes 

to commit herself to issues of sustain -

ability and global justice. 

> Contributors SEM 2015
> 225

SHUYU JIANG 

Shuyu JIANG is a 

student from Peking 

University-Sciences 

Po Dual Master’s 

Degree in Interna -

tional Relations. I 

studied interna -

tional development 

in Sciences Po with the concentration 

on China and environment. I am 

interested in studies concerning 

vulnerable groups in response to global 

challenges, particularly in developing 

countries. To fulfil my pursuit, I have 

conducted field research and voluntary 

work in western part of China, Vietnam 

and Cambodia. I also devoted to 

internships in World Economic Forum 

and other international organizations. 

In this research, I examine the resettle -

ment after the Ludian Earthquake, 

through which I further explore the 

environment migration as a positive and 

proactive way to environmental risks 

reduction, as well as climate change 

mitigation. 

JASON RIZZO 

Before obtaining a 

Master’s degree in 

Development 

Practice from the 

Paris School of 

International Affairs 

(PSIA/Sciences Po), 

worked for eight 

years as a senior recording engineer and 

multimedia journalist in the United 

States, producing content for broadcast 

radio, television, feature films, and 

online news outlets. He attained a 

Bachelor’s degree in Audio Arts and 

Acoustics from Columbia College 

Chicago, where he later held the 

position of Adjunct Faculty in Audio for 

Visual Media studies. In applying his 

skillset to the development field, he first 

volunteered for an NGO in Kenya to 

assist in the establishment of their 

public relations and social media 

strategy. After recently completing a 

communications post with the Center 

for Global Health at Institut Pasteur in 

Paris, he is most interested in contin -

uing to research, implement, and 

promote sustainable development 

projects that interlink issues relating to 

global health, food security, and refugee 

rights. He can currently be found 

surveying the streets of Paris, bag of 

potato chips in hand, in search of good 

jazz and a glass of Bordeaux. 

ELISE HAUMONT 

Elise Haumont 

graduated from 

Sciences Po Paris in 

June 2015, with a 

Master in Interna -

tional Public 

Management. She 

specialized in 

European and migration studies. 

Previously, she spent four months as an 

intern for the Office for Familial 

Immigration in the French Ministry of 

Interior where she worked on jurispru -

dence. She also worked as a junior 

researcher at the French Court for the 

Right of Asylum where she wrote a 

report on the extreme left in Turkey. In 

2012-2013, Elise lived in Istanbul for ten 

months. She studied political science 

and international relations at Bogaziçi 

University as an Erasmus student. Elise 

is currently a volunteer teacher in 

French as a foreign language to adult 

migrants. She is currently working as a 

junior project manager at Le Comptoir 

de l’Innovation, a company which 

promotes supports and finances the 

development of social enterprises. Elise 

is Humanity in Action fellow and 

remains very interested by integration 

and multiculturalism issues. 

> Contributors BIOGRAPHIES

LINH NGUYEN 

Linh Nguyen is a 

young Vietnamese 

who has educational 

background in 

Economics and 

Environmental 

Policy. She is 

interested in finding 

innovative solutions to protect the 

environment while improving living 

standard and social equality. 

Her study and work have been largely 

related to renewable energy and poverty 

reduction in developing countries. 

Before Sciences Po, she developed finan -

cial improvement strategy for ONergy, 

a social enterprise which provides 

affordable and renewable energy 

to the rural areas in Eastern India. 

Recently, she has been responsible for 

technological cooperation in “Energy 

Support Programme”, GIZ Vietnam to 

help scale-up wind power sector in the 

country. Her “next big plan” is to work 

in adaptation, with the focus on the 

poorest in developing countries such 

as Vietnam, Pakistan and Philippines, 

as they are the most vulnerable group 

to the climate change. She enjoys living 

in different countries to meet people 

from all walks of life and to learn about 

others cultures. 

ADRIANA CRUZ FELIX 

Adriana Cruz Felix is 

master student in 

Environmental 

Policy with concen -

tration in Global 

Economic Policy at 

Sciences Po Paris 

class 2016. As part of 

her master program she is currently 

making an internship at the Green 

Climate Fund (GCF) based in South 

Korea, at the Country Programming 

Division, developing the strategy to 

strengthen stakeholders’ engagement 

with the GCF. Before attending Sciences 

Po, she was the Partnerships Coordi -

nator at an international conservation 

NGO called Rare, where she supported 

the research and development of 

natural resources co-management 

projects in different countries in Latin 

America, which had a strong focus in 

creating community empowerment for 

the responsible management of 

fisheries and watersheds. Adriana plans 

to work in the development of projects 

focused on improving the capacity of 

the population to adapt and mitigate 

climate change impact, particularly 

interested in working in the develop -

ment of bottom-up initiatives. She is 

Mexican and has a BA in International 

Relations. 

MOLLY O’HARA 

Molly O’Hara 

recently graduated 

from the Paris 

School of Interna -

tional Affairs (PSIA/ 

Sciences Po) with a 

master’s degree in 

Environmental 

Policy, specializing in International 

Energy and European Studies. She began 

her graduate program specifically 

interested in how to harness the 

innovation and capacity of the private 

sector in order to solve global sustain -

ability problems. While working at a 

private insulation company, she 

developed research skills pertaining to 

the public’s perception of a potentially 

environmentally hazardous flame 

retardant, the energy efficiency among 

residential building codes across the 

USA and the extent to which home 

builders prioritize and market energy 

efficiency features. In the private sector, 

Molly will continue seeking ways to 

deconstruct various environmental 

misconceptions, such as the widespread 

belief that going green means dimin -

ishing profits. Constructing more 

effective bottom-up solutions, Molly 

hopes to begin her career in a private 

company or consulting firm, where she 

believes the most progress can be 

achieved. 

> Contributors
> SEM 2015
> 226

OLIVA KAVISHE 

Oliva Kavishe 

worked as an Intern 

for the Migration, 

Environment and 

Climate Change 

(MECC) team for a 

four months 

part-time Internship 

while attending the study abroad 

programme at Webster University 

pursuing her Bachelors in International 

Relations. Oliva studies International 

Affairs, International Economic 

Integration and Diplomatic Affairs 

EMILY SKOVRAN 

Emily Skovran 

worked as an Intern 

with the Migration, 

Environment and 

Climate Change 

(MECC) team 

assisting with 

research and 

analytical work on migration and policy 

issues, in addition to editing and 

revising IOM MECC publications. 

Emily is in the process of earning a 

Bachelor’s degree in Economics and 

Global Health from the University of 

Wisconsin-Madison. 

DARIA MOKHNACHEVA 

Daria Mokhnacheva 

is a thematic 

specialist at the 

Migration, Environ -

ment and Climate 

Change Division at 

IOM, where she 

focuses on the 

impacts of disasters and environmental 

change on societies, migration and 

development, and where she provides 

support to the elaboration of relevant 

programmes and projects. 

> Editorial Team International Organization for Migration (IOM)

# The State of 

# Environmental 

# Migration 2015 

## A Review of 2014 

## Edited by 

## François Gemenne 

## Caroline Zickgraf 

## Dina Ionesco 

With the support of
