Title: Study Details | NCT04968691 | Telerehabilitation in Individuals With Unilateral Transtibial Amputation | ClinicalTrials.gov

URL Source: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04968691

Published Time: Tue, 30 Sep 2025 14:49:41 GMT

Markdown Content:
Study Details | NCT04968691 | Telerehabilitation in Individuals With Unilateral Transtibial Amputation | ClinicalTrials.gov

===============

Hide glossary
#### Glossary

Study record managers: refer to the Data Element Definitions if submitting registration or results information.

Search for terms

*   Accepts healthy volunteers A type of eligibility criteria that indicates whether people who do not have the condition/disease being studied can participate in that clinical study. 
*   Active comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives an intervention/treatment considered to be effective (or active) by health care providers. 
*   Adverse event An unfavorable change in the health of a participant, including abnormal laboratory findings, that happens during a clinical study or within a certain amount of time after the study has ended. This change may or may not be caused by the intervention/treatment being studied. 
*   Age or age group

A type of eligibility criteria that indicates the age a person must be to participate in a clinical study. This may be indicated by a specific age or the following age groups:
The age groups are:

    *   Child (birth-17)
    *   Adult (18-64)
    *   Older Adult (65+)

*   All-cause mortality A measure of all deaths, due to any cause, that occur during a clinical study. 
*   Allocation A method used to assign participants to an arm of a clinical study. The types of allocation are randomized allocation and nonrandomized. 
*   Arm A group or subgroup of participants in a clinical trial that receives a specific intervention/treatment, or no intervention, according to the trial's protocol. 
*   Arm type A general description of the clinical trial arm. It identifies the role of the intervention that participants receive. Types of arms include experimental arm, active comparator arm, placebo comparator arm, sham comparator arm, and no intervention arm. 
*   Baseline characteristics Data collected at the beginning of a clinical study for all participants and for each arm or comparison group. These data include demographics, such as age, sex/gender, race and ethnicity, and study-specific measures (for example, systolic blood pressure, prior antidepressant treatment). 
*   Canceled submission Indicates that the study sponsor or investigator recalled a submission of study results before quality control (QC) review took place. If the submission was canceled on or after May 8, 2018, the date is shown. After submission of study results, a study record cannot be modified until QC review is completed, unless the submission is canceled. 
*   Certain agreements Information required by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007. In general, this is a description of any agreement between the sponsor of a clinical study and the principal investigator (PI) that does not allow the PI to discuss the results of the study or publish the study results in a scientific or academic journal after the study is completed. 
*   Certification A sponsor or investigator may submit a certification to delay submission of results information if they are applying for FDA approval of a new drug or device, or new use of an already approved drug or device. A sponsor or investigator who submits a certification can delay results submission up to 2 years after the certification/extension first submitted date, unless certain events occur sooner. See Delay Results Type in the Results Data Element definitions for more information about this certification. 
*   Certification/extension first posted The date on which information about a certification to delay submission of results or an extension request was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov. ClinicalTrials.gov does not indicate whether the submission was a certification or extension request. There is typically a delay between the date the study sponsor or investigator submitted the certification or extension request and the first posted date. 
*   Certification/extension first submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a certification or an extension request to delay submission of results. A sponsor or investigator who submits a certification can delay results submission up to 2 years after this date, unless certain events occur sooner. There is typically a delay between the date the certification or extension request was submitted and the date the information is first available on ClinicalTrials.gov (certification/extension first posted). 
*   Certification/extension first submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a certification or an extension request that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit a certification or extension request one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. Meeting QC criteria for an extension request does not mean that the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has determined that the request demonstrates good cause. The process for review and granting of extension requests by the NIH is being developed. 
*   Clinical study A research study involving human volunteers (also called participants) that is intended to add to medical knowledge. There are two types of clinical studies: interventional studies (also called clinical trials) and observational studies. 
*   Clinical trial Another name for an interventional study. 
*   ClinicalTrials.gov identifier (NCT number)The unique identification code given to each clinical study upon registration at ClinicalTrials.gov. The format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). 
*   Collaborator An organization other than the sponsor that provides support for a clinical study. This support may include activities related to funding, design, implementation, data analysis, or reporting. 
*   Condition/disease The disease, disorder, syndrome, illness, or injury that is being studied. On ClinicalTrials.gov, conditions may also include other health-related issues, such as lifespan, quality of life, and health risks. 
*   Contact The name and contact information for the person who can answer enrollment questions for a clinical study. Each location where the study is being conducted may also have a specific contact, who may be better able to answer those questions. 
*   Cross-over assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which groups of participants receive two or more interventions in a specific order. For example, two-by-two cross-over assignment involves two groups of participants. One group receives drug A during the initial phase of the trial, followed by drug B during a later phase. The other group receives drug B during the initial phase, followed by drug A. So during the trial, participants "cross over" to the other drug. All participants receive drug A and drug B at some point during the trial but in a different order, depending on the group to which they are assigned. 
*   Data Monitoring Committee (DMC)A group of independent scientists who monitor the safety and scientific integrity of a clinical trial. The DMC can recommend to the sponsor that the trial be stopped if it is not effective, is harming participants, or is unlikely to serve its scientific purpose. Members are chosen based on the scientific skills and knowledge needed to monitor the particular trial. Also called a data safety and monitoring board, or DSMB. 
*   Early Phase 1 (formerly listed as Phase 0)A phase of research used to describe exploratory trials conducted before traditional phase 1 trials to investigate how or whether a drug affects the body. They involve very limited human exposure to the drug and have no therapeutic or diagnostic goals (for example, screening studies, microdose studies). 
*   Eligibility criteria The key requirements that people who want to participate in a clinical study must meet or the characteristics they must have. Eligibility criteria consist of both inclusion criteria (which are required for a person to participate in the study) and exclusion criteria (which prevent a person from participating). Types of eligibility criteria include whether a study  accepts healthy volunteers, has age or age group requirements, or is limited by sex. 
*   Enrollment The number of participants in a clinical study. The "estimated" enrollment is the target number of participants that the researchers need for the study. 
*   Exclusion criteria A type of eligibility criteria. These are reasons that a person is not allowed to participate in a clinical study. 
*   Expanded access A way for patients with serious diseases or conditions who cannot participate in a clinical trial to gain access to a medical product that has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Also called compassionate use. There are different expanded access types. 
For more information, see FDA Expanded Access: Information for Patients. 
*   Expanded access status

    *   **Available:**Expanded access is currently available for this investigational treatment, and patients who are not participants in the clinical study may be able to gain access to the drug, biologic, or medical device being studied.
    *   **No longer available:**Expanded access was available for this intervention previously but is not currently available and will not be available in the future.
    *   **Temporarily not available:**Expanded access is not currently available for this intervention but is expected to be available in the future.
    *   **Approved for marketing:** The intervention has been approved by the  U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use by the public.

*   Expanded access type

Describes the category of expanded access under U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations. There are three types of expanded access: 
    *   **Individual Patients**: Allows a single patient, with a serious disease or condition who cannot participate in a clinical trial, access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This category also includes access in an emergency situation.
    *   **Intermediate-size Population**: Allows more than one patient (but generally fewer patients than through a Treatment IND/Protocol) access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This type of expanded access is used when multiple patients with the same disease or condition seek access to a specific drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA.
    *   **Treatment IND/Protocol**: Allows a large, widespread population access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This type of expanded access can only be provided if the product is already being developed for marketing for the same use as the expanded access use.

*   Experimental arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives the intervention/treatment that is the focus of the clinical trial. 
*   Extension request In certain circumstances, a sponsor or investigator may request an extension to delay the standard results submission deadline (generally one year after the primary completion date). The request for an extension must demonstrate good cause (for example, the need to preserve the scientific integrity of an ongoing masked trial). All requests must be reviewed and granted by the National Institutes of Health. This process for review and granting of extension requests is being developed. See Delay Results Type in the Results Data Element definitions for more information. 
*   Facility name The name of the hospital or institution where a clinical study takes place. Note that not all study records include this information. To use this filter, you can enter some or all of a facility name, or type a few letters and select from the list that appears. 
*   Factorial assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which groups of participants receive one of several combinations of interventions. For example, two-by-two factorial assignment involves four groups of participants. Each group receives one of the following pairs of interventions: (1) drug A and drug B, (2) drug A and a placebo, (3) a placebo and drug B, or (4) a placebo and a placebo. So during the trial, all possible combinations of the two drugs (A and B) and the placebos are given to different groups of participants. 
*   FDAAA 801 Violations

A FDAAA 801 Violation is shown on a study record when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a Notice of Noncompliance to the responsible party of an applicable clinical trial. A Notice of Noncompliance indicates that the FDA has determined the responsible party was not in compliance with the registration or results reporting requirements for the clinical trial under the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, Section 801 (FDAAA 801).
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is required by FDAAA 801 to add information to a study record about any FDAAA 801 Violation. This information is provided by the FDA. There are three categories of information that may be included:

    *   Violation: Shown when the FDA issues a Notice of Noncompliance and posts the Notice of Noncompliance on its designated webpage. There are three types of violations:
        *   Failure to submit required clinical trial information
        *   Submission of false or misleading clinical trial information
        *   Failure to submit primary and secondary outcomes

    *   Correction: Shown when the FDA confirms that the responsible party has updated the study record to correct the violation and posts the correction notice on its designated webpage. Because of the time for FDA review and processing, there may be a delay between the date when the study record was updated and the addition of correction information to the FDAAA 801 Violation information. 
    *   Penalty: Shown when the FDA imposes a penalty for the violation and posts the penalty notice on its designated webpage.

*   First posted The date on which the study record was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov after National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review has concluded. There is typically a delay of a few days between the date the study sponsor or investigator submitted the study record and the first posted date. 
*   First submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a study record to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is typically a delay of a few days between the first submitted date and the record's availability on ClinicalTrials.gov (the first posted date). 
*   First submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit a study record one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, Section 801 (FDAAA 801)U.S. Public Law 110-85, which was enacted on September 27, 2007. Section 801 of FDAAA amends Section 402 of the U.S. Public Health Service Act to expand ClinicalTrials.gov and create a clinical study results database. For more information on FDAAA 801, see the Clinical Trial Reporting Requirements page on this site. 
*   Funder type

Describes the organization that provides funding or support for a clinical study. This support may include activities related to funding, design, implementation, data analysis, or reporting. Organizations listed as sponsors and collaborators for a study are considered the funders of the study. ClinicalTrials.gov refers to four types of funders: 
    *   U.S. National Institutes of Health
    *   Other U.S. Federal agencies (for example, Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs)
    *   Industry (for example: pharmaceutical and device companies)
    *   All others (including individuals, universities, and community-based organizations)

*   Gender-based eligibility A type of eligibility criteria that indicates whether eligibility to participate in a clinical study is based on a person's self-representation of gender identity. Gender identity refers to a person's own sense of gender, which may or may not be the same as their biological sex. 
*   Group/cohort A group or subgroup of participants in an observational study that is assessed for biomedical or health outcomes. 
*   Human subjects protection review board A group of people who review, approve, and monitor the clinical study's protocol. Their role is to protect the rights and welfare of people participating in a study (referred to as human research subjects), such as reviewing the informed consent form. The group typically includes people with varying backgrounds, including a community member, to make sure that research activities conducted by an organization are completely and adequately reviewed. Also called an institutional review board, or IRB, or an ethics committee.
For more information, see Who can join clinical research? on this site. 
*   Inclusion criteria A type of eligibility criteria. These are the reasons that a person is allowed to participate in a clinical study. 
*   Informed consent A process used by researchers to communicate to potential and enrolled participants the risks and potential benefits of participating in a clinical study. 
For more information, see Who can join clinical research? on this site. 
*   Informed consent form (ICF)The document used in the informed consent or process. 
*   Intervention model The general design of the strategy for assigning interventions to participants in a clinical study. Types of intervention models include: single group assignment, parallel assignment, cross-over assignment, and factorial assignment. 
*   Intervention/treatment A process or action that is the focus of a clinical study. Interventions include drugs, medical devices, procedures, vaccines, and other products that are either investigational or already available. Interventions can also include noninvasive approaches, such as education or modifying diet and exercise. 
*   Interventional study (clinical trial)A type of clinical study in which participants are assigned to groups that receive one or more intervention/treatment (or no intervention) so that researchers can evaluate the effects of the interventions on biomedical or health-related outcomes. The assignments are determined by the study's protocol. Participants may receive diagnostic, therapeutic, or other types of interventions. 
*   Investigator A researcher involved in a clinical study. Related terms include site principal investigator, site sub-investigator, study chair, study director, and study principal investigator. 
*   Last update posted The most recent date on which changes to a study record were made available on ClinicalTrials.gov. There may be a delay between when the changes were submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov by the study's sponsor or investigator (the last update submitted date) and the last update posted date. 
*   Last update submitted The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted changes to a study record to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is typically a delay of a few days between the last update submitted date and when the date changes are posted on ClinicalTrials.gov (the last update posted date). 
*   Last update submitted that met QC criteria The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted changes to a study record that are consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Last verified The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator confirmed the information about a clinical study on ClinicalTrials.gov as accurate and current. If a study with a recruitment status of recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting has not been confirmed within the past 2 years, the study's recruitment status is shown as unknown. 
*   Location A place where a research site for a clinical study can be found. Location information can be searched using a facility name, a city, state, zip code, or country. A location where a study is being conducted may also include contact information.  
*   Location countries Countries in which research facilities for a study are located. A country is listed only once, even if there is more than one facility in the country. The list includes all countries as of the last update submitted date; any country for which all facilities were removed from the study record are listed under removed location countries. 
*   Masking A clinical trial design strategy in which one or more parties involved in the trial, such as the investigator or participants, do not know which participants have been assigned which interventions. Types of masking include: open label, single blind masking, and double-blind masking. 
*   NCT number A unique identification code given to each clinical study record registered on ClinicalTrials.gov. The format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). Also called the ClinicalTrials.gov identifier. 
*   No intervention arm An arm type in which a group of participants does not receive any intervention/treatment during the clinical trial. 
*   Observational study A type of clinical study in which participants are identified as belonging to study groups and are assessed for biomedical or health outcomes. Participants may receive diagnostic, therapeutic, or other types of interventions, but the investigator does not assign participants to a specific interventions/treatment.
A patient registry is a type of observational study. 
*   Observational study model The general design of the strategy for identifying and following up with participants during an observational study. Types of observational study models include cohort, case-control, case-only, case-cross-over, ecologic or community studies, family-based, and other. 
*   Other adverse event An adverse event that is not a serious adverse event, meaning that it does not result in death, is not life-threatening, does not require inpatient hospitalization or extend a current hospital stay, does not result in an ongoing or significant incapacity or interfere substantially with normal life functions, and does not cause a congenital anomaly or birth defect; it also does not put the participant in danger and does not require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the results listed above. 
*   Other study IDs Identifiers or ID numbers other than the NCT number that are assigned to a clinical study by the study's sponsor, funders, or others. These numbers may include unique identifiers from other trial registries and National Institutes of Health grant numbers. 
*   Other terms In the search feature, the Other terms field is used to narrow a search. For example, you may enter the name of a drug or the NCT number of a clinical study to limit the search to study records that contain these words. 
*   Outcome measure For clinical trials, a planned measurement described in the protocol that is used to determine the effect of an intervention/treatment on participants. For observational studies, a measurement or observation that is used to describe patterns of diseases or traits, or associations with exposures, risk factors, or treatment. Types of outcome measures include primary outcome measure and secondary outcome measure. 
*   Parallel assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which two or more groups of participants receive different interventions. For example, a two-arm parallel assignment involves two groups of participants. One group receives drug A, and the other group receives drug B. So during the trial, participants in one group receive drug A "in parallel" to participants in the other group, who receive drug B. 
*   Participant flow A summary of the progress of participants through each stage of a clinical study, by study arm or group/cohort. This includes the number of participants who started, completed, and dropped out of the study. 
*   Patient registry A type of observational study that collects information about patients' medical conditions and/or treatments to better understand how a condition or treatment affects patients in the real world. 
*   Phase The stage of a clinical trial studying a drug or biological product, based on definitions developed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The phase is based on the study's objective, the number of participants, and other characteristics. There are five phases: Early Phase 1 (formerly listed as Phase 0), Phase 1, Phase 2, Phase 3, and Phase 4. Not Applicable is used to describe trials without FDA-defined phases, including trials of devices or behavioral interventions. 
*   Phase 1 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that focus on the safety of a drug. They are usually conducted with healthy volunteers, and the goal is to determine the drug's most frequent and serious adverse events and, often, how the drug is broken down and excreted by the body. These trials usually involve a small number of participants. 
*   Phase 2 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that gather preliminary data on whether a drug works in people who have a certain condition/disease (that is, the drug's effectiveness). For example, participants receiving the drug may be compared to similar participants receiving a different treatment, usually an inactive substance (called a placebo) or a different drug. Safety continues to be evaluated, and short-term adverse events are studied. 
*   Phase 3 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that gather more information about a drug's safety and effectiveness by studying different populations and different dosages and by using the drug in combination with other drugs. These studies typically involve more participants. 
*   Phase 4 A phase of research to describe clinical trials occurring after FDA has approved a drug for marketing. They include postmarket requirement and commitment studies that are required of or agreed to by the study sponsor. These trials gather additional information about a drug's safety, efficacy, or optimal use. 
*   Phase Not Applicable Describes trials without FDA-defined phases, including trials of devices or behavioral interventions. 
*   Placebo An inactive substance or treatment that looks the same as, and is given in the same way as, an active drug or intervention/treatment being studied. 
*   Placebo comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives a placebo during a clinical trial. 
*   Primary completion date The date on which the last participant in a clinical study was examined or received an intervention to collect final data for the primary outcome measure. Whether the clinical study ended according to the protocol or was terminated does not affect this date. For clinical studies with more than one primary outcome measure with different completion dates, this term refers to the date on which data collection is completed for all the primary outcome measures. The "estimated" primary completion date is the date that the researchers think will be the primary completion date for the study.  
*   Primary outcome measure In a clinical study's protocol, the planned outcome measure that is the most important for evaluating the effect of an intervention/treatment. Most clinical studies have one primary outcome measure, but some have more than one. 
*   Primary purpose The main reason for the clinical trial. The types of primary purpose are: treatment, prevention, diagnostic, supportive care, screening, health services research, basic science, and other. 
*   Principal investigator (PI)The person who is responsible for the scientific and technical direction of the entire clinical study. 
*   Protocol The written description of a clinical study. It includes the study's objectives, design, and methods. It may also include relevant scientific background and statistical information. 
*   Quality control (QC) review National Library of Medicine (NLM) staff perform a limited review of submitted study records for apparent errors, deficiencies, or inconsistencies. NLM staff identify potential major and advisory issues and provide comments directly to the study sponsor or investigator. Major issues identified in QC review must be addressed or corrected (see First submitted that met QC criteria and Results first submitted that met QC criteria). Advisory issues are suggestions to help improve the clarity of the record. NLM staff do not verify the scientific validity or relevance of the submitted information. The study sponsor or investigator is responsible for ensuring that the studies follow all applicable laws and regulations. 
*   Randomized allocation A type of allocation strategy in which participants are assigned to the arms of a clinical trial by chance. 
*   Recruitment status

    *   **Not yet recruiting:** The study has not started recruiting participants.
    *   **Recruiting:** The study is currently recruiting participants.
    *   **Enrolling by invitation:** The study is selecting its participants from a population, or group of people, decided on by the researchers in advance. These studies are not open to everyone who meets the eligibility criteria but only to people in that particular population, who are specifically invited to participate.
    *   **Active, not recruiting:** The study is ongoing, and participants are receiving an intervention or being examined, but potential participants are not currently being recruited or enrolled.
    *   **Suspended:** The study has stopped early but may start again.
    *   **Terminated:** The study has stopped early and will not start again. Participants are no longer being examined or treated.
    *   **Completed:** The study has ended normally, and participants are no longer being examined or treated (that is, the last participant's last visit has occurred).
    *   **Withdrawn:** The study stopped early, before enrolling its first participant.
    *   **Unknown:** A study on ClinicalTrials.gov whose last known status was recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting but that has passed its completion date, and the status has not been last verified within the past 2 years.

*   Registration The process of submitting and updating summary information about a clinical study and its protocol, from its beginning to end, to a structured, public Web-based study registry that is accessible to the public, such as ClinicalTrials.gov. 
*   Removed location countries Countries that appeared under location countries but were removed from the study record by the sponsor or investigator. 
*   Reporting group A grouping of participants in a clinical study that is used for summarizing the data collected during the study. This grouping may be the same as or different from a study arm or group. 
*   Responsible party The person responsible for submitting information about a clinical study to ClinicalTrials.gov and updating that information. Usually the study sponsor or investigator. 
*   Results database A structured online system, such as the ClinicalTrials.gov results database, that provides the public with access to registration and summary results information for completed or terminated clinical studies. A study with results available on ClinicalTrials.gov is described as having the results "posted." 
**Note:** The ClinicalTrials.gov results database became available in September 2008. Older studies are unlikely to have results available in the database. 
*   Results delayed Indicates that the sponsor or investigator submitted a certification or extension request. 
*   Results first posted The date on which summary results information was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov after National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review has concluded. There is typically a delay between the date the study sponsor or investigator first submits summary results information (the results first submitted date) and the results first posted date. Some results information may be available at an earlier date if Results First Posted with QC Comments. 
*   Results first posted with QC comments The date on which summary results information was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov with quality control review comments from the National Library of Medicine (NLM) identifying major issues that must be addressed by the sponsor or investigator. As of January 1, 2020, initial results submissions for applicable clinical trials (ACTs) that do not meet quality control review criteria will be publicly posted on ClinicalTrials.gov with brief standardized major comments. Accordingly, the Results First Posted with QC Comments date may be earlier than the Results First Posted date for an ACT with summary results information that is not consistent with NLM quality control review criteria. 
*   Results first submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record with summary results information. There is typically a delay between the results first submitted date and when summary results information becomes available on ClinicalTrials.gov (the results first posted date). 
*   Results first submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record with summary results information that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit results information one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Results returned after quality control review The date on which the National Library of Medicine provided quality control (QC) review comments to the study sponsor or investigator. The sponsor or investigator must address major issues identified in the review comments. If there is a date listed for results returned after quality control review, but there is not a subsequent date listed for results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov, this means that the submission is pending changes by the sponsor or investigator. 
*   Results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov Indicates that the study sponsor or investigator has submitted summary results information for a clinical study to ClinicalTrials.gov but the quality control (QC) review process has not concluded.
The results submitted date indicates when the study sponsor or investigator first submitted summary results information or submitted changes to summary results information. Submissions with changes are typically in response to QC review comments from the National Library of Medicine (NLM). If there is a date listed for results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov, but there is not a subsequent date listed for results returned after quality control review, this means that the submission is pending review by NLM. 
*   Secondary outcome measure In a clinical study's protocol, a planned outcome measure that is not as important as the primary outcome measure for evaluating the effect of an intervention but is still of interest. Most clinical studies have more than one secondary outcome measure. 
*   Serious adverse event An adverse event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or extends a current hospital stay, results in an ongoing or significant incapacity or interferes substantially with normal life functions, or causes a congenital anomaly or birth defect. Medical events that do not result in death, are not life-threatening, or do not require hospitalization may be considered serious adverse events if they put the participant in danger or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the results listed above. 
*   Sex A type of eligibility criteria that indicates the sex of people who may participate in a clinical study (all, female, male). Sex is a person's classification as female or male based on biological distinctions. Sex is distinct from gender-based eligibility. 
*   Sham comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives a procedure or device that appears to be the same as the actual procedure or device being studied but does not contain active processes or components. 
*   Single group assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which all participants receive the same intervention/treatment. 
*   Sort studies by

The Sort studies by option is used to change the order of studies listed on the Search Results page. You can sort by Relevance or Newest First: 
    *   Relevance: Studies that best match your search terms appear higher in the search results list. This is the default display for all searches.
    *   Newest First: Studies with the most recent First posted dates appear higher in the search results list.

*   Sponsor The organization or person who initiates the study and who has authority and control over the study. 
*   Statistical analysis plan (SAP)The written description of the statistical considerations and methods for analyzing the data collected in the clinical study. 
*   Status Indicates the current recruitment status or the expanded access status. 
*   Study completion date The date on which the last participant in a clinical study was examined or received an intervention/treatment to collect final data for the primary outcome measures, secondary outcome measures, and adverse events (that is, the last participant's last visit). The "estimated" study completion date is the date that the researchers think will be the study completion date. 
*   Study design The investigative methods and strategies used in the clinical study. 
*   Study documents Refers to the type of documents that the study sponsor or principal investigator may add to their study record. These include a study protocol, statistical analysis plan, and informed consent form. 
*   Study IDs Identifiers that are assigned to a clinical study by the study's sponsor, funders, or others. They include unique identifiers from other trial study registries and National Institutes of Health grant numbers. Note: ClinicalTrials.gov assigns a unique identification code to each clinical study registered on ClinicalTrials.gov. Also called the NCT number, the format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). 
*   Study record An entry on ClinicalTrials.gov that contains a summary of a clinical study's protocol information, including the recruitment status; eligibility criteria; contact information; and, in some cases, summary results. Each study record is assigned a ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, or NCT number. 
*   Study registry A structured online system, such as ClinicalTrials.gov, that provides the public with access to summary information about ongoing and completed clinical studies. 
*   Study results A study record that includes the summary results posted in the ClinicalTrials.gov results database. Summary results information includes participant flow, baseline characteristics, outcome measures, and adverse events (including serious adverse events). 
*   Study start date The actual date on which the first participant was enrolled in a clinical study. The "estimated" study start date is the date that the researchers think will be the study start date. 
*   Study type Describes the nature of a clinical study. Study types include interventional studies (also called clinical trials), observational studies (including patient registries), and expanded access. 
*   Submitted date The date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted a study record that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. 
*   Title The official title of a protocol used to identify a clinical study or a short title written in language intended for the lay public. 
*   Title acronym The acronym or initials used to identify a clinical study (not all studies have one). For example, the title acronym for the Women's Health Initiative is "WHI." 
*   Type of intervention A process or action that is the focus of a clinical study. Interventions include drugs, medical devices, procedures, vaccines, and other products that are either investigational or already available. Interventions can also include noninvasive approaches, such as education or modifying diet and exercise. 
*   U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)An agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. AHRQ's mission is to produce evidence to make health care safer, higher quality, more accessible, equitable, and affordable, and to work within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and with other partners to make sure that the evidence is understood and used. 
*   U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)An agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by making sure that human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products, medical devices, the Nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, and products that give off radiation are safe, effective, and secure. 
*   Unknown A type of recruitment status. It identifies a study on ClinicalTrials.gov whose last known status was recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting but that has passed its completion date, and the status has not been verified within the past 2 years. Studies with an unknown status are considered closed studies. 

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

**Official websites use .gov**

A **.gov** website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

**Secure .gov websites use HTTPS**

A **lock** ( ) or **https://** means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Skip to main page content

### Notice

Because of a lapse in government funding, the information on this website may not be up to date, transactions submitted via the website may not be processed, and the agency may not be able to respond to inquiries until appropriations are enacted. The NIH Clinical Center (the research hospital of NIH) is open. For more details about its operating status, please visit cc.nih.gov. Updates regarding government operating status and resumption of normal operations can be found at opm.gov.

 PRS Login 

 Menu 

*   Find Studies
    *   Expert Search
    *   How to Search
    *   How to Use Search Results
    *   How to Search for Studies with Results
    *   Constructing Complex Search Queries
    *   RSS Feeds

*   Study Basics
    *   Learn About Studies
    *   How to Read a Study Record
    *   How to Read Study Results
    *   Glossary
    *   Patient Resources

*   Submit Studies
    *   PRS Accounts
    *   PRS Help Resources

*   Data and API
    *   ClinicalTrials.gov API
    *   About the API
    *   How to Download Study Records
    *   Access Data in FHIR

*   Policy
    *   FAQs
    *   Clinical Trial Reporting Requirements
    *   FDAAA 801 and the Final Rule
    *   Protocol Registration Definitions
    *   Results Definitions
    *   Expanded Access Definitions

*   About
    *   News and Updates
    *   About ClinicalTrials.gov
    *   Trends and Charts
    *   Modernization
    *   Modernization Top Questions
    *   Selected Publications
    *   Release Notes
    *   Disclaimer
    *   Terms and Conditions
    *   Linking to This Site
    *   Accessibility

*   My Saved Studies (0)

1.   Home
2.   Search Results
3.   Study Record

The U.S. government does not review or approve the safety and science of all studies listed on this website.

Read our full  for details.

ClinicalTrials.gov is a website and online database of clinical research studies and information about their results. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) maintains the website. **The study sponsor or investigator submits information** about their study to ClinicalTrials.gov and **is responsible for the safety, science, and accuracy** of any study they list.

Before joining a study, talk to your health care professional about possible risks and benefits. To learn more about taking part in studies, read .

ClinicalTrials.gov ID 

Sponsor 

Information provided by 

Last Update Posted 

What would you like to download?
--------------------------------

File Format

Study Details Researcher View No Results Posted Record History

On this page

Study Overview

Contacts and Locations

Participation Criteria

Study Plan

Collaborators and Investigators

Publications

Study Record Dates

More Information

Study Overview
--------------

Brief Summary

It is aimed to investigate the effects of telerehabilitation-based structured exercise on muscle strength, balance, performance, body image, prosthesis adaptation, activity limitation, prosthesis use satisfaction, and quality of life in individuals with unilateral below-knee amputation. Study hypothesis: In individuals with transtibial amputation, telerehabilitation-based structured exercise has an effect on muscle strength, balance, performance, body image, prosthesis adaptation, activity limitation, prosthesis use satisfaction, and quality of life. Forty individuals with a unilateral transtibial amputation will be included in the study. Participants will be divided into two groups as telerehabilitation and control groups with equal sample sizes by the randomization method. All participants will undergo a 6-week exercise program. A structured exercise program supported by telerehabilitation will be applied to the telerehabilitation group 3 days a week, and a home exercise program will be applied on the remaining days of the week. An only a home exercise program will be applied to the control group. Participants will be evaluated at the beginning and end of the study.

Detailed Description

Amputation is a major trauma that significantly disrupts the biomechanics of the musculoskeletal system, results in serious physical and psychological loss, and completely affects the quality of life, social and professional life of the individual. Due to the increase in the elderly population and the incidence of diabetes and vascular diseases in the world, the number of individuals with amputation is increasing day by day. Approximately 150,000 lower extremity amputations are performed each year in the United States alone. The number of amputated individuals worldwide is expected to double by 2050. The most common amputation level in the world and in our country is transtibial amputations and approximately 39% of all amputations are performed at this level. In addition, the most common prosthesis use among individuals with lower extremity amputations is seen in those with the transtibial amputation level. Individuals who have undergone transtibial amputation have lost the foot-ankle complex and all related muscular functions. After transtibial amputation surgery, loss of proprioceptive information occurs in ankle control and in foot-ankle and all lower extremity muscles due to loss of exteroceptors around the foot. This leads to loss of balance during standing, stepping, and walking.

Physiotherapy and rehabilitation practices are needed in order for individuals with amputations to use their prostheses effectively and have a successful prosthesis adaptation. After the transtibial amputation, early period physiotherapy applications are followed by the use of prosthesis, and prosthetic period rehabilitation applications are continued. Prosthetic rehabilitation in individuals with transtibial amputation; aims to provide balance by taking into account the losses after amputation, to gain close to normal walking with minimum energy consumption, to ensure maximum independence in a safe manner by taking into account the pre-amputation lifestyles, expectations, and medical limitations of individuals. Physiotherapy and rehabilitation practices in individuals with transtibial amputation consist of a long-term process that starts before amputation and includes the early period after amputation, the prosthetic period, and returns to social life. Factors such as the long-term physiotherapy needs of individuals with transtibial amputation, the presence of gait and balance problems, geographical conditions, financial inadequacies, and epidemic diseases may cause problems for these individuals to reach the physiotherapy and rehabilitation applications offered in health institutions. In order to facilitate participation in physiotherapy and rehabilitation practices and to reduce resource use, telerehabilitation practices are recommended for individuals with amputation, as with other diseases that require rehabilitation. It is thought that telerehabilitation can be a useful and practical method for individuals with transtibial amputation where it is difficult and tiring to go to the clinic.

In the literature, it has been observed that there are very few studies examining the effects of physiotherapy and rehabilitation on parameters such as muscle strength, balance, gait, performance, body image, prosthesis fit, prosthesis use satisfaction, and quality of life in the rehabilitation of individuals with transtibial amputation. In addition, there are very few studies in the literature that include telerehabilitation applications related to transtibial amputations, and there is no study that questions the effects of structured exercise programs. This study was planned in order to determine the effects of telerehabilitation applications on muscle strength, kinesiophobia, balance, activity limitation, body image, prosthesis compliance and satisfaction with use, and quality of life in individuals with transtibial amputation. It is aimed to guide physiotherapists whether they prefer telerehabilitation applications as an evidence-based practice among rehabilitation methods in this field.

It is aimed to investigate the effects of telerehabilitation-based structured exercise on muscle strength, balance, performance, body image, prosthesis adaptation, activity limitation, prosthesis use satisfaction, and quality of life in individuals with unilateral transtibial amputation.

In order to determine the number of samples in the study; the alpha significance level of the hypothesis was 0.05; the effect size was determined as 0.5 and power as 0.85. As a result of the analysis; The research will be carried out with a total of 40 people, 20 people in each group.

Forty individuals with a unilateral transtibial amputation will be included in the study. Participants will be divided into two groups as telerehabilitation and control groups with equal sample sizes by the randomization method. All participants will undergo a 6-week exercise program. A structured exercise program supported by telerehabilitation will be applied to the telerehabilitation group 3 days a week, and a home exercise program will be applied on the remaining days of the week. An only a home exercise program will be applied to the control group. Participants will be evaluated at the beginning and end of the study.

Method of the Study:

*   A mobile telecommunication group will be formed, including the participants and the physiotherapist. Communication with the participants will be provided here. In addition, one-on-one or collective teleconferences will be held with the participants when necessary.
*   Before each session, the telerehabilitation group will be shown how to do the exercises online by the researcher, and it will be ensured that the patients do the exercises correctly and are followed up. In addition, at the beginning of each week, videos with the exercise content of that week will also be sent.
*   The control group will be given exercise cards showing the home exercise program at the beginning of the treatment.
*   Tracking of the exercises will be done with the exercise diary Statistical analysis: In the analysis of the data, statistical analysis including a descriptive, comparator, and correlation will be made. Mean, standard deviation and percentage distributions will be calculated for descriptive data. In the analysis of the repeated measurement results of the scales, ANOVA will be applied for the data conforming to the normal distribution. The student's t-test will be used for parametric data and Mann Whitney-U test for non-parametric data.

Official Title

Investigation of Results of Structured Exercise Application Based on Telerehabilitation in Individuals With Unilateral Transtibial Amputation

Conditions 

Amputation Telerehabilitation Exercise Prosthesis User

Amputation Telerehabilitation Exercise Prosthesis User

Amputation Telerehabilitation Exercise Prosthesis User

Amputation Telerehabilitation Exercise Prosthesis User

Intervention / Treatment 

*   Other: Telerehabilitation based exercise treatment
*   Other: Home based exercise treatment

Other Study ID Numbers 

*   A-15

Study Start  (Estimated) 

2021-08-01

Primary Completion  (Estimated) 

2021-12-31

Study Completion  (Estimated) 

2022-12-31

Enrollment  (Estimated) 

40

Study Type 

Interventional

Phase 

Not Applicable

#### Resource links provided by the National Library of Medicine

FDA Drug and Device Resources(https://clinicaltrials.gov/fda-links)

Contacts and Locations
----------------------

This section provides contact details for people who can answer questions about joining this study, and information on where this study is taking place.

To learn more, please see the Contacts and Locations section in How to Read a Study Record(https://clinicaltrials.gov/study-basics/how-to-read-study-record#contacts-and-locations).

This study has 1 location

Turkey (Türkiye)

**Istanbul, Turkey (Türkiye)**

Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa Faculty of Health Science

Click to view interactive map

Participation Criteria
----------------------

Researchers look for people who fit a certain description, called eligibility criteria. Some examples of these criteria are a person's general health condition or prior treatments.

 For general information about clinical research, read Learn About Studies(https://clinicaltrials.gov/study-basics/learn-about-studies).

Eligibility Criteria

Description

Inclusion Criteria:

*   Having a unilateral transtibial amputation
*   Using active vacuum system prosthesis and carbon foot for at least one year
*   Being at the level of mobility level K2-K3
*   Not having any problems in the healthy leg
*   A score of 21 or higher on the Montreal cognitive assessment scale (MOCA)

Exclusion Criteria:

*   Patients who received physical therapy in the last 6 months
*   Having a neurological, orthopedic, and systemic condition that will prevent them from exercising
*   Having any orthopedic and neurological problems in the upper extremity
*   Having severe hearing, vision, and speech impairment

Ages Eligible for Study 

30 Years to 60 Years (Adult) 

Sexes Eligible for Study 

All

Accepts Healthy Volunteers 

No

Study Plan
----------

This section provides details of the study plan, including how the study is designed and what the study is measuring.

Expand all / Collapse all

 How is the study designed? 

Design Details

**Primary Purpose  :**Treatment

**Allocation  :**Randomized

**Interventional Model  :**Parallel Assignment

**Masking  :**Triple (Participant Care Provider Outcomes Assessor) 

Arms and Interventions

| Participant Group/Arm | Intervention/Treatment |
| --- | --- |
| Participant Group/Arm | Experimental: Telerehabilitation group The group to which a structured exercise program supported by telerehabilitation will be treated. | Intervention/Treatment | Other: Telerehabilitation based exercise treatment * The telerehabilitation group will be shown how to do the exercises online by the researcher before each session, 3 sessions a week for 6 weeks, with mobile telecommunication applications, and it will be ensured that the patients do the exercises correctly and are followed up. In addition, at the beginning of each week, videos with the exercise content of that week will also be sent. |
| Participant Group/Arm | Active Comparator: Control group The group to which the home exercise program will be treated. | Intervention/Treatment | Other: Home based exercise treatment * n the study, exercise cards were given to the control group and the exercise treatment they were asked to do at home 3 sessions a week for 6 weeks |

 What is the study measuring? 

 Primary Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| The Timed Up and Go test | The Timed Up and Go test is a simple test used to assess a person's mobility and requires both static and dynamic balance. It uses the time that a person takes to rise from a chair, walk three meters, turn around 180 degrees, walk back to the chair, and sit down while turning 180 degrees. During the test, the person is expected to wear their regular footwear and use any mobility aids that they would normally require. | up to 20 weeks |
| 30 Second Sit to Stand Test | lso known as a 30-second chair stand test, this test is a way to assess an individual's leg strength and endurance by having them stand up from a sitting position repeatedly over the course of 30 seconds. | up to 20 weeks |

 Secondary Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Trinity Amputation and Prosthesis Experiences Scales (TAPES) | TAPES consists of 9 subscales. There are 3 psychosocial subscales: general adjustment , social adjustment, and adjustment to limitation. Scores range from 5 to 25, with higher scores indicating greater levels of adjustment. The TAPES also contain 3 activity restriction subscales: functional activity restriction , social activity restriction , and athletic activity restriction . Scores range from 3 to 12, with higher scores indicating greater activity restriction. There are 3 additional subscales that assess satisfaction with the prosthesis, measured along a 5-point scale (very dissatisfied, dissatisfied, neither dissatisfied nor satisfied, satisfied, very satisfied). Higher scores in each of the satisfaction subscales indicate greater satisfaction with the prosthesis. | up to 20 weeks |
| Activities-specific Balance Confidence Scale (ABC Scale) | The ABC scale contains 16 tasks related to indoor and outdoor daily living activities, to measure balance confidence in elderly people who have various levels of functioning. Scores range from 0% (no confidence) to 100% (complete confidence) for each question item. Higher scores indicate greater confidence. | up to 20 weeks |

Other Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| The Amputee Body Image Scale (ABIS) | ABIS is comprised of 20 items. The response to each item ranges from 1 (none of the time) to 5 (all of the time). This scale produces scores that range from 20-100, with high scores indicating high body image disturbance. Three questions (question 3, 12 and 16) are reverse-scored. | up to 20 weeks |
| The Nottingham Health Profile | The Nottingham Health Profile (NHP) is a general patient-reported outcome measure which seeks to measure subjective health status. It is a questionnaire designed to measure a patient's view of their own health status, in a number of areas. The NHP consists of two parts. The first part focuses on health and comprises 38 items which deal with pain, energy, sleep, mobility, emotional reaction and social isolation. The second part focuses on life areas affected and consists of 7 items which deal with problems regarding occupation, housework, social life, family life, sexual function, hobbies and holidays. Scoring is straightforward, with 0 assigned to a 'no' response and 1 to a 'yes' response. Scores for each of the sections range between 0 ('worst health') and 100 ('best health'). | up to 20 weeks |

Collaborators and Investigators
-------------------------------

This is where you will find people and organizations involved with this study. 

Sponsor 

Mehmet Kurtaran

Investigators 

*   Principal Investigator:Mehmet Kurtaran, MSc,Istanbul Universtiy- Cerrahpasa 
*   Study Director:Derya Çelik, PhD,Istanbul Universtiy- Cerrahpasa 

Publications
------------

General

These publications are provided voluntarily by the person who enters information about the study and may be about anything related to the study.

*   Ziegler-Graham K, MacKenzie EJ, Ephraim PL, Travison TG, Brookmeyer R. Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United States: 2005 to 2050. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2008 Mar;89(3):422-9. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.11.005.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18295618)
*   Highsmith MJ, Kahle JT, Miro RM, Orendurff MS, Lewandowski AL, Orriola JJ, Sutton B, Ertl JP. Prosthetic interventions for people with transtibial amputation: Systematic review and meta-analysis of high-quality prospective literature and systematic reviews. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2016;53(2):157-84. doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2015.03.0046.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27149143)
*   Davie-Smith F, Paul L, Nicholls N, Stuart WP, Kennon B. The impact of gender, level of amputation and diabetes on prosthetic fit rates following major lower extremity amputation. Prosthet Orthot Int. 2017 Feb;41(1):19-25. doi: 10.1177/0309364616628341. Epub 2016 Jul 9.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26850990)
*   Dillingham TR, Pezzin LE, Shore AD. Reamputation, mortality, and health care costs among persons with dysvascular lower-limb amputations. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2005 Mar;86(3):480-6. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2004.06.072.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15759232)
*   Hsu MJ, Nielsen DH, Lin-Chan SJ, Shurr D. The effects of prosthetic foot design on physiologic measurements, self-selected walking velocity, and physical activity in people with transtibial amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006 Jan;87(1):123-9. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2005.07.310.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16401450)
*   Hofstad CJ, van der Linde H, Nienhuis B, Weerdesteyn V, Duysens J, Geurts AC. High failure rates when avoiding obstacles during treadmill walking in patients with a transtibial amputation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006 Aug;87(8):1115-22. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.04.009.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16876558)
*   Broomhead P, Clark K, Dawes D, Hale C, Lambert A, Quinlivan D, et al. Evidence-based clinical guidelines for the physiotherapy management of adults with lower limb prostheses. Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. 2012, 2nd. London.

*   Rintala DH, Krouskop TA, Wright JV, Garber SL, Frnka J, Henson HK, Itani KM, Gaddis W, Matamoros R, Monga TN. Telerehabilitation for veterans with a lower-limb amputation or ulcer: Technical acceptability of data. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2004 May;41(3B):481-90. doi: 10.1682/jrrd.2004.03.0481.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15543466)
*   Nelson VS, Flood KM, Bryant PR, Huang ME, Pasquina PF, Roberts TL. Limb deficiency and prosthetic management. 1. Decision making in prosthetic prescription and management. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006 Mar;87(3 Suppl 1):S3-9. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2005.11.022.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16500187)
*   Jones CJ, Rikli RE. Measuring functional fitness of older adults. J Active Aging. 2002; 24-30.

*   Ayhan Ç, Büyükturan Ö, Kırdı N, Yakut Y, Güler Ç. The Turkish vercion of the Activites Specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale: Its cultural adaptation, validation and reliability in older adults. Turkish Journal of Geriatrics, 2014;17(2),157-163.

*   Topuz S, Ulger O, Yakut Y, Gul Sener F. Reliability and construct validity of the Turkish version of the Trinity Amputation and Prosthetic Experience Scales (TAPES) in lower limb amputees. Prosthet Orthot Int. 2011 Jun;35(2):201-6. doi: 10.1177/0309364611407678.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21697202)
*   Bumin G, Bayramlar K, Yakut Y, Sener GY. Cross cultural adaptation and reliability of the Turkish version of Amputee Body Image Scale (ABIS). J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2009;22(1):11-6. doi: 10.3233/BMR-2009-0208.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20023358)
*   Demet K, Guillemin F, Martinet N, Andre JM. Nottingham Health Profile: reliability in a sample of 542 subjects with major amputation of one or several limbs. Prosthet Orthot Int. 2002 Aug;26(2):120-3. doi: 10.1080/03093640208726634.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12227446)

 From PubMed 

These publications come from PubMed, a public database of scientific and medical articles. This list is automatically created by ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier (NCT Number), and these articles may or may not be about the study.

*   B Aledi L, Flumignan CD, Trevisani VF, Miranda F Jr. Interventions for motor rehabilitation in people with transtibial amputation due to peripheral arterial disease or diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023 Jun 5;6(6):CD013711. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013711.pub2.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37276273)

Study Record Dates
------------------

 These dates track the progress of study record and summary results submissions to ClinicalTrials.gov. Study records and reported results are reviewed by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) to make sure they meet specific quality control standards before being posted on the public website. 

Study Registration Dates

First Submitted 

2021-07-07

First Submitted that Met QC Criteria 

2021-07-08

First Posted 

2021-07-20

Study Record Updates

Last Update Submitted that met QC Criteria 

2021-07-08

Last Update Posted 

2021-07-20

Last Verified 

2021-07

More Information
----------------

Record History

Expand all / Collapse all

Terms related to this study
---------------------------

 Keywords Provided by Mehmet Kurtaran, Istanbul University - Cerrahpasa

Transtibial Amputation 

Below Knee Amputation 

Transtibial Prosthesis Users 

Below Knee Prosthesis Users 

Telerehabilitation 

Amputees Rehabilitation 

Exercise 

Additional Relevant MeSH Terms

Behavior 

Motor Activity 

Plan for Individual Participant Data (IPD)
------------------------------------------

Plan to Share Individual Participant Data (IPD)?

No

IPD Plan Description

All IPD that underlie results will not be shared

Drug and device information, study documents, and helpful links
---------------------------------------------------------------

Studies a U.S. FDA-Regulated Drug Product

No

Studies a U.S. FDA-Regulated Device Product

No

About

About ClinicalTrials.gov

Release Notes

Site Map

Help

Give us feedback

Glossary

Customer Support

Legal

Disclaimer

Terms and Conditions

About

*   About ClinicalTrials.gov
*   Release Notes
*   Site Map

Help

*   Give us feedback
*   Glossary
*   Customer Support

Legal

*   Disclaimer
*   Terms and Conditions

 National Library of Medicine

 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 

ClinicalTrials.gov

An official website of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services(https://www.hhs.gov), National Institutes of Health(https://www.nih.gov), National Library of Medicine(https://www.nlm.nih.gov), and National Center for Biotechnology Information(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

*   About HHS
*   About NIH
*   About NLM
*   About NCBI
*   Accessibility support
*   FOIA requests
*   No FEAR Act data
*   Office of the Inspector General
*   Privacy policy
*   HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Looking for U.S. government information and services?

Visit USA.gov(https://www.usa.gov/)

Revision: v3.2.0

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
