Title: Hillary Clinton's first 60 Minutes interview

URL Source: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UqKNgrwK8E

Markdown Content:
CBS News 60 Minutes 11 oz Black Mug $15.95 Paramount Shop Sip hot coffee or tea from this CBS 60 Minutes 11 oz Black Mug as you settle in for an hour of politics, pop culture, health, science, and more. Featuring the iconic 60 Minutes logo, this mug is perfect for any avid viewer of this ground-breaking segment. Sip your favorite beverage and represent your favorite show with this ceramic mug! Capacity: 11 oz Care: Dishwasher and microwave safe Additional Information: Large, easy-grip handle. Shop Paramount Shop CBS News 60 Minutes Adult Short Sleeve T-Shirt Grey / SM $26.95 Paramount Shop Represent the oldest and most-watched series on television by adding this comfortable CBS 60 Minutes Adult Short Sleeve T-Shirt to your daily outfit. Featuring the iconic 60 Minutes title across the chest, this t-shirt is the perfect style for any fan of the iconic show. This is the perfect tee to lounge around in! Fit: This crew neck shirt is comfortable and lightweight. Made of: 100% Combed Ring-Spun Cotton and 90/10 Cotton/Polyester in color Care: Machine wash cold inside out with like colors and tumble dry low. Additional Information: Its design is drapey and easy to wear on the go or while lounging at home. Shop Paramount Shop CBS News 60 Minutes Laser Engraved Stemless Wine Glass $17.95 Paramount Shop Enjoy a gripping episode of 60 Minutes with your favorite bottle of wine from this CBS 60 Minutes Stemless Wine Glass for the perfect night in. This stemless wine glass also makes an excellent holiday, birthday, or graduation gift for fellow 60 Minutes fans. These glasses are the perfect way to show off what you love; what's inside and outside! Measures: Holds up to 17 oz of liquid. Made Of: Glass. Care: Hand wash with warm soapy water. Shop Paramount Shop CBS News 60 Minutes Logo Fleece Hooded Sweatshirt Black / XL $49.95 Paramount Shop From taking a stroll outside to settling in to watch 60 Minutes, stay cozy by wearing this CBS 60 Minutes Logo Fleece Hooded Sweatshirt. The fleece material of this sweatshirt will keep you warm during the cooler seasons and represent your favorite television series with each wear. Get cozy in this super-soft traditional hoodie! Fit: Comfy and casual fit Made of: 50% polyester / 50% cotton Care: Machine wash cold inside out with like colors and tumble dry low. Shop Paramount Shop CBS News 60 Minutes Logo Women's Tri-Blend T-Shirt Grey / M $29.95 Paramount Shop From politics to pop culture, the gripping 60 Minutes segment has been adored since 1968. Show off how much you love all things 60 Minutes by sporting this buttery-soft CBS 60 Minutes Logo Women's Tri-Blend T-Shirt around town. With a vibrant design, this t-shirt is sure to rake in the compliments! Super soft and comfortable tri-blend material will make this shirt your new favorite! Fit: Slim structure for a modern silhouette - we suggest ordering a size up if you prefer a baggier fit. Made of: 50% polyester/25% combed ringspun cotton/25% rayon jersey Care: Machine wash cold inside out with like colors and tumble dry low Additional Information: Laundered fabric to avoid shrinkage after washing Shop Paramount Shop CBS News 60 Minutes Logo Journal $29.95 Paramount Shop This CBS 60 Minutes Logo Journal is the perfect way to keep your meeting notes, big ideas, and goals in one place. The iconic 60 Minutes logo designed across the journal cover lets the world know that you are the #1 60 Minutes fan with each use. This is the perfect journal to use to write down all of your thoughts, feelings, and reflections. Measures: 5 1/4"L x 8 1/4"W x 3/4"H. Made of: Faux leather; includes a satin ribbon bookmark. Care: Wipe clean. Shop Paramount Shop
