Title: Factchecking claims about Hurricane Helene response efforts

URL Source: https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/czd1q9q9gl9o

Published Time: 2024-10-07T21:15:15.556Z

Markdown Content:
Biden condemns misinformation about hurricane
---------------------------------------------

9 October 2024

Jake Horton & Lucy Gilder BBC Verify

Getty Images

President Joe Biden has said the "irresponsible and relentless promotion of disinformation and outright lies" about the government's hurricane response is "undermining confidence" in rescue and recovery efforts, even as Hurricane Milton heads towards Florida.

Since Hurricane Helene caused widespread damage in several states, misleading and false claims have been spreading and have intensified as Florida prepares for a new hurricane.

Against the backdrop of the election campaign, Donald Trump has been highly critical of the Biden-Harris administration's response.

Biden has responded by condemning a number of claims by Trump and other Republicans - BBC Verify has been examining them.

Has government money for hurricane victims been spent on migrants?
------------------------------------------------------------------

At multiple campaign events since the hurricane struck, Trump and his allies have claimed that government money earmarked for disaster victims has been spent on migrants who crossed illegally into the US.

“Kamala spent all her Fema money - billions of dollars - on housing for illegal migrants," Trump said in Michigan last week.

This claim is false.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema), a government agency, has a Disaster Relief Fund - worth more than $20bn (£15bn) for the last financial year - which is ring-fenced to spend on responding to hurricanes and other natural disasters.

Fema also has a dedicated budget from Congress to be spent on food, shelter, transportation, and other support services for immigrants released from Department of Homeland Security (DHS) custody.

This budget amounts to around $1bn over the last two financial years - not the “billions” Trump claims.

So, these are two separate pots of money - administered by the agency - which Trump appears to be conflating.

Fema, which has now set up a fact-checking page on its website, called Trump's claim "false" saying, "no money is being diverted from disaster response needs".

In 2019, while Trump was president, money was diverted from Fema's Disaster Relief Fund - around $38m - to give to Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).

The focus on Fema's current funding comes after the Secretary of Homeland Security, Alejandro Mayorkas - who oversees the agency - warned that it was running low on funds for the rest of the hurricane season.

But Fema says it has “enough money right now for immediate response and recovery needs”.

Are hurricane victims only getting $750?
----------------------------------------

Donald Trump and his running mate JD Vance have repeatedly highlighted a $750 payment from Fema to hurricane victims, often contrasting it with the money the US government spends on Ukraine or on illegal migrants.

“They promised $750 to American citizens who have lost everything,” Vance said at a rally in Butler, Pennsylvania on Saturday.

It is true that the victims are getting $750 but some context is needed.

This is just one type of assistance provided by Fema.

The $750 is what people can get as an upfront payment to help cover the costs of food, water, medication, and other emergency supplies.

Following this initial payment, disaster victims may receive additional funds following a Fema assessment.

This can go towards repairing damage to homes and personal property, and to help find a temporary place to stay.

So far, Fema has said that more than $210m has been given to communities affected by Hurricane Helene - this includes upfront payments and money to support housing needs.

Getty Images

JD Vance criticised Fema's response to the hurricane at a rally in Butler on Saturday 

Did Biden call the Governor of Georgia?
---------------------------------------

When the hurricane first hit, Trump claimed that the governor of Georgia hadn’t spoken to President Biden following the state being badly affected.

“He has been calling the president, hasn't been able to get him,” Trump said at a news conference in Georgia on the afternoon of 30 September.

But earlier that day, Georgia’s Governor Brian Kemp - a Republican - said in an interview: “The president just called me yesterday afternoon, I missed him and called him right back, and he just said ‘hey what do you need?’ and I told him we’ve got what we need, we’re working through the federal process.”

“He offered if there’s other things we need to call him directly, which I appreciate,” he added.

Getty Images

Were any helicopters sent to help victims?
------------------------------------------

Trump said at the Butler rally that “Kamala wined and dined in San Francisco, and all of the people in North Carolina - no helicopters, no rescue - it’s just - what’s happened there is very bad.”

This is false. By the time Trump made this remark on 5 October, the North Carolina National Guard, which is under the dual command of federal and state governments, had already posted on X that its “air assets have completed 146 flight missions, resulting in the rescue of 538 people and 150 pets”.

The post, published on 3 October, featured a video of a National Guard helicopter.

The North Carolina Department of Public Safety's website says that President Biden approved the state governor’s request for military personnel and equipment to support rescue operations in North Carolina.

The National Guard and military personnel “are operating 50 helicopters” as part of search and rescue missions, and are also helping to deliver critical supplies in the state, the department said.

Getty Images

At least 50 helicopters have helped with search and rescue in North Carolina since Hurricane Helene struck
