Title: Microsoft PowerPoint - ch 7 - the electoral process - sec 1 notes [Compatibility Mode]

URL Source: https://www.centrallyon.org/vimages/shared/vnews/stories/48ac3e52d2a52/ch%207%20-%20the%20electoral%20process%20-%20sec%201%20notes%20[Compatibility%20Mode].pdf

Published Time: Tue, 15 May 2012 19:19:49 GMT

Markdown Content:
Chapter 7: The Electoral Process
Section 1
Chapter 7: The Electoral Process
Section 1ObjectivesObjectives
1. Explain why the nominating process is a
critical first step in the election process.
2. Describe self-announcement, the
caucus, and the convention as
nominating methods.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 2Chapter 7, Section 1
nominating methods.
3. Discuss the direct primary as the
principal nominating method used in the
United States today.
4. Understand why some candidates use
the petition as a nominating device.Key TermsKey Terms
• nomination: the naming of those who seek
office
• general election: regularly scheduled elections
for public office
• caucus: a group of people who meet to select
candidates for election
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 3Chapter 7, Section 1
candidates for election
• direct primary: an election held in a party to
pick the party’s candidates
• closed primary: a party’s nominating election in
which only party members can voteKey Terms, cont.Key Terms, cont.
• open primary: a party’s nominating election
in which any qualified voter can vote
• blanket primary: an election in which all
voters can vote for candidates from every
party
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 4Chapter 7, Section 1
party
• runoff primary: an election held if no one
wins a majority in the main primary
• nonpartisan elections: an election in which
candidates are not identified by party labelsIntroductionIntroduction
• What methods are used to choose
candidates for public office?
– Candidates are nominated for public office
through:
• Self-announcement
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 5Chapter 7, Section 1
• Self-announcement
• Caucus
• Convention
• Direct primary
• PetitionThe Nominating ProcessThe Nominating Process
• Checkpoint: What is nomination?
– Nomination is the process of selecting the
candidates who will seek public office. It is a
key function of American political parties.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 6Chapter 7, Section 1
key function of American political parties.
– In our two-party system, the nominating
process puts limits on the choices available to
voters in the general election.The Nominating Process, cont.The Nominating Process, cont.
• In countries where one
party wins most general
elections, whoever wins
the nomination is usually
elected to office.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 7Chapter 7, Section 1
• Nominations can be
made by self-
announcement, caucus,
convention, direct
primary, or petition.Self-AnnouncementSelf-Announcement
• A person who wants
to run for office can
simply announce that
fact. Whenever a
write-in candidate
appears, self-
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 8Chapter 7, Section 1
appears, self-
announcement has
been used.
– Why might wealthy
candidates favor self-
announcement?The CaucusThe Caucus
• In the early republic, key party members
met in caucuses to nominate candidates.
– Party members in State legislatures held
caucuses to nominate candidates for State
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 9Chapter 7, Section 1
caucuses to nominate candidates for State
offices, while party caucuses in Congress
nominated presidential candidates.
– Caucuses were criticized as being too small,
private, and out of touch with everyday party
members.The ConventionThe Convention
• Conventions replaced
caucuses.
• Party voters choose
delegates who attend
conventions, where they
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 10Chapter 7, Section 1
conventions, where they
pick party candidates and
elect delegates to attend
higher level conventions.
• Conventions were soon
controlled by party
bosses.• By law, the direct
primary is now the
nominating method
used by the major
parties in most States.
The Direct PrimaryThe Direct Primary
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 11Chapter 7, Section 1
• Qualified voters cast
private ballots for their
preferred candidate.
The person receiving
the most votes is
nominated.• The States regulate and
conduct party primaries.
• A closed primary is
closed to all but declared
members of a party.
The Direct Primary, cont.The Direct Primary, cont.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 12Chapter 7, Section 1
members of a party.
Usually this means being
a registered party
member.
• An open primary is open
to all qualified voters.Open v. Closed PrimariesOpen v. Closed Primaries
• Closed primaries help make candidates more
responsive to their party, force voters to choose
a party affiliation, and keep the opposing party
from “raiding” a primary and picking the weakest
candidates.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 13Chapter 7, Section 1
• Open primaries do not exclude independent
voters. In many cases, open primary voters can
also keep their choice of party private.Other Types of PrimariesOther Types of Primaries
• In 8 States the primary winner must receive a
majority of the votes. If no one does this, then
a runoff primary is held between the top two
vote getters.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 14Chapter 7, Section 1
• In most States, nearly all elected school and
municipal officers are elected in nonpartisan
elections, where candidates are not identified
by party labels. The majority winner may be
awarded the office or run unopposed in a
general election.Forms of Primaries in State ElectionsForms of Primaries in State Elections
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 15Chapter 7, Section 1• Depending on the
State, party voters
may use the
presidential primary to
choose delegates to
their national party
Presidential PrimaryPresidential Primary
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 16Chapter 7, Section 1
their national party
convention, to choose
the candidate they
want to be their
party’s presidential
nominee, or both.Evaluating PrimariesEvaluating Primaries
• Checkpoint: What are the benefits and
drawbacks of primaries?
– Primaries put the nominating process into the hands
of the everyday party members.
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 17Chapter 7, Section 1
– Drawbacks include the fact that primaries make
campaigns more expensive and voter turnout in
primaries is usually less than half what it is for general
elections.
– The primary process also emphasizes name
familiarity over talent and can cause divisions within a
party.• At the local level,
candidates may be
nominated by petitions
signed by a minimum
number of qualified
voters in the election
PetitionPetition
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 18Chapter 7, Section 1
voters in the election
district.
• Many States require
minor party and
independent
candidates to be
nominated by petition.ReviewReview
• Now that you have learned about the
methods used to choose candidates for
public office, go back and answer the
Chapter Essential Question.
– How fair and effective is the electoral
Copyright © Pearson Education, Inc. Slide 19Chapter 7, Section 1
– How fair and effective is the electoral
process?
