Title: 336296_Volume%20II.pdf

URL Source: http://contracts.patreasury.gov/Admin/Upload/336296_Volume%20II.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 29 Dec 2015 15:24:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 496

Markdown Content:
Appendix A: Résumés Page 1 

# GLORIA L. AANENSON 

Manager of Education Information Systems 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Gloria Aanenson has over 25 years of experience as an Information Systems Manager with a proven track record of exceeding customer expectations. She has managed projects and information systems professionals, and has led the overall application development processes. Since joining DRC in 1998, Ms. Aanenson has worked extensively on programs in Pennsylvania. Additionally, she has managed the information systems development of several other large, statewide assessments projects, including those for: Alabama, Arkansas, California, Minnesota, North Carolina, Ohio, and Virginia. 

Ms. Aanenson manages development activities to ensure the delivery of on-time information systems that adhere to the high-quality standards that meet client expectations. She is responsible for the project schedules and resource retention, recruiting, and planning. Ms. Aanenson builds strong business partnerships with clients to understand their assessment and accountability programs. 

Ms. Aanenson holds an A.A. in Accounting from North Hennepin Community College in Brooklyn Park, Minnesota, and has taken Management Information Systems coursework at Augsburg College, in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She is also a certified Project Management Professional. 

CURRENT POSITION 

1998–Present Manager of Education Information Systems 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the management and scheduling of all information systems to meet the needs of large-scale statewide assessment projects, including business analysis, system design, quality control, processing, and report production. Coordinates development activities within project teams to ensure that appropriate technical resources are available and project schedules are met. Provides technical solutions to meet clients’ requirements for timely, accurate student data and quality reporting at all levels. Works effectively with project management and business unit managers to build partnerships on projects, understand business priorities, adhere to schedules, resolve conflicts, and efficiently deliver solutions. Gives technical advice, guidance, and direction to implement a culture of continuous improvement. Résumé of Gloria Aanenson Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Examination—1998–1999 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—1998–1999 

Arkansas Alternate Portfolio Assessment Systems—2000–2001 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program, End of Course Examinations—1999–2005 

California Golden State Examination—1998–1999 

North Carolina High School Exit Examination—2001 

North Carolina Open-Ended Assessment—1999–2000 

Pennsylvania AYP Reporting—2003–2013 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Generalizability Study—2000 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania School Performance Incentive Reporting—1998–2002 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1998–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—1997–1998 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1997–1998 Infrastructure, Help Desk and PC Support Manager 

Cargill Worldwide Seed 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed information technology (IT) professionals and outside contractors to achieve quality support levels. Managed infrastructure of 24 (Netware 3.12 and 4.11) LAN, 400+ workstations, and communications throughout North America. Developed plan for implementation and support of hardware and applications to meet business requirements. Plan included use of Windows 3.1, Windows 95, TCP/IP communications, AS/400 business systems, Microsoft Office 97, Lotus Smart Suite, dial-up networking, Netscape, and CC:Mail, CC:Mobile. Responsible for all IT procurement requests, hardware recommendations, and asset management, including newly acquired network sites, hubs, routers, peripherals, desktops, laptops, and communication lines. Accountable for infrastructure annual budget and professional staff development. Developed and maintained relations with corporate IT personnel and Cargill preferred vendors (leasing agents, hardware suppliers, manufacturer’s representatives, national certified trainers). Implemented IT policies, security, standards, and procedures to meet business objectives. 

1996–1997 Information Technology Support Manager 

Cargill–Fertilizer Division 

Minneapolis, MN 

Supervised information technology (IT) professionals that supported 100+ desktop and laptop users and seven (Net Ware 3.12) LAN. Coordinated and oversaw system performance and security of AS/400, LAN, and WAN Résumé of Gloria Aanenson Page 3 

communication for all U.S. wholesale fertilizer locations. Planned and implemented system and software upgrades for seven sites in a six-week period as required to meet the performance standards and implementation schedules of a new client server application. Project included server configuration, preparation for software distribution, Tivoli, Wininstall, and user training. Recommended and approved purchase of software and hardware to meet user requirements and corporate standards. Acted as a liaison for new system courseware development to provide business processes and schedule over 75 users for training. Administered a custom sales forecast application for remote sales force and management. This included monthly AS/400 data downloads and transfer of data via e-mail to sales force. Established national training contract with preferred vendor to provide training for all U.S. wholesaler fertilizer locations. Prepared the hardware costs for annual budget process. 

1992–1995 Information Technology Support 

Cargill 

Minneapolis, MN 

Monitored daily operations of (NetWare 3.12) LAN and AS/400 to optimize performance. Provided first-level support and escalated appropriately to support staff for new user authorization, Lotus Smart Suite, CC:Mail, CC:Mobile, LanExpress, SDI, Novell NetWare, Netscape, AS/400 business application. Assisted management in defining requirements, planning, and executing automation for sales force. This included ACT!, CC:Mobile, and integration with business systems. Established successful customer service relations to meet end-users’ support requirements. Conducted customized training of sales personnel in the use of automation software and CGO. This included Windows, Lotus 1-2-3, LanExpress, and CC:Mobile. 

1991–1992 Executive Information Administrator 

Cargill 

Minneapolis, MN 

Developed and created an executive information system (EIS) for the president and managers of the Cargill Fertilizer Division. Supported and trained executives on application and functionality of the commander EIS software. Demonstrated new applications for management’s feedback and critique of system. 

1986–1991 Merchant/Logistics and Transportation Specialist 

Cargill 

Minneapolis, MN 

Accountable for budgets, long-range planning, and profit and loss results for product line. Responsible for price verification, invoice approval, and payment request for all product bought and sold. Negotiated and executed purchase and sales contracts for regional product positioning. Coordinated most efficient and profitable distribution network to meet division’s supply and demand. Résumé of Gloria Aanenson Page 4 

Coordinated barge position with warehouse manager and producers. Reconciled shipments with suppliers and customers per contractual agreements. 

EDUCATION 

Augsburg College 

Minneapolis, MN 

Management Information Systems coursework 

Metropolitan State University 

Minneapolis, MN 

Marketing 

North Hennepin Community College 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

A.A., Accounting 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Bloomington, MN Page 1 

# DEEDRA ARVIN 

Test Development Program Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Deedra Arvin has eleven years of experience in the assessment industry. As a Test Development Program Manager at DRC, Ms. Arvin oversees and participates in the development of state assessments and ancillary materials. She oversees work to provide accommodated forms for print and online assessments, including bilingual English/Spanish forms for English Language Learners and video sign language and audio for visually impaired students. Ms. Arvin participates in the development of directions for administration manuals for use with accommodated forms. Additionally, she works closely with clients to develop professional development materials, including simulations for the interpretation of student reports, resources for educators to involve students and parents in the learning process, and guidelines for the implementation of read-aloud accommodations. 

Ms. Arvin currently serves as the Project Lead for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment, summative assessments in Mathematics, Reading, Science, and Writing that recently transitioned to become available online in addition to paper/pencil testing, and the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools, a set of diagnostic assessments in computer-adaptive format. 

In a previous position as a Content Development Lead, Ms. Arvin oversaw the development of an international client’s high school graduation exam that included bilingual English/Arabic assessments of Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, and Physics in addition to English (as a second language). 

Prior to working in educational assessment, Ms. Arvin served as a science teacher for two years. She also volunteered with the Indiana State 4-H program, developing assessments for a competition of equine knowledge for students in Grades 3–12. 

Ms. Arvin holds an M.S. in Educational Psychology with an emphasis in Research Methods and Measurement, a graduate certificate in Teaching English Language Learning in K–12, and a B.S. in Chemistry with a Teaching Option, all from Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana. She is currently enrolled in a doctoral program in Literacy and Language Education with an emphasis in English Language Learning, also at Purdue University. Résumé of Deedra A. Arvin Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Test Development Program Manager 

2010–2012 Senior Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Oversees and participates in the development of online state assessments, including, accommodations such as video sign language and ancillary products. Reviews and edits test items, forms, and ancillary materials. Interacts with program management staff to ensure on-time delivery of all assessment materials. Communicates with client at various stages of the test development process. Oversees and facilitates committee reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Acuity Philadelphia—2010 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2010–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment 

Standards Based Assessment—2010–Present 

Bermuda Testing Program—2006–2008 

District of Columbia Comprehensive Assessment System—2006–2009 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests—2007–2009 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2010–Present 

Indiana Statewide Testing for Educational Progress-Plus—2008–2009 

Missouri Assessment Program—2004–2009 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

Qatar Senior Schooling Certificate—2009–2010 

West Virginia WESTEST 2—2008–2010 

Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examinations—2004–2009 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2010 Science Assessment Editor IV/Content Development Lead 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Indianapolis, IN 

Oversaw the development of test materials and ancillary products for all content areas of an international client’s high school graduation exam (including English as a second language and bilingual English/Arabic assessments of Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, and Physics) and a large school district’s online benchmark exam. Provided senior reviews of science item specifications, items, and forms at the elementary, middle, and high school levels. Résumé of Deedra A. Arvin Page 3 

2008–2009 Science Development Manager 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Indianapolis, IN 

Supervised the development of science tests in Grades 3–12 for multiple state, district, or international contracts. Reviewed and prioritized the work of multiple assessment editors working on science assessments. Provided training in item development and form selection to assessment editors, vendors, consultants, and educator committees. Served as the science subject-matter expert for a research and development project to develop new item types and on a committee to improve the implementation of Universal Design. 

2007–2008 Science Development Supervisor 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Indianapolis, IN 

Supervised the development of science and social studies test items, forms selection, and page production in Grades 3–10 for multiple state contracts. Reviewed the work of assessment editors working on science and social studies assessments. Provided training in item development and form selection to assessment editors, consultants, and vendors. 

2004–2007 Science Development Content Editor 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Indianapolis, IN 

Developed science and social studies items, selected test forms, completed page reviews, and developed and reviewed ancillary materials in Grades 2–11 for multiple state, district, or international contracts. Provided feedback to item writers. 

2004–2004 Long-Term Substitute Teacher 

Northview High School 

Brazil, IN 

Planned and implemented lessons for Biology I, Chemistry I, and Integrated Chemistry and Physics courses. Provided before- and after-school tutoring for struggling students. 

2003–2004 Chemistry and Physics Teacher 

Southmont High School 

Crawfordsville, IN 

Planned and implemented lessons for Chemistry I, Chemistry II, and Physics I courses. As junior class sponsor, coordinated fundraising activities. Provided before- and after-school tutoring for struggling students. Developed materials to aid a student with a hearing impairment. Résumé of Deedra A. Arvin Page 4 

2003–2003 Student Teacher 

Benton Central High School 

Oxford, IN 

Planned and implemented lessons for five periods of Chemistry I and one period of Chemistry II. 

2002–2004 Super Saturday and Super Summer Teacher 

Purdue University Gifted Education Resource Institute 

West Lafayette, IN 

Planned and implemented hands-on lessons for classes of first and second or third and fourth grade students in Kid Chemistry, Experimental Chemistry, Astronomy and Beyond, and Our Dynamic Earth. 

PUBLICATIONS 

Arvin, D. & Franklin, D. (in press). Standardized assessments for ELLs. In L. C. de Oliveira & J. G. Iddings (Eds.), Genre pedagogy across the curriculum: theory and application in U.S. classrooms and contexts . Equinox Publishers. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

“Pockets of Promise” presented with Dr. Chrystal S. Johnson at the American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, April 2012 

“Project InteGREATe!: the ripple effects of the continued marginalization of K-5 social studies” presented with Dr. Chrystal S. Johnson at the National Council for the Social Studies Conference, Nov. 2009 

“Making the Most of Your Classroom Assessments” presented with Amy Heath at the Hoosier Association of Science Teachers, Inc. Conference, Feb. 2008 

“Multiple Choice Does Not Mean Multiple Facts” presented at the National Council for the Social Studies Great Lakes Regional Conference, Feb. 2008 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

American Educational Research Association 

TESOL, International Résumé of Deedra A. Arvin Page 5 

EDUCATION 

Purdue University 

West Lafayette, Indiana 

M.S., Educational Psychology: Research Methods and Measurement 

Purdue University 

West Lafayette, Indiana 

Graduate Certificate, Teaching English Language Learning in K–12 

Purdue University 

West Lafayette, Indiana 

B.S., Chemistry with Teaching Option Page 1 

# JONICA BACKES 

Director Information Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Jonica Backes has 15 years of experience in information systems and over 20 years in project management. She currently oversees program management for the INSIGHT Online Test Delivery System. Ms. Backes is a seasoned program manager with experience and knowledge in agile development methodologies, web-based software, and education assessment systems. She has performed requirements analysis and system design for numerous projects and programs. 

In Ms. Backes’ current role as Director of Information Services, she administers an iterative and incremental  agile software development  framework for managing DRC software projects, product, and application development. She assists in the definition of a flexible,  holistic  product development strategy where DRC development teams work as a unit to reach a common goal. This process, different than a more traditional, sequential approach to product development, enables teams to self-organize by encouraging physical co-location or close online collaboration of all team members and daily face-to-face communication among all team members and disciplines in the project. It advantages customers with substantially increased flexibility and nimbleness. Ms. Backes provides daily oversight and support for all aspects of this process as well as for frequent communication linkages across all stakeholders. 

Ms. Backes holds a B.S. in Business Management from Cardinal Stritch University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and an A.A. in Liberal Arts from North Hennepin Community College in Brooklyn Park, Minnesota. She also holds a certification as “Scrum Master,” which is an integral element regarding the supervision and management of an agile software development processes. This certification is strongly oriented towards leadership and critical skills including moderation, facilitation, presentation, communication, and conflict management in addition to technical orientations. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Director Information Systems 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the delivery of flexible and customized systems to clients. Serves as the Lead in the development of the INSIGHT Online Test Delivery System—a system that delivers next-generation assessments aligned to the state’s standards and uses computer-adaptive technology. Résumé of Jonica Backes Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2012 Medtronic, Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Roles included: 

• Sr. Program Manager – Neurology 

• Sr. Program Manager – Cardiology 

• Development Core Team Member – CareLink HF 

• Development Core Tam Member – NT&D (Chronicle, IHM II, ALPS) 

• Development Core Team Member – Blackwell / Curie 

• Development Core Team Member – Adams 

• SW / FW Engineering Manager 

1995–2000 REAL Solutions 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Served as web development manager, marketing communications manager and marketing communications specialist. 

1990–1995 American Medicals Systems/Schneider USA 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Served as marketing manager and marketing communication specialist. 

1986–1990 CVN Companies 

Minneapolis, MN 

Served as marketing specialist. Résumé of Jonica Backes Page 3 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Below is a list of some of the technologies and tools Ms. Backes and her teams use to manage and implement a program. Ms. Backes also has experience with the .Net suite of technologies and tools. 

Platforms: Windows, MAC, Linux 

Server OS: RedHat 

Web/Application Servers: JBOS, Tomcat 

Database Platform: MongoDB, MySQL 

Database Tools: RoboMongo, RockMongo 

Development Frameworks: Groovy/Grails, Java, jQuery, CSS, Angular 

Web Development: HTML5, JavaScript,Twitter Bootstrap 

Source Control: GitHub 

Build Management: Jenkins, Artifactory 

Issue Tracking: JIRA with Greenhopper 

Team Collaboration: Google, Lync, HipChat 

Methodologies: Agile Methodology (Scrum) 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Scrum Master 

Scrum Alliance 

Indianapolis, IN 

EDUCATION 

Cardinal Stritch University 

Milwaukee, WI B.S., Business Management 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

Computer Science and Math 

North Hennepin Community College 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

A.A., Liberal Arts Page 1 

# HOLLY BAKER 

Vice President, Education Solutions 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Holly Baker has over 15 years of experience in the fields of education serving at local, state, and national levels. As Vice President, Educational Solutions at DRC, Dr. Baker provides direction for DRC’s new product offerings and works with DRC’s education clients to identify needs, track trends in accountability and assessment, and monitor innovations in the industry. 

Prior to joining DRC, Dr. Baker served as Vice President for Performance Assessment Scoring at Measurement Incorporated. In addition to providing leadership for all performance scoring services, Dr. Baker served as a primary contact for federal, state, and local policy makers, strategic partners, and education organizations. 

Dr. Baker holds a Ph.D. in Education Leadership and Policy Studies from the University of Denver, an M.A. in Teaching Secondary English from the University of Alaska, and a B.A. in English from the College of St. Benedict in St. Joseph, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2015–Present Vice President, Education Solutions 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides direction for new product offerings. Works with DRC’s education clients to identify needs, track trends in accountability and assessment, and monitor innovations in the industry. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Science Assessment —2010–2011 

Arkansas Writing Assessment—2010–2014 

Arizona Instrument to Measure Standards Statewide Assessment—2014–2015 

Arizona (Tempe) District Performance Assessment in Writing—2010–2015 

California Assessment of Student Performance and Progress—2014–2015 

Connecticut Mastery Test—2010–2015 

Connecticut Academic Performance Task—2010–2015 

Maine Comprehensive Assessment System—2014–2015 

Maryland High School Assessment—2010; 2013–2015 

Michigan Educational Assessment Program—2010–2015 

Michigan Educational Assessment Program Access—2013–2014 

Michigan Merit Exam—2010–2015 Résumé of Holly Baker Page 2 

Michigan Access—2013–2015 

Multi-Agency Assessment Cooperative (WA, ID, SD, WV, HI, USVI) — 

2014–2015 

New England Assessment Consortium (CT, VT, NH)—2014–2015 

New Jersey Assessment of Skills—2010–2014 

New Jersey High School Proficiency Assessment—2010–2015 

New York Regents Pre-Test/Field Test—2010–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium—2013–2014 

Tennessee Comprehensive Assessment Program—2010–2015 

Tennessee Alternate Portfolio Assessment—2010–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2015 Vice President, Performance Assessment Scoring 

2009–2010 Project Manager 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Supervised project management of multiple statewide assessment contracts; coordinated staff of more than 60 full-time and more than 3,000 part-time/temporary employees in management and scoring of custom-designed and consortia built assessments; fostered team collaboration and communication, and establish effective communications across departments; maintained department budget and handle contract invoicing for state programs; directed and coordinated performance assessment scoring efforts; guided development of distributed scoring platform, process, and policies; served as a primary contact for federal, state and local policymakers, strategic partners, and education organizations; participated in state and national associations and conferences and disseminated relevant state and federal policies as it related to corporate planning and partnerships; developed comprehensive responses for requests for proposals and information; maintained communications and sustained relationships with contracting agencies, monitored contract obligations, and assigned and supervised scoring staff; and facilitated innovation initiatives for entire organization including program development, systems development, and training. 

2008–2010 Peer Reviewer 

United States Department of Education 

Washington D.C. 

Reviewed state submissions for content standards and assessments including regular, modified, and alternate systems; developed recommendations for program improvement; reviewed applications for inaugural Investing in Innovation (i3) grant competition; and participated in review meetings and documented feedback for applicants. Résumé of Holly Baker Page 3 

2008–2009 Project Director/Principal Consultant, Postsecondary Workforce Readiness 

Assessment Pilot 

2006–2008 State Assessment Principal Consultant 

Colorado Department of Education 

Denver, CO 

Coordinated stakeholder involvement and input; collaborated with research and evaluation team on survey development and growth model analysis, and established criteria for analysis in conjunction with third party reviewers; managed request for information proposal and review processes, and maintained communication with vendors and participant schools, and facilitated data submissions processes; presented status updates to the State Board of Education, and House and Senate Education Committees; managed all development functions of the Colorado Student Assessment Program for all content area assessments; facilitated coordination and collaboration between all Colorado assessment programs including the alternate assessment and English language development assessment; developed and implemented statewide trainings, policy manuals, data interpretation manuals, and related guidance for assessment administration; organized documentation for peer review submissions; coordinated stakeholder involvement in assessment processes, including anchor pulls, item reviews, frameworks revisions, and alignment studies; collaborated with assessment vendor to ensure ongoing attention to plain language and universal design in Colorado documents; facilitated collaboration and cross unit projects related to standards and assessment within the department of education; designed a priori assessment review and alignment process for assessments; and designed and conducted comparability study for English and Spanish versions of reading and writing assessments. 

2002–2006 Gifted and Talented Coordinator 

2004–2005 Coordinator, Curriculum Review Steering Committee 

Aspen School District 

Aspen, CO 

Developed and implemented gifted and talented program including all components from identification policies and process to matching student strengths to service options; facilitated assessment programs for talent development and statewide accountability programs; participated in a statewide curriculum and program committees and provided statewide training on differentiated instructional models; developed and taught advanced level classes in both math and literacy; served as member of School Accountability Committees focusing on using multiple sources of data to inform instruction and reform initiatives; taught embedded professional development workshops into the school day, focusing on differentiation and cross-curricular integration; collaborated with teachers to design differentiated curriculum, and coordinated resources for accelerated classes; presented regularly for the Board of Education and a parent breakfasts; coordinated and facilitated review year activities for K-12 literacy curriculum; organized and facilitated vertical team meetings to streamline and align curriculum to essential frameworks and developed essential questions and quality Résumé of Holly Baker Page 4 

performance assessments; and coordinated middle school vocabulary curriculum implementation. 

2001–2002 Technology Coordinator 

Telluride Mountain School 

Telluride, CO 

Created and implemented technology curriculum for grades 1–8. Created and maintained school webpage. 

2000–2001 Gifted Education Coordinator 

1999–2001 Language Arts and Social Studies Teacher 

Goldenview Middle School 

Anchorage, AK 

Developed and maintained gifted IEPs for grades 7–8; coordinated student scheduling with counselors; reviewed IEPs with parents and administration; coordinated identification assessment and paperwork with district gifted office; instructed seventh grade gifted and regular language arts, social studies, and remedial reading classes; participated in gifted and inclusion IEPs, and facilitated parent involvement; organized fundraising, field trips, and integrated units and events; designed and maintained school and team webpage; and co-authored school technology competency curriculum and technology handbook 

PRESENTATIONS AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

LEAD Conference, Nashville, TN—2011 

Colorado Librarian Day, Featured Speaker—2009 

English Language Acquisition Academy —2008 

Colorado Association of School Executives, Pre-Conference—2008 

Differentiating in the Classroom—2005–2007 

Gifted Students in Poverty—2006 

Colorado Association of Gifted and Talented—2005 

District-wide, Mid-level In-service, Anchorage School District—2000 

Alaska Association of Principals Conference Presenter—1999 

“Standards at Work,” Anchorage School District, Fall Mid-level In-service—1999 Résumé of Holly Baker Page 5 

EDUCATION 

University of Denver 

Denver, CO 

Ph.D., Education Leadership/Policy Studies 

Dissertation: Effects of Plain Language Revision on Item Difficulty, Discrimination and DIF 

University of Alaska 

Anchorage, AK 

M.A., Teaching 

College of St. Benedict 

St. Joseph, MN 

B.A., English Page 1 

# JOHN R. BANDY 

Chief Information Officer 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. John Bandy is an information systems executive with more than 29 years of experience leading large-scale, corporate initiatives. In his current position as Chief Information Officer, he provides leadership and direction to all of Information Services personnel who support all clients within DRC’s Education, Surveys, and Document Services Divisions. 

Mr. Bandy has a diverse background in major applications and technology systems. He has been a champion of quality, process, and cost-effective delivery throughout his career. Mr. Bandy began his Information Technology career at NCS (now Pearson) where he served as an analyst and manager of communication services. Later, he held project management and IT management positions, and led infrastructure technology initiatives for Johnson Controls, Inc., a Fortune 100 corporation. He was also a partner in a Wisconsin-based IT consulting company. Prior to joining DRC, he was a senior member of the Information Services executive team at Foremost Farms, USA, one of the largest dairy cooperatives in the country. 

In addition to his professional experience, Mr. Bandy is actively involved in several Information Technology forums and leadership councils in the Minneapolis area. Mr. Bandy holds a B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Iowa. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Chief Information Officer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the overall strategic direction of the information systems departments. Leads efforts to develop appropriate technology-based solutions to meet client needs. Oversees all software development projects. Staffs and manages information technology resources. Implements software and hardware in support of company business strategies. Manages all information technology processes that protect client data and provide a reliable production environment. Implements software quality assurance processes. 

Provides direction and oversight of the software and technology teams that are responsible for information systems in DRC’s Technology, Education, Survey, and Document Services Divisions as well as corporate projects. Staffs and manages resources to ensure that each team has the appropriate personnel available to meet all schedules and deliverables. Résumé of John Bandy Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2010 Senior Director of Application Development 

2005–2007 Director of Application Development 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provided direction and oversight of the software development teams that are responsible for all information systems to support all of DRC’s educational assessment projects, as well as DRC’s Document Services Division. Ensured that each development team has the appropriate technical resources available to meet all schedules and deliverables. Developed and delivered departmental objectives to continually maintain skills and staff required to meet the needs and goals of projects. Enhanced standards and processes to more effectively and efficiently deliver cost-effective solutions to DRC’s clients. 

1997–2005 Information Technology Manager 

Foremost Farms, USA 

Baraboo, WI 

Reported to the Director of Information Services and supervised a staff of three managers, one project manager, and 16 network/system analysts. Responsible for all IS technology. Senior member of the IS executive team. Developed outsourcing strategy for Microsoft Windows operations. Developed strategy for business-wide password management driving towards a single password/single sign-on solution. Assisted with the development of standard purchasing processes and templates. Spearheaded and executed efforts to reorganize operations to create an Operations Center. This included adopting ITIL processes and tools such as service management, change management, problem management, and service levels. Developed road map and implemented strategy for thin-client computing. Organized and developed efforts to overhaul the entire technical environment, including Windows servers, desktop clients, routers, switches, telephone systems, and storage. 

1995–1997 Manager of Technical Projects/Senior Project Manager 

Johnson Controls Inc. 

Milwaukee, WI 

Reported to the director of communications with a staff of five project managers/leaders. Responsible for all cross-functional and strategic projects for Technical Services and Operations. Responsible for the development of project management standards and methodologies. Spearheaded the infrastructure upgrade of field offices across North America. This $10 million project defined the field technology standards and implemented wiring, physical infrastructure, Netware server upgrades, and standard desktop configurations for 100+ locations. Led the planning and implementation phases of a North American Wide Area Network. Responsible for the design, planning, and implementation of a $2.5 Résumé of John Bandy Page 3 

million renovation of network infrastructure at the corporate facility. Led technology efforts on a number of cross-functional business efforts to empower field personnel. Led an effort to identify and select technology solutions for remote access for traveling employees and telecommuting access for “work at home” users. 

1992–1995 IT Project Manager 

Johnson Controls Inc. 

Milwaukee, WI 

Reported to the Manager of Technical Services and Architecture. Responsible for technology projects in the field organization and managed the efforts of six analysts and systems engineers. Responsible for the development of product specifications for infrastructure components of an overall technology architecture. Defined the requirements, selection criteria, and vendor evaluation and validation process for determining strategic relational database and UNIX vendors. Constructed the RFP documents, led the vendor evaluation efforts, and participated in contract negotiations and ongoing vendor relationships. 

1991–1992 Manager of Communication Services 

National Computer Systems 

Iowa City, IA 

Managed the implementation and administration of division-wide Token-Ring LAN. Defined division-wide standards for LAN, workstation hardware, software, and LAN-based printers. Managed large-scale documentation team responsible for RFP responses to the Federal Department of Education. 

1985–1991 Senior Systems Analyst, Analyst/Programmer I & II 

National Computer Systems 

Iowa City, IA 

Acted as a lead analyst for U.S. Department of Education Guaranteed Student Loan system, as well as student assessment systems to support Riverside Publishing and Harcourt. Developed expertise in large system design. 

EDUCATION 

University of Iowa 

Iowa City, IA 

B.S., Computer Science Page 1 

# MARY BASCH 

Senior Project Lead 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Mary Basch has nine years of educational assessment experience. As a Senior Project Lead, Ms. Basch works with Test Development directors, project leads, and content specialists to plan, organize, and establish priorities for all phases of the item and test development and production processes for large-scale assessment projects, for online and paper/pencil assessments. She has contributed her expertise to multiple large-scale educational assessment programs in multiple states, including: Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Georgia, Louisiana, Michigan, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Washington. 

As Senior Project Lead, Ms. Basch has been responsible for managing teams of content specialists to develop items and tests; coordinating the creation of the regular student booklets, as well as large-print forms and ancillary documents, including forms in Spanish; maintaining the electronic item bank; and contributing to status reports for state departments of education. She also coordinated the computer-adaptive components of the Michigan Interim Assessments. 

In addition to her educational assessment experience, Ms. Basch has 19 years of teaching experience. During her years as a teacher, she provided leadership in many ways, including working on the Graduation Standards Committee for Columbia Heights Independent School District, matching curriculum to the Minnesota State Standards; and serving on the district leadership team, fulfilling the roles of both grade-level and department chairs. In addition, Ms. Basch is trained in Gifted and Talented education and has taught the gifted and talented cluster. 

Ms. Basch holds a M.A. in Curriculum and Instruction from St. Mary’s University in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and a B.S. in Elementary Education with an Early Childhood minor from the College of St. Teresa in Winona, Minnesota. 

COLLEGE- AND CAREER-READINESS STANDARDS (CCRS) 

Ms. Basch’s CCRS experience includes: 

• Reviewing item and standards alignment to the college- and career-ready standards in English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics and providing feedback to department of education staff for alignment of items and/or existing state standards to the college- and career-ready standards for programs in Alaska and Alabama. 

• Reviewing the ELA and mathematics CCRS as a major step in the item development project for Michigan K, 1, and 2 Interim Assessments. Résumé of Mary Basch Page 2 

• Conducting cognitive labs for the Michigan K, 1, and 2 Interim Assessments. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2012–Present Senior Project Lead 

2010 –2012 Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Contributes to all aspects of the item and test development process and works closely with stakeholders to produce quality assessments. Establishes priorities for all phases of the development and production process. Facilitates content and item review meetings, contributes to reviewing items and test ancillaries and attends internal and client meetings for assigned projects. Provides support for project schedules through the use of MS Project. Maintains accurate records concerning item and test development processes. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2006–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2006–2014 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment —2006–Present 

Michigan K-12 Interim Assessment Development—2012–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2006–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

2006–2010 Reading/Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Participated in all areas of reading and language arts item and test development. Worked with passage finders and item writers through all steps in the item and test development process including, including item writing, editing, and proofreading; aligning items to state standards; and constructing assessments according to specifications. Participated in professional development activities. Résumé of Mary Basch Page 3 

2007–2008 Adjunct Professor 

College of St. Scholastica 

St. Paul, MN 

Taught graduate-level course for teaching licensure in methods, concepts, and theories; observed, mentored, and assessed students in field experience work. 

1998–2006 Teacher, Gifted and Talented Cluster, Grade-Level Chair 

Valley View Elementary 

Columbia Heights School District 

Columbia Heights, MN 

Taught elementary students in all curriculum areas. Developed differentiated curriculum for gifted and talented students, adapted curriculum for students with special needs, and second language needs. Served on School District Leadership Team and Graduation Standards Committee. Chaired Math Curriculum Committee and served on Language Arts Committee. Served as grade-level chairperson and mentor to new staff; also served as a liaison with colleges for placing student teachers. 

1988–1998 Teacher 

Holy Spirit School 

St. Paul, MN 

Designed and implemented full-day kindergarten program. Created grade-level curriculum and enrichment activities. Recruited families through presentations and conferences. Member, self-study recertification committee. Served as Department Chair. Mentored new teachers. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota—Pre-K–6 (expired) 

EDUCATION 

St. Mary’s University 

Minneapolis, MN M.A., Curriculum and Instruction 

College of St. Teresa 

Winona, MN B.S., Elementary Education, Early Childhood minor Page 1 

# ERIN BAYER 

Software Quality Assurance Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Erin Bayer is the Software Quality Assurance Manager ensuring adherence to quality processes for several large-scale assessment programs, including those for Alabama, Alaska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Washington. Previously, Ms. Bayer served as the lead software quality assurance analyst working primarily with the Washington State Assessment. In this role she handled the assignment of day-to-day activities, assisted her team with triaging defects through the use of SQL Management Studio, Ultra Edit and SMART and worked closely with the development staff to implement design and testing strategies that will deliver high quality results. 

In addition to her work on state teams, Ms. Bayer has been closely involved in software quality assurance for DRC’s item banking system, the Item Development and Educational Assessment System (IDEAS), along with the company’s customer service database system, known as the Education Project Information Center (EPIC). 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Bayer was involved with large projects in the healthcare industry as a user acceptance tester, system test analyst, and Siebel configuration testing. In these roles, she gained experience testing PeopleSoft and using testing tools such as Mercury Test Director. Ms. Bayer also has development and configuration experience with Oracle, SQL, and Access. 

Ms. Bayer earned a B.A. in Management Information Systems, with a minor in Business Management from Augsburg College in Minneapolis, Minnesota. She is also a trained Network Support Specialist and certified Scrum Master. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Software Quality Assurance Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Acts as the central SQA point of contact between SQA analysts, developers, project managers, and other functional teams to ensure programs and data are adequately tested. Collaborates with Education Project Management in scheduling all software quality activities and building SQA sub-schedules. Provides daily work direction to SQA analysts. Defines approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Designs and implements processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules and procedures. Coordinates the development and execution of comprehensive testing plans, scripts, and test summaries, and reviews all documentation for accuracy, feasibility, consistency, and completeness. Integrates testing approach with software development methodology. Collects and analyzes Résumé of Erin Bayer Page 2 

data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrates them into business processes to address business needs. Defines and tracks quality assurance metrics, defect densities and priorities, and open defect counts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2012–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test+—2012–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2012–Present 

Education Project Information Center (EPIC)—2006–2007 

Item Development and Educational Assessment System (IDEAS)—2005–2007 

Nebraska State Accountability—2012–Present 

Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities—2012–Present 

Ohio Graduation Test—2012–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2006 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2007; 2012–Present 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007–2008 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

End of Course Exam —2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2012 Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Developed and executed comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test summaries. Completed appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. Résumé of Erin Bayer Page 3 

2007–2010 Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and implemented software development process quality standards, methods and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvement. Developed and executed comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documented all software defects and performed regression testing. Coordinated defect review meetings. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Reviewed requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

2005–2007 Associate Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked as part of a project team to implement quality standards across software applications. Developed and edited test scripts. Executed software testing procedures, practices, and pre-defined test scripts. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Documented all software defects and performs regression testing. Updated Requirements Traceability Matrix. 

2004–2005 Accenture 

Minneapolis, MN 

User Acceptance Tester 

Client was a national leader in offering comprehensive health management services through organized health systems and insurance products. Validated that changes had been received from source system. Executed test scripts in Mercury Test Director. Identified and tracked defects. Documented and distributed test metrics to project team. Communicated changes, testing defects, and requirement status to test lead. Assisted and trained the operational readiness team on re-pricing application and testing documentation. 

System Test Analyst 

Project to enhance a billing and accounts receivable system for a large health insurance firm. Gathered design and functional requirement documents to create testing condition, storyboards, and scripts. Obtained sign-off on conditions document from business. Coordinated with data source systems to request customer set-up. Validated that changes had been received from source system using PeopleSoft Tools queries and Oracle–SQL. Executed test scripts in Mercury Test Director. Identified and tracked defects. Tracked testing metrics. Communicated changes, testing defects, and requirement status to test lead. Assisted User Acceptance Tester with any documentation needed or questions regarding the initiative being tested. Résumé of Erin Bayer Page 4 

Siebel Configuration Developer 

Client was a national leader in offering comprehensive health management services through organized health systems and insurance products. Configuration of Siebel screens per business requirements. Created buttons, links, drop-downs, and page layout to assist employees with customer calls. Gained Siebel 7.7 Configuration and Escript experience. Interacted with the business to resolve issues. Maintained documentation, including technical and data change requests, UI Specs, and RequisitePro. Created Test Procedures document for unit testing. 

2002–2004 Mailroom Student Supervisor 

Augsburg College 

Minneapolis, MN 

Maintained and updated student, faculty, and staff databases in AS-400 System. Provided lead direction for mailroom student workers. Planned and maintained student schedules. Received incoming mail, sorted for efficient pick up and delivery. Guided student workers in providing the highest-quality response and service in person, as well as over the phone. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

PeopleSoft AR\Billing and PeopleSoft Tools, Siebel 7.7 Configuration and Escript, Oracle–SQL, Test Director, MS Word, Excel, Access, PowerPoint, Project, and FrontPage 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—2005–Present 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Certified Scrum Master (Scrum Alliance)—2014 

EDUCATION 

Augsburg College 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Management Information Systems, Business Management Minor 

Itasca Community College 

Grand Rapids, MN 

A.A. Page 1 

# JAMES BELL 

Senior English Language Arts Test Development Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. James Bell has more than 25 years of experience in secondary and higher education and assessment. At DRC, he participates in all aspects of English language arts test and item development. Prior to taking a full-time position at DRC, Dr. Bell served as chair and associate professor in the Department of English, Foreign Language and Humanities at Northwestern Oklahoma State University. He has also served as director of Institutional Assessment and associate professor at College of the Ozarks. 

In addition to his 14 years of university teaching, Dr. Bell spent 11 years as a teacher in the public schools, where his experience included teaching middle school reading, middle school language arts, and high school English. He has also served as a freelance English language arts writer, editor, and facilitator in test and item development. He has extensive experience as a writing consultant for elementary and secondary schools, conducting workshops and on-site visits related to standardized test development and review, secondary writing center design, the writing process, and authentic analogies for the writing process. 

Dr. Bell holds a Ph.D. in English from Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas; an M.A. in English and Drama from Texas Woman’s University in Denton, Texas; and a B.S. in Secondary Education in English and Psychology from Lamar University in Beaumont, Texas. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Dr. Bell’s CCR experience includes developing CCR-aligned items, passages, and scoring rubrics for the Smarter Balanced consortium and for DRC’s College- and Career- Readiness Item Bank project. 

In his former position as Department Chair in English, Foreign Language and Humanities at Northwestern Oklahoma State University, Dr. Bell participated in discussions of PARCC-related issues as a faculty representative to the Course Equivalency Project Discipline Committee meetings sponsored by the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education, and as a university representative to meetings sponsored by the Oklahoma Association of Colleges for Teacher Education. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Writing Test Development Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the development of English language arts assessments aligned to the CCR standards. Participates in all aspects of English language arts test and Résumé of James Bell Page 2 

item development and works with freelance item writers and consultants in passage selection and item development. Stays current with developments in English language arts curriculum and assessment and develops English language arts curriculum and in-service materials and programs. Reviews and edits test items, facilitates committee reviews, constructs test forms, and performs other test development activities. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

College and Career Readiness Item Bank—2013–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2008–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessments—2008–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2013 Chair, Department of English, Foreign Language and Humanities 

Northwestern Oklahoma State University 

Alva, OK 

Served as chair and taught classes in Literature and Composition. 

1999–2010 Director of Institutional Assessment and Associate Professor of English 

College of the Ozarks 

Point Lookout, MO 

Served as institutional assessment director and associate professor of English. Taught classes in literature, composition, and English education. 

1995–1999 Junior High and High School English Teacher and Writing Center Director 

Southland Independent School District 

Southland, TX 

Established and directed a campus-wide, student-staffed writing center for K–12 students and taught high school English, middle school reading, and middle school language arts. 

1994–1995 Graduate Teaching Assistant 

Texas Tech University 

Lubbock, Texas 

Taught courses in composition. Résumé of James Bell Page 3 

1989–1994 High School English, Theater, and Psychology Teacher 

Alvord High School 

Alvord, Texas 

Taught high school English and theater classes. 

1986–1988 High School English and Psychology Teacher 

Little Cypress-Mauriceville High School 

Orange, Texas 

Taught high school English and psychology classes. 

1992 –2013 Freelance Writer, Editor, and Committee Facilitator 

Wrote and edited items for Arizona AIMS, Arizona AZELLA, Cincinnati Public Schools, Delaware, Florida FCAT, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. Facilitated meetings for Arizona AIMS, Arizona AZELLA, Kansas, Kentucky, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Southwest/Texas Popular Culture Association—1996–1998, 2003–Present 

South Central Modern Language Association—1997–1998, 2010–Present 

Cormac McCarthy Society—2001, 2008, 2012–Present 

American Association of Higher Education—2010, 2012 

National Council of Teachers of English—2003 

PUBLICATIONS 

Bell, James (2002). Cormac McCarthy’s West: The Border Trilogy Annotations .El Paso: Texas Western Press. 

Bell, James. “Seismic Overstatement: Challenging the Paradigm Shift in Composition.” English in Texas , 26.3, 1995. 

CONFERENCE PAPERS 

Bell, James. “Cormac McCarthy's Verisimilitude: Historical and Cultural Accuracy in the  Border Trilogy.”  Conference of the South Central Modern Language Association, Fort Worth, 29 October 2010. 

Bell, James. “‘Truly Believers in the Supernanny Way’: The Language of Repentance, Reform, and Revival in Supernanny .” Southwest/Texas Popular Culture and American Culture Associations Conference, Albuquerque, 15 February 2007. Résumé of James Bell Page 4 

Bell, James. “Cormac McCarthy’s ‘Casual Command of the Right Names for Things’ in the Border Trilogy .” Annual Conference of the Cormac McCarthy Society, El Paso, 27 October 2001. 

Bell, James. “The Technological Interstate Passes through Southland ISD: Small School Connectivity.” Texas Association of School Boards’ Technology in Schools Conference, Corpus Christi, 16 April 1999 

Bell, James. “Establishing and Maintaining the High School Writing Center: One Approach.” Conference of College Teachers of English, Denton, Texas, 8 March 1999. 

Bell, James. “The Future Is Now: An Ongoing Collaborative Partnership between K-12 and Higher Education.” 1998 Visions of the Future Distance Learning Conference, Lubbock, Texas, 21 October 1998. 

Bell, James. “Contextualizing Cormac McCarthy’s The Orchard Keeper : An Annotative Approach.” Conference of the South. Central Modern Language Association, Dallas, 31 October 1997. 

Bell, James. “Literary Surrogacy: The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian and the Question of Authority.” Southwest/Texas Popular Culture Association Conference, Tulsa, Spring 1996. 

EDUCATION 

Texas Tech University 

Lubbock, Texas Ph.D., English 

Texas Woman’s University 

Denton, Texas M.A., English 

Lamar University 

Beaumont, Texas B.S., Secondary Education: English and Psychology Page 1 

# MARK BLECKEBERG 

IS Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Mark Bleckeberg is an Information Systems Director with over 21 years of experience, including project management, program management, process improvement, business analysis, software development and testing, and personnel management. In his current role, he manages projects in support of DRC’s imaging system, handscoring system, shipping and receiving systems, and student data processing system. 

Mr. Bleckeberg is skilled in project lifecycle management, customer communication, process improvement, team collaboration, problem resolution, software development, systems analysis, and personnel management. Prior to joining DRC, he worked for seven years at a major insurance company where he gained software development and software deployment experience. 

Mr. Bleckeberg holds a B.S. in Finance and a B.S. in Economics, both from St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. He also received and maintains his Project Management Professional certification from the Project Management Institute and received his ScrumMaster Certification from the Scrum Alliance. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present IS Director 

2009–2013 IS Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the management and scheduling of all information systems to meet the needs of large-scale statewide assessment projects, including business analysis, system design, quality control, processing, and report production. Coordinates development activities within project teams to ensure that appropriate technical resources are available and project schedules are met. Provides technical solutions to meet clients’ requirements for timely, accurate student data and quality reporting at all levels. Works effectively with project management and business-unit managers to build partnerships on projects, understand business priorities, adhere to schedules, resolve conflicts, and deliver efficient solutions. Gives technical advice, guidance, and direction to implement a culture of continuous improvement. Manages personnel including performance reviews, time-off approval, salary adjustments, and staffing. Résumé of Mark Bleckeberg Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2009 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Delivered excellent customer service. Created and maintained project plans for development and support teams. Liaison between Imaging Information System area and other company divisions. Worked with Director to develop resource plans and budgets. Worked on enterprise team to standardize project plan templates. Managed development and deployment of first .Net applications in the company with successful results. Application cut processing time by approximately 75%. Earned PMP certification. 

2002–2005 Software Developer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Developed software solutions for two sub-divisions of the company specializing in Object-Oriented design and n-tier client server systems. Facilitated analysis and design sessions. Responsible for developing implementation solutions for new applications and enhancements. Created and maintained system documentation and testing plans. Responsible for developing and enhancing applications and web pages using VB 6.0, VB.Net, JavaScript, ASP, VBScript, and XML. Built stored procedures using SQL Server 7.0. Responsible for training and mentoring new and junior employees on existing applications and business processes. 

Interacted with business users throughout the development cycle to ensure that requirements were being met. Provided production support for multiple geographic locations. Worked with team to develop first company data warehouse. 

2001–2002 Programmer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed, programmed, tested, and implemented COBOL applications for statewide assessment systems. Installed COBOL applications and DOS batch files on remote user systems. Coordinated and directed the coding activities of Programmer Analysts. Provided design and programming estimates. 

1998–2001 IT Specialist 

International Business Machines 

Plymouth, MN 

Performed Visual Basic, Lotus Notes, SQL, SAS, and COBOL programming and system architecture to rapid application development solutions area. Analyzed and implemented processing flow automation and improvements. Designed system architecture and programmed surround solutions used to automate manual Résumé of Mark Bleckeberg Page 3 

procedures. Used processes such as Full Life-cycle Testing, Software Quality Assurance, and Software Configuration Management to support goal of SEI Level 3. 

1993–1998 System Analyst 

Prudential Insurance 

Plymouth, MN 

Researched and documented mainframe system problems found in the manual calculations and tax reporting areas. Attended specification and quality assurance testing reviews for solutions to documented problems. Successfully coordinated two system upgrades, one of which was the largest in Prudential's history. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Software Development Lifecycle, Project Management, Visual Basic, MS SQL Server/Enterprise Manager and SQL Stored Procedures, XML, Java, C++, Cobol, Active X, Object Oriented Analysis, Microsoft Office Suite including Project, JavaScript, VBScript, ASP, .Net Technologies – ASP and VB 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Bloomington, MN 

Certified ScrumMaster (CSM) 

Scrum Alliance 

Indianapolis, IN 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S., Finance and Economics Page 1 

# THOMAS BOATMAN 

Senior Director of Software Quality Assurance 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Thomas Boatman has more than 16 years of software testing and quality assurance experience and 13 years of experience with statewide testing programs. As Senior Director of Information Systems Software Quality Assurance, he leads and oversees the software quality assurance team that supports DRC’s corporate information systems in Education, Surveys, and Document Services. Mr. Boatman’s staff currently provides quality assurance support on assessment projects for Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. His expertise includes developing and administering test scripts, performing defect classifications and severity assessments, and developing software quality assurance process flows and guidelines that encompass all phases of a project. Mr. Boatman has ensured adherence to quality processes for several large-scale assessment programs, including those for Alaska, Arkansas, Georgia, Minnesota, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. 

Mr. Boatman’s prior experience includes working for the Division of Research and Assessment at the Minnesota Department of Education, where he was responsible for requirements and quality control for all scoring and reporting activities for the Minnesota assessment system. He has also worked as a software test manager, software test engineer, and systems analyst. 

Mr. Boatman holds a B.A. from the University of Wisconsin—Eau Claire. He is a Certified Quality Analyst and Certified Software Test Engineer through the Quality Assurance Institute, and is a member of the Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Senior Director Software Quality Assurance 

2009–2011 Director of Software Quality Assurance 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leading and manages quality assurance initiatives for Corporate Information Systems (IS) departments, including Education, Surveys, Document Services, Corporate Technology, and New Product Development. Ensures solid SQA practices and standards are established and implemented. Develops and implements testing strategies in Software Quality Assurance. Works with staff and clients to clarify business requirements and ensure information technology requirements are met. Ensures SQA procedures and processes are incorporated into project schedules. Oversees production of quality products for clients. Résumé of Thomas Boatman Page 2 

Coordinates and implements code promotion procedures for development, testing, and production environments. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2009–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Alternate Assessment—2005–2006 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2007; 2009–2014 

Science Assessments—2005–2007 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–2007; 2009–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: End-of-Course Examinations—2002–2005 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2009–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2009–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2009–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2009–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2009–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2009–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2009–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2012–Present 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005; 2011–2014 

Minnesota Graduation-Required Assessments for Diploma—2011–2014 

Minnesota Test of Academic Skills—2011–2014 

Missouri Assessment Program—2014–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Ohio Graduation Test—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Testing Program—2005–2007; 

2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostics—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–2007; 2009–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2009–2014 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2009–Present 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2009–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 Résumé of Thomas Boatman Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2009 Supervisor, Data and Reporting 

Division of Research and Assessment 

Minnesota Department of Education 

Roseville, MN 

Oversaw all scoring and reporting for Minnesota’s statewide assessments. Coordinated work between the information technology groups at MDE and test vendor. Worked with both information technology groups to ensure the proper documentation of all scoring and reporting requirements. Implemented and oversaw quality control procedures. Supervised psychometric staff and oversaw development of technical documentation. Supervised state coordinator for National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). Served as program area lead on development of a new post-test editing system from initial requirements through implementation. Led development effort for two distinct growth models for state and federal accountability. Made presentations to district assessment coordinators, legislators, administrators, lobbyists, and other stakeholders. 

2006–2007 Software Quality Assurance Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Acted as central SQA point of contact between SQA analysts, developers, project managers, and other functional teams to ensure programs and data were adequately tested. Collaborated with Education Project Management in scheduling all software quality activities and building SQA sub-schedules. Provided daily work direction to SQA analysts. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Coordinated the development and execution of comprehensive testing plans, scripts, and test summaries, and reviewed all documentation for accuracy, feasibility, consistency, and completeness. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities and priorities, and open defect counts. 

2002–2006 Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Developed and executed comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test Résumé of Thomas Boatman Page 4 

summaries. Completed appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. 

2000–2002 Software Test Engineer 

Pitney Bowes 

Bloomington, MN 

General Systems Testing 

Logged, tracked, and retested software errors for Windows C++/Visual Basic application, two major releases of Windows client-server version, and one major release of web-enabled version. Performed installation and platform (environmental) application testing on various operating systems. Developed and executed test plans and test cases for client-server modules for carrier-certification and vendor-compliance functionality as well as EDI and SAP integration. 

Carrier Certification 

Analyzed requirements and created integration and functional-level test scripts for carrier certification of Internet transmission. Completed carrier certification for international labels. 

Carrier Rate Change Testing 

Developed and executed test cases for nine carrier rate changes. Completed requirements analysis for testing team. Implemented test design analysis; achieved greater than 50 percent reduction in test time. 

1998–2000 Software Test Consultant 

Testware Associates, Inc. 

Edina, MN 

Software Tester 

Logged, tracked, and retested software errors for five major and two minor releases of Windows C++ app; with Watcom 4.0 (now Sybase) database; Seagate’s Crystal Reports; environmental testing of printers and print drivers; and three releases of a DOS-based system written in Advanced Revelation. Developed and executed test plan and test cases for data conversion process (export, conversion, and import) for clients migrating from any of five legacy applications to new flagship product. Redesigned test script for nursing home Medicare intake to support baseline integration activities, plus functional detail, for unique processing. Analyzed requirements and created submissions integration and functional-level test scripts for Internet transmission. Reviewed requirements and modified test scripts supporting nine states’ unique intake and submission requirements. Met federal mandate for implementation. Performed application installation and platform (environmental) testing on various operating systems. Résumé of Thomas Boatman Page 5 

Systems Analyst 

Determined implementation of enhancements and fixes in light of changing federal requirements. Created specification and design documents for release. 

Third-Level Technical Support 

Assisted with problem analysis, database rebuilds, and SQL database updates. 

1996–1998 Youth Minister and Education Administrator 

Church of St. Bonaventure 

Bloomington, MN 

Trained, evaluated, and supervised a team of 32 peer ministers and seven adult leaders. Coordinated social events and retreats. Developed budget and calendar. 

1992–1996 Program Coordinator 

Office of Precollegiate Programs for Talented and Gifted 

Iowa State University 

Ames, IA 

Developed and coordinated a new summer residential program for high-ability high school students. Facilitated the integration of academic and social portions of the program. Trained and supervised residential staff of 12 for two summers. 

1995–1996 Supervisor 

B. Dalton Booksellers 

Lincoln, NE 

Supervised part-time booksellers in providing retail customer service. Assisted in training new personnel. Performed a variety of administrative and clerical tasks. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Certified Quality Analyst (CQA) by the Quality Assurance Institute 

Certified Software Test Engineer (CSTE) by the Quality Assurance Institute 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—1998–Present 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin 

Eau Claire, WI 

B.A., Social Studies and French Education Page 1 

# DANIEL BRAUN 

Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Daniel Braun has over three years of experience working in the Software Quality Assurance (SQA) field at DRC. Mr. Braun has been involved with many state projects, with his main focus on Pennsylvania and Washington. Within these state projects he has helped develop and enhance many testing processes used to verify testing materials, reports, and applications with great accuracy. This includes such items as Pre-ID Labels, District/School Labels, ISRs, Summary Reports, and the scoring system used to calculate students’ results. 

Mr. Braun has a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science and a Minor in Mathematics from the College of Business and Economics at the University of Wisconsin—River Falls. Through his schooling he has learned numerous programming languages including Java, C, C++, HTML, XML, Perl, SQL, Mathematica, and Assembly, among others. He has also taken math courses ranging from Trigonometry, Discrete Mathematics, Linear Algebra, Calculus (I, II, and III), as well as other courses. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Plans and implements software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvement. Develops and executes comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documents all software defects and performs regression testing. Coordinates defect review meetings. Participates in appropriate software development meetings. Reviews requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania AYP Reporting—2013– Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania School Performance Incentive Reporting—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2013–Present Résumé of Daniel Braun Page 2 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Developmentally Appropriate Proficiency Exams—2011–2013 

High School Proficiency Exams—2011–2013 

Measurements of Student Progress—2011–2013 

End-of-Course Exams—2011–2013 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2011 Resource Counselor 

Enrich, Inc. 

Shoreview, MN 

Improved the quality of life for residents living in various group homes around the Shoreview, Minnesota area. Aided residents in areas such as everyday tasks, obtaining personal goals, and helping them in events around the community, such as the Special Olympics. Performed duties to meet the demands and expectations of program directors. Responsible for administering proper medications and dosages to residents living in the homes. 

2008–2009 Installer 

Northland Irrigation 

North St. Paul, MN 

Worked with a team of up to 10 members installing and repairing lawn irrigation systems for both commercial and residential customers. Used commercial grade equipment to install, repair, and maintain irrigation systems. Educated customers in proper usage and maintenance of hardware. Installed and explained how to use the control module to management and/or new owners of the irrigation system. Assisted with snow removal and maintenance of sidewalks and parking lots. 

2007–2009 Student Aid 

University of Wisconsin—River Falls 

River Falls, WI 

Created, sorted, and managed students’ personal information files for past and present University of Wisconsin—River Falls students. Assisted faculty with sorting mail, filing paperwork, helping walk-in students, completing detailed projects, and operating multi-line phone system. Helped students with transcript requests, re-entry admission, adding/dropping classes, enrollment verifications, withdrawals, personal information change, degree audit reports, and graduation. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Languages : Java, HTML, C, C++, SQL, Assembly, Mathematica, Perl, XML 

Applications: Eclipse, MySQL Workbench, Mathematica, Visual Paradigm, UltraEdit, Microsoft Office—Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Visio, Access, SQL Server Management Studio 

Operating Systems: Windows, Mac OS, Linux Résumé of Daniel Braun Page 3 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin—River Falls, College of Business and Economics 

River Falls, WI 

B.S., Computer Science and Information Systems, Minor in Mathematics Page 1 

# GINNY BURNETT 

Senior Director, Operations—Education 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

With over 29 years of experience in operational activities, Ms. Ginny Burnett demonstrates a commitment to efficient and innovative management of large-scale assessment projects. Ms. Burnett currently serves as DRC’s Senior Director, Operations—Education; prior to this position, she served as DRC’s Director of Clerical Operations for six years. 

Ms. Burnett has implemented quality assurance procedures into the DRC Operations environment and expanded the use of technology into education operations quality functions. Her large-scale assessment experience includes projects for Alabama, Alaska, Georgia, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington. Throughout her career, Ms. Burnett has significantly improved business processes, integrated new technical systems, and provided outstanding project leadership. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2006–Present Senior Director, Operations—Education 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Provides leadership for the timely delivery and processing of education materials. Monitors project schedules, progress, and costs. Develops contingency plans. Forecasts and budgets business goals. Prioritizes and delegates responsibilities within Education—Operations. Supervises fulltime staff. Proposes process modifications to enhance competitiveness in a multi-shift environment. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—2000–2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2000–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Alternate Assessment—2005–2006 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Science Assessments—2005–2009 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing Assessment & Accountability: 

End of Course Examinations—2000–2005 

California Golden State Examinations—2000–2002 Résumé of Ginny Burnett Page 2 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test—2003–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2003–Present 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System Program—2000–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2000–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2000–2005 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2010–Present 

North Carolina High School Exit Examination—2000–2002 

North Carolina Open-Ended Assessment—2000–2002 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2006–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2000–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2000–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2006–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2009–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program—2000–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—2000–2003 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007–2008 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program 

End-Of-Course—2011–Present 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2006 Director of Clerical Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Led and directed complex production processes. Prioritized projects and delegated responsibility. Defined schedules and developed contingency plans. Designed and implemented procedures. Supervised full-time and seasonal staff. Forecasted and budgeted business goals. Proposed process modifications to enhance competitiveness in a multi-shift environment. Résumé of Ginny Burnett Page 3 

1999 Remarketing Services Support Manager 

GE Capital Fleet Services 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Recruited for a special assignment to improve business processes, integrate new technical systems, reset metrics, and build an invested team supporting a key corporate restructuring and systems conversion. Partnered cross-functionally to streamline North American remarketing service operations and provided communications to internal and external customers (13,000+) and vendors related to business process changes. Delivered $11.3 million in net income gains. 

1997–1999 Remarketing Operations Manager 

GE Capital Fleet Services 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Independently led highly effective and efficient processing for all national remarketing sales channels. Benchmarked and delivered a high level of service and responsiveness to internal and external customers. Cited repeatedly for quality-based work, including project leadership of the Wholesale Processing Quality Team and the process owner/co-leader of the Design for Six Sigma Client Sales Team, a Black Belt quality initiative. Hired and trained a top performance service team of 30 direct reports. Managed an annual budget of $1 million. 

1995–1997 Managing Leader 

Used Vehicle Sales (UVS) Fleet Answer Line 

GE Capital Fleet Services 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Promoted to spearhead a politically sensitive business restructuring of sales processing and the implementation of the UVS Fleet Answer Line, servicing 7,000 calls monthly. Gained confidence of the remote location supervisor, the Canadian Remarketing Team Leader, who requested U.S. Remarketing back-up representation at management meetings. Managed a $750,000 budget and a strongly productive team of 24 direct reports. Developed and co-facilitated business-wide Fleet Services University class on the “Introduction to Fleet Answer Line” to support understanding and operation interface with other functions. 

1989–1995 Dealer Operations/Delivery Services Manager 

Title and Licensing Manager 

Rapid Tag Product Manager 

GE Capital Fleet Services 

Eden Prairie, MN Résumé of Ginny Burnett Page 4 

1988–1989 Cash Application Supervisor 

Kerr Leasing/GE Capital Fleet Services 

Denver, CO 

Relocated Cash Applications from Colorado to Minnesota. Developed, hired, and trained new staff to centralize and relocate the acquisition. Implemented system changes to ensure accurate posting of cash and improved quality of cash reported. 

1985–1988 Damage Control Supervisor 

Gelco CTI Container/GE Capital 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Supervised, planned, and coordinated invoicing of billable repairs, $48 million annually. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook, Quest, Siebel, ACD, and LotusNotes 

TRAINING PROVIDED 

Provided operation, product, and technical training to more than 475 individuals, ranging from entry-level clerks to senior management. 

EDUCATION 

Training Received: More than 1,650 hours of training in Management, Quality (Green Belt, Black Belt), Project Management, Customer Workouts, Team Building and Revitalization, Process Improvement, Product Development, Customer Service, and numerous technical applications. Page 1 

# DAVID CHAYER 

Senior Vice President of Research 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. David Chayer has more than 31 years of experience performing and directing research for test design and development activities. His work has included large-scale educational assessments, norm-referenced tests, and licensure/certification testing programs for both paper-and-pencil and computer-based tests. He has produced and evaluated measurement instruments; coordinated, designed, and implemented standard setting procedures; and ensured that all methodologies and processes were valid and legally defensible. 

Mr. Chayer holds a Master of Arts in Educational Psychology, specializing in Measurement, and a Bachelor of Arts in Statistics, both from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Vice President of Research 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

In addition to the overall management of the Research Department, responsible for leading Psychometric Quality Process Team initiatives; consulting on education policy and legislative actions on state and federal levels; design and development of diagnostically useful reports; investigation and implementation of innovative item types in online testing; and design and implementation of various proprietary computer adaptive testing systems and associated research including comparability studies, item exposure controls, and predictive modeling. Senior management duties include corporate-wide strategic planning, and budget and profit and loss responsibilities within the Education Services business unit. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1999–2010 Vice President of Psychometric Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for leading the planning, design, and development of innovative assessment programs. Direct large-scale experience in several client states including Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Minnesota, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. Responsibilities included designing and implementing systems for effective management of research in assessment; identifying creative uses of technology to Résumé of David Chayer Page 2 

provide for efficient handling of items and data in the test development process; and serving as a consultant for clients and staff on psychometric issues. 

1995–1999 Director of Test Development 

Experior Assessments (formerly Cogent Testing Network/ Insurance Testing Corporation) 

St. Paul, MN 

Responsible for the production and evaluation of computer-based measurement instruments that met exacting industry standards in licensure and certification in 17 states including standard setting on all programs. In addition, managed a computer systems development team, supervising systems personnel who modified and maintained systems necessary for research, test development, distribution, scoring, and reporting using Item Response Theory (IRT) methodologies for implementing both computer-assisted and computer adaptive testing (CAT) programs. 

Senior management responsibilities included writing business proposals and co-authoring state client proposals; formulating occupational analysis designs and reports; coordinating, designing, and implementing standard-setting procedures; and serving on a legal defensibility committee. 

Additional responsibilities included managing the incorporation of client tests into the electronic Cogent testing network; producing needs-analysis reports for prospects and clients; and performing psychometric research and analysis for clients as an external consultant. 

1994–1995 Manager of Test Production 

Experior Assessments (formerly Cogent Testing Network/ Insurance Testing Corporation) 

St. Paul, MN 

Responsible for designing, testing, and implementing a proprietary system for setting examination standards for clients. This was performed completely on a portable, local area network designed specifically for enhancing test security and improving the accuracy and efficiency of the analyses to provide immediate feedback. Also responsible for designing the materials for performing occupational analysis, including sample selection methodology, and writing/ programming and designing the methodology used to analyze the results of the study. 

Responsible for managing and conducting monthly statistical analyses on item response data using traditional and IRT methodologies, including ongoing evaluation and refinement of statistical methodologies used to analyze both item and candidate score data. Prepared files for and managed off-site examination review committee meetings with subject matter experts, which included reviews of substantive content outlines/blueprints, item appropriateness and accuracy, item-to-content category matching, and setting of examination difficulty Résumé of David Chayer Page 3 

standards. Managed, constructed, evaluated, and maintained measurement instruments for all clients. 

1989–1994 Measurement Statistician 

American Guidance Service 

Circle Pines, MN 

Responsible for performing statistical analysis; scheduling, coordinating, and managing staff for all projects in the Research Division of Test Development; researching measurement issues; and attending professional conferences in statistics, psychology, the advancement of science, and measurement. 

Test development projects included: 

• Behavior Assessment Scales for Children (BASC) 

• Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning (DIAL-3) 

• Early Screening Profiles (ESP) 

• Kaufman Adult Intelligence Test (KAIT) 

• Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (KABC) 

• Kaufman Survey of Early Academic and Language Skills (KSEALS) 

• Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement (KTEA) 

• Keymath-R 

• Listening Comprehension and Oral Expression /Written Expression kit (OWLS) 

• Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT-III) 

• Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-R) 

• Social Skills Rating System (SSRS) 

• Specialized Science High Schools Admission Test (SSHSAT: New York City Schools) 

• Student Self Concept Scale (SSCS) 

• Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS) 

• Woodcock Reading Mastery Tests (WRMT-R) 

Introduced and implemented modern statistical methodologies, including LISREL (confirmatory factor analysis, multi-method, multi-trait methods, structural equation modeling); FACETS item analysis (multifaceted Rasch measurement); computer-generated sample selection procedures; and the investigation of differential item functioning using logistic regression. 

1983–1989 Statistical Analyst 

American Guidance Service 

Circle Pines, MN 

Responsible for performing statistical analyses on educational and psychological test data. Techniques included analysis of variance and covariance, classical and IRT reliability, item calibration, indices of predictive and concurrent validity, multiple regression, tests of item bias using traditional and Rasch analysis Résumé of David Chayer Page 4 

methodology, confirmatory and exploratory factor analysis, and analysis of loglinear models. 

RELEVANT COURSEWORK AND SPECIFIC AREAS OF INTEREST 

Advanced Measurement Theory 

Analysis of Variance/Covariance Structures 

Applied Multivariate Analysis 

Applied Regression Analysis 

Categorical Data Analysis 

Computer Adaptive Models 

Computer Assisted Models 

Design of Experiments 

Factor Analysis 

Hierarchical Structure Analysis 

Item Exposure Models and Methods 

Latent Trait Theory 

Monte Carlo Simulations 

Statistical Quality Control and Automation 

Structural Equation Modeling 

Theoretical Statistics 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Tao, S., Sorenson, B., Simon, M., Chayer, D., Du, Y., Hermann, P., Optimal Designs for Embedded Field Test Item Calibration in Operational Computerized Adaptive Testing. 2013 NCME. San Francisco, CA. 

Liu, X., Chayer, D., Liu, F., Simon, M., A Bayesian Hierarchical Modeling Approach for Detecting Suspicious Schools in Data Forensics Studies. 2013 NCME. San Francisco, CA. 

Chayer, D., Hermann, P., Simon, M., Du, Y., Field-Test Items Calibration in CAT: Approaches and Implications to Practice in State Assessment Programs. 

2012 NCME, Vancouver, BC. 

Hu, H., Chayer, D., Bishop, K. & Hermann, P. (2011) NCME New Orleans, LA. 

Investigation of Mode Effects on a Field Test: A Confirmatory Differential Item Functioning Analysis. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education conference. New Orleans, LA. 

Du, Y., Tao, S., Plackner, C. & Chayer, D.. (2010) Evaluating Feasibility and Stability of the Traditional Equipercentile, Kernel, and Rasch Equating Methods for a State Alternate Assessment Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education conference. Denver, CO. 

Chayer, D. & Smith, L. (2008, March). Handling the Assumption of Randomly Equivalent Groups in Equating: A Comparison of Rasch and 3PL Software. 

Paper to be presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association conference, New York, NY. Résumé of David Chayer Page 5 

Chayer, D. & Smith, L. (2008). Comparing State NAEP with Large Scale Assessments: An Overview of Recent Research Findings. Data Recognition Corporation (Internal Report). 

Taylor, M., Carr, T., & Chayer, D. (2007). Comparability and Scalability of Access-Enhanced Items: Results from AARDL. Presented at Council of Chief State School Officers Large-Scale Assessment Conference. Nashville, TN 

Chayer, D., Tanner, J., & Kahl, S. (2006). What Challenges Do SEAs and Business Confront Around Innovative Assessments? Invited Panelist at CEO-CEO Exchange, Council of Chief State School Officers, Park City, UT. 

Chayer, D. (2006). Application of Growth Models in Large-Scale Assessment .Presented at the Growth Model Conference, Mobile, AL. 

Chayer, D. (2005). Standards-Based Assessments: Understanding the Data .Presented at the, No Child Left Behind Winter Conference. Anchorage, AK. 

Chayer, D. (2005). Achieving Vertical Articulation of Performance Level Cutpoints Across Grades in Large Scale Assessment via Standards Validation: Multiple Approaches. Presented at Council of Chief State School Officers Large-Scale Assessment Conference. San Antonio, TX. 

Wong, C. & Chayer, D. (2004). From Here to There (and Through NCLB): The PA Story from a Psychometric Perspective. Co-presented at Council of Chief State School Officers Large-Scale Assessment Conference. Boston, MA. 

Chayer, D., Mead, R., McDivitt, P., Hambleton, R. Hill, R., & Marion, S. (2005). Technical Aspects of Standards Validation. Presented at the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment: Technical Roundtable. Harrisburg, PA. 

Chayer, D. (2003). Statistics 101: A Short Course for Large Scale Assessment .Presented at the , York, PA. 

Chayer, D. (2000a). Feasibility Study to Assess Switching IRT Models from the 3-Parameter Logistic Model to the Rasch Model for the PACT-2000. Technical Documentation for the 1999 Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests of English Language Arts and Mathematics, Grades Three through Eight. Office of Assessment, South Carolina Department of Education. Columbia, South Carolina 

———. (2000b). Feasibility Study to Assess Switching from Multiple Reader Scoring to Single Reader Scoring of Constructed Response Items for the PACT-2000. Technical Documentation for the 1999 Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests of English Language Arts and Mathematics, Grades Three through Eight. Office of Assessment, South Carolina Department of Education. Columbia, South Carolina 

———. (2000c). Feasibility Study to Assess Impact of Eliminating the Writing Portion of Reading Items for PACT-2000 . Technical Documentation for the 1999 Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests of English Language Arts and Mathematics, Grades Three through Eight. Office of Assessment, South Carolina Department of Education. Columbia, South Carolina 

Ittenbach, R., Chayer, D., Bruininks, R., Thurlow, M., Beirne-Smith, M. (1993), "Adjustment of young adults with mental retardation in community settings: comparison of parametric and nonparametric statistical techniques", American Journal on Mental Retardation , Vol. 97 pp.607-15. Résumé of David Chayer Page 6 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

American Educational Research Association—1983–Present 

American Statistical Association—1983–Present 

Association of American Publishers (AAP) 

Association of Test Publishers (ATP) 

National Council on Measurement in Education—1983–Present 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

M.A., Measurement, Educational Psychology 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Statistics 

Minor in Philosophy Page 1 

# KARA COURTNEY 

English Language Arts Test Development Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Kara Courtney has more than 16 years of test development experience and has worked on more than 15 statewide assessments, providing leadership as a director, project manager, team lead, or content lead. Ms. Courtney’s assessment experience includes all steps in the item and test development process, including: directing and participating in item and rubric development and test construction for grades K-12; participating in performance assessment scoring processes; developing performance-level descriptors; and facilitating standard setting meetings, range finding meetings, content reviews, and data reviews with committees of educators. She has also presented at numerous professional conferences. 

Ms. Courtney’s assessment experience also covers working with state departments of education to develop and implement K-2 blueprints, item specifications, and assessments in the content areas of mathematics and English language arts for both paper and pencil and online delivery. Ms. Courtney has also worked closely with the state of Michigan to construct a design for a cognitive study for the K-2 population. 

In addition to her comprehensive experience in large-scale assessment, Ms. Courtney served as a grant manager, program evaluator, and assessment specialist for two years in the Research, Federal Programs and Grants Department for a large urban school district. She also served as a teacher for four years, working mostly with at-risk students. In addition, Ms. Courtney served as a director of education for four years at an international tutoring company. 

Ms. Courtney holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Secondary English Education, Reading and Language Arts, from Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio. She has also completed coursework at Michigan State University and holds a certificate in Educational Assessments for the Practitioner. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS STANDARDS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Courtney’s CCR experience includes reviewing the Alabama reading alignment to the CCR standards and providing feedback. 

Ms. Courtney works on all aspects of item development for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium project and is responsible for the development of new reading passages, items, technology-enhanced items, and scoring guidelines aligned to the Smarter Balanced Claims and Targets, aligned to the Common Core standards. In addition, Ms. Courtney works with committees of Michigan and Idaho educators to develop items aligned to the Common Core for the Smarter Balanced project. Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 2 

Ms. Courtney’s work in early education has included developing a K-2 assessment based on CCR standards and implementing articulation throughout K-12. Her participation in the Early Childhood SCASS meetings has maintained her knowledge and experience with the CCR standards from all content areas including mathematics and English language arts. 

By participating in webinars sponsored by the Council of Chief State School Officers and other entities, Ms. Courtney remains current on issues related to English language arts, such as text complexity, and other CCR developments. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present English Language Arts Test Development Director 

2012–2014 Senior Manager, Test Development 

2010–2012 Manager, Test Development 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Participates in all aspects of reading and English language arts test and item development. Works with content specialists, freelance writers, and consultants in reading and English language arts item development and test construction. Researches and communicates current developments in reading and English language arts assessment. Responsibilities also include representing DRC at the Early Childhood SCASS meetings, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Facilitates content, data, and rangefinding committee reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Standards Based Assessments—2004–Present 

Basic Early Assessment of Reading—2002–2004 

College and Career Readiness Item Bank Project—2013–Present 

Early Childhood Reading Test—2001–2002 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test—1998–2000 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2004 

Integrated Performance Assessment Series—1997–1998 

Massachusetts State Standards-Referenced Test—1998 

Michigan Interim Assessments K–2—2012–Present 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Mississippi Norm-Referenced Performance Assessment Program—1997–1998 

New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment—1997–1999, 2002–2004 

New Jersey Proficiency Assessments Series—1997–2004 Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 3 

New York State Standard Setting, Data Analysis and Technical Reports for the Regents Exams—2013–Present 

North Carolina High School Exit Exam—1999–2000 

Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests—1999–2004 

Ohio Proficiency Tests—1998–2001 

Oklahoma Criterion-Referenced Tests—2000 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Tests of New York State Standards—2000–2004 

Voluntary National Reading Test —1997–2000 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—1999–2003 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2010 Senior Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Participated in all aspects of reading and English language arts test and item development. Worked with content specialists, freelance writers, and consultants in reading and English language arts item development and test construction. Researches and communicates current developments in reading and English language arts assessment. Responsibilities also included representing DRC, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Facilitated content, data, and rangefinding committee reviews. 

2004–2006 Consultant 

Data Recognition Company 

Minneapolis, Minnesota 

Consulted on various large-scale assessment programs by reviewing test booklets, performing key verifications, mapping items to state standards, creating answer key documents, reviewing passages, and editing material as needed. 

2004–2006 Program Evaluator, Grant Manager, Assessment Specialist 

Rockford Public School District #205 

Rockford, Illinois 

Internal evaluator for several federal grants for the Rockford Public School District. Designed program evaluation, collected data to support the measure of goals and objectives, and created evaluation reports. Project director for two Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 4 

multi-million dollar federal grants, serving as the liaison to the federal program director, the team leader of community members and school administration, and coordinator of the grant implementation. Provided overall management of the grants, including adherence to budget, implementation of program, monitoring of success, and following federal compliance criteria such as submitting and writing of the yearly performance reports. Provided critical assessment specialist support before, during, and after administration of the state assessment (ISAT) and created data sets from the assessments for administrators and educators to drive instruction. 

2003–2005 English Teacher, Alternative High School 

Regional Office of Education 

Rockford, Illinois 

Taught English to at-risk students in grades nine through twelve. 

2003–2004 Project Supervisor 

Riverside Publishing Company 

Itasca, Illinois 

Supervised test development specialists within large-scale programs. Content 

liaison between state representatives and Riverside internal processing departments. Maintained schedules and adherence to deadlines. Ensured quality control procedures were met. Oversaw the production of all assessment materials and provided support to test development specialists. Projects included: Basic Early Assessment of Reading, Project Supervisor, Grades K–3; Early Childhood Reading Test, Assessment Specialist, Grades K–3; Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests Item Banking System and English Language Arts Content Lead, Grades 1–8, Project Lead, Grades 1–8; Integrated Performance Assessment Series, Content Lead, Grades 3–12; Massachusetts State Standards-Referenced Test, Assessment Specialist; Mississippi Norm-Referenced Performance Assessment Program, Content Lead, Grades 3–12; New Jersey Proficiency Assessments Series; Project Supervisor, Grades 3, 5, 6, 7, and 9; New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment, Project Lead and Content Lead, Grade 4; North Carolina High School Exit Exam, Assessment Specialist, Grade 10; Oklahoma Criterion-Referenced Tests, English Language Arts Assessment Specialist, Grades 5, 8, and 11; Ohio Proficiency Tests, Project Supervisor, Grades 4, 6, 8, and 10; Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests, Project Supervisor, Grades 3, 5, 6 7, and 9; Riverside Item Banking System, Project Supervisor, Grades 1–10; Tests of New York State Standards, Project Supervisor, Grades 3, 5, 6, and 7; Washington Assessment of Student Learning, Project Supervisor, Grades 4, 7, and 10; Voluntary National Reading Test at Fourth Grade, Assessment Specialist, Grade 4. Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 5 

2001–2003 Manager, Reading Language Arts Test Development 

Riverside Publishing Company 

Itasca, Illinois 

Supervised the reading and language arts test development specialists and their projects. Guided production of all reading and language arts assessment materials, provided support to test development specialists, and oversaw item writers and consultants. 

1997–2001 Senior Reading and Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

Riverside Publishing Company 

Itasca, Illinois 

Developed materials for statewide custom assessment programs. Aligned curriculum to test blueprints; created test and item specifications and scoring rubrics; designed test blueprints; trained and supervised item writers; selected grade-appropriate reading passages; and facilitated content review meetings. 

1995–1997 Director of Education 

Sylvan Learning Center 

Dundee and St. Charles, Illinois 

Served as an administrator and diagnostician. Worked with students ranging from 5 to 20 years old; taught beginning reading, academic reading, writing, basic math, algebra, geometry, study skills, and SAT/ACT college preparation. In addition, trained staff members and discussed student program progress with parents/guardians. 

1993–1995 Director of Education 

Sylvan Learning Center 

St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada 

Served as an administrator and diagnostician. Worked with students ranging from 5 to 20 years old; taught beginning reading, academic reading, writing, basic math, algebra, geometry, and study skills. In addition, trained staff members and discussed student program progress with parents/guardians. 

1991–1993 English Teacher, Alternative High School, Grades 9 –12 

Southwestern City School District 

Grove City, Ohio 

Taught English to at-risk students in grades 9 –12; developed the English curriculum for the alternative program. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development—1997–Present 

Delta Kappa Gamma, Beta Gamma Chapter—2005–Present Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 6 

International Reading Association—1997–Present 

National Council of Teachers of English—1990–Present 

CONFERENCES ATTENDED 

National Conference on Student Assessment, CCSSO (2013), Washington, D.C. 

International Reading Association Annual Conference (2011), Orlando, FL. 

ASCD Annual Conference (2009), Orlando, FL. 

Organization of American Historians Annual Convention and the Teaching American History Grant Pre-Conference Symposium (2006). Washington, D.C. 

Illinois Teaching American History Grant Conference (2006). Chicago, IL. 

Teaching American History Grant Federal Program Director’s Conference (2005). Washington, D. C. 

Professional Development Schools Convention (2005). Orlando, Florida. 

Teacher Quality Enhancement Conference (2005). Washington, D. C. 

Illinois Teaching American History Grant Conference (2005). Bloomington, IL. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Courtney, K., Middlestead, A., McDivitt, P. Neitzel, S., Spradlin, M. (2013). 

Debunking the Myth Attached to Commissioned Texts for Assessments. 

CCSSO, National Conference on Student Assessment, Washington, D.C. 

Courtney, K. and Houtz, P. (2009). Improving Student Achievement without Teaching to the Test . ASCD, Annual Conference, Orlando, FL. 

Courtney, K. and Kuzniewski, M. (2006). Lessons Learned . Smaller Learning Communities Grant, Federal Project Director’s Meeting, Washington, D.C. 

Courtney, K., Homewood, B., Cassioppi, K., and Bowers III, J.D. (2006), History Connections , Teaching American History Grant Federal Project Director’s Meeting, Washington, D.C. 

Courtney, K., and Ostergard, K. (2005). Choice for Achievement: Where are We Now? District Level Presentation on the Voluntary Public School Choice Federal Grant, Rockford Public School District #205, Rockford, IL. 

Courtney, K., Downey, P., and Sorensen, C. (2005). Orchestrating a Medley of Change . Professional Development Schools Conference, Orlando, FL. 

Courtney, K., Downey, P., and Sorensen, C. (2005). Orchestrating a Medley of Change . Teacher Quality Enhancement Grant Federal Project Director’s Meeting, Washington, D.C. 

Courtney, K. and Schepley, F. (2005). Data Made Simple , District Level Presentation on Illinois Standard Achievement Test, Rockford Public School District #205, Rockford, IL. Résumé of Kara Courtney Page 7 

Courtney, K. and DeRoo, C. (1996) Metacognition: Strategies and Uses in the Classroom. Seminar for educators sponsored by Sylvan Learning Centers, St. Charles, IL. 

Courtney, K. (1995) How to Succeed in High School: Study Skills for Better Grades. Seminar for students and their parents sponsored by Sylvan Learning Centers, St. Charles, IL. 

EDUCATION 

Michigan State University 

East Lansing, MI 

Certificate in Educational Assessment for Practitioners 

Ohio State University 

Columbus, Ohio B.S., English Education 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Illinois—Language Arts, Grades 6 –8

English, Grades 9 –12 

State of Ohio—Language Arts, Grades 6 –8

English, Grades 9–12 Page 1 

# NONA DAVIS 

Senior IS Business Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Nona Davis is an accomplished Senior Business Analyst with a proven track record of exceeding customer expectations. She is responsible for working directly with the client to gather, document, and implement the requirements for all assessment phases. With 33 years of experience in information technology, she offers DRC’s best recommendations based on her technical experience, DRC product offerings, and knowledge of the client program. 

Ms. Davis has developed an in-depth understanding of the client’s accountability reporting requirements of No Child Left Behind. She consults with the client to understand and document the requirements of the Required Federal Reporting Measures web-based reporting system and the web-based school, district, and state reports, including: school designations as identified by School Performance Profile (SPP), web-based corrections system and process, data files, and online reports. Ms. Davis has a unique ability to listen and understand end-audience needs while translating them into concise system requirements. Focusing on the client’s business and processes, she recommends DRC’s customized technical solutions and process improvements to provide enhanced client solutions. 

Ms. Davis’ assessment experience also includes defining the data elements and design for the individual student and district/school summary reports. She has been a key contributor to various DRC web-based systems for Pennsylvania such as Online Enrollment, Student Precode System, Student Correction System, Student Redistribution System, AYP Appeals System, and AYP Accountability and Reporting System. 

Ms. Davis gained experience working for The Pillsbury Company, Fingerhut, Cable Value Network, Applied Learning International, and Aramco Services Company. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2006–Present Senior IS Business Analyst 

2001–2006 IS Business Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for client support: client relations, client communications, requirements analysis, and implementation of the defined business requirements. Participates in project planning activities, scope management, project estimates, project schedules, and timelines. Collaborates with the client to understand and document assessment and reporting systems. Offers customers enhanced solutions Résumé of Nona Davis Page 2 

that leverage other DRC offerings or provide process improvements. Designs individual student reports and state/district/school reports. Works directly with Commonwealth personnel, leads new design and enhancements to reports and web-sites. Leads transition from Adequately Yearly Progress (AYP) to SPP reporting web-sites, reports, and processes, including text changes, report, and web design. Contributes as part of a project team to meet or exceed customer expectations. Makes certain all deliverables are produced according to client specifications. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2001–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment AYP Reporting—2003–2013 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment School Performance Profile Reporting—2013–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1999–2000 Senior Business Analyst 

Information Management Department 

The Pillsbury Company 

Minneapolis, MN 

Designed and implemented new processes for leadership team to review or modify completed audits, increasing efficiency of audit reviews by 85%. Managed research and recommendation services provided by external resources regarding trends and business best practices. Performed individual research analysis for senior management; increased company use of advisory services by 50% in one year. Managed project providing 45 Information Management employees with introductory, advanced, and ongoing project management training. Developed and implemented policies, guidelines, and procedures to track and monitor supplies used within the department; reduced expenses by 7% in the first year. 

1995–1999 Training Manager 

Information Management Department 

The Pillsbury Company 

Minneapolis, MN 

Designed and managed the Education Center. Established and maintained training vendor relationships. Served as member of Information Management Department communication team. Designed, oversaw, and upgraded the training database; reported training results to senior management. Designed training home page on the company intranet. Résumé of Nona Davis Page 3 

1992–1995 Training Manager 

Information Systems Department 

Fingerhut 

Minneapolis, MN 

Selected and contracted with vendors to provide on-site training. Managed yearly budgets of up to $885,000 and prepared monthly accountability reports. Prepared cost/benefit analyses for consultant-led courses, multimedia training, computer-based tracking systems, and other training activities. Reduced training costs by 12–18% each year. Evaluated and supervised the installation and customization of training-related software packages. 

1990–1992 Independent Consultant 

Minneapolis, MN 

Provided IS training management and technical writing services to Fingerhut and Pillsbury. Designed an IS employee orientation program. 

1988–1990 Senior Training Analyst/Technical Writer 

Cable Value Network 

Minneapolis, MN 

Prepared and implemented customized training plans. Supervised instructors and consultants. Developed end-user documentation for PC and mainframe 

computer systems. 

1987–1988 Training Analyst Consultant for Exxon Oil Company 

Applied Learning International 

Houston, TX 

Managed the technical training function. Supervised support staff. Contracted with vendors for customized on-site training. Reengineered process flow, resulting in 15% efficiency improvement. 

EDUCATION 

University of Houston 

Houston, Texas 

Coursework in English Page 1 

# JOAN DETZLER 

Associate IS Project Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Joan Detzler has been an integral part of the software development team at DRC for over eight years, most recently in a project management role for a large-scale statewide assessment client. As an Associate IS Project Manager, she develops and maintains project schedules, monitors the progress of project deliverables, and communicates project-related information. Prior to moving into project management, Ms. Detzler had over 14 years of experience as a business analyst, defining business needs, documenting business and technical requirements for development, and ensuring that requirements were met. 

Ms. Detzler holds a Master of Science degree in Technical Communication and a Bachelor of Science degree in Management Information Systems, both from Metropolitan State University in St. Paul, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Associate IS Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops and maintains project schedules and monitors the progress of project deliverables. Communicates schedule-related issues. Negotiates for resolution of resource-related constraints. Manages both internal and external customer expectations and influences and motivates project team to meet and/or surpass customer expectations. Serves as a key contributor in the project management process by providing scope and high-level estimates for new project initiatives. Directs and coordinates project activities using MS Project. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2006–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 Résumé of Joan Detzler Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–Present Adjunct Instructor, Business Program 

Brown College 

Mendota Heights, MN 

Develops curriculum for courses. Courses taught include Government and Industry, Employment Law, Supervision, Management Information Systems, Business Research, Project Management, and Business Capstone. Curriculum components include overall plan for the term, lecture notes, homework assignments, and tests. Uses a variety of teaching methods, including lecture, group discussion, and group activities. 

2006–2012 Business Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Determined and analyzed client (internal and external) requirements and developed software specifications. Designed mockups of reports and interacted with the client and project management throughout the approval process. Worked closely with project management and the lead software developer to clarify issues and communicate the impact of any change. Suggested ways to simplify tasks. Analyzed and recommended solutions to problems that might occur during the execution of the project. Created layouts for data files. Responsible for requirements analysis and ensuring clients’ needs were met through quality systems. 

2005–2006 Business Analyst Consultant 

Analysts International 

Minneapolis, MN 

Worked with marketing and technical teams to define business needs for marketing technologies projects. Gathered business and technical requirements to be used for driving improvements and enhancements. Provided project leadership by creating project plans, facilitating meetings, and creating and maintaining project related documents. 

2000–2005 Business Analyst 

Banta Catalog Group 

Maple Grove, MN 

Interviewed business users to evaluate and document business processes and design solutions for integration with existing applications or development of new applications. Created project-related documentation including project plans, business requirements, functional design, database design, and user documentation. Formulated and executed test plans for newly developed software to ensure the application performed as expected and met the needs of the user. Résumé of Joan Detzler Page 3 

Served as liaison between users and software developers so that business needs were clearly understood and applications were designed to support those needs. 

Conducted user training prior to application implementation to ensure a smooth transition into the new processes. Analyzed and documented business processes for the list processing department as part of a company-wide quality initiative. Deliverables included Visio process flows, procedures, and job aids. Served as project lead for a website development project that successfully transformed a manual catalog ordering system into a web-based system. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Software: Microsoft Office Suite (Windows version), Visio, Microsoft Project, FileZilla (FTP), FireFox, IE, Chrome 

Database: SQL Server 

Operating Systems: Windows 7, Vista, XP Professional 

EDUCATION 

Metropolitan State University 

St. Paul, MN 

M.S., Technical Communication 

B.S., Management Information Systems Page 1 

# PAUL DIORIO 

Senior Reading/Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Paul Diorio has 15 years of experience working on large-scale assessment projects. He provides subject-specific expertise relative to all phases of the test development process. His assessment experience includes passage selection, item and scoring guideline development, test construction, editing and proofreading, and working with state department personnel and educators to develop rangefinding training materials for reading, writing, and alternate assessments. Mr. Diorio has experience with numerous assessment models and rubrics. 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Diorio served as a teacher for three years. He holds a B.A. in English from Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey, and is pursuing a graduate degree in English Literature from Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) STANDARDS EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Diorio’s CCR experience includes developing CCR-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Reading (Grades 3–8) and the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams for Literature (High School). 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Reading/Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

2006–2013 Reading/Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Participates in all aspects of reading and English language arts test and item development. Trains and works with item writers in passage selection and item writing. Aligns items to state standards and constructs assessments according to test blueprint specifications. Edits and proofreads test booklets and ancillary materials. Participates in professional development activities. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: Alternate Assessment—2004–2005 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2006 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: End of Course Examination—2000 

Georgia High School Graduation Tests—2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2008–Present 

Kentucky Portfolios—2001–2002 Résumé of Paul Diorio Page 2 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment—2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination—2005–2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2001–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2006–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Pennsylvania Writing Assessment—2002 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2003–2006 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2000–2001 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2006 Reading, Writing and Alternate Assessment Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Worked with state department personnel and educators in the development of training materials for reading, writing, and alternate assessments including reviewing and editing open-ended items and scoring guidelines. Facilitated range-finding activities and led professional development workshops for educators. Supervised handscoring staff and conducted reader training and monitoring. Interpreted and acted upon daily and cumulative statistical data. Implemented retraining and validity procedures. 

1997–2000 Classroom Teacher 

Calvin School 

Roseville, MN 

Taught reading, writing, biology, social studies/US history, and Math in an alternative education setting. Initiated a successful school wide book-reading with weekly discussion of text. Created lesson plans and developed curriculum for a population that included students with unique challenges. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota—Grades 1–6, provisional Grades 6–12 Résumé of Paul Diorio Page 3 

EDUCATION 

Concordia College 

St. Paul, MN Teacher Certification Program 

Rutgers University 

New Brunswick, NJ Graduate English credits 

Seton Hall University 

South Orange, NJ B.A., English Page 1 

# KIRK DUKATZ 

Software Quality Assurance Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kirk Dukatz has more than 14 years of experience in the software quality assurance (SQA) field. His project experience includes: developing and administering test scripts; test automation and load/performance testing; performing defect classifications and severity assessments; and developing SQA process flows and guidelines encompassing all phases of a project. His attention to detail has ensured the quality of software processes implemented for DRC’s Imaging, Handscoring, and Autoscoring Systems. 

Mr. Dukatz is a trained Network Support Specialist and certified Scrum Master. 

He is a member of the Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA). 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Software Quality Assurance Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Acts as the central SQA point of contact between SQA analysts, developers, project managers, and other functional teams to ensure programs and data are adequately tested. Collaborates with Education Project Management in scheduling all software quality activities and building SQA sub-schedules. Provides daily work direction to SQA analysts. Defines approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Designs and implements processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules and procedures. Coordinates the development and execution of comprehensive testing plans, scripts, and test summaries, and reviews all documentation for accuracy, feasibility, consistency, and completeness. Integrates testing approach with software development methodology. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrates them into business processes to address business needs. Defines and tracks quality assurance metrics, defect densities and priorities, and open defect counts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Autoscoring System—2011–2012 

Handscoring System Rewrite—2008–2009 

Imaging System Redesign—2006–2007 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–2006 Résumé of Kirk Dukatz Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2012 Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Developed and executed comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test summaries. Completed appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. 

2003–2008 Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and implemented software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvement. Developed and executed comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documented all software defects and performs regression testing. Coordinated defect review meetings. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Reviewed requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

2002–2003 Quality Assurance Analyst 

Digital River 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Created and implemented test plans and test cases for java based e-commerce application. This included UI and feature testing, as well as error handling and defect tracking. Worked closely with software development and product management teams to ensure all functional requirements were clearly defined at the beginning of the software life cycle, and all technical design documents and use cases were acceptable prior to a project entering system test (QA). Experience with SQL Plus, CVS, and minimal UNIX commands. 

2001–2002 Commerce System Support Engineer 

Digital River 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Handled triage of trouble tickets using Perfect Tracker defect tracking software. Researched tickets to verify as an application defect and assigned to appropriate development team as necessary. Managed out-sourced Tier I support group and provided Tier II support for Orbit Commerce application used by small to Résumé of Kirk Dukatz Page 3 

medium business clients (Orbit Commerce acquired by Digital River in October 2001). Demonstrated ability to gain expert knowledge of a new application in a short amount of time. Proposed and helped facilitate the move to bring Tier I support for Orbit clients “in house.” 

2000–2001 Quality Assurance Engineer 

Digital River 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Executed test cases for e-commerce platform projects, including system performance, UI, and regression testing, as well as defect reporting using Perfect Tracker software. Part of a team that established and implemented a new release cycle process for introducing new code to production in twice-weekly code releases. Used SQL Plus tools for analyzing database tables and validating database updates made through UI. 

1999–2000 Customer Service Technician 

Digital River 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Team Lead for Fujitsu PC site support. Assisted customers with product questions and ordering of Fujitsu laptops and accessories, which included returns authorization and refunds. Held weekly meetings with client to discuss common customer concerns and feedback and promotional concepts. 

AWARDS 

Digital River Team Achievement Award—3rd Quarter 2000 and 1st Quarter 2001 

DRC—Recognition for work on Imaging System Redesign—March 2008 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Microsoft SQL 2012 Enterprise 

Microsoft Visual Studio 2010—Coded UI Testing 

Microsoft Visual Studio 2010—Test Manager 

Programming Logic and Design, Java I, Java II, and CompTIA A+ 

Core XML (XML, XSL, Schema, XPath) 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—2003–Present 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Certified Scrum Master (Scrum Alliance)—2014 Résumé of Kirk Dukatz Page 4 

EDUCATION 

North Dakota State University 

Fargo, ND 

General Studies 

KRS Computer and Business School 

Bloomington, MN 

Network Support Specialist Page 1 

# DAVID DURETTE 

Science Test Development Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

For over 17 years, Mr. David Durette has worked on a variety of assessment programs, providing his expertise and leadership in the content area of science. He has coordinated and directed item development teams, overseeing the development of science items, including multi-dimensional scenarios for several regular and modified large-scale testing programs. 

Mr. Durette has developed items, created and revised guiding documents, and drafted performance-level descriptors. He has also facilitated a variety of committee meetings, including content reviews, fairness reviews, standard setting, and range finding. These diverse experiences have allowed him to consistently deliver the required quality of items and assessment materials to DRC’s state education clients. 

Mr. Durette contributed to the review of the Next Generation Science Standards by providing constructive feedback in line with the overall vision established by the National Research Council’s Framework for K-12 Science Education. He is an active member of the current CCSSO Science SCASS committee charged with developing and reviewing some NGSS-related documents and resources. In addition, he served on the Florida Department of Education Student Standards Tutorial Project Committee of Experts for Science, reviewing lesson plans and other materials. 

Prior to his work in the K–12 testing industry,  Mr. Durette received experiential field training in the rocky-mountain region at Teton Science School. In addition to studying ecological changes resulting from the Yellowstone fires of 1988 and possible impacts to the re-introduction of wolves to the Greater-Yellowstone Ecosystem, he was also a member of the research team that published “AField  Guide  to The  Hoofed  Mammals  of Jackson Hole” in 1991. Mr. Durette also worked as the field experience director for an Upward Bound program. This federally-funded program helps to identify and assist special populations of promising high school students to complete high school and to enroll in post-secondary institutions. 

Mr. Durette holds a B.S. in Biology from Northland College in Ashland, Wisconsin, and is an M.S. candidate in Teaching and Learning through DePaul University in Chicago, Illinois. Résumé of David Durette Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2005–Present Science Test Development Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for science test development activities across all assessment projects, coordinating and participating in all aspects of the development process. Provides leadership for science testing programs, including development of item specifications, test blueprints, items, and all ancillaries. Develops achievement level descriptors for the content area of science. Assists with standard setting activities. Oversees and facilitates committee reviews, including item reviews and bias/fairness/sensitivity reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2005–2015 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Science Assessments—2005–2009 

Standards Based Assessments—2005–Present 

California Standardized Testing and Reporting—2002–2005 

Florida Competency and Achievement Test—2001 

Florida Department of Education Student Standards Tutorial Project Committee of Experts—2012–Present 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests and Item Banking System— 1998–2000 

Georgia End-of-Course Tests—2001–2005 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Idaho Science End-of-Course Tests—2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

Maryland High School Assessment—2003–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2010–Present 

New Jersey ASK Science—2003–2005 

New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment—1998–2001 

North Carolina High School Exit Examination—2000–2001 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2000–2001; 

2006–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of Student Assessment—2005–Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program Science Assessment Standard Setting—2009 

Tennessee Comprehensive Assessment Program—2005 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—2000 Résumé of David Durette Page 3 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

West Virginia Educational Standards Tests Alignment Studies—2009–2011 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2001–2005 Director of Science Assessments, K–12 

Educational Testing Service 

San Antonio, TX 

Directed and oversaw the development of all science assessments; utilized curriculum guides and state standards to develop test and item specifications; wrote and reviewed test items, developed ancillaries to support assessments, and provided content-area expertise as needed for all other steps in the item and test development process; supported the development of statewide testing programs by facilitating teacher item review and bias/sensitivity review committee meetings. 

1998–2001 Senior Test Development Specialist, Science 

Riverside Publishing 

Itasca, IL 

Utilized curriculum guides, frameworks, and standards to create test and item specifications. Developed and customized science test items according to specifications for both States and shelf products. Facilitated item and statistical review committee meetings. Participated in range finding. Mentored other science test development specialists. 

1994–1997 Teacher Services Coordinator 

Shedd Aquarium 

Chicago, IL 

Conducted teacher seminars on science education related to aquatic science. Designed and edited standards-based science classroom activity guides for a national audience. Worked cooperatively with the Chicago Public School System on a variety of reform initiatives. Coordinated and instructed classroom and field experiences in the Bahamas. 

1994 Marine Science Educator 

Newfound Harbor Marine Institute at SEACAMP 

Big Pine Key, FL 

Developed lesson plans and marine science curriculum for grades 3–12. Taught marine science in a field setting and acted as boat captain as well as lifeguard. Résumé of David Durette Page 4 

1992–1994 Field Experience Director 

Upward Bound at Northland College 

Ashland, WI 

Organized and directed science, cultural, and social activities for high school students. Created a stream ecology course for the S. Olson Environmental Center. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Durette, D., & Hernandez, D. (2003). Large-scale Assessment Update in California. Presentation at the California Science Teachers Association Conference, Long Beach, CA. 

Durette, D. (2000). Item Development for Large Scale Assessments. Presentation at the Illinois Science Teachers Conference, Champaign, IL. 

Durette, D. (1997) Riding the Wave “The Year of the Ocean.” Presentation at the Illinois Science Teachers Conference, Champaign, IL. 

Durette, D., & Dye, M. (1997). Sea Otters and the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill. Presentation at the National Marine Educators Conference, Chicago, IL. 

Durette, D., & Mell, C. (1996). Special Exhibit FROGS! Presentation at the National Marine Educators Conference, Durham, NH and the Illinois Science Teachers Conference, Chicago, IL. 

Durette, D., & Ihde, T. (1996). Aquarium Setup and Usage in the Classroom. 

Presentation at the Great Lakes Educators Conference, Chicago, IL. 

Durette, D., & Resk, P. (1995). Beluga Whales. Presentation at the Great Lakes Educators Conference, Sea World of Ohio. 

EDUCATION 

DePaul University 

Chicago, IL M.S. Candidate, Teaching and Learning 

Northland College 

Ashland, WI B.S., Biology, Minor in Chemistry Page 1 

# JENNIFER EASTMAN 

General Counsel and Senior Vice President, Contract Management and Human Resources 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Jennifer Eastman is a senior attorney with over 31 years of experience in corporate law and contract management. Ms. Eastman leads the contract management process for the negotiation and implementation of contracts for DRC. Ms. Eastman is also responsible for all aspects of DRC's human resources function, including: employee recruitment and retention, health and wellness benefits, compensation, and employee relations. 

Ms. Eastman has extensive in-house experience in contract management and transactions in federal and commercial contracting for aerospace and energy conservation programs. Prior to joining DRC, she worked on the internal counsel team at Honeywell International Inc., where she gained expertise in counseling an international sales force on deal structures, contract formation, and regulatory and compliance matters. 

Ms. Eastman holds a J.D. from Hamline University School of Law in Saint Paul, Minnesota. She also earned a B.A. in Liberal Arts and Education & Child Study from Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, and completed undergraduate coursework at Harvard University. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present General Counsel and Senior Vice President, Contract Management and Human Resources 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leads the contract management process for the negotiation and implementation of contracts. Serves as General Counsel for DRC. Responsible for all aspects of DRC's human resources function, including: employee recruitment and retention, health and wellness benefits, compensation, and employee relations. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2012 Vice President of Contract Management 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Lead the Project Management Office and the contract management process for the negotiation and implementation of contracts for DRC. Résumé of Jennifer Eastman Page 2 

1985–2009 Honeywell International Inc. 

1977–1983 Minneapolis, MN 

Vice President and General Counsel—Honeywell Building Solutions (a unit of Automation and Control Solutions) 

As general counsel for global business unit provided strategic advice, risk and competitive analysis, negotiation of transactions, corporate and legal compliance, investigations, training, and legal advice on all business matters. Lead multi-region contract management group. Managed 42 individuals across three regions: Americas, Europe–Middle East, and Asia Pacific. Directed contracting practices, risk assessments and negotiations. Advised on complex transactions and contracts in both the commercial and government arenas. Lead negotiations and the preparation of agreements, including US federal government contracts. Negotiated and implement mergers and acquisitions; due diligence, agreement preparation, legal support and business integration. Provided legal support for initiatives across legislative, marketing, and sales teams. Special areas of expertise included US Federal Government contracting, renewable energy sources, energy savings performance contracts, and construction. 

General Counsel and Director of Contract Management—Defense and Space Electronics Systems (a unit of Aerospace) 

As general counsel provided strategic advice, negotiation and contract management for the Defense Avionics and Electronics business within the Honeywell Aerospace strategic business group. Managed and lead contract management groups in ten locations in the US and Germany, a team of 140 contract managers. 

Corporate Compliance Counsel—Office of the General Counsel (Honeywell Inc. corporate) 

Handled investigations and resolutions of corporate compliance matters and provided extensive compliance training. 

Division General Counsel and Senior Contract Representative—Military Avionics Division (a unit of Aerospace) 

Provided negotiation and federal contract management for both prime and subcontract levels in the aerospace industry. 

TRAINING AND CERTIFICATIONS 

Minnesota State Bar—Admitted 1977 

Training in management, leadership and business development areas 

Six Sigma: Green Belt certified and Black Belt trained 

Leadership and management courses at Honeywell, Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business, Stanford University Business School’s Executive Program with the American Electronics Association Résumé of Jennifer Eastman Page 3 

EDUCATION 

Hamline University School of Law 

St. Paul, MN 

Juris Doctor 

Harvard University 

Cambridge, MA 

Undergraduate Coursework 

Smith College 

Northampton, MA 

B.A., Liberal Arts and Education & Child Study Page 1 

# MARIA EIFFLER 

Spanish Project Lead 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Maria Eiffler serves as a Spanish Project Lead at DRC, overseeing and participating in the development of state assessments and ancillary materials. She coordinates daily project communication, develops and monitors schedules, and reviews and edits test items, forms, and additional materials. Specifically, she is responsible for determining the linguistic and cultural appropriateness of each item in large-scale assessment programs, including programs for Nebraska and Pennsylvania. This includes mediating communication between her team and various Test Development Specialists for reading, science, and mathematics. In her previous role at DRC, Ms. Eiffler was part of the Spanish team that translated, proofread, reviewed, revised, and copyedited multiple exams. 

Ms. Eiffler’s past experience includes serving as a reader/scorer of Advanced Placement Spanish exams, a specialist in the oral assessment of Spanish proficiency for Minneapolis Public Schools, and a Spanish teacher at the University of Minnesota and Minneapolis Community and Technical College. She participated in the development of the University of Minnesota’s listening portion of the computer-delivered language proficiency assessment, as well as recorded a significant portion of the listening dialogue. Ms. Eiffler has created multiple topic-based courses, as well as developed innovations to traditional language courses. 

Ms. Eiffler holds an M.Ed. in Linguistics with an emphasis in Spanish and English as a Second language; an M.A. in Spanish; a B.A. in Spanish; and a B.S. in Chemistry. She is pursuing her Ph.D. in Hispanic Linguistics. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Spanish Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Oversees and participates in the development of Spanish language versions of state assessments and ancillary materials. Organizes, monitors, and provides guidance for the development and review of items, test forms, and other materials for all content areas and grades of multiple state assessment programs. Co-facilitates state item content; bias, fairness and sensitivity; performance-level descriptor; and data reviews. Monitors and reports progress of deliverables in relation to quality, schedule, resources, and scope. Ensures proper guiding documentation is utilized to assign state and College- and Career-Readiness alignments, cognitive difficulty, and Depth of Knowledge, as well as follows state specifications, style guidelines, and Universal Design. Implements Spanish Résumé of Maria Eiffler Page 2 

translation process of forms and revises the Spanish items following the Spanish style guide. Translates practice tests for Nebraska State Accountability Program (NeSA) and reviews and revises items from the online NeSA tests for formatting and accuracy of the Spanish language. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Nebraska State Accountability—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2011–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2012–2013 Spanish Team Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Revised, reviewed, and copyedited test items, forms and additional material for all content areas and grades of state assessments for Nebraska and Pennsylvania. Translated test items following the translation process guide to ensure linguistic and cultural accuracy. Edited and proofread the English and Spanish versions of the Directions for Administration Manuals for the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams. 

2011–2012 Spanish Proofreader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Collaborated with the Spanish team that reviewed, proofread, and revised science and math items for accuracy of content and alignment to state standards and specifications, appropriate cognitive difficulty and depth of knowledge, and correct use of style. 

2001–2013 Spanish Language Proficiency Assessment Interviewer 

Conducted and evaluated language proficiency interviews for the Masters in Education students at the University of Minnesota, and bilingual teachers for the Minneapolis Public Schools following the ACTFL guidelines. Conducted and evaluated language proficiency interviews for the Saint Paul Police Department. 

2006–2013 Spanish Faculty 

Minneapolis Community and Technical College 

Created and taught the online beginning Spanish courses. Developed and taught the Spanish for Heritage Speakers course. Participated in assessments at a departmental level. Supervised the study abroad program in Costa Rica. Taught beginning and intermediate Spanish courses. Coordinated the World Languages and Communication Studies department. Résumé of Maria Eiffler Page 3 

2002–2012 Exam Evaluator – Educational Testing Service 

Evaluated Advanced Placement (writing and speaking) Spanish Language Exams for content and accuracy. Received extensive training in evaluating large-scale standardized exams. 

1999–2006 Spanish Teaching Specialist 

University of Minnesota 

Taught Spanish as a second language and Hispanic culture to beginning, intermediate, and advanced students. Administered placement and proficiency evaluations of Spanish writing samples. Developed curricular material. Designed and implemented student assessments. Conducted oral proficiency interviews and placement testing. 

1993–1999 Spanish Professor and Coordinator 

ITESM—Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey – México 

Taught advanced Spanish writing, reading, and communication courses to college and high school students. Coordinated the Spanish language department and organized cultural events. 

1992–1995 Professor of Literature 

Universidad Iberoamericana—México 

Taught Latin-American and Mexican literature courses, as well as advanced Spanish writing courses to college-age students. 

PROFESSIONAL AWARDS 

Excellent Faculty Award for creating the Spanish Medical course—2007 

Excellent Award for creating CASA (College/Accessibility/Success/ Achievement) a project to help Latino students graduate from college—2009 Résumé of Maria Eiffler Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Ph.D. (in progress), Hispanic Linguistics 

Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey 

Monterrey, México 

M. Ed., Applied Linguistics 

University of Washington 

Seattle, WA 

M.A., Spanish 

B.A., Spanish 

Universidad Autónoma de Coahuila 

Coahuila, México 

B.S., Chemistry Page 1 

# JOE ELIAZ 

Senior Social Studies Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Joe Eliaz is an experienced educator and test developer. Mr. Eliaz has 11 years of experience teaching social studies and language arts and over 20 years of experience in educational assessment. He has contributed to the development of multiple large-scale social studies assessments, including the California Standards Tests, the Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test, the Maryland High School Assessment, the Michigan Educational Assessment Program, the Michigan Merit Examination, the Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests, the Pennsylvania Keystone Exam, the South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards, the Tennessee High School End of Course Assessment, and the Virginia Standards of Learning Tests. Mr. Eliaz has facilitated item development, content reviews, bias reviews, data reviews, test blueprint development, and item writing workshops. His extensive experience in the test development process also includes development of content standards, performance level descriptors, test blueprints, standards alignment, and forms construction. 

In addition to his educational assessment experience, Mr. Eliaz taught secondary school history and language arts for eleven years and served as a campus administrator for three years. His diverse experience as an educator includes teaching positions at an alternative high school and a campus for a district Gifted and Talented program, and as a designated inclusion teacher. His administrative experience included serving as a 504 coordinator, special education ARD administrator, and curriculum coordinator. Mr. Eliaz has developed and presented assessment related material to teachers and administrators, members of client state committees, and attendees at state conferences and workshops. 

Mr. Eliaz earned a Master of Arts degree in Educational Administration from the University of Houston at Clear Lake, and a Bachelor of Science degree in History from Southwest Texas State University. He holds teaching certificates in History, English, and English as a Second Language. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Senior Social Studies Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Contributes to all aspects of social studies assessment design and item development. Assigns, writes, evaluates, and edits test items for content accuracy, client style requirements, and adherence to client content and quality standards. Builds both operational and field test forms according to client blueprint and test specifications. Conducts content and data review meetings as well as content standard and test blueprint development meetings with clients and committees. Résumé of Joe Eliaz Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE` 

California Alternate Performance Assessment—1996–2001; 2006 

California Standardized Testing and Reporting—1996–2001; 2006 

California Test of Academic Skills—1996–2001 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test—1996–2001, 2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2008–2010 

Maryland High School Assessment—2001–2006 

Michigan Educational Assessment Program—1996–2001 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment—1996–2001 

Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Test—1996–2001 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2001–2006; 

2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exam—2010–Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2013–Present 

Tennessee High School End of Course Assessment—2001–2006 

Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills—2001–2006 

Virginia Standards of Learning Tests—2001–2006 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—1996–2001 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2008 Teacher 

Doris Miller Junior High School 

San Marcos, TX 

Taught Texas History to seventh-grade students. 

2006–2007 Teacher 

Maria Hernandez Intermediate School 

San Marcos, TX 

Taught World Cultures to sixth-grade students. 

2001–2006 Assessment Director, History/Social Science 

Educational Testing Service 

San Antonio, TX 

Directed the development of social science assessments. Collaborated with various state and district level clients. Organized item development plans for state custom assessments. Facilitated blueprint development, content and bias reviews, standard setting, and data reviews. Senior reviewer of all items. Managed construction of pilot, field test and operational forms. Supervised assessment specialists and evaluated staff performance. Ensured product quality in compliance with ETS and state standards of excellence. Achieved an item development acceptance rate of greater than 90% for all state programs. Résumé of Joe Eliaz Page 3 

1998–2001 Assistant Principal 

Maria Hernandez Intermediate School 

San Marcos, TX 

Managed, developed, and deployed federal, state, and local educational programs. Developed and aligned curriculum. Hired and trained faculty. Evaluated teacher and student performance. Scheduled, budgeted, and coordinated tutorial and after school programs. TAAS coordinator, 504 coordinator, and district chairperson for communication networks cadre. Facilitated special education ARDs, wrote and edited responses for state and federal grant applications, and public relations. 

1996–2001 Freelance Item Writer 

Created multiple choice and extended response items in social studies, reading, and language arts. Devised scoring rubrics, wrote and found reading passages. Projects included the following: Texas Assessment of Academic Skills, Virginia History and Social Science Standards of Learning Tests, Tennessee High School End of Course Assessment/United States History, Oklahoma Core Curriculum Tests/United States History and Geography, California STAR History/Social Science, Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Test, Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test, New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment, California Test of Academic Skills, Michigan Educational Assessment Program, Washington Assessment of Student Learning. 

1997–1998 Teacher 

Doris Miller Junior High School 

San Marcos, TX 

Taught Texas and U.S. History curriculum to seventh- and eighth-grade students. Served as team leader, campus improvement team member, and administrative intern. 

1995–1998 Lead Teacher for Extended Summer School Program 

San Marcos, TX 

Supervised all aspects of program. Developed curriculum. Scheduled courses and transportation. Budgeted and maintained payroll. Administered pre- and post-test, discipline, and public relations. 

1994–1997 Teacher 

Goodnight Junior High School 

San Marcos, TX 

Taught language arts curriculum to seventh- and eighth-grade students. Trained language arts and history departments in item writing, holistic scoring, creating rubrics, and designing sound subject area assessments. Résumé of Joe Eliaz Page 4 

1989–1994 Teacher 

Central Middle School 

Galveston, TX 

Taught G/T language arts and United States History curriculum to eighth-grade students. Taught language arts, United States and World History to high school students in Alternative School, 1992-1994. 

TRAINING 

History Alive, SIOP, Project Read, New Jersey Writing Project, Greater Houston Area Writing Project, Universal Test Design 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Texas Teaching Certifications: History, English, ESL 

EDUCATION 

University of Houston/Clear Lake 

Houston, TX M.S., Educational Administration 

Southwest Texas State University 

San Marcos, TX B.S., History Page 1 

# SUSAN SHANNON ENGELEITER 

Chief Executive Officer and President 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Susan Shannon Engeleiter has established a strong track record of extending and expanding technology and technical capabilities within DRC. She leads a senior management team that actively works to improve all processes in the organization. Under her leadership, the company has achieved record levels of growth and profitability. 

Ms. Engeleiter previously served as Vice President of Government Markets at Honeywell, Inc. from 1992 to 1998 where she started a business unit that grew to approximately $200 million in revenue. She was appointed by President George H.W. Bush to direct and manage the Small Business Administration in Washington, D.C. 

Ms. Engeleiter also served as a State Senator for Wisconsin’s 33rd District from 1984 to 1988 and served as the Senate Minority Leader during these years. She belongs to numerous professional and civic organizations, and has received many service awards. Her public service background attests to her commitment to public needs, specifically in the area of education. Ms. Engeleiter holds a Juris Doctor degree from the University of Wisconsin Law School. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2006–Present Chief Executive Officer and President 

1998–2006 President and Chief Operating Officer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Established a strong track record for producing results and leading the company in its pursuit of new and emerging markets. Since joining DRC in 1998, revenue has grown from $31 million in that year to $206 million in 2013. Developed and successfully implemented a long-term strategy for the corporation. Responsible for business planning and development that includes strategic investments, acquisitions, partnerships, and legal and governmental affairs. 

Instrumental in growing and shaping DRC into what it is today. The company’s full-time employee base has more than 600 people, with more than 4,500 temporary workers employed during peak periods. Primary focus has been to create and improve processes and technologies within DRC, to keep pace with evolving customer needs and the increasing demand for our company’s services. Ms. Engeleiter is leading efforts to ensure that the visions, goals, and initiatives of DRC’s four divisions are fully aligned with those of the corporation, while maximizing operational efficiency. Résumé of Susan Shannon Engeleiter Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1992–1998 Vice President, Government Markets 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Led a rapidly growing Honeywell Home and Building Control business unit with $129 million in sales in 1996 and almost $200 million in sales in 1998. Customers included federal, state, and local governments in North America and government customers worldwide. Top responsibility for market development and sales of HVAC systems, security and fire systems, comprehensive building and district energy retrofits, and maintenance services. 

Led extensive legislative and regulatory efforts in the energy, environmental, and procurement areas to support business unit objectives at the national, and state levels. Represented Honeywell on various industry association boards and on various U.S. government agency advisory boards. 

1991–1992 Vice President and Staff Executive 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Assisted Chairman and Chief Executive Officer in establishing and developing various business, public affairs, and community initiatives. 

1989–1991 Administrator 

United States Small Business Administration (SBA) 

Washington, D.C. 

Independent federal agency head with 4,000 employees, 100 offices nationwide, and appropriated budget of $320 million. Appointed by and reported to the President of the United States, confirmed by the United States Senate to direct and manage SBA’s numerous financial and technical assistance programs. These included loan guarantee programs totaling more than $5 billion; $1.2 billion Disaster Assistance Program. Member of President’s Trade Policy Coordinating Council. Member of National Women’s Business Council, named chair by President Bush. Member of National Minority Business Council. 

1984–1988 Senate Republican Floor Leader 

State Senator 

Wisconsin’s 33rd District 

Leader in successful effort to lower Wisconsin’s personal/corporate income taxes and high level of state spending. Résumé of Susan Shannon Engeleiter Page 3 

1988 Republican Nominee, United States Senate 

State of Wisconsin 

1982–1984 Assistant Senate Republican Floor Leader 

1982–1984 Member, Governor’s Strategic Development Commissions 

1979–1980 Legislative Director to Wisconsin Governor Lee Sherman Dreyfus 

1974–1978 State Representative 

Wisconsin’s 99th Assembly District 

PROFESSIONAL/CIVIC AFFILIATIONS 

Hazelden Foundation Board of Directors—2011–Present 

University of Wisconsin Foundation Board of Directors—2012–Present 

Humphrey School of Public Affairs Advisory Council—2011–Present 

AAP Test Committee—2001–2006 

Aware Gold/Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota Member, Board of Directors— 1998–2011 

St. Croix Valley YMCA, Board—1999–2002 

Wisconsin Governor’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Jobs for the 21st Century, Member—1996–1998 

National Association of Energy Service Companies, Board Member— 1992–1998 

The Children’s Theatre Company, Board Member—1992–1996 

National Legal Center for the Public Interest, Board Member—1992–1995 

U.S. DOE/EPA Global Climate Change Advisory Committee, Member— 

1992–1995 

First Trust National Association, Board Member—1991–1996 

Lutheran Social Services of Wisconsin and Upper Michigan, Board Member— 1991–1996 

President’s Export Council, Appointed by President Bush, Member—1991–1994 

Minnesota Business Partnership, State of Minnesota Education Reform Task Team, Member—1991–1993 

National Kidney Foundation, State of Wisconsin Gift of Life Chair—1986–1987 

Tri County YMCA, Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin, Board Member—1985–1986 

National Commission on Uniform State Laws, Board Member—1981–1983 

Aurora Health Care, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Board Member—1979–1989 Résumé of Susan Shannon Engeleiter Page 4 

RECOGNITION HIGHLIGHTS 

Outstanding Contribution to Minority Small Business Award, Atlanta Minority Small Business Council—1991 

Mayor’s Outstanding Service Award, Mayor of Oakland’s award for assistance with Loma Prieta earthquake disaster—1990 

Guardian of Small Business Award, National Federation of Independent Business—1988 

Outstanding Alumna Award, Friends and Alumni of the University of Wisconsin– Waukesha—1987 

Top Ten Legislators in the Nation Award, National Republican Legislators Association—1986 

Community Services Award, Alliance for the Mentally Ill of Greater Milwaukee—1986 

Appreciation Award, Girl Scouts of Wisconsin 

Distinguished Service Award, Wisconsin Association of the Future Farmers of America—1986 

Women of Distinction Award, Christoph Memorial YMCA—1986 

Outstanding Women in Wisconsin History Award, American Association of University Women—1980 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin Law School 

Madison, WI 

Juris Doctor 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

B.S., English and Communications, Teaching Degree Page 1 

# PAM ENSTAD 

Senior Director, Marketing Communications 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Pam Enstad has over 26 years of experience leading marketing communications initiatives for large and medium-sized corporations as well as start-up technology companies. As DRC’s Senior Director of Marketing Communications, Ms. Enstad leads integrated marketing communications and produces technical documentation for DRC’s INSIGHT Online Learning System. 

Ms. Enstad’s extensive experience covers a broad range of communications disciplines, including business-to-business and consumer marketing, corporate communications, technical communications, media relations, and issues management. Throughout her career, Ms. Enstad has served as a company spokesperson and has been quoted in numerous business, consumer, and trade publications. She has also been an expert panelist at industry conferences and conducted media relations training workshops for both clients and company executives. 

Prior to DRC, Ms. Enstad was director of marketing communications for Honeywell’s Environmental and Combustion Controls (ECC) business. In this role from 2003–2008, Ms. Enstad led the marketing communications team dedicated to rolling out the company’s home comfort and building solutions products to the marketplace. She helped develop the strategy and creative execution for new product launches and was responsible for overall brand management. 

Before her tenure at Honeywell ECC, Ms. Enstad held communications leadership roles at Optical Solutions, Centron DPL, Network Systems, and Honeywell Commercial Buildings Group. 

Ms. Enstad holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Journalism from the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Senior Director, Marketing Communications 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the successful planning, development, and execution of the company’s integrated marketing communications initiatives, as well as the development and production of technical documentation. Leads DRC’s internal/corporate communications activities. Résumé of Pam Enstad Page 2 

• Develops and executes communication plans, including candidly counseling DRC clients and DRC management on the best external and internal communications strategies and serving as spokesperson. 

• Assists DRC’s Education clients in developing targeted messaging for key stakeholders, including the media, parents, school personnel, and the broader community. 

• Works with clients to deliver a preparedness strategy that helps prevent and diffuse issues, and provides strategic counsel to help ensure that clients respond to the media in a timely, appropriate and confident manner 

• Helps clients expertly navigate important communications channels, including traditional as well as digital and social media. 

• Plans and executes internal/external events, including trade shows, teacher of the year events, and annual employee meetings. 

• Develops and maintains the content of DRC’s corporate website, including enhancing graphics and user experience. 

• Produces and maintains all technical documentation for DRC’s INSIGHT Online Learning System. 

• Writes and designs DRC sales collateral, presentations, and other materials to support DRC’s business development efforts and client communications. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2008 Marketing Communications Director, Environmental Combustion and Controls 

Honeywell 

Golden Valley, MN 

Responsible for integrated marketing communications for Honeywell ECC’s retail, trade, and OEM sales channels, with a heavy emphasis on media relations activities that enhanced Honeywell’s reputation in the community and marketplace and helped grow external sales. 

• Led marketing communications team and develop strategic communications plans that support Honeywell’s business goals and brand image. Measured and communicated program results. 

• Defended and grew our installed customer base via aggressive media relations programs that promote our leadership and superior products. Proactively pitched and placed stories to the media that are tied to our current events, economic trend or business challenges. Held media training sessions for executive and product marketing teams. 

• Maintained trust relationships with key media and ensured Honeywell spokespeople are viewed “as experts” by consumers and within the HVAC controls industry. 

• Planned and executed internal/external events, including annual sales meetings. Marketing summits, customer/new product rollout meetings, and national trade shows. Résumé of Pam Enstad Page 3 

• Created and placed award-winning advertisements in key target publications to build awareness. 

• Designed and produced effective sales promotion tools, including capability brochures, case histories, white papers, product flyers, and sales video/multi-media presentations. 

• Directed the content of our business and consumer web sites, including the ongoing maintenance of copy/graphics. 

• Worked with Honeywell’s Government Relations team on key energy and mercury legislation impacting Honeywell’s products and growth in the marketplace. Developed media “standby” statements for key legislation that reflects Honeywell’s position on the legislation. 

• Collaborated across Honeywell’s businesses to gather information, identify communications project requirements, and make sure all time, cost and quality objectives are met. 

• Managed budget and expertly negotiated contracts with external vendors and partners. 

• Served as Brand Compliance Officer and worked to ensure corporate identity standards are adhered to on all marketing communications projects. 

• Championed global sourcing initiatives to increase efficiencies and reduce costs. 

2000–2003 Marketing Communications Manager 

Optical Solutions (now Calix) 

Plymouth, MN 

Managed both internal and external communications functions with a strong focus on proactive, community-based media relations and special events. 

• Wrote and distributed press released to key media and analyst contacts, including 40 press releases in 2002. Secured numerous, positive article placements in local and trade industry publications, including more than 12 feature stories in 2002. 

• Implemented public relations programs and special events in customers’ communities nationwide, including ribbon cutting ceremonies, open houses and even pancake breakfasts. 

• Produced sales promotion tools, including brochures, newsletters and presentations. 

• Wrote key messages, employee e-mails and inter-company meeting presentations. 

• Served on the Communications Committee of the Fiber-To-The-Home Council, an industry consortium dedicated to “enhancing lives” through deployment of advanced broadband services throughout North America. Issued press release in support of key broadband legislation and submitted supporting documentation to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Résumé of Pam Enstad Page 4 

1999–2000 Marketing Communications Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Managed marketing communication programs for the company’s three divisions: Education, Surveys, and Laser Images. 

• Produced sales promotion tools – including writing copy and selecting images for brochures and other collateral. 

• Managed both media relations and internal communications. 

1996–1999 Marketing Communications Manager 

Centron (now California-based El Camino REAL) 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Built Centron’s brand awareness via integrated marketing programs, including a heavy emphasis on media relations and sales events. 

• Utilized technology market data and trends to make the right decisions about Centron’s communications strategy, positioning and messages. 

• Wrote and distributed press releases to media, successfully placed customer success stories. 

1995–1996 Public Relations Manager 

Network Systems (now Colorado-based StorageTek) 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Consistently reinforced Network systems’ position in the marketplace and dramatically increased awareness and visibility in customer and prospect organizations. 

• Wrote press releases and product backgrounders for media and industry analysts and scheduled press tours. Developed and placed case histories in trade publications. 

• Supported new product launches with specials events and aggressive trade show media relations, including on-site customer and executive management interviews. 

• Educated industry analyst on where company’s products fit in the realm of customers’ problems; cultivated analyst relationships for use in marketing communications initiative. 

• Placed company representatives as speakers at numerous industry forums and trade shows. Résumé of Pam Enstad Page 5 

1989–1995 Honeywell 

Minneapolis, MN 

Senior Communications Account Specialist 

Dedicated to specific product and service markets as the single point of contact for all marketing communications programs including advertising, sales promotion, public relations, trade shows, specials events and field sales support. Acted as the internal “communications account executive” for vertical markets – including the industrial, security, and lighting business units. 

• Responsible for strategic business communications planning with marketing and sales teams. 

• Produced sales collateral, advertising, direct mail, presentations and training packages. 

• Managed trade show activities, included booth design and pre-and post-show media relations. 

• Received a Honeywell award for my winning “Green Lights Ally of the Year” application, an award bestowed by the EPA to corporations who can demonstrate their ongoing dedication to the environment. 

Marketing Communications Specialist 

Developed and implemented marketing communications program for Honeywell’s product and service markets. (Honeywell college intern from September 1988-May 1989) 

• Wrote market newsletters, managed media relations and special events, placed speakers at trade shows, and produced materials for Honeywell’s Top Hat/Top Tech incentive programs. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Journalism Page 1 

# PATRICK ERIKSON 

Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Senior Test Development Specialist, Mr. Erikson has participated in all aspects of science item development and assessment. His duties include reviewing, verifying, and editing test items; forms construction; and facilitating review committees and developing training materials for teachers and assessment leaders. 

Mr. Erikson is currently overseeing the item development and forms construction for Michigan’s K-12 Interim Assessment program. He has also successfully lead development activities for Pennsylvania’s System for Student Assessment and Science Voluntary Model Curriculum programs. 

In addition to his assessment experience, Mr. Erikson has five years of teaching experience in middle and upper elementary school classrooms. He has taught courses in life science, Earth and space science, health, and pre-algebra. Having taught in both urban and suburban classroom settings, Mr. Erikson has developed a diverse and in-depth teaching portfolio, addressing district, state, and national standards. He has also taught at a classical charter school, where he received certification as a classical educator. 

Mr. Erikson holds an M.Ed. in Elementary Education from DePaul University in Chicago, Illinois, and a B.S. in Zoology, Psychology, and Exercise Science from Weber State University in Ogden, Utah. He is a licensed teacher in Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

2010–2013 Science Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides science content expertise to DRC’s item development program. Writes, reviews, and formats science items. Serves as content resource for the biological, earth, physical, and environmental sciences. Coordinates item development with outside item writers. Facilitates state committee content meetings. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2010–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2010–Present Résumé of Patrick Erikson Page 2 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System for Student Assessment—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2010–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2010 Classroom Earth and Life Science Teacher 

Nova Classical Academy 

St. Paul, MN 

Taught life science and Earth science to 5 th  and 6 th  graders. 

2007–2010 Classroom Pre-Algebra Teacher 

Nova Classical Academy 

St. Paul, MN 

Taught pre-algebra to 6 th  and 7 th  graders. 

2007–2008 Classroom Health Teacher 

Nova Classical Academy 

St. Paul, MN 

Taught health to Grades 6–8. 

2005–2007 Classroom Earth and Life Science Teacher 

Tempe Public Schools 

Tempe, AZ 

Taught life science and Earth science to 7 th  graders. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

National Science Teacher Association—2005–Present 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota Teaching License—Elementary 

EDUCATION 

DePaul University 

Chicago, IL M.Ed., Elementary Education w/ Middle School Science Endorsements 

Weber State University 

Ogden, UT B.S., Integrated Sciences (Zoology, Psychology, and Exercise Science) Page 1 

# DENISE ESNER 

Senior Manager, Support Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Denise Esner has over 26 years of design experience, including managing design and publishing departments for item and test development programs. In addition, she has extensive experience coordinating projects, organizing production workflow of all related media, streamlining production procedures, and working closely with clients so that production schedules are met in the most efficient manner with superior quality and accuracy. 

Ms. Esner also works on numerous aspects of item and passage graphics for a variety of statewide assessments and consortia. In addition, she plays a vital role in formatting items and passages for all test assessments, both paper/pencil and online. 

Ms. Esner supervises a creative team of illustrators and technical support staff that implements and executes the formatting of new product test items within DRC’s item bank, as well as maintain style consistency in existing products lines. She utilizes client style guides for layout specifications to help ensure consistency throughout the project; she also works to help to ensure the quality of graphic images displayed either online or in print. Her work in these specialized items involves the meticulous creation of graphics and formatting the item precisely for the desired technology-enhanced functionality. 

Ms. Esner is adept at evaluating workflow and collaborating with editors, proofreaders, illustrators, and printers for timely production of test booklets, manuals, and other associated materials. She actively engages and manages her team members to ensure accuracy of graphics and adherence to client-specific formatting details. She has created covers for client reviews, and multiple ancillary project graphics 

Ms. Esner holds a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Illustration from Northern Illinois University. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Manager, Support Services 

2003–2013 Manager, Support Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Supervises team, providing leadership, goals, and direction. Plans and evaluates workflow for all graphic images and formatting to meet deadlines. Drives and implements quality processes. Serves as a resource to all content areas to ensure ideas are clearly presented in graphics and layout for all print and online material. Résumé of Denise Esner Page 2 

Manages, creates, and formats all graphics, passages and items for testing items, for both online and in print. Maintains updates to all items and graphics once entered into item banking system. Develops and documents guidelines for formatting with specifics to technology-enhanced items within multiple item banking systems, and improves graphics with updated software and technology. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2004–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

College- and Career-Ready Item Development, American Institute for Research—2014–Present 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2007 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2012–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2005–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2003–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present Louisiana Interim Transitional Tests—2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2003–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

New Jersey Proficiency Assessment System—1996–2000 

New York Tests of State Standards—1996–2000 

Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests—1996–2000 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 Résumé of Denise Esner Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2003 Senior Art Director 

8/13 Creative 

Minneapolis, MN 

Responsibilities included the conceptual and creative development of several non-fiction children’s books ages K–3. Created original color illustrations, designed accurate color graphics, and researched images that were age-specific. Maintained communication with editorial staff and verified accuracies of facts, images, and supplemental information. Additional responsibilities included creating various design/layout materials, promotional advertising, and supporting sales, directing photo shoots, and communicating with clients to ensure product accuracy and overall visual appeal. 

1996–2000 Manager, Art Design and Prepress 

Riverside Publishing 

Itasca, IL 

Responsibilities included supervising a creative team of graphic designers, providing electronic creation of new product testing, and managing consistency in existing products lines. Organized and managed the production workflow of all print-related mediums, streamlined production procedures with printing vendors, and maintained budgets. Worked closely with test editors to ensure accuracy in graphics. Additional responsibilities included researching new software and technologies. Examples of projects include the Integrated Performance Assessments, Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests, New York Tests of State Standards, New Jersey Proficiency Assessment System, Multiple Assessment Series for the Primary Grades, the Comprehensive Measure of Necessary Skills ,and the Iowa Test of Basic Skills .

1992–1996 Art Director 

Cole-Parmer Instrument Company 

Vernon Hills, IL 

Responsibilities included the supervision of graphic designers in the development of print advertising, direct response, and graphic material. Planned and directed photo shoots, developed cross-training program with design and writing team, and worked closely with product managers and engineers to ensure complete accuracy. Additional responsibilities included supervising the development and implementation of a company website. 

1990–1992 Designer/Illustrator 

Century Communications 

Niles, IL 

Responsibilities included developing marketing pieces utilizing all aspects of conventional and electronic graphic design, creating illustrations for editorial and Résumé of Denise Esner Page 4 

promotional page layouts, and planning multi-faceted projects with project teams, clients, and printers. 

1988–1990 Designer 

Edward Don & Company 

North Riverside, IL 

Responsibilities included creating advertising collateral and maintaining graphic support in event marketing and promotion. Strategized ideas with editorial and marketing departments in promoting advertising and direct response collateral. Additional responsibilities included researching marketing trends, conditions, and environments. 

1986–1988 Illustrator 

Reliance Trading Company 

Chicago, IL 

Responsibilities included creating illustrations for advertising materials and technical illustrations for point-of-purchase displays using conventional graphic design. 

SOFTWARE EXPERTISE 

Expertise in Adobe Creative Suite, with extensive knowledge in Illustrator, Photoshop, and InDesign ; Additional knowledge in Quark Xpress; and all Microsoft products. 

EDUCATION 

Northern Illinois University 

DeKalb, IL B.F.A., Illustration Page 1 

# BOBBI FEHRMANN 

Senior Project Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Since 2012, Ms. Bobbi Fehrmann has been a Senior Project Manager for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment. In this role, she manages budgets and invoices, oversees project deliverables, updates schedules, and works closely with resource areas. Prior to her current role, Ms. Fehrmann served as a project manager at DRC, specializing in the production of paper test materials. She worked closely with resource areas to oversee product quality, efficiencies, and timeliness. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Fehrmann worked as an operations and project manager for a localization company. Ms. Fehrmann managed project managers and quality assurance specialists and coordinated translation services. She also coordinated multiple translation projects by creating detailed scopes of work provided by the clients and assembling a team of external translators. 

Ms. Fehrmann holds a B.S. in International Business and a Minor in French from Minnesota State University in Moorhead, Minnesota. She also completed the Localization Certification Program and holds a Localization Project Management Certification from California State University in Chico, California; completed a Secondary Education Graduate Program at Bethel University in Roseville, Minnesota; and completed Project Management: Planning, Controlling, and Implementation coursework at the University of Wisconsin—Madison in Madison, Wisconsin. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Works with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacts with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assigns tasks, and sets priorities. Develops, edits, and proofreads manuals, publications, and project documentation. Manages project within budget. Monitors project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production. Provides customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs. Résumé of Bobbi Fehrmann Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2009–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2012 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients and customers to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assigned tasks, and set priorities. Managed and developed project schedules and other project documentation. Monitored project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production while providing support for other assessment programs from conception through completion. Provided customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs, including online assessment tools. 

2005–2009 Operations Manager 

KJ International Resources 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed project managers, desktop publishers, and quality assurance specialists in order to coordinate document and software translation services. Coordinated projects by creating a detailed scope of work, assembling a project team of internal and external resources, and assigning individual responsibilities. Developed and maintained project schedules and budgets with multiple dependencies. Hired, trained, and supervised operations staff to increase team competency and productivity. Consulted with clients to ensure quality project implementation and execution within demanding schedule parameters. Analyzed translation processes to identify inefficiencies and optimize work flow to ensure documentation accuracy. 

2002–2005 Premium Phone Auditor 

Overland Solutions 

Edina, MN 

Served as lead auditor, reviewed auditor files, and ensured insurance policy and premium auditing and documentation accuracy and integrity. Consulted with policy holders, conducted premium audits, and defined policy coverage and premium parameters. Technically supported auditing team, troubleshot/resolved auditing issues, and achieved high client satisfaction and retention levels. Résumé of Bobbi Fehrmann Page 3 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin—Madison 

Madison, WI 

Project Management: Planning, Controlling, and Implementation 

Bethel University 

Roseville, MN 

Secondary Education Graduate Program 

California State University 

Chico, CA 

Localization Certification Program 

Localization Project Management Certification 

Minnesota State University 

Moorhead, MN 

B.S., International Business, Minor French Page 1 

# NIALL FINN 

Senior Director of Customer Service 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Niall Finn is a senior leader responsible for leading DRC’s customer service processes. He brings extensive customer service and quality experience to DRC from several manufacturing environments, including a 23-year tenure with Steelcase Inc. 

Mr. Finn earned a Masters of Management in Marketing from the Aquinas College in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and a Bachelor of Science in Production Management from Central Michigan University in Mt. Pleasant, Michigan. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014 –Present Senior Director of Customer Service 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for DRC Customer Service contact center support. Leads a full-service team that provides information to DRC clients regarding their solutions, follow-up on incident management activities, and performance reporting requirements. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2014 Senior Director of Quality 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for driving corporate compliance with quality management (ISO 9001), information security (ISO 27001, NIST 800-53), business continuity, environmental, and safety standards. Served as leader of enterprise business process improvements. 

2006–2009 Director of Quality, Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for leading the implementation of ISO 9001 Quality Management System certification across all DRC operational areas. Résumé of Niall Finn Page 2 

2003–2006 Andersen Corporation 

Bayport, MN 

Director of Quality 

Led Performance Engineering staff driving lean sigma projects in Order Management, Customer Service, Logistics, and 16 Distribution Centers within Andersen using “lean sigma” process improvement toolbox. Responsible for plant Quality Assurance staffs in six manufacturing facilities, all using lean manufacturing techniques. Quality Engineering staffs assigned by “value streams.” Responsible for Supplier Quality Assurance program, addressing both supplier development and daily supplier management activities within a $1.1 billion supplier purchase base. Implemented standardized work practices within 13 Andersen Logistics centers in the United States. 

Led staff of certified black and green belt process engineers in “lean sigma” practices, driving business process improvements within the Andersen dealer network and distribution channel. Drove process improvements within order management systems. In 2005, reduced order entry errors by 65% using “lean sigma” techniques in order entry process. Drove process improvements in reducing service parts turnaround time 60% in four months. Responsible for managing and leading improvements within Initial Quality and Warranty programs. 

1980–2003 Steelcase Inc. 

Grand Rapids, MI 

Director of Customer Service & Quality—Wood Division (2002–2003) 

Responsible for Sales Project Management and Customer Service leaders managing over $140 million in sales (presale through post ship responsibilities). Led Sales/Service Support and Quality Assurance teams in four manufacturing facilities (two in Grand Rapids, Michigan, one in Fletcher, North Carolina, and the Stow Davis division in New Paris, Indiana). Achieved 49% reduction in total customer complaints (per million dollars sold) between 2002 and 2003. 

Director of Customer Service—Steelcase North America (SNA) (2000–2002) 

Led SNA call centers (handling 800,000 calls annually). Responsible for Order Management, Field Service Quality, Product Compliance Testing Labs, and Customer Performance Reporting teams. Co-led Customer Service business process re-engineering project, which eliminated 264 Field Sales and Internal Order Management support personnel (36% of total Sales and Order Management teams) while increasing order management response times. 

Director of Corporate and Operations Quality Assurance—SNA (1995–2000) 

Managed team of 550 (hourly and salaried) people at 14 facilities within the U.S., Mexico, and Canada (including plant QA groups, Test Labs, Customer Service teams, Supplier Quality, Product Development Quality Engineers, and Corporate Quality teams). Managed Quality Systems compliance towards ISO 9001 (scope included Operations, Order Management, Product Development, Engineering, and Résumé of Niall Finn Page 3 

Information Technology). Implemented Supplier Performance Program yielding 35% improvement on incoming quality and $12 million in savings from 1996– 1997). 1996 and 1997 Quality Assurance team voted #1 support group by Steelcase Operations Team. 

Total Quality Manager—Filing and Casegoods—SNA (1991–1995) 

Led three plants to ISO 9001 certification. Managed department of hourly and salaried Quality Assurance personnel supporting daily manufacturing needs. 

Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering Positions (1980–1991) 

Led total redesign on Steelcase’s Filing Division (186 machines, five miles of paint line, etc.); completed three months ahead of schedule and $400,000 under budget in 1990–1991. Various process improvement and cost reduction programs. 

CERTIFICATIONS AND TRAINING 

2012 ISO 27001 Information Security – Certified Auditor 

2010 ISO 14001 Environmental Standard – Certified Auditor 

2005 Andersen Corporation’s Advanced Leadership program 

2004 Andersen Executive Leadership training, a 16-week course at the Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota 

2003 Green Belt training in 6 sigma methodology 

2001 Steelcase Lean Certification Program through the University of Tennessee, Knoxville 

2000 Certified Rummler Brache Performance Consultant 

1999 Trained Kaizen Facilitator 

1998 Four-week Executive Training Course on “Winning Supply Chain Logistics” course through Steelcase Leadership program at Harvard University School of Business 

1997–1998 Examiner to the State of Michigan Quality Award 

1995–1997 Founding Member of the State of Michigan Quality Council 

EDUCATION 

Aquinas College 

Grand Rapids, MI 

M.M., Marketing/Sales Management 

Central Michigan University 

Mt. Pleasant, MI 

B.S., Production Management Page 1 

# JAMES FLEMING 

Senior Director, Information Systems Strategy, Architecture, and Technology 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Jim Fleming is an accomplished IS leader with more than 31 years of experience leading enterprise information management, enterprise architecture, applications development, information security, and infrastructure initiatives. In his current position at DRC, Mr. Fleming provides leadership and direction for DRC’s Education, Surveys, and Document Services Divisions’ infrastructure services, information security, enterprise architecture practice, and IT Service Management processes. 

Mr. Fleming also serves as a DRC representative to the IMS Global Learning Consortium. DRC has a Contributing Membership in IMS Global and is actively involved in discussions with IMS on many fronts, including development and revision of the QTI and APIP interoperability standards as well as APIP profile committees. Mr. Fleming works on change requests submitted by DRC to IMS Global, as well as reviews and votes on proposals submitted to IMS by other entities. He also attends the Consortium’s quarterly meetings and participates in various committees. 

Mr. Fleming is highly skilled in setting strategy, delivering quality solutions, communications, financial management, and process development. Throughout his career, Mr. Fleming has been recognized for: having a strong business understanding and a strong technical understanding; delivering results aligning with business objectives; and having strong interpersonal skills. 

Mr. Fleming began his Information Technology career at The St. Paul Companies (now Traveler) where he served as an application developer, project manager, and director of application development and technology services. Later, he held IT management positions for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota. Most recently, Mr. Fleming held leadership roles at Boston Scientific, United Healthcare, and Best Buy. 

Mr. Fleming holds a B.S. in Business from the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. He also holds both ITIL and Agile Development certifications. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Director Information Systems Strategy, Architecture, and Technology 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the overall architecture and technical direction for DRC’s Technology, Education, Survey, and Document Services Divisions, including Résumé of James Fleming Page 2 

enterprise architecture, corporate technology, service management, enterprise information management, and information security. Engaged in business technology planning, and new product development strategy and planning. Leads efforts to drive innovation through technology, as well as defining and delivering DRC’s Technology Readiness offerings. Serves as a DRC representative to the IMS Global Learning Consortium. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011–2013 Director, Enterprise Architecture 

Best Buy 

Richfield, MN 

Led establishment of the Enterprise Architecture practice and led development of overall infrastructure strategy and roadmaps in support of the enterprise technical environment. Established standards, reference architectures, policies, and guiding principles while maintaining current state view. Responsibilities also included interpreting the organization’s security policies and developing secure infrastructure and application frameworks and standards to support the policies. 

2010–2011 Director, Data Architecture and Business Intelligence 

United Healthcare, Specialty Benefits 

Golden Valley, MN 

Led the development, planning, and implementation of both the enterprise data architecture strategy and the enterprise portal strategy for the UHC Specialty Benefits (Vision, Dental, and Life/Disability Insurance) business. Aligned data management strategic direction with business data and reporting requirements, while developing a robust data delivery framework, which was used as a model for other data warehousing initiatives. Developed a strategy to enhance the web experience for members and providers across the Specialty Benefits business lines. 

2009–2010 Senior Manager/Director 

Cardiac Rhythm Management, Application Development 

Boston Scientific 

Arden Hills, MN 

Led the organization responsible for the data transformation and web architecture, design, development, and implementation of the Latitude Patient Management application, which monitored cardiac device patients in a highly regulated environment. Oversaw a department with 50 professionals responsible for the development, certification, and FDA required documentation for enhancements to the Latitude application. Résumé of James Fleming Page 3 

2003–2009 Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota 

Eagan, MN 

Senior Director, Enterprise Data and Information Management (2007–2009) 

Developed and maintained a strategic direction for data and information management. Ensured the integrity of data and information used in enterprise initiatives and served as consultant for data management related activities including business intelligence, health care informatics, actuarial and underwriting analytics, as well as data extracts and submissions. Managed all Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) development and related quality assurance activities. Responsible for the SAS BI framework and the SAS Development Center. Responsible for four departments of over 70 IT and business professionals, with a staffing budget of $5.5 million and a development budget of $7 million. 

Senior Director, Enterprise Portal Systems (2006–2007) 

Led the organization responsible for the architecture, design, development, implementation, support, and quality assurance of all web applications. Directed two departments of over 60 IS and business professionals, and was responsible for staffing budget of $3.2 million, and development capital budget of over $12 million. 

Senior Director, Technology Support (2003–2006) 

Directed technical architecture, design, implementation, and support of distributed, mainframe, desktop, messaging, and storage infrastructure, as well as, database administration and change, release, and problem management functions. Responsibilities also included voice and data network and ETL development. Led organization of 85 IS professionals, and was responsible for staffing budget of $8 million, operating budget of over $30 million, and annual capital investment budget of $11 million. 

1983–2003 Director, Enterprise Technology 

The St. Paul Companies now Travelers 

St. Paul, MN 

From 1994–2003: responsible for the design, implementation, and support of the desktop and data center infrastructure, as well as providing database administration and application developer tools support. Oversaw the data center consolidations, desktop standardization, and vendor hardware and software management. Led the overall improvements to serviceability, availability, and recovery of infrastructure services. 

Prior to 1994: held other various leadership roles in application development and infrastructure management, as well as programming and project management positions. Résumé of James Fleming Page 4 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

• Data Management 

• Iterative Development Application Development 

• Web Development Portals 

• Content Management 

• ITIL Best Practices 

• Configuration Management 

• Database Administration 

• Server Virtualization. 

• Information Architecture 

• Agile Development 

• J2EE / JAVA Development 

• SAS Application Development 

• Contract Management 

• Release Management 

• Infrastructure Management 

• Infrastructure Architecture 

• Desktop Administration Messaging & E-mail 

• Certified Scrum Master 

• Business Applications 

• SAS Framework Support 

• Mainframe Administration 

• Storage Management EMC, IBM, HDS 

• Desktop Virtualization 

• Data Warehousing Teradata, DB2, Oracle 

• Waterfall Development 

• ETL Development Informatica, DataStage, SSIS 

• Disaster Recovery 

• Business Continuity Planning 

• Change Management 

• Server Administration UNIX, Windows, Win 

• Infrastructure Engineering 

• Private, Public & Hybrid Cloud 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Information Systems Analysis and Design Certificate, High Distinction 

ITIL Foundation Certificate in IT Service Management 

Certified Scrum Master from the Scrum Alliance, Inc. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota, School of Management 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Management Information Systems, Minor in Management Page 1 

# KIMBERLY FOUNTAIN 

Bias/Fairness and Sensitivity Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Kimberly Fountain has 16 years of experience in educational assessment. As DRC’s Bias/Fairness and Sensitivity Test Development Specialist, Ms. Fountain develops training materials and facilitates bias and sensitivity review meetings for large-scale state assessment programs for English Language Arts, as well as all other content areas. As a leader in bias/fairness and sensitivity, she provides training for local educators, state departments of education, national experts, and test development specialists on best practices and current research. Ms. Fountain also has project management experience in all stages of the test development process. 

Her extensive professional development background includes College and Career Readiness Standards, Cognitive Labs, DRC INSIGHT™ iPad Usability Studies, Accommodations for Special Education Students, No Child Left behind (NCLB) compliance, Peer Review Process, Balanced Literacy, Six Plus One Traits of Writing, the New Jersey Writing Project, and Learning Strategies Institute. 

In addition to her educational assessment experience, Ms. Fountain has 13 years of teaching experience at the elementary level, including special education and gifted/talented education. Ms. Fountain is a former Teacher of the Year and recipient of an Angel Grant. This award gave her the opportunity to implement the Flat Stanley Project (an international literacy and communication project) within her classroom. In addition, she has conducted staff development training for teachers and provided academic advisement for students within a juvenile justice school setting. 

Ms. Fountain holds a Master of Science Education from Jackson State University in Jackson, Mississippi, and a Bachelor of Science in Education from the University of Southern Mississippi in Hattiesburg, Mississippi. Additionally, she has completed graduate coursework at Rice University in Houston, Texas. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Fountain’s CCR experience includes managing the process for alignment of state standards to CCR standards, working with state department of education staff regarding alignment, and creating alignment reports. Additionally, Ms. Fountain participated in college and career ready item development for the American Institute for Research (AIR). She reviewed items for bias, fairness, and sensitivity issues. Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2005–Present Bias/Fairness and Sensitivity Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Conducts research on bias in assessment. Develops bias training manual for test development employee orientation. Provides training to team members on bias issues. Prepares state-specific bias review training materials (i.e., review guidelines, Fairness in Testing training manual for English Language Arts and other content areas. Responsible for the training and facilitation of bias and sensitivity meetings (Grades 3−8 and high school) for teachers, community 

members, national consultants, and state department of education staff. Provides support for team members in English language arts and proposals. Conducts quality assurance procedures to ensure error-free test administration manuals and paper/pencil and online assessments. Conducts iPad usability studies via DRC INSIGHT to understand how students respond to testing on an iPad. Manages the development of K −8 and high school fine arts assessment programs. 

BIAS FAIRNESS AND SENSITIVITY PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2005 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2010 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2008–2011 

Standards Based Assessment—2005 

California Modified Assessment Alignment Study—2012 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2006–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Mississippi Subject Area Testing Program—1999–2001 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2008–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2012–2013 

COGNITIVE LABS EXPERIENCE 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium : Grades 3 −11—2012 

Michigan State Assessment Program : Grades K −2—2012 Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 3 

iPad USABILITY STUDIES EXPERIENCE 

South Carolina, grades 7, 8, and 9—2013 

Pennsylvania, grades 7, 8, 9, and 10—2014 

OTHER PROJECT EXPERIENCE 

Arizona Instrument to Measure Standards—2002 

Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test—1999–2001 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005 

Hawaii Content and Performance Standards II—2001–2003 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination—2011 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2005 

Nebraska State Accountability Assessment for Writing—2009–2011 

New Jersey Assessment for Skills and Knowledge—2003 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2009–2011 

Virginia Assessment Program-Standards of Learning—2000 

West Virginia Educational Standards Test—2009 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2005 Teacher 

Fort Bend Independent School District 

Sugar Land, TX 

Implemented English language arts, science, and social studies research-based instruction to fourth and fifth grade students, with a focus on written composition, aligned with the Texas state curriculum. Scored student writing papers. Wrote and received an Angel Grant from the Fort Bend Education Foundation. Administered state and district assessments. Participated in planning career day activities. Served as Student Council advisor. 

2003 Scoring Leader 

Educational Testing Service 

Rosedale, NJ 

Provided program support and guidance to scorers for the New Jersey ASK program. Scored deferred and adjudication responses for constructed-response items. 

2003 Instructor 

Sylvan Learning Center 

Missouri City, TX 

Implemented the Sylvan Method, tutored students on how to utilize program 

resources for student success. Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 4 

1999–2003 Senior Project Manager 

Harcourt Educational Measurement 

San Antonio, TX 

Managed all phases in the development of state-mandated tests for two testing programs, including collaborating with state departments of education and test advisory committees. Other duties included developing practice tests, establishing test specifications/guidelines, selecting reading passages, facilitating bias and item review meetings for reading and composition, and constructing and administering field tests. 

Developed ancillary materials such as directions for administering, teacher’s interpretive guides, and parent information guides. Was instrumental in managing the development of an online “teacher toolbox.” Managed team that was the first to successfully pilot an online item review meeting. Other duties included creating answer documents; reviewing data and interpreting scores; creating, reviewing, and approving test defines; and planning the development of documents with internal departments. 

Developed and monitored program budgets, facilitated weekly team meetings, interviewed applicants for employment, assisted in the planning of standard setting and professional development workshops for teachers, and developed materials for participants. 

1998–1999 Learning Specialist 

Community Education Partners 

Houston, TX 

Supervised teachers and conducted monthly staff development workshops on effective classroom management and instructional strategies. Administered pre-and post-program tests and interpreted and analyzed transcripts for academic placement of students (G rades 4−12) in a juvenile justice school program. Coordinated special events for students and employees. 

1998 Instructor, Youth Enrichment Program 

Texas Southern University 

Houston, TX 

Developed an individualized academic program for remediation and enrichment 

of students (multi-level grades) in English language arts and mathematics. Created and instructed students using course syllabus. Administered diagnostic 

assessments. Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 5 

1997–1998 Teacher 

Katy Independent School District 

Katy, TX 

Planned a cultural diversity program. Instructed first-grade students using research-based instructional methods in all subject areas. Collaborated with students and parents on a weekly basis regarding academic performance. Created lesson plans. Incorporated technology into the curriculum. Involved in selecting educational materials and participated in grant writing activities. 

1992–1997 Teacher 

Fort Bend Independent School District 

Sugar Land, TX 

Provided research-based instruction for second- and fourth-grade students. Participated in the development of the campus mission, goals, and improvement objectives; conducted staff development training on instructional strategies; supervised student teachers; and served as a liaison between the school and the district community relations department. 

1989−1992 Teacher 

Beaumont Independent School District 

Beaumont, TX 

Instructed fourth grade students using language arts curriculum. Created 

lesson plans. Had conferences with students and parents regarding academics and 

behavior. Implemented award system for good behavior and class work. Served as the American Red Cross teacher representative. 

1988–1989 Teacher 

Moss Point School District 

Moss Point, MS 

Provided research-based instruction to fifth- and sixth-grade students in all content areas. Provided research-based instruction to third- and fourth-grade learning-disabled students, developed IEPs, conducted ARD meetings, administered diagnostic assessments. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

International Reading Association ( Reading Teacher Manuscript Reviewer) 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Fountain, K. (1998). Time Management for Teachers . Community Education Partners. Houston, TX. 

Fountain, K. (1997–1998). Using Instructional Strategies in the Classroom .Community Education Partners. Houston, TX. Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 6 

Daniels, E.P., Fountain, K., & Robinson-Henry, S., (2000). Assessment in the New Millennium: Implications for African American Educators . National Alliance of Black School Educators’ conference, Philadelphia, PA. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2006−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA) Bias Review Meeting: Reading, Mathematics, Writing, and Science . Data Recognition Corporation. Harrisburg, PA. 

Fountain, K. (2006). Making the Grade: Students, Parents, Teachers, and the Community . National Alliance of Black School Educators’ 34 th  Annual Conference, Orlando, FL. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2007−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Idaho Standards Achievement Test (ISAT) Bias Review Meeting : Reading, Language, Usage, Mathematics, and Science . Data Recognition Corporation. Sun Valley, Coeur d’Alene, and Boise, ID. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2008−2011). Fairness in Testing. Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment (CSSA) and Alaska High School Graduation Qualifying Examination (HSGQE) Bias Review Meeting: Reading, Mathematics, and Writing . Data Recognition Corporation. Anchorage, AK. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2009 −2010). Fairness in Testing. Pennsylvania System of School Assessment-Modified (PSSA-M) Bias Review Meeting: Reading, Mathematics, and Writing. Data Recognition Corporation. Harrisburg, PA. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2009−2010). Fairness in Testing . Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test (ARMT) Content and Bias Review Meeting: Reading and Mathematics. Data Recognition Corporation. Montgomery, Alabama. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2010 −P resent). Fairness in Testing. Pennsylvania Keystone Exams Bias Review Meeting: Literature, Mathematics, and Science. Data Recognition Corporation. Harrisburg, PA. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2010 −Present). Fairness in Testing. Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) Bias Review Meeting: Literature, Mathematics, and Science. Data Recognition Corporation. Houston, TX. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2010). Fairness in Testing. Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests (OCCT) Bias Review Meeting–Reading, Mathematics, Writing, Social Studies, and Science. Data Recognition Corporation. Oklahoma City, OK. 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. English Language Proficiency Assessment Item Review Meeting, Context Review Meeting: Reading and Writing. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Michigan Interim Assessments Bias Review Meeting: Science and Social Studies. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Michigan Educational Assessment Program Item Review Meeting, Item Writer Training: Reading, Writing, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Michigan Educational 

Assessment Program−MEAP -Access Item Writer Training: Reading, Mathematics, and Writing. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI Résumé of Kimberly Fountain Page 7 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Michigan Alternate 

Assessment−MI -Access Item Review Meeting, Item Writer Training, and Bias Review Meeting: Reading, Mathematics, Writing, and Science. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI 

Fountain, Kimberly (2012−P resent). Fairness in Testing. Michigan Merit Exam Item Writer Training and Item Review Meeting: Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies. Data Recognition Corporation. Lansing, MI 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Mississippi Teacher License (Class AA) 

Texas Educator Certificate 

EDUCATION 

Rice University 

Houston, TX 

Graduate coursework 

Jackson State University 

Jackson, MS M.S. Ed., Education 

Lamar University 

Beaumont, TX 

Graduate Coursework 

University of Southern Mississippi 

Hattiesburg, MS B.S. Ed., Education Page 1 

# MAGGIE FRYE 

Senior Meeting Planner 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Senior Meeting Planner, Ms. Frye manages meetings related to the company’s large-scale educational assessment contracts, such as content, data and bias reviews, standard setting, and rangefinding meetings. Her background includes 16 years of experience in contracting, organizing and managing events, conferences and travel programs for corporations and hotels. 

Ms. Frye holds a B.S. in Hotel, Restaurant and Institution Management with a minor in Economics from South Dakota State University in Brookings. She is a member of Meeting Professionals International. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Meeting Planner 

2009–2014 Meeting Planner 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Oversees all aspects of the meeting planning process for assigned states including, but not limited to, coordinating and executing logistical arrangements, contract negotiations, attendee recruitment, database management, lodging and travel arrangements. Keeps internal and external customers up-to-date on meeting schedules and details in an efficient and timely manner. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

California Alignment Study—2012 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2009 Sourcing Specialist (Meeting Planner) 

Target Corporation 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed company meetings and large travel projects. Responsibilities included interdepartmental communication, expense management, and hotel contract negotiation/execution. Conducted comprehensive strategic analysis for large travel projects and/or company meetings including detailed cost comparisons. Résumé of Maggie Frye Page 2 

Created and implemented a database to track and report all meeting expenditures and contract savings. 

2003–2006 Sales Manager (Meetings and Conventions) 

Doubletree Hotel Minneapolis Park Place 

Minneapolis, MN 

Used sales skills and strategies to secure events that drove revenues and maximized profits for the hotel meeting space. Directed department managers to ensure service levels were met and contractual obligations were fulfilled. Analyzed revenue management reports focusing on sales efforts and develop action plans. 

2002–2003 Sales Manager (Meetings and Conventions) 

Visit Minneapolis North Convention and Visitors Bureau 

Minneapolis, MN 

Responsible for promoting and marketing member cities and hotels as a destination for meetings and conventions. Assisted meeting planners in securing hotel and event centers. Created marketing materials to reach large and varied audience, including newsletters, invitations, flyers, and brochures. 

1999–2002 Sales Manager (Meetings and Conventions) 

Northland Inn and Executive Conference Center 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Supported management team in securing meeting contracts with new and existing customers. Duties included  scheduling and coordinating events and meetings,  contract negotiations, problem resolution, and revenue generation. Developed and maintained relationships with assigned accounts. Evaluated market trends to maximize business opportunities. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Meeting Professionals International, Member—2010–Present 

Society of Government Meeting Professionals—2001–2003 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Microsoft Office, Delphi, GetThere, Cliqbook, Cvent, and Starcite 

EDUCATION 

South Dakota State University 

Brookings, SD 

B.S., Hotel, Restaurant and Institution Management 

Minor: Economics Page 1 

# WYATT GARNETT III 

Project Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Project Manager at DRC, Mr. Wyatt Garnett III provides exceptional customer service, develops correspondence to district contacts, assists with material development, monitors resources areas, and performs other general project manager duties for programs in Pennsylvania, including the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA), Keystone Exams (end-of-course), and the Classroom Diagnostic Tools (CDT). 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Garnett III was a small business owner for ten years, responsible for day-to-day operations, including marketing, sales, and customer service. Mr. Garnett III holds a B.A. in Education from Metropolitan State University in St. Paul, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Coordinates and communicates project scope with the client. Provides superior 

customer service support to field and team. Assists Associate Project Managers to expand their knowledge of the CDT. Collaborated with team on process improvements (e.g., requirements documents, assigning permissions on eDIRECT, and MS Project). Created a new schedule for the CDT in MS Project. Collaborated with project management office (PMO) on MS Project and how to improve understanding of CDT process for future administrations. Worked with resource groups to determine schedule and durations. Contributed ideas with the eDIRECT Product Team on how to improve eDIRECT for program management team and clients. Lead the Test Setup and Technology Coordinator Training. 

2012–2013 Associate Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients and customers to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacts with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assigned tasks, and set priorities. Managed and developed project schedules and other project documentation. Monitored project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production, while providing support for other assessment programs from conception through completion. Provided customer service to Résumé of Wyatt Garnett III Page 2 

school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs, including online assessment tools. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2001–2012 Owner/Operator 

Garnett Painting & Restoration 

Minneapolis, MN 

Performed marketing, sales, and long-term business plan with a goal of becoming the primary painting company for a large property management company working with multiple realtors and businesses on an ongoing basis. Grew profits seven-fold over 10 years. Developed an effective referral-based marketing plan. Developed project estimates, negotiated final pricing, and managed subcontractor schedules, work plans, and performance. Recruited, trained, and developed employees, including performance and compensation reviews. 

2011 Long Term Substitute Special Education Teacher 

Richfield Middle School 

Richfield, MN 

Taught Grade 6 Language Arts, including curriculum development. Taught Grade 6 Mathematics, including curriculum development. Increased Students Test scores by 4–15 percentage points. Developed and nurtured relationships with teachers through team building activities and managing duties throughout the school day. 

2009 Long Term Substitute Teacher 

Richfield Middle School 

Richfield, MN 

Wrote curriculum for Grade 6 Ancient History. Built relationships with teaching team and students. 

2005 Long Term Substitute Teacher 

Jordan Park Middle School 

Minneapolis, MN 

Built relationships with faculty through daily team meetings which included identifying and assigning responsibilities, as well as discussing classroom management plans and curriculum. Supervised after-school program for elementary school students. Activities included enhancing reading and math skills, plus recreation. Résumé of Wyatt Garnett III Page 3 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Microsoft Office and Smartboard 

EDUCATION 

Metropolitan State University 

Saint Paul, MN 

B.A., Education Page 1 

# STUART GARRICK 

English Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Stuart Garrick has extensive experience in the field of education and assessment. As an English Language Arts Test Development Specialist at DRC, Mr. Garrick participates in all aspects of the item and test development process, including, writing, editing, and reviewing test items, as well as participating in performance assessment scoring processes and rangefinding. He also facilitates committee meetings for item, passage, and data reviews. 

In addition to his educational assessment experience, Mr. Garrick is a writer and language arts specialist with 18 years of teaching experience at the middle and high school level. Mr. Garrick holds a B.A. in English from the University of Montana in Missoula, Montana. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Garrick helped the Pennsylvania Department of Education develop Pennsylvania English language arts assessment anchors and eligible content (standards and objectives) aligned to the Pennsylvania Core Standards (PCS). He also participated in the development of new writing items, passages, and writing prompts aligned to the new Pennsylvania standards. Mr. Garrick also developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Writing, grades 3–8. 

In addition, Mr. Garrick’s experience includes aligning existing Louisiana assessments to the College and Career Readiness Standards in Louisiana’s efforts to transition to the Common Core State Standards. This led to the development of new items, development of new writing passages, development of writing prompts associated with these passages, development of scoring rubrics, and other related test materials for inclusion in the new transitional Louisiana English language arts assessments for grades 3–8. 

Mr. Garrick also participated in the development of items for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (Smarter Balanced) in 2013, providing a senior review of items, as well as writing passages to meet the Smarter Balanced item specifications. This development spanned grades 3–8 and included research and writing items. Résumé of Stuart Garrick Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present English Language Arts Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Participates in all aspects of English language arts curriculum, instruction, and assessment development. Works with curriculum content specialists, freelance item writers, and consultants in prompt development, passage selection, and item development. Develops, reviews, and edits test items, writing prompts, and passages; constructs test forms; and develops scoring guides. Facilitates various test development external committee meetings, including item specification meetings; bias, fairness, and sensitivity review; content review of passages, prompts, and items; data review; and forms approval meetings. Stays current on English language arts curriculum and assessment. Participates in professional development. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2012–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2012–Present 

Idaho Standard Achievement Tests—2012–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2012–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2011 English Language Arts Teacher 

Pioneer Ridge Middle School 

Chaska, MN 

English language arts teacher for Grade 8. Taught general education, special education, and gifted students within a mainstream classroom. Developed curriculum aligned to district and state standards. Developed new curriculum for accelerated language arts programs. Developed local assessments for writing. Collected and tracked data in order to make data-driven decisions. Résumé of Stuart Garrick Page 3 

2008–2009 English Language Arts Teacher 

Prestige Academy 

Minneapolis, MN 

English language arts teacher for Grades 10 and 12. Taught general education, special education, and gifted students within a mainstream classroom. Developed curriculum aligned to state standards. Developed grade-level assessments to collect and track data to make data-driven decisions. Led after-school ACT preparation classes. 

1996–2008 English Language Arts Teacher 

South Middle School 

Grand Forks, ND 

English language arts teacher for Grades 7 and 8. Taught general education, special education, and gifted students within a mainstream classroom. Developed curriculum aligned to state standards. Developed grade-level assessments to collect and track data to make data-driven decisions. Played an integral part in the implementation of writing-across-the-curriculum initiatives. Led the literacy committee as part of the school improvement process. Served as department chair for four years. Led a textbook adoption committee. 

1994–1996 English Language Arts Teacher 

Powder River County District Schools 

Broadus, MT 

English Language Arts Teacher for Grades 9, 11, and 12. Taught general education, special education, and gifted students within a mainstream classroom. Served as department chair. 

1991–1993 ESL Teacher 

US Peace Corps 

Kluczbork, Poland 

English teacher for Grades 9, 10, and 12. Taught general education, special education, and gifted students within a mainstream classroom. Developed the oral and written graduation exams (Matura) for English in a secondary lyceum. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota—Teacher, English Language Arts, Grades 7–12 

State of Montana—Teacher, English Language Arts, Grades 5–12 

State of North Dakota—Teacher, English Language Arts, Grades 6–12 Résumé of Stuart Garrick Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Montana 

Missoula, MT 

B.A., English Page 1 

# DEBRA GARTNER 

Director, Publications 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Debra Gartner has developed large-scale assessment publications at DRC for more than 25 years. Her experience includes the design, layout, and production of test booklets, manuals, and other documents for statewide testing programs in numerous states, such as Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington. Working closely with her DRC colleagues and state department of education clients, she develops comprehensive, state-specific style guides for test forms and ancillary materials. As the manager of the professionals in the Document/Graphic Design Group (graphic designers, word processing specialists, and editors), she coordinates staffing requirements to meet the needs of DRC’s large-scale assessment clients. 

Before joining DRC, Ms. Gartner managed the desktop publishing and word processing department of a technical translations company and worked as a technical writer and programmer for a mortgage company. 

Throughout her career, Ms. Gartner has received numerous hours of technical training in desktop publishing and graphic design applications. She is currently pursuing a B.A. in English at Augsburg College in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Director, Publications 

1990–2010 Manager of Document/Graphic Design Group 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Ensures compliance with state assessment contracts as related to the Document/ Graphic Design Group. Coordinates publishing schedules with project management. Manages the day-to-day production and quality assurance requirements of large-scale assessment materials. Supervises desktop publishing, editing, and word processing staff. Schedules production personnel. 

Creates templates that reflect client specifications to ensure consistency throughout project production. Produces detailed graphics based on rough sketches or written instructions for a wide variety of documents, including scannable, non-scannable, and image-scannable test booklets and surveys, student workbooks, administration manuals, oral administration manuals, answer document mock-ups, software user manuals, brochures, PowerPoint presentations, advertisements, and forms. Résumé of Debra Gartner Page 2 

Develops and maintains electronic and hard copies of style guides as set forth by clients. Creates PDF files for print vendors and for use on client websites. Ensures that the Document/Graphic Design Group maintains current technology. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—1994–2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—1998–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: Benchmark Examinations—1995–2001 

End of Course Examinations—1999–2005 

Arkansas Direct Writing Assessment—1991–1995 

Arkansas Minimum Performance Test—1990–1994 

Florida End-of-Course Assessment—2014–Present 

Florida High School Competency Test—1994–1997 

Florida Standards Assessment—2014–Present 

Florida Writing Assessment—1992–1994 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System Program—1998–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—1998–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2000–2005 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Missouri Assessment Program—2015–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

New Jersey Early Warning Test—1990–1993 

Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities—2015–Present 

Ohio Computer-Based Assessments—2013–Present 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2012–2013 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Oregon Statewide Assessment—1990–1995 

Oregon Statewide Writing Assessment—1990–1991 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1990–Present 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—1991–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present Résumé of Debra Gartner Page 3 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2006–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—1997–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—1990–2003 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007–2008 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1988–1990 Supervisor, Desktop Publishing/Word Processing 

P.H. Brink International 

Minneapolis, MN 

Contracted through Addison-Wesley to create bilingual mathematics textbooks (Grades K–6 teacher’s guide and four supplemental workbooks, totaling 11,000 pages) and through Silver-Burdett to create bilingual mathematics textbooks (Grades 1–5 teacher’s guide and four supplemental workbooks, totaling 9,000 pages). 

Managed Desktop Publishing and Word Processing Department projects to ensure that production schedules were met in the most efficient, cost-effective, and quality-conscious means possible. Designed style sheets according to client specifications to assure consistency throughout the project. Maintained continuous communication with editors, proofreaders, illustrators, and keyliners. 

1979–1990 Technical Writer/Programmer 

Knutson Mortgage Corporation 

Bloomington, MN 

Created, updated, and distributed manuals to corporate and branch staffs. Provided technical support and training for company personnel. Programmed sophisticated project tracking and time management system. Coordinated with outside vendors for services, support, and cost comparisons. 

SOFTWARE EXPERTISE 

Adobe Illustrator, Adobe InDesign, Adobe Acrobat 6.0, Adobe Photoshop, CorelDraw, Corel Designer (Micrografx), Quark 5.0, Quicksilver (Interleaf), and Microsoft Office Suite. 

Technical training in desktop publishing and graphics applications, along with Unix systems administration. Résumé of Debra Gartner Page 4 

EDUCATION 

Augsburg College 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., English ( in progress )Page 1 

# JACQUELYN G. GRAHAM 

Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment Consultant 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Jacquelyn Graham offers subject-area expertise in the development of model curriculum, formative assessment, item and passage review, alignment of College and Career Readiness (CCR) standards with grade-level expectations, and the creation of item samplers with annotations. Prior to working as a consultant, she served as the English Language Arts Test Development Director at Data Recognition Corporation, Research Coordinator for the Washington Office of Superintendent and Public Instruction, a Research Analyst for the American Institutes for Research, and as the MSPAP Facilitator for Writing for the Maryland State Department of Education. 

In her position as Professor of Teacher Education, Dr. Graham has taught teacher education courses, used formative assessment techniques as part of daily and weekly instruction, taught students formative assessment techniques to use in elementary school classrooms, used observation instruments when observing pre-service teachers, and used an electronic portfolio system to assess students on the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices. She has been certified by the Florida Department of Education as a clinical educator, which certifies her to train other field supervisors in formative observation and assessment techniques for teachers. Dr. Graham has also been involved in curriculum development at the higher education level, developing writing remediation modules for teacher education students, as well as revising and creating new curriculum for the elementary education program in the College of Education at St. Petersburg College. Additionally, she worked as part of the reading team on a reading endorsement proposal that was submitted to and approved by the Florida Department of Education. 

Dr. Graham has also worked for two state departments of education. In her position with the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of Washington, she worked with school, district, and state department of education staff, designing formative assessments to measure Title I schools’ progress toward established goals. In her position with the Maryland State Department of Education, Dr. Graham was responsible for all phases of development of the Maryland School Performance Assessment Program. As part of this position, Dr. Graham helped develop sample materials for teachers to use with students, as well as an online formative assessment scoring tool for teachers to practice scoring constructed response items. Dr. Graham worked with Maryland public school teachers to create the writing portion of the assessment, which was an integrated assessment that incorporated all subject areas. 

> As a Research Analyst for the American Institutes, Dr. Graham’s responsibilities

included directing research and policy analysis over a range of education, assessment, and evaluation programs. In this role, she was responsible for all Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 2 

aspects of research, including project management, research design, survey instrument development, statistical analysis, creation of final reports, and presentation briefings of results. Dr. Graham was also responsible for writing chapters related to educational assessment for proposal efforts to various State Departments of Education, on assessment topics such as professional development, item development, passage selection processes, and range finding. 

Dr. Graham has worked as an elementary educator for eight years, teaching grades three through six. All of her elementary teaching experience was focused on urban education with at risk students in Title 1 schools. In this role, she was responsible for teaching and assessing students using the Maryland State Learning Outcomes for all subjects. Dr. Graham’s concentration in teaching was the teaching of writing, literary analysis, and content area reading skills. 

Dr. Graham also worked as an elementary reading specialist for one year. In this role, she was responsible for the diagnosis and remediation grades 1–6 students’ reading difficulties. As a middle school reading specialist, Dr. Graham worked with at risk grade 7 and 8 students to remediate reading difficulties, with a focus on content area reading strategies. Dr. Graham also served as a lead staff development trainer on reading strategies as well as formative assessment methods. She also was responsible for the instruction of students on writing skills in preparation for the Maryland Writing Assessment. As a middle school English teacher, Dr Graham taught English to grade 7 students in a Title 1 school. In this role, she was responsible for teaching and assessing the Maryland State Learning Outcomes for middle school English. 

Dr. Graham earned a Ph.D. in English Education from the University of Maryland Graduate School of Education with a concentration in composition. She also holds an M.Ed. in Reading Education and a B.S. in Elementary Education from Indiana University of Pennsylvania. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER (CCR) READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Dr. Graham’s CCR experience includes reviewing the proposed Alaska alignment (completed by Alaska educators) to the CCR English Language Arts standards for alignment. 

Dr. Graham has also developed new reading passages, items, and scoring guidelines aligned to the new Pennsylvania Core Standards (PCS). She has developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Reading (grades 3–high school) and Literature and has developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams for Literature. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 3 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Graham Educational Consulting 

Principal Consultant 

Palm Harbor, FL 

Work as a consultant writing and reviewing curriculum, passages, and items for state reading assessments, grades 3–12. Work on creating Performance-Level Descriptors for English Language Arts for state departments of education. Work on finding appropriate permissioned passages, writing commissioned passages for state assessments, aligning items according to content standards and levels of cognitive complexity, and creating scoring guides for constructed response items. Conduct alignment studies of College and Career Readiness Standards to formative and summative assessment standards. Create art requests for passages. Write annotations for selected response and constructed response items for state department of education assessment samplers. Review final test forms and provide key verification for final test forms. 

2009–Present Adjunct Professor, Communications 

E-Campus 

St. Petersburg College 

Seminole, FL 

Teach online developmental reading courses for Department of Communications. 

Courses focus on developing students’ critical reading and vocabulary skills. 

2009–Present Adjunct Professor, Teacher Education 

College of Education 

St. Petersburg College 

Tarpon Springs, FL 

Teach core education online courses for teacher education program candidates in both the undergraduate and alternative certification programs using Angel as the online platform. Create and evaluate class assessments based on the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices and TESOL ESL Standards. 

2009 Literacy Curriculum Consultant 

Pearson Education Corporation 

Upper Saddle River, NJ 

Trained teachers as part of professional development on Pearson balanced literacy instructional program for English language arts at the elementary grade levels. Trained teachers on several diagnostic, formative, and summative assessment tools included in the Pearson literacy program. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 4 

2004–2008 Full Time Professor, Teacher Education 

College of Education 

St. Petersburg College 

Tarpon Springs, FL 

Taught reading, language arts, writing, and core education courses for teacher education program candidates in both the undergraduate and alternative certification programs. Experience in working with nontraditional student population. Taught courses using adult learning face to face and online methodologies. Wrote and revised College of Education curriculum on a continual basis. Designed a totally online course with materials, interactive instructional components, as well as formative and summative assessments. Supervised and evaluated students in local public schools for practicum and internship using formative and summative observational assessment instruments. Formative and summative assessment instruments included ongoing conferences, electronic portfolios, self-assessment instruments for pedagogy and dispositions and the creation and reflection of student goals for professional development plans. Advised and counseled students within the program. 

Created formative and summative class assessments based on the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices and TESOL ESL Standards. Managed the administration and data collection of online writing assessment given to College of Education majors. Developed instructional online writing remediation modules with formative and summative assessment components for students identified as needing improvement. As part of reading committee, wrote proposal that was submitted to the Florida Department of Education for reading endorsement approval. Worked as part of a committee to write proposal for Business Education program for state approval submitted to the Florida Department of Education. 

Designed online courses and taught blended courses with online components. Faculty counselor for Kappa Delta Pi, the international honors organization for education majors. Served on Faculty Application Selection Panel. Served on Faculty Interview Panel. Served as Writing Assessment and Instructional Remediation Coordinator. Proficient with using Angel, People Soft, and Live Text. Proficient with teaching with many modes of technology. Faculty champion member of Quality Enhancement Plan team for SACs accreditation renewal. Trained by Florida Department of Education to train supervisors and teachers to be clinical educators. The clinical education program includes the identification of performance standards for student teachers; diagnosis of student teacher professional performance; diagnosis of elementary student performance; feedback on student teacher performance; preparation and implementation of student teacher professional development plans; and reflection. 

Designed Student Learning Improvement Program that would be integrated throughout the College of Education curriculum from the first semester that students entered the program. This curriculum component utilized components of action research that would be used to improve elementary student performance in a core curriculum area. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 5 

2008 Teacher Education Consultant 

Florida Department of Education 

Tallahassee, FL 

Worked as part of a committee to review two new teacher education programs from two Florida colleges for initial state program approval. 

2007 Educational Assessment Consultant 

Florida Teacher Certification Exam Standards Committee 

National Evaluation Systems/Florida Department of Education 

Tampa, FL 

Wrote standards for item development for Florida Teacher Certification Exam for 

reading grades K-12. 

2002–2004 English Language Arts Test Development Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as part of senior management team for test development. Served as content lead for all projects assigned to and responsible for all phases of test development for English language arts. Supervised a staff of ten and provided ongoing training to staff members on aspects of quality test development. Conducted training to contracted teachers for passage collection and item writing. Coordinated English language arts item development and works with freelance writers and consultants in reading and English language arts test construction for elementary, middle, and high school grades. Researched and communicated current developments in reading and English language arts assessment. Responsibilities also included representing DRC, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Participated in professional development, planning, and giving presentations. Led content, data, and range finding committee reviews. Collaborated with and address the concerns of clients regarding reading and English language arts. Wrote performance level descriptors for elementary, middle, and high school English language arts. Wrote sections of proposals involving staffing and test development. Attended and participated in standard setting sessions. 

2002 Research Coordinator for School Improvement 

Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction 

Olympia, WA 

Responsible for working in collaboration with school, district, educational service district, and Office of Superintendent for Public Instruction staff to coordinate the development and implementation of effective tools to measure baseline data in schools receiving focused assistance through Title I, as well as intermittent measures designed to identify and communicate progress toward established goals. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 6 

Also supported School Improvement Facilitators in the collection of data needed to complete a well-designed research study on the effectiveness of varied interventions. Enhanced the capacity of School Improvement Facilitators, schools, districts, and educational service districts to understand, interpret, communicate, and use the tools developed and implemented in the comprehensive school improvement processes to improve student learning. Supported the development and implementation of educational audits, comprehensive school improvement plans, and negotiated performance agreements. Identified measures that demonstrate appropriate and optimum use of school staff, program resources, and contracted services in order to evaluate successful strategies so that the system of providing assistance is enhanced over time within a continuous improvement model. 

2000–2002 Research Analyst 

American Institutes for Research 

Washington, D.C. 

Responsibilities included directing research and policy analysis over a range of education, assessment, and evaluation programs. Responsible for all aspects of research, including project management, research design, survey instrument development, statistical analysis, reports, and briefings. Responsible for writing chapters related to educational assessment for proposal efforts to various State Departments of Education, on assessment topics such as professional development, item development, passage selection processes, and range finding. 

Project-Specific Experience: 

National Assessment of Adult Literacy 

Responsible for creating rubrics for National Assessment of Adult Literacy for the U.S. Department of Education. Attended range finding sessions and selected papers for anchor, training, and qualifying sets. Was responsible for conducting training of scorers and monitoring scoring of constructed response items. Also responsible for interacting with client representative from U.S. Department of Education as to the progress of the project. 

Cultural Competency Curriculum Modules 

Served as the Deputy Project Director. Responsible for leading the development, pilot testing, and field testing of curriculum modules that effectively equip family medical practitioners with cultural and linguistic competencies, which are anchored in the principles and concepts established in the National Standards on Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in Health Care. The three modules being developed center around the themes of 1) culturally competent care, 2) language access services, and 3) organizational supports for cultural competence. Monitored the development of parallel web-based modules. Wrote mid-project report and final report on the project. Responsibilities as deputy project director also included researching the current literature and curricula of cultural competence in the medical profession, presenting the findings of the research and the project to AIR staff, monitoring the progress of task Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 7 

leaders, delegating responsibilities to task leaders, and presenting and facilitating discussions at the National Advisory Committee meetings. 

School District of Philadelphia Citywide Proficiency Exam 

Acted as team leader to develop all phases of the middle and high school English language arts assessments for the School District of Philadelphia. Responsibilities included training consultants in multiple-choice and constructed-response item writing, reviewing and revising test items and rubrics submitted by consultants, and selecting all literary passages for item writing and pilot testing. Client interactions involved analyzing school district curriculum to create content test specifications, as well as facilitating passage and item review meetings and cultural inclusion meetings with client representatives. Post-assessment procedures involved facilitating range finding following test administration, overseeing the training of constructed-response scorers, and coordinating the selection and hiring of consultants to assist with range finding; analyzing item statistics for form construction, analyzing items for linguistic difficulty, and simplifying items for English language learners; and supervising and delegating tasks to research assistants involved with the project. 

Voluntary National Test 

Responsible for item development of the VNT for Grade 4 students in Reading. Duties included writing selected-response and constructed-response items that represented the four stances reflected in NAEP, facilitating Content Expert Panel meetings to evaluate items written, and writing new items as needed. Reviewing responsibilities involved evaluating current items for quality and alignment with test specifications, facilitating bias and sensitivity review panel meetings to evaluate items for multi cultural representation and fairness, and facilitating readability panel meetings to determine reading levels of passages selected for the test. 

1998–2000 Maryland School Performance Assessment Program Facilitator for Writing 

and English Language Usage Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Responsible for all activities related to the development and production of tasks and activities in writing and language usage related to the Maryland School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP) for Grades 3, 5, and 8. Test development duties included convening groups of Maryland experts in English language arts for the purpose of providing direction to task development; establishing continuity between state assessment in writing and language usage, local school systems' assessments of writing and language usage, and both state and local curricular and instructional goals; and integrating the Maryland Learning Outcomes with statewide content standards for writing and language. Developed content on research-based best practices for writing instruction for state school improvement web site. In addition, served as division point of contact regarding MSPAP writing assessment for Planning, Results, and Information Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 8 

Management (PRIM) and School and Community Outreach Office (SCOO) staff in the area of graphics, publishers' copyright permissions, test administration, proficiency level interpretation, waivers and accommodations, and public information concerning testing program in writing and language usage. 

Test administration procedures included observing in the out-of-state field testing of tasks and field testing of all reading materials to assess readability, developmental appropriateness, and interest level. Post-test administration responsibilities included designing and implementing training protocol for Maryland teachers for task development; coordinating the drafting, revising, and editing of tasks and scoring tools; and setting up an eLearning scoring project in conjunction with IBM as staff development for Maryland teachers to be able to score sample constructed-response items from the MSPAP and receive feedback on accuracy of scoring. Additional responsibilities included developing materials and publications for parents and teachers that provided illustrative examples of MSPAP writing and language usage instructional and assessment activities, and participating in a research project, in collaboration with the University of Maryland, in the development of a survey and analysis of results once administered as part of MSPAP to all Maryland students in Grades 3, 5, and 8. 

Leadership positions included co-chair for Developmentally Appropriate Practices Review Committee (DAP), team reviewer for bias and sensitivity issues, and co-chair for reading materials field testing committee. Worked with state specialist in English language arts to ensure articulation of MSPAP with the goals and expectancies established for English language arts in the state curricular framework and content standards documents. Worked closely with MSPAP Facilitator for Reading in developing professional development sessions, assessment tasks, and item-specific rubrics. 

1998 Adjunct Professor 

Department of English 

Howard Community College 

Columbia, MD 

Taught a developmental writing course that integrated reading of American cultural issues with persuasive writing. Taught course in which students used computers for the writing process using a writing workshop approach. 

1997–1998 Test Development Consultant 

Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Served as consultant contracted to serve on a development team to write an integrated writing, language usage, reading, and social studies task for Grade 5, 1999, Maryland School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP) test. Responsible for designing activities that measured the Maryland state writing and language usage outcomes appropriately. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 9 

1998 Test Development Consultant 

Howard County Public Schools 

Ellicott City, MD 

Developed a multiple-choice summative assessment for Grade 6 middle school students in reading essentials unit on research. 

1997–1998 Curriculum Development Consultant 

Howard County Public Schools 

Ellicott City, MD 

Helped to develop a plan for implementation of reading portfolios for middle school grades for use in county middle schools. 

1997–1998 Middle School Reading Specialist/English Teacher 

Howard County Public Schools 

Ellicott City, MD 

Responsible for diagnosis and remediation of grades seven and eight middle school students' reading difficulties, instructing students in functional, interpretive, and critical reading skills, study skills, and test-taking strategies. Responsible for preparing students for the Maryland Writing Test and the Maryland Functional Reading Test. Team taught, served as staff consultant, and functioned as lead teacher for teacher training in-services. Worked with special education teachers in an inclusion program to provide reading services for students with reading disabilities. Interacted regularly with parents during ARD meetings. Administered the Grade 8 MSPAP. Leadership positions included member of student services team, Human Relations Committee, and Student Awards Committee. Completed Junior Great Books training program to be a discussion leader for shared inquiry. 

1997 Adjunct Professor 

Department of English 

Prince George’s Community College 

Largo, MD 

Responsible for teaching a developmental writing course focusing on grammar, punctuation, sentence construction, paragraph development, and short essay writing. 

1996–1997 Test Development Consultant 

Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Acted as a consultant contracted to serve on a development team to write an integrated writing, language usage, science, social studies, and mathematics task for Grade 5, 1998, Maryland School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP) Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 10 

test. Responsible for designing activities that measured the Maryland state writing and language usage outcomes appropriately. 

1996–1997 Reading Specialist 

Prince George’s County Public Schools 

Beltsville, MD 

Coordinated the reading/English language arts program in elementary education. Responsibilities included conducting model reading/English language arts lessons and staff development sessions for teachers; directing a school-wide reading incentive program; training an instructional assistant who assisted with small groups of students in reading instruction; and coordinating Young Authors' Contest and county Write-A-Book Contest. Also, created formative benchmark assessments for writing for grades 1-6 for four modes of writing that teachers would administer and score using the state holistic rubric in order to modify writing instruction based on student needs. 

Additional responsibilities included serving as teacher consultant for reading/English language arts; testing/screening students’ reading levels for reading group placements; implementing emergent literacy strategies based upon the Reading Recovery Program with students in Grades 1 and 2; diagnosing and remediating students' reading difficulties via small group instruction; teaching primary talented and gifted (TAG) students via a pull-out model; and coordinating and overseeing the administration of MSPAP for Grades 3 and 5. 

1996 Curriculum Development Consultant 

Prince George’s County Public Schools 

Capitol Heights, MD 

Worked with a committee of reading specialists for the county reading supervisor to develop a curriculum handbook for the teaching of standard orthography for the Prince George’s County reading/English language arts program for elementary grades. Handbook included research basis for teaching developmentally appropriate orthography, best practices, and strategies for instruction as well as formative and summative assessment measures. 

1995–1996 Test Development Consultant 

Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Served as a consultant contracted to serve on a development team to write an integrated writing, language usage, and reading task for Grade 5, 1997, Maryland School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP) test. Responsible for designing activities that measured Maryland state writing and language usage outcomes appropriately. Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 11 

1995 Scorer for Maryland School Performance Assessment Program 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Responsible for scoring writing and language usage activities of Maryland School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP) administered to Grade 8 students. Used holistic scoring rubrics to score for three different modes of writing and language usage. 

1993–1996 Communications Resource Teacher 

Prince George’s County Public Schools 

Landover Hills, MD 

Responsibilities included working with at-risk pre-kindergarten through grade 6 students developing oral and written language skills by teaching the writing process, reading strategies, literature, research, and study skills. Also worked closely with a reading specialist to implement reading incentive programs, including, RIF. Used MAC software for computer-assisted instruction for reading, writing, and multimedia production and acted as site coordinator for Jostens computer program for IBM computers. Served as judge for county Write-a-Book contest and for school science fair. Served as member of county book review committee. 

Served as Talented and Gifted (TAG) Coordinator, responsible for all screening and assessment of students nominated by parents and teachers for the talented and gifted program. Additional responsibilities included teaching primary and intermediate TAG students using a countywide TAG curriculum and producing weekly live closed-circuit television news program, which was a performance assessment of reading and speaking instruction for students. 

1990–1993 Elementary Classroom Teacher 

Prince George’s County Public Schools 

Landover Hills, MD 

Worked as a classroom teacher for Grades 2 and 3. Responsible for designing lessons that taught and assessed countywide local curriculum as well as the Maryland State Learning Outcomes. Used current research-based teaching techniques. Concentration on teaching writing process using writing workshop approach, teaching of literature and literary analysis, and teaching of interpretive and critical reading skills. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) 

National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) 

International Reading Association (IRA) Résumé of Jacquelyn Graham Page 12 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS (since 2003) 

Brodney, B., Graham, J. (2008). Quality Enhancement Plan on Critical Thinking ,

Fall Faculty Inservice Workshop, St. Petersburg College—Clearwater, Florida. 

Graham, J ., Gauweiler, C. (2007). Digital Literacy for Today’s Students, New 

Faculty Workshop, St. Petersburg College—Largo, Florida. 

Graham, J., Gerena, L. (2006). How to Use the Electronic Portfolio to Assess Pre-

Service Teachers on the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices —Tarpon 

Springs, Florida. 

Graham, J. (2004). Implications of the “No Child Left Behind Act” on Students 

and Teachers, St. Petersburg College—Tarpon Springs, Florida. 

Graham, J. (2002). State of Alaska Project Item Writer Training for Composition 

and Language Usage— Maple Grove , Minnesota. 

Graham, J. (2001). State of Minnesota Project Item Writer Training for 

Reading— Maple Grove , Minnesota. 

Graham, J. (2004). State of Minnesota Project Passage Collection Training for 

English Language Arts— Maple Grove , Minnesota. 

Graham, J. (2003). General Item Writer Training for English Language Arts— 

Maple Grove , Minnesota. 

EDUCATION 

University of Maryland Graduate School of Education 

College Park, MD 

Ph.D., English Education 

Cognate: Composition 

Indiana University of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education 

Indiana, PA 

M.Ed., Reading Education 

Indiana University of Pennsylvania 

Indiana, PA 

B.S., Elementary Education, Summa Cum Laude 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATIONS 

Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development—Professional 

Development Coach Training 

St. Petersburg College Levels I, II, and II Angel Certification 

State of Florida—Clinical Educator Trainer 

St. Petersburg College—Clinical Education Training for Pre-Service Teachers 

State of Maryland Advanced Professional Teaching License— 

Reading Specialist, Grades K–12 

Elementary, Grades 1–6 

Junior Great Books National Certification—Grades 6–8 Page 1 

# MICHELLE GRONEMEYER 

Sr. IS Director, Online Testing Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Michelle Gronemeyer has more than 21 years of experience in the information systems field. She currently oversees program management of the DRC INSIGHT ® Online Learning System. She has performed requirements analysis and system design for numerous statewide assessments, including those for Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. She also led the effort to identify common requirements across all state-wide projects for DRC’s shipping, receiving, operational, editing, and handscoring processes. DRC subsequently leveraged this work to design and develop all of our common processing systems (shipping, receiving, imaging document processing, and image handscoring). 

Ms. Gronemeyer holds a B.S. in Business and an M.B.A. with a concentration in Information and Decisions Sciences, both from the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. She received her Project Management Professional (PMP ®) certification in July 2002. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Sr. IS Director, Online Testing Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leads the DRC INSIGHT Online Learning System team to deliver a comprehensive assessment and reporting system that provides teachers a robust set of tools to assess performance, monitor growth, and enhance instruction. Leads the Online Testing Engine Product Team to ensure the emerging trends in the industry and needs of DRC’s clients can be met with DRC’s testing engine. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: 

End of Course Examinations—2000–2002 

Kentucky Core Content Test—1997–2002 

Kentucky Instructional Results Information System—1997–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2000–2006 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2000–2006 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2002–2004 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessment—2003–2004 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2000–2006; 2010–Present Résumé of Michelle Gronemeyer Page 2 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment Program— 

2012–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Test Program—2000–2006 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2011–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2010 Program Manager 

Medtronic 

Minneapolis, MN 

Led the development of a web-based, remote device monitoring system. Allowed patients’ devices to be validated and verified on a daily basis for any problems or potential issues, without requiring a visit to the doctor’s office. 

2004–2006 Director of Information Systems 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for the management and scheduling of all information systems to meet the needs of Louisiana Education assessment projects, including business analysis, system design, quality control, processing, and report production. Coordinated development activities to ensure that appropriate technical resources were available and project schedules were met. Provided technical solutions to meet client requirements for timely, accurate student data and quality reporting at all levels. 

2001–2004 Director, Information Systems, Corporate Information Technology 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for leading corporate software development related to the imaging, operations, and handscoring systems. Designed and led the development of DRC’s imaging solution, including hardware selection and implementation, and software design that encompassed business requirements from all Education state-specific projects. Led the design and implementation of the OpsMMS (Materials Management System), which manages secured materials for all Education projects. Managed the corporate technology infrastructure, including the imaging systems, networks, servers, web systems, and PCs. 

1997–2001 Systems Analyst Data Recognition Corporation Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for requirements analysis and system design. Ensured that clients’ business needs were effectively met by DRC’s information systems. Guided the Résumé of Michelle Gronemeyer Page 3 

software development process to ensure DRC was meeting expectations. Served in a lead role in systems and acceptance testing. Led the effort to incorporate requirements analysis as a key piece of the application development methodology. 

1994–1997 Analyst Partners Consulting Group, a Towers Perrin Company Minneapolis, MN 

Developed financial projections for health care clients’ integrations, acquisitions, and proposed business entities. Analyzed financial performance and determined opportunities for improvements for medical practices. Compared physician productivity and compensation to industry standards. Evaluated physician fee schedules, documentation practices, and code utilization for possible audit exposure and revenue enhancement possibilities. 

1993–1994 Conversion Consultant Computer Power, Inc. (CPI) Jacksonville, Florida 

Project leader for conversion to CPI’s mortgage inventory, loan marketing, and quality control systems. Defined data and monitored electronic conversion of data to the CPI systems. Analyzed client business needs. Provided direction for data input, report output, and subsequent analysis based on specific requirements of each client. Served as focal point for client during conversion. 

1992–1993 Information Systems Analyst Metropolitan Financial Corporation Minneapolis, MN 

Worked with outside vendor (CPI) to customize, install, and implement three systems in IBM mainframe and Novell network environments. Developed operating procedures and documentation for each of six departments using the CPI systems. Developed and conducted formal training for each of the six departments. Coordinated electronic conversion of loan records from an in-house system to three vendor systems. 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Edina, MN Résumé of Michelle Gronemeyer Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota, Carlson School of Management 

Minneapolis, MN M.B.A., Information and Decision Sciences 

University of Minnesota, Carlson School of Management 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Business Page 1 

# PAMELA HERMANN 

Senior Director, Research 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Pamela Hermann has 19 years of experience in data analysis and psychometrics. Her large-scale assessment work includes the role of lead psychometrician on the South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests, the Idaho Standards Achievement Tests, the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment, the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams, and the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools. Her duties have included item analysis, test design and construction, item calibration, equating, scaling, and standard setting for paper and pencil, computer-based, and computer-adaptive assessments. She previously worked in the areas of licensure and certification testing. 

Ms. Hermann earned her Master of Science in Econometrics/Statistics from the University of Wisconsin, where she specialized in probability theory, time series, regression analysis, and stochastic modeling. She has also taken extensive coursework in these same areas as a doctoral student at the University of Wisconsin. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Director, Research 

2009–2014 Managing Senior, Psychometrics 

2008–2009 Senior Director, Measurement 

2001–2008 Senior Psychometrician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for designing, computing, and evaluating all traditional and Item Response Theory statistical analyses, including defining, managing, and monitoring all psychometric analyses. Responsibilities also include producing project documentation and statistical reports; enhancing test development processes and systems; and working with research associates, statistical analysts, and state departments of education throughout the item and test development processes. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2011–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–2009 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2008–2009 Résumé of Pamela Hermann Page 2 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—1999–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1999–2001 Measurement Statistician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for computing and evaluating traditional and IRT statistical analyses, producing project documentation and statistical reports, and working with senior psychometricians, research associates, and state departments of education throughout the item and test development processes. 

1998–1999 Manager of Psychometric Services 

Experior Assessments, LLC 

St. Paul, MN 

Responsible for managing the statistical staff. Work included analyzing test data to determine item performance, maintaining multiple large databases, calibrating test items (IRT and non-IRT), and performing regression analysis. In addition, was responsible for using proprietary item banking software on development projects, constructing high-stakes licensure tests based on calibrated data, and developing and implementing programs to simulate computer-adaptive tests. 

1996–1998 Measurement Statistician 

Cogent Testing Network/Insurance Test Corporation 

St. Paul, MN 

Responsible for analyzing test data to determine item performance, maintaining multiple large databases, calibrating test items (IRT and non-IRT), and performing regression analysis. Used proprietary item banking software on development projects, constructed high-stakes licensure tests based on calibrated data, and developed and implemented programs to simulate computer-adaptive tests. 

1994–1996 Staff Economist 

Laurits R. Christensen Associates, Inc. 

Madison, WI 

Responsible for performing market analysis, feasibility study, and impact analysis for new international postal product. Analyzed cost structure for postal rate changes and prepared support material for case. Performed regression analysis to estimate first-class mail revenue, volume, and weight based on bulk mail transaction data; developed volume and cost estimates for fourth-class mail; developed third-class mail characteristics survey; and prepared informational and analytical reports detailing regression and survey results. Responsibilities also Résumé of Pamela Hermann Page 3 

included drafting project proposals and conducting extended field surveys at various postal facilities. 

1992–1994 Teaching Assistant 

University of Wisconsin 

Department of Economics 

Madison, WI 

Prepared lecture material and taught undergraduate classes, developed course material, and wrote and graded exams and assignments. 

1992–1994 Member of Undergraduate Curriculum Committee 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

Responsible for evaluating new course proposals for the Department of Economics and determining qualifications for conferral of undergraduate economics degree. Performed rigorous analytical problem solving and statistical analysis, as well as mathematical and econometric modeling. Taught and tutored students in economics and mathematics. 

COMPUTER SKILLS 

UNIX, FORTRAN, and Visual FoxPro programming; WINSTEPS, PARSCALE, MULTILOG, SPSS, SAS, micro TSP (Time Series Program), MATLAB, RATS (Regression and Time Series), GAUSS, MS Office suite 

SELECTED ANALYSIS PROJECTS 

Investigation of optimal embedded field test design in computer-adaptive testing 

Evaluation of item parameter stability in computer-adaptive testing 

Feasibility study to assess switching IRT models from the 3-Parameter Logistic model to the Rasch model 

Feasibility study to assess the impact of eliminating the writing score for reading items 

Study to assess the possibility of determining proficiency classification based solely on multiple-choice items 

Study to assess the impact of a single versus a double read with adjudication for constructed-response items 

Investigation of the impact of introducing revised mathematics standards 

Vertical scaling for reading, mathematics, science, and writing 

Vertical scale application and impact to students testing off grade level Résumé of Pamela Hermann Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

Ph.D., ABD, Economics and Econometrics/Statistics 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

M.S., Economics and Econometrics/Statistics 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

B.S., Mathematics and Economics with Mathematical Analysis Page 1 

# TIMOTHY HETTWER 

Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Timothy Hettwer has 15 years of experience in quality assurance. Since joining DRC, Mr. Hettwer has performed software quality assurance functions on a number of statewide assessments, including the Alabama Basic Skills Exit Exam Program and High School Graduation Exam, and the South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program and Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests. Mr. Hettwer has also provided software quality assurance testing and support for the DRC Image Scanning and Scoring System, Operations Materials Management System, eDirect System, and Web Based Test Engine. 

Mr. Hettwer holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Finance from St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. He is a member of Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA). 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Software Quality Assurance Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Acts as the central SQA point of contact between SQA analysts, developers, project managers, and other functional teams to ensure programs and data are adequately tested. Collaborates with Education Project Management in scheduling all software quality activities and building SQA sub-schedules. Provides daily work direction to SQA analysts. Defines approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Designs and implements processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Coordinates the development and execution of comprehensive testing plans, scripts, and test summaries, and reviews all documentation for accuracy, feasibility, consistency, and completeness. Integrates testing approach with software development methodology. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrates them into business processes to address business needs. Defines and tracks quality assurance metrics, defect densities and priorities, and open defect counts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Basic Skills Exit Exam Program—2002–2005 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2002–2008 

Image Scanning and Scoring System—2002–2007 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007 Résumé of Timothy Hettwer Page 2 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007 

English Language Development Assessment—2007 

Michigan Educational Assessment Program—2011–2013 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2007–2013 

Operations Materials Management System—2002–2005 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2002–2005 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2002–2005 

South Carolina End of Course Test—2010–2013 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2014 Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Developed and executed comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test summaries. Completed appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. 

2005–2008 Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and implemented software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvement. Developed and executed comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documented all software defects and performs regression testing. Coordinated defect review meetings. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Reviewed requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

2002–2005 Associate Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked as part of a project team to implement quality standards across software applications. Developed and edited test scripts. Executed software testing procedures, practices and pre-defined test scripts. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Documented all software defects and performed regression testing. Updated Requirements Traceability Matrix. Résumé of Timothy Hettwer Page 3 

2001–2002 Quality Assurance Analyst 

Rural Community Insurance Services 

Anoka, MN 

Responsible for system testing on new code for crop insurance using automated testing tool. Other responsibilities included testing AS400 applications; writing, executing, and reviewing test plans; and documenting defects found in testing. 

Also used query functions to find and test specific information, and performed regression analysis and testing. 

2000–2001 Quality Assurance Analyst 

Prudential Financial 

Plymouth, MN 

Performed user acceptance testing on multiple platforms. In addition, utilized Excel spreadsheets to run specific calculations; communicated status of testing efforts at weekly meetings; wrote, executed, and reviewed test plans; and facilitated teleconferences regarding business and software requirements. Analyzed and documented code turnover decisions (go/no-go decisions). Coordinated with business partners to improve efficiencies of system-to-system testing processes. 

1995–2000 Senior Calculation Expert 

Prudential Financial 

Plymouth, MN 

Performed manual calculations and basic accounting functions pertaining to life insurance policies. Also responsible for manually calculating the effects of taxes on insurance policies and for facilitating training for coworkers on all aspects of manual calculations. Participated in improvement committees for reducing caseload turnaround time. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—2003–Present 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S., Finance Page 1 

# NICHOLAS HOOK 

Senior Project Manager, Performance Assessment Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Nicholas Hook has 22 years of experience working on large-scale assessment projects, including 20 years of experience working on Pennsylvania statewide assessments. Since 2010, his primary responsibilities have included overseeing all handscoring and rangefinding activities related to the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA). Mr. Hook has been instrumental in managing the rangefinding process to develop training materials for field test scoring both reading and English language arts (ELA) assessments. Other responsibilities include overseeing rangefinding for all subjects; monitoring handscoring activities for all subjects; and supervising handscoring staff. He has also closely collaborated with managing the handscoring effort for the Keystone Literature Assessment. 

Mr. Hook has worked closely with Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) personnel and educators to develop reading and ELA items and scoring guidelines. He was a member of the team that developed the most recent Pennsylvania Writing Scoring Guides and the team that created the Text-Dependent Analysis (TDA) Scoring Guide. He oversaw the development of item samplers for both the TDAs and the holistic PSSA Writing Prompts. In addition, Mr. Hook participated in the initial TDA pilot study and continues to participate in the TDA study project (both done in conjunction with the Center for Assessment and PDE), offering the perspective of handscoring to the proceedings. He has attended reading/TDA new item review meetings for the PSSA since 2008 and helped develop Evidence-Based Selected Response items at item development workshops with Pennsylvania educators. 

Mr. Hook has specialized in the content areas of reading, ELA, and social studies. He has worked closely with DRC’s Test Development department to proofread and edit reading rubrics for clarity in training. He has also been involved with handscoring projects for several other states, including Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, and New Jersey. 

In addition to working in Performance Assessment Services, Mr. Hook has had experience as an item writer for various reading comprehension and social studies assessments. 

Mr. Hook earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, and is also a certified T.E.F.L. (Teaching English as a Foreign Language) instructor. Résumé of Nicholas Hook Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Project Manager 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Manages all handscoring activities and tasks for large-scale assessment programs. Serves as a scoring consultant to state departments of education. Serves as client liaison and provides services as assigned by the Vice President of Performance Assessment Services. Works in close collaboration with other members of the handscoring management and handscoring imaging system teams. Determines technical and staff needs. Coordinates activities among performance assessment content specialists and monitors scoring directors and reader training for duration of each project. Interprets and acts upon daily and cumulative statistical data generated by handscoring reports. Implements retraining and validity procedures. Oversees rangefinding activities, including: committee meetings, rubric refinement, and the development of training materials. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Grade 2 Integrated Reading/Writing Assessment—1992–1993 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment and Accountability Program—2001–2004 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System—1995–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2000–2005 

New Jersey Early Warning Test—1992–1995 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1995–Present 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment—1992–1995 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—1998–2002 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—1993–1994 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2008–2010 Content Specialist 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Assumed responsibility for assigned mathematics content including state-specific curriculum knowledge. Facilitated and participated in rangefinding activities, and developed and supervised the development of both initial and ongoing project training materials. Worked closely with DRC personnel at multiple scoring sites as needed to ensure project oversight. Coordinated, supervised, and monitored the scoring of assessments to ensure that projects were completed accurately and on time. Worked in close collaboration with other members of the handscoring Résumé of Nicholas Hook Page 3 

management team. Implemented validity procedures. Interpreted and acted upon daily and cumulative statistical data. Consulted on the development of scoring rubrics. 

2006–2008 Project Manager 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Oversaw the scoring of large-scale educational assessments and ensured that projects were completed accurately and on time. Consulted with state department of education staff and ensured that accurate and consistent training materials for project scoring were prepared. Acted as scoring consultant regarding performance assessment needs. Trained scoring directors and other performance assessment personnel on the use of DRC’s image handscoring system. Facilitated rangefinding activities and professional development workshops for educators. Consulted with test development staff on the development of scoring rubrics. Served as a liaison to state assessment clients. 

1992–2005 Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka and Woodbury, MN 

Scoring Director/Team Leader (1993–2005) 

Performance Assessment Services 

Trained and monitored teams of 10–12 readers to maintain validity and reliability of scores. Retrained as necessary and resolved discrepant scores. Provided written performance evaluations of team leaders. 

Item Writer/Developer (1999–2003) 

Test Development 

Developed multiple-choice and constructed-response items for reading comprehension portions of statewide assessments. 

Reader (1992–1993) 

Performance Assessment Services 

Assessed and scored student responses applying state-mandated scoring criteria. Maintained a high level of concentration, accuracy, and productivity. 

2005–2007 Editor 

The Whittier Globe 

Minneapolis, MN 

Organized group of writers and edited community interest stories. Took part in layout/design meetings. Résumé of Nicholas Hook Page 4  

> 2004 Substitute E.S.L. Teacher and Teaching Assistant/Tutor

Roseville Public Schools 

Roseville, MN 

As a substitute E.S.L. teacher, taught adult English language learners in a classroom setting, created lesson plans, and provided all teaching materials. As a teaching assistant/tutor, assisted teacher in summer school English language arts classroom and tutored high school students in reading comprehension and writing. 

2001 Item Writer (freelance) 

Measured Progress 

Dover, NH 

Developed multiple-choice and constructed-response items for social studies portion of South Carolina statewide assessment. 

EDUCATION 

Macalester College 

Saint Paul, MN 

B.A., Anthropology 

Hamline University 

Saint Paul, MN 

T.E.F.L. Certification Page 1 

# HUIQIN ANN HU 

Senior Research Scientist II 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Huiqin Ann Hu has extensive experience in conducting psychometric analysis in the process of test development and validation. She has worked recently on several large-scale achievement testing programs, including the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams, the Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests; the Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program ( iLEAP) and Louisiana Alternate Assessments 1 and 2; the Alabama High School Graduation Exam and Alabama Science Assessment for Grades 5 and 7; and the Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments and Basic Skills Test. 

Her psychometric analysis experience includes conducting item analysis; differential item functioning analysis (DIF); calibration, equating, and reliability and validity analysis based on Classical Test Theory (CTT); Item Response Theory (IRT); and Rasch Measurement. Her experience also includes test design and test development using IRT and generalizability theory. 

Dr. Hu has conducted in-depth research on IRT-based item calibration and test equating methods. She was also actively involved in research projects on Rasch model-based calibration and equating, standard setting methods, classroom assessment, the integration of educational assessment and cognitive psychology-based learning theory, and teacher education. As a research methods consultant at the Center for Research in Applied Measurement and Evaluation at the University of Alberta, she assisted faculty members and graduate students with the design and development of their experiments and assessment tools, choosing the appropriate analyses methods, explaining the analyses results, and editing their reports or dissertations. 

Dr. Hu has a solid conceptual understanding of educational assessment. She holds a B.S. in Psychology and a M.Ed. in Educational Psychology from East China Normal University, where she specialized in integrating educational assessments and cognitive psychology-based learning theory. She received her doctorate in Measurement, Evaluation, and Cognition from the University of Alberta with a focus on the application of IRT models in large-scale achievement tests. This background knowledge enables her to work independently on psychometric issues and communicate effectively with both test developers and test users. Résumé of Huiqin Ann Hu Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Research Scientist II 

2004–2014 Psychometrician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for calibration, scaling, and equating of forms and for performing data analyses of tryout, field test, and operational tests and retests. Oversees item selection for tests and directs the work of research analysts and statistical analysts. Participates in planning and review meetings. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2006–2008 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–2008 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–2006 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–2006 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–2006 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–2006 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2004–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2004–2005 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2003–2004 Research Methods Consultant 

Center for Applied Measurement and Evaluation 

University of Alberta 

Edmonton, Canada 

Provided research methods consultation to graduate students and faculties. The methods included ANOVA, MANOVA, Multiple Regression, Logistic Regression, Discriminant Function Analysis, Factor Analysis, Structural Equation Modeling, Experiment Design, Questionnaire Development, Reliability and Validity Analyses. 

2000–2003 Research Assistant 

Center for Applied Measurement and Evaluation 

University of Alberta 

Edmonton, Canada 

Assisted the research project with An Investigation of ESL/EFL Teachers’ Classroom Assessment Practices. Specifically involved in questionnaire development, data collection, interview, data analyses, and paper writing. Résumé of Huiqin Ann Hu Page 3 

2002 Harcourt Lenke Psychometric Fellow 

Educational Measurement Division 

Harcourt Educational Measurement 

San Antonio, TX 

Assisted with the large-scale assessment data analysis and equating using Classical Test Theory and Item Response Theory. Conducted the research project 

The Effects of Outliers on IRT Equating with Fixed Common Item Parameters. 

Specifically involved in proposal writing, research design, and data analysis. 

PUBLICATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS 

Hu, H.,Hermann, P.A., Chayer, D.E., & Sorenson, B.J. (2014). Optimizing Item/Passage Selection Routines at CAT Administration . Paper presented at the 2014 IACAT Conference. Princeton. 

Hu, H. (2014). Comparison of Item Selection Methods in Adaptive Diagnostic Testing. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Philadelphia. 

Stoddart, L., Hu, H., & Norlin-Weaver, J. (2014). Assessing Students on iPad: a Usability Study. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Philadelphia. 

Sireci, S.G., Wells, C.S., & Hu, H. (2014). Using Validity Evidence Based on Internal Structure to Evaluate Test Accommodations. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Philadelphia. 

Hu, H., Chayer, D. E., Bishop, K. L., & Hernann, P. A. (2011). Investigation of Mode Effects on a Field Test: A Confirmatory Differential Item Functioning Analysis. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. New Orleans. 

Hu, H., & Bishop, K. L. (2011). Comparison of Rasch-based and MH Procedures in Detecting Item Differential Functioning. Paper accepted at the annual conference of American Educational Research Association. New Orleans. 

Dai, G., Han, K., Hu, H., & Colarelli, S. M. (2010). Cultural differences and measurement invariance of selection tools: a case of examining Chinese NEO PI-R conscientiousness scale. Journal of Chinese Human Resource Management, Vol. 1 No. 2, 2010, 95–114. 

Hu, H., Zhu, X., & Thalberg, J. A. (2010). Evaluation of Mantel-Haenszel Procedure for Detecting  Differential Item Functioning  in Large-Scale Assessments Using True DIF Criteria. Paper presented at the annual conference of American Educational Research Association. Denver. 

Hu, H. (2010). Conditional Standard Errors of Measurement for  Scaled Scores  at the Lower End of Score Distribution: a  Comparison  of Four Estimation Methods. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Denver. 

Yang, X., & Hu, H. (2009). Understanding the Paradox of Parameter Invariance .Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. San Diego. Résumé of Huiqin Ann Hu Page 4 

Price, C., & Hu, H. (2009). Desciplined Inquiry:Using Interviewing Methodology to Identify Teachers Educational Belief Systems and Instructional Practices. 

Paper presented at the annual conference of American Educational Research Association. San Diego. 

Hu, H., Rogers, W.T., & Vukmirovic, Z. (2008). Investigation of IRT-based equating methods in the presence of outlier common items. Applied Psychological Measurement, Vol. 32 No. 4, June 2008, 311–333. 

Hu, H., Yang, X., & Bishop, N.S. (2008). Item Parameter Recovery for the Low-Discrimination Items. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. New York City. 

Hu, H., & Dai, G. (2006). An Investigation of the Power and Type I Error Rates for Winsteps Fit Statistics. Paper presented at the annual conference of American Educational Research Association. San Francisco. 

Hu, H., Rogers, W.T., & Vukmirovic, Z. (2005). Investigation of IRT-based equating methods in the presence of outliers. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Montreal, Canada. 

Cheng, L., Rogers, W.T., & Hu, H. (2004). ESL/EFL instructors’ classroom assessment practices: purpose, methods, and procedures. Language Testing, 

21, 359-389.Vukmirovic, Z., Hu, H., & Turner, J.C. (2003). The effects of outliers on IRT equating with fixed common item parameters. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. New Orleans, LA. 

Rogers, W.T., Cheng, L., & Hu, H. (2002). An investigation of ELS/EFL teachers’ classroom assessment practices . Paper presented at the annual conference of the Canadian Society of the Study of Education. Toronto, Ontario. 

PROPOSAL AND JOURNAL REVIEWS 

American Educational Research Association, Division D—2008 

National Council on Measurement in Education—2008; 2009–2010 

Applied Psychological Measurement—2009 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

American Educational Research Association—2002–Present 

National Council on Measurement in Education—2002–Present 

Rasch Measurement SIG (AERA)—2005–Present Résumé of Huiqin Ann Hu Page 5 

EDUCATION 

University of Alberta 

Edmonton, Canada 

Ph.D., Measurement, Evaluation, and Cognition 

East China Normal University 

Shanghai, China 

M.Ed., Educational Psychology 

East China Normal University 

Shanghai, China 

B.S., Psychology Page 1 

# ERICA HYLAND 

Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

In her role as a Senior Test Development Specialist at DRC, Ms. Erica Hyland participates in all aspects of science item development and assessment design. Her duties include writing, reviewing, editing, and verifying test items; forms construction; facilitating item review committees; and developing training materials for teachers and assessment leaders on how to develop assessments and interpret assessment results. 

Ms. Hyland has successfully developed dually-aligned science items and has worked collaboratively to develop and present professional development assessment workshops for science teachers. She has also worked on developing science scenarios for elementary, middle school, and high school assessments. These scenarios have utilized multiple-choice, constructed-response, and technology-enhanced items. During her time at DRC, Ms. Hyland has worked collaboratively with many science teachers to develop high-quality, scientifically accurate items and ancillary documents used by teachers in the classroom. 

Ms. Hyland has six years of classroom teaching experience, including five years as a science teacher at the middle school and high school levels. Ms. Hyland holds a Master of Education in Science Education and a Bachelor of Science in Biology, both from the University of Minnesota. She is a licensed science educator in the State of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2007–Present Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides science content expertise to DRC’s item development projects. Writes, reviews, and formats science items. Serves as content resource for the biological, earth, physical, and environmental sciences. Participates in all aspects of science assessment design and item development. Coordinates item development with outside item writers. Facilitates state committee content and bias meetings. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Science Assessments—2005–2009 

Standards Based Assessments—2005–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2008–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2012–Present Résumé of Erica Hyland Page 2 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2012–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2012–Present 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2007–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2007 Classroom Middle School Science Teacher 

Anishinabe Academy 

Minneapolis, MN 

Taught ninth-grade environmental and earth science. Taught sixth- to eight-grade Minneapolis-prescribed curriculum (this included life science, earth science, and chemistry for middle school). Also taught tenth-grade biology and ninth- and tenth-grade reading. 

2002–2005 Classroom Secondary Science Teacher 

North Community High School 

Minneapolis, MN 

Taught high school science courses, including ninth-grade science foundations, which encompassed biology and physical and earth science, and tenth-grade biology. Also taught a basic math skills course. 

2000–2001 Substitute Teacher 

Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Worked as a substitute teacher in this large, urban district. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

National Science Teacher Association 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN M.Ed., Science Education 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Biology Résumé of Erica Hyland Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota Teaching License—Life Science grades 9–12, General Science grades 5–8 Page 1 

# MIKE JANIKOWSKI 

Logistics Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As Logistics Specialist at DRC, Mr. Mike Janikowski is responsible for the coordination of outbound and inbound shipments to Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington. 

Mr. Janikowski provides safe and cost-effective outbound and inbound transportation across all modes of transportation. His responsibilities include coordinating shipments with several logistics companies and United Parcel Service (UPS), monitoring claims, negotiating freight rates and carrier penalties, and providing analysis of current transportation practices to determine cost and operational improvements. 

Prior to his role at DRC, Mr. Janikowski worked at UPS for over 36 years in a variety of capacities, ranging from unloading trailers to sales and operations management. For more than 21 of those years, he was responsible for DRC in a sales management or operations role, now making him the perfect liaison between DRC and their largest carrier. The positions that Mr. Janikowski has held have given him extensive logistics industry knowledge and perspective, aligning seamlessly with DRC’s philosophies and mission. His positive leadership skills have given him an edge when it comes to motivating UPS personnel to achieve unmatched performance and safety milestones. 

At UPS, Mr. Janikowski was responsible for driver groups, the delivery and pick-up of tens of thousands of packages daily, as well as managing expectations to meet customers’ needs. He has continually designed improved ways to ensure operations functions better in terms of customer service, performance, and safety. Mr. Janikowski was also responsible for picking up and managing large accounts with revenues above $5 million. He was awarded the prestigious “All Star” award from Target Corporation for his tireless efforts ensuring Target’s trailers containing product were picked up and delivered on time. He also received this award for his efforts to help Target with continuous operations improvements involving their outbound, payroll, and return shipments. 

Mr. Janikowski has completed over 83 internal UPS training courses and has earned numerous annual certifications. Course content included everything from DOT and OSHA compliance standards to analyzing customer freight needs. Mr. Janikowski served as the designated instructor for more than half of these courses. Résumé of Mike Janikowski Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Logistics Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provide safe and cost-effective outgoing and incoming transportation across all modes of transportation. Coordinate shipment with carriers, audit freight bills, and prepare, negotiate, and monitor claims/freight rates/carrier penalties. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2013–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2013–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2013–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2013–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2013–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2013–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2013–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2013–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Minnesota Assessments—2013–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2013–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2013–Present 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2013–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2013–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2013–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2013–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2013–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program 

End-Of-Course—2013–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2013–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2013–2015 Résumé of Mike Janikowski Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1977–2013 United Parcel Service (UPS) 

Minneapolis, MN 

Dispatch Operations Supervisor (2005–2013) 

Responsible for reviewing UPS dispatch activity to ensure timely and proficient service. Oversaw dispatch planning and was responsible for ensuring service, safety, and cost goals were met. Supervised drivers and dispatch specialists. Responsible for overseeing the production of four dispatch supervisors and 32 drivers in the delivery and pickup of freight parcels. Demonstrated consistent communication to team members (yard control supervisors, drivers, region schedulers, etc.) to ensure dispatch plans were efficiently executed. Analyzed staffing levels according to workload in order to create efficiency and reduce costs. Reviewed daily service reports and dispatch schedules to proactively improve workforce planning and performance. Provided ongoing coaching, motivation, and feedback to employees in order to improve, meet, or exceed performance levels. Ensured 100 percent compliance with federal and state regulations by auditing hours, hazardous materials, and safety reports. Maintained a thorough knowledge of feeder/line haul tools and equipment, hub and sort tools, and legal/regulatory/safety compliance. 

UPS Business Development (1995–2005) 

Responsible for supporting major accounts and identifying, understanding, and transitioning profitable freight opportunities in their assigned base of accounts. Analyzed customers’ current shipping needs to create appropriate solutions and promptly responded to customer requests. Helped navigate the freight operations, pricing, and other aspects of the freight network to effectively manage revenue. Reviewed enterprise strategies of accounts and freight opportunities to understand assigned accounts. Managed accounts from $100,000 to $5 million in revenue, including Data Recognition Corporation. Specialized as Hundredweight manager in helping customers with freight analysis and achieving cost savings through Hundredweight or LTL. Analyzed freight bills, negotiated freight rates, and implemented rate incentives as needed. Conducted face-to-face meetings with customers to manage new freight opportunities, penetrate business with existing business, or retain business at risk. Reviewed service reports (e.g., month to date revenue, shipping manifests, etc.) to ensure shipments were made within contract terms and met customers’ expectations. Identified, measured, and monitored customer or business needs in order to create solutions, make decisions, and take appropriate actions. Used knowledge of current industry and financial trends, global business perspectives, and organizational structures and functions to make business decisions. Analyzed customer data. Conducted research to identify customer needs, customer acceptance criteria, perceived value, and overall impact of products/services on customers. Résumé of Mike Janikowski Page 4 

Driver Trainer (1980–1995) 

Responsible for training UPS tractor trailer drivers according to company guidelines. Monitored performance to ensure drivers were in compliance with UPS and regulatory requirements. Supervised UPS drivers. Transferred to the feeder transportation department and sent to the DTS (Driver Training School). Completed a six-week course that included education on how to train employees and how to drive tractor/trailers, including combinations of single or double trailers. Trained drivers by providing classroom and on-road instruction to ensure drivers’ understanding of UPS’s Safe Work Methods and government regulations (i.e., Occupational Safety and Health Administration and Department of Transportation regulations.) Held title as a third party examiner for the State of Minnesota and was qualified to test applicants for Class A driver’s license. Monitored UPS driver safety by conducting monthly safety meetings to ensure drivers were adapting to weather and road conditions, reviewing safety reports, and providing safety and wellness information. Supervised and monitored development plans and training needs of employees. Held others accountable to establish performance levels and achieve individual and group goals. Resolved individual and group performance issues in a timely manner in accordance with UPS’s policies and procedures in order to motivate and foster teamwork. 

EDUCATION 

UPS 

Minneapolis, MN UPS Internal Training Courses Page 1 

# ERIC JENSON 

Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

In his role as a Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist, Mr. Eric Jenson participates in all aspects of the item and test development process. He develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications including, but not limited to, creating, editing, and reviewing items. He also provides assessment design, item development, and curriculum content services to DRC’s state education clients, and he works closely with item writers. As a result of his knowledge of mathematics and his item writing and reviewing expertise, he helps to construct tests that are compliant with both content and psychometric requirements. At DRC, he has provided services for numerous large-scale statewide assessments, including those for Alaska, Alabama, Idaho, Louisiana, Nebraska, and Pennsylvania. He has also been involved in reviewing the College and Career Readiness Standards, specifically in terms of alignment to state-specific content curriculum standards. 

Mr. Jenson has worked closely with state clients in Nebraska and Michigan, developing summative assessments using educator-written test items. He is experienced in assisting state clients with the training of educator item writers. Mr. Jenson is also an experienced facilitator of committee meetings with educators, during which items are reviewed for technical quality, match to curriculum standard, depth of knowledge, psychometric item data, etc. He has also facilitated meetings with educators for developing performance-level descriptors and setting standards. 

Mr. Jenson’s background with online assessments includes working with the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools formative assessment and the Nebraska State Accountability summative assessment. For assessments offered both in print and online delivery, his work ensured a parallel test-taking experience for both modes of delivery. Mr. Jenson has also been involved with innovative item types that take advantage of the assessment tools offered only in online delivery. 

Mr. Jenson has six years of high school and college classroom experience teaching mathematics courses including basic skills, pre-Algebra, Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II, and college mathematics at economically diverse schools. He also has experience with both reformed and traditional curriculum and with developing alternative education programs for students who did not meet the standard assessment requirements. 

Mr. Jenson holds a B.A. in Mathematics from Carleton College in Northfield, Minnesota. He is a certified teacher of Secondary Mathematics in Minnesota. Résumé of Eric Jenson Page 2 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Jenson’s CCR experience includes working with Pennsylvania educators in developing CCR-aligned curriculum for the Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum (VMC). He aligned the items in the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) to the CCR standards and developed items to augment the existing pool. 

In addition, Mr. Jenson has also worked with the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium in developing items for both the pilot test and the field test, including the development of performance tasks. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

2010–2012 Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications. Develops, edits, and reviews items. Provides assessment design, item development, and curriculum content services. Works with item writers in item development. Constructs tests that are compliant with both content and psychometric requirements; facilitates educator committee reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2010–2011 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2010–2011 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2010–2011 

Iowa Alignment Study—2012 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska Student Accountability—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–2011 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2012–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 Résumé of Eric Jenson Page 3 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2009 Teacher 

Armstrong High School 

Robbinsdale Public Schools 

New Hope, MN 

Designed, planned, and taught pre-Algebra, Geometry, and Algebra II mathematics classes. 

2008–2010 Teacher 

Art Institute International of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Planned and taught mathematics classes for remediation and college mathematics. 

2006–2007 Teacher 

Maple Grove Senior High 

Osseo Area School District 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and taught high-school mathematics classes. Served on curriculum adoption team for geometry. 

2004–2006 Teacher 

Columbia Heights High School 

Columbia Heights School District 

Columbia Heights, MN 

Planned and taught high-school mathematics classes. Member of National Urban Alliance teacher cohort. Served as faculty advisor to youth service organization. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATION 

Minnesota Council of Teachers of Mathematics (MCTM) 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Jenson, E., and Danielson, Christopher. (2008). Probability in Practice: The Case of Turkey Bingo. Mathematics Teacher, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota—Secondary Mathematics, Grades 5–8 and 9–12 Résumé of Eric Jenson Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN Initial Licensure—Mathematics 

Carleton College 

Northfield, MN B.A., Mathematics Page 1 

# KARI JOHNSON 

Senior Graphic/Document Designer, Publications 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Kari Johnson has assisted in the development and production of large-scale assessment publications at DRC for more than ten years. Her experience includes the typesetting, layout, graphics development, and production of test booklets, manuals, and other documents for statewide testing programs in numerous states, such as Alaska, Washington, and Pennsylvania. Working closely with her DRC colleagues, she creates and revises comprehensive, state-specific style guides for test forms and ancillary materials. As a senior graphic designer in the Document/Graphic Design Group, she coordinates priorities and workload of her projects to meet the needs of DRC’s large-scale assessment clients. 

Before joining DRC, Ms. Johnson wrote and produced point-of-sale in the marketing department of a large department store company before becoming a graphic design contractor for various companies on assignment. 

Throughout her career, Ms. Johnson has received formal training and numerous hours of experience in desktop publishing, typography, and graphic design applications, having studied at Hennepin Technical College and the University of Minnesota in these disciplines. She holds a B.S. in Costume Design from the College of Design, University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Graphic/Document Designer, Publications 

2005–2012 Graphic/Document Designer, Publications 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Performs typesetting, layout, graphics development, and production of test booklets, manuals, and other documents for statewide testing programs. Creates and revises state-specific style guides for test forms and ancillary materials. Ensures compliance with state assessment contracts as related to the Document/ Graphic Design Group. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2005–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2005–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2008–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2007–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2007–Present Résumé of Kari Johnson Page 2 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Developmentally Appropriate Proficiency Exam—2008–2015 

End-of-Course—2011–2015 

High School Proficiency Exam—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–2005 Graphic Designer 

Celarity, Inc. 

Bloomington, MN 

Assisted in development and production of printed materials at Toro, Patterson Dental, and Data Recognition Corporation. 

1991–2003 Graphic Designer, Sign Services, Marketing 

Marshall Field’s Department Store (formerly Dayton’s) 

Minneapolis, MN 

Within store standards and guidelines, wrote and designed point-of-sale signing for apparel and home products. Created product line-art illustrations for use on point-of-sale signs . Proofread, edited, and organized the daily release of point-of-sale signs. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Graphic Design and Graphic Support Software: Adobe Illustrator ®, Adobe PhotoShop ®, QuarkXPress ®.

EDUCATION 

College of Design, University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Costume Design 

Hennepin Technical College 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Coursework in Graphic Design, Typography, Photoshop, Illustrator, and QuarkXpress 

University of Minnesota 

Saint Paul, MN 

Coursework in Graphic Design & Computers Page 1 

# ELIZABETH JOYCE 

Senior Manager of Editorial Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Elizabeth Joyce has more than 24 years of experience as a technical and science content editor with emphasis in the earth and environmental sciences and science assessment design, development, implementation, evaluation, and scoring. She has facilitated state committee content review and standard-setting meetings, and has been the sole or co-author of more than 200 technical and scientific reports and public relations materials and has edited in excess of 750 reports in these areas. 

As Senior Manager of Editorial Services, Ms. Joyce supervises a team of editors who are responsible for document editing for all DRC business units. This work includes the coordination of DRC editing functions, such as copyediting and substantive editing, cold reads, test materials production (both paper and online), document fact-checking, and materials-specific quality assurance reviews. Her team is solely responsible for the production and editorial review of test materials, including ancillary and large-print, for South Carolina assessments (3 years), Louisiana statewide educational assessments (11 years), and Washington assessments (6 years), as well as the editing of yearly technical reports for multiple state programs. Her team assists all content areas and state programs, including college- and career-ready (CCR) and Smarter Balanced, with their item development and reviews, production of nearly 200 test forms annually, and key verifications. Editorial Services also routinely establishes and maintains style guidelines for state programs. 

Ms. Joyce has 15 years of secondary classroom teaching experience in the areas of English language arts; life, physical, and earth sciences; health; and first aid. She also has five years of post-secondary research and teaching experience in the earth sciences and geology. Ms. Joyce designed curricula with emphasis on hands-on, inquiry-based approaches to earth, life, and physical sciences; researched, created, and instituted new curriculum for study skills; and developed scope and sequence for English curriculum. 

Ms. Joyce has more than 10 years of private sector management and technical experience in environmental testing, assessment, mitigation, and reporting; hazardous materials response and handling; and quality assurance procedures and documentation. She holds a Bachelor of Science degree in English Language Arts and multiple degrees in the earth and general sciences and is a licensed professional geologist. Résumé of Elizabeth Joyce Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Manager of Editorial Services 

2008–2012 Manager of Editorial Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Supervises a team of editors who are responsible for document editing for all DRC business units. This work includes all types of editing and test materials production. For the past nine years her team has been solely responsible for the production and editorial review of several state educational assessment programs. Her team also assists all content areas and state programs with their test form production. Editorial services routinely establishes and maintains style guidelines for state programs. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2005–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Standards Based Assessment—2005–Present 

College- and Career-Ready Item Development, American Institute for Research— 2014–Present 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2007 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2005–Present 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2012–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2003–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Academic Skills Assessment—2012 

Interim Transitional Tests—2012 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Michigan Model Arts Education Instruction and Assessment Program— 

2014–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Ohio K–5 Assessment System—2004–2005 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2001–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 Résumé of Elizabeth Joyce Page 3 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2003–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2012–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2012–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2003–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2008 Senior Test Development Specialist/Senior Editor 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Developed and produced deliverables and other assessment materials. Provided leadership, evaluation and design of quality processes, review, and overall editing direction to all content teams. Served as a content resource and support to all other content areas. Executed test designs. Finalized test forms. Facilitated state committee content meetings. Contributed to proposals and other departmental and corporate materials. 

2003–2005 Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Was responsible for item development production and deliverables for science as well as all other aspects of assessment design. Provided leadership, reviews, and overall editing direction. Serves as content resource for the earth and space sciences and content support for all other science areas. Executed test designs. Finalized test forms. Facilitated state committee content meetings. Contributed to proposals and other departmental and corporate materials. 

2001–2002 Test Editor, Science 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as science editor and lead content specialist for earth and space sciences. Developed and maintained all state-specific science style guides. Developed, reviewed, and edited science items for a variety of state assessments. Developed, created, and implemented training manual and collateral materials for science item writers program. Facilitated content committee review meetings. Established, streamlined, and integrated internal item development processes. Contributed text to and edited company proposals. Résumé of Elizabeth Joyce Page 4 

1990–2001 PR Director and Senior Management Team Member 

West Central Environmental Consultants, Inc./AquaCare International, Inc. 

Morris and Maple Grove, MN 

Served on company’s senior management team. As director, managed all aspects of the technical services division (five departments). Edited and wrote over 500 scientific and technical (engineering) documents. Supplied text and professional insight, and edited documents for technical and scientific content and usage, including state agency reports, business plans, district watershed strategic use plans, handbooks, manuals, patent applications, training documents, and QA/QC procedures documentation (per ISO 9000). Created and delivered multimedia presentations. Previous positions held at the parent company and emerging sister company included the following: New Projects Development Coordinator and D/MBE Specialist (AquaCare), Director of Technical Services, Senior Technical Editor, Writing Department Head, Senior Technical Writer, Sampling Department Head, and Environmental Technician. 

1987–1990 Teaching and Research Assistant, Geology and Earth Sciences 

University of Minnesota 

Morris, MN 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

Assisted professors and students. Taught and supervised laboratory classes. Prepared and delivered lectures. Administered and graded assignments. Researched abandoned wells in a west central Minnesota county and developed methodology to prioritize sealing. Characterized St. Cloud granites in conjunction with a study related to proposed nuclear waste storage sites. 

1974–1989 Middle- and Secondary-School Classroom Teacher 

ISD #880 

Howard Lake, MN 

Taught: English language arts (grammar, literature); life, physical, and earth sciences; health; first aid; and study skills. Designed and expanded new and existing curricula. Developed assessment tools and practice experiences for grades 7–10. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Minnesota State Board of Architecture, Engineering, Land Surveying, Landscape Architecture, Geoscience and Interior Design Résumé of Elizabeth Joyce Page 5 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Joyce, E., Tozer, M.K., Whelen, P.M., & Cotter, J.F.P. (1990). “Tectonic Implications of the Striated and Faceted Boulder Pavement, Western Minnesota.” Abstracts with Program, North Central Section of the Geologic Society of America. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Joyce, E. (1998–2001). SBEACR (Single Basin Extended Aeration Cyclic Reactor) multimedia proposal presentations to: the Minnesota Department of Administration; Minnesota legislators; Legislative Commission on Minnesota Resources (LCMR) members; the U.S. Army; Farmland; and Land O’Lakes. 

Joyce, E. (1992). Minnesota statewide HazMat emergency/spill response multimedia contract presentation to the Minnesota Department of Administration, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Joyce, E. (1990). Tectonic Implications of the Boulder Pavement, Northeast and South Central Minnesota River Valley, Minnesota. North Central Section of the Geological Society of America, Duluth, Minnesota. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Morris, MN B.A., Geology 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN B.S., Earth Sciences B.S., Comprehensive General Sciences, Physics emphasis, 7–12 B.S., English Language Arts/Biology 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATIONS 

Licensed Professional Geologist, State of Minnesota 

Licensed Professional Geologist, State of Wisconsin Page 1 

# MARC JULIAN 

Senior Director, Psychometric Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Marc Julian has over 20 years of psychometric research experience including serving as director of research, research manager, senior research scientist/team leader, and research scientist at multiple educational assessment companies. In his current role at DRC, Dr. Julian is responsible for designing, computing, and evaluating all traditional and Item Response Theory (IRT) statistical analyses, including defining, managing, and monitoring all psychometric analyses. His responsibilities also include producing project documentation and statistical reports; conducting standard settings; enhancing test development processes and systems; and working with research associates, statistical analysts, and state departments of education throughout the item and test development processes. 

Dr. Julian holds a Ph.D. in Educational Measurement from the University of Georgia and a B.A. in Psychology from the State University of New York at Plattsburgh. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Director, Psychometric Services 

2012–2014 Managing Senior, Psychometrics 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for designing, computing, and evaluating all traditional and IRT statistical analyses, including defining, managing, and monitoring all psychometric analyses. Responsibilities also include producing project documentation and statistical reports; conducting standard setting; enhancing test development processes and systems; and working with research associates, statistical analysts, and state departments of education throughout the item and test development processes. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2012–2014 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2012–2014 

Arizona Instrument to Measure Standards—2006–2007 

Florida Standards Assessment—2014–Present 

Georgia Criterion Referenced Competency Tests—2006–2012 

Georgia End of Course Testing—2002–2005 

Maryland School Performance Assessment Program—1995–2001 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2014–Present 

Michigan Online Statewide Assessments—2014–Present Résumé of Marc Julian Page 2 

New York State Regents Examinations Standard Setting—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

TABE–Test of Adult Basic Education—2011 

TerraNova–1st Edition (Achievement Test Battery) —1995–1997 

TerraNova–2nd Edition (Achievement Test Battery) —1997– 2001 

TerraNova Supera (Spanish Language Version of TerraNova) —1996–1997 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2012 Research Manager 

CTB/McGraw Hill 

Monterey, CA 

Responsibilities included: management of staff members including research scientists and research associates, developing proposals and budgets, designing research specifications, project management, IRT scaling analyses, equating analyses, standard setting, and team leadership. Served as the primary research scientist for the Georgia CRCT assessment. Supervised research scientists in the development and implementation of large-scale assessment programs to support state and district assessments as well as product development within CTB/McGraw-Hill. 

2005 Research Professional/Associate Director 

Georgia Center for Assessment, University of Georgia 

Athens, GA 

Responsible for designing and overseeing complex technical analyses, supervising graduate students, psychometric research, initial proposal development, interfacing with customers, project supervision, and research and development. 

2001–2005 Director of Research 

ETS K12 Works/Educational Testing Service 

Monterey, CA 

Directed and supervised research and statistical analysis activities for up to 25 staff members. Supervised the development of the ETS K–12 statistical analysis software infrastructure and quality control procedures. Established and coordinated sample acquisition infrastructure for K–12 products. Planned and coordinated the statistical work for complex testing programs in accord with ETS K–12 policies and procedures, client specifications, and sound measurement principles. Proposed, designed, directed, conducted, and reported on complex research projects, standard setting, and special research studies. Contributed to proposals for RFPs client presentations, and product planning. Résumé of Marc Julian Page 3 

1998–2001 Research Manager 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Monterey, CA 

Management of 15 staff members including research scientists, research associates, systems analysts, and staff assistants. Responsibilities included developing budgets, designing research specifications, project management, IRT scaling analyses, equating analyses, standard setting, and team leadership. Served as the primary research monitor for the development of norm-referenced, multi-level, multi-subject assessment products (e.g., TerraNova – The Second Edition). Served as the primary research monitor for complex custom testing programs (e.g., Maryland School Performance Assessment Program). Responsible for recruiting research scientists to the Research Department. 

1997 Senior Research Scientist/Team Leader 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Monterey, CA 

Major responsibilities included monitoring projects, developing research specifications, performing scaling analyses, conducting equating analyses, standard setting, and managing a team of six research scientists and research associates. 

1995–1996 Research Scientist 

CTB/McGraw-Hill 

Monterey, CA 

Major responsibilities included monitoring projects, developing research specifications, performing scaling and equating, standard setting, and programming. 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Schneider, M. C., Egan, K.L., & Julian, M.W. (2013). Classroom assessment in the context of high stakes assessment. In J. McMillian (Ed.) Handbook of Research in Classroom Assessment. Sage. 

Henderson, D., Julian, M., & Yen, W. (2003). Multiple perspectives on multiple measures: An introduction. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 22(3), 6. 

Henderson, D., Julian, M., & Yen, W. (2003). Multiple measures: Alternative design and analysis models. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 22(3), 7–12. 

Schaeffer, G., Henderson, D., Julian, M., & Bene, N. (2002). A comparison of three scoring methods for tests for tests with dichotomous and polytomous items. Educational Assessment, 8(4), 317–340. 

Ercikan, K., & Julian, M. (2002). Classification accuracy of assigning student performance to proficiency levels. Applied Measurement in Education, 15, 269–294. Résumé of Marc Julian Page 4 

Julian, M.W. (2001). The consequences of multilevel data structures in covariance modeling. Structural Equation Modeling, 8, 325–352. 

Ercikan, K., Burket, G., Julian, M., Link, V., Schwarz, R., & Weber M. (1998). Calibration and scoring of tests with multiple-choice and constructed-response item types. Journal of Educational Measurement, 35, 137–154. 

Huberty, C.J., & Julian, M.W. (1995). An ad-hoc analysis strategy with missing data. Journal of Experimental Education , 63, 333–342. 

Horton, D.L., Pavlick, T.J., & Julian, M.W. (1993). Retrieval-based and familiarity-based recognition and the quality of information in episodic memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 39–55. 

Benson, I.J., Julian, M.W., Schwarzer, C., Seipp, B., & El-Zahhar, N. (1992). Cross-validation of a revised test anxiety scale using multi-national samples. In K.A. Hagtvet (Ed.), Advances in test anxiety research (Vol. 7, pp. 58–77). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Kim, J, Julian, M, Li, W, Kelley, K & Kim, D (2010, May). Use of IRT to Investigate Test Design, Mixed Formats, Common Item Characteristics Linking Procedures and Item Location. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Denver, CO. 

Fitzpatrick, A., Julian, M., Hauck, M., Dawber, T., & Mills, C (2006, May). The Dimensionality of Two States Tests Designed to Assess Students’ English Language Proficiency. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. San Francisco, CA. 

Wang, J & Julian, M (2004, June). Scaling the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test. Paper presented at the annual National Conference on Large Scale Assessment. Boston, MA. 

Julian, M, Henderson-Montero, D., Paek, P, Monfils, L., & Lall, V (2004, May). 

Adequate yearly progress: Examination of alternative design and analysis models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. San Diego, CA. 

Monfils, L., Lall, V., Henderson-Montero, D., & Julian, M (2004, May). 

Comparability of AYP methods across years: A simulation study investigating a single population of schools. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. San Diego, CA. 

Yen, W., Fitzpatrick, A., Henderson-Montero, D., Wang, J., Monfils, L., Rizavi, S., Julian, M., & Way, W. (2003, June). Linking non-parallel assessments .Paper presented at the annual National Conference on Large Scale Assessment. San Antonio, TX. 

Henderson-Montero, D., Monfils, L., Wang, J., Yen, W., Julian, M., & Moody, M. (2003, April). Investigation of the application of cognitive diagnostic testing to a high school exit examination. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Chicago, IL. 

Yen, W., Fitzpatrick, A., Henderson-Montero, D., Wang, J., Monfils, L., Rizavi, S., Julian, M., & Way, W. (2003, April). Linking non-parallel assessments to maintain longitudinal information. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education. Chicago, IL. Résumé of Marc Julian Page 5 

Julian, M. (2002, June). Item review and test development: A psychometric perspectiv e. Paper presented at the annual National Conference on Large Scale Assessment. Palm Desert, CA. 

Julian, M. (2002, April). Putting your talents to work: Launching your career. 

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. New Orleans, LA. 

Henderson, D., Julian, M., & Yen, W. (2002, April). Multiple measures: examination of alternative design and analysis models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. New Orleans, LA. 

Kubiak, A., Way, W., Julian, M., Henderson, D., Yen, W., & Robin, F. (2002, April). Accuracy and stability of calibration for mixed-item-format test using the one-parameter and generalized partial credit models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. New Orleans, LA. 

Julian, M. (2001, April). Putting your talents to work: Launching your career. 

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Seattle, WA. 

Julian, M., & Yen, S. J. (2001, April). Field test and operational test design issues. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, Seattle, WA. 

Schaeffer, G., Henderson, D., Julian, M., & Bene, N. (2001, April). A comparison 

of weighted raw scores and IRT pattern scores for tests with dichotomous and polytomous items. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, Seattle, WA. 

Julian, M. (2000, November). How previous performance on CTBS/5 relates to MSPAP proficiency. Maryland Assessment Group, Ocean City, MD. 

Julian, M., & Schaeffer, G. (2000, April). The impact of ceiling effects on IRT parameter estimates. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, New Orleans, LA. 

Ercikan, K., & Julian, M. (1999, April). Classification accuracy of assigning student performance to proficiency levels. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, Montreal, Canada. 

Yen, W. M., & Julian, M. (1998, November). How CTBS/5 scores from the previous grade relate to MSPAP performance . Maryland Assessment Group, Ocean City, MD. 

Benson, J., Hagtvet, K., & Julian, M. (1998, July). The distinction between the components of test anxiety under two testing conditions and their relationship to achievement for males and females. Paper presented at the 19th annual meeting of the Stress and Anxiety Research Society, Istanbul Turkey. 

Julian, M. (1998, April). Working for a test publisher: Perspectives of a new professional. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education. San Diego, CA. 

Julian, M.W. (1997, March). The impact of multilevel data structures on model/data fit statistics in covariance modeling. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL. Résumé of Marc Julian Page 6 

Yen, W. M., Sykes, R. C., Ito, K., & Julian, M. W. (1997, March). ABayesian/IRT index of objective performance for tests of mixed item types. 

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, Chicago, IL. 

Julian, M.W. (1996, April). The consequences of multilevel data structures in covariance modeling . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York, NY. 

Ercikan, K., Burket, G., Julian, M., Link, V., Schwarz, R., & Weber M. (1996, April). Calibration and scoring of tests with multiple-choice and constructed-response item types . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, New York, NY. 

Julian, M.W., & Searcy, C.A. (1995, April). Regression procedures for the detection of rater effects in direct writing assessment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement Education, San Francisco, CA. 

DeJoy, D.M., & Julian, M. (1994, November). Predictors of impaired driving decision in the general population . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Public Health Association, Washington, D.C. 

Comunian, A.L., Benson, J., & Julian, M. (1994, July). Gender differences in the Italian Test Anxiety Inventory. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Stress and Anxiety Research Society, Madrid, Spain. 

Huberty, C., & Julian, M. (1994, April). An ad-hoc analysis strategy with missing data. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. 

Hutchinson, S., & Julian, M. (1993, April). Application of discriminant analysis as a measurement tool. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Atlanta, GA. 

El-Zahhar, N., Benson, J., & Julian, M. (1992, July). The effect of optimism and test anxiety on educational expectations. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Test Anxiety Research, Leuven, Belgium. 

Julian, M. (1992, April). Univariate and multivariate modification statistics: Modification of non-nested confirmatory factor analytic models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA. 

Julian, M. (1991, November). Scale revision: Modification of confirmatory factor analytic models. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Georgia Educational Research Association, Atlanta, GA. 

Horton, D., Pavlick, T., & Julian, M. (1989, November). More about the 

relationship between recall and recognition. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Atlanta, GA. 

Horton, D., Pavlick, T., & Julian, M. (1989, June). The relationship between recall and recognition . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Society, Alexandria, VA. 

Gaeddert, W. & Julian, M. (1986, August). The relationships of gender related information with expected performance ratings. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C. Résumé of Marc Julian Page 7 

TECHNICAL REPORTS 

CTB/McGraw-Hill. (2000). TerraNova – 2nd Edition, Prepublication Technical Bulletin. Monterey, CA: Author. 

CTB/McGraw-Hill. (1997). SUPERA Prepublication Technical Bulletin. Monterey, CA: Author. 

Fitzpatrick, A. R., & Julian, M. W. (1996). Two studies comparing the parameter estimates produced by PARDUX and PARSCALE. Unpublished manuscript. 

CTB/McGraw-Hill. (1996). TerraNova Prepublication Technical Bulletin. Monterey, CA: Author. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS AND ACTIVITIES 

American Educational Research Association (reviewer, chair, discussant)— 1995–2014 

National Council on Measurement in Education (reviewer, chair, discussant)— 1995–2014 

NCME Dissertation Award Committee—1997–1998, 2013–2015 

Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice (editorial board)—2000–2001 

Applied Psychological Measurement (reviewer)—2004–2005 

EDUCATION 

University of Georgia 

Athens, GA 

Ph.D., Research, Evaluation, Measurement and Statistics, Department of Psychology 

University of Maryland at College Park 

College Park, MD 

Graduate program in Educational Measurement, Department of Measurement, Statistics and Evaluation 

Graduate program in Cognition, Department of Psychology 

State University of New York at Plattsburgh 

Plattsburgh, NY 

B.S., Psychology Page 1 

# CAROL JULLIE 

Material Production Coordinator 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Carol Jullie serves as a Materials Production Coordinator providing a consistent structure to clients, vendors, and internal resources during the development of DRC produced materials. 

Prior to her experience with assessments, Ms. Jullie worked as a copy editor at various newspapers. Ms. Jullie holds a B.A. in English Language and Journalism from South Dakota State University in Brookings, South Dakota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Material Production Coordinator 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Works with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacts with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assign tasks, and set priorities. Develops, edits, and proofreads manuals, publications, and project documentation. Manages project within budget. Monitors project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—2002–2004 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2002–2004 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2012 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2002–2004 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2002–2004 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2012–2014 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with the client and internal resources groups to develop all materials for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment and the Keystone Exams. Developed, edited, and proofread manuals, publications, and project Résumé of Carol Jullie Page 2 

documentation. Managed project within budget. Monitored project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production. 

2004–2012 Editing Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Worked with the education group in the development and production of various testing materials by writing, editing, and proofreading documents. Obtained information from project managers regarding the client’s product and service needs. Developed procedures, and proofread test booklets and project materials to ensure 100 percent accuracy. Maintained and implemented state-specific style guides. Served as an editorial resource to the company. 

2002–2004 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assign tasks, and set priorities. Developed, edited, and proofread manuals, publications, and project documentation. Managed project within budget. Monitored project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production. Provided customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs. 

2000–2002 Customization Specialist 

Personnel Decisions International 

Minneapolis, MN 

Produced tests, feedback reports, and training materials for clients worldwide. Responsible for editing, proofing, and referencing detailed report content. Filed project documents including contracts and preliminary assessment models. Worked with clients on content, output, graphics, and printing of materials. Worked with technical staff to provide materials via the web. Managed progress of multiple projects simultaneously. Worked with other teams to improve processes and systems. 

1998–2000 Copy Editor/News Director 

The Free Press 

Mankato, MN 

Supervised five-person copy desk at award-winning daily newspaper. Determined story and photo placement for all local and national news pages. Edited stories, wrote headlines, and designed pages on a tight deadline. Responsible for organizing coverage of late-breaking news stories. Took part in weekly critique awarding writers for exceptional work. Résumé of Carol Jullie Page 3 

1996–1998 Copy Editor/News Editor 

The Daily Globe 

Worthington, MN 

Served as sole person in charge of editing and designing all news pages. Planned and implemented special sections will all departments. Wrote articles needed for special sections within the newspaper. Instrumental in redesign of paper and eased transition to new system. 

1995–1996 Copy Editor 

The Kearney Hub 

Kearney, NE 

Wrote headlines and edited wire stories for mid-sized daily newspaper. Helped put together weekend paper and special sections within newspaper. Assisted production staff in manual layout of all news pages. 

EDUCATION 

South Dakota State University 

Brookings, SD 

B.A., English Education and Journalism Page 1 

# SETH KAHLER 

Director, Operations – Education Materials 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As Director, Operations – Education Materials, Mr. Seth Kahler is responsible for leading DRC’s materials management processes from manufacturing through delivery. He brings more than 11 years of extensive operational and project management experience to this position. Mr. Kahler holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Business from Augsburg College in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Director, Operations – Education Materials 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leads a materials team that manages materials from manufacturing through delivery, ensuring all client specifications are adhered to, and internal and external schedules are achieved. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2013–2014 Manager, Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for oversight of printing and manufacturing; packaging; and distribution of large-scale statewide assessments. 

2010–2013 Senior Corporate Quality Systems Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as lead auditor of Quality System, Environmental, Information Security, and Business Assessment evaluations. Enterprise responsibility to driving customer-focused process improvements. Served as leader of corrective and preventive action initiatives. Served as quality systems administrator for enterprise policies and procedures. 

2008–2010 Quality Systems Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as auditor of Quality System. Facilitated weekly quality meetings. Résumé of Seth Kahler Page 2 

2005–2009 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to obtain and disseminate information regarding projects, prioritize work, and coordinate tasks to meet deadlines. Developed, edited, and proofread manuals, publications, and project documentation. Verified answer keys and test questions. Monitored project status, distribution and collection systems, and printing production. Provided customer service to school districts needing assistance with their state assessment programs. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Accountability Reporting System—2005–2009 

Alabama Data Warehouse—2007–2009 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2005–2009 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

2004–2005 Materials Processor 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Processed materials for large-scale, statewide assessments. 

CERTIFICATIONS 

ISO 9001:2008 QMS Internal Auditor Certified 2009 

ISO 9001:2008 QMS Auditor/Lead Auditor Certified 2009 

ISO 14001:2004/OHSAS 18001:2007 EMS Internal Auditor Certified 2010 

ISO 27001 Information Security – Certified Auditor 2012 

Six Sigma Green Belt Certified 2012 

Carlson School MBA Essentials Certificate Program 2014 

EDUCATION 

Augsburg College 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Business Administration, emphasis in Management Page 1 

# DOYLE KIRKEBY 

Senior Vice President of Operations 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Doyle Kirkeby has over 40 years of experience in corporate operations management and software development. He has effectively implemented projects and managed staff for a variety of corporate clients. 

Mr. Kirkeby has been a senior leader in DRC Operations since 1995. He currently serves as the executive in charge of all phases of production scheduling, printing, packaging, materials distribution and collection, warehouse operations, document processing (scanning, editing and clerical support), and secure storage of materials. 

Mr. Kirkeby holds an A.A. in Computer Programming/Data Processing Management from Alexandria Technical Institute in Alexandria, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Vice President of Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides executive-level oversight of overall production scheduling, printing, packaging, distribution and collection of materials, warehouse operations, document processing (scanning, editing, and clerical support), and handscoring. Senior management duties include corporate-wide strategic planning, and budget and profit and loss responsibilities. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1999–2010 Vice President of Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Directed and managed overall production scheduling, packaging, distribution and collection of materials, warehouse operations, document processing (scanning, editing, and clerical support), and handscoring. 

1995–1999 Director of Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Directed and managed the following operational areas: laser printing; inserting and mailing; computer operations (scanning, data processing); warehouse and Résumé of Doyle Kirkeby Page 2 

shipping; and clerical operations (document handling and processing, data editing). 

1983–1995 Data Processing Manager 

United Mailing, Inc. 

Chanhassen, MN 

Developed system protocols and managed the installation of the company’s first mainframe computer. Built a five-person management team and hired administrative, technical support, and programming staff—approximately 60 people with a $5 million operating budget over an 11-year period. Supervised this fast-paced, rapidly growing department through several phases of management and processing changes. 

Effectively managed a fluctuating workload and structured the systems support staff to handle seasonal peaks and valleys to maximize department profitability. Participated on the United Mailing executive management and strategic planning team. Led a task force to identify and implement efficient methods of processing mail in response to major U.S. Postal Service processing requirements. 

Analyzed and investigated new hardware and software technologies to ensure United Mailing’s technological and economic advantage in the market. Provided technical support to in-house and regional sales personnel and interacted routinely with customers to develop processing specifications for large direct mail projects. 

1982–1983 Project Leader/Senior Systems Analyst Economic Laboratories 

St. Paul, MN 

Designed and supported forecast and sales performance reports for the company’s sales and marketing functions. Managed the development of monthly, quarterly, and annual sales projections, performance data, and cost of sales reports. Provided work direction to systems analysts and applications programmers. 

1980–1982 Operations Manager/Systems Analyst Red Owl/Snyder, Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed a staff of eight computer operators and three control analysts. As a Systems Analyst/Manager designed process improvements and managed all facets of a major system upgrade (from an IBM 360/50 to a CDC Omega/480 mainframe). 

Trained in-house computer customers who were unfamiliar with system capabilities on how to request and use reports, and built rapport between users and the systems staff. Résumé of Doyle Kirkeby Page 3 

1972–1980 Operations Manager 

I.C. Systems, Inc. 

Arden Hills, MN 

Supervised operations personnel. Assisted in the selection and installation of computer hardware and software, and oversaw several system upgrades. 

EDUCATION 

Alexandria Technical Institute 

Alexandria, MN 

A.A., Computer Programming/Data Processing Management 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 

PATENT 

Kirkeby, Doyle. Priority System and Method for Processing Standardized Tests. Patent US 7,881,898 B2. 1 Feb. 2011. 

PUBLICATION 

Member of working group that developed and published “Operational Best Practices for Statewide Large-Scale Assessment Programs” (October 2011) Page 1 

# ANNE KIRPES 

Reading Test Development Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Anne Kirpes has 17 years of reading and language arts test development experience at all grade levels. As DRC’s Reading Development Director, she provides subject-specific expertise relative to all stages of the test development process. She has worked on more than 15 statewide assessments across all grade levels, including providing leadership as team lead and/or content lead. 

Ms. Kirpes’ assessment experience ranges from test design to standard setting, including directing and participating in item/rubric development and test construction for both online and print assessments, participating in performance assessment scoring processes for both online and print assessments, facilitating and participating in standard setting, and facilitating rangefinding and data committee reviews for both online and print assessments. 

In addition to her comprehensive experience in large-scale assessment, Ms. Kirpes has eight years of teaching experience at the elementary level. She has presented at numerous professional conferences and has won several prestigious awards, including both the Silver and Gold Congressional Awards from the United States Congress and being named to the Phi Delta Kappa 2007–2008 Class of Emerging Leaders. 

Ms. Kirpes has served as president of the State of Minnesota Phi Delta Kappa Chapter. She has served four years on the International Reading Association’s Honor Society Committee of Alpha Upsilon Alpha, including a two-year term as Chair. She co-authored the article, “Demystifying Assessments: Understanding the Test Development Process in Large-Scale Assessments,” in PDK’s January 2009 issue of its Ed ge magazine. 

Ms. Kirpes earned an Ed.M. with a concentration in Teaching and Learning from Harvard University Graduate School of Education. She also holds a B.A. in Elementary Education, Reading/Language Arts, from the University of Northern Iowa. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Kirpes’ CCR experience includes reviewing the proposed Alaska alignment (completed by Alaska educators) to the College and Career Readiness English Language Arts standards and providing feedback to the Department. In addition, she reviewed the Alabama reading alignment to the CCR standards and provided feedback. 

In addition, Ms. Kirpes worked with committees of Pennsylvania educators to develop Pennsylvania assessment anchors and eligible content (standards and objectives) and learning progressions aligned to CCR. She is responsible for the Résumé of Anne Kirpes Page 2 

development of new reading passages, items, and scoring guidelines aligned to these new Pennsylvania Core Standards. Ms. Kirpes has also developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Reading (grades 3–8) and Literature (high school) and has developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams for Literature. 

Ms. Kirpes oversees all aspects of the item development for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium project and the College and Career Ready Item Development for the American Institutes of Research, including reviewing selected-response, multi-select, and technology-enhanced items and performance tasks. 

By participating in webinars sponsored by the Council of Chief State School Officers and other entities, Ms. Kirpes remains current on issues related to reading, such as text complexity, and other CCR developments. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2002–Present Reading Test Development Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Coordinates and participates in all aspects of reading and English language arts test development. Coordinates and participates in reading and English language arts item development. Trains content specialists, freelance writers, and consultants in reading and English language arts test construction for both online and print assessments. Researches and communicates current developments in English language arts, College and Career Readiness, reading, and assessment. Responsibilities also include representing DRC, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Participates in professional development, planning, and presentations. Facilitates content, data, and rangefinding committee reviews. Collaborates with and addresses the concerns of clients regarding English language arts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2005–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment and Accountability Program: 

End of Course Examinations—2002–2005 

College and Career Ready Item Development for American Institute for Research—2014–Present 

Early Childhood Reading Test—2001–2002 

Florida Department of Education Student Standards Tutorial Project Committee of Experts—2012–Present Résumé of Anne Kirpes Page 3 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test—1998–2000 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Louisiana Development of Grade Level Expectations and Alignment of Standards and Assessments—2003–2004 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Massachusetts State Standards-Referenced Test—1998–1999 

Maryland Modified High School Assessment Alignment Study—2008 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessments K–2—2012–Present 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Minnesota Basic Skills Tests—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests—2002–2004 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2002–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2014–Present 

Tests of New York State Standards—2001–2002 

Voluntary National Reading Test —1998–2000 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—1999–2002 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

U.S. Academic Decathlon—2004–2008 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1998–2002 Senior Test Development Specialist 

The Riverside Publishing Company 

Itasca, IL 

Developed reading and language arts assessments according to item and test specifications. Selected grade-appropriate reading passages. Developed, edited, and reviewed items. Conducted content and data reviews and rangefinding meetings. Created and reviewed scoring guides. Developed directions for administration and other ancillary materials. Projects included: Georgia State Criterion-Referenced Competency Test, Content Lead, Grades 1–8; Voluntary Résumé of Anne Kirpes Page 4 

National Reading Test at Fourth Grade, Team Lead; Massachusetts Off-Grade Standards Tests, Team Lead, Grades 5, 6, 7, and 9; Pennsylvania Off-Grades Tests, Team Lead, Grades 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, and 10; Early Childhood Reading Test, Content Lead, Grades K, 1, 2, and 3; Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Test, Content Lead, Grades 8 and 9; Oklahoma Criterion Referenced Test, Team Lead, Grades 5, 8, and 11; Washington Assessment of Student Learning, Listening and Writing, Content Lead, Grades 4, 7, and 10; Washington Alternative Assessment of Student Learning, Content Lead, Grades 4–10. 

1997–1998 Teacher 

Keene State College, Wheelock Laboratory School 

Keene, NH 

Third grade self-contained classroom teacher with a multi-handicapped child. Taught all subjects, specifically integrating reading and language arts into science and social studies team-taught units. Supervised student teachers and methods students. 

1989–1996 Teacher 

School District 161 

Flossmoor, IL 

First grade self-contained classroom teacher with various handicapped children. Taught reading in basal and literature programs, incorporating whole language techniques, including instruction through reading and writing workshops. Adapted materials for at-risk and handicapped children. Developed age-appropriate reading and language arts curriculum and instructional practices, presenting teaching techniques to colleagues. Developed an at-home reading program involving parents, a family writing night program, author’s day, and curriculum for integrating reading/language arts into other content areas. Developed the hands-on Butterfly Science Unit for the school district. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Alpha Upsilon Alpha, Honor Society of the International Reading Association— 1986–Present (Ad Hoc Subcommittee—2005–Present; Chair, 2007–2009) 

Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development—1998–Present 

International Reading Association—1986–Present 

Kappa Delta Pi, International Honor Society in Education, International—1988– Present (Nominations Committee—1989–1990) 

National Council of Teachers of English—1998–Present 

Omicron Delta Kappa, Academic and Leadership Honor Society—1987–Present 

Phi Delta Kappa, International Professional Fraternity in Education—1990– Present (President, Minnesota State Chapter, Phi Delta Kappa—2009–2011) Résumé of Anne Kirpes Page 5 

CONFERENCES ATTENDED 

International Reading Association Convention (2012). Chicago, Illinois. 

International Reading Association Convention North (2009). Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

International Reading Association Convention West (2009). Phoenix, Arizona. 

Phi Delta Kappa International Summit on High-Performing Educators (2008). San Antonio, Texas. 

International Reading Association Convention (2008). Atlanta, Georgia. 

Phi Delta Kappa International Summit on Global Education (2007). Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 

International Reading Association Convention (2007). Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 

International Reading Association Convention (2006). Chicago, Illinois. 

American Educational Research Association Convention (2006). San Francisco, California. 

International Kappa Delta Pi Convocation (2005). Orlando, Florida. 

International Reading Association Convention (2005). San Antonio, Texas. 

American Educational Research Association Convention (2005). Montreal, Canada. 

American Educational Research Association Convention (2004). San Diego California. 

International Reading Association Convention (2000). Indianapolis, Indiana. 

International Kappa Delta Pi Convocation (1990). Indianapolis, Indiana. 

International Kappa Delta Pi Convocation (1988). New Orleans, Louisiana. 

PUBLICATIONS 

Kirpes, A., and Price, C. (2009). “Demystifying Assessments: Understanding the Test Development Process in Large-Scale Assessments.” In Phi Delta Kappa 

ED ge magazine. 

Kirpes, A. and Bruni, K. (1993). “Butterfly Curriculum for First Grade.” School District 161, Flossmoor, IL. 

> PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS

Kirpes, A., Strange, N. (2009). Alpha Upsilon Alpha—IRA’s Literacy Honor Society Promoting Scholarship, Leadership, and Service. International Reading Association Convention, Phoenix, Arizona. 

Kirpes, A., Donahue, L. (2009). Alpha Upsilon Alpha—Bringing IRA to Your College Campus. International Reading Association Convention, Phoenix, Arizona. 

Kirpes, A., Donahue, L., Eliason, C., and Strange, N. (2007). Honoring and Developing Scholars and Leaders Through the Alpha Upsilon Alpha Honor Society of the International Reading Association . International Reading Association Convention, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Résumé of Anne Kirpes Page 6 

Kirpes, A., Eliason, C., and Lund, D. (2005). Honoring and Developing Scholars and Leaders Through the Alpha Upsilon Alpha Honor Society of the International Reading Association . International Reading Association Convention, San Antonio, Texas. 

Kirpes, A. and Watkins, M. (2005). High Stakes Testing: An Inside View of A Testing Company. International Kappa Delta Pi Convocation, Orlando, Florida. 

Kirpes, A. (2005). Infinite Possibilities in Education. Kappa Delta Pi, Psi Chapter Initiation Keynote Speaker presentation, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls, Iowa. 

Kirpes, A. and Schatz, J. (1999). Rubrics: The Link Between Assessment and Instruction . Iowa Reading Conference, Des Moines, Iowa. 

Kirpes, A. (1997). Education and You. Kappa Delta Pi, Psi Chapter Initiation Keynote presentation, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls, Iowa. 

Kirpes, A. and Burns, M.L. (1995). Tiny Bubbles. Illinois Science Teachers Association Annual Convention, St. Charles, Illinois. 

Kirpes, A. (1994). G.A.I.M.S.—Girls Achieving In Math/Science. Program developer and lead instructor, Serena Hills School, Chicago Heights, Illinois. 

Kirpes, A. (1992). Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) Panel Use. In-service for Western Avenue Elementary School, Flossmoor, Illinois. 

Kirpes, A. and Zima, L. (1992). Calculators in the Classroom. In-service for School District 161 faculty, Flossmoor, Illinois. 

Kirpes, A. (1989). Components of a Whole Language Classroom. In-service for School District 161, Flossmoor, Illinois. 

EDUCATION 

Harvard University Graduate School of Education 

Cambridge, MA Ed.M. Education, concentration in Teaching and Learning 

University of Northern Iowa 

Cedar Falls, IA B.A., Elementary Education, Reading/Language Arts 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Illinois—Language Arts, Grades K–9 Elementary, Grades K–6 Page 1

# JOHN KOBE 

ELA Handscoring Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kobe has 12 years of experience working on large-scale assessment projects. His primary responsibilities include working closely with state department personnel and educators to develop training materials for scoring reading and writing assessments; monitoring handscoring projects; supervising handscoring staff; and coordinating rangefinding activities. Since 2010, Mr. Kobe has overseen all handscoring and rangefinding activities related to the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment’s (PSSA) reading comprehension assessment and Text-Dependent Analysis (TDA) field test. From 2007–2009, Mr. Kobe served as a scoring director for PSSA reading. In this capacity, he conducted rangefinding, prepared training materials, trained readers, and oversaw handscoring sessions. 

Mr. Kobe has experience with a range of English language arts items/prompts and scoring models. He has taken part in the PSSA’s reading comprehension new item review meetings with Pennsylvania educators since 2011 and the TDA new item review meetings since 2012, providing handscoring perspective to the proceedings. Mr. Kobe participated in the creation of items samplers for the PSSA’s holistic Writing Prompts, as well as the TDA item-type. He also provided input at the Evidence-Based Selected Response item writing workshops with Pennsylvania educators. Additionally, Mr. Kobe participated in the initial rounds of rubric editing for the Keystone Literature field test. 

Mr. Kobe holds a B.A. degree in History from the College of St. Scholastica in Duluth, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present ELA Handscoring Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Manages the maintenance and timely completion of projects. Oversees the training of readers, team leaders, and scoring directors, and documents pertinent project information. Helps develop and supervise the use of project materials, including scoring guides, anchor, training, and validity sets. Contributes to review of assessment materials and scoring staff. Résumé of John Kobe Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment, 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2003–2007 

Standards Based Assessment—2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessment System—2005 

Oklahoma Core Curriculum Tests—2004–2009 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2003–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2010–2011 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2010 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2010 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2010 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN and Pittsburgh, PA 

Oversaw groups of team leaders and readers for various assessment projects. Lead rangefinding activities and helped develop resultant training materials. Trained team leaders and readers to accurately score various assessments. Monitored scoring accuracy by interpreting daily and cumulative statistical data and retraining when necessary. 

2006–2007 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Trained and monitored teams of 10-12 readers to maintain consistency and adherence to scoring guidelines and state standards. Retrained, as necessary, to resolve scoring issues and concerns. Provided written evaluations of reader performance at project end. 

2003–2006 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Participated in training and qualifying activities in order to apply state-mandated scoring criteria. Assessed open-ended reading, writing and science responses, while maintaining a high level of reliability and consistency. Résumé of John Kobe Page 3 

1994–2002 HealthPartners 

Communication Specialist 

Bloomington, MN 

Served as editor and chief writer for two external newsletters. Wrote, designed and developed communications materials, including brochures, reports, pamphlets, and both internal and external correspondences. 

EDUCATION 

College of Saint Scholastica 

Duluth, MN 

B.A., History Page 1 

# RICHARD KOHR 

Program Consultant, Statewide Assessments 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Richard Kohr has more than 41 years of experience in all phases of large-scale educational assessment. For the past 12 years, Dr. Kohr has served as a Program Consultant, Statewide Assessments at DRC, working on the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA) and the Keystone Exams. His most recent work has included writing and reviewing reports for the PSSA and Keystone Exams. 

Prior to joining DRC, Dr. Kohr worked for the Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) for more than 30 years where he was involved in all aspects of test development. He also served as a university lecturer and adjunct professor at Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania; a graduate assistant, research associate, and adjunct professor at Pennsylvania State University; and a diagnostic assistant at Williamsport Area Community College in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. 

In addition to his educational experience, Dr. Kohr is a retired, licensed psychologist, having conducted psychological evaluations and provided counseling in a part-time, private practice for more than 20 years. 

Dr. Kohr holds a Ph.D. in Educational Psychology from Pennsylvania State University, a M.S. in Educational Research from Bucknell University in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, and a B.A. in Psychology, with a minor in Mathematics, from Lycoming College in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2003–Present Program Consultant, Statewide Assessments 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Harrisburg Program Office 

Harrisburg, PA 

Dr. Kohr participates in the writing and review of PSSA and Keystone reports. . He reviews specifications documents and data file layouts and conducts analyses of individual student, school summary, and disaggregated data files related to quality assurance. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2011; 2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–Present Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2005 Psychologist (part-time private practice) 

Sleber Associates P.C. 

Harrisburg, PA 

1971–2003 Annuitant Return to Service (2003) 

Educational Measurement and Evaluation Supervisor (1986–2002) 

Educational Research Associate II (1971–1986) 

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Education 

Division of Evaluation and Reports 

Harrisburg, PA 

Involved with all aspects of test development, including construction and review of test items, administering field tests in school classrooms, conducting reliability and validity studies, and performing item analysis and DIF studies. For operational assessments: responsible for matrix designs and the design of data structures, including specifications and layout of data elements. Developed analytic strategies for conducting quality assurance analyses on assessment data, which often required the development of specialized computer programs. Deeply involved in developing interpretive materials and designing reports for individual and school assessment results. Other interpretive responsibilities involved meeting with school district administrative and teaching staff to conduct interpretive sessions. These sessions helped to promote a better understanding and utilization of assessment results. Carried out numerous analyses of statewide assessment data, which were presented at national professional meetings. Supervised employees. Had extensive experience facilitating information flow and overseeing scoring and technical activities of assessment contractors. 

1984–2001 Psychologist (part-time private practice) 

Knestrick and Sleber, Clinical Psychology Associates 

Harrisburg, PA 

Provided psychological services, including counseling individuals and couples and conducting psychological evaluations. 

1991–1993 Adjunct Professor 

Pennsylvania State University 

Harrisburg, PA 

1978 Adjunct Professor 

Bucknell University 

Lewisburg, PA Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 3 

1977 Adjunct Professor 

The Pennsylvania State University, Capitol Campus 

Harrisburg, PA 

Taught courses in statistics, research methods, and testing and measurement to graduate and undergraduate students. 

1970–1971 Lecturer 

Bucknell University 

Lewisburg, PA 

Served as instructor for undergraduate courses in testing and measurement and was part of research staff that was engaged in ongoing research in schools. 

1968–1970 Research Associate 

The Pennsylvania State University, Center for Cooperative Research with Schools 

University Park, PA 

1967–1968 Graduate Assistant 

The Pennsylvania State University, Center for Cooperative Research with Schools 

University Park, PA 

Participated in the design of research and evaluation studies involving mathematics and science education in school settings. Activities included: design and analysis of survey instruments, statistical analysis of research data, and report writing. 

1965–1966 Diagnostic Assistant 

Williamsport Area Community College, Psychological Services Department 

Williamsport, PA 

Conducted individual testing and vocational counseling of students and clients undergoing rehabilitation. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Pennsylvania Psychological Association 

American Educational Research Association 

National Council on Measurement in Education 

Phi Delta Kappa 

Association for Psychological Type Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 4 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Professional Journal Articles 

Kohr, R. L. & Suydam, M. N. (1970). An instrument for evaluating survey research. Journal of Educational Research, 64 , 78–85. 

Kohr, R. L. (1971). An item analysis and scoring program for summated rating scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 31 , 769–770. 

Kohr, R. L. & Games, P. A. (1974). Robustness of the analysis of variance, the Welch procedure, and a Box procedure to heterogeneous variances. Journal of Experimental Education , 43 , 61–69. 

Kohr, R. L. & Games, P. A. (1977). Testing complex a priori contrasts on means from independent samples. Journal of Educational Statistics, 2 , 207–216. 

Kohr, R. L., Coldiron, J. R., Skiffington, E. W., Masters, J. R. & Blust, R. S. (1988). The influence of race, class and gender on self-esteem for fifth, eighth and eleventh grade students in Pennsylvania schools. Journal of Negro Education, 57 ,1–15. 

Kohr, R. L., Masters, J. R., Coldiron, J. R., Blust, R. S. & Skiffington, E. W. (1991). The relationship of race, class and gender with mathematics achievement for fifth, eighth and eleventh grade students in Pennsylvania schools. In W. G. Secada & M. R. Meyer (Eds.), Needed: An agenda for equity in mathematics education, Special issue of the Peabody Journal of Education, 66 (2), 147–171. 

Book Articles 

Kohr, R. L. (1984). Dimensionality in the meditative experience: a replication. In D. H. Shapiro, Jr. and R. N. Walsh (Eds.). Meditation: Classic and Historical Perspectives (pp. 271–280). New York: Aldine. 

Convention Papers 

Kohr, R. L. & Games, P. A. (1974, April). Procedures for testing M1 = M2 with unequal n’s and variances . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago. 

Kohr, R. L. (1974, April). A longitudinal study of self-concept from grade 5 to grade 9 . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, Chicago. Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 5 

Kohr, R. L. (1975, March). A longitudinal study of selected cognitive and noncognitive student outcomes from grade 5 to grade 9 . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, D.C. 

Kohr, R. L. (1975, April). Application of regression analysis techniques . Forum for the Advancement of State Educational Assessment Programs: presentation at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, D.C. 

Coldiron, J. R. & Kohr, R. L. (1975, April). Statewide assessment in Michigan and Pennsylvania: curriculum impact and implications . Division B symposium presentation at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, D.C. 

Kohr, R. L. (1976, April). An evaluation of a multiple matrix sampling procedure for a state assessment program . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, San Francisco. 

Kohr, R. L. (1977, April). A survey of teacher attitudes and classroom practices .Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York. 

Kohr, R. L. (1977, April). Measurement problems and concerns in statewide minimum competency requirements . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, New York. 

Kohr, R. L. (1979, April). The relationship of homework and television viewing to cognitive and noncognitive outcomes . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, San Francisco. 

Kohr, R. L. (1979, June). Using affective measures in state testing . Paper presented at the 9th annual conference on large-scale assessment, National Assessment of Educational Progress, Denver, Colorado. 

Kohr, R. L. & Hertzog, J. F. (1980, June). Helping school districts interpret and use assessment data: an in-depth look at the Pennsylvania EQA assistance strategies . Paper presented at the 10th annual conference on large-scale assessment, National Assessment of Educational Progress, Boulder, Colorado. 

Blust, R. S. & Kohr, R. L. (1981, April). An examination of the relationship between school scores derived from commercial achievement tests and those from statewide assessment . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, Los Angeles. Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 6 

Kohr, R. L. (1981, April). Correlates of reading and writing achievement . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Los Angeles. 

Blust, R. S. & Kohr, R. L. (1982, March). A survey of teacher perceptions on school conditions and school related conditions. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York. 

Kohr, R. L. (1982, March). Examining self esteem needs in school programs through item analysis . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York. 

Kohr, R. L. (1986, April). Correlates of cognitive student outcomes . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco. 

Kohr, R. L., Coldiron, J. R., Skiffington, E. W., Masters, J. R. & Blust, R. S. (1987, April). The influence of race, class and gender on mathematics achievement and self-esteem for fifth, eighth and eleventh grade students in Pennsylvania schools . Symposium presentation at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, D.C. 

Masters, J. R. & Kohr, R. L. (1991, April). The relationship between teachers’ standard setting ratings and their own success in teaching the content being rated . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council on Measurement in Education, Chicago. 

COMPUTER EXPERIENCE 

Computer Programs (FORTRAN) Developed and Documented 

Kohr, R. L. (1967) Likert Attitude Scale Analysis (System Library Computer Program: LIKRT). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. 

Kohr, R. L. (1969) Factor Scores (System Library Computer Program: FSCORE). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. 

Kohr, R. L. (1970) Complex Multiple Comparisons Among Means (System Library Computer Program: CMCMP). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. 

Kohr, R. L. (1975) Curvilinear Analysis (System Library Computer Program: CRVSCN). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 7 

Kohr, R. L. (1977) Cultural Validity Analysis (System Library Computer Program: CULVAL). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. 

Games, P. A., Kohr, R. L., Ellis, J. & Ramos, J. G. (1983) Complex Contrasts on Means, Proportions, Correlations or Variances (System Library Computer Program: COMCON). University Park, PA: Computation Center, The Pennsylvania State University. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Presentations on Test Interpretation and Test Utilization conducted in workshops at Intermediate Units 8, 10, 15, 16, and 17 held in 1979, 1980, 1981. 

Presentations on Test Interpretation and Test Utilization conducted in the Pennsylvania Dissemination Capacity Building Workshops, State College, 1979, 1980, 1981. 

Provided test interpretation sessions to school district administrative staff regarding results of Educational Quality Assessment from 1972 to 1988. 

“Evaluation of Self Esteem,” Pennsylvania Dept. of Education, Executive Academy on Self Esteem, March 1985. 

“Understanding Psychological Type and its Application to Management,” Pennsylvania Dept. of Education: Principal’s Academy: December 1987, March 1988. 

“Psychological Type and Education,” Phi Delta Kappa, Camp Hill, PA, February 1989. 

“Update on the Pennsylvania Assessment and Proposed Mathematics Test,” Pennsylvania Council of Teachers of Mathematics Annual Conference, Mountain Laurel Resort, March 1989. 

“The Future of Mathematics Assessment in Pennsylvania,” MathConn 89, Cedar Crest College, April 1989. 

“The Test of Mathematics Skills for the Pennsylvania Assessment System,” Delaware Valley Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, Widener University, May 1989. 

“The Test of Mathematics Skills for the Pennsylvania Assessment System,” National Council for Teachers of Mathematics, Philadelphia, December, 1989. Résumé of Richard Kohr Page 8 

“Testing Trends: State, National and International,” Pennsylvania School Boards Association Presentations: Williamsport Sheraton (September 12, 1990); Wilkes Barre Sheraton Crossgates (September 18, 1990); Lancaster Sheraton (September 27, 1990). 

“Teaching Style and Learning Style as Viewed by Psychological Type,” Educational Psychology class at Dickinson College: November 1987, March 1988, October 1988, April 1989, November 1989, April 1990, November 1990, April 1991, December 1991, April 1992, December 1992, April 1993, November 1993, April 1994. 

“Psychological Type in Marital Relationships,” The Pennsylvania State University Extension: Couples Roundtable, Harrisburg, PA: April 9, 1990; April 29, 1991; April 20, 1992; April 18, 1993; April 4, 1994. 

“Psychological Type and Codependent Behavior,” Co-Dependency Issues for the 90s. Conference sponsored by CONTACT Harrisburg, the Caron Foundation, and Mazzitti & Sullivan, Harrisburg, September 8, 1990. 

“Psychological Type and the Pastoral Role,” Penn Central Conference of the United Church of Christ: Parish Leadership Lab: Trinity Retreat Center, October 29, 1991, and Hartman Retreat Center, January 11, 1994. 

EDUCATION 

The Pennsylvania State University 

University Park, PA 

Ph.D., Educational Psychology 

Bucknell University 

Lewisburg, PA 

M.S., Educational Research 

Lycoming College 

Williamsport, PA 

B.A., Psychology, Minor Mathematics 

PROFESSIONAL LICENSE 

Psychologist: Licensed for independent practice in Pennsylvania (PS-004349-L), 1984 (Retired in 2005) Page 1 

# SCOTT KOY 

Senior Director of Information Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Scott Koy has more than 31 years of experience providing information systems technology leadership in a variety of business sectors. In his current role, Mr. Koy directs Information Services work required to meet the needs of large-scale, statewide educational assessment projects, including project management, business analysis, system design, quality control, processing, and report production. 

Mr. Koy has proven expertise in strategic planning and execution, hardware/software selection, database administration, system support and operation, software development methodologies, and project planning and management. 

Mr. Koy is certified as a Project Management Professional (PMP ®) through the Project Management Institute. He earned a B.S. in Computer Science from the University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Director of Information Services 

2007–2010 Director of Application Development 

2002–2007 Education Information Systems Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Directs Information Services work required to meet the needs of large-scale, statewide educational assessment projects, including project management, business analysis, system design, quality control, processing, and report production. Oversees development activities within project teams to ensure that appropriate technical resources are available and project schedules are met. Provides technical solutions to meet clients’ requirements for timely, accurate student data and quality reporting at all levels. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2010–2015 

Alabama Reading and Math Tests +—2010–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Alternate Assessment—2005–2006 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2010–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010–Present Résumé of Scott Koy Page 2 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests—2004–2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2010–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2010–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2010–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2010–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–2014 

Minnesota Basic Skills Tests—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005; 2011–2014 

Minnesota Graduation-Required Assessments for Diploma—2011–2014 

Minnesota Test of Academic Skills—2011–2014 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2010–Present 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2006–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania AYP Reporting—2003–2009 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–2010; 2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–2010; 2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2010–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2010–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2010–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2010–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

WIDA Assessment Services Supporting ELs through Technology Systems— 2011–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1994–2002 Application Development Manager 

Fingerhut Companies 

Minnetonka, MN 

Successfully managed Phase I re-engineering of Fingerhut’s order entry system. The development included moving from a two-tier “C” application to a three-tier Java application using state-of-the-art technology and tools. Managed multiple development teams responsible for Fingerhut’s order entry, customer service, and order processing systems. Responsible for the budgeting and forecasting for multiple cost centers. Supervised a staff of 26, including indirect reports. Responsible for streamlining Fingerhut’s catalog production process through the use of a digital content management system. Résumé of Scott Koy Page 3 

1991–1994 Senior Project Manager 

MedPower, Inc. 

Edina, MN 

Assisted with the startup of MedPower. Selected tools and technology to be used for software development. Co-authored the software development methodology and standards. Assisted with the design and development of a sophisticated health care processing system for hospitals and clinics. Also assisted with the marketing efforts for MedPower services and systems. 

1990–1991 Project Manager 

Carlson Companies 

Minnetonka, MN 

Provided technical leadership to a project team charged with the task of automating the capture of daily sales for Carlson’s 200+ travel agencies. Successfully implemented a solution that reduced the time required to create the monthly agency reports by four weeks. Led the development of an automated system for gathering and posting general ledger entries for 200+ travel agencies. The system reduced the time required to create monthly postings from more than three weeks to less than one week. 

1989–1990 Project Manager 

Fingerhut Companies 

Minnetonka, MN 

Managed a project team responsible for implementing Fingerhut’s new EDI system. Successfully installed a new software system for processing Fingerhut’s EDI transactions. Project installed on time and within budget. Managed the design and development of a system for handling product substitutions. Project reduced the significant manual labor for maintaining product substitutions. 

1986–1989 Project Leader 

CVN/COMB Companies 

Minnetonka, MN 

Led the design and development of a system that computerized over 100 forms. The system enabled customer service to enter and route customer inquiries and requests electronically. Led the design, development, and support for CVN’s first real-time customer service system. Lead analyst responsible for moving the order processing systems from a Wang VS to an IBM system. Résumé of Scott Koy Page 4 

1983–1986 IT Developer and Consultant 

Draves and Barke Systems 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Principal lead analyst/programmer responsible for the development of an order entry, sales analysis, accounts payable, accounts receivable, and general ledger system for a local manufacturer of microwave foods. 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®) Certification—2002, 2006, 2012 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

St. Paul, MN 

Mini-Master’s in IT and IS; Mini-Master’s in Software Design and Development 

University of Wisconsin—Eau Claire 

Eau Claire, WI 

B.S., Computer Science 

Minors in Mathematics and Management Information Systems Page 1 

# JOANNA KUHN 

Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Joanna Kuhn has over 21 years of experience as a software quality assurance analyst. In her current role, Ms. Kuhn develops and administers test scripts, plans, and schedules for other software quality assurance analysts. She also performs defect classification and severity assessment, and develops software quality assurance process flow and guidelines for all project phases. She has worked on several large-scale assessment projects, including those for Alaska, Kentucky, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. 

Before joining DRC, Ms. Kuhn worked as a test analyst consultant with Fortune 1000 companies and a quality assurance specialist with Prudential Insurance. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designs and implements processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrates them into business processes to address business needs. Defines approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrates testing approach with software development methodology. Develops and executes comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test summaries. Completes appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defines and tracks quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment, 

Standards Based Assessment—2006–2010 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2006–2010 

California Golden State Examination—2002 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System—2002 

Kentucky Portfolio and Longitudinal Study—2002 

North Carolina Open-Ended Assessment—2002 

Oklahoma School Testing Program Criterion-Referenced Test Component— 2006–2010 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–Present 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—2002–2003 Résumé of Joanna Kuhn Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2012 Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and implemented software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvement. Developed and executed comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documented all software defects and performed regression testing. Coordinated defect review meetings. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Reviewed requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

1997–2002 Software Quality Management Consultant 

Spherion Technology 

Bloomington, MN 

Worked as a test analyst with Fortune 1000 companies in the Minneapolis metropolitan area. Created and executed test scripts for a multi-platform application integrated with e-commerce retail site that included a GUI application and mainframe application. Created and executed the quality assurance testing process for an innovative I-Commerce website. This project accommodated multiple products for business administration and customer use and generated multi-million-dollar accounts. Facilitated and assisted the I/T subject matter experts and business subject matter experts in developing the test plan, defining critical functions, creating test conditions, and executing tests identified as mission-critical covering thousands of lines of code. Performed the role of test lead for a large utility company performing due diligence testing on 90+ mission-critical host-based applications. Coordinated testing efforts on user acceptance testing and application validation performed by offsite business users. 

1987–1997 Quality Assurance Specialist 

Prudential Insurance 

Plymouth, MN 

Analyzed requirements and designed written specifications for new products and enhancements and applied this to the test plans created for these projects. Performed tests in phases such as integration, user acceptance, and regression testing. Successfully completed the testing cycle for multiple projects during rapid application development and cyclical releases. Utilized quality assurance tools to perform system testing, verify results, and document defects. Designed and wrote quality assurance testing procedural handbooks to be used as reference and training guides. Effectively implemented and trained associates in quality assurance test processes. Résumé of Joanna Kuhn Page 3 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

PC Knowledge: Windows, Microsoft Office Applications, GUI Applications, e-Commerce 

Mainframe: Cobol, DOS 

Tools: Image Field Definition, SQL, Visual Source Safe, Ultra Edit, FileAid, Winrunner 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—2003–2010 

EDUCATION 

North Hennepin Community College 

General Studies Page 1 

# SARA LABERGE 

Item Development Coordinator/Graphics 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Sara LaBerge has more than six years of experience in graphic design. As an item development coordinator, Ms. LaBerge ensures that all of DRC’s assessment graphics are of superior quality and accuracy. She has worked on numerous aspects of item and passage graphics for a variety of statewide assessments and consortia. In addition, she plays a vital role in formatting items and passages for all test assessments. 

Ms. LaBerge actively engages and collaborates with her team members to ensure accuracy of graphics and style guide templates. She also creates, refines, and diligently maintains state- and client-specific style guide templates to guarantee consistent results. She has created covers for client reviews and multiple ancillary project graphics. 

Ms. LaBerge is DRC’s lead for graphics creation and item formatting for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. Her experience has provided her with a thorough knowledge of the Consortium’s style and adaptability within multiple item bank systems. Her key role is training and supervising graphic design development with contractors, as well as proofing their work to ensure precise and accurate results. 

Ms. LaBerge received her Bachelor’s degree in History at Furman University in Greenville, South Carolina and her Master’s degree in the History of Art at King’s College, part of the University of Aberdeen in the United Kingdom. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Item Development Coordinator/Graphics 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Specializes in the creation of graphics for Math assessments, and creates consistently thorough and accurate graphics for other content areas. Holds in-depth knowledge of technology enhanced items for online assessments. Specialized item work involves the meticulous creation of graphics and formatting the item precisely for the desired functionality. Résumé of Sara LaBerge Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2009–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2009–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2009–Present 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2012–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2009–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Education Assessment Program—2009–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2009–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2009–Present 

Louisiana Interim Transitional Tests—2011–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development —2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests —2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2009–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

LaBerge, S. (2008). “A Study of British Blackwork Embroidery.” Dissertation for Master of Letters Degree in the History of Art, Queen Mother Library, University of Aberdeen, UK. 

LaBerge, S. (2004). “The Story of an American Family and the Evolution of Seventeenth and Eighteenth-Century New England Society” and “Five Generations in Missouri.” Thesis for Bachelor of Arts Degree in History, Furman University, Greenville, SC. 

LaBerge, S. (2003). “An American Tale: A look at the development of the midwestern identity and culture in the nineteenth century.” American History Thesis, Furman University, Greenville, SC. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Certificate in Graphic Design, Adobe Creative Suite (Illustrator, Photoshop, InDesign), Microsoft Office Suite, Apple iWork Suite Résumé of Sara LaBerge Page 3 

EDUCATION 

King’s College, University of Aberdeen 

Aberdeen, United Kingdom 

Master of Letters, History of Art 

Furman University 

Greenville, South Carolina 

B.A., History Page 1 

# VICKIE LANE 

Handscoring Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Vickie Lane has 13 years of experience as a reader, team leader, scoring director, and Content Specialist for large-scale assessments, primarily in the areas of science, mathematics, and reading. In the past seven years, Ms. Lane has worked extensively as a Content Specialist with the states of Alaska, Louisiana, Pennsylvania, and Washington, ensuring accurate and efficient scoring for each state, as well as the management and supervision of scoring staff, rangefinding, training material development, and all aspects of handscoring. 

Since 2010, Ms. Lane has been the Lead Content Specialist for the State of Washington grades 5 and 8 and End of Course Biology. She has also worked since 2008 as science Content Specialist for the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program, grades 4, 8, and 11, and most recently, she served in this role for the Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for grades 3, 5, 6, and 7 science. 

Before joining DRC Performance Assessment Services, Ms. Lane taught Elementary School. Ms. Lane retired in 2008 with 28 years of service with the Newport Independent School System. During her service she was a special education teacher and a readiness teacher for children who had not mastered the skills in Kindergarten required for first grade. Ms. Lane also served as a resource teacher for Kindergarten through fifth grade students in the area of language arts and writing. Ms. Lane taught second grade for the last 4 years of her service. She earned a Bachelor of Science in Elementary Education at Eastern Kentucky University in Richmond, Kentucky and a Master of Education degree at Northern Kentucky University in Highland Heights, Kentucky. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Handscoring Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Manages the maintenance and timely completion of projects, training of material, monitoring reader reliability, and documenting project information. Helps to develop and supervise project materials, such as scoring guides and training materials. Also contributes to review of assessment materials. Managed the Rangefinding for the State of Washington for Operational and Pilot Testing, which included working with the department to edit scoring rubrics and writing annotations used in training materials. Résumé of Vickie Lane Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2008–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2014 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2008–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2008–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2007 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Mason and Sharonville, OH 

Oversaw a group of team leaders and their readers for particular projects. Trained team leaders and readers on various items for project. Helped to prepare training materials, as well as, ensuring that the projects were scored accurately by making scoring decisions along state guidelines/rubrics, reviewing statistics and making sure readers were scoring accurately. 

2002–2003 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Mason and Sharonville, OH 

Trained and monitored team of 10–12 scorers to maintain adherence to scoring guidelines and consistency. Retrained as necessary and resolved scoring concerns. Provided scorer evaluations at project end. 

2001–2002 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Mason, OH 

Participated in training and qualifying activities in order to apply state-mandated scoring criteria. Assessed open-ended responses to Science, Social Studies, Reading and Math prompts, while maintaining high levels of reliability and accuracy. 

1980-2008 Newport Independent Schools 

Teacher (Elementary) 

Newport, Kentucky 

Taught Grades K-6 all subjects. Was the Writing Specialist for the district for 4 years and presented the Professional Development needed to score writing portfolios. Presented Professional Development as needed within the district. Helped to write curriculum for the district to go with the Core Content for Kentucky. Served on many committees within the school system. Résumé of Vickie Lane Page 3 

EDUCATION 

Northern Kentucky University 

Highland Heights, KY 

M.A., Education 

Eastern Kentucky University 

Richmond, KY 

B.A., Education Page 1 

# KURT LANGER 

Senior Materials Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As the Senior Materials Manager, Mr. Langer manages material processing, inventory, and logistics and is responsible for the outbound packaging/ distribution and inbound receipt processing of all Education and Commercial material. Mr. Langer has over 26 years of experience in both the Education and Commercial Survey processing arena. He has led a variety of departments including, logistics/transportation, warehouse/inventory, purchasing, OMR/image scanning, data prep, and field service parts distribution, and has served as an Oracle process owner. 

Since joining DRC, Mr. Langer has initiated and led the development of the SOWA (Statement of Work Agreement) between Education Project Management and Operations; created and leads the Continuous Improvement team focusing on quality analysis and process improvements; leads the ISO effort with the organization; has created an extensive training program for both full-time and temporary employees; has reduced temporary labor costs through improved project efficiency, scheduling, and forecasting; has implemented a 5S program within the organization; has created comprehensive department home pages (material processing, inventory, logistics, services) designed to be a one-stop shop for both the organizations and the company; and serves as Co-Chair on the DRC Safety Team. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Senior Materials Manager 

2010–2011 Materials Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Manages all aspects of the Operations-Materials Processing functions. Major duties include daily production planning, quality assurance, schedule adherence, and coordinating, managing, and training staff (DRC and agency). 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2010–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2010–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2010–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2010–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2010–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010–Present Résumé of Kurt Langer Page 2 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2010–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2010–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2010–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2010–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010–Present 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2010–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2010–Present 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2010–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2010–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2010–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2010–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2010–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program 

End-Of-Course—2011–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2009 Processing Manager 

Scantron 

Eagan, MN 

Responsible for the inbound/outbound processing and quality delivery of customer data. Ongoing communication with customers, sales force, management and project teams. Spearheaded the integration of 126 clients, hardware, software and processes acquired via merger in addition to maintaining legacy clients delivering high-quality data processing services. Identified a need to include project management in the scope of the ISO quality program and expanded ISO (International Standards Organization) management responsibilities by preparing project management for ISO certification. Championed and directed the weekly management review quality meetings, ensuring open communication focused on expedited resolution for customers. Led process improvements utilizing lean initiatives, value stream mapping, and root-cause analysis, saving the organization over $75,000 during the fiscal year. Responsible for scheduling and monitoring of all operational internal/external deliverables, ensuring on-time performance. Planned and implemented large seasonal projects through optimum coordination and cross training of increased temporary labor forces, equipment, and facility utilization, reducing the need for additional shifts, supervisor coverage, and space. Developed and maintained quality performance measures for all departments in operations working solutions, through appropriate quality steps, while increasing the combined quality rating by 1.9%. Guided employee development by using business strategy for growth, establishing goals, monitoring progress and Résumé of Kurt Langer Page 3 

encouraging decisions which resulted in opportunities for additional responsibilities or jobs. 

2000–2008 Materials Manager 

Pearson 

Minneapolis, MN 

Responsible for the outbound distribution of customer projects via outsourcing in addition to processing all client projects in the scanning center. Initiated and managed comprehensive ISO quality program resulting in retention of major clients through improved processes, documentation, administration, quarterly audits, and corrective action responses. Educated the organization on the ISO program, resulting in improved quality through consistency. Trained key employees to become internal auditors elevating their understanding of the ISO program and helping to identify issues so that corrective actions could be taken. Evaluated and selected vendors that provided services, products, warehousing, and distribution solutions resulting in increased profitability and on-time performance. Provided subject matter expertise with pricing and proposal development for large or complex customer quotes. Responsible for department budget, forecasting operational costs, monitoring and evaluating project margins, and analyzing data to uncover opportunities to improve. Managed scanning processing center ensuring all customer deliverables were met through training of personnel, customized project documentation, resource planning, and machine maintenance. 

1985–2000 National Computer Systems 

Minneapolis, MN 

> Materials Manager

Managed all material functions, including requirements planning, procurement, warehousing and inventory/security of customer owned products. Special assignment as Oracle Enterprise Process Owner for purchasing module. Responsibilities included testing, training, and implementation for successful roll-out of program to the corporation. Evaluated and selected temporary labor force vendor, implementing a multi-shift, on-site program. The program dramatically reduced time required by Human Resources and supervisors to coordinate hiring/scheduling of temporary labor force. 

> Distribution and Traffic Manager

Provided high-quality and cost effective distribution support by developing and implementing improved processes on international and domestic distribution networks with global, national, and regional carriers. Led and coordinated partnership with other branches of the corporation to negotiate contracts for airfreight, motor freight, van lines, local, and courier services, reducing overall distribution costs to the company by $900 thousand annually. Managed high-value inventory warehouse including shipping and receiving. Résumé of Kurt Langer Page 4 

Warehouse and Distribution Manager 

Developed warehouse inventory control through new technology and automation improving accuracy and efficiency. Managed Corporate Relocation Program, which included employee contact, site visits, vendor management, and employee satisfaction follow-up, assisting all transfers and new hires with high-quality personalized service. 

> Distribution Coordinator
> Coordinated freight movement of inbound/outbound systems and parts, ensuring on-time delivery for customers and field employees.

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

Local and Urban Affairs Page 1 

# BRANDI LASHINSKI 

Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Brandi Lashinski has almost three years of experience working in the Software Quality Assurance (SQA) field at DRC. Ms. Lashinski has been involved in many state projects. Within these projects she has helped develop and enhance many testing processes used to verify testing materials and reports with great accuracy. This includes items such as Pre-ID Labels, Range Sheets, District/School Labels, ISRs, Summary Reports, and Data Files. 

Ms. Lashinski has a Bachelor’s degree in Statistics with an emphasis in Actuarial Science and a minor in Economics from Saint Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. Through her schooling, she has learned various programming languages including HTML, SQL, SAS, and MATLAB. She has also taken many math courses including Regression and analysis of Variance, Multivariable Calculus, Operations Research Models, Numerical Analysis, Linear Algebra, Calculus (I, II, and III), as well as other courses. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Plans and implements software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvement. Develops and executes comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documents all software defects and performs regression testing. Coordinates defect review meetings. Participates in appropriate software development meetings. Reviews requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2013–Present Résumé of Brandi Lashinski Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011–2012 Intern 

Stearns County Jail 

St. Cloud, MN 

Found patterns with the criminal activity and jail time in the St. Cloud area. Used data and facts to identify possible patterns and solutions to the overcrowding problem in the jail and to find patterns in the amount of jail time for people serving more than 90 days and people with reoccurring offenses. Worked with highly confidential information. Presented findings to members from the Stearns County Jail and Saint Cloud Police Department. 

2009–2012 Personal Care Attendant for Special Needs Adult 

Consumer Directions 

Clear Lake, MN 

Assisted clients with daily living and communication skills. Utilized a variety of approaches to teach clients in order to ensure the task and its importance was understood. Educated clients on personal safety situations. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Programming: HTML, SAS, R, MATLAB, SQL Server 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S., Statistics with emphasis in Actuarial Science, Minor in Economics Page 1 

# ROBERTA LAWLER 

Mathematics Handscoring Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Roberta Lawler has 10 years of experience working on large-scale assessment projects. In her current role as Mathematics Handscoring Content Specialist, Ms. Lawler specializes in the development of science and mathematics training materials for scorers and scoring directors/team leaders, analytical and holistic scoring rubrics, the selection of exemplar item sets for training and rangefinding applications, and the facilitation of rangefinding activities with departments of education and their teacher advisory committees. 

Ms. Lawler has overseen science scoring for the Pennsylvania System of Scoring Assessment and Keystone Exams and the Louisiana iLEAP and Alternate Assessment, as well as the mathematics scoring of the Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test and the Smarter Balanced Small-Scale Trial, and handscoring for Smarter Balanced assessments in Delaware and Oregon. 

Ms. Lawler holds a B.A. in Biology from Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, and a B.S. in Pharmacy from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Mathematics Handscoring Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Assumes responsibility for assigned science and mathematics content including state-specific curriculum knowledge. Provides high-quality training materials tailored to client standards and guidelines. Recommends staffing plans to complete science and mathematics projects in a timely and cost-effective manner. Ensures accurate completion of scoring projects within the allotted timeframe. Collaborates with appropriate state departments and committees of educators to ensure successful rangefinding meetings. Develops and reviews rubrics as needed for science and mathematics scoring projects. Provides oversight and direction of Scoring Directors, Team Leaders, and readers. Monitors and maintains handscoring quality control in a manner consistent with ISO certification. Identifies potential Scoring Directors/Team Leaders and supports their growth. Manages project files. Résumé of Roberta Lawler Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2011–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment, 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2005; 2007–2008 

Standards Based Assessment—2006 

Delaware—Handscoring of Delaware’s Smarter Balanced Assessments— 

2015–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–2014 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

Oregon—Handscoring of Oregon’s Smarter Balanced Assessments— 

2015–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium: Small Scale Trials, Pilot, and Field Test—2013 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2010 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2009 Scoring Director 

Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Trained team leaders and groups of 10–50 readers. Prepared training materials. Monitored and evaluated team leaders and readers for accuracy and productivity. Prepared range-finding materials and represented DRC at range-finding committee meetings for high school mathematics and science. 

2005–2007 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses applying state-mandated scoring criteria. 

1995–2002 Staff Pharmacist 

Walgreens 

Minneapolis, MN 

Reviewed and verified prescriptions. Counseled patients and recommended over-the-counter treatments. Supervised technicians and University of Minnesota Résumé of Roberta Lawler Page 3 

College of Pharmacy interns. Resolved problems with insurance and third-party payer coverage. Entered prescriptions data into computer system. 

2000–2001 Staff Pharmacist 

Fairview UMC —Riverside Campus 

Minneapolis, MN 

Supervised interns and technicians in geriatric and psychiatric units. Worked closely with physicians and nursing staff in managing patient care. Compounded intravenous prescriptions, including chemotherapy. 

1995 Clerk 

Hennepin County Medical Center 

Minneapolis, MN 

Compiled data for Poison Control Center study. Presented case studies and educated nurses as to newly-released medications. 

1995 Hospital Extern 

Pharmacy Corporation of America 

Fridley, MN 

Formulated, provided, and monitored intravenous therapy for long-term care patients. Participated in weekly care conferences. Researched questions pertaining to drug stability and pharmaceutical care. 

1992–1995 Pharmacy Technician/Intern 

V.A. Medical Center 

Minneapolis, MN 

Filled and checked unit-doses, pre-packed medication, and performed other technical activities for outpatient and inpatient therapies. Entered patient and medication data into computer. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota College of Pharmacy 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Pharmacy 

Macalester College 

St. Paul, MN 

B.A., Biology Core Page 1 

# DANIELLE LENZ 

Editing Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Danielle Lenz has more than 11 years of experience developing large-scale assessment publications at DRC, including the design, layout, and editing of test booklets, manuals, and other ancillary materials for statewide testing programs including Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington. As an editing specialist, Ms. Lenz edits and proofreads all testing materials designed in the publications department to ensure highest quality. 

Ms. Lenz is a returned Peace Corps volunteer, having taught English to high-school students and adults in West Africa. In addition, Ms. Lenz has taught English through the Minnesota Literacy Council and has presented AIDS education to local groups and communities through the American Red Cross. Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Lenz published food and restaurant reviews and articles for City Pages, an alternative weekly publication in Minneapolis. She also developed communications for a fine jewelry company and worked as an editorial intern for a trade magazine publisher. 

Ms. Lenz has received numerous hours of technical training in design and editing and is a member of the Twin Cities’ Professional Editors Network. She holds a Bachelor’s Degree in English from the University of Florida in Gainesville, Florida. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2001–Present Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Editing Specialist (July 2007–Present) 

Work with department staff (e.g., desktop publishers, graphic designers, word processing staff) and education division staff (e.g., project managers, test development specialists) on all materials design, development, and production activities for state education assessment projects. Edit all test materials (e.g., test booklets, answer documents, ancillary materials) at all development stages (e.g., first proof, final proof, blueline) based on technical specifications and state client requirements. Adhere to all in-house and client specifications to ensure the design, development, and production of high-quality materials. Develop and maintain style guides for state clients to ensure consistency and quality across all test materials for each client. Adhere to all ISO 9001 specifications and participate in all ISO interviews as necessary to maintain department ISO certification. Work as necessary to ensure the development and delivery of high-quality materials in the time required, including materials with immediate Résumé of Danielle Lenz Page 2 

turnaround deadlines. Participate in regularly scheduled project meetings and ad hoc materials development/production meetings as necessary. 

Proposals Writer (2007) 

Worked with senior management team and education division staff (e.g., proposals operations team, project managers, test development specialists) on all document design, development, and production activities for proposals submissions to prospective state department of education clients. Performed activities within protracted timeframes to consistently meet all delivery schedules. Created boilerplate text for specified subject matter (e.g., online testing implementation and administration) for use across all necessary proposals as needed. Created, revised, and modified graphics, charts, tables, and other visual elements as needed for proposal inclusion, using all requisite software applications (e.g., Adobe Photoshop, Microsoft PowerPoint). Collaborated with necessary vendors and subcontractors to obtain all vendor- and subcontractor-specific information, text, and graphics as needed for proposal inclusion. Revised, edited, and formatted staff résumés for proposal inclusion; contacted staff members as necessary for résumé content elaboration and/or clarification. Participated in all proposal-related meetings on an as-needed basis. 

Document/Graphic Designer (July 2002–2005; 2006–2007) 

Worked with department staff (e.g., editors, word processing staff) and education division staff (e.g., project managers, test development specialists) on all materials design, development, and production activities for state education assessment projects. Participated in regularly scheduled project meetings and ad hoc materials development/production meetings as necessary. Created detailed graphics for test items and test materials based on technical specifications and state client requirements. Typeset and formatted a variety of state testing materials (e.g., nonscannable test booklets, image-scannable test booklets/answer documents, reporting ancillaries) based on detailed technical specifications and state client requirements. Performed various file conversion activities related to the receipt and manipulation of externally generated graphics/text files and the provision of PDFs to print production staff. Adhered to all in-house and client specifications to ensure the design, development, and production of high-quality materials. Worked additional hours as necessary to ensure the development and delivery of high-quality materials in the time required, including materials with immediate turnaround deadlines. Supported training of new employees and assisted in candidate interviews as necessary (e.g., new word processing staff). Assisted editorial staff as needed (e.g., proofreading and editing nonscannable test booklets, image-scannable test booklets/answer documents, reporting ancillaries, and other state testing materials). Participated in additional organizational initiatives as required (e.g., participated in focus group to select a web design company for the development of a web-based practice test). 

Word Processing Specialist (2001–2002) 

Worked with department staff (e.g., editors, graphic designers) and education division staff (e.g., project managers, test development specialists, proposal coordinator, and proposal writers) on materials design, development, and Résumé of Danielle Lenz Page 3 

production activities for state education assessment projects for selected materials (e.g., manuals, reporting ancillaries) and state testing proposals. Typeset and formatted selected state testing materials based on detailed technical specifications and state client requirements. Created and manipulated detailed graphics as necessary using various graphic software packages. Supported all proposal development activities for numerous comprehensive proposals (e.g., 300-page documents), including typesetting, graphic production, editing/proofreading, and coordination of various in-house handoffs. Performed activities within protracted timeframes to consistently meet all delivery schedules. Performed various file conversion activities related to the receipt and manipulation of externally generated graphics/text files and the provision of PDFs to print production staff. Adhered to all in-house and client specifications to ensure the design, development, and production of high-quality materials. Worked additional hours as necessary to ensure the development and delivery of high-quality materials in the time required, including materials with immediate turnaround deadlines. Assisted editorial staff as needed (e.g., proofread and edited nonscannable test booklets, image-scannable test booklets/answer documents, reporting ancillaries, and other state testing materials). Conducted software training for in-house staff (e.g., Microsoft Word editing techniques for project managers). 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2001–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System Program—2001–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2001–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2001–2005 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2001–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2006–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2001–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present Résumé of Danielle Lenz Page 4 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011 Food and Restaurant Freelance Writer 

City Pages 

Minneapolis, MN 

Wrote articles, interviews, and reviews of the local food and restaurant scene for City Pages’ food section The Hot Dish. Interviewed local chefs and food industry professionals. Collaborated with managing editor and food editor to develop articles. Met with managing editor, staff writers, and other City Pages food writers as necessary to discuss the state of the local food scene. Contributed to the 100 Favorite Dishes of 2011 list. 

2005–2006 Volunteer, Teacher of English as a Foreign Language 

United States Peace Corps 

Republic of Cape Verde, West Africa 

Taught five classes of ninth-grade first- and third-level English to 200 students (15 hours per week). Developed all daily lesson plans, exercises, exams, and other educational materials as necessary. Administered and graded all exams (two per trimester). Worked with department staff (i.e., English teachers) to develop curriculum, construct and administer exams, evaluate students and observe colleagues, and develop or adapt other educational materials as necessary. Attended all departmental and school-wide staff meetings as necessary. Taught two evening classes per week to approximately 15 local adults (four hours per week). Developed all adult-learner curriculum, lesson plans, and other learning materials as necessary. Participated in an intensive nine-week pre-service training program, including Portuguese and Creole language instruction, TEFL (Teaching English as a Foreign Language) instruction (including methodological and pedagogical strategies), cross-cultural training (including history and integration techniques), and medical and safety and security training. Participated in a weeklong in-service training conference, receiving TEFL instruction and language, cross-cultural, and medical and safety and security training. 

2000–2001 Communications Specialist/Office Coordinator 

Creative Jewelry DeZign, Inc. 

Roseville, MN 

Performed all production aspects related to customer newsletters, brochures, and fliers, including development, design, writing, typesetting, editing, printing, and mailing. Conducted interviews with clients and customers for publication in customer newsletters. Designed and edited print advertisements in collaboration with senior management. Updated and edited company website. Supported all Résumé of Danielle Lenz Page 5 

daily office duties, including processing billing, creating purchase orders, processing merchandise, assessing inventory, and providing exceptional client and customer service. 

1999 Editorial Intern 

Naylor Publications, Inc. 

Gainesville, FL 

Wrote articles and copy for various publications (e.g., trade magazines, directories, guides). Edited and formatted print proofs and documents for publication. Compiled research for articles using print and online resources and through interviews and reporting. Provided assistance to all editors (e.g., fact verification, scanning, data and key entry). 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Professional Editors Network—2010–Present 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Desktop Publishing/Graphics Software : Adobe Acrobat, Adobe Distiller, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe InDesign, Adobe Photoshop, BroadVision QuickSilver, CorelDRAW, CorelPHOTO-PAINT, Microsoft FrontPage, Microsoft Publisher 

EDUCATION 

University of Florida 

Gainesville, FL 

B.A., English Page 1

# DAN MAGHRAK 

Permissions Project Lead 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Permissions Project Lead for DRC, Mr. Dan Maghrak is responsible for overseeing DRC’s entire permissions process, including working directly with publishers and rights holders to obtain all necessary permissions required for DRC projects. He is also responsible for tracking internal permission processes, record keeping, and reporting updates as needed. Additional duties include updating and maintaining the permissions database and assisting with proofreading and editing of permissioned work. 

As a Project Lead, Mr. Maghrak works closely with test development directors, other project leads, content specialists, and editorial specialists in the production of test items and forms for DRC’s clients. He provides leadership for the creation and production of all items and test materials for both print and online delivery. Mr. Maghrak identifies and supports implementation of ongoing enhancements to item banks, as needed. Mr. Maghrak performs troubleshooting and problem resolution for technical issues for all users of DRC’s item bank as well as other state-owned item banks, as required by a given program. 

Mr. Maghrak also holds the position of Data Analyst, Test Development Alignment Studies at DRC. In this role, Mr. Maghrak is involved with many different aspects of the alignment study process, and worked on the third-party alignment study project for Iowa. Mr. Maghrak held a variety of responsibilities ranging from task sheet and materials development, to data analysis and report writing. He works with an analysis template that quickly and accurately calculates the results of third-party independent alignment study data. 

Mr. Maghrak is also responsible for completing proposals for the Test Development department. Mr. Maghrak works closely with test development directors to gather information necessary to successfully complete the proposal. This information includes, but is not limited to, labor hours and outside costs associated in bidding the project. 

Mr. Maghrak holds a B.A. in Business Management from Concordia College in Moorhead, Minnesota. Résumé of Dan Maghrak Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Permissions Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Responsible for overseeing DRC’s entire permissions process, including working directly with publishers and rights holders to obtain all necessary permissions required for DRC projects. Also responsible for tracking internal permission processes, record keeping and reporting updates as needed. Additional duties include updating and maintaining the permissions database and assisting with proofreading and editing of permissioned work. 

2012–Present Project Lead, Test Development Alignment Studies 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Works closely with test development directors, other project leads, content specialists, editorial specialists, and item and test production teams to determine process workflow using item-banking systems throughout all stages of the item and test development process. Provides support to other functional units within DRC and participates in discussions concerning the requirements and enhancements for developing and using item-banking and online testing technology as directly related to item and test development roles and responsibilities. Constructs forms for print and online including the use of QTI (XML file) imports from outside vendors. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2012–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2013–Present 

Idaho End-of-Course Science—2013–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2012–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2014–Present 

Michigan Model Arts Education Instruction and Assessment Program— 

2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2014–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2014–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

Standard Setting for Iowa Test of Basic Skills —2013 Résumé of Dan Maghrak Page 3 

EDUCATION 

Concordia College 

Moorhead, MN B.A. Business Management Page 1 

# PEGGY MAHER 

Senior Technical Writer 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Peggy Maher has developed large-scale assessment publications at DRC for more than 13 years. Her experience includes the writing, editing, design, layout, and production of test administration manuals, district test coordinator manuals, user guides, interpretive guides, technical reports, and other documents for statewide testing programs in numerous states, including Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington. She works closely with her DRC colleagues to make certain the state department of education clients’ guidelines are followed throughout all state-specific materials. As Senior Technical Writer and team member of the Publications Department, she also provides editing support to meet the deadlines of DRC’s large-scale assessment clients. 

Before joining DRC, Ms. Maher worked in the marketing department developing proposals, manuals, and other materials for a professional licensure and certification testing company. She also worked as an assistant office manager for a printing company, and as a specialist developing custom surveys and reports for a survey company. 

Throughout her career, Ms. Maher has received numerous hours of technical training in desktop publishing and graphic design applications. She holds a M.S. in Technical Communication from Metropolitan State University in Saint Paul, Minnesota and a B.A. in Electronic Publishing from Saint Mary’s University in Winona, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Senior Technical Writer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Primary duties include the writing, editing, design, layout, and production of test administration manuals, district test coordinator manuals, user guides, interpretive guides, technical reports, and other materials for statewide testing programs. She works closely with her DRC colleagues to make certain the state department of education clients’ guidelines are followed throughout all state-specific materials and that all deadlines are met. Résumé of Peggy Maher Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—2002–2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2002–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: 

End of Course Examinations—2002–2005 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2002–Present 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2002–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2006–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2002–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007–2008 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2011 Technical Writer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designed and edited teacher administration manuals, district test coordinator manuals, and technical reports for large-scale K–12 educational assessments. Designed each series of manuals to meet unique state and client specifications. Designed, wrote, edited, and coordinated the production of large-scale K–12 educational assessment proposals to maintain existing business and generate new business. Developed standardized department procedures to obtain ISO 9000 Résumé of Peggy Maher Page 3 

certification. Developed and implemented departmental procedures to reduce project turnaround time. 

1999–2002 Marketing/Communication Services Associates 

Experior Assessments ™, LLC 

St. Paul, MN 

Designed, edited, and printed newsletters, licensing information bulletins, announcements, and invitations. Created departmental procedures to enhance print quality, and at the same time cut departmental expenditures by 25 percent. Designed, wrote, edited, and coordinated the production of professional licensure and continuing education proposals to maintain existing business and generate new business. Redesigned company letterhead, envelopes, and business cards and pursued competitive bids from external print vendors, decreasing departmental expenditures by 20 percent. Maintained corporate website. Met and exceeded client expectations and project deadlines by creating and implementing web processes, decreasing web project deadlines by 25 percent. 

1998–1999 Office Manager Assistant 

Church Offset Printing Inc. 

Maplewood, MN 

Wrote and designed brochures, flyers, tickets, and other documents for external clients; decreased lead time and press time by 15 percent. Increased revenue by 30 percent by improving billing and bookkeeping processes. 

1997–1998 Customization Specialist 

Personnel Decisions International Corporation 

Minneapolis, MN 

Designed custom questionnaires and feedback reports to improve overall readability and audience interpretation. Coordinated manual production process to meet the needs of unique evaluation instruments utilized by individual Fortune 500 companies. Enhanced product delivery system to better address client needs. Restructured product delivery processes such that lead times were decreased by more than 50 percent, attaining turnaround times substantially less than those previously realized within the organization. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Operating Systems: Familiar with both PC-based and Macintosh platforms. Extensive use of Windows operating systems. 

Graphic Design and Graphic Support Software: Adobe Acrobat ®, Adobe Distiller ®, Adobe Illustrator ®, Adobe InCopy ®, Adobe InDesign ®, Adobe PhotoShop ®, CorelDraw ®, Microsoft PowerPoint ®, Microsoft Publisher ®,Microsoft Visio ®, QuarkXPress ®.Résumé of Peggy Maher Page 4 

EDUCATION 

Metropolitan State University 

St. Paul, MN 

M.S., Technical Communication Program 

Saint Mary’s University 

Winona, MN 

B.A., Electronic Publishing, Minor: Art—Graphic Design Emphasis Page 1 

# KIMBERLEY MANCINI 

Senior Test Development Editor 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Kimberley Mancini has over seven years of direct test development experience with many state assessment programs for which her responsibilities range from editorial reviews of items to implementing test designs. She has secondary teaching experience in English/language arts and three years of experience working and training others in the field of test preparation as an ACT/SAT tutor. She also worked for four years as a writing instructor and tutor, and has protracted experience with editing a variety of texts, ranging from doctoral thesis papers to standardized tests. 

As a senior test development editor for DRC, Ms. Mancini works closely with the editorial team’s senior manager and test development specialists in the production of test items and forms for DRC’s clients. Although her background is predominantly in the field of English/language arts, Ms. Mancini’s experience tutoring the science and math components of the ACT have prepared her to edit comparable sections on the test forms DRC produces. She works conjointly with the publications and project management departments to confirm that test materials are appropriately published according to style guides, schedules, and state-specific, standards-based criteria. Ms. Mancini also assists with editing DRC’s press releases and proposals and helps train new editors in the Test Development Department. 

Ms. Mancini brings with her a comprehensive background, including editorial work for a non-profit organization, secondary teaching experience as a ninth-grade English teacher, and years of tutoring experience specializing not only in ACT/SAT, but also in basic subject skills, study skills, and homework help for Algebra I and Algebra II students. As an English teacher, Ms. Mancini created interactive lesson plans and curricula that would engage her students, the majority of whom were second-language learners, and served as the school’s literary criticism coach. 

Ms. Mancini’s considerable experience as a test preparation tutor provides her with a unique perspective and distinctive familiarity with a variety of test formats that enhance the quality of her editing. Her experience as a writing tutor and English teacher has kept her abreast of the current grammatical standards set forth by various style guides. Ms. Mancini holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in English Literature and Russian Language and is a licensed secondary education English/language arts teacher. Résumé of Kimberley Mancini Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Test Development Editor 

2007–2012 Test Development Editor 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Assembles and finalizes test forms, including large-print versions of the state assessments, according to blueprints and state guidelines. Maintains and implements state-specific style guides. Reviews items. Serves as an editorial resource to the department. Assists with scheduling and coordinating work assigned to the editorial team. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2011–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2007–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2007–Present 

DRC Item and Passage Pool—2013 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2008–Present 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2012–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007–Present 

Iowa Alignment Study and Standard Setting—2013 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Graduation Exit Examination—2007–Present 

Interim Transitional Practice Tests—2012 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

Online Field Tests—2013 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2012–Present 

Minnesota Test of Academic Skills—2012–2013 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma Core Curriculum Test Alignment Study—2012 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2013 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2007–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2010 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2013 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2012–2014 Résumé of Kimberley Mancini Page 3 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Alternate Assessment System—2010–2015 

End-of-Course Assessments—2010–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2008 SAT/ACT Tutor 

Huntington Learning Center 

Houston, TX, and Maple Grove, MN 

Tutoring SAT/ACT math and verbal sections, basic subjects, and Algebra I and Algebra II; instructing writing. 

2006–2007 Ninth-Grade English Teacher 

Spring Woods High School 

Houston, TX 

Instructed English; coached UIL Literary Criticism. 

2005–2006 Administrative Assistant 

Italian Cultural and Community Center 

Houston, TX 

Coordinated facility rentals, cultural events, and volunteer participation; maintained bulk mailings, membership database, and calendar. 

2004–2005 Writing Tutor 

Trinity University 

San Antonio, TX 

Edited papers and projects for Trinity students and staff; explained grammatical rules; and worked closely with international students to help them improve their understanding of the English language. Résumé of Kimberley Mancini Page 4 

EDUCATION 

Trinity University 

San Antonio, TX B.A., English Literature and Russian Language 

Boston University 

Moscow, Russia Study Abroad Program 

Middlebury College 

Middlebury, VT Russian Language Immersion Program 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Standard License in Texas, Grades 8–12 English/Language Arts Instruction, Fully Certified 

Standard License in Minnesota, Grades 7–12 English/Language Arts Instruction (Temporary) 

SIOP Certified—Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol Page 1 

# CHRISTOPHER T. MCCULLOUGH 

Test Development Project Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Christopher McCullough has more than 23 years of test development and large-scale assessment experience, including 11 years in item and test development project leadership, directing day-to-day development processes. In his current role as the Test Development Project Director, he provides team leadership for online and paper/pencil-based programs, for which he schedules, manages, and facilitates all required test development project tasks. He also provides additional area expertise in mathematics, reading, science, social studies, writing, and alternate assessment. In addition, he coordinates and facilitates review meetings for content, statistical data, and bias/fairness/sensitivity. Mr. McCullough coordinates the development of test administration manuals and participates in the development of scoring rubrics, scoring guidelines, and video tutorials. As the main point of contact for test development issues for a given program, Mr. McCullough facilitates communication between the Test Development department and other key resource areas within the company and at state education departments and other test development providers. In addition, he participates in planning meetings, and develops and gives presentations at state sponsored meetings. 

Before joining DRC, Mr. McCullough gained extensive experience working with the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). There, he provided scoring leadership while collaborating with other stakeholders to refine, rewrite, and create performance assessment tasks, selected-response items, and constructed-response items for language usage, mathematics, reading, science, social studies, and writing. In addition, he led the handscoring efforts of Maryland’s School Performance Assessment Program (MSPAP), developing the scoring guidelines used annually by hundreds of teachers to assess student responses. He also trained test writers, led rangefinding committees, and facilitated item reviews. 

Mr. McCullough holds a B.A. in Communications and English—Writing from Whitworth College in Spokane, Washington. He also earned an A.A. in Communications from Kirkwood community College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Mr. McCullough’s CCR experience includes providing project coordination and oversight for DRC’s work on the development of CCR-aligned items for Smarter Balanced, the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools (CDT), the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA), and the Keystone Exams covering the areas of English Language Arts (ELA, Reading, Literature, Writing, and English Composition) and Mathematics (Mathematics, Algebra I, Algebra II, and Geometry). Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 2 

In addition, Mr. McCullough has provided project coordination and oversight for the committees of Pennsylvania educators to develop assessment anchors and eligible content (standards and objectives), learning progressions, and Voluntary Model Curriculum aligned to the Pennsylvania Core Standards. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Test Development Project Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Directs overall design and implementation of large-scale assessment development for state programs. Participates in all aspects of test development and item development for the content areas of mathematics, reading, science, social studies, and writing. Supervises other project leads to manage portions of state projects. Coordinates and facilitates content, data/statistical, and bias/ fairness/sensitivity review meetings. Writes and coordinates the development of test administration manuals (computer-based and paper/pencil-based), scoring guides, video tutorials, and other ancillary materials. Schedules, manages, and facilitates project tasks across functional areas within the Test Development Department. Serves as a point of contact for state clients. Facilitates communication between the Test Development department and other key resource areas within DRC, state education departments, consultants to states, and subcontractors to DRC. Participates in professional development, planning, scheduling, presentations, and state-specific tactical management teams. Develops scoring rubrics and scoring guidelines, and collaborates on technical reports. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2006 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–2006 

Career and College Readiness Item Pilot—2014 

Connecticut Mastery Test—1995–1996 

Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test—1997 

Florida Writing Assessment Program—1994–1997 

Georgia Basic Skills Test—1997 

Illinois Goal Achievement Program—1993–1996 

Maryland Functional Test—1994–2004 

Maryland High School Assessment—1999–2004 

Maryland School Performance Assessment Program—1998–2002 

Maryland Student Assessment—2002–2004 

Medical College Admissions Test—1993–1997 

Michigan Educational Assessment Program—1997–1998 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2004 

Nebraska State Accountability—2011–Present Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 3 

Nebraska State Accountability Alternate Assessment—2013–Present 

New Jersey Early Warning Test—1993–1998 

New Jersey High School Performance Test—1994–1997 

North Carolina Writing Assessment—2004 

Ohio Proficiency Test—1998 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2008–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystones Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

Texas Assessment of Academic Skills—1992–1995 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2009 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2009 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2006–2008 Test Development Senior Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Helped coordinate overall design and implementation of large-scale assessment development. Participated in all aspects of test development and item development for the content areas of mathematics, reading, science, and writing. Coordinated and facilitated content, data/statistical, and bias/fairness/sensitivity client-review meetings. Wrote and coordinated the development of test administration manuals, scoring guides, and other ancillary materials. Scheduled, managed, and facilitated project tasks across functional areas within Test Development. Served as a point of contact for state clients. Facilitated communication between the Test Development unit and other key units within DRC, state departments of education, consultants to states, and subcontractors to DRC. Participated in professional development, planning, scheduling, presentations, and state-specific tactical management teams. Developed scoring rubrics and scoring guidelines. Collaborated on technical reports. 

2004–2006 Test Development Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Point of contact for state clients. Facilitated communication among key units within DRC, state departments of education, consultants to states, and subcontractors to DRC. Participated in all aspects of reading and English language arts test and item development. Compiled, reviewed, and edited test Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 4 

items, constructed test forms, and facilitated various test development activities including item and data reviews. Worked with freelance item writers and consultants in passage selection and item development. Participated in professional development, planning, presentations, and state-specific tactical management teams. Conducted committee reviews. 

2000–2004 Education Program Specialist I 

Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Provided leadership in the creation, maintenance, and approval of scoring-related materials for the state’s annual large-scale assessment projects in language usage, mathematics, reading, science, social studies, and writing. Edited and wrote performance assessment tasks, constructed-response items, selected-response items, and extended-length essay prompts. Wrote guides on scoring tool construction and trained teachers and central office representatives to write scoring tools for large-scale assessments. Designed and implemented updates to scoring procedures and scoring guides for annual assessments. Piloted assessment enhancements, including creation of reading and mathematics rubrics. Led rangefinding meetings, monitored scoring projects at multiple scoring sites, and provided leadership and services on identification and resolution of scoring-related concerns and adherence to quality standards. Collaborated on the composition of requests for proposals (RFPs) for assessment projects. Submitted internal reports responding to outside reviews and criticism of testing programs. 

1998–2000 Staff Specialist III in Assessment 

Maryland State Department of Education 

Baltimore, MD 

Created, maintained, and approved scoring-related materials for the state’s annual large-scale assessment projects in language usage, mathematics, reading, science, social studies, and writing. Edited and wrote performance assessment tasks, constructed-response items, selected-response items, and extended-length essay prompts. Wrote guides on scoring tool construction and trained teachers and central office representatives to write scoring tools for large-scale assessments. Designed and facilitated item reviews for scoring viability. Designed and implemented updates to scoring procedures and scoring guides for annual assessments. Piloted assessment enhancements, including creation of reading, language usage, and writing rubrics. Led rangefinding meetings, monitored scoring projects at multiple scoring sites, and provided leadership and services for identification and resolution of scoring-related concerns and adherence to quality standards. Created a library system for cataloging and storing assessment documentation. Conceptualized and helped design a Microsoft Access application for activity-specific scoring tool creation, standardization, and measurement integration. Redesigned a database process and numbering system for tracking and organizing item measurement parameters from test design to test scoring. Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 5 

Collaborated on composition of RFPs for assessment projects. Submitted internal reports responding to outside reviews and criticism of testing programs. 

1997–1998 Scoring Director 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Directed the complete hand-scoring process for large-scale assessments. Refined and finalized scoring criteria in cooperation with clients. Selected responses for training procedures. Produced training and ancillary project materials (including guides, qualification tests, and validation tests) for open-ended performance test items and extended-length essays. Advised and worked directly with state department of education officials to create and develop training guidelines. Trained, directed, and monitored up to 110 readers in a single project, including 11 intermediate team leaders. Gathered documentation material for the final project report and coordinated communications between departments. Provided written performance evaluations of each reader and team leader. Individually assigned scores to thousands of student responses. 

1997–1998 Test Development Specialist 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Developed and reviewed potential test items. Wrote selected-response and constructed-response items, both as stand-alone items and in themed series. Presented items to client states at item reviews. 

1997–1998 Rangefinding Content Specialist 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Refined scoring criteria and selected training papers while rangefinding prompts for pilot, field-test, and statewide administrations. Selected student responses for use in rangefinding. Advised clients during the rangefinding process on individual score decisions and the usefulness of student responses for application in test. Selected suitable responses for training purposes. 

1997 Field-Test Project Coordinator 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Coordinated a team of expert readers to evaluate open-ended field-test items. Ascertained item feasibility and adherence to established rubrics and test standards. Adapted unsuitable or poorly performing items into useful, applicable alternatives. Wrote reports advising clients on the feasibility and viability of items for inclusion in statewide administrations. Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 6 

1996–1997 Team Leader 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Learned unique scoring criteria and trained a team of readers to adhere to clients’ rigid standards of accuracy for handscoring student responses. Monitored and evaluated reader viability through validity testing, retraining, and statistical analysis. Resolved scoring discrepancies between readers. Provided written performance evaluations of readers. Scored thousands of student responses from grades 3–12 and for college admission purposes. 

1994–1997 Field Test Reader 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Handscored and evaluated field-test prompts and items. Ascertained prompt and item feasibility and adherence to established rubrics. Adapted unsuitable prompts and items into useful, applicable alternatives. Scored thousands of student responses from grades 3–12 and for college admission purposes. 

1992–1996 Reader 

Measurement Incorporated 

Durham, NC 

Handscored open-ended student responses for content, development, organization, audience, mechanics, and/or the ability to respond to given directives. Strictly adhered to the unique evaluation criteria required by each project. Resolved scoring discrepancies of peers. Scored thousands of student responses from grades 3–12 and for college admission purposes. 

1991–1992 Writing Consultant 

The Writing Center 

Whitworth College 

Spokane, WA 

Evaluated student academic writing and coached college students to write effectively for specific audiences. Generated operational procedures for pilot program. Nominated for position by English department faculty. 

PAPERS, PUBLICATIONS, AND OTHER MEDIA 

Pennsylvania Online Assessments Spring 2014 Tutorials—Pennsylvania System of School Assessment, Keystone Exams, and Classroom Diagnostics Tools .Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Suzanne Pfeifer, Wolfgang. Performer Terri Parker-Brown. 2014. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2014. Video and interactive HTML. Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 7 

Alaska Online Assessments Spring 2014 Tutorials—Alaska College and Career Readiness Item Pilot . Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Suzanne Pfeifer, Wolfgang. Performer Terri Parker-Brown. 2014. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2014. Video and interactive HTML. 

Nebraska Online Assessments Spring 2014 Tutorials—Nebraska State Accountability . Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Suzanne Pfeifer, Wolfgang. Performer Terri Parker-Brown. 2014. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2014. Video and interactive HTML. 

Pennsylvania Online Assessments Spring 2013 Tutorials—Pennsylvania System of School Assessment . Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Suzanne Pfeifer, Wolfgang. Performer Barbara Simon. 2013. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2013. Video and interactive HTML. 

Pennsylvania Online Assessments Spring 2011 Tutorials—Keystone End-of-Course and Classroom Diagnostic Tools . Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Julie Albertson, DRC. Producer Suzanne Pfeifer, Wolfgang. Performer Barbara Simon. 2011. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2011. Video and interactive HTML. 

Pennsylvania Online Assessments Fall 2010 Tutorials—Keystone End-of-Course and Classroom Diagnostic Tools . Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough, DRC. Producer Julie Albertson, DRC. Performer Barbara Simon. 2010. Wolfgang Films, Inc., 2010. Video and interactive HTML. 

Data Recognition Corporation INSIGHT Tutorial (Spring 2010)— Keystone End-of-Course and Classroom Diagnostic Tools. Audio and video script by Christopher T. McCullough. Producer Julie Albertson. Performer Barbara Simon. 2010. Data Recognition Corporation, 2010. Video. 

McCullough, C.T. (2002). 2003 Scoring Tool Construction Guide . Maryland State Department of Education Secure Assessment Library, Baltimore, MD. 

McCullough, C.T. (2001). 2002 Scoring Tool Construction Guide . Maryland State Department of Education Secure Assessment Library, Baltimore, MD. 

McCullough, C.T. (2000). 2001 Scoring Tool Construction Guide . Maryland State Department of Education Secure Assessment Library, Baltimore, MD. 

McCullough, C.T., et al. (1999). Teacher to Teacher Talk 1999 . Maryland State Department of Education Assessment Library, Baltimore, MD. 

McCullough, C. T., Herrmann, A. (1999). Eighth Grade Public Release Task: Archimedes Scoring Guide. Maryland State Department of Education Assessment Library, Baltimore, MD. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Simaska, D., McCullough, C.T., and Mann, C. (2010). English Composition Performance Level Descriptor Development—Keystone End-of-Course. 

Workshop sponsored by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 8 

McCullough, C.T., and Mann, C. (2009). English Composition Academic Standards Development and Review—Keystone End-of-Course. Multiple workshops sponsored by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. 

Durette, D., Schweiss, J., and McCullough, C.T. (2009). Biology Academic Standards Development—Keystone End-of-Course. 

Workshop sponsored by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. 

McCullough, C.T., Mann, C., and Houtz, P. (2006). Performance Level Descriptor Review—Writing: Pennsylvania’s System of School Assessment (PSSA). Workshop sponsored by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. 

McCullough, C.T., Mann, C., and Houtz, P. (2004). Item Writer Orientation: Constructing Items for Pennsylvania’s System of School Assessment (PSSA). 

Workshop sponsored by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, York, Pennsylvania. 

McCullough, C.T., and McCool, S. (2004). Item Writer Orientation: Constructing Writing Items for Alaska’s Comprehensive System of Student Assessment (CSSA). Workshop sponsored by the Alaska Department of Education and Early Development, Anchorage, Alaska. 

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (2002). 2003 Scoring Tool Construction Guide. Maryland test development workshop sponsored by the Maryland State Department of Education, Baltimore, Maryland. 

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (2001). 2002 Scoring Tool Construction Guide. Maryland test development workshop sponsored by the Maryland State Department of Education, Baltimore, Maryland. 

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (2000). MSPAP Reading from the Scoring Perspective. Maryland Reading Network Conference, Johns Hopkins University, Columbia, Maryland .

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (2000). Writing Expectations and the Scoring of Writing/Language Usage on MSPAP from the Scoring Perspective. 

Presentation, Scotts Branch Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland. 

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (2000). 2001 Scoring Tool Construction Guide. Maryland test development workshop sponsored by the Maryland State Department of Education, Baltimore, Maryland .

McCullough, C.T., and Herrmann, A. (1999). Teacher to Teacher Talk 1999. 

Presentation, Maryland Assessment Group Conference, Ocean City, Maryland .

McCullough, C.T. (1999). Scoring MSPAP. Keynote address, Baltimore County Achievement Facilitator Meeting, Baltimore, Maryland. Résumé of Christopher T. McCullough Page 9 

Swanson, G., and McCullough, C.T. (1998). MSPAP vs. HSA: Is there a link? 

Presentation, Maryland Assessment Group Conference, Ocean City, Maryland .

EDUCATION 

Whitworth College (currently Whitworth University) 

Spokane, WA B.A., Communications; English—Writing 

Kirkwood Community College 

Cedar Rapids, IA A.A., Communications Page 1 

# PATRICIA JO MCDIVITT 

Senior Vice President of Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Patricia Jo McDivitt serves as Senior Vice President of Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment at DRC. She oversees all phases of the item and test development process for K–12 large-scale assessment programs in content areas such as reading, English language arts, science, mathematics, and civics and government. She also directs the activities of the Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment Development department at DRC, including curriculum unit and lesson plan developers, publications staff, editorial staff, and performance assessment handscoring staff. 

Ms. McDivitt has over 30 years of direct “hands-on” educational curriculum, instruction, and assessment development experience, including experience in the development of assessments designed to link students’ results with postsecondary education and career decision-making. She is also an experienced professional development trainer and facilitator of teacher committees, including item writing committees, standards alignment review committees, curriculum review committees, content item and item/data review committees, bias, fairness, and sensitivity review committees, and committees responsible for the development of content curriculum standards and performance-level descriptors and standards. Ms. McDivitt has conducted numerous professional development workshops on such topics as aligning assessment results to curriculum and instruction and assessment literacy. She currently serves as DRC’s representative to the Assessing Special Education Students (ASES SCASS). 

Ms. McDivitt began her career as an educator, serving as a classroom teacher and/or counselor for 12 years. She is past president of the Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education (AACE). During her year as president, Ms. McDivitt was co-editor of the Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development (MECD) special edition Large-Scale Assessment and High-Stakes Testing, and she facilitated the revision of the Responsibilities of Users of Standardized Tests (RUST) Statement. She served on the MECD Editorial Board for eight years. Ms. McDivitt also served as a member of the American Counseling Association’s Publications Committee, where she served as co-chair. She also served for a number of years as a member of the Guidance Policy Board for the Association for Career and Technical Education (ACTE). Since 1995, Ms. McDivitt has served as a member of the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation where she was instrumental in the development and launch of The Student Evaluation Standards . Ms. McDivitt served as the Joint Committee’s vice chair, and is currently serving as the co-chair of the development task force for the Classroom Assessment Standards . Ms. McDivitt has written several articles and chapters on assessment, including chapters on helping educators develop assessments. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 2 

Ms. McDivitt earned an M.S. in Education, School Guidance and Counseling, and Secondary Teaching in English Language Arts with a Special Education Endorsement, and a B.S. in Secondary Education English Language Arts, both from Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana. 

CAREER AND COLLEGE READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Ms. McDivitt’s CCR experience includes providing guidance and oversight for DRC’s work on the following projects: 

• Review of the proposed Alaska alignment (completed by Alaska educators) to career and college readiness standards and providing feedback to the Department for alignment 

• Development of grades 3–8 mathematics career and college ready items pilot tested in Alaska 

• Review of the Alabama reading and mathematics alignment to career and college ready standards and providing feedback 

• Development of CCSS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Reading (Grades 3–8), Literature (high school), Writing (Grades 3–8), English Composition (high school), Mathematics (Grades 3–high school), Algebra I, Algebra II, and Geometry 

• Development of CCSS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania end-of-course Keystone Exams for Literature, English Composition, Algebra I, Algebra II, and Geometry 

• Development of assessment anchors and eligible content (standards and objectives) and learning progressions aligned to the Pennsylvania career and college ready standards—Pennsylvania Core Standards—in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Department of Education 

• Training Michigan and Idaho teachers in the development of career and college ready items using an evidence-centered design model for the Michigan assessment program 

• Development of career and college ready items using an evidence-centered design model for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Vice President of Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Directs the activities of the Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment Development department at DRC, including curriculum unit and lesson plan developers, publications staff, editorial staff, and performance assessment handscoring staff. Oversees the development of content standards-based learning progressions, as well as model curriculum units, lesson plans, and formative classroom-based tasks. Oversees all phases of item and test development for K– Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 3 

12 standards-based assessments, including alternate assessments for significantly cognitively disabled students, and alternate assessments based on modified achievement standards. This includes standards alignment and the development of grade-level expectations; test blueprint development; item specification development; item writing, editing, and revising; field test and operational forms construction; development of test ancillaries; and committee facilitation. Also provides technical support to state departments on a wide range of topics. Senior management duties include corporate-wide strategic planning, and budget and profit/loss responsibilities in DRC Education Services. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2010 Vice President of Test Development 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Directed the activities of the Test Development department at DRC and oversaw all phases of item and test development for K–12 standards-based assessments, including alternate assessments for significantly cognitively disabled students, and alternate assessments based on modified achievement standards. This included standards alignment and the development of grade-level expectations; test blueprint development; item specification development; item writing, editing, and revising; field test and operational forms construction; development of test ancillaries; and committee facilitation. Also provided technical support to state departments on a wide range of topics. 

2001–2002 Educational Testing Service (ETS) 

Princeton, NJ, and San Antonio, TX 

Executive Director, Educational Measurement and Test Development—K–12 Assessments 

Oversaw all phases of item and test development for standards-based assessments for K–12 statewide testing programs. Aligned state curriculum with assessment blueprints; developed blueprints and items; and facilitated committee review processes. Also managed test development teams, including editorial; art, design, and pre-press; and database, item banking, and item authoring. Maintained and monitored department budget. 

Vice President and Director of Educational Measurement and Test Development 

Led start-up of item and test development group for ETS K–12 Works, Inc. Oversaw all phases of the item and test development process for K–12 programs, including aligning state curriculum with assessment blueprints; developing blueprints and items; and facilitating committee review processes. Also trained and managed teams of content-area test developers and editors; maintained and monitored department budget. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 4 

2000–2001 Senior Director, Large-Scale Assessment 

Harcourt Educational Measurement 

San Antonio, TX 

Oversaw and managed development of various statewide standards-based assessments, including programs for Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Massachusetts, Mississippi, and Ohio. Managed content-area project directors responsible for overseeing item/test development for statewide standards-based assessments. Overseeing and wrote all technical scope of work sections for proposals, including providing cost information. 

1994–2000 Riverside Publishing 

Itasca, IL 

Vice President and Director of Product Development (1997–2000) 

Served as the senior designer, author, and reviewer of numerous in-house developed assessments and oversaw development of all statewide standards-based testing programs, including programs for Georgia, Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio, Washington, and the Grade 4 National Voluntary Test of Reading. Oversaw the work and management of seven major product/test development departments, including research; large-scale assessment contract management; software engineering; art, design, and pre-press; Iowa Tests of Basic Skills editorial group; and departments responsible for content and item development for all in-house developed norm-referenced assessments, psychological assessments, and guidance and counseling assessments; maintained and monitored department budget. Also oversaw and wrote all technical scope of work sections for proposals, including providing information related to costs. 

Vice President and Director of Educational Assessments (1995–1997) 

Oversaw all in-house test development activities, including all phases of the test development process for such testing programs as the Mississippi norm-referenced performance-assessment program. Directed development of all Riverside-authored multiple-choice and open-ended test items and educational assessment ancillaries, including performance-assessment tasks, norm-referenced assessments, criterion-referenced statewide assessments, and assessments used for school-to-careers transition. Examples include the Integrated Performance Assessments , Ohio Off-Grade Proficiency Tests , New York Tests of State Standards , New Jersey Proficiency Assessment System , Multiple Assessment Series for the Primary Grades , and the Comprehensive Measure of Necessary Skills . Supervised staff and maintained and monitored department budget. 

Director of Guidance Product Development (1994–1995) 

Oversaw development of all guidance products, assessments, and services, including an electronic guidance-based delivery system. Supervised staff and maintained and monitored department budget. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 5 

1985–1994 Harcourt Educational Measurement 

San Antonio, TX 

Senior Project Director (1987–1994) 

Oversaw development of numerous norm-referenced achievement tests and performance assessments, including the Stanford Achievement Test Series , Eighth Edition, Forms L and M; the Integrated Science Performance Assessment System ;Stanford Abbreviated, Eighth Edition; and Aprenda, Spanish-Language Achievement Test Series. Developed professional training materials for teachers and conducted workshops on interpretation of test results, including linking test results to classroom instruction, and on how to prepare students for making wise educational/career decisions. Managed content development of various statewide testing programs, including the Alabama statewide guidance and counseling assessment program and the California Learning Assessment System . Supervised project directors responsible for writing items and test ancillaries. 

Project Director (1985–1987) 

Developed assigned assessments, wrote items and assessment ancillaries, including the Differential Aptitude Tests , Fifth Edition, with Career Interest Inventory , and the Adult Basic Learning Examination, Second Edition. Supervised editors and assistant project directors responsible for writing and editing items and test ancillaries. Developed the Guide to Career Portfolio Workbook and the 

Guide to Career Planning Workbook , curriculum materials designed to link aptitude and interest results with education and career decision-making. 

1973–1985 Teacher/Counselor 

English Teacher, Department Chairperson and Member of the North Central Accreditation Team St. Alphonsus High School Dearborn, MI 

English Teacher, Counselor, and Head of Curriculum Development Team Crestwood High School Dearborn Heights, MI 

Adult Education Teacher and Adult Education Curriculum Development Team Member Garden City Adult Education Program Garden City, MI 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

American Counseling Association, High-Stakes Testing Task Force Committee Member—2003–Present 

American Counseling Association, Publications—Co-Chairperson 2004–2007 

American Educational Research Association—1994–Present 

Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education—President 2000–2001 Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 6 

Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education—Treasurer 1997–1999 

Association for Career and Technical Education, Guidance Policy Board Member—1994–1998 

Association of Test Publishers Committee Member—2004–Present 

Corwin Press, Educational Reviewer—2004–Present 

Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation, American Counseling Association and Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education Liaison—1995–Present 

Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation Executive Committee Member—2002–2007; 2008–2012 

Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation Co-Chair of the Development Task Force for the development of Classroom Assessment Standards—2008–Present 

Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation Vice Chair—2008– 2012. 

Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development (MECD) Guest Editor—2001 

Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development (MECD), Editorial Board Member—2002–2010 

National Career Development Association—1988–Present 

National Council on Measurement and Evaluation—1994–Present 

State Collaborative on Assessment and Student Standards (SCASS) Assessing Special Education Students (ASES) Committee Member—2008–Present 

State Collaborative on Assessment and Student Standards (SCASS) Implementing the Common Core System Committee Member—2011–2012 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS (SINCE 2004) 

McDivitt, P. J. (2014 submitted for publication). “High-Stakes Testing: What Counselors Need to Know.” In Assessment for Counselors, Third Edition , edited by Brad Erford, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, Co. 

McDivitt, P.J. (2009). “Criterion-Referenced Assessment.” In ACA Encyclopedia of Counseling , edited by Brad Erford, Washington, DC: American Counseling Association. 

McDivitt, P.J., Russell, M., Camacho, C., Thurlow, M., Geller, L.K., Godin, K, Hess, K., Bechard. (2009). “Research Methodologies and Theoretical Foundations to Support Alternate Assessment Based on Modified Achievement Standards.” White paper. 

McDivitt, P.J., Fincher, M., and Hess, K. (2008). “Who Are the 2% Students and How Do We Design Test Items and Assessments that Provide Greater Access for Them?” Available online: www.nciea.org. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2007). “Assessing Intelligence, Scholastic Aptitude, and Achievement.” In Research and Evaluation , edited by Brad Erford, Austin, TX: PRO-ED. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 7 

McDivitt, P. J. (2007). “Chapter 14: High-Stakes Testing.” In Assessment for Counselors, First Edition , edited by Brad Erford, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, Co. 

McDivitt, P. J., and Gibson, D. (2004). “Guidelines for Selecting Appropriate Tests.” In Measuring Up: Assessment Issues for Teachers, Counselors, and Administrators , edited by Janet Wall and Garry R. Walz, Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2004). “The Test Development Process: What Educators Need to Know.” In Measuring Up: Assessment Issues for Teachers, Counselors, and Administrators , edited by Janet Wall and Garry R. Walz, Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 

McDivitt. P. J. (2004). “High-Stakes Testing,” In Professional school counseling: a handbook of theories, programs, and practices, edited by Brad Erford, Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 

PROFESSIONAL PRESENTATIONS (SINCE 2003) 

McDivitt, P.J., Young, R., Simaska, D., Hall, E., Thompson, J., (2014). 

Establishing a Measure of Text-Dependent Analysis – Spotlight Session. Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) National Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

McDivitt, P.J., Middlestead, A., Courtney, K., Newcombe, J. (2014). Creating Statewide Educator Buy-in for Career and College Readiness Standards through Next-Generation Assessments – Coordinated Session. Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) National Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

McDivitt, P.J. Middlestead, A., Courtney, K. (2013). Debunking the Myth Attached to Commissioned Texts for Assessments – Coordinated Session> Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) National Conference, Washington DC. 

McDivitt, P.J., Howard, B. (2012). Applying the Classroom Assessment Standards to K-12 Practice – Invited Session. American Evaluation Association (AEA) National Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

McDivitt, P.J., Middlestead, A., Moon, J., (2012). Collaborating with Teachers for Next Generation Item Development. – Coordinated Session. Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) National Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

McDivitt, P.J., Rolf, B., Klinger, D., Munoz, M., Wylie, C., (2012). National Hearing for the Classroom Assessment Standards – Invited Session. Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) National Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

McDivitt, P.J., Klinger, D., Rogers, T., Yarbrough, D., (2012). National Hearing for the Classroom Assessment Standards – Invited Session. American Educational Research Association (AERA) National Conference, Vancouver, Canada. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 8 

McDivitt, P.J., Klinger, D., Rogers, T., Yarbrough, D., (2011). Revising the Standards to Meet Our Evolving Conceptions of Student Classroom Assessment – Coordinated Session. National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) National Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

McDivitt, P.J., Dickenson, T., Cheong, Y.F., Hembry, I., Lee, M., Mao, X., Sato, E., (2011). Technical Issues and Students with Disabilities – Paper Session. National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) National Conference, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

McDivitt, P.J., Howard, B., and Klinger, D. (2010). Student Assessment Standards: The Time is Now . Consortium for Research on Educational Accountability and Teacher Evaluation (CREATE) National Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia. 

McDivitt, P.J. ,McCormick, E., Marashiello, R., and Roschewski, P. (2010). 

Using Assessment Results to Inform and Guide Instruction. National Conference on Student Assessment (CCSSO), Detroit, Michigan. 

McDivitt, P.J., Bechard, S., Gorin, J., Parker, C., Stocia, W., and Rabino, S. (2010). Research Methodologies and Theoretical Foundations to Support Alternate Assessment Based on Modified Achievement Standards (AA-MAS) –Coordinated Session. National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) National Conference, Denver, Colorado. 

McDivitt, P.J., Klinger, D., Rogers, T., Yarbrough, D., (2010). Revising the Standards to Meet Our Evolving Conceptions of Student Classroom Assessment. American Educational Research Association (AERA) National Conference. Denver, Colorado. 

McDivitt, P.J., Blank, R., and Munoz, M. (2009). The Role of Assessment in Developing Valid and Sound Student Evaluation Systems . National Conference on Student Assessment (CCSSO), Los Angeles, California. 

McDivitt, P.J., and Paavola, K. (2009). The Role of Student Evaluation Practices in a Balanced Assessment System . Consortium for Research on Educational Accountability and Teacher Evaluation (CREATE) National Conference, Louisville, Kentucky. 

McDivitt, P.J., and Paavola, K. (2009). Maximizing State Standards in Your Classroom. Consortium for Research on Educational Accountability and Teacher Evaluation (CREATE) National Conference, Louisville, Kentucky. 

McDivitt, P. J., Felix, A., Fincher, M., Quenemoen, R., and Davis, C. (2008). 

Redesign of Alternate Assessments for Students with Significant Cognitive Disabilities: National and State Perspective. National Conference on Student Assessment (CCSSO), Orlando, Florida. 

McDivitt, P. J., Fincher, M., Rigney, S., Hess, K., and Dunn, J. (2008). Who Are Those 2% Students and How Do We Design Items That Work? National Conference on Student Assessment (CCSSO), Orlando, Florida. Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 9 

McDivitt, P. J., Krentz, J., Nedley, S., Morse, L., and Price, C. (2007). Using the Think-Aloud Method and Student Surveys to Create More Accessible and Effective Statewide Assessments. Large-Scale Assessment Conference (CCSSO), Nashville, Tennessee. 

McDivitt, P. J., Turner, G., Davis, C., and Young, R. (2005). Challenges in Meeting NCLB High School Requirements for Science Assessment. Large-Scale Assessment Conference (CCSSO), San Antonio, Texas. 

McDivitt, P.J. (2005). Understanding the Research and Considering Policies .Symposium, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2004). High-Stakes Testing: What Counselors and Educators Need to Know. Luncheon Invited Speaker. Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education Annual Conference, Charleston, South Carolina. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2004). Standards for Improving Student Evaluations in the Service of Learning. Association for Assessment in Counseling and Education Annual Conference, Charleston, South Carolina. 

McDivitt, P. J., Brinckerhoff, L., Quenemoen, R., and Lager, C. (2004). Universal Understanding of “Universal Design:” What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know? Large-Scale Assessment Conference (CCSSO), Boston, Massachusetts. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2004). Standards for Improving Student Evaluations in the Service of Learning. American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education National Conference, Chicago, Illinois. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2003). Assessment Help for Teachers: The Student Evaluation Standards. National Board Certified Teachers Conference, Sponsored by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, Washington, D.C. 

McDivitt, P. J. (2003). Standards for Educational Evaluation: What Educators Need to Know . American Counseling Association National Conference, Anaheim, California. 

McDivitt, P. J., Gullickson, A., Dilworth, M., and Winters, M. (2003). Standards for Improving Student Evaluations in the Service of Learning . ETS Educational Policy Leadership Institute Forum, Washington, D.C. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Michigan—Lifetime Secondary English Language Arts, Grades 9–12 Lifetime Guidance and Counseling, Grades K–12, with Special Education K–12 endorsement Resume of Patricia Jo McDivitt Page 10 

EDUCATION 

Indiana University 

Bloomington, IN M.S., Education, School Guidance and Counseling: Secondary Teaching English Language Arts: Special Education Endorsement 

Indiana University 

Bloomington, IN B.S., Secondary Education English Language Arts Page 1 

# MICHELLE MCDONALD 

Project Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Michelle McDonald serves as the Project Manager for the Pennsylvania Winter and Summer Keystone Exams. In this role, she oversees materials development, updates schedules, monitors resource areas, and performs other general project managerial duties. She also provides outstanding customer service to Pennsylvania districts and schools for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment, Keystone Exams Assessment, and the Writing Field Test Assessment. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. McDonald served as an admissions coordinator at a private medical university. She holds a B.S. in Business Management and a minor in Finance from St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Works with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacts with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assign tasks, and set priorities. Develops, edits, and proofreads manuals, publications, and project documentation. Manages project within budget. Monitors project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production. Provides customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams Program—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment Program—2011–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011–2013 Associate Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to obtain and disseminate information regarding projects, prioritize work, and coordinate tasks to meet deadlines. Developed, edited, and Résumé of Michelle McDonald Page 2 

proofread manuals, publications, and project documentation. Verified answer keys and test questions. Monitored project status; distribution and collection systems; and printing production. Provided customer service to school districts needing assistance with their state assessment programs. 

2009–2011 Admissions Coordinator 

Herzing University 

Crystal, MN 

Provided sales support for Admissions Team with follow up calls to prospective students, coordinating and follow-up for information/testing sessions, proctoring entrance exams, researching competitors, collecting and submitting student documentation and enrolling students into their respective program. 

2007–2009 Sales Manager/Assistant Sales Manager 

Herberger’s 

Brainerd/Roseville, MN 

Attained sales and profit plans, effectively merchandised the sales floor to maximize sales opportunities and communicate with store management and buyers regarding business opportunities. Maintained strong customer service expectations through effective selection, training, motivation, and retention of staff. 

2006–2007 Data Management Associate 

Stearns Bank 

St. Cloud, MN 

Assisted in the preparation of management and board reporting, provided administrative support for multiple departments, prepared officer loan committee information, reviewed real estate appraisals for the Real Estate Credit Administrator, and administered the Problem Loan Report. 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S., Business Management 

Minor, Finance Page 1 

# DOUG MILLER 

Senior Director of Materials Operations and Logistics 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Doug Miller has worked at DRC since 1994 in a variety of capacities, ranging from performance assessment to operations management. These positions have given him excellent industry perspective and have placed him solidly in step with DRC’s philosophies and mission. Mr. Miller has won consistently positive and well-deserved recognition within DRC for his employee-friendly management style and his ability to combine procedural efficiency with industry-leading accuracy and product quality. He has been responsible for and successfully fulfilled all DRC scheduled commitments for delivery of materials and reports since 1998 and has set the bar for exacting standards in test security. He continuously designs and augments existing quality control procedures for materials handling operations and regularly partners with the Information Systems group to design and implement technological solutions to complex materials handling issues. 

Mr. Miller has been instrumental in the development and continued enhancement of the Operations Material Management System, DRC’s proprietary materials tracking and security system, and continues his central role in its phased expansion. Mr. Miller manages all aspects of materials packaging and logistics within the Operations group. He is also responsible for the tracking, receipt processing, and inventory for all secure materials associated with DRC’s educational assessment projects. He has direct experience on several statewide testing programs, including those for Alaska, Alabama, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington. 

Mr. Miller holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in English and Psychology from St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Senior Director of Materials Operations and Logistics 

2008–2011 Director of Materials Operations 

2000–2008 Materials Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Supervises and coordinates product packaging and delivery, as well as the retrieval, processing, and storage of secure materials for all education measurement and survey projects. Manages all warehouse activities in the Boone Avenue Distribution facility, including personnel, equipment, and technology. Designs and implements technological solutions, as well as quality control procedures for the assembly and packaging of materials and secure document check-in. Oversees timelines for packaging, processing, logistics, and inventory Résumé of Doug Miller Page 2 

activities based on production schedules and materials receipt deadlines. Facilitates development of and adherence to ISO procedures. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Exit Exam—2000–2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2000–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 and 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Alternate Assessment—2005–2006 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Science Assessments—2005–2009 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing Assessment & Accountability: 

End of Course Examinations—2000–2005 

California Golden State Examinations—2000–2002 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Test—2003–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2003–Present 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System Program—2000–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21st Century—2000–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21st Century—2000–2005 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2002–2005 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2010–Present 

North Carolina High School Exit Examination—2000–2002 

North Carolina Open-Ended Assessment—2000–2002 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2006–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2005–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2000–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2000–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2006–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2009–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program—2000–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—2000–2003 Résumé of Doug Miller Page 3 

Washington Assessment for Segmented Mathematics—2007–2008 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program 

End-Of-Course—2011–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1999–2000 Production Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

1998–1999 Materials Processing Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

1996–1998 Materials Processor 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

1994–1996 Reader, Performance Assessment 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

1986–1994 Co-Owner/Manager 

Warehouse Maintenance Co. 

Columbia Heights, MN 

EDUCATION 

St. Olaf College 

Northfield, MN 

B.A., English and Psychology Page 1 

# SCOTT MILLER 

Lead Support Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Scott Miller has 16 years of experience in the field of software development and is an integral part of the software development team at DRC. As Lead Support Analyst, he designs and implements applications for large-scale statewide assessment clients. He is responsible for processing data from online and paper/pencil tests and creating files and reports. His assessment experience includes projects for Minnesota, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Miller’s experience included working on a variety of mainframe and PC applications in the financial services industry. He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Computer Science with a minor in Mathematics from Central College in Pella, Iowa. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Lead Support Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leader of state IS team responsible for producing various client deliverables. This includes producing test materials needed for paper/pencil testing, scoring test results from paper/pencil and online tests, and producing the required reports and files. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2011–2012 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2009 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2005 Application Software Architect 

2000–2002 Application Software Analyst 

1998–2000 Application Software Designer 

1996–1998 Application Software Developer 

Thrivent Financial for Lutherans 

Minneapolis, MN 

Technical leader for the corporate Client Information System (CIS), responsible for the personal data of approximately eight million clients and prospects. Defined Résumé of Scott Miller Page 2 

software requirements for new CIS functionality to support business initiatives. Analyzed and designed system and user interfaces, program and process flows, and data models. Wrote detailed technical specifications. Developed and unit tested new application functionality and supported quality assurance testers. Provided on call production support to meet service level agreements with the business unit. Mentored less experienced software designers/developers. 

Selected Accomplishments: 

• Designed and developed process to extract and manipulate data from corporate data warehouse in order to create records needed to generate redesigned Variable Universal Life statements. 

• Designed and developed process to convert and maintain financial associate relationships to clients on Client Information System and multiple product administration systems. Created process to facilitate cross LPAR communication using DB2 stored procedures in order to reduce maintenance costs associated with redundant source code. 

• Supported corporate merger by providing technical leadership to combine multiple customer information systems and data. Designed and developed batch processes to match clients, delete duplicate data, and update product information. 

• Member of team that designed and developed new client/server application to support Client Interaction Center. Team built a new GUI application to insulate call center employees from underlying mainframe applications reducing training needs and reducing call times by automating some manual processes. 

• Supported corporate initiative to implement new Automated Voice Response (AVR) system to access and update customer account information. Developed process to convert and maintain customer PIN numbers from external vendor database to an internal database in order to facilitate customer data access via the AVR. Created GUI for PIN reset functionality for call center associates. 

• CIS Technical leader on project to migrate mutual fund new business application from OS/2 to NT environment. Redesigned CIS GUI using Net Express, designed and developed all related enhancements on mainframe and client side, and rewrote the interfaces between CIS and vendor software. 

• Reduced maintenance costs by developing utility programs that could be used to support both online and batch processes. 

• Developed generic batch conversion process to add customer data to CIS from other corporate data stores. 

• Supported actuarial and accounting processes for calculating cash reserve values needed for statutory reporting requirements. 

• Developed process to simplify maintenance of prospective client lists and to streamline assignment of prospects to financial associates for marketing purposes. Résumé of Scott Miller Page 3 

• Designed and developed batch process to delete duplicate client data in order to reduce customer complaints and to reduce costs associated with extra mailings. 

1995–1996 PC Support/Help Desk Intern 

Vermeer Manufacturing Company 

Pella, IA 

Responsibilities included configuring new PC hardware and upgrading business software. Created tracking system to monitor company software usage to ensure compliance with software licensing requirements. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Platforms: MVS (OS/390, z/OS), TSO/ISPF, CICS, Windows 7/XP 

Tools : Microsoft SQL Server, Microsoft Visual Studio, Microsoft Office Suite, 

DB2, Datacom, Net Express, Edify Electronic Workforce 

EDUCATION 

Central College 

Pella, IA 

B.A., Computer Science, Minor in Mathematics Page 1

# CHRISTOPHER MRNAK 

Item Development Coordinator 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Christopher Mrnak serves as an Item Development Coordinator at DRC. He assists test development specialists and directors with item and test development activities, including organizing and formatting materials in the item banking system, overseeing item and graphic development work flow, and material preparation. Mr. Mrnak also handles all newly submitted items and passages for large-scale assessment projects. 

In addition to his assessment experience, Mr. Mrnak has experience as a publications coordinator and a production assistant. He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Mass Communications from the University of St. Thomas, in St. Paul, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2004–Present Item Development Coordinator 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Assists test development specialists, project leads, and directors by organizing, formatting, and maintaining items and passages for all clients within DRC’s in-house item banking system. Creates and monitors a directory of specifications, checks facts, researches accuracy of test content, cross-references data, verifies answer keys, oversees the work flow of graphics and items, prepares materials for committee review, summarizes committee review comments, along with preparing all the necessary invoices and contracts for contractors and consultants. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2004–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2007 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2012–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2005–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2004–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present Louisiana Interim Transitional Tests—2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2004–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present Résumé of Christopher Mrnak Page 2 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2002–2004 Communications Coordinator 

Alzheimer’s Association 

Minneapolis, MN 

Produced the association’s newsletter. Served as point person for press releases and public relations materials for all Minnesota, North and South Dakota media. Booked association representatives as guests on radio and television programs. Marketed professional and family-education programs through all media channels (print, radio, television). 

2000–2002 Sales Assistant 

Continental TV—KATZ Media 

Minneapolis, MN 

Brokered commercial airtime between television stations and advertising agencies. Worked with account executives on the placement and follow-up of commercial spots. Handled discrepancies and negotiations for replacement of commercial spots that did not air. 

1999–2000 Production Assistant 

KARE 11 Television 

Golden Valley, MN 

Handled scripts for on-air talent, producers, and directors. Operated teleprompter and television cameras. 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

St. Paul, MN B.A., Communications Page 1 

# MARY E. MULHERN 

Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Mary Mulhern has worked in the assessment field since 2009. As a Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist at DRC, she has participated in all aspects of DRC’s item and test development, including item acquisition and editing, test construction, standard alignment studies, forms production, rangefinding, and development of college and career-ready curriculum/instructional ancillary materials for elementary, middle school, and high school student populations. 

Ms. Mulhern has also served as a senior mathematics item and test developer for a number of large-scale assessment programs, including those for South Carolina, Alabama, Alaska, Louisiana, and Pennsylvania. In addition to her development work, she is also an experienced facilitator having facilitated committees of educators in the review of items for content, alignment, and data. Her expertise extends to all grades K-high school mathematics, including expertise in the development of college and career ready items. Most recently she provided support to the development of college and career ready items for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. 

Ms. Mulhern’s background also includes tutoring experience at the high school and college levels. She holds a Master of International Management degree, and a B.A. in Mathematics/Education, both from the University of St. Thomas in St. Paul, Minnesota. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS STANDARDS (CCRS) EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Mulhern’s college-and career-readiness (CCR) experience includes reviewing item and standards alignment to the CCR standards for the state of Alaska and the state of Alabama to aid the transition to CCRS for mathematics assessments. In addition, she has contributed to writing achievement-level descriptors for the states of Iowa and Louisiana. 

Ms. Mulhern has developed CCR-aligned items and scoring guidelines for the Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment for Grades 3–9, for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium, and the transitional Louisiana Mathematics assessments for grades 3–8. She has also developed new mathematics items and scoring guidelines aligned to the Pennsylvania Core Standards. 

For the state of South Carolina, she has most recently developed items for the End- of-Course Examination Program and, along with committee members representing the state of South Carolina, constructed forms for both print and online administration. Résumé of Mary Mulhern Page 2 

She has also led the development of CCR-aligned items for the American Institutes for Research for online testing and has developed CCR-aligned items for DRC’s internal item bank. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

2009–2013 Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Manages and facilitates project tasks. Plans and coordinates work among project partners and contractors. Develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications, including items and assessments aligned to the CCRS. Develops, edits, and reviews items. Conducts content item reviews, data reviews, and forms reviews. Trains and works with freelance writers and consultants in item development and test construction. Provides curriculum content services. Maintains electronic item bank. Coordinates and participates in development of technology-enhanced, innovative items and dual-mode presentation of items and performance tasks. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2010–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2010–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2010–Present 

College and Career Readiness Item Bank—2013–2014 

College and Career Readiness Item Development for the DRC Item Bank— 

2013–Present 

College and Career Ready Item Development for the American Institute for Research—2014–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2010–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2012–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2012–Present 

Item Development—2012–Present 

Practice Test—2012–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2013–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2010 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 Résumé of Mary Mulhern Page 3 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2014–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2009 Business Analyst, Learning and Development 

Cargill, Incorporated 

Wayzata, MN 

Facilitated and designed corporate training sessions. 

2002–2006 Forwarding Specialist, Grain Division 

Cargill, Incorporated 

Wayzata, MN 

Wrote contracts and financial documentation. Established pricing for international grain shipments. 

1999–2002 Accounting Clerk, Grain Division 

Cargill, Incorporated 

Wayzata, MN 

Computed monthly profit/loss reports. Verified invoices and authorized payments of grain transactions. 

1992–1998 Financial Analyst/Accounting Assistant 

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota – Aspen Medical Group, P.A. 

St. Paul, MN 

Produced budget for ten-clinic health system. Developed training manual and trained/supervised budget entry personnel. Prepared and analyzed medical data and expenses. 

1990–1992 Mathematics Teacher 

Archdiocese of St. Paul and Minneapolis Catholic Schools 

St. Paul, MN 

Taught mathematics classes to junior and senior high students. Tutored on an individual basis. Résumé of Mary Mulhern Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

St. Paul, MN Master of International Management 

University of St. Thomas 

St. Paul, MN B.A., Mathematics/Education Page 1 

# EMILY MURRAY 

IS Project Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As an Information Services Project Manager, Ms. Emily Murray provides management and scheduling for the team that develops and maintains the DRC eDIRECT System. The eDIRECT team’s initiative is to meet the needs of multiple clients by providing solutions for Student and Testing Management. Ms. Murray has extensive experience in all aspects of the product development lifecycle, including project plan development, requirements review, test creation and execution, customer feedback, design review, requirements traceability matrices, risk and issue tracking, test data collection, summarization, and presenting to executive management. She is an expert in agile and waterfall project management methodologies and is known for high-quality deliverables. 

Prior to this role, Ms. Murray served as a Software Quality Assurance Analyst in a Lead role within Information Services. Ms. Murray has established her competencies in multiple industry verticals including Education, Manufacturing, Medical Device, and Real Estate. Ms. Murray is a graduate of the Minnesota School of Business, was accepted into, and completed, the ACE Leadership Training through the Minnesota High Tech Association, and is a Certified Scrum Master through the Scrum Alliance. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present IS Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Oversees all aspects of project planning and scheduling, status reporting, resource allocation, and issue risk and client management. Leads software development group of 10 team members. Determines business needs and presents clear, actionable solutions. Carries out all project planning, while working in conjunction with business and partner teams to negotiate schedules and production release dates. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011–2013 Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provided QA Lead direction to a team of six; supplied mentoring to QA resources; QA project management; performed process improvement and modification to procedures; requirements gathering; project documentation Résumé of Emily Murray Page 2 

reviews; scope session planning; risk assessment planning; UAT/regression planning and execution; release planning; post-production validation; test environment management; system integration testing. Responsible for all aspects of functionality, compatibility, security, and related testing of custom web-based production educational software product on Windows, Linux and Macintosh operating systems. Created and executed test plans and test suites. Upgraded, re-wrote, and reorganized product test specifications and test cases. Performed exploratory and ad-hoc testing. Handled bug documentation and regression testing. Directly interacted with developers, project managers, and business analysts on a daily basis to trouble shoot and resolve issues and ensure project timelines and quality issues are addressed. 

2007–2011 Project Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Oversaw all aspects of projects. Set deadlines, assigned responsibilities, managed financials, and monitored and summarized progress of projects. Provided process improvement direction and involved in the ISO 9001 certification process. Managed billing and inventory spreadsheets. Developed business requirement documentation. Managed the development and production of print marketing and educational materials. Provided quality assurance direction on complex data layouts and variable programming for client products. 

2003–2007 Licensed Real Estate Agent 

Keller Williams and Remax Performance 

Big Lake, MN 

Managed the listing of specific critical property information within online Multiple Listing Service. Coordinated sales negotiations and closings for buyers and sellers with title companies and mortgage lenders. Audited and organized intricate contracts to ensure compliance in transaction process. Designed and implemented all marketing campaigns and advertising for multiple listings. Handled daily accounting for all business transactions to ensure profitability of the business. Developed yearly financial forecasts summarizing sales and expenses. 

2000–2003 Buyer/Account Manager 

Medamicus Inc. (Greatbatch Medical) 

Plymouth, MN 

Involved in Package Software Selection Analysis and successful implementation of the Visual Manufacturing software application. Conducted weekly expectations and standards meetings. Negotiated terms with key suppliers to reduce purchase price cost. Vendor Management with current and potential business partners. Analyzed, scheduled, and planned medical manufacturing production materials. Coordinated tradeshows, locally and nationally. Involved in the Internal Communications Committee, which met to explore ways to increase the morale of Résumé of Emily Murray Page 3 

the employees and deal with communication barriers. Maintained positive relationships with customers and accurately handled orders and returns. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

• Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) 

• QA Methodologies 

• Agile 

• Waterfall 

• SQL 

• Fiddler 

• Visual Studio 

• JIRA 

• Smartsheet 

• Microsoft Team Foundation Server 2008/2010 

• AgileZEN 

• Package Software (COTS) Selection Analysis 

• Business Case and Feasibility Study 

• Facilitation of Scope and Requirements 

• Business Process Modeling Development 

• Business Analysis & Process Engineering 

• Requirements Prioritization 

• Requirements Gathering, Analysis, & Traceability 

• Requirements Management and Change Control 

• Process Quality Measurement 

• Systems Integration Design, Development, Testing and Implementation 

• Implementation Planning 

• Release Planning 

• Test Plan Development & Management 

• UAT Strategy, Approach, Planning, and Execution 

• Software Documentation and Training 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Scrum Alliance 

Indianapolis, IN 

Certified SCRUM Master 

EDUCATION 

Minnesota School of Business 

Richfield, MN 

Diploma- Business System Specialist 

Minnesota High Tech Association 

Minneapolis, MN 

ACE Leadership Training Page 1 

# JENNIFER L. NORLIN-WEAVER 

Senior Director, Education Marketing 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Jennifer Norlin-Weaver has worked in the areas of Curriculum, Assessment, Instruction, and Professional Development for over 35 years in local, national, and international settings. In her current role at DRC, Dr. Norlin-Weaver works to support clients through formulating strategic direction, market and research analysis, and product planning. 

Prior to assuming district administrative roles, she was an elementary and middle school classroom teacher and led programs in the areas of Title I and Gifted and Talented. Notably, she worked in the Saudi Arabian International Schools, and in Edina Public Schools—considered a top public school district in the state of Minnesota. Dr. Norlin-Weaver is a presenter and consultant who has facilitated the planning work of multiple groups, is the past president of the MN Staff Development Council, and has been actively involved in the legislative process as it relates to the development of curriculum standards and related policy. While working at the University of Minnesota as a research assistant, Dr. Norlin-Weaver worked with a team to design an Accountability System for Minnesota schools. As an Assistant Professor with local graduate programs, Dr. Norlin-Weaver works primarily with aspiring administrators focused on leadership in curriculum, assessment, and instruction. She has worked with the design of Educator Evaluation systems for teaching staff and administrators. 

Dr. Norlin-Weaver holds an Ed.D. in Educational Policy and Administration, a Principal and a Superintendent license (Ed.S.), and an M.Ed. in Curriculum and Instructional Systems from the University of Minnesota. Dr. Norlin-Weaver also holds a B.A. in Elementary Education from Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Director, Education Marketing 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Works to support clients through formulating strategic direction, market and research analysis, and product planning. Résumé of Jennifer L. Norlin-Weaver Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1997–2012 Director, Teaching and Learning 

Edina Public Schools 

Edina, MN 

Provided leadership as assistant to superintendent for all PK–12 curriculum development, instructional design, systems accountability, and strategic planning initiatives. Provided Leadership for district-wide training to all employee groups. 

1996–1998 Research Assistant, College of Education and Human Development 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Served as co-author, team coordinator, presenter of the Minnesota Educational Accountability Reporting System. 

1990–Present Assistant Professor 

St. Mary’s University 

Minneapolis, MN 

Adjunct Faculty 

Hamline University 

St. Paul, MN 

St. Thomas University 

St. Paul, MN 

University of Minnesota, Twin Cities 

Minneapolis, MN 

Teaches graduate courses for Master’s and Licensure programs. Topics include: curriculum development, technology and assessment, teacher leadership, instructional leadership, school improvement planning, assessment and accountability systems, and ethics. 

1993–1996 Teacher Trainer 

Saudi Arabian International Schools 

Dhahran, Saudi Arabia 

Served numerous roles including: site staff development coordinator, trainer, and team leader; curriculum facilitator for JK-9 language arts and social studies; and school development process facilitator. Résumé of Jennifer L. Norlin-Weaver Page 3 

1989–Present Educational Consultant 

Regional and International 

Presented on numerous topics including: placing and implementing standards, effective schools planning, data use, team processes, effective instruction, cooperative learning, classroom management, and peer coaching. Consulting projects have included: 

• Education Minnesota, TALL Project 

• Witness; Minnesota Legislature, Policy: Curriculum and Instructional topics 

• MN Department of Education, MN Department of Children, Families and Learning 

1978–1993 Classroom Teacher; Teacher Leader 

Farmington Public Schools 

Farmington, MN 

Served as resource teacher, staff development coordinator, curriculum leader, mentor teacher, Title I coordinator, gifted and talented program teacher and coordinator, and elementary and middle school classroom teacher. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

MN Association of School Administrators (MASA); Charter Member, Curriculum Leaders of MN—2006–Present 

Board Member, State Conference Chair, President, Past President; MN Staff Development Council (MSDC; now MN Learning Forward) —1983–2012 

MN Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (MASCD)— 1983–2012 

National Affiliations: Learning Forward, Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASDC)—1983–Present 

NASSP Trained Assessor; St Thomas Principal Assessment Center—2000– Present 

St. Thomas University; Curriculum and Instruction, Educational Leadership Adjunct Advisory Boards—1999–Present 

The Arabian Reading Association (TARA), Charter Board Member—1993–1996 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Steve Buettner, Jenni Norlin-Weaver, Michael Walker, Wylie Wong, “The One-to-One Transformation: BYOD,” EdTechMagazine , Spring 2012, pp. 16. Résumé of Jennifer L. Norlin-Weaver Page 4 

Jenni Norlin-Weaver, “Assessment for Learning; Appropriate Use of Accountability System Indicators,” in James Popham (ed.), Assessment for Educational Leaders Pearson/Allyn and Bacon, University of Michigan, 2006, pp. 168. 

Ken Dragseth, Yi Du, Jenni Norlin-Weaver, Christine Weymouth, “Gender Differences and Student Learning; How are Our Boys Doing?” Edina, MN 

District studies conducted, papers and findings presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA), Chicago, April, 2003 and the Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD), San Francisco, March 2006. 

Jenni Norlin-Weaver, “Selecting Accountability Indicators,” doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, 1999. 

Robert Bruininks, Mark Davison, Ron Erickson, Jenni Norlin-Weaver, Martha Thurlow, et al. Minnesota Educational Accountability Reporting System: Feasibility and Design Study (Vol. 1–2), University of Minnesota: College of Education and Human Development, Minneapolis, 1996. 

AWARDS 

MINNSPRA (Minnesota School Public Relations Association) Publications-Print Award—2011 

Minnesota Staff Development Council (MSDC) Service Award—2009 

Gates Foundation Technology Leadership Fellow—2003 

Bush Foundation Principal’s Leadership Team—1989–1990 

Minnesota Chamber of Commerce Excellence in Education Award —1987 

Farmington Minnesota Teacher of the Year—1986 

SELECT PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

“Non-negotiable Goals for Student Achievement,” presentation given at Great Start Workshops, Minnesota Association of School Administrators Conference, St. Paul, March 2010, November 2012. 

“Curriculum 101,” “Beyond the MCA’s – Using Data in Program Review,” and “Curriculum in a CCSS World,” presentations given at Curriculum Leaders of Minnesota Conferences, Brainerd, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012. 

“Teachers as Learners and Leaders,” “Teacher Leadership,” presentations given at Education Minnesota Conferences, St. Paul, 2009, 2010. Résumé of Jennifer L. Norlin-Weaver Page 5 

“Minnesota and the New Academic Standards,” presentation given at Minnesota Association of School Administrators Conference, Bloomington, 2008. 

“Strengthening the Partnership; K-12 and Higher Education,” presentation given at Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, San Francisco, 2002. 

Near East South Asia Council of International Schools (NESA), presentations given at conferences in Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1994, Athens, Greece, 1995, Cairo, Egypt, 1996. 

“Balanced Literacy in the Classroom,” presentation given at The Arabian Reading Association (TARA) Conference, Manama, Baharain, 1994. 

Multiple presentations given at; Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Baharain, Kuwait, 1993–1996. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Ed.D., Educational Policy and Administration 

Ed.S., Licensed as a Principal and a Superintendent 

M.Ed., Curriculum and Instructional Systems 

Gustavus Adolphus College 

St. Peter, MN 

B.A., Elementary Education Page 1 

# JULIE OLSON 

Social Studies Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Julie Olson has 11 years of extensive experience in test and item development for social studies assessments in grades 3–12. She has written and edited items for multiple print and online statewide assessments. Ms. Olson works with item writers to assign, edit, and evaluate their items. She facilitates content review, bias review, data review, and item writing meetings with clients. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Olson served as a teacher for five years, teaching reading, social studies, and special education. She holds an M.A. in Teaching with an emphasis in Secondary Social Studies from National-Louis University in Chicago, Illinois, and a B.A. in Economics and German from St. Olaf College, in Northfield, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2004–Present Social Studies Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Prepares and conducts all stages of social studies assessments, including test design, item development, item editing, and forms construction for print and online administrations. Coordinates item development work and mentors item writers. Primary responsibilities have included social studies item development and forms review for grades 3–12 in Louisiana, grades 3–5 in Michigan, grades 3–8 and US History and Constitution in South Carolina, and grades 5, 7, and 8 in Oklahoma. Facilitates content and bias review, data review, and item development meetings with clients. Provides training for item writers and review committee members. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2004–2006; 2009 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2004–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Alternate Assessment 2 Standard Setting—2005 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2004–2005 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2012–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present 

Ohio K–5 Assessment System—2004–2005 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present Résumé of Julie Olson Page 2 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2010–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2013—Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2014—Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

Summer 2004 Educator in Residence 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Received intensive, hands-on training and experience in all facets of test development during a six-week Educator in Residence program. 

2001–2004 Teacher–Special Education and Social Studies 

Stillwater Area Schools 

Stillwater, MN 

Special Education LD and EBD teacher; Middle Level Alternative Learning Center, (ALC) Lead Teacher; Targeted Services teacher; Minnesota Basic Skills test prep teacher. Developed and implemented individualized instructional programs to improve targeted skills. 

2000 – 2001 Teacher–Social Studies 

St. Paul Public Schools 

St. Paul, MN 

Designed and implemented lessons to align with state standards for regular and gifted Grade 8 geography classes. 

1999– 2000 Teacher–Reading 

Success Lab, Inc. 

Chicago, IL 

Reading specialist for students in Grades 3–6 who tested below grade-level in reading. Assessed and monitored student progress with a battery of pre and post assessments. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

National Council for the Social Studies—2004–Present 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Minnesota Standard License 7–12 Social Studies Résumé of Julie Olson Page 3 

EDUCATION 

National-Louis University 

Chicago, IL 

M.A., Teaching (Secondary Social Studies emphasis) 

St. Olaf College 

Northfield, MN 

B.A., Economics and German Page 1 

# CHAD OSTERGREN 

Information Security Systems Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As an Information Security Systems Analyst at DRC, Mr. Chad Ostergren conducts internal security assessments; plans and implements security controls to remediate security shortcomings and improve existing DRC security controls; operates network scanning tools to find network and computer vulnerabilities; and creates and rewrites DRC security policies, standards, and procedures. 

Mr. Ostergren holds a B.S. in Mass Communications, with a minor in Art and Graphic Design with an Emphasis on Public Relations and News Editorial from Minnesota State University in Mankato, Minnesota. He has several years of experience in ISO certification, has had experience with certifications and audits for ISO 27001, ISO 9001, SOC 2, and PCI compliance and holds both implementation and internal audit certifications for ISO 27001. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2015–Present Information Security Systems Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Conducts internal security assessments to prepare DRC business lines for audits and external security assessments based on NIST, ISO/IEC, HIPAA, and FERPA controls and requirements. Plans and implements security controls to remediate security shortcomings and improve existing DRC security controls. Operates network scanning tools to find network and computer vulnerabilities. Reports vulnerabilities to responsible information technology groups and follows up to assist and ensure adequate remediation occurs. Creates and rewrites DRC security policies, standards, and procedures. Plans and leads information security projects like building a DRC incident response process, improving the usage of DRC passwords, and regularly reviewing account access. Plans and delivers information security awareness training classes. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2013–2015 IT Client Compliance Analyst 

Covergys 

Eagan, MN 

• Led certifications and audits for ISO 27001, SOC 2, and PCI compliance. This included scheduling meetings, gathering evidence, and working with the auditors to present relevant information to gain the certifications. Résumé of Chad Ostergren Page 2 

• Responsible for managing large clients and supporting and implementing initiatives to make sure compliance is upheld at all the Convergys locations worldwide. 

• Managed all daily checklists, incident management, and credential management reporting for all 12 Microsoft locations worldwide. 

• Responsible for managing projects for compliance initiatives, IT, and integration that included project scopes, timelines, budgets, and delivery. 

• Built two data base systems to track and remediate issues: one for tracking all ISO 27001 nonconformities and the other for all of the incidents received from Microsoft. 

2012–2013 Employee Benefits Account Manager 

Associated Financial Group 

Minnetonka, MN 

• Provides customer service to employee benefits clients and support to BIAs/benefit consultants and marketers with the goal of increasing new business production and client retention. 

• Resolved client issues efficiently and accurately, primarily through phone and electronic communication methods. Utilized superior customer service skills to respond to client requests in methods that exceeded expectations. 

• Responsible for managing the client and prospect by being accessible and responsive to the benefits consultant, business insurance advisors, account executive and keeping them advised of deadlines and updates, serving internal and external customers in a positive, professional manner, and following all guidelines on confidentiality. 

2012 Associate Project Manager for 3e The Lifetime Agency 

Lifetime Fitness 3e 

Chanhassen, MN 

• Responsible for assisting with PMO activities, managing small projects, including project scope, timelines, budget, and effective delivery of member and prospect digital solutions. 

• Led and motivated project teams, making timely decisions to ensure project success within set parameters. 

• Ensured expectations were clearly communicated across internal teams and business stakeholders. 

• Supported the project management office activities around intake, project prioritization, and resourcing, also worked on a variety of interactive projects involving various applications and technologies. Résumé of Chad Ostergren Page 3 

2011–2012 Associate Project Manager for the Enterprise Management System Team 

Optum Health Care Solutions 

Minnetonka, MN 

Served the Enterprise Management System and its user population as a project manager/communications agent. Responsibilities included: 

• Developing, authoring, and distributing various communication vehicles for information regarding the EMS and support of Business Deployment Lead communication responsibilities. 

• Leading and participating in projects to maintain general knowledge of, awareness of, and updates related to the Enterprise Management System and to assist with change management across Care Solutions. 

• Creation, planning, purchasing, and distribution of promotional materials to support EMS and ISO activity and culture adaptation. 

2008–2011 Disability Benefit Specialist 

ING 

Minneapolis, MN 

• Responsible for the intake process, adjudication, and managing of Short-Term Disability, as well as Voluntary Short and Long Term Disability for ING’s Benefit Management Services. 

• Acted as a trainer/mentor for employees transitioning to the Short Term Disability department. Created job aids, templates, and reference guides. 

• Collaborated with sales, account managers, and leadership with claim processes for several clients, including a return to work program and specialized reporting procedures. 

• Maintained the reporting and ensured all claims were processed in a timely manner, along with processing work for all three lines of business when co-workers were out of the office. 

2005–2008 Short Term Disability Specialty Diagnoses/Long Term Disability Ability Analyst 

The Hartford 

Bloomington, MN 

• Responsible for the intake process, adjudication, and managing of short-term and long term disability claims with complex diagnoses for The Hartford’s Group Benefits Division. 

• Interacted with sales, policyholders, account representatives, and claimants and utilized the Vocational Rehabilitation, Social Security Assistance, Fraud, and Medical teams to manage complex claims. Résumé of Chad Ostergren Page 4 

ACHIEVEMENTS 

• Contributed to and assisted the Enterprise Management Team in receiving ISO 9001:2008 certification for Optum Health Care Solutions. 

• Completed a Six Sigma project that implemented a consistent end-to-end claim adjudication process and management process across all three lines of short-term disability business, as well as created a QA process to ensure sustainability of consistent process. 

• Created and implemented new letters for all three lines of short-term disability in order to gain a consistent message to our customers as well as decrease the time it takes to create a letter. 

EDUCATION 

Mankato State University 

Mankato, MN 

B.S., Mass Communications, Minor in Art and Graphic Design 

Emphasis on Public Relations and News Editorial Page 1 

# JOSEPH PAVLIK 

Director of Operations 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Joseph Pavlik has more than 10 years of experience as Director of Operations at DRC. For more than 30 thirty years, Mr. Pavlik has provided industry-related experience in production management, recruitment, staff training, quality control and accuracy analysis, plant operations, coaching and counseling, performance development, and improved service implementation. His employment record includes printers in the top Fortune 500 companies. 

Mr. Pavlik holds an A.A. in Commercial Art, Illustration from Alexandria Technical College in Alexandria, Minnesota, and certification in Digital Printing from Rochester Institute of Technology In Rochester, Minnesota. He has taken classes and attended trainings in the areas of Industrial Relations, Graphic Design, Management Development, and Leadership and Development. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2004–Present Director of Operations 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides leadership to Document Services Project Management, offset and digital print/inserting production operations, focusing direction to a 24-hour per day, 7 days a week print production facility. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2004 Supervisor of Electronic Production/Marshall Field’s Marketing Operations 

Target Corporation 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed the desktop Electronic Production Artists for storewide circular, newspaper and promotional advertising. Oversaw daily production, coached and developed teams, implemented process improvements, and collaborated with designers and art directors. Résumé of Joseph Pavlik Page 2 

2002–2003 Supervisor of Print Services 

Target Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Shift manager for in-plant prepress, printing and bindery services for retail industry leader. Involved in budgetary processes, equipment evaluation and implementation, and coaching and counseling of production staff. Target is ranked in the top ten in-plant printers in the nation. 

1997–2002 Operations Production Manager 

Merrill St. Cloud 

St. Cloud, MN 

Oversaw daily production of various commercial prepress, print, and bindery for the financial, commercial, and real estate business. Rebuilt and maintained a successful manufacturing project involving direct-to-plate imaging, short run press implementation, and capital expenditures for commercial and program real estate printing. 

1981–1996 Manager, National Photo Art and Prepress 

Deluxe Corporation 

St. Paul, MN 

Various duties including production management, direct mail engineering, and equipment evaluations related to the management of marketing services printing for one of the largest check printers in the country. 

TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Industrial Relations 

Minneapolis College of Art and Design 

Minneapolis, MN 

Graphic Design 

Rochester Institute of Technology 

Rochester, MN 

Certified in Digital Printing 

Deluxe Corporation 

Fundamentals of Management 

Management Development Series 

Merrill Corporation 

Merrill Business Academy Résumé of Joseph Pavlik Page 3 

Target Corporation 

Leadership and Development Training 

EDUCATION 

Alexandria Technical College 

Alexandria, MN 

A.A., Commercial Art, Illustration Page 1 

# DAVID PAYNE 

Senior Director of Performance Assessment Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. David Payne has over 21 years of large-scale testing experience. He currently oversees all handscoring activities for several large-scale assessment projects, including the Ohio Graduation Tests, the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams, and the Pennsylvania System of Student Assessment. He previously served in this capacity for numerous other programs, including the Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment, the Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments, and DRC’s portion of the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Small-Scale Trials, Pilot, and Field Test administrations He has worked closely with other leaders in DRC’s Performance Assessment Services (PAS) division to oversee and advise DRC’s handscoring efforts for these and other assessment projects at a range of grade levels. 

As a handscoring project manager and advisor, Mr. Payne routinely collaborates closely with clients and with DRC’s Test Development staff in an effort to coordinate and guide the activities of PAS. He is responsible for all of the handscoring activities for the projects under his direction, including the successful planning and implementation of rangefinding sessions, the development of high-quality handscoring training materials that reflect the scoring criteria of DRC’s clients, the delivery of accurate and timely handscoring results, and the management of PAS’ content staff. 

Mr. Payne’s experience includes collaborating with clients to plan, implement, and conduct assessment administration, scoring, and reporting. Mr. Payne has played a key role in informing the design of DRC’s Handscoring Imaging System, and he successfully led several of DRC’s Scoring Centers through the ISO 9001 certification process. In addition to overseeing all handscoring activities for the projects under his direction, he played a key role in designing, developing, and implementing the Arkansas IEP and LEP Alternate Portfolio Assessment System and the Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities (Grades 3–6). As a Senior Project Manager for Kentucky’s Writing Portfolio Assessment, Mr. Payne developed training materials and reports that were used by hundreds of educators during localized, in-state scoring sessions. His DRC experience also includes item development and conducting professional development for educators. 

Mr. Payne holds a Master of Library Information Science degree from St. Catherine University in St. Paul, Minnesota, and a Bachelor of Arts degree in English Literature from Stetson University in DeLand, Florida. Résumé of David Payne Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Director 

2008–2010 Director 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Oversees and manages large-scale educational assessment projects that involve the handscoring of student essays and constructed responses. Collaborates with clients to determine the best way to meet scoring requirements and ensure high-quality and accurate handscoring reports. Works closely with other DRC resource areas to coordinate schedules that result in meeting deadlines and efficiently utilizing all of DRC’s scoring centers. Confers with Test Development staff to ensure scoring guidelines are appropriate and effective for use with constructed-response items. Directs all rangefinding meetings and the preparation of training materials used during scoring. Manages a staff of experienced content specialists, site coordinators, technical specialists, scoring directors, team leaders, and several hundred readers at the scoring centers located in Plymouth and Brooklyn Park, Minnesota. Develops, implements, and oversees professional development sessions for educators. Prioritizes and assigns tasks for the most efficient use of resources. Responsible for budgeting and preparation of proposals. Arranges staff development opportunities that enhance the abilities of the department. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: Alternate Assessment—2005–2006 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessments—2004–2014 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: Alternate Assessment—2001 

End-of-Course Examinations—2001–2005 

Kentucky Instructional Results Information System—1997 

Kentucky Voluntary Continuous Assessment—1995–1996 

Kentucky Writing Portfolios and On-Demand—1998–2002 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—1997 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Minnesota Graduation-Required Assessment for Diploma—2011–2014 

North Carolina End-of-Grade—1995–1997 

North Carolina English II—1996 

Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities—2002–2005;2007-2011 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2007–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of Student Assessment—2011–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium: Small Scale Trials, Pilot, and Field Test—2012–2014 Résumé of David Payne Page 3 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2005–2008 Manager 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Collaborated with clients to plan, implement, conduct, and complete timely, accurate, and cost-effective assessment administrations, rangefinding, scoring, and reporting. Managed a cross-functional team of project support staff. Oversaw all rangefinding and handscoring activities, including rubric refinement and creation of reader training materials; training and qualifying of handscoring personnel; and monitoring and maintaining handscoring quality control during the scoring process. Managed effectiveness of team members by communicating project information, setting priorities, coordinating associates’ activities, determining staff training needs, providing ongoing mentoring and leadership, and assessing their performance. Served as customer liaison while fulfilling administrative responsibilities and coordinating scoring activities with other DRC resource areas to meet client needs. 

1998–2005 Senior Project Manager 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Responsible for all phases of performance assessment projects, including proposal preparation; rubric development and review; rangefinding activities; scoring guide and training materials selection and preparation; reader recruitment, training, and supervision; and project monitoring. Served as client liaison. Coordinated activities with internal team members, including Performance Assessment Content Specialists. 

1996–1999 Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Created on-demand writing prompts. Located reading passages appropriate for grade level. Designed multiple-choice questions evaluating a variety of state-specified reading comprehension skills. Participated in bias review activities. 

1996–1998 Scoring Director 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Conducted reader training and oversaw monitoring of 50–100 readers. Participated in rangefinding activities and development of training materials. Résumé of David Payne Page 4 

Implemented retraining and validity procedures. Interpreted and acted upon daily and cumulative statistical data. 

1996–1997 Customer Service 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Assisted clients with test registration and ordering. Maintained working file of client orders. 

1995–1997 Team Leader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Trained and monitored team of 10–12 readers to maintain validity and reliability of scores. Retrained readers, as necessary, and resolved discrepant scores. Provided written performance evaluation of scores. 

1994 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses applying state-mandated scoring criteria. 

1991–1993 Foreign Language Lab Assistant Supervisor 

Stetson University 

DeLand, FL 

Assisted faculty and students with use of lab resources. Supervised classroom activities. Maintained working library of audio/visual materials. 

PRESENTATIONS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Olson, B., Mead, R., Payne, D. “A Report of a Standard Setting Method for Alternate Assessments for Students with Significant Disabilities.” NCEO Synthesis Report 47. National Center on Educational Outcomes. October 2002. 

Payne, David. “On-Demand Writing Scoring Training.” Instruction and Assessment Workshops 2002: All for Proficiency. Kentucky Association for Assessment Coordinators. Galt House East. Louisville. October 29, 2002. 

Payne, David, et al. “Writing and Scoring Test Questions Based on Ohio’s Academic Content Standards.” Workshops and Presentations given to over Ohio educators in Akron, Columbus, and Toledo, OH. August 4–August 15, 2004. Résumé of David Payne Page 5 

EDUCATION 

St. Catherine University 

St. Paul, MN 

M.L.I.S. (Master of Library Information Science) 

Stetson University 

DeLand, FL 

B.A., English Literature Page 1 

# ALAN PECARINA 

Lead Support Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Alan Pecarina has 33 years of experience in the software development field and is an integral part of the software development team at DRC. As Lead Support Analyst, he leads a team of four developers to implement projects for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment. Prior to Pennsylvania, his assessment experience included projects for Alaska, Nebraska, Ohio, and Oklahoma. 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Pecarina’s experience included working on a variety of mainframe and distributed applications in the insurance and financial industries. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2007–Present Lead Support Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leads a team of four developers to produce printed materials and files based on annually changing specifications. Ensures quality on all deliverables. Reviews developers’ code prior to implementation. Designs how data needs to be stored and processed. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2007–2009 

Science Assessments—2007–2009 

Standards Based Assessment—2007–2009 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–2010 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2007–2009 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Testing Program—2007–2009 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2008–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2007 IT Consultant 

Ameriprise Financial 

Minneapolis, MN 

Environment consisted of a mainframe based system using Easytrieve Plus, COBOL, JCL, Word, and Excel. Responsibilities included designing one-time conversion of historical financial information into a new layout for interfacing to Résumé of Alan Pecarina Page 2 

a performance system. Designed processes to value contracts using historical transaction data for three insurance and annuity systems. Directed portion of work to outsource resources and programmed and tested the remainder. 

2005–2007 IT Consultant 

GMAC-RFI 

Richfield, MN 

Environment consisted of a distributed network using netCOBOL, JCL, C#, Visual Studio IMS, Oracle, SAM, VSAM, Word, Excel, MS Outlook, SourceSafe, and Beyond Compare. Responsibilities included support for mainframe Cobol to .net Cobol conversion project. Provided technical assistance to conversion team as needed. Provided consultant support for mainframe issues. Assisted less experienced staff with troubleshooting and testing. 

2003–2005 IT Consultant 

American Express Financial Advisors 

Minneapolis, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using Assembler, COBOL, SQL, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, IMS, DB2, SAM, VSAM, Word, Excel, Access, and Lotus Notes. Responsibilities included providing expert business and technical support for assembler/Cobol life insurance and annuities system that was more than 40 years old. Provided support for offshore resources in all phases of the project life cycle. Trained offshore resources on the life insurance and annuities system. Provided analysis and design for a large enhancement project requiring more than 10,000 hours. Wrote detailed specifications for an offshore team of six programmers. Provided technical and business support for the testing phase. Ensured project was completed on time. Provided 24/7 support to the production batch and online CICS applications. Provided immediate technical and business assistance for legal and regulatory tasks. Provided business partners with innovative reporting solutions to replace or enhance traditional mainframe batch reporting. Provided support to technical staff by mentoring and answering questions about programs, JCL, CICS, and utilities. Acted as a business, technical, and environmental resource for the offshore team. 

2002–2003 IT Consultant 

Blue Cross Blue Shield of SC 

Columbia, SC 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using APS (similar to Pacbase), COBOL CICS, SmartTest, Endevor, Fastlist, Word, Excel, and TAO. 

Responsibilities included assisting with design, coding, and testing of new CICS screens and programs for claims display related to the HIPAA enactment. Worked with business partners to resolve problems and questions. Coordinated changes to testing and production environments. Assisted as programmer/analyst to design, program, and implement the replacement of online claim status inquiry screens. Resolved issues and assigned work to other staff as needed. Suggested ways to Résumé of Alan Pecarina Page 3 

improve efficiency and make future maintenance easier. Researched concerns from testers, business analysts, and team leader. Served as technical leader and assistant team leader. 

2001–2002 IT Consultant 

Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance 

Charlotte, NC 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using Assembler, COBOL, SQL, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, DB2, SAM, VSAM, Word, Excel, Visio, and Lotus Notes. Responsibilities included designing a replacement for a complex assembler insurance claim system that was more than 30 years old. Assisted with implementing a replacement for a similar system for insurance premiums. Provided programming support for financial and actuarial systems. Acted as technical lead to design, program, and implement the replacement of an assembler based insurance claims subsystem with a COBOL based application. Project was delivered ahead of expectations despite technical environment setbacks and loss of personnel. Provided technical assistance for insurance premium system project. Programmed, tested, and implemented the proposed DB2 solution. Provided technical expertise to plan the implementation of programming standards to save time on future system maintenance. Assisted financial and actuarial partners with balancing and reporting needs. Assisted with company merger conversions to allow accurate financial and regulatory reporting. Instigated and led an informal brown-bag user group. Discussion was primarily related to tips and techniques to help perform day-to-day tasks more efficiently. 

1997–2000 IT Consultant 

American Express 

Minneapolis, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using Assembler, COBOL, SQL, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, IMS, DB2, SAM, VSAM, Word, Excel, Access, and Lotus Notes. Responsibilities included providing expert business/technical support for assembler/Cobol life insurance and annuities system that was more than 30 years old. Provided assistance and leadership to the Y2K project. Trained offshore resources on the life insurance and annuities system. Provided support to the ad-hoc reporting team. Acted as subject matter expert (SME) team leader for Y2K project that was behind schedule and needed assistance. Provided mentor resources to the contract programming team. Assigned and performed extensive testing of Y2K related changes to this complex system. Created an add-on to the Vantage Life system for generating fund progress reports to track annuity account performance for an individual. Provided 24/7 support to the production batch and online CICS applications. Provided immediate technical and business assistance for legal and regulatory tasks. Provided business partners with innovative reporting solutions to replace or enhance traditional mainframe batch reporting. Provided support to technical staff by mentoring and answering questions about programs, JCL, CICS, and utilities. Acted as a business, technical, and Résumé of Alan Pecarina Page 4 

environmental resource for the offshore project, which was to replace current contract support of the life and annuity systems. 

1996–1997 IT Consultant 

MSI Insurance 

Arden Hills, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using COBOL, SQL, QMF, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, DB2, SAM, VSAM, Word, Excel, Access, and CCMail. Responsibilities included performing maintenance and development on the actuarial property and casualty insurance system. Developed subsystem to collect and report data related to a legal situation. Created new CICS screens to capture information and interfaced with business areas to determine the reporting needed. Several projects related to reporting statistical information were collected using DB2 database. Most projects were one-person, full life cycle and involved interaction with the business actuarial staff. 

1992–1996 IT Consultant 

IDS Life Insurance 

Minneapolis, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using Assembler, COBOL, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, IMS, SAM, and VSAM. Responsibilities included performing maintenance and development on complex assembler based life insurance and annuity system that was more than 30 years old. Created a subsystem to generate financial progress reports for annuities. Project involved heavy analysis of a large volume of historical data dating back 25 years. Tested and interfaced with business partners. Contributed to project that supported a new type of annuity that needed to be in place in a very short timeframe; as a result, the company was selected to be on the state’s short list of approved companies to sell the product. Expanded limits of an old assembler system to meet the demands of current annuity product data requirements. Instrumental in the creation of a “model office” environment for quality assurance. This allowed for more efficient testing of common situations and the ability to perform end-to-end testing of the system. Provided 24/7 support to the production batch and online CICS applications. 

1989–1992 IT Consultant 

Eduserv Technologies 

St. Paul, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using COBOL, Assembler, JCL, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, SAM, and VSAM. Responsibilities included performing maintenance and development on a student loan servicing system. Maintained a legacy CICS online and batch system slated for replacement. Provided end-to-end project work and 24/7 support for the production system. Helped develop and maintain ISPF panels, skeletons, and clists. Résumé of Alan Pecarina Page 5 

1984–1989 Programmer/Analyst 

ITT Life 

Plymouth, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM mainframe using Assembler, COBOL, JCL, Easytrieve, Focus, Easytrieve Plus, CICS, BDAM, SAM, and VSAM. 

Responsibilities included analysis of existing versus new release of Life-Comm life insurance software package. Supported maintenance and development efforts on the package system. Maintained and developed end-user reporting applications. Assisted with the upgrade to the Life-Comm life insurance software package to a new release. This included a new CICS online general ledger application. Provided primary support for the CICS online general ledger sub-system. Supported programs related to the policy print function of Life-Comm. Maintained and developed end-user reporting applications. 

1982–1984 Programmer/Analyst 

Austin Mutual Insurance 

Minneapolis, MN 

Environment consisted of IBM DOS/VSE mainframe using COBOL, Assembler, JCL CICS, DL1, SAM, and VSAM. Responsibilities included performing maintenance and development on a property and casualty insurance system. Ran nightly batch cycle as an operator. Served as fill-in daytime operator when needed. Developed process to report online usage statistics. Developed CICS applications to replace cardpunch input. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Assembler, BAL, CICS, COBOL, Easytrieve Plus, Endeavor, JCL, MS Office Suite, SQL, Micro Focus COBOL Page 1 

# CHRISTOPHER K. PETERSON 

Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Christopher Peterson has four years of experience in large-scale, statewide assessments, and is an important contributor to the test development process at DRC. He has participated in DRC’s work for assessments in Alabama, Louisiana, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina. In addition, Mr. Peterson helped establish the test development group at DRC. He was responsible for quality testing several assessment projects and working with psychometric data to make informed decisions about item and test development. 

Mr. Peterson recently returned to the large-scale, statewide assessment industry after spending eight years in the middle school mathematics classroom. His experience there included teaching pre-algebra and algebra for 6 th  and 7 th  grade students, both in the accelerated and traditional classroom. He has also worked extensively with special needs students in 6 th  through 9 th  grade mathematics classrooms, including teaching geometry curriculum. 

Mr. Peterson holds a M.Ed. degree in Teaching from the University of St. Thomas in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and a B.S in Mathematics from Wheaton College in Wheaton, Illinois. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Peterson is currently the mathematics Content Lead at DRC for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) item development project, which involves selected-response, constructed-response, and technology-enhanced items. He has led the development of elementary, middle, and high school items for the 2013 SBAC pilot test and the 2014 SBAC field test, which involved leading in-depth item writing training for both educators and independent contractors. He also led the development of elementary items for DRC-facilitated SBAC cognitive labs held across the country in 2012. 

In addition, Mr. Peterson worked with committees of Pennsylvania educators to develop Pennsylvania assessment anchors and eligible content (standards and objectives) and learning progressions aligned to CCR standards. He is responsible for the development of new mathematics items and scoring guidelines aligned to the Pennsylvania Core Standards. Résumé of Christopher K. Peterson Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops selected-response, constructed-response, and technology-enhanced items and performance tasks. Performs crosswalk alignment between state standards and CCR standards for several projects. Facilitates various committees of educators, administrators, and state department of education assessment professionals. Constructs regular and modified test forms for statewide assessments. Reviews item data for future test development decisions. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2011–2014 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Arts and Mathematics Alignment Study, Grades 3–8— 2011–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2010–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2011–Present 

Transition to Common Core English Language Arts and Mathematics Field Test, Grades 3–8—2011–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Missouri Assessment Program—2015–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2010 Mathematics Teacher 

South View Middle School 

Edina, MN 

Taught pre-algebra and accelerated algebra courses for 6 th  and 7 th  grade students. Coached Math League and Math Counts teams for students in 6 th  through 8 th 

grade. Résumé of Christopher K. Peterson Page 3 

2003–2005 Special Education Paraprofessional 

Valley View Middle School 

Edina, MN 

Worked one-on-one and in small group settings with 6 th  through 9 th  grade students with emotional/behavioral disorders, learning disabilities, and autism. 

1999–2001 Research Analyst (Education Research & Test Development Division) 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked as a quality assurance specialist in a new Test Development Division at DRC. Quality tested state department projects and analyzed psychometric testing data. 

1998–1999 Quality Assurance Analyst (Education Programming Division) 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Developed and implemented software testing plans on both system and program levels. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota–Secondary Mathematics, Grades 5–12 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas, Graduate School of Education 

Minneapolis, MN 

M.Ed., Teaching 

Wheaton College 

Wheaton, IL 

B.S., Mathematics Page 1 

# LISA PETERSON-NELSON 

Chief Quality Officer 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Lisa Peterson-Nelson has an engineering and operations management background spanning over 31 years across several Fortune 100 corporations. She has led, developed, and implemented quality measurement systems and monitoring processes within these organizations, including Six Sigma quality approaches and processes. 

At DRC, Ms. Peterson-Nelson is directing the enhancement of key work processes for delivery of products and services to clients. She serves as the internal auditor of all quality processes and risk management plans for the company’s current educational assessment clients. Since 2007, Ms. Nelson has been leading DRC’s efforts to achieve ISO 9001:2000 Certification. The company has attained ISO 9001:2008 Certification in three areas: Operations (Distribution, Logistics, Materials Processing, Warehousing, and Document Scanning); Document Services (Project Management, Document/Graphic Design, Pre-Press, Printing, Bindery, Inserting, and Purchasing); and Performance Assessment Scoring. Ms. Peterson-Nelson will continue to lead the expansion of our ISO 9001 certification to other areas of DRC over the next several years. 

Ms. Peterson-Nelson attended Michigan Technological University, where she earned a Master of Science degree in Operations Management and a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Chief Quality Officer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Executive responsible for the development and improvement of quality management systems across the corporation. Duties also include corporate-wide strategic planning, and budget and profit and loss responsibilities. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–2009 Vice President of Quality 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Senior manager responsible for implementing process improvements across all areas of DRC, including leadership for the ISO 9001:2000 Certification. Résumé of Lisa Peterson-Nelson Page 2 

2001–2004 Chief Quality & Process Engineer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Senior manager responsible for leading, guiding, and directing the enhancement of DRC’s key work processes associated with the delivery of products and services to clients. Also responsible for ensuring that quality practices and strategies are integrated into all business operations and planning. 

2000–2001 Vice President Six Sigma Deployment 

American Express 

Minneapolis, MN 

Senior executive responsible for driving overall Six Sigma strategy across American Express Financial Advisors in order to achieve radical performance 

improvements in cost, productivity, revenue growth, and customer service. Created an environment that positively drives the success of the overall Six Sigma program. Built process management disciplines, and developed and retained 75 Six Sigma Black Belts and five Master Black Belts who led process improvement/product and process design projects resulting in annual financial benefit of $500,000 per project. 

1999–2000 Director of Quality & Performance Measurement— Client Service Organization (CSO) 

American Express 

Minneapolis, MN 

Developed and implemented client-focused quality measurement systems to determine capability of key business processes. Deployed Six Sigma methods into the business and identified, developed, and retained Six Sigma Black Belts. Also responsible for benchmarking, customer satisfaction measurement approaches, quality monitoring, and auditing processes. Developed high-level management reports of process accuracy, process cycle time, customer satisfaction, and cost for client service processes. Supervised 10 direct reports and managed overall group of 60 people. 

1997–1999 Home and Building Control Total Quality Leader 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Developed and implemented quality strategies that helped accomplish key business priorities within Home & Building Control North America, a $4 billion, global strategic business unit. Responsible for aligning quality initiatives with key business strategies, advising executive and line management, and developing quality processes and plans for the organization. 

Major initiatives in 1998 included using the Malcolm Baldrige Quality Award criteria for performance excellence as a management model for the business, and Résumé of Lisa Peterson-Nelson Page 3 

implementing an enterprise-level measurement system with a “balanced scorecard” approach focusing on shareholder, customer, and people value. 

1997 Total Quality Integration Leader—Solutions Business 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Led the integrated application of total quality initiatives for Home & Building Control Solutions strategic business unit. Built functional and process group leadership commitment. Initiatives included Customer Value Management, Business Process Management, Honeywell Quality Value, and Quality Learning Strategy. Built total quality competence within the business unit, and developed strategies for embedding total quality tools and processes globally. 

1996 Manager of Total Quality 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Developed and implemented Home and Building Control’s Total Quality Learning Strategy aimed at supporting the effective execution of business priorities, affecting 12,000 employees. Consulted with members of the senior management team and their staffs to create and implement strategic and operational plans focused on embedding Total Quality processes, tools, and behaviors. Acted as Business Process Engineering subject matter expert to senior management process owners and process teams in their efforts to define, implement, and improve key business processes within the North American Region. Experience with Customer Relationship, Customer Acquisition, Project Delivery, Service, and Financial Management Processes. 

1994–1996 Quality Improvement Process Content Lead 

Honeywell Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Process Owner/Content Leader for Quality Improvement Process implementation. Consulted, facilitated, and trained Home and Building Control organization on Quality Improvement Process and Problem Solving Process. Developed and maintained process for certifying and coaching all Home & Building Control Quality trainers (40 individuals) to consistently deliver the material to all 12,000 employees in the U.S. and Canada. 

1992–1994 Total Quality Management Consultant 

Alliant Techsystems, Inc. 

Hopkins, MN 

Consulted and trained all levels of the organization (executive management to hourly factory personnel) on the use of the following methodologies: Business Process Management, Benchmarking, Concurrent Engineering, Design of Experiments, Quality Function Deployment, and Statistical Process Control. Résumé of Lisa Peterson-Nelson Page 4 

1989–1992 Principal and Senior Quality Improvement Engineer 

Alliant Techsystems, Inc. 

Hopkins, MN 

Promoted to Principal Engineer in 1991. Provided technical support to more than 200 Design of Experiments and Statistical Process Control process improvement teams. Trained more than 500 management and technical people and was regarded as the company expert in implementing product and process optimization methods. 

1987–1989 Senior Quality Engineer 

Boeing Electronics Company 

Renton, WA 

Provided quality engineering support to the design and manufacturing of electronic assemblies for commercial and military customers. 

1986 Master’s Program Intern 

Ford Motor Company 

Dearborn, MI 

Supplier Quality Assurance Engineer responsible for assisting suppliers in their efforts to become certified as “Q1” preferred suppliers of electrical and vacuum systems for prototype vehicles. 

1984–1985 Design Engineer 

Boeing Aerospace Company 

Seattle, WA 

Electrical Design Engineer responsible for designing interface test adapters and test stations for Department of Defense weapon systems. Department of Defense Secret Security Clearance. 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Statistical Applications in Process Control , contributing author, Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1996 

Sequential Application of Advanced Quality Tools , 48th Annual Quality Congress, 1994 

Applying Robust Design Methods to Enhance Product Performance , American Defense Preparedness Conference, 1993 

Alternative Approaches to Implementing a Design of Experiments/Taguchi Methods Program , Juran Conference, 1991 

Chebyshev’s Orthogonal Polynomial Applied to High Velocity Warhead Design ,American Supplier Institute Taguchi Methods Symposium, 1990 

A System View of Quality Management , Master’s Thesis, Michigan Technological University, 1987 Résumé of Lisa Peterson-Nelson Page 5 

EDUCATION 

Michigan Technological University 

Houghton, Michigan 

M.S., Operations Management 

Michigan Technological University 

Houghton, Michigan 

B.S., Electrical Engineering Page 1 

# MELINDA PEULEN 

Writing/Reading/ELA Handscoring Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Melinda Peulen has 13 years of experience working on large-scale English language arts (ELA) and writing assessment projects. Ms. Peulen’s primary responsibilities include working closely with state department personnel and educators to develop training materials for assessments; monitoring handscoring projects; supervising handscoring staff; and coordinating rangefinding activities to ensure accurate and efficient scoring. She has worked with clients to develop both domain and focused holistic scoring guides for an array of item-types, including Keystone Literature constructed-response items and the Pennsylvania System of School Assessments (PSSA) grade 3 open-ended (short answer) items. Ms. Peulen has participated in item development for the Keystone Literature exam, the PSSA grade 3 ELA assessment, and other state assessment projects, offering the perspective of handscoring to the proceedings. 

Ms. Peulen has overseen all handscoring and rangefinding activities associated with the Keystone Literature exam since its inception in 2010. She also oversaw rangefinding, training materials development, and handscoring for the Keystone Composition exams standalone field test. She also oversees the writing portion of the Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment High School Graduation Qualifying Examination, and the Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment Standards Based Assessment. 

Ms. Peulen holds a Master of Arts degree in Public and Nonprofit Administration from Metropolitan State University in St. Paul, Minnesota, and a Bachelor of Arts degree, Cum Laude, in English and Secondary Education from Hamline University in St. Paul, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Writing/Reading/ELA Handscoring Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Oversees the scoring of large-scale educational assessments. Ensures that projects are completed accurately and on time. Develops and supervises the development of project materials, such as scoring guides and training materials. Assumes responsibility for timely completion of projects, maintaining reader reliability, and documenting project information. Contributes to review of assessment materials. Consults with state department of education staff. Trains scoring directors and other performance assessment personnel on the use of DRC’s image handscoring system. Facilitates rangefinding activities and professional development workshops for educators. Consults with test development staff on Résumé of Melinda Peulen Page 2 

the development of scoring rubrics. Serves as a client liaison and provides services as assigned by the Director of Performance Assessment Services. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2005, 2009–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2009–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program—2005 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System—2002 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessment—2005 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2006–2008 

Ohio Alternate Assessment of Students with Disabilities—2009–2012 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2006–2007 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2002–2003; 2005–2008; 

2013–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot—2012 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2004–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2009–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2008 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Oversaw a group of team leaders and their readers for various projects. Trained team leaders and readers on various project requirements. Prepared training materials. Ensured scoring accuracy by making scoring decisions according to state guidelines/rubrics, reviewing statistics, and ensuring reader scoring accuracy. 

2007–2008 Test Development Assistant 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Edited and proofread passages and questions before going to print for the Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment, Ohio Graduation Tests, Oklahoma Core Curriculum Tests, Pennsylvania System of School Assessment, and the Louisiana Alternate Assessments (LAA 1 and LAA 2). Résumé of Melinda Peulen Page 3 

2005–2007 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Trained and monitored team of 10–12 scorers to ensure consistency and adherence to scoring guidelines. Retrained as necessary and resolved scoring concerns. Provided scorer evaluations at project end. 

2002–2006 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Woodbury, MN 

Participated in training and qualifying activities in order to apply state-mandated scoring criteria. Assessed open-ended responses to reading and writing prompts, while maintaining high levels of reliability and accuracy. 

2006 Special Events Intern 

St. Croix Valley Chapter of the American Red Cross 

Bayport, MN 

Worked on “Evening in Red” fundraiser, sent out mailings, made phone calls, received and processed mailed responses, helped collect and organize silent and live auction items, and participated in weekly committee meetings. 

2004 Communications Intern 

Girl Scout Council of St. Croix Valley 

St. Paul, MN 

Edited print items, edited and updated Girl Scout Council of St. Croix Valley website, wrote press releases, researched and compiled data, wrote article for several newsletters, presented a cookie selling workshop for girls, researched and compiled list of service area school librarians, and wrote media advisory. 

2003–2004 Event Manager 

Hamline University 

St. Paul, MN 

Greeted and provided assistance at athletic competitions for the opposing team, the referees, and the home team; and oversaw duties of the scoring table, ticket sellers, security personnel, and clean-up crew. 

2003 Coach 

Mahtomedi Soccer Association 

Mahtomedi, MN 

Co-coached a group of 23 ten-year-olds in twice weekly practices with one to two games per week. Wrote practice logs that included attendance for practices and games, practice plans, and reflections on each game. Résumé of Melinda Peulen Page 4 

2001–2002 Clinic Services Assistant 

Orthopedic Sports, Inc. 

Stillwater, MN 

Answered phones, made/cancelled/rescheduled appointments, prepped patient charts, keyed insurance information into computer system, and provided customer service to clients. 

EDUCATION 

Metropolitan State University 

St. Paul, MN 

M.A., Public and Nonprofit Administration 

Hamline University 

St Paul, MN 

B. A., Cum Laude, English and Education, minors in Communication Studies and Coaching Page 1 

# CHRISTIE PLACKNER 

Director, Research Quality and Data Forensics 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Christie Plackner has 18 years of educational assessment and research experience. In her current role at DRC, Ms. Plackner serves as the manager of the psychometric quality group that works alongside the psychometricians and statistical analysts, checking for internal and external consistency and reasonableness. This group also researches and completes data forensic analysis for multiple state programs. 

Ms. Plackner’s experience in large-scale assessment also includes: item analysis, calibration, linking, and sampling; conducting analyses related to technical reports; contributing to special studies and reports; facilitating standard setting sessions and committee reviews; and assisting with the development of test forms and providing psychometric sign-off. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Plackner worked in the certification testing industry, where she gained experience in job analysis survey development and analysis and item and test form development, along with project management. She coordinated certification testing programs, worked with clients and subject-matter experts, created and managed schedules, oversaw the test development process, and participated in standard setting activities. 

Ms. Plackner holds an M.A. in Industrial/Organizational Psychology from St. Mary’s University in San Antonio, Texas and a B.S. in Psychology from Valparaiso University in Valparaiso, Indiana. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Educational Psychology focusing on quantitative methods in education from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Director, Research Quality and Data Forensics 

2010–2014 Manager, Psychometric Quality 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Directs quality initiatives for psychometric services. Develops psychometric quality plan for key clients. Facilitates process enhancements and develops approval processes for critical interdepartmental handoffs. Facilitates the independent audit and certification of psychometric processes by third party vendors. Coordinates data forensic projects to examine data integrity. Résumé of Christie Plackner Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2009–Present 

Idaho Science End-of–Course Test—2014–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2011–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2013–Present 

> PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE

2008–2010 Psychometrician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for calibration, scaling, and equating of forms and for performing data analyses of tryout, field test, and operational tests and retests. Oversaw item selection for tests and directs the work of research and statistical analysts. Participated in planning and review meetings. 

2005–2008 Senior Statistical Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

In conjunction with psychometricians, performed psychometric activities, including item analysis, calibration and linking, and sampling. Assisted content specialists with test development activities and facilitated communication between participants. Worked on special studies and conducted analyses related to technical reports. Coordinated development of materials and facilitated standard setting procedures and committee reviews. 

2002–2005 Statistical Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Supported psychometricians in the design, computation, report generation, and data analysis of assigned projects. Assisted with test development activities. Résumé of Christie Plackner Page 3 

1999–2002 Research Associate 

Applied Measurement Professionals, Inc. 

Lenexa, KS 

Responsible for coordinating certification testing programs and providing psychometric guidance. Duties included serving as clients’ primary point of contact; developing and analyzing job analysis surveys; assisting clients in developing test specifications; and reviewing test forms for psychometric properties. Facilitated and analyzed standard setting studies using the modified Angoff procedure; reviewed test scoring data based on item performance; presented item writing workshops; and created job analysis surveys and cut score study reports. 

1998–1999 Test Development Specialist 

Applied Measurement Professionals, Inc. 

Lenexa, KS 

Provided test development activities for a variety of clients, including multiple-choice and simulation test development. Other responsibilities included constructing tests based on specific requirements from draft through typeset stage; conducting test development meetings throughout the country (item review, draft test); communicating with clients to ensure content accuracy of tests; maintaining item pools; and editing test items. 

1996–1997 Research Assistant 

Mei Technology 

San Antonio, TX 

Assisted program managers in research projects and development of training technology. Other responsibilities included designing course materials for the Internet; creating lessons for computer-based instruction; developing test items; assisting in the instructional design of a distance learning course; and helping to train a distance education instructor. 

1997 Intern 

United Services Automobile Association (USAA) 

San Antonio, TX 

Calculated return on investment and cost avoidance. Established test cut-off scores and standards. Gathered survey data using Optical Character Recognition software. Identified methods of employee development. Résumé of Christie Plackner Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Ph.D., Educational Psychology, Quantitative Methods in Education (in progress) 

St. Mary’s University 

San Antonio, TX 

M.A., Industrial/Organizational Psychology 

Valparaiso University 

Valparaiso, IN 

B.S., Psychology Page 1 

# ROBERT POPPE 

Test Development Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Robert Poppe’s experience includes test development project leadership for large-scale assessment programs, including working with teachers and state education professionals and facilitating committees responsible for the development of standards-based English language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies assessments for print and/or online test administration; and modified and alternate assessments. He has produced professional development training materials and conducted many teacher-training sessions related to instruction, assessment, and standards alignment. 

Also, Mr. Poppe has expertise in the development of learning progressions, curricula, practice tests, tutorials, and formative assessments, as well as in assessment design, development, evaluation, handscoring, and item banking systems. A special interest of Mr. Poppe’s is the coordination and facilitation of multidisciplinary and multifaceted educational and assessment programs. He has recent experience in directing the development of new Louisiana and South Carolina assessments, which will transition Louisiana’s assessment program for grades 3–8 and South Carolina’s assessment programs for high school English and Algebra and for grades 3–8 mathematics to the Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts and Mathematics. 

Mr. Poppe is responsible for the management and coordination of test materials production for dual-mode assessment programs in Washington and South Carolina, for Reading, Writing, Science, and End-of-Course tests. This work includes the test materials production of embedded field test forms and customized materials for paper/pencil and online administrations—a print-to-online transition where most embedded field testing is now accomplished online. The test materials production for one spring testing window in Washington included the test materials dual-mode production of more than 200 test forms. As part of this work, Mr. Poppe designed and wrote the scripts for interactive-audio/video production for 18 grades 3–8 Online Tools Training (OTT) tutorials to help facilitate the transition process to online testing. The South Carolina OTT system was recently revised to include new English and Algebra technology-enhanced item-types. 

In addition, Mr. Poppe has recently completed the development of Pennsylvania’s kindergarten through high school Voluntary Model Curriculum and Learning Progressions program for Reading, Literature, Composition, Writing, Mathematics, and Science. This included the development, teacher review, and piloting of more than 260 scripted lesson plans, and over 800 related instructional resources and formative assessment tasks—all accessible to teachers using a web-based feedback system. His team is currently updating the model curriculum for alignment to the Pennsylvania Core Standards. Résumé of Robert Poppe Page 2 

Mr. Poppe is also responsible for DRC Editorial Services (ES), which provides editing and proofreading services to all DRC departments. The Editorial Services group has edited a variety of materials including technical reports, test administration manuals, Spanish translations, test materials, marketing presentations, online tutorial scripts, and model curriculum. ES maintains style guides for several clients and keeps current with the latest version of The Chicago Manual of Style . The Editorial Services Team is currently responsible for the production and proofing of South Carolina’s SCPASS, ELDA, HSAP, and EOCEP customized test materials. Mr. Poppe also has supervisory responsibilities for DRC’s Social Studies Test Development Team, who have recently completed item and test development projects for South Carolina, Louisiana, Michigan, and Oklahoma. 

In addition to his work in assessment, he has extensive experience in systems development, ecological studies, pollution control, environmental assessment research, and state policy research. Mr. Poppe holds multiple degrees in science with an emphasis in the biological and environmental sciences; he earned B.A. degrees in Botany and Zoology from DePauw University in Greencastle, Indiana. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Poppe has overseen the alignment of existing programs, including South Carolina assessments to meet the expectations of College and Career Readiness for English language arts and mathematics. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2005–Present Test Development Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides project leadership within Test Development for large-scale assessment and curriculum development programs in English language arts, mathematics, science, social studies, modified, and alternate assessments. Responsibilities include managing all aspects of standards/GLE development, item development and review, test design, forms construction, editing services, and client support related to test and curriculum development. Other responsibilities include researching and communicating current developments in assessment, planning and facilitating professional development activities, managing and coordinating related subcontractor support, assisting with online assessment applications, planning and facilitating client committee reviews, planning and supporting standard setting activities, documenting the test development process, preparing USDOE Peer Review submissions, and collaborating with and addressing the concerns of clients. Résumé of Robert Poppe Page 3 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2014–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: Benchmark Examinations—1997 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2007–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Kentucky Continuous Assessment Program—1996 

Kentucky Instructional Results Information System—1997–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Development of new Common Core aligned English Language Arts and Mathematics Operational and Practice Tests, Grades 3–8—2012–Present 

Transition to Common Core English Language Arts and Mathematics Field Test, Grades 3–8—2011–2014 

English Language Arts and Mathematics Alignment Study, Grades 3–8— 2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present 

LAA 1 Alternate Assessment Program—2005–Present 

LAA 2 Alternate Assessment Program—2005–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Academic Skills Assessment—2011–2012 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2002–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present 

North Carolina End-of-Grade Testing Program—1997 

Ohio K–5 Assessment System—2002–2006 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1996–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—1997; 2003–2005 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2011–Present 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2011–2014 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2011–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2003–2008 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2008–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

End of Course Exams—2010–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 Résumé of Robert Poppe Page 4 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1998–2005 Science Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Coordinated all science-related aspects of test development, including science item development and test construction. Responsibilities also included representing DRC, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Other responsibilities included researching and communicating current developments in science assessment, planning and facilitating professional development activities, facilitating client committee reviews, planning and participating in standard setting activities, and collaborating with and addressing the concerns of clients. 

1997–1998 Scoring Director 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Responsible for conducting scorer training and monitoring 50–100 scorers. Participated in rangefinding activities and development of training materials. Implemented retraining and validity procedures. Interpreted and acted upon daily and cumulative statistical data. 

1996–1997 Team Leader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Responsible for training and monitoring a team of 10–12 scorers to maintain validity and reliability of scores. Retrained as necessary and resolved discrepant scores. Provided written performance evaluations of scorers. 

1996–1997 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses, applying state-mandated scoring criteria. Maintained high level of concentration, accuracy, and productivity. 

1980–1996 Independent Consultant 

St. Paul, MN 

Provided consulting services to the Minnesota Department of Children, Families, and Learning in the area of assessment services. Coordinated the administration of NAEP and the Third International Math and Science Study (TIMSS). Conducted Résumé of Robert Poppe Page 5 

pilot assessments for visual arts, music, mathematics, and science. Assisted with the development of scoring guides for a science assessment and the scoring of that assessment. 

1975–1979 Executive Director, Regional Copper-Nickel Study 

Minnesota Environmental Quality Board 

St. Paul, MN 

Directed the implementation and preparation of the first regional EIS in the U.S., and managed an extensive environmental impact research and environmental monitoring program within and adjacent to the Boundary Waters Canoe Wilderness Area. 

1969–1975 Manager, Environmental Science Services 

Environmental and Governmental Affairs Department 

Northern States Power Company 

Minneapolis, MN 

1969 Consultant 

Minnesota Environmental Science Education Center 

Golden Valley, MN 

1968–1969 Curriculum Development, Teacher Training 

Program Director, Environmental Education 

Granite Falls Public Schools 

Granite Falls, MN 

1967 Research Assistant–Zoology Department 

DePauw University 

Greencastle, IN 

EDUCATION 

DePauw University 

Greencastle, IN B.A., Botany and Zoology Page 1 

# KEVIN PTAK 

Enterprise Architect 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kevin Ptak has more than 16 years of experience in software development. As an Enterprise Architect at DRC, Mr. Ptak provides guidance to various organizational groups in software development, quality assurance, production support, and overall infrastructure. He has worked on large-scale assessment programs for DRC’s clients in Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Louisiana, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Washington, and for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. 

Mr. Ptak also serves as a DRC representative to the IMS Global Learning Consortium. DRC has a Contributing Membership in IMS Global and is actively involved in discussions with IMS on many fronts, including development and revision of the QTI and APIP interoperability standards as well as APIP profile committees. Mr. Ptak works on change requests submitted by DRC to IMS Global, as well as reviews and votes on proposals submitted to IMS by other entities. He also attends the Consortium’s quarterly meetings and participates in various committees. 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Ptak worked on numerous software systems for the travel industry, including accounting batch systems and web development for reservation systems. In addition to development duties, he has been extensively involved in requirements, designs, architecture decisions, and overall team management. Mr. Ptak is a highly skilled senior developer in current industry technologies and languages, and also excels in industry quality assurance techniques, as well as capacity and performance testing in the software development process. 

Mr. Ptak earned an M.B.A. from the University of St. Thomas in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He also holds a B.S. in Computer Engineering from the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology in Rapid City, South Dakota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Enterprise Architect 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides guidance to various groups in software development including work on the Smarter Balanced Test Delivery project, software quality assurance, production support, and overall enterprise infrastructure. Also provides governance, standards, and direction to various business units within DRC to help position DRC for future growth. Trains development staff and facilitates business Résumé of Kevin Ptak Page 2 

and technical discussions with development staff and senior leadership. Serves as a DRC representative to the IMS Global Learning Consortium. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Data Warehouse—2009–2012 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2007–2014 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2009–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2007–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2007–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2009–Present 

Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2007–Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program—2007–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2010–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Test Delivery System— 

2012–2014 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 

WIDA Assessment Services Supporting ELs through Technology Systems— 2012–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2009 Senior Software Developer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as a development team leader in enterprise-level solutions for the DRC Education Division. Oversaw a team responsible for processing student test data by developing and enabling web applications and multi-threaded applications for processing student data to obtain performance and flexibility. Also led the team in solution discussions and architectural decisions. Mentored and provided support for developers transitioning from COBOL to Microsoft VB.NET. Led training sessions and product demonstrations for the various internal teams. Provided solutions and support for an enterprise level scoring system that supported testing Résumé of Kevin Ptak Page 3 

administrations for programs in Idaho, Louisiana, Nebraska, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Washington. 

1997–2007 Senior Software Engineer 

Navitaire, Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Led development of a .Net/C# web site for Disneyland Paris to enable hotel and travel reservations, with a focus was on communications with third-party systems. Managed quality assurance process and overall requirements by determining scope, coordinating changes with clients, and providing estimates. Led development for a .Net/C# web service to allow existing reservation system to connect to insurance companies, managed client requirements and assisted in creation of user and support documentation. Provided airline industry clients with support, training, and product demonstrations including onsite install of an accounting system on a client site in Sydney, Australia, for Qantas Airlines. 

1997 Programmer/Analyst 

PRA Solutions (Andersen Consulting) 

Minneapolis, MN 

Conducted research and development for improvements on a revenue accounting system in preparation for Y2K issues. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

UNIX; Windows; Microsoft Office Products; Visual Studio 2003, 2005, 2008, and 2010; Microsoft Team Foundation Server 2005, 2008, and 2010; Microsoft SQL Server 2005 and 2008; VB.NET; C#; C; C++; COBOL; SQL; Perl; Java; Assembly; Turbo Pascal; XML; XSLT; .Net 1.0/2.0/3.5; some experience with Sybase, Oracle, and Microsoft SQL administrative duties 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

Minneapolis, MN 

M.B.A. 

South Dakota School of Mines and Technology 

Rapid City, SD 

B.S., Computer Engineering Page 1 

# KYLE RANDOLPH 

Software Quality Assurance Director 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kyle Randolph has more than 17 years of experience working with software systems to ensure data is collected and processed accurately and efficiently. As a Software Quality Assurance Director for the system testing team, Mr. Randolph leads the efforts to validate the proper and efficient function of DRC’s online education systems. He has worked as a leader in maintaining the quality of DRC’s online testing solutions, including leading the testing efforts for DRC INSIGHT, starting with its initial release. 

Prior to joining DRC in 2009, Mr. Randolph held supervisorial quality assurance positions with companies focusing on the collection, maintenance, and distribution of information in the fields of medical research and education. He holds a B.S. in Biology from St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota, and a Mini MBA for Technical Professionals from the University of St. Thomas in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Software Quality Assurance Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Ensures solid SQA practices and standards are established and implemented. Develops and implements testing strategies in Software Quality Assurance. Works with staff and clients to clarify business requirements and ensure information technology requirements are met. Ensures SQA procedures and processes are incorporated into project schedules. Oversees production of quality products for clients. Coordinates and implements code promotion procedures for development, testing, and production environments. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Accountability Reporting System—2009 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2011–2015 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2011–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2011–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2011–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2011–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2011–Present Résumé of Kyle Randolph Page 2 

Graduation Exit Examination—2011–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2011–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2011–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2011–Present 

Minnesota Assessments—2011–2014 

Nebraska State Accountability—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostics—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2011–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2011–2014 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2011–Present 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2011–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2011–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2011–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2011–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2011–2014 Software Quality Assurance Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Acted as the central SQA point of contact between SQA analysts, developers, project managers, and other functional teams to ensure programs and data were adequately tested. Collaborated with Education Project Management in scheduling all software quality activities and building SQA sub-schedules. Provided daily work direction to SQA analysts. Defined approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Designed and implemented processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Coordinated the development and execution of comprehensive testing plans, scripts, and test summaries, and reviewed all documentation for accuracy, feasibility, consistency, and completeness. Integrated testing approach with software development methodology. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrated them into business processes to address business needs. Defined and tracked quality assurance metrics, defect densities and priorities, and open defect counts. 

2011 IT Quality and Release Supervisor 

Mystic Lake Casino 

Shakopee, MN 

Supervised a staff of Quality Assurance Analysts and Release Coordinators responsible for the validation and release of software and hardware solutions. 

Tested gaming and non-gaming systems for compliance with Federal, State and Tribal regulations. Conducted audits of test and release related documentation to ensure all applicable guidelines and procedures were being met. Provided estimates of hours and determined resource availability for all projects requiring Résumé of Kyle Randolph Page 3 

QA involvement. Wrote and delivered annual performance reviews for members of the QA and Release teams. Interviewed and hired staff for open positions. 

2009–2011 Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Led a team of quality assurance personnel in testing INSIGHT for its initial release to Pennsylvania. Conducted load testing of the INSIGHT and eDIRECT systems and made recommendations for areas of improvement including load balancer changes and database index additions. Implemented automated testing practices which allowed for the validation of complex processes including web service calls and data processing. Participated in the migration to Team Foundation Server and Visual Studio for defect and progress tracking. 

Tested the calculation of student scores and AYP status for the state of Alabama. 

Provided day to day supervision and mentoring for members of multiple SQA teams. Estimated testing effort and resource requirements during project planning efforts. Worked with developers in a collaborative environment to troubleshoot coding issues and ensure requirements were properly implemented. Managed and approved the deployment of updates into multiple test and pre-production environments. 

2007–2008 Test Lead 

Plato Learning 

Bloomington, MN 

Supervised off-shore test engineers conducting integration, system, acceptance, and load testing of applications developed using ASP.Net, Java, PHP, SQL Server, Oracle, and MySQL technologies. Created documentation of test results including test metrics, test reports and traceability matrixes. Managed user access and build deployment for multiple test environments. Led go/no-go meetings to determine if all process requirements had been met for the release of new software versions to production. Developed and implemented mitigation plans when risks to quality or schedule were identified. Created and executed test plans and test cases based on user requirements and design specifications. Developed an automated framework to test PLATO’s courseware and management systems. 

2006–2007 Lead Software Quality Engineer 

Pharmaceutical Product Development 

New Hope, MN 

Led a team which ensured systems were developed within GMP guidelines and in compliance with federal regulations (21 CFR Part 11 and HIPAA). Acted as the Validation Coordinator and as a member of the Computer Systems Validation Committee to monitor and approve software, database and hardware changes on validated systems. Reviewed and approved software and hardware changes to validated systems. Led the software change control board and approved all software change requests. Reviewed system requirements and design Résumé of Kyle Randolph Page 4 

specifications to ensure they were complete and testable. Participated in client audits and drafted responses to audit findings. Wrote standard operating 

procedures and guidance documentation. Developed and executed manual and automated test cases. 

1998–2006 Marathon Multimedia 

Faribault, MN 

Supervisor of Product Quality 

Created and led a team responsible for the company's software quality and technical support. Provided final stamp of approval for all products produced by the company. Developed an environment that was committed to consistently improving product quality. Wrote and delivered performance appraisals for technical and non-technical staff. 

Quality Assurance Analyst 

Developed the role of quality assurance analyst in a company which previously had no formal quality assurance team or procedures. Created and executed test plans and test cases for new releases of software products. Monitored project schedules to ensure deadlines were met. Created and managed test data in MySQL, MS SQL and Access. 

Manager: Database, Publications and Technical Support 

Managed a department that provided database management, publications and technical support. Wrote performance appraisals and delivered quarterly updates to the Board of Directors. Created and managed the department’s annual budget. 

Streamlined systems and procedures that resulted in a 40% reduction in staff hours. 

Database Coordinator 

Identified problem areas and deficiencies and suggested solutions or enhancements for programs written in Cold Fusion, ASP, Visual Basic and PHP. 

Engineered databases in Microsoft Access and SQL Server to assemble medical data from Web applications and distribute that data in hardcopy, CD and online forms. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

CMMI, Agile Development, Scrum, Selenium RC, Selenium IDE, LoadRunner 

Webload, Microsoft SQL Server, Access, MySQL, .Net, XML, ASP, Visual Basic, SQL, Microsoft Office, Microsoft Team Foundation Server, Visual Studio 2008, and Visual Studio 2010 Résumé of Kyle Randolph Page 5 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

Minneapolis, MN 

Mini MBA for Technical Professionals 

Mankato State University 

Mankato, MN 

Graduate Level Courses in Biology 

St. Olaf College 

Northfield, MN 

B.S. Biology Page 1 

# DAMON RAY 

Enterprise Architect 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Damon Ray has 16 years of experience with information systems, mainly focusing on software development and IS architecture. In his current role, he provides corporate guidance on software development, quality assurance, production support, and overall infrastructure. He has contributed his expertise for large-scale assessment programs in Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Washington, and Wisconsin, and for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. 

Mr. Ray has technical experience in a variety of languages and database platforms, and has developed both client/server and internet-based applications. Mr. Ray has expertise with image scanning and processing systems. He has also architected online testing solutions for state assessment programs. At DRC, he has been involved with the software and systems in all divisions of the company. 

Mr. Ray holds a B.S.B. in Management Information Systems from the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Enterprise Architect 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides guidance to various organizational groups in the areas of software development, technical infrastructure, data management, software quality assurance, production support, and overall enterprise infrastructure for both internal DRC systems and for external systems, such as the Smarter Balanced Test Delivery system. Also provides governance, standards, and direction to various business units to help position DRC for future growth. Trains development staff and facilitates business and technical discussions with development staff and senior leadership. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Data Warehouse—2010–2012 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program, 

End of Course Examinations—2001–2004 Résumé of Damon Ray Page 2 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2010–Present 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System—2001–2002 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–2009–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2005–2009–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present 

English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2001–2005 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2003–2005 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2010–Present 

Ohio Alternate Assessment for Students with Disabilities—2010–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Criterion-Referenced Test Component— 2005–2009 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–2009; 2010–Present 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program—2001–2009 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2010–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Test Delivery System— 

2012–2014 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

WIDA Assessment Services Supporting ELs through Technology Systems— 2012–Present 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2009 Technical Architect 

Target Corporation 

Minneapolis, MN 

Served as technical lead for a team in a very large application development effort. Worked with hundreds of onshore and offshore resources. Coordinated development of key components for use by other teams. 

2001–2009 Senior Software Developer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Led software development on Image Scanning system. Ensured that software development practices and standards were followed during the development process and provided daily direction to the software development team. Worked closely with internal business users to clarify application functionality, finalize business requirements, and ensure the technology solution met the requirements. Résumé of Damon Ray Page 3 

1999–2001 Associate Consultant 

Computer Sciences Corporation 

Minneapolis, MN 

Web Developer—OnStar Corporation—Detroit, MI 

Created and maintained a project management website used for gathering and disseminating project information. 

Java Developer—OnStar Corporation—Detroit, MI 

Developed components of a Java-based call center application. The application was used to configure certain aspects of each customer’s vehicle in the system. 

Visual Basic Developer—Data Recognition Corporation—Maple Grove, MN 

Coded multiple pieces of a document tracking application. 

1997–1999 Developer/Auditor 

Deloitte & Touche, LLP 

Minneapolis, MN 

Access Developer—Residential Funding Corporation—Minneapolis, MN 

Developed auditing tools and served as a technical resource for auditing operations at a mortgage securitization client. 

Auditor—Residential Funding Corporation—Minneapolis, MN 

Reviewed mortgage documents and ascertained if information was accurate. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Programming Languages :

COBOL, C++, Java, ASP, ASP.NET, Visual Basic, VB.NET, and C# 

Database Platforms :

SQL Server, Oracle, Access 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Carlson School of Management 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S.B., Management Information Systems 

Associate Training—Computer Science Corporation 

Chicago, IL Page 1 

# DORIE RIEGER 

Mathematics Handscoring Content Specialist, 

Performance Assessment Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Dorie Rieger has extensive experience working on scoring projects for large-scale educational assessments in numerous states, including Alaska, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota, and Pennsylvania. She has provided her expertise on an array of mathematics assessment models and item types at multiple grade levels. 

Ms. Rieger’s primary responsibilities include: working closely with state department personnel and educators to develop high-quality, accurate, and consistent training materials; monitoring and supervising the associated handscoring projects and staff; and coordinating rangefinding activities to ensure accurate and efficient scoring. 

Ms. Rieger holds a B.A. in Allied Health from the College of Saint Teresa in Winona, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Mathematics Handscoring Content Specialist 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Assumes responsibility for assigned mathematics content including state-specific curriculum knowledge. Facilitates and participates in rangefinding activities, and develops and supervises the development of both initial and ongoing project training materials. Works closely with DRC personnel at multiple scoring sites as needed to ensure project oversight. Coordinates, supervises, and monitors the scoring of assessments to ensure that projects are completed accurately and on time. Works in close collaboration with other members of the handscoring management team. Implements validity procedures. Interprets and acts upon daily and cumulative statistical data. Consults on the development of scoring rubrics. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2005–2014 

Standards Based Assessments—2004; 2006–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing & Assessment Program: 

End-of-Course Examinations—2002–2005 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System Program—2002 Résumé of Dorie Rieger Page 2 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2001–2005 

Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination for the 21 st  Century—2002; 2005 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Graduation Exit Examination—2006 

Minnesota Basic Skills Test—2004 

Pennsylvania Keystone Examinations —2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Spanish Examinations —2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2001–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Pennsylvania System of School Spanish Assessment—2010–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2006 Scoring Director 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Conducted team leader and scorer training and supervised scoring projects to maintain reliability of scores. Worked closely with the project manager to ensure successful completion of projects. Participated in rangefinding activities and development of training materials. Interpreted and acted upon daily and cumulative statistical data. 

2001–2006 Team Leader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Trained and monitored team of 10–12 scorers to maintain validity and reliability of scores. Retrained as necessary and resolved discrepant scores. Provided written performance evaluations of scorers. 

2001–2003 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses while applying state-mandated criteria. 

Maintained a high level of accuracy and productivity. 

EDUCATION 

College of Saint Teresa 

Winona, Minnesota 

B.A., Allied Health Page 1 

# MACEY ROBERTSON 

Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Macey Robertson has more than five years of experience in the education-related IT field. As a Software Quality Assurance Analyst, she works on both print and online projects. Her responsibilities include reviewing requirements, testing data, coding, reporting issues, ensuring professional look of state reports, and testing software. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Robertson served as a business analyst at Infinite Campus, a student information system vendor, where she worked closely with the Department of Education in four states—Connecticut, Georgia, Louisiana, and New Jersey—to ensure expectations and standards for federal student reporting were met. Ms. Macey served as the lead analyst on a product module rewrite by gathering individual reporting requirements for 38 states and working with other business analysts, developers, and quality analysts to ensure seamless transition from the previous version of the module to the new version. 

Ms. Robertson earned a Master of Science degree in Information and Communication Technologies from the University of Wisconsin-Stout. She also holds a B.A. degree in Psychology from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Plans and implements software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvement. Develops and executes comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documents all software defects and performs regression testing. Coordinates defect review meetings. Participates in appropriate software development meetings. Reviews requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2012–2013 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2013–Present 

Michigan Item Development—2013–Present 

Ohio Graduation Test—2012–2013 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2013 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2013 Résumé of Macey Robertson Page 2 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Developmentally Appropriate Proficiency Exam—2013–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2013–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2012 Business Analyst 

Infinite Campus 

Blaine, MN 

Gathered and documented business requirements for K-12 public education state reporting need. Worked with state and district contacts to clarify expectations and coordinate changes to product to ensure accurate and successful student data reports. Acted as lead analyst on two product module rewrite projects -confirming that requirements writing and testing efforts by team of 16 were comprehensive and met deadlines. Managed Student Immunization module of product for 38 states. Performed product analysis and regression testing. Established and executed testing steps and scenarios with QA team. Reviewed and edited product release notes and documentation 

2008–2009 Office and Assistant Marketing Manager 

PB Loco Peanut Butter 

Minneapolis, MN 

Assisted in online marketing strategies and campaigns. Supervised customer service operations. Strategically responded to substantial amounts of inquiries. Created marketing pieces using Adobe Creative Suite. Managed websites and social media requests. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Software & Technologies: HTML, XML, Microsoft SQL Server, Microsoft Windows, 

Microsoft Office, Adobe Creative Suite, JIRA 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin—Stout 

Menomonie, WI 

M.S., Information and Communication Technologies 

University on Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Psychology Page 1 

# JON RODEBAUGH 

Social Studies/ELA Handscoring Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Jon Rodebaugh has 17 years of experience working with large-scale assessments, predominantly in the areas of social studies and English language arts (ELA). Since 2009, Mr. Rodebaugh has served as Content Specialist for the social studies components of the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program, the Louisiana Graduation Exit Examination, and the Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program, as well as the ELA components of the South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests. 

Mr. Rodebaugh’s primary responsibilities include working closely with state department personnel and educators to develop training materials for social studies and ELA assessments; monitoring and supervising the associated handscoring projects and staff; and coordinating rangefinding activities to ensure accurate and efficient scoring. For both programs, Mr. Rodebaugh served as a liaison between the client and the associated scoring rooms. 

Since 2013, Mr. Rodebaugh has worked in tandem with Louisiana Department of Education social studies content staff to help transition Louisiana’s previous social studies assessment to a new assessment model. He provided handscoring perspective during both the item development and rubric development phases of the process. He played a key role in rangefinding and materials development, thus aiding the transition. Mr. Rodebaugh has also contributed his handscoring expertise to state testing programs for Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Kentucky, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. 

Mr. Rodebaugh holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in English from Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Social Studies/ELA Content Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Oversees the scoring of large-scale educational assessments. Ensures that projects are completed accurately and on time. Develops and supervises the development of project materials, such as scoring guides and training materials. Assumes responsibility for timely completion of projects, maintaining reader reliability, and documenting project information. Contributes to review of assessment materials. Consults with state department of education staff. Trains scoring directors and other performance assessment personnel on the use of DRC’s image handscoring system. Facilitates rangefinding activities and professional Résumé of Jon Rodebaugh Page 2 

development workshops for educators. Consults with test development staff on the development of scoring rubrics. Serves as a client liaison and provides services as assigned by the Director of Performance Assessment Services. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2011–2013 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2006 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: 

Alternate Portfolio Assessment—2001 

Kentucky Commonwealth Accountability Testing System—1998–1999 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2000–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2000–Present 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessment—2003 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–2009 

Philadelphia Citywide Proficiency Exams—2002 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests—2000–2008 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program Scoring and Reporting—1998–2003 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2009 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Oversaw groups of team leaders and their teams of readers on various projects. Prepared training materials and trained team leaders and readers. Ensured scoring accuracy by making scoring decisions according to state client guidelines and rubrics. Analyzed daily and cumulative statistical data to monitor the overall performance of team leaders and readers and to maintain consistent, accurate scoring and timely progress of projects. 

1999–2000 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Oversaw readers in the day-to-day scoring of student responses. Closely monitored reader accuracy and performance. Advised readers on the application of scoring standards as presented in training materials and rubrics. Assisted scoring directors in training readers. Résumé of Jon Rodebaugh Page 3 

1998–1999 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Participated in training and qualifying activities to assess open-ended student responses according to state-mandated scoring criteria. 

1996–1997 Reader 

NCS Pearson 

Iowa City, IA 

Participated in training and qualifying activities to assess written student responses according to state-mandated scoring criteria. 

EDUCATION 

Gustavus Adolphus College 

St. Peter, Minnesota 

B.A., English Page 1 

# LESLIE ROLLAG 

Associate Customer Service Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As an Associate Customer Service Manager, Ms. Leslie Rollag provides customer service and support and operational support of different administrations within the Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program. She has versatility in supporting both the printed materials and online components of the program, which includes customer service, materials development, and materials shipment and return. Ms. Rollag actively participates within the team by providing operations support and developing documents and procedures. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Rollag worked in the aerospace and defense industries, serving as an operations manager and assistant manager. She holds a B.S. in Aviation Operations from St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Associate Customer Service Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Works with clients and customers to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacts with team members to coordinate activities, obtain or provide information regarding the project and changes to the project, assign tasks, and set priorities. Manages and develops project schedules and other project documentation. Monitors project status, distribution and collection of materials, and printing production while providing support for other assessment programs from conception through completion. Provides customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs, including online assessment tools. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Idaho End-of-Course Assessments—2015–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2015–Present 

Missouri Assessment Program—2015–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

End of Course Assessments—2012–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2012–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2013–2015 Résumé of Leslie Rollag Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2012 Operations Manager 

AirScout, LLC 

Elk River, MN 

Managed custom e-commerce website re-development project. Processed orders and provided customer service. Tracked inventory using online content management system. 

2008–2009 Assistant Manager 

Alliant Techsystems, Inc. (ATK) 

Arlington, VA 

Managed $3.9M budget tracking and analysis and prepared budget proposals. Assisted in planning, coordinating, and executing domestic and international trade shows to include pre-event logistics, exhibit set-up, transportation, security, and allocation of services. Co-coordinated on-site operations and interacted with cross-functional teams. 

2005–2008 Executive Administrative Assistant 

Alliant Techsystems, Inc. (ATK) 

Edina, MN 

Provided administrative support to executive-level management. Processed invoices and expense reports. Supported trade show manager in exhibition planning. 

2002–2005 Crew Resources Clerk 

Mesaba Airlines 

Eagan, MN 

Provided administrative support to Directors of Safety and Crew Resources. Created, developed, and maintained databases and filing systems pertaining to operational performance and company safety metrics. Launched a data sharing and communications forum for 12 regional air carriers 

1997–2001 Office and Administrative Specialist 

SCSU Affirmative Action Office 

St. Cloud, MN 

Developed and maintained databases to track 100+ hiring searches annually. Fielded data requests and prepared reports for campus community and state government agencies. Assisted with coordination of workshops and campus events. Résumé of Leslie Rollag Page 3 

MILITARY SERVICE 

2002–2005 Intelligence Specialist 

U.S. Naval Reserve 

1997–2002 Helicopter Repairer 

Army National Guard 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S. Aviation Operations major, Criminal Justice Studies minor Page 1 

# PAT ROSCHEWSKI 

Vice President, Education Solutions 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Pat Roschewski has 46 years of experience serving as an administrator, college professor, and classroom teacher. Prior to joining DRC, Dr. Roschewski served as director of statewide assessment for the Nebraska Department of Education for 12 years. She has served on many regional, state, and national committees and task forces advising state and national policy makers on issues of curriculum, instruction, assessment data, and accountability. 

As Vice President, Educational Solutions, Dr. Roschewski provides direction for DRC’s new product offerings and works with DRC’s education clients to identify needs, track trends in accountability and assessment, and managing industry systems. 

Dr. Roschewski holds a Ph.D. in Administration, Curriculum and Instruction, a Specialist’s Certification of Superintendency, an M.S. in Curriculum and Instruction with a gifted endorsement, and a B.S. in Education, all from the University of Nebraska. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Vice President, Education Solutions 

2012–2014 Senior Director, Education Solutions 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides direction for new product offerings. Works with DRC’s education clients to identify needs, track trends in accountability assessment data, and the management of industry systems. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2000–2012 Director of Statewide Assessment 

Nebraska Department of Education 

Lincoln, NE 

Led the state in building a system of classroom assessment, a centralized state testing system, and an interim assessment system. All aspects of assessment and accountability involved the management of high-level systems. Responsible for: oversight of content standards revision; oversight of local assessment development in Nebraska school districts; review of all local assessment used in Nebraska schools; leading the professional development efforts for the building of technically sound classroom assessment; all written and verbal communication to Résumé of Pat Roschewski Page 2 

the field and to policy makers regarding standards, assessment, and accountability; development and oversight of state accountability system with state board committees; integration of federal requirements into the assessment and accountability system; organizing all state professional development for standards, assessment, and accountability; supervising item/prompt development for centralized state tests in content areas such as reading, writing, mathematics, science; all technical issues including, standard settings, alignment studies, and validation studies in all subject areas; reporting and display of state, district, and building data; monitoring and overseeing security of state testing; managing a multi-million dollar budget, issuing contracts and RFPs; oversight of statewide writing assessment implementation and scoring; reporting to the State Board of Education all assessment and accountability-related issues; facilitating state board committees related to standards, assessment, and accountability; and representing Nebraska on national committees. 

2000–2012 Adjunct Professor 

Doane College 

Crete, NE 

Taught assessment leadership class for principals. 

1996–2000 Director of Curriculum, Instruction and Assessment 

Beatrice Public Schools 

Beatrice, NE 

Responsible for oversight of Curriculum, Instruction and Assessment at Beatrice Public Schools. Organized and/or provided all professional development. Organized and provided oversight to all curriculum committees. Facilitated the school improvement committees and process. Provided oversight and advice to all district assessment development. Prepared all data analysis for building and district use. Served as co-evaluator for principals and final staff evaluator. Visited every classroom in the district multiple times. Worked with Board of Education Committees and Goals. Served as North Central external chair for numerous school districts. Served as a school representative on multiple community committees. Completed state and federal reports and compliance requirements. Wrote grants and served as project manager for multiple district projects. Initiated district-level programs including gifted enrichment classes and Jumpstart Intervention Programs throughout the school year. Served on state committees representing the school district. The local district experience serves as an advantage in understanding all levels of system management. Résumé of Pat Roschewski Page 3 

1974–1996 Teacher and K-12 Gifted Seminar Facilitator 

Beatrice Middle School/Junior High and High School 

Beatrice, NE 

Taught English, creative writing, and drama to grades 8 and 10. Facilitated the K-12 gifted program and taught grades 8–9 gifted seminar and mentor opportunity. The classroom perspective has provided a depth of understanding regarding relieving burden from local educators. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Operation of Best Practices Committee, CCSSO—2010–Present 

National Technical Advisory Committee, Kentucky—2009–Present 

Association Supervision Curriculum Development (ASCD)—1997–2012 

Phi Delta Kappa, University of Nebraska Chapter—1997–2012 

Nebraska Council of School Administrators (NCSA)—1997–2012 

Association of Educational Research (AERA)—2000–2012 

National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME)—2000–2012 

Planning Committee for the Student Assessment Conference, CCSSO—2006– 2011 

Next Generation Accountability Systems Task Force, CCSSO—2010–2011 

Founder of MOSAIC consortium, later to become SMARTER Balanced Common Core Assessment—2009 

SELECTED PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Darling-Hammond, L., Neill, M., Roschewski, P., Wood, G., “Refocusing Accountability: Using Local Performance Assessments to Enhance Teaching and Learning for Higher Order Skills,” 2007. 

Dappen, L., Isernhagen, J., and Roschewski, P., “ASPECTS OF TESTING: Nebraska STARS: Achieving Results,” Phi Delta Kappan , 2006, Vol. 87, No. 6, 433–437. 

Auty, W., Blank, R., Choi, K., Goldschmidt, P., Hebbler, S., Roschewski P., Williams, A., “Policymakers’ Guide to Growth Models for School Accountability: How Do Accountability Models Differ?” Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO), 2005, <http://www.ccsso.org/Resources/Publications/Policymakers%E2%80%99_G uide_to_Growth_Models_for_School_Accountability_How_Do_Accountabili ty_Models_Differ.html> 

Roschewski, P., “High-Stakes Testing: Nebraska STARS Line Up,” Phi Delta Kappan , 2003, Vol. 84, No. 7, 517–520. 

Roschewski, P., “ Promising Practices in Building Local Assessment” 

Dissertation, Phi Delta Kappan , 2002. Résumé of Pat Roschewski Page 4 

Gallagher, C., Isernhagen, J., and Roschewski, P., “Nebraskans Reach for the STARS” Phi Delta Kappan, 2001, Vol. 82, No. 8, 611–615. 

HONORS AND AWARDS 

Nebraska Council of School Administrators, Friend of Education Award—2012 

Phi Delta Kappa, University of Nebraska Chapter, Outstanding Leadership Award—2012 

“Manager of the Year”, Nebraska Department of Education—2011 

Outstanding Alumnus 2010, University of Nebraska College of Education and Human Sciences—2010 

Association Supervision Curriculum Development (ASCD), Al Kilgore Award for Outstanding Service in Curriculum and Instruction—2007 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), Walter Beggs Award, Outstanding Accomplishments—2005 

Woman of the Year, Beatrice Business and Professional Women—1996 

Beatrice Chamber of Commerce Award for Outstanding Achievement—1994 

Beatrice Public Schools Outstanding Educator—1994 

Beatrice Jaycees Outstanding Young Educator—1978 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

As Nebraska’s former director of statewide assessment (from 2000–2012), Dr. Roschewski delivered numerous presentations across the United States for the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO), the Coalition of Essential Schools (CES), the National Education Association (NEA), the Senate HELP Committee, the Forum for Democracy, State Departments of Education, and the National Research Council (NRC). 

EDUCATION 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Lincoln, NE 

Ph.D., Administration, Curriculum and Instruction 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Lincoln, NE 

Specialist’s Certification of Superintendency 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Lincoln, NE 

M.S., Curriculum and Instruction with gifted endorsement 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Lincoln, NE 

B.S., Education with distinction Page 1 

# DOUG RUSSELL 

Senior Vice President, Education Program Management 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Doug Russell has over 37 years of industry experience, mostly with direct division P&L responsibility. For the last 16 years, he has operated at the general manager and vice president levels, focusing on the education, commercial, and government markets. Additionally, he has a strong background in operations and marketing, working in both plant and corporate environments. 

As the Senior Vice President, Education Program Management at DRC, Mr. Russell is the senior leader responsible for DRC’s Education Program Management organization. In this role, he oversees program management teams that develop and deliver assessment solutions to DRC’s Education clients nationwide. Mr. Russell acts as an executive client liaison, ensuring the company’s Education teams have the right resources, capabilities, and skills to meet evolving customer needs. 

Mr. Russell holds a B.S. in Business from Capella University in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and an A.S. in Journalism from Graham College in Boston, Massachusetts. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Vice President, Education Program Management 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for DRC Education Program Management. Supports the delivery of DRC services to statewide educational testing programs. Responsible for developing and implementing a strategic vision that mirrors the evolving direction of large-scale, statewide educational assessment programs and leading DRC’s program managers. Senior management duties include corporate-wide strategic planning, and budget and profit and loss responsibilities within the Education Services business unit. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2013 Senior Vice President of Education Solutions 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Led strategic marketing, alliance/partnership initiatives, and all product development initiatives for all business units. Responsibilities included: corporate Résumé of Doug Russell Page 2 

marketing, product development, proposals, alliances/partnerships, business development, and financial oversight. 

2002–2010 Vice President of Document Services and Surveys 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Led the Document Services and Surveys business units. Responsibilities included: providing direction for all sales, marketing, and operations/manufacturing functions for both businesses. Document Services provides design, printing, finishing, and fulfillment services. This unit focuses on delivering mission-critical applications utilizing digital and offset print technologies. The Surveys business unit provides complex, large-scale, full-service survey solutions focusing on customer satisfaction and employee opinion applications. Markets served include: education, publishers, commercial, and government. 

1999–2003 Vice President, Enterprise Administrative Solutions 

NCS Pearson 

Mesa, AZ 

Provided leadership for $80 million software product management organization. Direct P&L responsibility for enterprise solutions focused on Student Information Systems, Instructional/Assessment Services, and Financial applications. 

1998–1999 Division General Manager 

NCS Pearson 

Minneapolis, MN 

Managed performance of the Printing Division, with annual revenues of $75 million. Responsible for multiple manufacturing facilities with over 300 employees. Markets served were commercial, educational, and federal. 

1992–1998 Director of Marketing and Operations 

NCS Pearson 

Minneapolis, MN 

Responsible for the development and growth of the printing business, including annual operations, revenue, marketing, and long-term strategic plans. Directed all sales and marketing activities. 

1990–1992 Senior Product Manager 

NCS Pearson 

Minneapolis, MN 

Implemented a corporate initiative to drive executive-level product management. Established a core group to provide total product direction and leadership to designated NCS business units. Résumé of Doug Russell Page 3 

1978–1990 NCS Pearson 

Held numerous manufacturing, sales, and marketing positions at local plant level. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS AND AWARDS 

Kids Voting Minnesota 

Board Chair—2005–2011 

Sales and Marketing Executive International 

President of Lancaster, PA chapter—1987 

International Officer—1988–1993 

President of Minneapolis/St. Paul Chapter—1995 

Edward F. Mair Award for significant business community contributions 

Charles A. Bronstein Award for leadership in youth education 

EDUCATION 

Capella University 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Business 

Graham College 

Boston, MA 

A.S., Journalism 

Franklin and Marshall College 

Lancaster, PA 

Business Management Program Page 1 

# SHAUNDRA SAND 

Vice President, Education Program Management 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Shaundra Sand has more than 20 years of experience with large-scale statewide testing programs and is a certified Project Management Professional (PMP) through the Project Management Institute. Her work has included managing and directing a broad range of projects in Pennsylvania, including the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA), the Classroom Diagnostic Tools (CDT), the Voluntary Model Curriculum (VMC), and the Keystone Exams. Ms. Sand has also managed testing programs in other states, including the Florida High School Competency Test and the Minnesota Basic Standards Test. 

Ms. Sand’s management contributions in assessment programs throughout her career at DRC have been myriad and include: 

• Successful implementation of new major testing programs for Pennsylvania (the CDT and Keystone Exams). 

• Design and implementation of several web-based initiatives, including the interactive, online reporting suite for the CDT and computer-based testing for all Pennsylvania programs. 

• Management of multiple administrations of the PSSA and Keystone Exams, consistently meeting or exceeding contract deadlines. 

• Implementation of a large-scale AYP reporting system, including web release of data and a web-based appeals system for client use. 

Ms. Sand holds a Bachelor of Education degree in Secondary Education from Western Michigan University in Kalamazoo, Michigan. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Vice President, Education Program Management 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Manages senior-level Program Management professionals who oversee programs and program teams. Provides senior-level expertise, oversight, and leadership of designated state teams to ensure contract compliance, quality, and communication/resolution of scope changes and risks. Sets priorities collaboratively for respective teams and direct reports, helping to resolve conflicts and procure resources as appropriate. Serves as liaison and provider of customized solutions to state departments of education and district personnel. Hires, coaches, and supervises additional project management staff. Manages project forecasts, budgets, payment schedules, and billings; assists in proposal development and review. Oversees the management of internal and external Résumé of Shaundra Sand Page 2 

project resources. Other responsibilities include program evaluation and enhancements, planning, subcontractor management and performance review, and long-range planning. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Florida High School Competency Test—1995–1996 

Kentucky Instructional Results Information System—1995 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—1996 

Minnesota Essential Learner Outcome Test—1996–1997 

North Carolina End-of-Course Testing Program—1995 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1996–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2010–Present 

Philadelphia City-Wide Proficiency Exams—2001–2002 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2010 Senior Director of Large-Scale Assessment 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as liaison and provider of customized solutions to State Departments of Education and district personnel. Provided overall management and direction of large-scale statewide assessment programs to ensure that all quality processes, project schedules, and contract and budget requirements are achieved. Supervised project management staff, including the senior project manager, project managers, associate project managers, and project assistants. Responsibilities included hiring, coaching, resource planning, allocating, and assigning work requirements. Managed project forecasts, budgets, payment schedules, and billings; assists in proposal development and review; and develops training materials. Monitored project status and schedules. Oversaw the management of internal and external project resources. Other responsibilities included quality oversight, program evaluation and enhancements, planning, subcontractor management and performance review, and long-range planning. Involved in corporate strategic planning and corporate training initiatives. 

2002–2005 Director of State Assessment Programs 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Served as liaison and provider of customized solutions to state departments of education and district personnel. Provided overall management and direction of large-scale statewide assessment programs to ensure that all quality processes, project schedules, and contract and budget requirements were achieved. Supervised project management staff, including the senior project manager, Résumé of Shaundra Sand Page 3 

project managers, associate project managers, and project assistants. Responsibilities included hiring, coaching, resource planning, allocating, and assigning work requirements. In addition, oversaw the development of manuals, test booklets, scannable answer documents, and other materials related to testing projects. Managed project forecasts, budgets, payment schedules, and billings; assisted in proposal development and review; and developed training materials. Monitored project status and schedules. Oversaw the management of internal and external project resources. Other responsibilities included quality oversight, program evaluation and enhancements, planning, subcontractor management and performance review, and long-range planning. 

2000–2002 Manager, State Assessment Programs 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Performed client liaison and communication. Monitored vendor and subcontractor performance and prices. Designed, wrote, edited, and proofread manuals, test booklets, scannable answer sheets, and other materials related to testing projects. Designed report forms and developed reporting specifications. Verified answer keys to ensure accurate scoring. Developed specifications for distribution and collection systems and data analyses. Monitored project status, project budget, distribution and collection systems, and print production. Oversaw maintenance of project documentation so that all project specifications, procedures, printed materials, and report samples were available for current and future reference. Supervised team of project management staff. Oversaw the coordination of internal and external project resources. Assisted with the preparation of proposals. 

1998–2000 Project Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Served as liaison to the Pennsylvania Department of Education. Responsible for managing and directing the day-to-day project activities of the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment. Monitored project processes and materials for quality and consistency, as well as project schedules to ensure on-time delivery. Managed expenditures to ensure budgetary compliance. Supervised and trained project coordinators, project assistants, and customer service representatives. Wrote, edited, and proofread project test materials and score reports; developed training materials. 

1996–1998 Project Coordinator 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Responsible for implementing various phases of projects, including serving as client and customer liaison; coordinating and scheduling projects with internal operational staff and external vendors; and monitoring project status and project budget. In addition, maintained project documentation so that all specifications, Résumé of Shaundra Sand Page 4 

procedures, printed materials, and report samples were correct. Also designed scannable answer documents and forms, as well as score report forms and reporting specifications. Wrote, edited, and proofread manuals and other materials related to testing projects. Verified that administration manuals were consistent with materials handling procedures. Developed procedures for packaging of materials and reports; verified answer keys and test questions; coordinated out-of-state committee meetings; developed training materials. 

1995–1996 Project Assistant 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Minnetonka, MN 

Worked with customers to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to obtain and disseminate information regarding projects, prioritize work, and coordinate tasks to meet deadlines. Developed, edited, and proofread manuals, publications, and project documentation. Managed projects within budget by obtaining bids from outside vendors to find the best price by determining costs and by purchasing materials. Verified answer keys and test questions. Monitored project status, distribution and collection systems, and printing production. Provided customer service to school districts needing assistance related to their state assessment programs. 

1995 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses, applying state-mandated scoring criteria. 

1995 Quality Reviewer/Document Coder 

Quorum Litigation Services 

Bloomington, MN 

Created and edited computer databases for legal firms. Responsible for quality control of other editors’ work. Maintained client confidentiality. Achieved above-average standards in quality and quantity of production. 

1994 Intern Teacher 

South Middle School 

Kalamazoo, MI 

Taught five sections of American History and one section of Current Events to 120 eighth-grade students. Planned and implemented daily lesson plans complete with objectives, procedures, and assessments. Utilized a variety of teaching methods to target varied learning styles. Successfully applied a variety of classroom management techniques. Résumé of Shaundra Sand Page 5 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP) 

Project Management Institute 

November 2006 

EDUCATION 

Western Michigan University 

Kalamazoo, MI 

B.A., Secondary Education 

University of St. Thomas 

Minneapolis, MN 

Executive Education, School of Business 

Finance for Nonfinancial Managers 

University of St. Thomas 

Minneapolis, MN 

Continuing Education: The Beginning Manager 

University of Wisconsin 

Madison, WI 

Executive Education, School of Business 

Project Management Planning, Scheduling, and Control 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Executive Education, Carlson School of Management 

Power and Influence: Strategically Managing Business Relationships 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Continuing Education: Statistics 

Continuing Education: Assessment 

Employers Association, Inc. 

Plymouth, MN 

Continuing Education: Supervision 1: The Basics 

Milestone Consulting Group 

Continuing Education: Enterprise Project Management using Microsoft Office Project 2003 

Project Management Institute/RMC Project Management 

Continuing Education: Tricks of the Trade for Project Management 

Continuing Education: Project Management Tricks of the Trade 

Continuing Education: PMP Exam Preparation Résumé of Shaundra Sand Page 6 

Louellen Essex and Associates 

Continuing Education: Building a Foundation of Management Skills 

Hennepin Technical Institute 

Continuing Education: Principals of Project Management 

Franklin Covey 

Workshop: What Matters Most—Time Management Tools Page 1 

# JUDSON SATHER 

Senior Director, Test Development Technologies 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Judson Sather has broad-based skills and experience both in processes and applications of technology for the Test Development department, including electronic item banking and online testing. Mr. Sather is responsible for directing three of the department’s resource teams—Technologies, Publications, and Support Services. In this role he provides leadership for the creation and production of all materials both for print and online delivery. He has also taken a leadership role in facilitating the use and enhancement of DRC’s item-banking system—the Item Development and Educational Assessment System (IDEAS)— and its interaction with the online environment—DRC INSIGHT TM . Mr. Sather is responsible for training and guiding remote users of IDEAS and DRC INSIGHT, which include DRC employees and state department representatives. In addition, he has been instrumental in guiding the accommodations for DRC’s online assessment environment. 

In a previous position as a senior mathematics test developer and content lead with DRC, Mr. Sather led the mathematics test development process for the Alaska, Arkansas, and Idaho assessment programs. He has also participated in testing programs for Louisiana, Minnesota, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Pennsylvania. His test development experience includes item writing and editing, item writer training, electronic item bank maintenance, test blueprint construction, content standards development, audio script writing, and test form preparation and finalization for both print and online programs. He has facilitated content and data review, performance level descriptor development, and forms approval meetings. 

Mr. Sather taught secondary school mathematics and computer science for 14 years at all levels, from Grade 7 mathematics through calculus, with cognitive ranges from special education through gifted-and-talented. He has also developed professional development materials and presented them to teachers in local school districts, members of client state committees, and attendees at conferences of the Minnesota Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Mr. Sather holds an M.A. in Curriculum and Instruction from the University of St. Thomas in St. Paul, Minnesota, and a B.S. in Secondary Mathematics Education from the University of Minnesota. Résumé of Judson Sather Page 2 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Sather’s College and Career Readiness (CCR) experience includes providing leadership and guidance on the item banking and online testing technologies used in the item development process. This has included the development of items, including technology-enhanced items, aligned to career and college ready standards. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Senior Director, Test Development Technologies 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Serves as the Test Development representative for item banking and online testing. Works closely with Test Development staff members to determine process workflow using item-banking systems throughout all stages of the item and test development process. Provides support to other functional units within DRC and leads and participates in discussions concerning the requirements and enhancements for developing item-banking and online testing technology as directly related to test development roles and responsibilities. Facilitates interaction with clients in order to promote an understanding of the test development item-banking and online testing technology. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program: 

End of Course Examinations—2004–2005 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2006–Present 

Idaho End of Course Assessments—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2004–2005 

Michigan K-12 Item Development and Online Testing—2011–Present 

Michigan MI-Access Alternate Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Minnesota Basic Skills Tests—2004 

Minnesota Comprehensive Assessments—2004 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Item Development— 

2012–2013 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 Résumé of Judson Sather Page 3 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2012–2014 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

World-Class Instructional Design and Assessment (WIDA) Consortium 

ACCESS for ELLs 2.0 Field Test—2012–Present 

ACCESS for ELLs 2.0 Operational Assessments—2014–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–2008 Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist/Content Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Developed mathematics assessments according to item and test specifications. Developed, edited, and reviewed items. Trained freelance item writers and consultants to write multiple-choice and constructed-response questions. Maintained electronic item bank. Facilitated client content, data, and test form review meetings. Participated in standard setting and validation meetings. Led mathematics test development for several clients. 

2001–2004 Database Design Contractor 

Meier Tool & Engineering 

Anoka, MN 

Designed large databases and user interfaces with sophisticated capabilities using Microsoft Access, SQL, and Visual Basic. Coordinated key input from team members to achieve final outcomes. Trained employees on use of new databases. 

1989–2003 Mathematics Teacher, Computer Science Instructor, and Technology Trainer 

Eden Prairie High School 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Mathematics Teacher 

Worked with teams of colleagues to initially develop, continually evaluate, and regularly update courses, learning materials, assessments, and grading rubrics. Wrote outcome-based objectives and designed assessments in alignment with state standards and course objectives. Mentored new teachers. 

Mathematics Department Co-Chair 

Assisted in leading a 22-member department. Planned, coordinated, and conducted monthly department meetings. Represented the department in school-wide administrative meetings. Worked within budget to procure books and supplies. Generated complete teaching schedule involving 22 teachers, 15 classrooms, and 260 classes. Résumé of Judson Sather Page 4 

Technology Trainer 

Developed training curriculum for staff development in the use of technology. Conducted adult learner training classes and one-on-one training sessions. Created and implemented staff training needs surveys. Maintained a training center for drop-in and scheduled training sessions. 

Distance Learning Course Architect and Instructor 

Created first ever online distance learning computer course at Eden Prairie High School. Produced learner activities, assignments, labs, and assessments relevant to course objectives and guided by the principles of a quality online learning experience. Continually evaluated and modified the course content and design in order to best meet the needs of the learner. 

Online Computer Science Instructor 

Developed five online courses using web-based and in-class course materials, instruction, and assessment. Enhanced computer science courses through substantial modifications and additions. Launched a new course in A+ Certification and coordinated the purchase and set-up of all equipment and materials. Observed 200% growth in student participation in computer science classes over three years. Trained students in computer science classes, including HTML, web page design, CSS, networking, JavaScript, PHP, MySQL, C++, the UNIX operating system, A+ Certification hardware, and A+ Certification operating systems. 

EDUCATION 

University of St. Thomas 

St. Paul, MN 

M.A., Curriculum and Instruction 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Secondary Education 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.C.E., Structural Design Page 1 

# ALASSANE SAVADOGO 

Research Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Alassane Savadogo recently joined DRC and is currently working on the Pennsylvania Keystone project. He has experience in working on a number of studies including statistical modeling using Pareto chart, linear regression, logistic regression, and data mining including classification tree and random forest. His experience includes using Pareto Chart to rank the occurrences of defects in software with Lender Processing Inc. in a project for Defect Labeling; completing analysis to compare hearing aid return rates among clinics using Audiology data from St. Cloud State University; and using logistic modeling to predict the successfulness of students applying to St. Cloud State University. Mr. Savadogo completed his Master’s thesis project on: Logistic regression, classification tree and random forest approaches in analyzing educational data: Application to St. Cloud State University Teacher Candidates Evaluation Data. 

Mr. Savadogo has experience in statistical modeling and using main statistical packages such as R, SAS, JMP, and SPSS. He also has teaching experience including lecturing and tutoring at St. Cloud State University and St. Cloud Technical and Community College in St. Cloud, Minnesota. 

Mr. Savadogo holds a M.S. in Applied Statistics from St. Cloud University in St. Cloud, Minnesota and a B.S. in Statistics with a minor in Applied Economics from the Institute of Technology at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Research Analyst 

2014 Statistical Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Analyze educational data to identify patterns in scores using descriptive statistics and linear regression. Works on special studies and conducts analyses related to technical reports, and supports psychometricians in design, computation, and report generation. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2014–Present Résumé of Alassane Savadogo Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2013 Tutor 

St. Cloud Technical and Community College 

St. Cloud, MN 

Tutored students in elementary and intermediate statistics. 

2011–2012 Graduate Assistant 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

Taught elementary statistics and held office hours. Statistical consulting projects included analysis of time series data with R to find a trend using Wisconsin’s sales data. Helped graduate students analyze audiology survey data with SAS using t-test and ANOVA, in addition to analyzing archeology data with SAS using Chi-square test statistics and ANOVA. 

2011 Statistical Consulting Internship 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

Interviewed clients and performed data manipulation, data cleaning, and analysis using SPSS. Uploaded survey questionnaires on SurveyMonkey. 

2011 Statistics Tutor 

St. Cloud State University 

St Cloud, MN 

Tutored students in elementary and intermediate statistics. 

2009–2010 Data Analyst 

Lender Processing, Inc. 

Mendota Heights, MN 

Performed data mining and statistical modeling. Analyzed and resolved problems through appropriate identification, analysis, and recommendation using Pareto charts. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

R, SAS, Java programming, Microsoft Office, Microsoft Outlook, SPSS, JMP Résumé of Alassane Savadogo Page 3 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

M.S., Applied Statistics 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Coursework in Statistics 

Institute of Technology, University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Statistics, Minor in Applied Economics Page 1 

# CHRISTOPHER SCALERCIO 

Senior Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Christopher Scalercio has 14 years of reading and language arts test development experience across all grade levels. As a Senior Test Development Specialist, he provides subject-specific expertise in the content areas of reading and English language arts relative to all stages of the test development process. Mr. Scalercio has worked on several statewide assessment programs, providing leadership as the supervisor of content teams, team lead, and content lead. His assessment experience encompasses a wide range of activities: facilitating passage, item, data, and forms reviews; item writing, editing, and reviewing; item writer workshops; cognitive labs; prompt-anchor pulling; rangefinding; standard setting; test design, including test blueprints and item specifications; and assessment scripts, including scripts for special populations. 

Mr. Scalercio’s specific grade-level assessment experience includes grades 3 through high school for language, writing, and reading multiple-choice; evidence-based selected-response items; short and long constructed responses; and writing prompts. For three years, he has been the ELA Reading Lead for Pennsylvania’s PSSA, Keystone, and CDT assessments, handling all tasks related to item development, committee reviews, and test construction. In addition to supervising tasks associated with the development process, he worked on revising and updating item specifications. 

In addition to his comprehensive experience in large-scale assessment, Mr. Scalercio has seven years of teaching experience at the high school level. He holds a Master of Arts degree in Adult and Higher Education and a Bachelor of Arts degree in English, both from the University of Texas San Antonio. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS (CCR) EXPERIENCE 

Mr. Scalercio’s CCR experience includes developing CCR-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in ELA Reading (grades 3–8), Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA) in ELA Reading (grades 3– 8), and Keystone Literature Exams (high school). 

Mr. Scalercio has also aligned existing Louisiana assessments to meet the expectations of College and Career Readiness for English language arts and the implementation of PARCC assessments. He developed new reading passages, items, and scoring rubrics for the inclusion in the transitional English language arts assessments for grades 3–8. 

Mr. Scalercio remains current on issues related to College and Career Readiness by participating in webinars sponsored by the Council of Chief State School Résumé of Christopher Scalercio Page 2 

Officers. Some of the webinars have focused on text complexity and other College and Career Readiness developments. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2007–Present Senior Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Participates in all aspects of reading and English language arts test and item development. Works with content specialists, freelance writers, and consultants in reading and English language arts item development and test construction. Researches and communicates current developments in reading and English language arts assessments. Responsibilities also include representing DRC at conferences, working with nationally known content experts, assisting in curriculum and professional development activities, and updating and maintaining project documentation. Facilitates content, data, and rangefinding committee reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Tests +—2010–2014 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2010–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–2007 Senior Assessment Specialist 

Harcourt Assessment 

San Antonio, TX 

Responsible for writing and reviewing English language arts assessments for all grade levels for various custom contracts: Proficiency Assessments for Wyoming Students (grades 3–10, reading and prompts), Hawaii Content and Performance Standards Assessment (grades 3, 5, 8, 10, reading and prompts), and Mississippi Subject Area Testing Program (grade 10, reading, language, prompts). Responsible for writing and reviewing English language arts assessments for all grade levels for catalog product, Learnia (grades 3–8, reading). Responsible for monitoring and reviewing the work and progress of several assessment specialists. Résumé of Christopher Scalercio Page 3 

2001–2004 Assessment Specialist II 

Educational Testing Service 

San Antonio, TX 

Responsible for writing and reviewing English language arts (ELA) assessments for all grade levels for multiple state contracts: ELA Lead on the California High School Exit Examination (grade 10, reading, language, and prompts), California Standardized Testing and Reporting (grades 3 through high school, reading, language, and prompts), and Georgia End-of-Course Examination (grade 9 and American literature, reading, language, and prompts). Responsible for writing and reviewing English language arts assessments for all grade levels for catalog product, SLF (Standards Learning First—grades 3–8, reading). Responsible for monitoring and reviewing the work and progress of several assessment specialists. 

2000–2001 Assessment Specialist I 

Harcourt Educational Measurement 

San Antonio, TX 

Responsible for writing and reviewing English language arts assessments for all grade levels for multiple state projects: Writing Lead for Virginia Standards of Learning Assessment (grades 3, 5, 8, 10, reading, language, and prompts), Reading Lead for Hawaii Content and Performance Standards Assessment (grades 3, 5, 8, 10, reading and prompts). 

1999–2000 Teacher 

San Antonio Independent School District 

San Antonio, TX 

Taught English to students in grades 9 and 10. Responsible for developing, designing, and implementing district curriculum associated with teaching assignment at the high school level. Served as student mentor. 

1993–1999 Teacher 

Harlandale Independent School District 

San Antonio, TX 

Taught English to students in grades 9–12 and an English elective course to students in grades 11 and 12. Responsible for developing, designing, and implementing district curriculum associated with teaching assignment at the high school level. Gained experience in developing district initiatives and facilitating professional development workshops. Served as team member on multiple district/teaching initiatives: School for Leadership, Team Teaching, and Teaching with Technology. Served as curriculum facilitator. Résumé of Christopher Scalercio Page 4 

1993–1997 Scoring Supervisor 

The Psychological Corporation 

San Antonio, TX 

Responsible for training and supervising team of educational assessment readers/scorers during evenings and summers. Provided quality checks to ensure that contractual obligations were met; developed rubrics and training materials. Items, subjects, and grades included short answer and prompts in reading for grades 3–12 and short answer and prompts in social studies for grades 3–5. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) —2010–2011 

International Reading Association (IRA) —2006–2009 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Scalercio, Chris (1996). Integrating Technology in the Classroom. International Reading Association Convention, New Orleans, Louisiana. 

EDUCATION 

University of Texas San Antonio 

San Antonio, TX M.A., Adult and Higher Education 

University of Texas San Antonio 

San Antonio, TX B.A., English 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Texas Secondary Teaching Certificate—English Page 1 

# CHRISTIAN SCHILLER 

Director of State Assessment Programs 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Christian Schiller has 18 years of management experience at a variety of levels. For the past eight years, he has served in progressive roles for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment program, including project manager, senior project manager, program manager, and, most recently, Director. In his current role as Director, Mr. Schiller provides overall management and direction to ensure that all quality processes, project schedules, and contract and budget requirements are achieved. 

In addition to his extensive management background, Mr. Schiller has well-rounded writing and editing education and work experience, including a position serving a as co-editor for a small university newspaper. He holds a B.A. in English and Education with a minor in Communications from Concordia University in St. Paul, Minnesota. While obtaining his degree, he received training as a secondary educator. He is also certified as a Project Management Professional (PMP ®) through the Project Management Institute. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Director of State Assessment Programs 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Serves as liaison and provider of customized solutions to state departments of education and district personnel. Provides overall management and direction of large-scale statewide assessment programs to ensure that all quality processes, project schedules, and contract and budget requirements are achieved. Supervises project management staff, including the senior project manager, project managers, associate project managers, and project assistants. Responsibilities include hiring, coaching, resource planning, allocating, and assigning work requirements. In addition, oversees the development of manuals, test booklets, scannable answer documents, and other materials related to testing projects. Manages project forecasts, budgets, payment schedules, and billings; assists in proposal development and review; and develops training materials. Monitors project status and schedules. Oversees the management of internal and external project resources. Other responsibilities include quality oversight, program evaluation and enhancements, planning, subcontractor management and performance review, and long-range planning. Résumé of Christian Schiller Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2012 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2013–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2013 Senior Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with project team members to obtain and disseminate information regarding projects, prioritize work, and coordinate tasks to meet deadlines. Managed projects within budget by obtaining bids from outside vendors to achieve the best price, determine costs, and purchase materials. Additional responsibilities included monitoring project status, distribution and collection systems, and printing production, and providing customer service to school districts that need assessment-related assistance. Supported the manager of state assessment programs with all project staff supervision. Worked with the state department of education on the development and delivery of test coordinator workshops. 

2004–2007 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Interacted with clients to obtain information regarding their product and service requests and provides progress reports. Was responsible for accurate, timely completion of projects. Organized and scheduled work to be completed and resolves problems. Obtained bids from outside vendors to find best prices; purchased materials; monitored contract specifications, revisions, pricing, billing, and costs. Interacted with team members to coordinate activities. Obtained or provided information regarding projects and changes to projects, assigned tasks, and set priorities. Provided information to operations department regarding job parameters and changes to projects. Designed data collection processes and developed client project reports that met those needs. Developed, updated, and maintained project materials such as manuals, publications, meeting agendas, and project documentation. Provided work direction to associate project managers or temporary staff as needed and monitored quality of work. 

1999–2004 Senior Manager 

Standard Parking Corporation 

Minneapolis/St. Paul, MN 

Minneapolis Résumé of Christian Schiller Page 3 

Direct management of a “Class A” Hines-Management office tower parking facility, as well as a valet service catering to three up-scale downtown restaurants. Also acted as a senior representative to the facility manager of a second “Class A” Hines-Management parking facility which services the largest office tower in downtown Minneapolis. 

St. Paul 

Oversaw approximately 50 employees and managers in the day-to-day operation of two arena/convention center parking facilities, one office tower parking facility, one hotel parking facility, three valet locations, and two surface lots. 

Created and implemented effective budget strategies for all parking facilities/operations. Responsible for overseeing monthly P&L reports, while making final decisions on project completion and spending. Participated in the bidding/negotiating process for new locations and marketing to prospective tenants/customers. Served on the board of directors of the St. Paul Traffic Management Organization and participated in the advisory boards for the Convention Center and the St. Paul Convention and Visitor’s Bureau. Involved in the operation of each facility with clients, managers, and employees, and maintained a professional and exemplary work atmosphere at each location. 

1995–1999 Area Manager 

Allied Parking 

St. Paul, MN 

Managed the day-to-day operation of three parking facilities in downtown St. Paul. Hired and developed all employees. Implemented reward and disciplinary action strategies. Maintained written and verbal communication with all managers and clients. Orchestrated parking arrangements for large and special events. Handled all customer concerns and accident claims. Maintained well-run locations while upholding all company policies. 

1994–1995 Co-Editor of The Sword 

Concordia University 

St. Paul, MN 

Hired and maintained a complete newspaper staff. Edited all material to be printed. Wrote articles, news releases, headlines, and captions. Assigned all story assignments and photo requests. Assisted in the lay-out and final design of the newspaper. 

1995–1996 Freelance Writer and Editor 

Marching Innovations 

Sioux Falls, SD 

Freelance writer and editor of start-up company’s promotional material and contractual documents. Résumé of Christian Schiller Page 4 

1993–1994 Sports Editor 

Concordia University 

St. Paul, MN 

Sports editor for the college newspaper, responsible for editing all sports stories and writing a monthly sports column. 

1993–1994 Student Teacher 

Concordia University 

St. Paul, MN 

Student teacher at both Ramsey Junior High School and St. Agnes High School, aiding full-time English teachers in the preparation and presentation of daily classroom lessons and work. 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Bloomington, MN 

EDUCATION 

Concordia University 

St. Paul, MN 

B.A., English and Education, Minor in Communications Page 1 

# MELISSA SCHULTZ 

Project Lead Test Development Technology 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Melissa Schultz has thirteen years of item and test development experience, having served in progressive roles since joining the Test Development Team at DRC, including: item development coordinator, project lead, test development technology specialist, and senior test development technology specialist. 

In her current role as Project Lead Test Development Technology, Ms. Schultz works closely with the item and test development content specialists and editorial specialists in the production of test items and forms for DRC’s clients. She provides leadership for the creation and production of all items and test materials for both print and online delivery. She also provides technical support for the use of item banks, including DRC’s Item Development and Educational Assessment System (IDEAS) item bank and other state-owned item banks. 

Ms. Schultz holds an A.A.S in Accounting from the Minnesota School of Business in Brooklyn Center, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Project Lead Test Development 

2011–2012 Senior Test Development Technology Specialist 

2009–2011 Test Development Technology Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Serves as the item and test development representative for item banking and online testing. Works closely with content teams, editorial, and item and test production teams to determine process workflow using item-banking systems throughout all stages of the item and test development process. Identifies and supports implementation of ongoing enhancements to item banks, as needed. Creates numerous training documents and provides training to internal DRC staff and others on all aspects of a given item-banking system for both internal DRC and external client use. Acts as the lead in troubleshooting and problem resolution for technical issues for all users of DRC’s item bank as well as other state-owned item banks, as required by a given program. Provides support to other functional units within DRC and participates in discussions concerning the requirements and enhancements for developing and using item-banking and online testing technology as directly related to item and test development roles and responsibilities. Résumé of Melissa Schultz Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2005–2015 Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 Standards Based Assessment—2004–Present 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present Graduation Exit Examination—2005–Present Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2005–Present Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2005–Present English Language Development Assessment—2005–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2007–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2003–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2009 Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Oversaw and participated in the development of state assessments, including the development of Spanish translations. Interacted with item and test development staff to ensure on-time delivery of all items and assessment materials. Oversaw and participated in the production of ancillary products, including item samplers, technical reports, item-banking training manuals, and test administration manuals. Supervised the transfer of secure materials and electronic communications. Assisted with online state assessment projects. Résumé of Melissa Schultz Page 3 

2004–2008 Item Development Coordinator 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Assisted item and test development staff members by providing support to the entire item and test development process. Performed a variety of tasks, including but not limited to, the following: created new items and passages in the item bank, standardized and implemented unique format changes to passages and items through XML process instructions, maintained and updated item bank files per client requests, created and monitored directories of specifications. Provided support to the item and test development process by preparing printed materials for item and content review meetings and other ancillary materials associated with committee meetings. In addition, created a resource for troubleshooting of formatting-related issues in the item bank; created and revised graphics as specified by the client and/or internal graphic artists. Oversaw the input of items and graphics into the item-banking system. 

2001–2004 Administrative Assistant 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provided administrative support for the item and test development department. Tasks included, but were not limited to, the following: assisted with spreadsheets, presentations, and file management needs. Proofread testing items as required. Performed database entry on a weekly basis, updating project time in DRC accounting software. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

XPP, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Photoshop, and Microsoft Office 

EDUCATION 

Minnesota School of Business 

Brooklyn Center, MN 

A.A.S Accounting Page 1 

# JOSEPH SCHWEISS 

Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Joseph Schweiss participates in all aspects of science item development and assessment design. His duties include reviewing, editing, and verifying multiple choice and constructed response standalone and scenario-based items and forms; facilitating review committees; and developing training materials for teachers and assessment leaders on how to develop assessments and interpret assessment results. 

Mr. Schweiss works with nationally recognized experts on science assessment development and participates in professional development workshops and presentations. He also acts as a facilitator for item writer development and test construction. In this role, Mr. Schweiss has worked with numerous teachers from various locations around the country to develop high-quality, scientifically accurate items that meet state-specific, standards-based criteria. He understands that in order for an assessment to be successful, it needs to be designed to enhance educators’ understanding of the critical connection between assessments and day-to-day classroom instruction and learning. Mr. Schweiss’ professional experiences have given him the tools and insights needed to develop creative, accurate, and insightful science test items. 

Mr. Schweiss has classroom teaching experience in urban, suburban, and rural settings, including secondary physical and biological sciences and post-secondary marine biology. He has taught English as a foreign language to Costa Rican elementary students. Mr. Schweiss holds a Master of Education degree in Science Education, a Bachelor of Science degree in Biology, and a Minnesota teaching license in Life Sciences, Grades 9–12. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2005–Present Senior Science Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides science content expertise to DRC’s item development program. Writes, reviews, and formats science items. Serves as content resource for the biological, earth, physical, and environmental sciences. Participates in all aspects of science assessment design and item development. Coordinates item development with outside item writers. Facilitates state committee content and bias meetings. Oversees state committee forms review meetings. Assists in the development of standards and eligible content. Provides guidance to curriculum and lesson development. Résumé of Joseph Schweiss Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2005–2009 

Alabama Science Assessment: Grades 5 & 7—2006–2008 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2005–Present 

California Modified Assessment Alignment Study—2012 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2005–Present 

Maryland High School Examination Alignment Study—2008 

Maryland Modified High School Assessment Alignment Study—2008 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2005 Classroom Science Biology Teacher 

Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Taught biology and physical science in an inner city school. 

2002–2003 Classroom Physical Science Teacher 

Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Taught physical science in an urban school. 

2001–2005 Marine Biologist/Educator 

Underwater Adventures 

Bloomington, MN 

Served as an educator and on the animal husbandry staff at a large public aquarium. Résumé of Joseph Schweiss Page 3 

2001 English as a Foreign Language Teacher 

Heredia Public Schools 

Heredia, Costa Rica 

Taught English as a foreign language to elementary students. 

2000 Rainforest Conservationist 

I-to-I 

Quininde, Ecuador 

Worked as a researcher, conservationist, and translator in the Ecuadorian rainforest. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

National Science Teacher Association 

Minnesota Science Teacher Association 

American Educational Research Association 

America Association for the Advancement of Science 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Schweiss, J. (2009). Co-Facilitator, Developing Quality Science Assessment Items . NSTA Regional Convention, Minneapolis, MN. 

Schweiss, J. (2005). Co-Facilitator, Science Item Writers Training Workshop. 

Data Recognition Corporation, Woodbury, MN. 

Schweiss, J. (2005). Facilitator, So You Want to be a Marine Biologist: Teaching Marine Biology in the Classroom . Chippewa Falls, WI. 

Schweiss, J. (2005). Facilitator, Teaching Marine Biology in Your Classroom. 

Washburn Academy, Holmen, WI. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN M.Ed., Science Education 

University of Wisconsin 

LaCrosse, WI B.S., Science 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota Teaching License—Life Sciences, Grades 9–12 

TOEFL Certification Page 1 

# JOHN SELISKY 

Director, Test Development for Mathematics 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. John Selisky has 19 years of test development and educational measurement experience and 23 years of teaching experience. In his current role as Director, Test Development for Mathematics, Dr. Selisky oversees all aspects of mathematics item and test development. He has written and developed a variety of ancillary products in support of assessment programs; conducted training presentations, committee reviews, and analytical procedures for educators and measurement professionals; and trained and mentored assessment professionals in item writing and development, test construction, and data analysis. 

Dr. Selisky’s teaching experience includes high school and middle school mathematics in public schools in Pennsylvania and Illinois, remedial mathematics in Pennsylvania, and Chemistry and Physics in the Chicago public schools. He has also taught graduate and undergraduate university courses in computer programming, mathematics, teacher education, and supervised student teachers in clinical practice. 

Some of Dr. Selisky’s most important assessment policy contributions have been in the area of organizing, mapping, and coding state curriculum content standards, including the development of mathematics learning progressions. He has worked with the education departments of Georgia, Michigan, Oklahoma, and Washington to train educators to effectively use assessments and interpret and report results. 

Prior to working in educational assessment, Dr. Selisky served in the Peace Corps as a volunteer teacher in Sierra Leone, West Africa and a public school mathematics teacher, and held university teaching positions in mathematics and teacher education. 

Dr. Selisky holds an Ed.D. in Mathematics Education and an M.A. in Instructional Technology from the Teachers College, Columbia University in New York, New York; an M.A. in Secondary Education from Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; and B.S. degrees in Earth and Planetary Sciences and Mathematics from University of Pittsburgh in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS STANDARDS (CCRS) EXPERIENCE 

Dr. Selisky’s CCRS experience includes conducting CCRS alignment studies for Pennsylvania Assessment Anchors and Eligible Content for grades 3–11, Algebra 1, Algebra 2, and Geometry. He developed sample items for the Pennsylvania Keystone Examination for Algebra 1, Algebra 2, and Geometry. Résumé of John Selisky Page 2 

Dr. Selisky also developed and wrote 114 lesson assessments for the Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum Units for grades 7–11, Algebra 1, Algebra 2, and Geometry in accordance with selected CCRS standards. He conducted alignment studies for mathematics standards and associated assessment items for the Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (LEAP) for grades 4, 8, and 10. 

In addition, Dr. Selisky reviewed and evaluated mathematics items for the Michigan Education Assessment Program (MEAP), MI Access for students with special needs, and the Michigan Merit Examination (MME) assessment for Grades 3–8 and Grade 11, and conducted item writing training activities for Michigan educators participating in assessment development work for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium for grades 3–8 and high school. Dr. Selisky is responsible for supervision of mathematics item development for grades 5–8, including Claims 1–4, for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium and he directed the mathematics item development team for the completion and delivery of 2,000 new items aligned to the College and Career Readiness Standards. He also conducted Smarter Balanced cognitive laboratory studies for grade 3 students in the state of Washington in 2014. 

Dr. Selisky is the content lead for mathematics on the standard setting activities for the New York State algebra 1 and geometry Regents Examination, developed performance level descriptors in accordance with the College and Career Readiness Standards for all content domains in algebra 1, and facilitated the educator committee meetings for setting performance thresholds. 

Dr. Selisky directs the development of new items aligned to the College and Career Readiness Mathematics Standards for grades 5–8 and HS. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Director, Test Development for Mathematics 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Oversees, coordinates, and participates in all steps of the mathematics item and test development process for large-scale assessment programs. Provides direction and guidance to staff working on mathematics item and test development tasks and activities. Supervises and manages 10 full-time test development specialists, including work assignments, scheduling, professional development activities, and performance evaluations. Participates in Company-wide initiatives in professional development through committee work and research activities. Facilitates committee reviews, including bias reviews, item-data reviews, standard-settings, and range finding activities for scoring. Résumé of John Selisky Page 3 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2012–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2012–Present 

California High School Exit Examination—1999–2002 

California Standardized Testing and Reporting—1999–2002 

Educational Quality and Assessment Office, Ontario Ministry of Education, Canada—2003–2006 

College- and Career-Ready Item Development, American Institute for Research— 2014–Present 

Georgia Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests—1999–2002; 2007–2008 

Indiana Core 40—2003–2006 

Los Angeles Unified School District Mathematics Formative Assessments— 2003–2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

English Language Arts and Mathematics Alignment Study, Grades 3–8— 2010–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2010–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010–Present 

Transition to College and Career Readiness Standards English Language Arts and Mathematics Field Test, Grades 3–8—2010–Present 

Michigan Education Assessment Program—1999–2002 Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present Michigan K-2 Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Mississippi Norm-Referenced Performance Assessment Program—1999–2002 

Nebraska State Accountability—2011–Present 

New Jersey Elementary School Proficiency Assessment—1996–2002 

New York Department of Education Standard Setting, Data Analysis and Technical Reports for the Regents Exam—2014–Present 

Ohio Proficiency Test Program—1996–1999 

Oklahoma School Testing Program—1999–2002 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012; 2014–2015 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2015 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Virginia Standards of Learning Assessment—2003–2006 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—1999–2002 

COGNITIVE LABS EXPERIENCE 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium : Grades 3 −11—2014 Résumé of John Selisky Page 4 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2009–2012 Senior Project Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Plymouth, MN 

Responsible for development of the high school mathematics component of the Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum, encompassing the creation and development of 38 units and 114 lesson plans for Grade 3–high school, including Algebra 1, Algebra 2, and Geometry; and development of comprehensive scope and sequence documentation for mathematics standards for instruction, including organizing and sequencing content standards, distributing standards over reporting categories, and establishing their relationship to the Department’s large-scale assessment program. Content lead for mathematics item development for the Michigan Education Assessment Program (MEAP and MEAP Access), and for all levels of MI Access for students with special needs, and the Michigan Merit Examination (MME) assessment for high school students. 

2009 Assessment Specialist 

Riverside Publishing 

Rolling Meadows, IL 

Responsible for item development, test forms, and implementation of the seventh edition of the Iowa Test Group Cognitive Abilities Test, a nationally-normed assessment. The quantitative tests include number analogies, number series, and number puzzles for Grades K–11. National item tryouts for the current edition were conducted in Spring 2010. 

2008–2009 Student Assessment Specialist 

Chicago Public Schools 

Chicago, IL 

Responsibilities included the management of approximately 34 large-scale elementary and secondary assessment projects during the course of a typical school year. Provided content, measurement, reporting, and administration information to principals, test coordinators, teachers, students, and parents in Grades 3–11. Assignments within those responsibilities included all manner of coordination and collaboration between the District and multiple assessment contractors, including item development activities, item reviews, test construction, standards alignment, and scoring and reporting. Professional development responsibilities included making presentations to teachers and principals on assessment literacy, instructional practices, and effective utilization of assessment and measurement information. 

For the CPS Initiative for High School Improvement, additional activities and responsibilities in science education and science assessment included collaborative projects with education departments from Northwestern University, Illinois Institute of Technology, DePaul University, and Loyola University Résumé of John Selisky Page 5 

Chicago. In addition to the professional development assignments for presentations to science teachers, conducted item writing training sessions, lesson evaluations, and data analyses of large-scale assessments. 

2006–2008 Publishing Project Manager 

CTB McGraw-Hill 

Burr Ridge, IL 

As the senior publishing manager, was responsible for supervising, staffing, and budgeting for the development and production of tests, test items, and specifications, including writing, reviewing, and revising tests and items; planning for and facilitating committee reviews for content and fairness; item performance data evaluation reviews; planning for and training staff to perform test form construction; managing the development and performance of proprietary item management software; planning for and developing materials in support of test blueprints; and developing and writing test blueprints. 

As Publishing Project Manager supervision included five direct reports, test development managers for English Language Arts, mathematics, science, and social studies. Each test development manager included three editors in their own direct reports. Supervisory responsibilities included continuous performance assessment, individual and group training, interviewing and screening of professional candidates, creating and writing performance evaluation reviews, budgeting and planning for performance awards and compensation, and supervision and approval of performance reviews of second-level reports. Responsibility for customer-facing issues included quality control reporting, scheduling, meeting facilitation, and certification of deliverables. Additional management responsibility included production staff supervision, scheduling, quality assurance, work package directions, page and template specifications, and transition to proprietary item banking management software. 

Financial reporting responsibilities included preparing budgets, cost analyses, and projections; implementing cost-saving initiatives; preparing capacity planning for staff resource allocation; documenting estimates to complete, estimates at completion, accruals; tracking vendors; and reporting; as well as teaching and mentoring development staff in best practices of financial management. 

Business practice management included creating risk analysis and cost-benefit calculation with respect to staffing, scheduling, and scope management. Additional financial work required estimated costing for proposals, work hours, revenue anticipation, scheduling, time management, and cost accounting. Résumé of John Selisky Page 6 

2003–2006 Mathematics Assessment Specialist 

Educational Testing Service 

Princeton, NJ 

Responsible for developing tests, test items, and specifications, including writing, reviewing, and revising tests and items; planning for and facilitating committee reviews for content and fairness; planning for and developing materials in support of test blueprints; and developing and writing test blueprints. 

2002–2003 Head of Special Project Development 

Educational Testing Service 

Princeton, NJ 

Responsible for developing test, test items, and specifications; developing ancillary materials to support assessments; and providing content area expertise as needed for the test development process. Also facilitated teacher item review and bias/sensitivity committee reviews, developed and presented training materials to development staff, and directed research projects associated with large-scale assessment in state projects. Research projects included cognitive laboratory studies with high school students and item performance research with field test studies. Developed presentations and papers in content and measurement for academic and professional associations. 

1999–2002 Senior Mathematics Consultant 

Riverside Publishing 

Itasca, IL 

Responsibilities included presenting and communicating content and measurement information to state committees and professional groups, teachers, and sales staff; working with sales staff to plan and evaluate initiatives for assessment programs; developing training materials; and conducting training for test development staff. Additional responsibilities included development of curriculum and instructional components of statewide testing programs; analysis, interpretation, and reporting of research data regarding content and its relation to classroom instructional practice; developing and directing standard setting activities; reviewing and evaluating the research and professional literature in mathematics and science, instruction, learning, and educational measurement; and developing and publishing papers and presentations for academic and professional associations. 

1996–1999 Mathematics and Science Test Development Specialist 

Riverside Publishing 

Itasca, IL 

Responsibilities included the planning, development, writing, editing, and design of custom assessment instruments for school districts and state education authorities and management of item writers, art and production specialists, and editorial specialists in mathematics, science, reading, and language arts. Project Résumé of John Selisky Page 7 

management responsibilities included development and production of test and item specifications, analysis and evaluation of curriculum standards, creation of test blueprints, item writing, item writer training and evaluation, rubric development, rangefinding, content and sensitivity committee facilitation and approval, test design and form construction, pilot and field test data analysis, item selection and form building, and preparation and development of ancillary materials and public information for statewide assessments, including sample tests. 

1995–1996 Teacher 

Wendell Phillips High School Academy 

Chicago, IL 

Responsible for teaching mathematics, chemistry, and physics. 

1992–1996 Assistant Professor of Education 

Roosevelt University 

Chicago, IL 

Responsible for teaching mathematics methods, secondary methods, and student teaching seminar; supervised elementary and secondary teacher candidates and served as student advisor. 

1989–1990 Assistant Professor of Mathematics 

St. Xavier University 

Chicago, IL 

Responsible for teaching programming in Pascal, applications, and mathematics. 

1980–1989 Teacher 

Coudersport Area School District 

Coudersport, PA 

Responsible for teaching mathematics, Grades 7–12. 

1974–1980 Teacher 

Intermediate Unit 9 

Smethport, PA 

Responsible for teaching remedial mathematics, Grades 7–12. 

1971–1974 Teacher 

Newtown Friends School 

Newtown, PA 

Responsible for teaching mathematics, science, and physical education. Résumé of John Selisky Page 8 

1968–1970 Peace Corps Volunteer Teacher 

Sierra Leone, West Africa 

Teaching responsibilities included English as a second language, mathematics, physical education, and science for students ages 5 –20. 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Assessing Proportional Thinking , Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, 10 (August 2004): 1, 5. 

On Representation: An Important Process for Teaching and Learning Mathematics , Teaching Children Mathematics, 8 (November 2001): 129, 165. 

University of Chicago School Mathematics , Grade 6, Calculators in the Classroom, Everyday Learning Corporation, 1995. 

Houghton Mifflin Mathematics 3–6, Houghton Mifflin, ed. grades 3–8: history of mathematics, history of geometry, Teachers Edition notes, alternative assessment strategies, techniques for special learners, calculator strategies, answer manuscripts, problem solving strategies, cumulative reviews, 1994. 

Exploring Mathematics 1–8, Scott Foresman, ed. grades 7–8: history of mathematics, problem solving strategies, assessment criteria, Teachers Edition notes, assessment instruments, problem sets, 1992. 

Doctoral dissertation: The Infinity Concept: Development of Curricular Material for Junior High School Mathematics , Teachers College Columbia University, 1992. 

Computer Education for Pre-service Teachers , ed. SIGCUE, Association for Computing Machinery, 1990. 

Infinities, How Can We Use Them in the High School Curriculum? Pennsylvania Council of Teachers of Mathematics 1988 Yearbook: Mathematics for the Class of 2000, 1988. 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS (since 2002) 

Career Opportunities in Test Development , Office of Career Placement, Teachers College Columbia University, New York, NY, October 2010. 

Effects of Text Load in Multiple-Choice Mathematics Items for High School Students , Council of Chief State School Officers, National Conference, San Antonio, TX, June 2003. 

Assessing Representations, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Southern Regional Conference, Biloxi, MS, October 2002. 

Assessing Representations , National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Canadian Regional Conference, Montreal, Quebec, August 2002. 

Authenticity and Test Items , Research Council for Mathematics Learning, National Conference, Memphis, TN, March 2002. Résumé of John Selisky Page 9 

PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 

Council of Chief State School Officers 

National Council on Measurement in Education 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATIONS 

Green Belt Certification 

Business Process Management Institute 

45 instructional hours in best practices of program management 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Commonwealth of Pennsylvania—Permanent Instructional Certificate, Grades 7 –12: Mathematics, Chemistry, Physics, and Science 

State of New York—Instructional Certificate, Grades 6 –12 Mathematics, Chemistry, and Biology 

State of Illinois—Secondary Instructional Certificate, Grades 6 –12 Mathematics, Chemistry, and Physics 

EDUCATION 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

New York, NY 

Ed.D., Mathematics Education 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

New York, NY 

M.A., Instructional Technology 

Lehigh University 

Bethlehem, PA 

M.A., Secondary Education 

University of Pittsburgh 

Pittsburgh, PA 

B.S., Earth and Planetary Sciences and Mathematics Page 1 

# ROXANNE D. SEMON 

English Language Arts Consultant 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Roxanne Semon serves as a consultant in Educational Assessment at Data Recognition Corporation. She has an extensive background in assessment, including item writing and review, form building, electronic item bank development, state standards alignment, rubric scoring, and development of ancillary materials. She has many years of assessment experience working at all grade levels, including grades 3 –high school . She is also an editor of nationally distributed informational booklets and posters for high school counseling offices. In addition, Ms. Semon was an Adjunct Instructor at Sinclair Community College where she taught courses such as beginning and advanced composition and literature. 

Ms. Semon earned her B.A. in English with a minor in French and Religion from The College of Wooster (Ohio) and a M.A. in English from Wright State University (Ohio). 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Semon has developed new reading passages and items aligned to the new Pennsylvania Core Standards (PCS). She has also developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool (CDT) in Reading (Grades 3– high school) and Literature and has developed PCS-aligned items for the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams for Literature. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2004–Present Test Development Consultant 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provide services in all aspects of state and national test development, including item writing and review, form building and assessment support activities; assist in state teacher item reviews. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2011 

Alaska Comprehensive System of School Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessments—2004–Present 

Georgia End-of-Course Tests—2004–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2004–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present Résumé of Roxanne Semon Page 2 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2009–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

U.S. Academic Decathlon—2004–2008 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–Present Test Development Consultant 

ETS Elementary and Secondary Education 

Provided services in all aspects of electronic item bank development, including item writing and review, form building and state standards alignment 

1997–Present Editor 

Woodburn Press 

Co-edit nationally distributed informational booklets and posters for high school counseling offices. Topics include succeeding in high school, getting good grades, and preparation for college. 

2002–2004 Assessment Development Specialist II 

ETS Elementary and Secondary Education 

Involved in all aspects of the test design and development process for ETS ELA Item Bank. Researched state standards documents, created and reviewed test specifications, identified and trained item writers, assigned, wrote and reviewed reading passages, wrote and edited test items and scoring rubrics, facilitated fairness review committees, constructed field test forms, developed ancillary materials such as directions for administration, participated in scoring activities and reviewed test data, created a master item bank standard document to align with states’ standards, created curriculum and content support materials. 

1999–Present Educational Writer and Consultant 

Mazer Corporation 

Provide services in test and textbook preparation as needed for clients such as Glencoe, Prentice-Hall, McGraw Hill, Leapfrog Reading, and Entertainment Publications, including pupil and teacher editions. 

1995–2005 Test Development Consultant 

Riverside Publishing 

Provided services in all aspects of state assessment and electronic item bank development. Résumé of Roxanne Semon Page 3 

1990–2002 Adjunct Instructor 

Sinclair Community College 

Taught beginning and advanced composition and literature classes. 

EDUCATION 

Wright State University 

Dayton, OH M.A., English 

The College of Wooster 

Wooster, OH B.A. English, Minor in French and Religion Page 1 

# LIANGHUA SHU 

Director, Psychometric Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Lianghua Shu has over 20 years of experience in research and statistics, including 14 years of experience in psychometric research and educational assessment. Dr. Shu is a skilled computer programmer and excels in the development of statistical and psychometric tool development, including, but not limited to, item response theory-based tools, calibration, equating, scaling, scoring, computer-adaptive testing, and simulation. 

As Director, Psychometric Services, Dr. Shu works with the psychometric data forensics team in automating irregularity reporting, as well as the implementation of new data forensic statistics. Dr. Shu is also responsible for the development and maintenance of psychometric software that includes all traditional statistical and psychometric analyses required to support large-scale assessment programs. 

Dr. Shu holds a Ph.D. in Physical Oceanography with emphasis on numerical computer modeling from Florida State University and a M.S. in Physical Oceanography from China Ocean University in Qingdao, China. He also has a B.S. in Atmospheric Science from China Ocean University in Qingdao, China. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Director, Psychometric Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for working with the psychometric data forensics team in automating irregularity reporting, as well as the implementation of new data forensic statistics. Responsibilities also include development and maintenance of psychometric software that includes all traditional statistical and psychometric analyses required to support large-scale assessment programs; producing project documentation and statistical reports; conducting standard setting; working with research associates, statistical analysts, and state departments of education. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

California English Language Development Test—2001–2002 

Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System—2004–2005 

New York State Testing Program—2002 

Qatar Comprehensive Educational Assessment Program—2010–2011 

Qatar Senior Schooling Certificate—2011 

TerraNova–3rd Edition (Achievement Test Battery)—2004 

Washington, D.C. Comprehensive Assessment System—2010; 2012–2014 Résumé of Lianghua Shu Page 2 

World-Class Instructional Design and Assessment (WIDA) Consortium 

ACCESS for ELLs 2.0 Operational Assessments—2014–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2014 Research Scientist II 

CTB/McGraw-Hill Company 

Monterey, CA 

Lead psychometrician for large-scale assessment projects before and during common-core state standards transition. Oversaw the design, development, and documentation of operational technical procedures and lead group of statistical analysts and research associates in performing operational and field test data analysis. Provided real-time support for calibration, equating, vertical scaling, scoring for almost all operational projects. Specified and developed new options in calibration tool: 1) allow variable priors at item level in Marginal Bayesian Estimation; 2) allow automatic ability distribution update in the fixed anchor calibration. Developed the first CTB operational computerized-adaptive testing engine: item selected using maximum Fisher information, alpha stratification, random exposure control, objective rotation and constraints to link passage-based items; final score based on maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) and interim ability estimated from expected a posteriori (EAP); number of correct objective scoring and score penalty for incomplete tests, etc. Conducted Bookette AI scoring validation study. 

2004–2006 Research Scientist I (Methods and Applications) 

CTB/McGraw Hill Company 

Monterey, CA 

Developed/improved/maintained operational item response theory (IRT) psychometric tools included but not limited to calibration, equating, scaling and scoring, reliabilities, accuracy and consistency, OPI scoring, simulation, etc. Documented calibration codes through reverse engineering. Developed and improved IRT tools to run in Research Process Update system. Provided IRT support for all operational projects using above tools 

2002–2004 Statistical Program Analyst (Methods and Applications) 

2001–2002 Statistical Program Analyst (Statistical Service) 

CTB/McGraw Hill Company 

Monterey, CA 

Re-engineered and improved MLE item pattern scoring algorithm using C. Performed statistical data analysis on student responses and scores for operational projects using SAS programming. Ran Classical Test Theory (CTT) and IRT tools and analyzed outputs to support operational projects. Documented CIA and DIF codes Résumé of Lianghua Shu Page 3 

2000–2001 Numerical Computer Modeler/Postdoctoral Researcher 

Numerical Computer Modeling Group 

The Naval Postgraduate School 

Monterey, CA 

Numerical computer modeling and visualization. Modeled and observed data statistical analysis. 

1999–2000 Postdoctoral Researcher 

1995–1995 Research Assistant Scientist 

Dept. of Oceanography, Florida State University 

Tallahassee, FL 

Developed an equatorial ocean computer model. Performed large-scale data analysis on atmospheric and oceanic data. Analysis techniques included but not limited to statistics, correlation, regression, EOF, spectral and coherence analysis, filter design, gridding, optimization and numerical computation. UNIX system administration (Summer/1999) 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

National Council on Measurement in Education 

Psychometric Society 

RELATED PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Shu, L. & R. Schwarz. 2014. “IRT Estimated Reliability for Tests Containing Mixed Item Formats”. Journal of Educational Measurement, 51, 163–177. 

10/05/14 

Wothke, W., G. Burket, L. Chen, F. Gao, L. Shu & M. Chia. 2011. “Multimodal Likelihoods in Educational Assessment: Will the Real Maximum Likelihood Score Please Stand Up?” Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 36, 736–754. 

RELATED PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Shu, L. Scoring Penalty for Incomplete Computerized Adaptive Tests. NCME, April 3–6, 2014, Philadelphia, PA. 

Shu, L. On Initial Ability Guesses to Start an Adaptive Test. IMPS, July 10–12, 2012, Lincoln, NE. 

Shu, L. & Wim J. van der Linden. Pre-Operational CAT Simulation. IACAT, Oct 3–5, 2011, Pacific Grove, CA. 

Shu, L. “When Guessing Parameter can’t be Estimated under a Three-Parameter Model”, IMPS July 6–9, 2010, Athens, GA. Résumé of Lianghua Shu Page 4 

Shu, L. & R. Schwarz. “IRT Estimated Reliability for Tests Containing Mixed Item Formats”, NCME, April 29–May 03, 2010, Denver, CO. 

Shu, L. & R. Schwarz. “Estimated Reliability for Tests Containing Mixed Item Formats”, IMPS July 20–24, 2009, University of Cambridge. 

Shu, L. Chair “Social and educational data analysis potpourri” IMPS July 20–24, 2009, Cambridge, UK 

Shu, L. “A Comparison of Rasch Model Parameter Estimates between PARDUX and WINSTEPS”, IMPS June 29–July 2, 2008, Durham, NH. 

Shu, L., A. Lev-Ari & W. Wothke. “Simulated Annealing for Scoring Based on Item Response Theory”, Aug. 2–7, 2003, Joint Statistical Meetings, San Francisco, CA. 

“Multimodal Likelihoods in Educational Assessment: Will the Real Maximum Likelihood Score Please Stand Up?” Aug. 2–7, 2003 Joint Statistical Meetings, San Francisco, CA. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

C/C++, SAS, R/S-plus, Java, Pascal, FORTRAN, ORACLE SQL, FORTRAN90/77, MATLAB, Ferret, UNIX Shell programming, PERL, 

Java, JDBC, JSP, JavaScript, HTML, Parallel Calculation, FORTRAN 90/77, C/C++, JAVA, MATLAB, Unix shell programming, UNIX, Linux, Microsoft Office, SGI and Solaris Workstations, Windows & Macintosh 

EDUCATION 

Florida State University 

Tallahassee, FL 

Ph.D., Physical Oceanography 

China Ocean University 

Qingdao, China 

M.S., Physical Oceanography 

China Ocean University 

Qingdao, China 

B.S., Atmospheric Science Page 1 

# MAYUKO KANADA SIMON 

Senior Research Scientist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Dr. Mayuko Kanada Simon has extensive experience in psychometrics and statistical analysis. In her current position, Dr. Simon is responsible for conducting operational work, including calibration, equating, and data forensics analysis. She has worked on standards-based assessments for Grades 3–8, graduation exams, alternate and modified assessments, and English language learner assessments for Louisiana and Pennsylvania in both paper/pencil and online formats. Prior to joining DRC, Dr. Simon worked as a research assistant and consultant, and a teaching assistant at the University of Minnesota. 

Dr. Simon holds a Ph.D. in Educational Psychology with a specialization in Measurement/Psychometrics and minor in Statistics from the University of Minnesota. The focus of her research was the comparison of concurrent and separate linking methods in Multidimensional IRT (MIRT). She also holds an M.A. in Educational Psychology and an M.S. in Soil Science from the University of Minnesota and a B.S. in Agriculture from Shizuoka University in Shizuoka, Japan. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Research Scientist 

2008–2014 Psychometrician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for calibration, scaling, and equating of forms. Responsible for performing data analyses of tryout, field test, and operational tests. Has overseen item selection for tests and participated in planning and review meetings; worked on special studies upon request of the client and conducted analyses related to technical reports; produced creative research studies in data forensics including data mining to detect unusual score patterns in schools; and utilized newer regression statistical models (e.g. Adaptive Lasso Regression) to quantify the effect of a learning tool and to identify schools that are using that learning tool effectively. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2009–2013 

Graduation Exit Examination—2009–2012 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2009–2012 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2009–2012 Résumé of Mayuko Kanada Simon Page 2 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–2012 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2011–2012 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2009–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2011–2012 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2007–2008 Office of Research Consultation 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Provided consultation to graduate students and faculty on research design and analysis (ANOVA, MANOVA, regression, repeated measures ANOVA, logistic regression, t-test, correlation, reliability, validity, factor analysis, and survey data analysis). Provided consultation on statistical analysis using SPSS and SAS. 

2007–2008 Research Assistant 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Research assistant for the remedial course taking study. Used SAS for data cleaning and merging of large data sets (statewide student data across years, UMN, and MnSCU data). Provided data analysis using macro and proc SQL in SAS. 

2006–2007 Intern, Psychometric Research and Services 

Pearson Educational Measurement 

Iowa City, IA 

Assisted with operational work. Calculated reliabilities and generalizabilities for an essay scoring study using SAS and GENOVA. Served as a data analyst in standard setting meetings and attended a data review meeting. Performed data analysis using SAS including macro and SQL for various research projects. Conducted a literature review. 

2005–2007 Research Assistant 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Worked on a 2006/2007 ACT/SAT review program for at-risk high school students. Maintained database, managed day-to-day operations, and assisted with program organization. Résumé of Mayuko Kanada Simon Page 3 

2005–2006 Research Assistant 

General College 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Analyzed survey data collected from math programs (logistic regression using SAS). 

2004–2005 Research Assistant, Office of Educational Accountability (OEA) 

College of Education & Human Development 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Assisted in calculation of Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) for The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB) . Provided quality assurance (scoring, descriptive statistics, and calculation of reliability) of MN K–12 statewide (TEAE, BST, MCA) tests using SPSS and SAS. Created tables using SPSS syntax and figures using Excel for the Minnesota Education Yearbooks published from OEA. 

2003 Internship, Office of Educational Accountability (OEA) 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Wrote reports on high school dropouts and the generalizability of the graduation rate. Provided data analysis with SPSS and SAS. 

2002–2004 Teaching Assistant, Department of Educational Psychology 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Graded assignments and exams in graduate level statistical courses for social sciences (covers t-test, ANOVA, ANCOVA, mixed model, regression, and repeated measure design). Held office hours to answer students’ questions regarding statistics and SPSS. Organized students’ grades using Excel and webCT (course management software that gives web-based course learning activities and course materials). 

PUBLICATION 

Davision, M.L. , Davenport, E.C. , Wu, Y-C., Peterson, K.A., Ferdinand, M.L.I., Chan, C.K., Choi, J., Holleque, K., Kanada, M., & Shin, T. (June 2005) 2004 Minnesota Education Yearbook (http://education.umn.edu/oea/II/Reports/2004Yearbook/04MNEdYrbk.pdf) Résumé of Mayuko Kanada Simon Page 4 

PRESENTATIONS 

Simon, M., Plackner, C., Primoli, V., Liassou, D. (2013). Realistic simulation study to investigate sensitivity of data forensic methods for various cheating types. Presented at paper session in Conference on Statistical Detection of Potential Test Fraud, Madison, WI. 

Simon, M. and Shinde, S (2013). Effects of accommodations in state assessments: Exploration of students' performance using propensity score matching . Poster presentation at AERA ( American Educational Research Association ) in April, San Francisco, CA. 

Tao, S., Sorensen, B., Simon, M., Chayer, D., Du, Y., and Hermann, P. (2012) Optimal Designs for Embedded Field Test Item Calibration in Operational Computerized Adaptive Testing. Paper presented at National Council on Measurement in Education , in San Francisco, CA. 

Simon, M. (2012) Local outlier detection in data forensics: data mining approach to flag unusual schools . Conference on Statistical Detection of Potential Test Fraud , Lawrence, KS. 

Simon, M., Chayer, D., Hermann, P., & Du, Y. (2012) Detecting item parameter drift in a CAT program using the Rasch measurement model. AERA (American Educational Research Association ), in Vancouver, BC. 

Simon, M., Shinde, S.K., & Bishopi, N.S. (2012) A State mathematics modified assessment: an exploration of eligible students and differential item functioning. National Council on Measurement in Education , in Vancouver, BC. 

Simon, M., Zhu, X., Bishop, N.S., & Nhouyvanisvong, A. (2011) An Empirical comparison of different rater-effect adjustment methods when equating mixed-format large-scale state assessments. National Council on Measurement in Education , in New Orleans, LA. 

Simon, M. & Davison, M. L. (2009) Comparison of concurrent and separate Multidimensional IRT linking of item parameters. National Council on Measurement in Education , in San Diego, CA. 

Maruyama, G., Davison, M. L., Simon, M., Kellogg, J., & Schoenecker, C. (2009) Predicting developmental/remedial mathematics course taking in Minnesota public postsecondary institutions. Presented at AERA ( American Educational Research Association ) in April. 

Maruyama, G., Davison, M. L., Kanada, M., Kellogg, J., Schoenecker, C., Mercer, L., (2008) Antecedents of Developmental/Remedial Mathematics Course 

Taking in Minnesota Public Post-Secondary Institutions. Accepted for a Poster Session for the 2008 ASHE ( Association for the Study of Higher Education )Annual Meeting. 

Kanada, M., & Nichols, P (2007). Reliability estimates in an alternative scoring procedure of constructed-response items in large scale standardized tests. Presented at AERA ( American Educational Research Association ) in April. Résumé of Mayuko Kanada Simon Page 5 

Kanada, M., Kreiman, C., & Nichols, P. (2007). Effects of Scoring Environment on Rater Reliability, Score Validity and Generalizability: A Comparison of Standup Local Scoring, Online Distributed Scoring and Online Local Scoring. Presented at AERA ( American Educational Research Association ) in April. 

Nichols, P., Kreiman, C., & Kanada, M. (2006) Evaluating computer-delivered scorer training and scorer performance for scoring constructed responses. Poster presentation at The Iowa Educational Research and Evaluation Association meeting in December. 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

Ph.D., Educational Psychology; minor Statistics 

Specialization: Measurement/Psychometrics (Advisor: Dr. Mark Davison) 

Topic: Comparison of concurrent and separate linking methods in Multidimensional IRT (MIRT) 

M.A., Educational Psychology; minor statistics 

M.S., Soil Science 

Shizuoka University 

Shizuoka, Japan 

B.S., Agriculture Page 1 

# KELLIE SINNOTT 

Support Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Kellie Sinnott has more than 16 years of experience in software development and information technology. In her current role as Support Analyst, Ms. Sinnott writes and maintains code used for validating data, transforming data, creating materials, and reporting. Her project experience includes both the Pennsylvania Keystone Exams and the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment. 

Ms. Sinnott’s past experience includes graphic/web design, central support analysis, and technical diagnosis and analysis. Her prior technical experience and education has enabled her to become proficient in a number of languages, databases, software, and operating systems. 

Ms. Sinnott holds an Associate of Applied Science in Software Development from Minneapolis Community and Technical College in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present Support Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Code, test, and process inspections for data validation and audit reporting using SQL Server and eDM Manager. Investigate, propose, and implement code for client requirement changes. Build, test, and process data material calculations using eDM Manager. Transform data into required format. Create materials and reports with SQL Server. Work with project managers, business analysts, quality assurance, developers, support analysts, and other departments within DRC. Work independently and collaborate with others to solve problems and learn new systems. Meet assignment deadlines to specification on large scale projects and assist on other teams as needed. Mentor and assist others in technology-related skills. Designed and implemented a solution for technical reports using SSRS for a large project. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present Résumé of Kellie Sinnott Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2003–2011 Technical/Web and Graphic 

Various Businesses 

Minneapolis/St. Paul Metro Area, Minnesota 

Effectively communicated with clients to understand needs and create efficient solutions. Created, repaired, and optimized images for use online and in print. Designed, maintained, and provided assistance for sites/blogs. Provided technical information and support as needed. Designed and supported websites built on WordPress to allow them to update content and monitor statistics through Google analytics. 

1993–2003 Property Management 

Self-Owned 

Minneapolis, MN 

Created web page used for rental advertising purposes. Purchased domain, designed, and created a website as part of sales/advertising campaign when sold. 

2001–2003 Central Support Analyst 

SuperValu, Inc. 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Identified reason programs failed and worked with software developers to correct/restart. Utilized various applications, change management, knowledge base, incident tracking system, and personal experience to identify incident cause and accelerated resolution. Successfully contributed first/second level problem identification, troubleshooting, and resolution for more than 62,000 employees, vendors, and customers via phone/email in a fast-paced, dynamic, multi-platform environment. Fully documented issues to assist with later analysis and reporting. Assisted in training and coaching new team members. Completed HIPAA training. 

1998–2001 Computer Operator 

SuperValu, Inc. 

Hopkins, MN 

Analyzed, diagnosed, and resolved technical issues for warehouses, stores, and computer room. Assessed technical issues in order to provide supervisors with information to help them make critical time/financial decisions. Résumé of Kellie Sinnott Page 3 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Languages : Java, C# .NET, Objective-C (iOS), HTML 

IDE’s: Visual Studio, Xcode, Eclipse, Net Beans, TextEdit 

Database: SQL Server, SSRS, MySQL 

Software: VM Ware, Microsoft Office Suite (Windows and Mac), Visio, Casper, Adobe CS including Acrobat, Photoshop, Illustrator, FileZilla (FTP), phpMyAdmin, Pages, Numbers, FireFox, Safari, IE, Chrome 

Operating Systems: Windows 8, 7, Vista, XP Professional, Mac OS X Mavericks, Lion, Leopard, Tiger, DOS 

EDUCATION 

Minneapolis Community and Technical College 

Minneapolis, MN 

A.A.S., Software Development Page 1 

# DARREN SLACK 

Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Darren Slack has served as Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist and has participated in all aspects of the test development process for numerous large-scale statewide assessments, including those for Alaska, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, and Pennsylvania. He develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications, creating, editing, and reviewing items. He also provides assessment design, item development, and curriculum content services to DRC’s state education clients and works closely with item writers. Through his expertise, he helps to construct tests that are compliant with both content and psychometric requirements. 

In addition to his assessment experience, Mr. Slack has five years of classroom teaching experience in high school and middle school mathematics, including Algebra I, Algebra II, and AP Calculus. He also has experience with both reformed and traditional curriculum and developing alternative education programs for students who did not meet assessment requirements. He taught at both inner-city and suburban schools. 

Mr. Slack earned a B.S. in Mathematics from Valparaiso University in Valparaiso, Indiana. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2006–Present Senior Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications. Develops, edits, and reviews items. Provides assessment design, item development, and curriculum content services. Works with freelance writers in item development. Constructs tests that are compliant with both content and psychometric requirements. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS STANDARDS EXPERIENCE 

College and Career Readiness Item Bank—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (item development, review, and quality control; alignment to Pennsylvania Core Standards) —2006–Present; 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment-Modified—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool—2010–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium; item writing, item writing training, item development and alignment to College and Career Readiness Standards Résumé of Darren Slack Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2006–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2006–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2006–Present 

College and Career Readiness Item Bank—2013–2014 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2006 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program 

Graduation Exit Examination—2006–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2006–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2012–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessments K–2—2012–Present 

Michigan K–12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma Core Curriculum Tests—2006–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2006–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2010–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2014–Present 

U.S. Academic Decathlon—2006–2008 

Washington Assessment of Student Learning—2007–2008 

PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE 

2004–2006 Teacher 

North Community High School, Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Co-designed, planned, and taught an alternative mathematics program that met the graduation standards for Grade 11 and 12 students who were not on track to graduate. Planned and taught high school mathematics classes, including 

AP Calculus. Supervised mathematics team. Résumé of Darren Slack Page 3 

2002–2004 Teacher 

Franklin Middle School, Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Co-designed, planned, and taught an alternative mathematics program for students performing below grade-level expectations. Planned and taught middle-school mathematics classes. 

2001–2002 Teacher 

Patrick Henry High School, Minneapolis Public Schools 

Minneapolis, MN 

Planned and taught high-school mathematics classes. Participated in residency program that focused on the professional growth of new teachers. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota—Secondary Mathematics, Grades 5-8 and 9-12 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN Initial Licensure—Mathematics 

Valparaiso University 

Valparaiso, IN B.S., Mathematics Page 1 

# NANCY SMOLLEY 

Senior Item Development Coordinator 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As Senior Item Development Coordinator, Ms. Nancy Smolley assists test development specialists and directors by performing a variety of tasks, including item and passage formatting for print and online item assessments for statewide programs. She is responsible for training and assisting those working in the item bank on a daily basis to ensure quality product output. 

Through her understanding of formatting of various media needed for items and passages and her collaborative team efforts, she ensures the understanding of comprehensive and cohesive processes, procedures and attention to detail. This also includes the creation of technology-enhanced items that involve the blend of graphics with formatted text to achieve various desired functionality. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Senior Item Development Coordinator 

2004–2013 Item Development Coordinator 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Manages the formatting of all items and passages for testing items, either online or in print. Maintains updates to all items and passages once entered into the item bank system through updated instructions. Works with team members to maintain precise formatting instructions for consistency. Serves as a resource to all content areas to ensure items are clearly presented in the item bank. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Examination—2004–2015 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2004–2014 

Standards Based Assessment—2004–2006 

Georgia High School Graduation Test—2005–2007 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2006–Present 

Idaho End of Course Tests—2013–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2007–Present 

Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2007–Present 

Louisiana Interim Transitional Tests—2011–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2009–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2010–Present Résumé of Nancy Smolley Page 2 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2004–Present 

PSSA-M Modified Assessment—2010–2012 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2001–2004 Executive Administrative Assistant 

Wilson’s Leather 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Assistant to vice president and director of store sales. Coordinated air, hotel, and ground transportation for executives and office personnel throughout the country. Handled logistics for regional sales meetings for district and store managers. Coordinated set-up for annual warehouse sale. Monitored work schedules for district managers. 

1996–2001 Office Manager 

Signature Sales, Inc. 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Office manager for manufacturer representative firm. Maintained daily reconciliation of company expenses, commissions, and income reports. Supervised and trained office support staff. Worked directly with major accounts and manufacturers. Tracked orders transmitted from business partners to various manufacturers, managing point-of-sale data and inventory forecasting. Responsible for daily electronic data information from major accounts to manufacturers. 

1993–1996 Executive Administrative Assistant 

Sweeney Group, Inc. 

Edina, MN 

Assisted CEO as the customer service contact for the Target Account. Tracked orders, and monitored shortages and inventory for the various manufacturers. 

1991–1993 Executive Administrative Assistant 

Carlson Marketing Group 

Plymouth, MN 

Assisted Vice President of Merchandising and Director of Merchandising. Prepared presentation materials for promotional programs. Performed various Résumé of Nancy Smolley Page 3 

duties, including word processing, creating spreadsheets, and serving as customer service contact for sales people. 

1988–1991 Pension Administrator 

Principal Financial Group 

Mason City, IA 

Administered groups of profit sharing/401K plans for a number of companies. Performed governmental non-discrimination tests on plans throughout the year. Served as customer service contact for all participants, which involved monitoring contributions and distributions from the plan. Page 1 

# BEN SORENSEN 

Senior Research Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Ben Sorenson joined DRC in 2011 and has since been involved in calibrating, linking, and equating on several large-scale assessments, including the Pennsylvania Keystone and PSSA exams and the Louisiana LEAP and iLEAP exams. In 2011, he was a part of the Keystone standard setting activity as a data analyst, and has recently taken on an integral role in the sampling design and data analysis for the upcoming NY Regents exams. Additionally, Mr. Sorenson has developed software for data forensics, technical reporting, and forms construction for Pennsylvania’s Keystone, CDT, and PSSA, respectively. 

Mr. Sorenson coauthored studies on CAT embedded field-test design, link evaluation, and 3PL software comparison, and continues to conduct research addressing practical problems in large-scale assessment. 

Mr. Sorenson holds a B.A. in Mathematics and Economics from St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota and has been accepted into the Masters of Education in Measurement, Education, Statistics, and Assessment program at the University of Illinois, Chicago. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Senior Research Analyst 

2011–2014 Statistical Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

In conjunction with psychometricians, performs psychometric activities including item analysis, calibration, linking, and sampling. Works on special studies and conducts analyses related to technical reports, in addition to supporting psychometricians in design, computation, and report generation. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013 

Michigan Interim Assessments—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2011–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2012–2013 Résumé of Ben Sorenson Page 2 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

Statistical/Scientific Software: Python (NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib, Pandas, Statsmodels), R, SPSS, Excel, Winsteps, FlexMIRT, Multilog, Parscale, Matlab/Octave 

EDUCATION 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.A., Mathematics and Economics Page 1 

# DAN STEINBACH 

Production Support Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Dan Steinbach has over 21 years of software development, production support, and testing experience in the IT field. In his current role at DRC, Mr. Steinbach is an integral part of the Pennsylvania Education team as a Production Support Analyst. His project work for Pennsylvania includes: SLOQ, barcode labels, individual student files, and individual student reports. Mr. Steinbach earned a Diploma in Data Processing from South Central Technical College in Mankato, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2006–Present Production Support Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Monitors and controls the processing of programs to ensure the highest levels of service and system availability are attained. Establishes production runs, ensuring that appropriate production support procedures are followed, and that run documentation and data files are available. Assists in job setup and performs problem identification, escalation, and resolution. Communicates status of operations to allow for immediate response to service disruptions. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2006–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2006 Software Developer 

Prudential Financial 

Plymouth, MN 

Served as software consultant on centralized adapter group. Developed server-based programs for an existing insurance application being migrated from a CICS Transaction based system to a new distributed front-end system. Responsible for creating system specifications, test plans, program coding, and unit testing of the Client Change mainframe programs. Résumé of Dan Steinbach Page 2 

2002–2005 Recovery Collector 

Target Financial Services 

Minneapolis, MN 

Served as senior credit advisor in the recovery collections department. Assisted Target Credit Card guests with delinquent accounts and aided them in finding a solution to make their account current. 

1989–2002 Systems Analyst 

Prudential Financial 

Plymouth, MN 

Served as systems analyst on centralized adapter group. Developed server-based applications for customer service call center. Responsible for developing test and project plans to ensure mainframe modules functioned properly with other environments. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

SQL, SQL Server Studio, XML, C.C++, PVCS, CICS, VSAM, MVS/JCL, TSO/ISPF, Changeman, Visio, Micro Focus Cobol, CICS, MQSeries, Visual Studio 

EDUCATION 

South Central Technical College 

Mankato, MN 

Diploma in Data Processing Page 1 

# KEVIN SWENSON 

Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kevin Swenson is responsible for developing and managing test scripts, plans, and schedules for other software quality assurance (SQA) analysts. He performs defect classification and severity assessment. He also assures project excellence by developing SQA process flow and guidelines that address all project phases and test potential enhancements to existing software. Mr. Swenson has provided his SQA expertise for several assessment projects, including those for Alabama, California, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Virginia, as well as for DRC’s internal Ops MMS Program and the Imaging System and Testing Program. He also gained experience implementing quality assurance procedures into the DRC distribution environment. 

Mr. Swenson earned a B.S. degree in Industrial Management, as well as an A.A.S. degree in Information Technology. He is a member of the Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2008–Present Senior Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Designs and implements processes for quality standards, controls, test plans, schedules, and procedures. Collects and analyzes data for software process evaluation and improvements, and integrates them into business processes to address business needs. Defines approach and appropriate level of testing for projects. Integrates testing approach with software development methodology. Develops and executes comprehensive testing strategies, scripts, and test summaries. Completes appropriate SQA documentation according to approved methodology. Defines and tracks quality assurance metrics, defect densities, and open defect counts. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Basic Skills Exit Exam Program—2001–2005 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2001–2005 

California Golden State Examinations—2001 

Imaging System and Testing Program—2001–Present 

Operations Materials Management System Program—2001–2005 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2005–Present Résumé of Kevin Swenson Page 2 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—2001–2005 

South Carolina Palmetto Achievement Challenge Tests Program— 2001–2005 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—2001 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2001–2008 Software Quality Assurance Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Planned and implemented software development process quality standards, methods, and procedures. Collected and analyzed data for software process evaluation and improvement. Developed and executed comprehensive test scripts and test summaries. Documented all software defects and performed regression testing. Coordinated defect review meetings. Participated in appropriate software development meetings. Reviewed requirements and specifications with appropriate team members. 

1998–2001 Inserter 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Operated and repaired inserting machines. Performed quality control on various mailing projects. Maintained accuracy through count justifications. Participated in improving overall quality and process flow. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Twin Cities Quality Assurance Association (TCQAA)—2003–Present 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin—Stout 

Menomonie, WI 

B.S., Industrial Management with a focus in Business 

NEI College of Technology 

Columbia Heights, MN 

A.A.S., Information Technology Page 1 

# MARK SZULCZEWSKI 

Science Handscoring Content Specialist, Performance Assessment Services 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Szulczewski has six years of experience working on large-scale assessment projects. He has lent his expertise to an array of science assessment models and item types encompassing multiple grade levels. Mr. Szulczewski’s primary responsibilities include working closely with state department personnel and educators to develop high-quality, accurate, and consistent science training materials; monitoring and supervising the associated handscoring projects and staff; and coordinating rangefinding activities to ensure accurate and efficient scoring. 

Since 2011, Mr. Szulczewski has served as Content Specialist for the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment’s (PSSA) science assessment. He has served in a similar capacity for the Keystone Biology Exam since its inception in 2010. As a Science Content Specialist, Mr. Szulczewski oversees all rangefinding, training materials development, and handscoring for PSSA and Keystone science assessments. He has also served as a liaison between the Pennsylvania Department of Education and DRC scoring rooms, working efficiently to address issues as they arise. He has overseen rangefinding, field testing, and operational handscoring for the PSSA Science and Keystone Biology assessments. 

Mr. Szulczewski holds a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where he also obtained a Certificate in Business. He passed the EIT/Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Exam for the State of Ohio. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Handscoring Content Specialist 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Prepares scoring material in accordance with statewide standards and client specifications. Attends rangefinding sessions with representatives from state departments of education and educators. Oversees handscoring of statewide assessments. Organizes training schedules. Evaluates performance of temporary staff including scoring directors, team leaders, and scorers. Résumé of Mark Szulczewski Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2011–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2010 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2010–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Trained scoring personnel based on state educational standards. Monitored staff performance using daily and cumulative statistics. Prepared for and attended field test rangefinding sessions and helped create resulting training materials. 

2010 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Supervised teams of readers. Monitored reader performance. Provided feedback to readers to ensure proper alignment of scoring standards 

2009–2010 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Read, interpreted and scored large scale statewide assessments according to required scoring guidelines. Attended training sessions to learn project scoring requirements. 

2007 Manufacturing Engineering Co-OP 

Grede Foundries, Inc. 

Milwaukee, WI 

Created programs to control ABB 4400/6400 series robots; Worked on robotic production cell layouts for grinding casting; Supervised equipment shipments after closure of foundry; Assisted in design proposal of an extended stack mold cooling line. Résumé of Mark Szulczewski Page 3 

EDUCATION 

University of Wisconsin–Madison 

Madison, WI 

B.S., Mechanical Engineering 

Certificate in Business 

Passed EIT/Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Exam 

State of Ohio Page 1 

# JEREMIAH TANNER 

IS Manager 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Jeremiah Tanner has over 17 years of information technology experience, applying technology to solve business problems in a variety of industries. He has demonstrated expertise in the development of various complex software systems and applications. Mr. Tanner has proven this ability in a technical leadership position in the development and support of a DRC enterprise system responsible for student data processing and reporting, as well as in management positions overseeing IS projects and the resources responsible for development of the DRC INSIGHT TM  Online Learning System. 

Mr. Tanner also serves as DRC’s Personal Needs and Preferences Lead for the IMS Global Learning Consortium. DRC has a Contributing Membership in IMS Global and is actively involved in discussions with IMS on many fronts, including development and revision of the QTI and APIP interoperability standards as well as APIP profile committees. Mr. Tanner works on change requests submitted by DRC to IMS Global, as well as reviews and votes on proposals submitted to IMS by other entities. He also attends the Consortium’s quarterly meetings and participates in various committees. 

Mr. Tanner holds a B.S. in Computer Engineering Technology from Rochester Institute of Technology in Rochester, New York. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2011–Present IS Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Resource development and project management responsibilities for 11 direct report software developers, business analysts, and project managers on the eDIRECT team. Responsible for annual objective setting, quarterly and annual performance reviews, monthly 1-on-1 meetings, career development, and training facilitation. Serves as a DRC representative to the IMS Global Learning Consortium. Also responsible for the management of the work to support, maintain, and enhance the eDIRECT system. 

Projects: 

• Created and piloted the use of resource plans in Project Server 2010 to manage the rolling 12-month staffing forecast. Created and piloted Excel spreadsheets that pulled data from the Project Server 2010 reporting databases to provide the pivot tables of the staffing forecast that the CIO Résumé of Jeremiah Tanner Page 2 

required. Provided training for this process to all of the CIO’s direct reports and their managers. 

• Teamed with another manager to create core competency based annual objectives for software developers in an effort to align expectations across IS departments. Reviewed performance feedback measured against these objectives quarterly with each software developer. Accentuated positive feedback and provided constructive feedback with suggestions on how they could improve. 

• Worked with the five contracting vendors on our preferred list to source 10+ software developer contract positions in response to an unexpected project win. Filled positions in time to meet first development milestone despite tight deadlines to source them and an extremely active IT market in the metro. Continued to work with contracting vendors to help fill permanent positions with contract to hire candidates during and after sourcing for the new project work. 

• Worked with resource development management team and an external training vendor to identify and customize six different multi-day onsite classes in various technologies and disciplines for the production support analysts, business analysts, and software developers in IS. 

• The resource development management team facilitated and managed an early version of our IS portfolio management process. Worked with other management staff to refine and automate the process using Project 2010, Sharepoint 2010, and a third party tool. Also teamed with the same management staff to leverage Project Server 2010’s resource management functionality to help provide our team and the leadership staff with more visibility into the actual availability of IS resources. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2009–Present 

Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2009–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability Writing Assessment—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2012–Present 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2008–Present 

South Carolina English Language Development Assessment—2008–2014 

South Carolina High School Assessment Program—2008–2014 

South Carolina Palmetto Assessment of State Standards—2008–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2009–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2009–2015 Résumé of Jeremiah Tanner Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2011 Team Lead/Senior Software Engineer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Led a team of four software engineers in developing, enhancing, and supporting a new enterprise system for handling student processing and reporting. Provided design and code reviews, mentoring, and general guidance to team members on a daily basis. Worked with architects and other team leads on designing new capabilities and interfaces to other systems. Worked with project manager and director on resource allocation and task prioritization. Interfaced with other departments. Conducted training and informational presentations. 

Projects: 

• Led a team of six software engineers in the implementation and support of the enterprise student processing system to handle a new, large, and complicated state assessment. Provided initial analysis and triage of issues throughout processing. Provided guidance and support to team members. Worked with the team through many difficult situations to make sure that the client’s expectations were met. 

• Teamed with software architect on a project to create a service bus and workflow framework, common database schema, and configuration service for hosting and executing the business logic needed to handle a state’s student level processing. The driving force for this effort was to reduce the cost of starting a new assessment by creating a reusable and configurable framework and library of business logic components to leverage, thereby replacing the expensive and resource intensive COBAL driven legacy procedures. 

• Team lead of two software engineers responsible for enhancing and supporting the enterprise reporting system. Scoped, estimated, and assigned tasks for two to three week iterations. Led iteration review meetings that provided users of the system with information about what functionality was new and what was coming next. Led training and informational meetings for new users as well as developers and managers from other departments. Successfully transitioned a number of reports from each of the state teams’ legacy systems onto the enterprise reporting system. 

• Teamed with software architect on a project to create an enterprise reporting system to handle the sorting, merging, collating, and transforming of multiple data sources into one or more types of pre-rendered output formats. The system was driven by xml configuration files that specified where and how to load the source data, how to sort and collate specified data elements, and defined the mapping of the output file. The system made use of multi-threading to increase performance and to better utilize server resources. Résumé of Jeremiah Tanner Page 4 

2004–2006 Senior Software Engineer 

HealthTrio 

Tucson, AZ 

Led team in continuing transition of business logic to .NET. Led in identifying and fixing application performance issues. Provided guidance to associate software engineers. Day-to-day defect fixing in C#, VB6, and SQL stored procedures. 

Projects: 

• Project lead for refactoring of health insurance claims, pricing business logic from SQL stored procedures to C# .NET business objects. These objects were consumed directly by nightly jobs and remotely by the client applications via web services. Created a generic rules processing component that allowed for a much easier transition of the many and varied rules logic from stored procedures to C# .NET objects. Eliminated the extensive use of database work tables by, instead maintaining the pricing data in datasets and other objects in the middle tier, which greatly decreased the stress on the database during large batch pricing runs. 

• Team member on a project that refactored a nightly job, for pricing large numbers of health insurance claims, from a SQL stored procedure to a multi-threaded C# console application. This application made direct use of the previously mentioned C# .NET pricing components for the pricing of each claim. The .NET threading objects and the application configuration file allowed for the tuning of the number of threads used without recompiling the application. Helped to identify and fix memory management problems caused by the frequent creation and destruction of pricing objects by the many concurrently running threads. The improvements made in this refactoring allowed for a performance gain of over 500% and allows for the extensibility to continue with even greater increases. 

• Team lead of performance improvements of all layers of the product line (UI in VB6, middle tier in C#, and backend in SQL). Clients, internal testers, or IT would identify areas of the product that were not performing as well as they should. At that point, analysis of the root cause of the problem was done through the use of tools and troubleshooting. Performance tuning was then done depending on the layer in which the bottleneck was found. 

1999–2004 Senior Software Developer 

Misys Healthcare 

Tucson, AZ 

Project lead on several long term projects: responsible for taking the project through all layers of the software development life cycle and for producing detailed documents required by company procedures. Day-to-day defect fixing in VB6 and MUMPS. Résumé of Jeremiah Tanner Page 5 

Projects: 

• Project lead on an enhancement, for the laboratory product, developed by an international contracting firm. Managed project timeline and the expectations of the consultants. Performed technical lead duties involving design guidance, code reviews, and document reviews. Met all deadlines while involved with the project. 

• Project lead on blood bank instruments conversion from a text based, single-tier, MUMPS application to a GUI, multi-tier, VB6 application. This conversion was part of an over-arching conversion of the entire blood bank product suite. Responsible for leading team meetings involving representatives from multiple departments, designing the application to meet the functional requirements as well as the requirements of the new architecture, coding in VB6 and MUMPS, delegating work to the two other developers on the team, and writing all documents required by our department’s procedures. Also created and gave internal training presentations for the completed project. Met or beat all deadlines throughout the project’s life cycle. 

• Project lead for creating a centralized launching application, “launch-pad”, for the various laboratory software applications that the company had at the time. This was done as a first step in making the laboratory product suite feel like a integrated series of applications. Created a security logon COM component, in C++, that maintained the current user’s context across the laboratory applications. This allowed the user to open the disparate applications from the “launch-pad” without logging in multiple times. It also maintained other commonly used data that the applications could access without having to query the database. Created deployment validation tools that displayed their results as HTML in an Internet Explorer ActiveX control on the “launch-pad”. Was responsible for the designing and coding of the project as well as writing all of the documentation required by our department’s procedures. 

1997–1998 Software Developer (College full-time work co-op/internship) 

Unitron Systems 

Rochester, NY 

One of four software developers that started at the company on “day one” and created the entire software product from scratch. 

Projects: 

• Member of a team that created the first version of a VB6, client server application for tracking OSHA compliance. 

• Designed and coded the file/database interface and the TCP/IP server for communication between the database server and the handheld computer applications, used for collecting compliance data. Résumé of Jeremiah Tanner Page 6 

1996–1997 Associate Software Developer (College full-time work co-op/internship) 

AustinDetek 

Rochester, NY 

Defect fixing and small enhancements using VB6, C++, and SQL. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

VB .NET(3.5), C# .NET(3.0), SQL, LINQ, XML, XPath, XSLT, VB6, C++, MUMPS, Enterprise and multi-tier architectures, OOP, Refactoring, Design Patterns, TFS & Visual Studio .NET 2008/2010, MS-SQL Server 2005/2008 

EDUCATION 

Rochester Institute of Technology 

Rochester, NY 

B.S., Computer Engineering Technology Page 1 

# KEVIN TRENHOLM 

Program Lead 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Kevin Trenholm has more than 25 years of experience in large-scale educational assessment and teaching. For the past 15 years, Mr. Trenholm has provided program management support to the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA) as an associate project manager, project manager, senior project manager, and most recently, Program Lead. In his current role as a Program Lead, he also works on the Keystone Exams. Prior to joining the Pennsylvania Program Management Team, he worked on DRC’s Performance Assessment Team for eight years, serving as a reader, team leader, and scoring director. 

Prior to joining DRC, Mr. Trenholm served as a teacher for three years. He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in English Education from St. Cloud State University, and is certified as a Project Management Professional through the Project Management Institute. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Program Lead 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Provides senior-level expertise to clients, in terms of assessment and program knowledge, and understanding of the full range of DRC competencies. Provides the highest levels of project management expertise, in-depth knowledge of the client’s projects, and a comprehensive understanding of DRC’s processes and capabilities. Defines approaches and processes in situations that may be new or unclear. Works with all levels of client staff to determine direction, strategies, and approaches. Provides project leadership to all DRC staff, and is well-versed in leading all aspects of project work. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama Integrated Reading/Writing—1993–1994 

Arkansas Comprehensive Testing, Assessment & Accountability Program, 

End of Course Examinations—1995–1999 

California Learning Assessment—1994 

Florida Writing Assessment—1994 

Kentucky Voluntary Continuous Assessment—1995–2000 

Minnesota Basic Standards Test—1996 

New Jersey Early Warning—1993–2000 

North Carolina End-of-Grade—1996–1997 

North Carolina Writing Assessment—1994 Résumé of Kevin Trenholm Page 2 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2010–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—1993–Present 

South Carolina Basic Skills Assessment Program—1993–2000 

Virginia Literacy Testing Program—1993–1999 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2006–2014 Senior Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients and school district representatives to resolve problems and expedite communication. Conceptualized unique approaches to support clients’ evolving requirements. Provided work direction to project management staff regarding projects and oversees quality of work. Monitored project status and schedule, project budget, distribution and collection systems, and print production. Managed contract and scope changes, as well as project forecasts, budgets, payment schedules, and billings. Coordinated workflow between DRC and third party vendors. 

2003–2006 Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked with clients to resolve problems and expedite communication. Interacted with team members to obtain and disseminate information regarding current projects. Coordinated tasks to meet deadlines. Managed projects within budget by obtaining bids from outside vendors, determining costs, and purchasing materials. Verified answer keys and test questions. Prepared, edited, and proofread manuals and other materials related to testing projects. Monitored distribution and collection systems and print production. Provided customer service to school districts regarding their state assessment program. 

2000–2003 Associate Project Manager 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responded to requests from customers at the district and school level. Proofread and edited various project materials. Provided work direction to temporary employees. Obtained bids from outside vendors. Assisted project managers with materials development, project documentation, and client communication. Completed other administrative tasks as requested. Résumé of Kevin Trenholm Page 3 

1995–2000 Scoring Director 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Developed training materials. Trained readers. Monitored daily progress of projects. Presented workshops in Pennsylvania. 

1994–1995 Team Leader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Trained and monitored team of 10–12 readers to maintain validity and reliability of scores. Retrained readers as necessary. Resolved discrepant scores. Provided written performance evaluations of readers. Provided item-writing support for selected state assessment contracts. 

1993–1994 Reader 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Assessed and scored student responses applying state-mandated scoring criteria. Maintained high level of concentration, accuracy, and productivity. 

1990–1992 Substitute Teacher 

Anoka-Hennepin Public Schools 

Anoka, MN 

1990–1992 Substitute Teacher 

Princeton Public Schools 

Princeton, MN 

CERTIFICATIONS 

Project Management Professional (PMP ®)

Project Management Institute 

Bloomington, MN 

EDUCATION 

Project Management Institute 

Coursework for Project Management Professional (PMP) Certification 

St. Cloud State University 

St. Cloud, MN 

B.S., English Education Page 1

# HOLLY TROTTER 

Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Mathematics Test Development Specialist at DRC, Ms. Holly Trotter has direct experience with many components of the item and test development process. She is directly involved with writing, editing, reviewing, and compiling major mathematics assessments for numerous clients. She has facilitated educator committees formed to review test items for bias and sensitivity, content, and standards alignment. Ms. Trotter is closely involved with curriculum and standards-related projects, such as establishing model lesson plans or assessment-level indicators for multiple grade levels. Most recently, Ms. Trotter has coordinated, overseen, and contributed to the development of performance tasks for the nationally-recognized Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Trotter served as a middle school mathematics classroom teacher for four years, and a middle school mathematics intervention paraprofessional and high school mathematics student teacher for one year. During this time, she designed and taught courses including Pre-Algebra, Algebra I, Honors Algebra I, and Geometry. Ms. Trotter also co-developed an innovative new student assessment strategy, which she subsequently presented at the annual Minnesota Council of Teachers of Mathematics Spring Conference (2012). 

Ms. Trotter holds a B.A. in Mathematics and Spanish from Monmouth College in Monmouth, Illinois. 

COLLEGE AND CAREER READINESS STANDARDS EXPERIENCE 

Ms. Trotter’s CCR experience includes re-aligning high school Pennsylvania Assessment Anchors to the Pennsylvania Core Standards, writing and editing numerous test items written to CCR standards, and overseeing the development of over 100 exemplar lessons for Pennsylvania’s revised Voluntary Model Curriculum, Grades K–8, in accordance with selected CCR standards. 

In addition, Ms. Trotter has reviewed, evaluated, and managed mathematics items for the Michigan Education Assessment Program (MEAP), MI-Access for students with special needs, and the Michigan Merit Examination (MME) assessment for Grades 3–8 and 11. 

By writing computer adaptive items and leading the development of performance tasks for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium, Ms. Trotter has gained firsthand experience with modern assessment methodologies, and is well in tune with current best practices in education. Résumé of Holly Trotter Page 2 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications. Writes, edits, formats, and reviews test items. Facilitates educator committee reviews and collaborates with off-site item writers. Leads curriculum content and alignment projects. Organizes, schedules, and collaborates with off-site constituents to maintain large-scale projects and long-term goals. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

DRC Item Bank, Grades 3–8—2013–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Test—2014–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: Transition to College and Career Readiness Standards Mathematics Field Test, Grades 3–8—2013–Present 

Michigan K-2 Interim Assessment—2013–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2012–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2014–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic tools—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2012–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2014–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2012 Teacher 

Blake Middle School 

Hopkins, MN 

Instructed Grade 7 and 8 students in Pre-Algebra, Algebra I, and Honors Algebra I courses. Worked individually and collaboratively with colleagues to enhance and modify existing course curriculum. Co-developed and piloted innovative system for assessing students’ mastery of required concepts; led session to present system at the Minnesota Council of Teachers of Mathematics Spring 2012 Conference. Served as assistant coach of the Math Team and co-coordinator of the Yearbook Club. Résumé of Holly Trotter Page 3 

2008–2008 Teacher Paraprofessional 

Olson Middle School 

Bloomington, MN 

Planned and conducted small-group mathematics remediation for middle school students. Served as part-time building substitute and study hall monitor. 

2007–2007 Student Teacher 

Maine West High School 

Des Plaines, IL 

Planned and taught high school mathematics classes. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATION 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) 

PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOPS 

Minnesota Council of Teachers of Mathematics Spring 2012 Conference Presenter 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Mathematics Performance Task Huddle Participant, Fall 2013 

EDUCATION 

Monmouth College 

Monmouth, IL B.A. Mathematics 

B.A. Spanish 

Illinois Teaching Licensure—Mathematics, Grades 9–12 Page 1 

# TRACY TSCHIDA 

Project Lead Test Development Technology 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Mr. Tracy Tschida has five years of item and test development experience. Since joining DRC, he has served in progressive roles on the Test Development Team, including: Publications Designer, Test Development Technology Specialist, Senior Test Development Technology Specialist, and his most current role, Project Lead Test Development Technology. 

In his current, Mr. Tschida works closely with the item and test development content specialists and editorial specialists in the production of test items and forms for DRC’s clients. He provides leadership for the creation and production of all items and test materials for both print and online delivery. He also provides technical support for the use of item banks, including DRC’s Item Development and Educational Assessment System (IDEAS) item bank and other state-owned item banks. 

Mr. Tschida holds an A.A.S. in Commercial Art and Computer Graphics from the Staples Technical College in Staples, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Project Lead Test Development 

2011–2012 Senior Test Development Technology Specialist 

2010–2011 Test Development Technology Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Serves as the item and test development representative for item banking and online testing. Works closely with content teams, editorial, and item and test production teams to determine process workflow using item-banking systems throughout all stages of the item and test development process. Identifies and supports implementation of ongoing enhancements to item banks, as needed. Creates numerous training documents and provides training to internal DRC staff and others on all aspects of a given item-banking system for both internal DRC and external client use. Acts as the lead in troubleshooting and problem resolution for technical issues for all users of DRC’s item bank. Provides support to other functional units within DRC and participates in discussions concerning the requirements and enhancements for developing and using item-banking and online testing technology as directly related to item and test development roles and responsibilities. Résumé of Tracy Tschida Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alabama High School Graduation Exam—2008–2015 Alabama Reading and Mathematics Test +—2009–2014 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2008–2014 Standards Based Assessment—2008–Present 

Idaho Standards Achievement Tests—2008–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2008–Present Graduation Exit Examination—2008–Present Louisiana Alternate Assessment 1—2008–Present Louisiana Alternate Assessment 2—2008–Present English Language Development Assessment—2008–Present 

Michigan K-12 Item Development—2011–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2009–Present 

Oklahoma School Testing Program: Core Curriculum Tests—2008–2010 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2009–Present Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2009–Present Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2008–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Pilot Test Item Development— 

2011–2012 

South Carolina End-of-Course Examination Program—2012–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program: 

High School Proficiency Exams—2010–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2010–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2010 Publications Designer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked in the publications department developing test books for print, using various software applications such as Adobe InDesign, Illustrator, and Photoshop. 

2005–2008 Electronic Prepress Technician 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Worked in the prepress department preparing electronic file for output, imposing jobs for plating, and operated the plate-maker. Also administered Macintosh workstations and the Esko graphics prepress server. Résumé of Tracy Tschida Page 3 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

XPP, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Photoshop, and Microsoft Office 

EDUCATION 

Hennepin Technical College 

Brooklyn Park, MN 

Business Management Certificate 

NEI College of Technology 

Columbia Heights, MN 

Network Administration Certificate 

Staples Technical College ( now Central Lakes College) 

Staples, MN 

A.A.S., Commercial Art and Computer Graphics Page 1 

# ANNIE VAN DER MERWE 

English Language Arts Content Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Annie Van der Merwe has 14 years of experience as a reader, team leader, scoring director, and content specialist for large-scale assessments, with a primary focus on English language arts. Her extensive scoring and coordination experience has ensured the accurate and time-efficient scoring of statewide assessments, including those for Washington, Louisiana, Pennsylvania, and Alaska. 

Ms. Van der Merwe was the Reading content lead for the Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program (WCAP) and has experience in conducting range finding meetings with representatives from state departments of education, teachers, and scoring directors. The range finding meetings included Grades 3–8 and High School. Her experience includes working with a range of text-based items, including extended responses, short responses, and completion items. These include both online and paper/pencil assessment. She is currently the content lead for PSSA Writing (Grades 3–8) 

In addition to her educational assessment experience, Ms. Van der Merwe has 15 years of experience as a high school teacher and assistant principal. She holds a Master’s degree in Linguistics with an emphasis on Second Language Acquisition from the University of Stellenbosch in Stellenbosch, South Africa; a post-graduate diploma in Education from the University of Potchefstroom in Potchefstroom, South Africa; a Bachelor’s degree in Education Administration/ Management from the Teachers College for Further Education in Pretoria, South Africa; and a Bachelor’s degree in Liberal Arts from the University of Potchefstroom in Potchefstroom, South Africa. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present English Language Arts Content Specialist 

Performance Assessment Services 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Sharonville, OH 

Oversees the scoring of large-scale educational assessments, and ensures that projects are completed accurately and on time. Consults with state department of education staff, and ensures that accurate and consistent handscoring training materials are prepared. Acts as a scoring consultant regarding performance assessment needs. Trains scoring directors and other performance assessment personnel on the use of DRC’s image handscoring system. Facilitates range finding activities and professional development workshops for educators. Serves Résumé of Annie van der Merwe Page 2 

as a client liaison and provides services as assigned by the Director of Performance Assessment Services. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

High School Graduation Qualifying Examination—2006–2014 

Standards Based Assessments—2006 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program: 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2006–Present 

Graduation Exit Examination—2006–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program for the 21 st  Century—2003–2005 

Ohio Graduation Tests—2008 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2002–Present 

Washington Comprehensive Assessment Program 

High School Proficiency Exams—2008–2015 

Measurements of Student Progress—2008–2015 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2009 Scoring Director 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Cincinnati, OH 

Supervised and trained 10–150 readers to score assessment responses in accordance with state-mandated guidelines. Conducted range finding meetings, selected and annotated sets for training materials, and supervised recalibration and validity checks. Interpreted and reported daily and cumulative statistical data, resolved discrepant scores, and provided written performance evaluations of team leaders and readers. Provided support services to client as directed by content specialist. This included projects for Alaska Writing, Pennsylvania Reading, and Washington Reading. 

2005–2008 Team Leader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Cincinnati, OH 

Served as team leader on various projects including Louisiana ELA, Ohio Social Studies, Pennsylvania Reading, Pennsylvania Science, and Alaska Writing. Responsibilities included managing a team of readers, training team on different items, and monitoring readers to ensure correct scoring. Provided written reader performance evaluations. Résumé of Annie van der Merwe Page 3 

2002–2005 Reader 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Cincinnati, OH 

Assessed and scored student responses by applying state-mandated scoring criteria. 

1993–1994 Assistant Principal 

Huguenot High School 

Springs, South Africa 

Promoted to assistant principal in 1993. Responsible for daily operation of high school with 60 teachers and 950 students. Responsibilities included monitoring and assessing teacher performance, organizing and maintaining conduct in the daily operation of the school, and reporting to the Department of Education. Responsibility with the annual state examinations continued through to the end of 1994. 

1979–1993 Teacher 

Huguenot High School 

Springs, South Africa 

Started as language arts high school teacher and was promoted within two years to head of department. Managed the language department and was responsible for the standard of teacher and student performance, and for assessment of student learning from Grades 8–12. Responsible for curriculum implementation and ensuring that teachers followed curriculum. 

Responsibilities also included committee work on student assessment. Worked with the state superintendent of language arts in conducting annual statewide examinations for high school graduation. This included working closely with the state department in refining rubrics, training groups of teachers to score items and monitoring quality of scoring for writing, reading, oral, and grammar assessments. 

EDUCATION 

University of Stellenbosch 

Stellenbosch, South Africa 

Master’s Degree in Linguistics with emphasis on Second Language Acquisition 

Teachers College for Further Education 

Pretoria, South Africa 

Bachelor’s Degree in Education Administration/Management Résumé of Annie van der Merwe Page 4 

University of Potchefstroom 

Potchefstroom, South Africa 

Post Graduate Diploma in Education 

University of Potchefstroom 

Potchefstroom, South Africa 

Bachelor’s Degree in Liberal Arts Page 1 

# TERRA VAUGHN 

Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Mathematics Test Development Specialist, Ms. Vaughn participates in various aspects of item and test development, including item construction, editing, item and data review. Ms. Vaughn has facilitated data and item review committees with the Pennsylvania Department of Education. She has facilitated Performance Level Descriptor meetings with the New York Department of Education, and range finding, item, and bias committees with the Michigan Department of Education. She regularly contributes to projects for the states of Alaska, Indiana, Louisiana, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Texas. She has also worked on projects for the DRC Interim Assessment Tool and Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Vaughn served as a classroom teacher for 10 years, teaching elementary and middle school mathematics. She taught grade 1 for two years as well as grades 3, 4, and 5, while serving as an elementary teacher. As a middle school mathematics teacher, she taught grades 6, 7, and 8. Ms. Vaughn worked with her colleagues in Professional Learning Communities to analyze student progress and to make adjustments to instruction using formative and summative assessments. She served as the first grade teacher representative on the Science Committee tasked with aligning curriculum to state Science standards. She has taught in a wide range of settings, including urban, suburban, and private. 

Ms. Vaughn holds an M.A. in Education from St. Catherine University, and a B.A. in Child Psychology from the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2013–Present Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Develops mathematics assessments according to test and item specifications. Develops, edits, and reviews items. Provides assessment design, item development, and curriculum content services. Works with freelance writers in item development. Constructs tests that are compliant with both content and psychometric requirements. Résumé of Terra Vaughn Page 2 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Alaska Comprehensive System of Student Assessment: 

Standards Based Assessment—2013–Present 

College- and Career-Ready Item Development, American Institute for Research— 2014–Present 

Louisiana Educational Assessment Program—2013–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessment—2013–Present 

Michigan Interim Assessments K–2—2013–Present 

Nebraska State Accountability—2013–Present 

New York Department of Education Standard Setting, Data Analysis and Technical Reports for the Regents Exam—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tool—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2013–Present 

Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium Field Test Item Development— 

2013–2014 

South Carolina End of Course Examination Program—2014–Present 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2008–2012 Teacher – 1 st , 3 rd  & 4 th  Grade 

Meadowbrook Elementary School-Hopkins School District 

Golden Valley, MN 

Teach core curriculum to students with a range of academic and social needs. Regularly assess and monitor student progress using common and summative formative assessments to provide differentiated instruction. Create engaging lesson plans in a number of academic areas using a variety of software and hardware (Promethean Board, iPads, several software applications and Apps). Participate on Science Curriculum Committee and Equity Committee, as well as other support areas as needed. Work effectively with coworkers to regularly plan instruction and continuously assess needs of students. Establish positive relationships, and communicate regularly with parents. 

2005–2008 Teacher, Learning Resource Teacher, Assurance of Mastery Paraprofessional, 4 th  Grade Summer School Teacher, 1 st  and 6 th  Grade Math Tutor 

Alice Smith Elementary School 

Hopkins, MN 

Provided quality educational opportunities to students in grades 3 through 6 in a variety of positions. Provided students with instructional support in reading, math and writing, either in small groups or on a one-on-one basis. Identified areas for improvement, prescribed activities to improve skills, monitored student progress and regularly communicated with classroom teachers in regard to student progress. Taught engaging and rigorous lessons that incorporated different learning styles with an emphasis on inclusion and active involvement of all Résumé of Terra Vaughn Page 3 

students. Created a welcoming, respectful learning environment that encouraged and supported a desire to learn. Established relationships with staff at Alice Smith and employees district-wide, which allowed for cooperative learning opportunities and development. 

2003–2005 Teacher – Middle School Math, 5th Grade 

Our Lady of Peace School 

Minneapolis, MN 

Developed engaging math lessons and assessments that focused on student’s levels of ability and learning styles. Provided one-on-one opportunities as needed to advance understanding of curriculum. Advised 21 students in grades 6, 7 and 8 on academics and social/behavioral topics. Co-led student council activities and contributed to committees on a regular basis. Established positive working relationships with co-workers, principal and administrative staff and communicated regularly with parents in a timely, professional manner. 

1995–1997 Service Consultant 

Qwest 

Service Representative 

St. Paul, MN & Portland, OR 

Provided high quality customer service to customers in establishing telephone service. Assisted customers in troubleshooting new construction service, and provided information on billing inquiries. 

1989–1994 Graphics Supervisor 

TransWestern Publishing 

San Diego, CA 

Responsible for the timely and accurate completion of a number of publishing production processes. Responsible for the development and success of ten associates. Instituted Total Quality Management strategies and continuous improvement efforts. Developed and monitored 1M dollar annual budget. Responsible for training associates on a variety of graphic software applications. Résumé of Terra Vaughn Page 4 

EDUCATION 

St. Catherine University 

St. Paul, MN 

M.A., Education 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Child Psychology 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

State of Minnesota-Grades K-6-Elementary and Grades 5-8 Mathematics Page 1 

# GAIL VONWAHLDE 

Senior Business Analyst 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Gail VonWahlde has over 20 years of experience in analysis, programming, and technical writing and is an integral part of the business analysis team at DRC. She is responsible for writing requirement documents as well as tracking future enhancements to the system and checking data for accuracy. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. VonWahlde’s experience included working with applications in the printing, insurance, and mortgage industries. She holds a Bachelor of Computer Science degree from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Senior Business Analyst 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Responsible for client support including client relations, client communications, requirements analysis, and implementation of the defined business requirements. Participates in project planning activities, scope management, project estimates, project schedules, and timelines. Collaborates with the client to understand and document assessment and reporting systems. Offers customers enhanced solutions that leverage other DRC offerings or provide process improvements. Designs individual student reports and state/district/school reports. Works directly with Commonwealth personnel and leads new design and enhancements to reports and websites. Leads transition from Adequately Yearly Progress (AYP) to SPP reporting websites, reports, and processes, including text changes, report, and web design. Meets or exceeds customer expectations as part of a project team. Ensures all deliverables are produced according to client specifications. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2013–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present Résumé of Gail VonWahlde Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2010–2012 Configurator and Site Manager 

Magenic Technologies 

St. Louis Park, MN 

Documented key parts of a complex vendor program (containing over 1,000 modules) to aid with training of new configurators. Assisted QA with validating system by performing regression testing. Wrote guides to shorten the curve of less experienced configurators. Performed root cause analysis on a production support issue that involved high value properties. Ensured work was completed on schedule and according to specifications. Worked with teams of up to nine configurators. 

2003–2010 System Analyst/Solution Engineer 

Allianz Life Insurance 

Golden Valley, MN 

Analyzed business needs and enhanced document identification system that identified and interpreted customer forms for production launch within three weeks. Coordinated communication between business and IT. Collaborated with project business analysts on project plans to ensure accuracy. Trained departments on new processes and systems. Documented project configuration plans, testing plans and results, and installation instructions. Created estimation worksheet to standardize estimates across the department. Worked with end users and QA on planning and implement test plans. 

1998–2003 Software Developer 

Banta Catalog Group 

St. Paul, MN 

Led initiative to determine the best way to gather customer information into one system. Performed data modeling and interface analysis for reporting system. Elicited requirements by interviews and observation for various projects. Prototyped reports and screens. Worked independently on small projects. 

TECHNICAL SKILLS 

CSC EarlyResolution (home mortgage default management software), Hyland OnBase (document management software), Cardiff TeleForm (OCR/ICR/OMR software), Microsoft Access, Visual Basic .Net, Microsoft SQL Server 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota Institute of Technology 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.S., Computer Science Page 1 

# LONNY WITTNEBEL 

Chief Financial Officer 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As DRC’s Chief Financial Officer, Mr. Lonny Wittnebel leads the finance and accounting functions for DRC. He is a proven leader and manager of critical business processes, with broad-based financial planning, analysis and accounting expertise complemented by strong management information systems and internal operations experience in global, technology-oriented, firms. Mr. Wittnebel has a history of success in initiating and managing change in both growth and turnaround situations. He has the ability to understand complex business needs, and quickly develop strategies, staff, processes, and information to improve business performance. 

Mr. Wittnebel holds an M.B.A. in Management Information Systems and a B.S. in Accounting from the Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Chief Financial Officer 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Leads the finance and accounting function for DRC. Provides advice and counsel to the DRC organization, with a focus on financial and accounting impacts. Responsible for bank relations, financial reporting and analysis, accounting accuracy and analysis, staffing and development, tax planning and reporting, insurance, and strategy and vision with financial perspective. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2001–2010 Vice President of Finance and IT (CFO) 

Paddock Laboratories, Inc. 

Minneapolis, MN 

Led and managed all accounting, finance, banking, insurance, credit, cash management, and information systems functions of this $200M private (Subchapter S) corporation. Directed budgeting, financial reporting and analysis, and asset management activities ensuring company profitability and control. Led and directed information systems infrastructure deployment for all business systems, including the company's SAP R/3ERP system, electronic commerce, desktop, internet and intranet, and supporting applications. Supported strategic business planning, including alliance and partnership development, financial modeling of new product and business proposals, and financial and administrative structuring of all licensing and partnering ventures. Ensured compliance with relevant government and regulatory requirements including government pricing, Medicaid and Medicare reporting, and electronic records and Résumé of Lonny Wittnebel Page 2 

systems validation. Negotiated financial and risk management terms on all customer, vendor, and partner contracts. 

• Developed, implemented and support broad-based financial and operational metrics, following a "balanced-scorecard"-type methodology for key business processes, providing operating management with benchmarks and goals for decision making, and continuous business improvement. 

• Developed, implemented and support comprehensive financial models of new business ventures using net present value and return on investment tools to evaluate and prioritize capital allocations to the highest potential programs. 

• Hired and developed a business analyst staff within the Information Systems organization to directly support the company's major IT applications, and then directed the transition of SAP R/3 system support from an outsourcing vendor to an internal support model. 

• Directed the re-structuring of the company's Standard Operating Procedures, eliminating duplication and redundancy, better aligning and defining procedural ownership, and simplifying long term change management and support. 

• Developed and implemented comprehensive monthly financial performance reports for all operating departments. 

• Directed the implementation of new internal time management and reporting systems for factory and payroll operations, new content management systems and databases supporting new business development, new project collaboration and information sharing systems for new product development and management, and new customer contract and rebate management functionality. 

• Developed and implemented deferred compensation and performance-based “phantom stock" programs to support long-term retention and rewards for key management. 

1989–2001 MTS Systems Corporation 

Eden Prairie, MN 

Director, Product Operations/Sr. Operations Manager–Material Test Division 

Managed the global operations and financial processes and functions, including product and applications engineering, focused factory manufacturing, order fulfillment, project management, technical support, financial planning and analysis, and inter-plant operations of a $35M business unit of the division. Led overall financial planning, analysis and reporting for the greater $70M division. 

• Led major operational restructuring, including the sale or phase-out of unprofitable operations and product lines, re-direction and reduction of R&D and product support spending, and rationalization of manufacturing activities across multiple plant sites, resulting in improved margins and profits of the division. 

• Initiated and co-led the outsourcing of electronics manufacturing for the greater MTS corporation, including the sale of the company's electronics assembly Résumé of Lonny Wittnebel Page 3 

operations, resulting in a significant reduction in unit costs, $6M of freed capital, and a one-time gain on the sale. 

Controller, Mechanical Testing and Simulation Sector 

Directed financial planning, analysis and reporting, and led business process re-engineering, for a $200M, multi-business unit sector. 

• Re-built annual budgeting, business planning processes, and supporting organizations, restoring confidence in the financial organization after turnover within the function, and brought budgeting and planning processes back under control. 

• Developed and implemented new "economic value added" financial performance measurements, supported by activity-based costing methods for cost allocation. 

• Co-led the development of the sector's first information systems strategic plan, and a subsequent requirements planning and solution evaluation process that resulted in the selection and implementation of the SAP R/3 Enterprise Business System in the sector's North American and German operations. 

Manager, Systems Analysis and Design 

Identified, designed and led major business process re-engineering projects, and supporting information systems initiatives for the company's main business sector. 

• Led the re-engineering of Field and Customer Service business processes, and implemented the company's first major open-systems, client-server business system to support these processes. 

• Managed sales-force automation systems projects, including the development and implementation of a complex, rules-based product configuration system for Sales quotation development and order processing. 

Accounting Manager 

Managed all manufacturing cost, engineering project, and general ledger accounting processes and systems for the company's Eden Prairie operations, including global consolidations. 

• Led the automation and re-design of invoice, revenue, cost of sales and backlog accounting processes, and implemented a new Accounts Receivable system, eliminating multiple non-value added steps and improving management information of these key accounts. 

• Implemented percent of completion accounting processes for long-term contracts, improving compliance with GAAP for this key component of the company's business. 

• Re-designed month end closing processes, shortening the closing cycle by 25%. Résumé of Lonny Wittnebel Page 4 

1985–1989 Manager, Product Financial Analysis 

Unisys Corporation 

Roseville, MN 

Managed and directed departments responsible for developing manufacturing and engineering cost plans supporting new product business planning for all mainframe computers, peripherals, and related products and platforms. Handled the financial administration of multi-million dollar OEM, joint and third-party development, and component procurement contracts, including the administration of all product programs associated with a Japanese joint-venture manufacturing operation. Received a corporate "Achievement Award for Excellence” for work on a new business venture that resulted in an $11M+ sales contract. 

1980–1985 GTE Corporation 

Stamford, CT 

Hired into this multi-billion dollar communications company's "fast track" development program for finance and accounting personnel. Relocating five times, held a number of increasingly responsible financial positions including: financial associate, senior internal auditor, senior financial analyst, and manager, financial planning and analysis. 

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

Generic Pharmaceutical Association Finance and Technology Committee— 

Co-Chair 

The Collaborative CFO Work—Group Member 

University of Minnesota Alumni—Association Member 

EDUCATION 

University of Minnesota, Carlson School of Management 

Minneapolis, MN 

M.B.A., Management Information Systems 

B.S., Accounting Page 1 

# BILLIE KAY KRAUS 

Director of Education Solutions 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Billie Kay Kraus has over 26 years of experience in a career spanning work at the Pennsylvania legislature, Pennsylvania Schools Boards Association, Pennsylvania Department of Education, and Data Recognition Corporation. Ms. Kraus currently serves as DRC’s Director of Education Solutions where she is working to track and monitor relevant legislation, regulation, and education policy in Pennsylvania. Ms. Kraus is also an integral member of DRC’s Pennsylvania education project management team. 

Prior to joining DRC, Ms. Kraus’ experience included formulating education legislation and policies while at the Pennsylvania House of Representatives. Ms. Kraus also used her knowledge and expertise in Pennsylvania education while serving as the registered lobbyist for the Pennsylvania School Boards Association and while serving as the director of Community College Affairs at the Pennsylvania Department of Education. 

Ms. Kraus holds a B.S. in Education from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2012–Present Director of Education Solutions 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Harrisburg, PA 

Tracks and monitors relevant legislation, regulations, and education issues. Stays abreast of education issues in the Commonwealth, including attending and reporting on education-related meetings. Contributes as an integral member of DRC’s Pennsylvania education project management team. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Pennsylvania Classroom Diagnostic Tools—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Keystone Exams—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania System of School Assessment—2012–Present 

Pennsylvania Voluntary Model Curriculum—2012–Present Résumé of Billie Kaye Kraus Page 2 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2005–2007 Legislative Assistant for Rep. Mario J. Civera 

Pennsylvania House of Representatives 

Harrisburg, PA 

Assisted Chairman of House Appropriations Committee and House Policy Committee with legislative policy and committee work. Specialized in education-related issues. 

2002–2003 Director of Community College Affairs 

Pennsylvania Department of Education 

Harrisburg, PA 

Served as liaison between the Commonwealth’s community colleges and the Department of Education. Reviewed school programs to determine eligibility to receive New Economy Technology Scholarship (NETS) awards, in conjunction with the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency (PHEAA). Served as special assistant to the Deputy Secretary for Postsecondary and Higher Education. Served as postsecondary education liaison for workforce development. 

1995–2002 Director of Government Relations 

Pennsylvania Department of Education 

Harrisburg, PA 

Advocated Department legislative initiatives to the Pennsylvania General Assembly. Served as the spokesperson for the Department on legislation and issues of interest to legislators. Served as member of Secretary of Education’s senior staff to provide input and advice on a variety of educational and legislative issues. Coordinated and assisted with Senate confirmation process for the Secretary of Education. Served as liaison between the Pennsylvania General Assembly, the Governor’s Office, and the Department of Education, which involved coordinating the Department’s responses to legislative inquiries, concerns, and issues. Prepared Department personnel for legislative hearings. Supervised Department’s Office of Government Relations staff. 

1986–1995 Network Operations Director, Governmental Relations ,

Pennsylvania School Boards Association 

New Cumberland, PA 

As PSBA’s registered lobbyist, communicated and promoted PSBA’s positions on education legislation to the Pennsylvania General Assembly, Congress, and PSBA’s members. Developed, organized, and implemented PSBA’s statewide grassroots advocacy program to enhance PSBA’s legislative mission. Prepared legislative newsletters. Developed, organized, and implemented grassroots network for federal legislative issues. Résumé of Billie Kaye Kraus Page 3 

1981–1986 Legislative Research Analyst (Education Committee) 

Pennsylvania House of Representatives 

Harrisburg, PA 

Assisted the House Education Committee and legislators by preparing in-depth studies, background reports, analyses, and issue synopses. Formulated education legislation, and policy. Handled constituent requests, inquiries, and problems. Organized, scheduled, and administered Committee meetings and public hearings. Produced legislative television programs, including creating the format, selecting the guests, and writing the script. Supervised interns for the House Bipartisan Management Committee. 

EDUCATION 

Pennsylvania State University 

University Park, PA 

B.S., Education Page 1 

# SANDRA WIESE 

Senior Vice President, Business Development and Government Affairs 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

Ms. Sandra Wiese manages government affairs and follows education policy on behalf of DRC, and co-leads business development efforts for DRC. Ms. Wiese is a senior attorney, with more than 21 years of experience in government affairs, education policy, corporate law, and small business assistance. Prior to joining DRC, she worked in the federal government as the chief of staff of the U.S. Small Business Administration in Washington, D.C. and in state government as the chief of staff to the Wisconsin Senate Minority Leader. Ms. Wiese also served in senior-level positions in Government Affairs and Law with two Fortune 500 companies. 

Ms. Wiese holds a Juris Doctorate from William Mitchell College of Law in St. Paul, Minnesota, and a B.A in Political Science from the University of Minnesota. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2010–Present Senior Vice President, Business Development and Government Affairs 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Serves as chief internal legal counsel for DRC. Follows education policy and legislation in select states. Monitors and reports on federal education legislation and policy initiatives. Establishes and maintains regulatory and legislative relationships. Co-leads DRC’s business development team. Represents DRC in industry trade groups. Manages DRC’s meeting planning function. 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

2004–2010 General Counsel and Vice President of Government Affairs 

Data Recognition Corporation 

Maple Grove, MN 

Established and maintained regulatory and legislative relationships. Sponsored and lobbied for legislative reforms at the federal level and in key state legislatures. Represented DRC in industry trade groups. 

2001–2004 Vice President, Government Affairs 

Thrivent Financial for Lutherans Company 

Minneapolis, MN 

Established and maintained regulatory and legislative relationships. Managed 

staff of five. Sponsored and lobbied for significant legislative reforms at federal Résumé of Sandra Wiese Page 2 

level and in key states. Devised and implemented lobbying strategies for resolving issues with state insurance departments. Represented and lobbied for Thrivent Financial’s interests in industry trade groups. 

Created first Government Affairs function for Lutheran Brotherhood. Managed insurance department approval process in 50 states for the merger of Lutheran Brotherhood and Aid Association for Lutherans. Persuaded ten members of Congress who serve on the House Ways and Means Committee to contact the U.S. Department of the Treasury regarding the impact of proposed regulations on 

not-for-profit organizations. 

1991–2001 Assistant Vice President of Law, Corporate Secretary, Officer 

The St. Paul Companies, Inc. (now “Travelers”) 

St. Paul, MN 

Served in a variety of positions in the corporate law and government affairs divisions. Provided legal and regulatory advice to business units and Executive Management Team. Led Corporate Secretary function, serving as liaison with the SEC, the Board of Directors, and shareholders. Provided legal counsel on corporate law and intellectual property. Served as federal lobbyist for the organization and represented company on legislative and regulatory issues in a number of states. 

1989–1991 Chief of Staff 

U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) 

Washington, D.C. 

Appointed to serve in the Senior Executive Service of the federal government. Member of Agency’s Senior Management Team which oversees and directs financial and technical assistance programs for small businesses. 

Managed and directed SBA’s Offices of: External Affairs, Intergovernmental Affairs, Executive Secretariat, and the National Advisory Council. Directed and supervised the Administrator’s staff and operating budget. Served as White House Liaison to the Office of Presidential Personnel and as Cabinet contact person for all communications between SBA and White House. 

1984–1989 Chief of Staff to Senate Minority Leader 

Wisconsin State Senate 

Madison, WI 

Managed State Senate legislative office. Acted as primary liaison to other members of the Caucus. Directed policy work on business issues including tax laws, tort reform, corporate takeover legislation, workers’ compensation, and unemployment compensation. Drafted legislation and amendments. Prepared draft communications to be used by State Senator including responses to constituent mail, newsletters, and Letters to the Editor. Résumé of Sandra Wiese Page 3 

EDUCATION 

William Mitchell College of Law 

St. Paul, MN 

Juris Doctorate 

University of Minnesota 

Minneapolis, MN 

B.A., Political Science eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Huixing Tang, PhD 

Title: President 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILITIES :

As President and o wner of eMetric, Dr. Tang provides the visions, strategic plans, and overall leadership for 

eMetric products and services, team buildin g and business development. He is largely responsible for business 

relations with state department of agencies and corporate partners. With strong expertise in psychometrics and 

software application development, he is also heavily involved in the research and development of eMetric’s 

innovative solutions. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• 20 years of industry experience in psychometric analysis for large scale assessments. 

• 20 years of industry experience in application development for psychometric analysis, assessmen t data 

management and reporting, and online assessment. 

• Proficient in SAS, HTML, Java Script, JAVA (Sun -­‐ certified) 

• Proficient in open standards including SIF, QTI and HTML5 

EDUCATION: 

Ph.D. Measurement and Statistics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, May, 1992 

M.A. Linguistics, Shanghai International Studies University, Shanghai, China July, 1982 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Psychometrics : In his current position as well as in his prior position as the Principal Research Scientist wit h

Riverside Publishing (1999 -­‐ 2000) and Project Director and Senior Project Director of Psychometrics with Harcourt 

Assessment (1992 -­‐ 1999), Dr. Tang has directed the psychometric work for a large number of statewide assessment 

programs. He has also served a s independent consultant providing validation and replication services for many 

high -­‐ stakes assessment programs. 

Data Warehousing : Dr. Tang has designed, architected and did much of the initial programming for eMetric’s Data 

Interaction platform. The plat form has had a profound impact on the way assessment data have been used by 

educators and policy makers in many states. 

Online Assessment : Dr. Tang has provided visions, high level designs, and psychometric guidance for eMetric’s 

iTester platform. He desi gned and oversaw the development of the CAT module of the platform based on his 

extensive research in theory and practice. 

PROFESSIONAL MEMBERS HIP: 

American Educational Research Association (AERA) 

National Council of Measurement in Education (NCME) eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Vamsidhar Mukkamala 

Title: Vice President, Information Technology 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

As Vice President of Technology, Mr. Mukkamala provides leadership for the Software Development and 

Engineering team. He is responsible for the development and delivery of quality online assessment and reporting 

solutions for several state agencies – most notably Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Nevada, and South Dakota. He 

spearheaded the development of eMetric’s Data Interactio n, iTester and SIGMA platforms, integrating the latest 

technology innovations and concepts into user friendly solutions. He continues to provide insight into state -­‐ of -­‐ the -­‐ 

art development solutions at eMetric, ensuring that our customers have access to sca lable solutions that meet the 

evolving requirements in K -­‐ 12 education. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• 8 years of technology leadership experience in software development using agile methodologies. 

• 8 years of technology project management experience for large scale as sessment programs involving key 

deliverables in an assessment administration lifecycle. 

• 8 years of experience in design and architecture of enterprise applications with focus on scalability and 

security 

• 8 years of experience in designing secure infrastruct ure and hosting solutions, including the management 

and delivery of the required service level agreements. 

• 10 years of programming experience in Java and .NET platforms. 

• Proficient in C, C++, SQL, OLAP/OLTP, JavaScript and HTML5. 

• Proficient and experienced in implementing various open standards such as SIF, QTI/APIP and HTML5 

• Areas of Expertise include SOA, Web Services, Cloud Computing, Architecture Frameworks (Zachman, 

TOGAF, FSAM), Modeling (UML) and Frameworks (ITIL, CMMI) 

EDUCATION: 

M.S . Information T echnology , University of Texas , San Antonio , Texas , December , 2004 

B.Tech. Information Technology , Nagarjuna University , AP , India, May , 2002 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Online Assessment : Mr. Mukkamala played a key role in the design, architecture and d evelopment of the latest 

and the previous versions of eMetric iTester Online Assessment platform. He led the teams that supported the 

operations and implementation of the iTester platform successfully in several states. He is responsible for leading 

the te am that developed the latest version of iTester by using cutting edge technologies like HTML5 on both 

desktop and mobile form factors. 

Data Warehousing and Online Reporting : Mr. Mukkamala has led the development and implementation teams for 

the eMetric Da ta Interaction platform. He is responsible for numerous technology and architecture upgrades of 

the platform in the past 9 years. He contributed to the design, architecture and product strategy for SIGMA: a 

standards compliant eMetric Business Intelligence platform. SIGMA combines the power of open standards based 

protocols like SIF and traditional ETL tools to create a unified data solution with rich interactive interface for K -­‐ 12 

market. 

Management and Leadership : Mr. Mukkamala has provided the leadership and execution strategy to create a 

highly competitive development and operations processes such as Application Lifecycle Management (ALM) at 

eMetric. He has been responsible for managing eMetric technology infrastructure to deliver the required service 

level agreements for eMetric contracts in terms of availability, security and performance. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Dixie Knight 

Title: Vice President, Operations 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

As Vice President of Operations, Ms. Knight collabora tes as part of Senior Management to develop and execute 

strategic and operating initiatives. She is responsible for business operations including Project Management, 

Quality Assurance and Support. Ms. Knight is also responsible for contract negotiations and billing. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• 19 years serving and supporting the education field 

• 17 years in Sr. Management positions 

• Financial oversight of multi -­‐ million dollar budgets, including federal and state contracts, federal and state 

grants, and foundation -­‐ funded projects 

• Expertise managing technical requirements and application development 

• Significant experience developing and delivering training and tools to foster effective use of data to 

improve student and organization performance 

EDUCATION: 

M.B.A. Management of Technology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 2000 

B.B.A. Business, Baylor University, Waco, TX, 1992 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Ms. Knight has more than 1 8 years of experience providing leadership to help organizations plan, implement and 

sustain successful programs through effective, deliberate use of data, technology and human resources. She has 

collaborated with a broad range of education stakeholders, including program leaders, regional education service 

center direc tors, school and district administrators, foundation representatives, and state agency officials to bring 

multiple initiatives to statewide scale. 

Prior to joining eMetric, Ms. Knight served as director of a performance management initiative funded by the 

Michael and Susan Dell Foundation and the T exas Education Agency. Through this effort, Ms. Knight led the 

development of a suite of performance management tools designed to empower educators with relevant and 

timely information to effectively inform decisi ons and track results. She also co -­‐ authored the Performance 

Management chapter for the George W. Bush Institute’s Middle School Matters research platform and has 

developed and delivered training to support the platform. 

Ms. Knight previously served as Edu cation Technology Director for a regional education service center where she 

provided leadership for the development and delivery of regional and statewide services related to educational 

technology, distance learning and online learning resources. She beg an her education career as a special education 

teacher and later as a district technology director. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Abbie Currier , PMP 

Title: Project Manager II 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Ms. Currier has served as project manager fo r a number of large scale assessment contracts, including Connecticut, 

Indiana and Oklahoma. She has also provided technical support and quality assurance testing for online reporting 

of summative assessments for South Dakota, Alaska, Connecticut, and Penn sylvania. Ms. Currier p rovide s daily 

communication with external and internal teams regarding project specifications, business requirements, and 

project schedule changes/updates 

RELEVANT SKILL SET: 

• 6 years of experience providing support and project mana gement for online testing/reporting of 

statewide summative assessment programs. 

• 6 years of experience developing functional specifications, user documentation, and technical guidelines 

for online assessment and reporting solutions. 

• Extensive experience wit h creating training plans and training end -­‐ users. 

• Proficiency utilizing JIRA for managing software development and updates. 

• Thorough knowledge of project management best practices. 

EDUCATION: 

B. G. S. Bachelors of General Studies degree in English Literatur e, English Composition, and Women’s Studies ,

University of Michigan in Ann Arbor , 2005 

Project Management Professional (PMP) certified, 2015 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Ms. Currier has created and managed all project documentation , including scope of wor k, change requests, 

functional specifications, technical guidelines, and end -­‐ user help guides , for multiple high profile, large -­‐ scale 

assessment programs. She has provided in -­‐ person and web -­‐ based training for district testing coordinators and 

district tech nology coordinators in multiple states. She has also w orked with client and development teams to 

create new solutions for unique customer requirements , including solutions for item analysis reporting, re -­‐ 

rostering students, and reporting multiple exams wit hin a single interface eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Jessica Brite 

Title : Business Analyst 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Ms. Brite provides assistance and guidance to the support and project management teams. She supports project 

managers in the de velopment of user guides , and project specifications and training documentation. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• 5 years’ experience working with U.S. Department of Education under the Regional Education Laboratory 

Southwest contract 

• 4 years’ experience in developm ent of academic and psychological assessments 

• In depth knowledge of state assessment programs, reporting, and standards 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Psychology , The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, August 2003 

B.A. Psychology , The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, December 2001 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Ms. Brite has extensive experience working with districts, state departments of education, and the US Department 

of Education in the areas of data collection, standards development, standards alignment, and student 

assessment. In work with Denver Public Schools, Ms. Brite was an active member of a team who provided 

recommendations around assessment gaps and capability of assessment use in value added models for teacher 

pe rformance. Ms. Brite provi ded technical assistance to the Commission for College Ready Texas, a team tasked 

with providing content guidance for the development of Texas' s College and Career Readiness standards. Under 

the Regional Educational Laboratory Sou thwest contract, funded by the U. S. Department of Education , she 

actively participated in standards alignment studies including state assessment standards to national standards 

sets and national college and career readiness assessment standards. Her exper ience ranges from work in 

education to development of academic and psychological assessments. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Nathan L. Wall 

Role : Research Scientist 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

As a research scientist with eMetric, LLC, Dr. Wall pr ovides psychometric support to both internal and external 

clients as well as project management. Psychometric support includes consulting with clients to provide reporting 

solutions of assessment data, delivery of computerized adaptive tests, and review of technical specifications for 

eMetric’s assessment products. 

Dr. Wall currently co -­‐ manages a comprehensive assessment portal that provides students the capability to take 

on -­‐ line assessments and allows teachers to see the results of those assessments upon a student’s completion of 

the assessment. Dr. Wall also manages the development of an on -­‐ line data warehouse and analytics tool that 

allows school personnel to view students’ information from a wide array of educationally relevant domains. 

RELATIVE SKIL L SET :

Dr. Wall has experience using Item Response Theory (IRT) models in the scoring and equating of assessments. This 

includes using standard data analysis software, such as SAS, and specialized psychometric software, such as 

WINSTEPS and BILOG -­‐ MG. He ha s also participated in standard settings and data review meetings for many state -­‐ 

level assessments. 

EDUCATION: 

Ph.D . Educational Measurement and Statistics , University of Iowa , Iowa City, IA, 2011 

M.S. Sociology, University of Texas San Antonio, San Anto nio, TX 2003 

B.B.A. Sociology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, 2000 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Recently, Dr. Wall authored or co -­‐ authored papers that were presented at national research conferences on the 

topic of equating and IRT calibration with a focus on how each of these methods can affect the results of 

assessments used in state accountability programs. Results from his dissertation research were also written with 

regards to how IRT calibrations results might be affected by proposed assessment designs for measuring the 

Common Core State Standards. 

OTHER PERTINENT INFO RMATION: 

Prior to joining eMetric in 2011, Dr. Wall was employed by ACT, Inc. (2007 -­‐ 2011). In this role he worked with his 

colleagues in the Measurement and Research Department o n various psychometric and statistical analyses in 

support of both testing programs and educational measurement research. Prior to working at ACT, Inc. Dr. Wall 

was a senior statistical analyst with Pearson (2000 -­‐ 2007). In this role he provided psychometri c support for 

national norm -­‐ referenced and state -­‐ level assessment programs. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Kaelee Harper 

Title : Lead Support Specialist 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Kaelee Harper is responsible for providing client support includin g general and technical issue resolution for all 

eMetric applications. She provides assistance to project managers for project related tasks and assists with the QA 

process on pre -­‐ production application releases. Ms. Harper is also responsible for developi ng product user guides 

and maintaining support FAQs. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Over six years providing exceptional customer service 

• Strong verbal and written communication skills 

• Strong understanding of multiple operating systems and device types 

• Detailed -­‐ ori ented with passion for quick, complete problem resolution 

EDUCATION: 

B.B.A. Business Administration , Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 1999 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

While working at a previous company she was awarded Sales Support Specialist of the year for exceptional 

customer service and support. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Starre Lindgren 

Title : Support Specialist 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Starre Lindgren is responsible for providing client support including general and techn ical issue resolution for all 

eMetric applications. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Excellent oral and written communication skills 

• Strong technical and analytical skills 

• In -depth knowledge of all eMetric products 

EDUCATION: 

Pursuing a BBA in Human Resources Managem ent at the University of Texas at San Antonio, pending graduation 

date of May 2015 .eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Darsan Tatineni 

Role: Enterprise Architect 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Darsan Tatineni is currently the IT Project Manager of eMe tric’s iTester team, leading a team of software engineers 

devoted to the development and deployment of eMetric’s online assessment system. His responsibilities include 

overseeing the development, maintenance and implementation of the iTester online assessm ent platform as well 

as maintaining primary contacts with our state clients and corporate partners in the technical aspects of various 

projects. He is also responsible for ensuring the quality and competence of the product by constantly revisiting 

architec tural aspects of the platform with new and evolving technologies. 

RELEVANT SKILL SET: 

• 7 years of experience in designing and developing Rich interactive client and web applications. 

• 7 years of experience in designing, implementing and administering OLTP a nd OLAP Data base system. 

• 6 years of experience working and managing high stakes projects. 

• 6 years of experience in agile development methodologies with SCRUM. 

• 9 years of programming experience both in JAVA and .NET platforms. 

• Hands on experience using mod ern Web technologies like HTML5, jquery, Ajax etc. 

• 7 years of IT project management experience for large scale assessment programs 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas, 2004 

B.S. Informatio n Science and Engineering, Nagarjuna University, Nagarjuna Nagar, Andhra Pradesh, 2002 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Over the years working at eMetric, Mr. Tatineni has contributed to the development of several components and 

tools using cutting -­‐ edge tech nologies which are integrated into eMetric’s online reporting, assessment and data 

management platforms. During this period he modeled the initial relational data warehouse which formed the 

foundation for the subsequent models. He also helped eMetric trans ition from a legacy XML based data 

warehouse to this relational model. Mr. Tatineni played a key role in designing and developing the online 

assessment platform (iTester) and successfully oversaw its implementation in several states. He successfully led 

an d managed a team of developers working on several high stake projects. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Neil Gandhi 

Role : IT Project Manager 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Neil Gandhi is an IT Project Manager at eMetric, LLC. His current responsibilitie s include managing and overseeing 

development on the entire line of Data Interaction products at eMetric. This includes collaborating with project 

managers to gather business requirements from clients, working with database and application developers to 

translate requirements into optimal technical solutions, formulating functional and technical requirements, and 

cooperating with quality assurance staff to develop the appropriate testing plans. Mr. Gandhi is also responsible 

for managing and leading a dev elopment team, ensuring all projects are executed effectively and according to 

schedule and for deploying projects to production environments. He also contributes to hands -­‐ on application and 

database development, when needed. 

RELEVANT SKILL SET :

• Software development in object -­‐ oriented programming languages C#, Java, PHP, Ruby (9 years) 

• ASP .NET model frameworks including WebForms and MVC 

• Database design and development using SQL Server, MySQL (9 years) 

• Web development skills including HTML, CSS, Javascrip t (9 years) 

• Analysis of systems with functional & behavioral models in UML (2 years) 

• Deployment and build techniques with MSBuild and the .NET framework (4 years) 

• Management and delivery of large -­‐ scale software projects (6 years) 

EDUCATION: 

Mr. Gandhi ha s earned a Master’s degree in Information Technology from the University of Texas at San Antonio 

and a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science from the University of Texas at Austin. He also completed a Business 

Foundations Certificate from the McCombs Scho ol of Business at the University of Texas at Austin while pursuing 

his Bachelor’s degree. 

M.S . Information Technology , University of Texas San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 

B.S . Computer Science , University of Texas, Austin, TX 

Business Foundations Certificat e University of Texas, Austin, TX 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Mr. Gandhi has performed development on a number of Data Interaction applications for high -­‐ stakes reporting 

including the Connecticut Mastery Test, Alaska state assessments, Pearson assessmen ts, and CTB assessments, 

among others. He has successfully managed to oversee the concurrent development and delivery of multiple 

applications throughout the year, ensuring they are released to the highest level of quality and in a timely manner. 

He also played a key role in migrating the Data Interaction platform from a primarily server -­‐ based architecture to a 

service -­‐ oriented architecture with an emphasis on HTML5 for delivery of front -­‐ ends on multiple form factors .eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name : Phikhanh Nguyen 

Title : Lead Developer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Mr. Nguyen is responsible for maintenance of the Data Interaction p latform. He also implements new features 

and functionality to enhance the system. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• C#, ASP.net, ASP MVC 

• Java Script / H TML 

EDUCATION: 

B.S . Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, 2007 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Phi has successfully served as a lead d eveloper for Data Interaction deliverables in Pennsylvania, Connecticut, 

Alaska, and Sou th Dakota. He also led the development of a mobile version for Data Interaction. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Mr. Amiras Gand hi

Title : Database Analyst 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Mr. Gand hi is responsible for implementing and maintaining high q uality ETL solutions with architects and other 

developers and taking ownership and accountability for database deliverables in all phases of the development 

lifecycle .

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Design and maintain various database environments on SQL server 

• De velop and maintain ETL processes using MS SQL and SSIS. 

• Provide data extraction techniques for various businesses 

• Identify and resolve problems and ensure appropriate tracking of issue 

• Computer progra ming using VB.Net 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Computer Science S an Jose State University, San Jose, CA 2009 

B.E. Computer Engineering Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, Surat, India 2005 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Mr. Gand hi has extensive experience managing databases for a number of reporting and online testing programs 

supported by eMetric’s platforms. He has successfully managed database related tasks for these projects. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Yongkang Hong 

Title : Database Analyst 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Mr. Hong is a dat abase analyst at eMetric. Hi s responsibilities include design ing , build ing , test ing and 

implement ing high quality ETL solutions with architects and other developers, taking ownership and accountability 

for database deliverables in all phases of the develo pment lifecycle . He is also responsible for m onitoring and 

optimizing the performance of the database , trouble -­‐ shooting and database migration. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Design and maintain various database environments on SQL server and Oracle 

• Develop ETL pro cesses using MS SQL and SSIS. 

• Provide data extraction techniques for various businesses 

• Identify and resolve problems and ensure appropriate tracking of issue 

• Monitor efficient quality of data 

• Computer programing using VB.Net, ASP.Net, Java 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Statistics , University of Texas at San Antonio , 2009 

M.S. Computer Application, Dalian University of Technology, China, 1988 

B.B.S. Computer Science, Dalian University of Technology, China, 1985 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Mr. Hong has worked on a number of projects since he joined the eMetric in 2009 . He possesses a deep 

understanding of database architecture. Mr. Hong’s analytical approach to problem solving allows for a deep 

understand ing of the data and the consequences of variou s approaches to utilizing the data. He is able to 

collaborate with all eMetric developers to produce a solution which can satisfy the client’s needs and work within 

the scope of the application’s capabilities. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Mr. Tjiputra Tham 

Title: Lead Developer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Tjiputra Tham is a software engineer at eMetric, LLC and serves as a lead developer for the Data Interaction 

platform. He contributes to every aspect of the development cycle includin g requirements gathering, 

documentation, design , coding, and testing. 

RELA VANT SKILL SET: 

• Languages: C#, Java 

• Platforms: Visual Studio 2010, SQL Server 2012 

• Web Technologies: ASP.NET Webforms, ASP.NET MVC, HTML, JavaScript 

EDUCATION: 

B.S . Computer Scien ce, Texas A&M University , San Antonio , Texas , August , 2006 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Tjiputra Tham has served as a lead developer fo r Data Interaction deliverables in Connecticut, Alaska, and Nevada. 

He has also made significant development contributi ons to eMetric’s district data warehouse solution. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Bailey Landress 

Title : Software Engineer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Bailey Landress is a software engineer at eMetric, LLC and serves as a developer for the iTester and Data 

Interaction platform s. He contributes to every aspect of the development cycle including requirements gathering, 

documentation, design , coding, and testing. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• HTML, CSS, JavaScrip t

• SQL (relational databases, database normalization) 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Computer Science, TX A&M University Corpus Christi, 2012 

B.S. Economics , University of Texas at Austin , 2000 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Bailey Landress recently joined the eMetric team . In his time here h e has refactored significant pieces of 

functionality for the iTester platform, in particular for student accommodations, and he has contributed both 

design and logic to our support tool s.

# eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae Name: Zhubi You 

Role: Software Engineer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Zhubi You is a software engineer responsible for front -­‐ end and back -­‐ end development on Data Interaction TM ,

eMetric’s online reporting and data mana gement system. Her responsibilities include implementing API support, 

managing data, performing quality testing, and maintaining the online reporting systems. 

RELEVANT SKILL SET: 

• 6 years of programming experience in C/C++ and C# 

• 3 years of programming ex perience in JavaScript, HTML, CSS, Python and .NET framework 

• 2 years of experience in designing and developing front -­‐ end components of web applications 

• 2 years of experience in designing and developing back -­‐ end support of web applications 

• Research experien ce in up -­‐ to -­‐ date computer science technologies 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Computer Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, 2014 

B.E. Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, CHINA, 2012 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

As a software engineer intern at eMetric, Ms. You worked on both the front -­‐ end and back -­‐ end of eMetric’s 

Lighthouse platform. She developed several new widgets and features based on industry research and 

implemented efficient programs for processing large amount of data. She now works f or eMetric as a full -­‐ time 

employee. She has contributed to the development and improvement of eMetric’s reporting platforms and has 

focused on implementing database and API support for eMetric’s online reporting platform. 

# eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae Name: Swati Cherukuri 

Role : Manager, Quality Assurance 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

As a quality assurance manager at eMetric, Ms. Cherukuri is responsible for customer requirements gathering, 

developing test and verification plans, testing applicati ons, and maintaining the quality of the products released by 

eMetric. In this role, she has developed and implemented several QA procedures at all phases of the software 

development cycle for eMetric products . She is proficient in applying manual testing as well as using the 

automated tools. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

Automated tools: 

• QTP 

• Win Runner 

• Test Director 

• Selenium 

Programming Languages: 

• Java 

• C++ 

Database Languages: 

• SQL 

Statistical Programming: 

• SAS 

ERP packages: 

• SAP BIW 

• SAP ABAP 

EDUCATION: 

B.B.S. Compu ter Science Pondicherry University, India , 2005. 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Since joining eMetric in 2008 Ms. Cherukuri has led the eMetric quality assurance team and managed the quality 

assurance work for all eMetric’s online assessment and reporting products. She has established a set of testing 

procedures which are instrumental to the successful product roll -­‐ out and delivery for state and corporate clients. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Ryan Rasti 

Title: QA Engineer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Mr. Rasti is responsible for providing manual QA testing and creation and maintenance of UI automation scripts for 

eMetric web applications. He works to create and improve QA documentation and process enhancement 

practices . Mr. Rasti also provides IT support and problem resolution with business stakeholders, eMetric 

employees, and end -­‐ users. Additional responsibilities include office system administration duties, defect 

management, and research into new ways to improve eMetric products from a busines s and technology 

perspective. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Selenium UI automation using C# 

• Understanding of how user requirements impact functional/test requirements 

• Contributing to QA initiatives and E2E procedures 

• Translating technical concepts to non -­‐ technical personnel 

• Conducting technical training with business stakeholders via web conferencing 

• Facilitating communication between developers, project managers, and QA 

• Continuing education in development, database, and system analysis concepts 

EDUCATION: 

B.B.A In formation Systems , University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 2011 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Mr. Rasti has continued to refine and improve eMetric products by providing QA and analysis for a variety of 

eMetric's HTML5 and Java products. Notab le accomplishments include enhancing current QA practices for the CTB 

products, working with developers to modify and test additional functionality and usability features for the iTester 

3 and Lighthouse products, as well as consistently providing excellen t technical support and service to business 

stakeholders and clients. eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Summer Li 

Title: QA Analyst 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Ms. Li’s responsibilities include preventing defects in eMetric’s online assessment syste m and online reporting 

system. Ms. Li creates and implements automation testing processes using the Selenium Framework to verify each 

system meets client requirements and objectives . She is also responsible for enhancing the production user 

experience thro ugh analysis the cognitive ergonomics of users. 

RELATIVE SKILL SET :

• Testing Framework: Selenium, NUnit; 

• Testing Language: C#, C++; 

• Web technologies : HTML5, JavaScript, 

• Optimizing testing process flow standards 

EDUCATION: 

M.S. Industrial and Sy stem Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 2012. 

M.S. Automation -­‐ Electrical Engineering Department, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China, 2010. 

B.S. Automation -­‐ Electrical Engineering Department, Dalian University of Technology , Dalian, China, 2008. 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLI SHMENTS: 

Ms. Li has been using the eMetric’s quality control processes, tools and frameworks (Selenium and NUnit) to 

ensure quality deliverables for eMetric’s Data Interaction products. She also contributes to qu ality control and user 

experience analysis for the online testing platform, iTester 3 .eMetric Staff Curriculum Vitae 

Name: Fang Zhang 

Role: QA Engineer 

CURRENT RESPONSIBILI TIES: 

Fang Zhang is a member of the Quality Assurance team at eMet ric. She is responsible for quality assurance testing 

for the New Mexico and Oklahoma online assessment portals. 

RELEVANT SKILL SET: 

• 3 years of experience with SOA & Web Based applications functionality testing 

• 3 years of experience in writing test scrip ts based on user requirements 

• Experience with full life cycle software development with multiple high priority projects 

• 3 years of programming experience in Java and test automation tools such as Selenium and Junit 

EDUCATION: 

M.Sc. Computer Engineering, U niversi ty of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minnesota 

M.E. Management Engineering, Beijing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics, Beijing, China 

B.E. Industrial International Trade, Beijing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics, Beijing, China 

SIGNIFICANT ACCOMPLISHMENTS: 

Ms. Zhang has contributed to several high -­‐ reliability product releases as a result of thorough testing. She has been 

recognized for developing excellent test plans and scripts , and rapidly discovering defects. She has also developed 

automation testing suites for regression testing. Page 1 

# MICHAEL AVIDON 

Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As the Mathematics Test Development Specialist, Dr. Michael Avidon participates in all phases of item and test development, including item construction, editing, data review, and client interactions. Dr. Avidon is an accomplished mathematician whose career includes teaching, tutoring, and content writing. His eight years of experience with mathematics content development and item writing across grades 3–12 includes work on nationally recognized programs for publishing firms such as Pearson/Prentice Hall and Glynlyon. Dr. Avidon’s keen mathematical mind, deep content knowledge, and extensive teaching experience provide him with a rich repertoire of examples and contexts in creating relevant and realistic assessment tasks. In the past four years, Dr. Avidon’s main concentration has been on the development of tasks for state-level assessment products, including, New York, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Puerto Rico. 

Dr. Avidon served as a mathematics instructor for almost 20 years, teaching college level mathematics before becoming a mathematics editor. He holds a Ph.D. in Mathematics from Columbia University, and an A.B. in Mathematics from Princeton University in New Jersey. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2009–Present Mathematics Test Development Specialist 

Victory Products 

Worcester, MA 

Dr. Avidon’s responsibilities at Victory Productions have included content development for both print and digital products—from full-scale programs to lesson specific instructional resources. Currently, his main emphasis has been focused on the creation of assessment items for Career and College Readiness projects. Most recently, Dr. Avidon was the Mathematics Item Development Manager for two major projects at Victory Productions where he oversaw the successful development of both traditional and technology-enhanced items. In one state specific assessment project, he managed a team of six writers that developed over 750 items across grades 3–10 and correlated the items to a defined set of standards. As the Item Development Manager, Dr. Avidon reviewed every item; provided guidance to the writers in creating and revising their items; implemented necessary style changes; and maintained a close, collaborative relationship with the client. Dr. Avidon’s dedicated attention to each detail of the project’s scope resulted in nearly a 100% acceptance rate from the client. In his other most recent project, Dr. Avidon oversaw the development of 1,200 technology-enhanced items targeted for grades 3–5. These items represented a bank of assessment tasks designed to reflect a greater degree of critical thought and reasoning from the Résumé of Michael Avidon Page 2 

learner. This work was accomplished in fewer than 8 weeks within the client’s own authoring system. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Benesse—Straight Ace Digital eLearning Assessment System (Grades 6–8) 

Marshall Cavendish Education—Singapore Mathematics/ Primary Mathematics Assessments (Grades 3–5) 

Measured Progress—Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System Mathematics (Grades 3–10) 

Measured Progress—Mathematics–State Level Item Bank (Grades 3–12) 

Measured Progress—Rhode Island Mathematics (RIIA) (Grades 3–11) 

Pacific Metrics—EAGLE (LA) Assessment Item Review (Grades K–8) 

Pearson—New York State Mathematics Assessments (Grades 3–8) 

Pearson—Puerto Rico Mathematics Assessments (Grades 3–8) 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

Pearson/Prentice Hall 

December 2007–July 2009 

Mathematics Editorial 6–12, Associate Editor 

Media and Technology Charter High (MATCH) School, Boston, MA 

June 2002–June 2004 and January 2007–June 2009: 

Part-time mathematics teacher (Algebra II) and substitute teacher; 

MCAS tutor; prepped materials for MCAS tutors; SAT tutor 

Connecticut College, Assistant Professor 

August 1999–May 2001: 

Linear Algebra, Calculus I, II, III, Finite Mathematics, Introduction to Mathematical Thought 

St. Lawrence University, Assistant Professor 

August 1998–May 1999: 

Elementary Number Theory, Linear Algebra, Calculus I and II 

Centenary College, Assistant Professor 

August 1997–May 1998: 

College Algebra, Elementary Functions, Finite Mathematics, Business Calculus, Linear Algebra 

Brigham Young University, Assistant Professor 

January 1997–June 1997: 

Linear Algebra Résumé of Michael Avidon Page 3 

Emory University, Mathematics Department, Assistant Professor 

September 1989–June 1993: 

Elementary Linear Algebra 

Calculus I and II, Honors Calculus, Multi-variable Calculus 

Analytic Number Theory (graduate course) 

Columbia University, Mathematics Department, Instructor 

May 1981–June 1989: 

Calculus I and II, Pre-Calculus, Basic Mathematics 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

On the distribution of primitive abundant numbers, Acta Arithmetica LXXVII.2 (1996), pp.195–205. 

On primitive 3-smooth partitions of n, The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics (1997). 

An upper bound for the discrepancy of convex plane sets (accepted for publication by Acta Arithmetica). 

Enumerating row arrangements of three species with Rick Mabry and Paul Sisson, Mathematics Magazine Vol. 74, No. 2, April 2001, 130–135. 

PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION 

Commonwealth of Massachusetts—Mathematics (gr. 8–12) 

EDUCATION 

Columbia University 

New York, NY 

Ph.D., Mathematics 

Columbia University 

New York, NY 

M. Phil., Mathematics 

Columbia University 

New York, NY 

M.A., Mathematics 

Princeton University 

Princeton, NJ 

A.B., Mathematics Page 1 

# PATTY KREIKEMEIER 

Science Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As a Science Test Development Specialist for Victory Productions, Ms. Patty Kreikemeier participates in various aspects of item development, including item construction, editing, and review. In her previous positions, Ms. Kreikemeier has facilitated data review committees, created alignment instruments and training manuals, and developed assessment blueprints and scoring protocols. 

Prior to joining Victory Productions, Ms. Kreikemeier has 23 years of experience as an independent science writer and consultant specializing in educational technology and assessment. She was a high school science educator for 14 years, with an additional two years as a community college instructor. Ms. Kreikemeier has developed science curricula, assessments, and standards with many local school districts and state level education departments including Alaska, California, Georgia, Louisiana, South Carolina, Utah, and Washington. She brings a wealth of research knowledge and practical experience in designing technology-enhanced assessment instruments. 

Ms. Kreikemeier holds an M.S. in Education Administration and an M.S. in Developmental Biology from the University of Cincinnati, and a B.S. in Zoology from Colorado State University. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present Science Test Development Specialist 

Victory Products 

Worcester, MA 

Current responsibilities include science assessment work on items designed to address the Next Generation Science Standards. Other supporting tasks include the editing and revision of the work of other team item writers. Develops general and specific skills in using client’s proprietary authoring platform. 

1994–Present Technology and Assessment Specialist 

Education Technology and Assessment Consulting (ETAC) 

Norfolk, NE 

As an independent science specialist, Ms. Kreikemeier’s proficiency covers a range of areas including developing traditional assessment items for local and state educational agencies; experience with technology-enhanced items including drag and drop, clip and pop, hot spots; and in editing, revising and uploading items to client secure databases. Her client list includes notable organizations and corporations such as A.C.T., Council of Chief State Science Officers, Delta Résumé of Patty Kreikemeier Page 2 

Education, Educational Data Systems Inc., Measured Progress, Northwest Evaluation Association, and Pearson. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Research and Item Development 

Experience designing, developing, and revising test forms for large-scale field testing: 

California Golden State Exam— Content area team leader for Biology and Coordinated Science; item development, revision, field testing; test form construction; scoring and training; disseminate work at local, regional and state meetings. 

New Standards Science Reference Exam— Development Manager; design and develop standards-based, science reference examinations including field tests and score protocols; supervise scoring; and disseminate project information at state, regional, and national meetings. 

Riverside Publishing—Minnesota Assessment— develop assessment blueprints; develop scenario-based assessment instruments; write reports. 

Seeds of Science, Roots of Reading— assessment components for a grade 3–6 curriculum that integrates inquiry science with content-rich literacy instruction. 

Science and Global Issues— assessment component of high school that integrates the role of science in the needs of modern society and the use of technology in advancing scientific knowledge. 

Assessing Science Knowledge— assessment component of Full Option Science System (FOSS). 

National Alliance for Restructuring in Education (NARE)— develop curriculum for Programs of Study for Chicago Public Schools (Environmental Sciences, Biology, Earth/Space Sciences, Chemistry, Physics); develop test blueprint for end-of-course exams. 

Validities of Standards-based Science Inquiry Assessments— lead the Alignment strand; develop inquiry codes based on National Science Education Standards (NSES) Inquiry Standards; lead alignment advisory team (national-level experts and internal personnel); data analysis; write reports; disseminate project at national meetings. 

Transforming Instruction by Design in Earth Science (TIDES)— develop instruments for assessment of middle school teacher pedagogical content knowledge and middle school student content knowledge; write reports; disseminate project at national meeting. Résumé of Patty Kreikemeier Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

Northeast Community College, Norfolk, Nebraska (2011–2013) 

Central Catholic High School, West Point, Nebraska (2009–2011) 

Center for Research, Assessment and Evaluation, Lawrence Hall of Science, University of California, Berkeley, California (2007–2009) 

Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International, Menlo Park, California (2000–2007) National Center on Education and the Economy, Washington, D.C. & Office of the President, University of California (1997–2000) 

Jesup Community Schools, Jesup, Iowa (1996–1997) 

Grossmont Union High School District, LaMesa, California (1984–1996) 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Penuel, W. R., Kreikemeier, P. A., & Venezky, D. (2006). Mapping Standards to Big Ideas: A Task for Assessing Teachers’ Comprehension of Curricular Purposes in Ear t h Scie nce. American Geophysical Union, Annual Meeting, San Francisco, 2006. 

Ryan, J.M., Quellmalz, E., Kreikemeier, P.A., & Haertel, G. D. (2004). Testing the Alignment of a State’s Mathematics Tests to Standards and Grade -Level Expectations. Paper presented at American Educational Research Association Symposium, San Diego, 2004. 

Kreikemeier, P., & Quellmalz, E. (2003). Alignment of NAEP, TIMSS and New Standards Science Items with the NSES Inquiry Standards. Paper presented at American Educational Research Association Symposium, Chicago, 2003. 

Quellmalz, E., Kozma, R., & Kreikemeier, P. (2003). Development of an ICT Assessment Framework for the 21st Century. Paper presented at 2003 North American International Organization for Science and Technology Educators Symposium, Williamsburg, VA. 

Kreikemeier, P., & Quellmalz, E. (2002). Aligning GLOBE to Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS). Paper presented at 4th Annual Texas Science Summit, San Antonio, TX. 

Quellmalz, E., Kreikemeier, P., Rosenquist, A., & Hinojosa, T. (2001). Aligning GLOBE to National and International Standards. Paper presented at the Sixth Annual GLOBE Conference, Blaine, WA. 

Fisher, D., Sax, C., Pumpian, I., Rodifer, K., & Kreikemeier, P. (1997). Including All Students in the High School Reform Agenda. Education and Treatment of Children; v20 n1, pp. 59–67. Résumé of Patty Kreikemeier Page 4 

EDUCATION 

University of Cincinnati 

Cincinnati, OH 

M.S., Developmental Biology 

Colorado State University 

Fort Collins, CO, MN 

B.S., Zoology Page 1 

# DAVID MARKSON 

ELA Test Development Specialist 

PROFESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS 

As an ELA Test Development Specialist, Mr. David Markson serves as a test developer, a meeting facilitator, and a professional-development trainer. Over the years he has worked on assessment programs used in more than 30 states including Pennsylvania. His clients have included companies such as Victory, Amplify, Continental Press, CTB, DRC, ETS, Pearson, and Riverside, as well as smaller companies and individual school districts. Mr. Markson has written thousands of test questions and hundreds of passages and prompts. 

Mr. Markson began his career as a middle school teacher of English and reading. After 10 years in the classroom he joined what was then Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Mr. Markson worked as an in-house editor/assessment specialist for 12 years and contributed to shelf products, such as the Stanford Achievement Test series, and to numerous customized state testing programs. In 1997, he left Harcourt and established his own business, serving as an independent consultant. In this capacity, Mr. Markson has been a test developer, a meeting facilitator, and a professional-development trainer. He especially enjoys contact with teachers in item and passage-review meetings. To stay connected to real students in real classrooms today, Mr. Markson often works as a substitute teacher. 

Mr. Markson earned his B.A. in Literature and Philosophy from Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio, and his M.A. in Education (reading specialist certification) from Seton Hall University in South Orange, New Jersey. 

CURRENT POSITION 

2014–Present ELA Test Development Specialist 

Victory Products 

Worcester, MA 

Current responsibilities include ELA assessment work on items designed to address state and national standards. Other supporting tasks include consulting with team members on editing and revising items and directing item writers. Works with the Victory ELA team in designing items associated with paired informational and literary passages. Résumé of David Markson Page 2 

1997–Present Free-Lance Test Development and Educational Consulting 

San Antonio, TX 

Assessment projects include consulting on all aspects of test development, from content to team management. Clients include: CTB, DRC, ETS K–12, Intel, Pearson, Riverside, and others. 

Instructional projects include developing textbook ancillaries in reading and language arts and making in-service presentations. Clients include: American Guidance Services; Pearson Professional Development; Holt, Rinehart and Winston; Continental Press, Inc.; Irving, TX ISD; Millard, NE Schools; Loudoun County Schools, Leesburg, VA. 

PROJECT-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCE 

Amplify Education (2007–Present) 

Develop passages, items, and prompts for Intel Assessment Item Bank K-12; develop passages, items, and prompts for various districts (e.g., Washington, DC; Kipp Academy); and provides copyediting/proofreading services 

Continental Press (1998–2012) 

Developed numerous reading and writing practice-test forms (passages, items, and prompts) used in CA, NY, MD, IL, MA, Washington, DC, and elsewhere at grades 2–12. 

ETS K–12 (2012–2014) 

Developed items for TX STAAR Reading Test at grades 5–8 

Measured Progress, often as a sub-subcontractor through Total Assessment (2012–2014) 

Developed items for grade 6–8 Reading Test in MA; developed items for Task-Models Project in reading; and researched and developed prompts for RI HS Social Studies 

Pearson (2004–2014) 

Developed reading passages, items, and prompts for state projects (i.e., LA, MN); developed items and prompts for ESL tests (Abu Dahbi 2011; CA, TX, FL 2014) Résumé of David Markson Page 3 

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 

1985–1997 Executive Editor 

Harcourt Assessment 

San Antonio, TX 

Planned and developed numerous shelf and custom assessment products. 

Examples of Content-Area Projects: 

Language Arts: 

Stanford 8 Language, Listening, Vocabulary 

Language Arts Performance Assessments 

Alabama Integrated Reading–Writing Assessment 

Treasury of Literature Reading & Language Series 

Science: 

HB Science Anytime Assessments 

Alabama Integrated Grade 3 Science Assessment 

Connecticut (CAPT) Science Assessment (Gr. 10) 

Holt Rinehart Winston Science Plus Assessments 

Social Studies: 

HB Stories in Time Assessments 

Mathematics: 

HB Math Advantage Assessments 

1976–1985 Teacher 

South Orange Middle School 

South Orange, NJ 

Teacher of English, reading, and journalism for grades 6–9; also served as advisor to an award-winning student newspaper. 

1977–1984 Teacher, 

South Orange-Maplewood Adult School 

Maplewood, NJ 

Taught English as a Second Language, GED, and Adult Basic Literacy. 

PAPERS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Published articles on educational and environmental issues in The New York Times , The English Journal , Instructor Magazine , The Mother Earth News , and other periodicals. Résumé of David Markson Page 4 

EDUCATION 

Seton Hall University 

South Orange, NJ 

M.A., Education/Reading Specialist 

Kean University 

Union, NJ 

Certificate: Teacher of English K–12 

Antioch College 

Yellow Springs, OH 

B.A., Literature and Philosophy
