Title: Investigation finds tourists responsible for fatal tiger attack at Beijing zoo

URL Source: https://en.people.cn/n3/2016/0825/c90000-9105160.html

Markdown Content:
The investigation panel for the tiger attack at a wildlife park in Beijing late last month has confirmed that the tragedy was mainly caused by the actions of two visitors who ignored the warnings of a staff member and stepped out of their car in an enclosure, China's state media CCTV reports.

The incident occurred on July 23 and the tiger mauling left a 57-year-old mother dead, and her 32-year-old daughter injured.

A report issued by the investigation panel said that the reason for the accident was firstly because the daughter Zhao did not abide by the rules of the zoo, and left her car after ignoring the warnings of a staff member resulting in her being injured. Secondly, her mother Zhou also violated the rules and left the vehicle as she attempted to save her daughter, which led to her death.

According to the report, Beijing Badaling Wildlife World has clear warning signs at the zoo, and provides leaflets to tourists instructing them of the rules, with visitors also required to sign a responsibility agreement.

The staff of the zoo verbally warned the woman to get back in her car before the incident occurred and immediate rescue efforts were carried out by the zoo after the attack, the report said.

The investigation found that the facts show the zoo will not take major responsibility for the incident.

The incident has shocked many people in China, with footage released by China's state media CCTV, showing the attack widely viewed. The footage shows a woman getting out of a car and walking to the driver's side, with a male driver then getting out and speaking with the woman. While they are talking a tiger pounces on the woman and drags her away. The footage then shows a second woman getting out of the car and heading off to help the first woman.

Later media reports confirmed that the two women were mother and daughter, with the daughter suffering severe injuries, while the mother was killed.

The incident has sparked heated debate on who should take responsibility for the attack: the tourists or the zoo.

Some netizens argued that the wildlife park should not be responsible for the incident because all visitors are informed of the danger and they must sign an agreement with the park confirming they will stay in their cars.

However, others believe that the park should take responsibility because personal cars touring the zoo are not appropriate and the zoo should provide its own vehicles for tourists to view the animals, especially when entering the enclosures of predators.

**(For the latest China news, Please follow People's Daily on Twitter and Facebook)**(Editor: Yuan Can,Bianji)
