Title: Rewordify.com | Understand what you read

URL Source: https://rewordify.com/index.php?u=6z3p54wgb9bgwc

Markdown Content:
TopTable of contentsSettingsNext chapter
Rewordify is now a feature in  Read&Write

Rewordify.com

Understand what you read.

Search for documents:
	
Home
Demo
Help
Settings
Classic literature
Public documents
	
Teach smarter
Register safely
Log in
Home
Log in
Help
Settings
Demo
Teach smarter
Search / browse classic literature
Search / browse public documents
Register safely
Close Menu
There are 747 hard words. How many do you want to learn?  3 7 10   Hand-pick words
Reading time: 2 seconds. | Total points: 0 | ? | X
Rewordified text
Stats
Share
Print / Learning activities
Parts of speech

Previous chapter	
Contents	
Next chapter	

The Good Soldier
PART I
by

Ford Madox Ford

PART I

(Part of the book Good Soldier, The)



THIS is the saddest story I have ever heard. We had known the Ashburnhams for nine seasons of the town of Nauheim with an extreme emotional closeness—or, rather with a casual friendship/knowledge as loose and easy and yet as close as a good glove's with your hand. My wife and I knew Captain and Mrs Ashburnham as well as it was possible to know anybody, and yet, in another sense, we knew nothing at all about them. This is, I believe, a state of things only possible with English people of whom, till today, when I sit down to puzzle out what I know of this sad affair, I knew nothing whatever. Six months ago I had never been to England, and, certainly, I had never sounded the depths of an English heart. I had known the shallows.

I don't mean to say that we did not know about many English people. Living, as we necessarily lived, in Europe, and being, as we necessarily were, fun/relaxationd Americans, which is as much as to say that we were un-American, we were thrown very much into the (community of people/all good people in the world) of the nicer English. Paris, you see, was our home. Somewhere between Nice and Bordighera gave/given yearly winter quarters for us, and Nauheim always received us from July to September. You will gather from this statement that one of us had, as the saying is, a "heart", and, from the statement that my wife is dead, that she was the sufferer.

Captain Ashburnham also had a heart. But, whereas a yearly month or so at Nauheim tuned him up to exactly the right pitch for the rest of the twelvemonth, the two months or so were only just enough to keep poor Florence alive from year to year. The reason for his heart was, about, polo, or too much hard (respectful, fair behavior by athletes in a competition) in his youth. The reason for poor Florence's broken years was a storm at sea upon our first crossing to Europe, and the immediate reasons for our (state of being locked in a prison) in that continent were doctor's orders. They said that even the short Channel crossing might well kill the poor thing.

When we all first met, Captain Ashburnham, home on sick leave from an India to which he was never to return, was thirty-three; Mrs Ashburnham Leonora—was thirty-one. I was thirty-six and poor Florence thirty. This way today Florence would have been thirty-nine and Captain Ashburnham forty-two; whereas I am forty-five and Leonora forty. You will perceive, therefore, that our friendship has been a young-middle-(old/allowed to get old/got older) affair, since we were all of us of quite quiet personalities/disposals, the Ashburnhams being more especially what in England it is the custom to call "quite good people".

They were moved downward/originated, as you will probably expect, from the Ashburnham who went with Charles I to the support, and, as you must also expect with this class of English people, you would never (have seen/have heard/have become aware of)d it. Mrs Ashburnham was a Powys; Florence was a Hurlbird of Stamford, Connecticut, where, as you know, they are more old-fashioned than even the residents of Cranford, England, could have been. I myself am a Dowell of Philadelphia, Pa., where, it is (in the past) true, there are more old English families than you would find in any six English counties taken together. I carry about with me, in fact—as if it were the only thing that invisibly (held or secured/gave support and security/did TV news) me to any spot upon the globe—the title deeds of my farm, which once covered (more than two, but not a lot of) blocks between Chestnut and Walnut Streets. These title deeds are of (bracelets and belts made of small beads and shells), the grant of an Indian chief to the first Dowell, who left Farnham in Surrey in company with William Penn. Florence's people, as is so often the case with the residents of Connecticut, came from the neighbourhood of Fordingbridge, where the Ashburnhams' place is. From there, at this moment, I am actually writing.

You may well ask why I write. And yet my reasons are quite many. For it is not unusual in human beings who have seen the bag of a city or the falling to pieces of a people to want to set down what they have seen for the benefit of unknown heirs or of generations much/very remote; or, if you please, just to get the sight out of their heads.

Some one has said that the death of a mouse from cancer is the whole bag of Rome by the Goths, and I swear to you that the breaking up of our little four-square group of friends was such another (too terrible to think about) event. Supposing that you should come upon us sitting together at one of the little tables in front of the club house, let us say, at Homburg, taking tea of an afternoon and watching the miniature golf, you would have said that, as human affairs go, we were an amazingly safe (huge, fancy, stone house). We were, if you will, one of those tall ships with the white sails upon a blue sea, one of those things that seem the proudest and the safest of all the beautiful and safe things that God has permitted the mind of men to frame. Where better could one escape/hide? Where better?

(state of existing forever)? (firm and steady nature/lasting nature/strength)? I can't believe it's gone. I can't believe that that long, peaceful life, which was just stepping a minuet, disappeared in four crashing days at the end of nine years and six weeks. Upon my word, yes, our emotional closeness was like a minuet, simply because on every possible occasion and in every possible situation/event we knew where to go, where to sit, which table we (every single person agrees) should choose; and we could rise and go, all four together, without a signal from any one of us, always to the music of the Kur orchestra, always in the mild/not extreme sunshine, or, if it rained, in quiet (so nobody else will know) shelters. No, in fact, it can't be gone. You can't kill a minuet de la cour. You may shut up the music-book, close the harpsichord; in the cabinet and presses the rats may destroy the white satin favours. The mob may sack Versailles; the Trianon may fall, but surely the minuet—the minuet itself is dancing itself away into the furthest stars, even as our minuet of the Hessian washing/swimming places must be stepping itself still. Isn't there any heaven where old beautiful dances, old beautiful (very close, personal relationships) prolong themselves? Isn't there any Complete happiness and peace spreaded (or existed) throughout by the faint thrilling of (tools or objects used to do work or measure something) that have fallen into the dust of wormwood but that yet had weak, unsteady (and shaking), and everlasting souls?

No, by God, it is false! It wasn't a minuet that we stepped; it was a prison—a prison full of screaming (uncontrolled emotional outbursts), tied down so that they might not outsound the rolling of our (vehicle with wheels/body posture/carrying something) wheels as we went along the shaded avenues of the Taunus Wald.

And yet I swear by the holy and untouchable name of my creator that it was true. It was true sunshine; the true music; the true splash of the fountains from the mouth of stone dolphins. For, if for me we were four people with the same tastes, with the same desires, acting—or, no, not acting—sitting here and there (every single person agrees), isn't that the truth? If for nine years I have possessed a good apple that is rotten at the core and discover its rottenness only in nine years and six months less four days, isn't it true to say that for nine years I possessed a good apple? So it may well be with Edward Ashburnham, with Leonora his wife and with poor dear Florence. And, if you come to think of it, isn't it a little odd that the physical rottenness of at least two (tall supporting posts/important parts) of our four-square house never presented itself to me as a dangerous and threatening thing to its security? It doesn't so present itself now though the two of them are actually dead. I don't know....

I know nothing—nothing in the world—of the hearts of men. I only know that I am alone—horribly alone. No fireplacestone will ever again witness, for me, friendly intercourse. No smoking-room will ever be other than filled with (cannot be counted or figured out) (things that are similar to other things) in the middle of smoke wreaths. Yet, in the name of God, what should I know if I don't know the life of the fireplace and of the smoking-room, since my whole life has been passed in those places? The warm fireplaceside!—Well, there was Florence: I believe that for the twelve years her life lasted, after the storm that seemed permanently to have weakened her heart—I don't believe that for one minute she was out of my sight, except when she was safely tucked up in bed and I should be downstairs, talking to some good fellow or other in some lounge or smoking-room or taking my final turn with a cigar before going to bed. I don't, you understand, blame Florence. But how can she have known what she knew? How could she have got to know it? To know it so fully. Heavens! There doesn't seem to have been the actual time. It must have been when I was taking my baths, and my Swedish exercises, being neatly trimmed. Leading the life I did, of the thorough, strained nurse, I had to do something to keep myself fit. It must have been then! Yet even that can't have been enough time to get the hugely long conversations full of worldly wisdom that Leonora has reported to me since their deaths. And is it possible to imagine that during our prescribed walks in Nauheim and the neighbourhood she found time to carry on the lengthy (or lengthened) (back-and-forth conversations to agree on something) which she did carry on between Edward Ashburnham and his wife? And isn't it amazing that during all that time Edward and Leonora never spoke a word to each other in private? What is one to think of people/(the kindness of people)?

For I swear to you that they were the model couple. He was as gave/reserved as it was possible to be without appearing stupid. So well set up, with such honest blue eyes, such a touch of stupidity, such a warm goodheartedness! And she—so tall, so great in the saddle, so fair! Yes, Leonora was amazingly fair and so amazingly the real thing that she seemed too good to be true. You don't, I mean, as a rule, get it all so excellently together. To be the county family, to look the county family, to be so appropriately and perfectly rich; to be so perfect in manner—even just to the saving touch of disrespectful rudeness that seems to be necessary. To have all that and to be all that! No, it was too good to be true. And yet, only this afternoon, talking over the whole matter she said to me: "Once I tried to have a lover but I was so sick at the heart, so completely worn out that I had to send him away." That struck me as the most amazing thing I had ever heard. She said "I was actually in a man's arms. Such a nice chap! Such a dear fellow! And I was saying to myself, extremely strongly, hissing it between my teeth, as they say in novels—and really squeezing tightly them together: I was saying to myself: 'Now, I'm in for it and I'll really have a good time for once in my life—for once in my life!' It was in the dark, in a (vehicle with wheels/body posture/carrying something), coming back from a hunt ball. Eleven miles we had to drive! And then suddenly the anger of the endless poorness, of the endless acting—it fell on me like an ugly sight/disease, it spoiled everything. Yes, I had to (understand/make real/achieve) that I had been spoiled even for the good time when it came. And I burst out crying and I cried and I cried for the whole eleven miles. Just imagine me crying! And just imagine me making a fool of the poor dear chap like that. It certainly wasn't playing the game, was it now?"

I don't know; I don't know; was that last remark of hers the remark of a prostitute, or is it what every decent woman, county family or not county family, thinks at the bottom of her heart? Or thinks all the time for the matter of that? Who knows?

Yet, if one doesn't know that at this hour and day, at this pitch of city/people to which we have reached, after all the preachings of all the people concerned about doing what's right, and all the teachings of all the mothers to all the daughters in saecula saeculorum... but maybe that is what all mothers teach all daughters, not with lips but with the eyes, or with heart whispering to heart. And, if one doesn't know as much as that about the first thing in the world, what does one know and why is one here?

I asked Mrs Ashburnham whether she had told Florence that and what Florence had said and she answered:—"Florence didn't offer any comment at all. What could she say? There wasn't anything to be said. With the grinding poorness we had to put up with to keep up appearances, and the way the poorness came about—you know what I mean—any woman would have been gave a good reason for in taking a lover and presents too. Florence once said about a very almost the same position—she was a little too (raised to be polite and interesting), too American, to talk about mine—that it was a case of perfectly open riding and the woman could just act suddenly and without planning. She said it in American of course, but that was the sense of it. I think her actual words were: 'That it was up to her to take it or leave it....'"

I don't want you to think that I am writing Teddy Ashburnham down an animal. I don't believe he was. God knows, maybe all men are like that. For as I've said what do I know even of the smoking-room? Fellows come in and tell the most amazingly gross stories—so gross that they will positively give you a pain. And yet they'd be offended if you suggested that they weren't the sort of person you could trust your wife alone with. And very likely they'd be quite properly offended—that is if you can trust anybody alone with anybody. But that sort of fellow obviously takes more delight in listening to or in telling gross stories—more delight than in anything else in the world. They'll hunt slowly and dress slowly and dine slowly and work without excited interest (in something) and find it a bore to carry on three minutes' conversation about anything whatever and yet, when the other sort of conversation begins, they'll laugh and wake up and throw themselves about in their chairs. Then, if they so delight in the narration, how is it possible that they can be offended—and properly offended—at the suggestion that they might make attempts upon your wife's honor? Or again: Edward Ashburnham was the cleanest looking sort of chap;—an excellent judge, a first rate soldier, one of the best (managers of apartment buildings), so they said, in Hampshire, England. To the poor and to hopeless people (who are always drunk), as I myself have seen, he was like an extremely careful (person who protects another from harm). And he never told a story that couldn't have gone into the columns of the Field more than once or twice in all the nine years of my knowing him. He didn't even like hearing them; he would move and wiggle around and get up and go out to buy a cigar or something of that sort. You would have said that he was just exactly the sort of chap that you could have trusted your wife with. And I trusted mine and it was madness. And yet again you have me. If poor Edward was dangerous because of the (never having sex) of his expressions—and they say that is always the hall-mark of a wild person—what about myself? For I seriously promise that not only have I never so much as hinted at an improper behavior in my conversation in the whole of my days; and more than that, I will absolutely promise the truth or realness of the cleanness of my thoughts and the complete and total (never having sex) of my life. At what, then, does it all work out? Is the whole thing a stupidity and a joke/(making fun of something)? Am I no better than a (man without testicles) or is the proper man—the man with the right to existence—a screaming and acting violently stallion forever neighing after his neighbour's womankind?

I don't know. And there is nothing to guide us. And if everything is so unclear about a matter so elementary as the morals of sex, what is there to guide us in the more difficult to notice/skillful sense of right and wrong of all other personal contacts, associations, and activities? Or are we meant to act on sudden (unplanned) desire alone? It is all a darkness.

I DON'T know how it is best to put this thing down—whether it would be better to try and tell the story from the beginning, as if it were a story; or whether to tell it from this distance of time, as it reached me from the lips of Leonora or from those of Edward himself.

So I will just imagine myself for two weeks or so at one side of the fireplace of a country house, with an understanding soul opposite me. And I will go on talking, in a low voice while the sea sounds in the distance and overhead the great black flood of wind polishes the bright stars. From time to time we will get up and go to the door and look out at the great moon and say: "Why, it is nearly as bright as in Provence!" And then we will come back to the fireside, with just the touch of a sigh because we are not in that Provence where even the saddest stories are gay. Think about/believe the very unfortunate history of Peire Vidal. Two years ago Florence and I motored from Biarritz to Las Tours, which is in the Black Mountains. In the middle of a winding valley there rises up a huge peak and on the peak are four (huge, fancy, stone houses)—Las Tours, the Towers. And the huge mistral blew down that valley which was the way from France into Provence so that the silver grey olive leaves appeared like hair flying in the wind, and the tufts of rosemary walked (slowly and quietly) into the iron rocks that they might not be torn up by the roots.

It was, of course, poor dear Florence who wanted to go to Las Tours. You are to imagine that, however much her bright personality came from Stamford, Connecticut, she was still a graduate of Poughkeepsie. I never could imagine how she did it—the queer, talky person that she was. With the far-away look in her eyes—which wasn't, however, in the least romantic—I mean that she didn't look as if she were seeing poetic dreams, or looking through you, for she hardly ever did look at you!—holding up one hand as if she wished to silence any objection—or any comment for the matter of that—she would talk. She would talk about William the Silent, about Gustave the Talkative, about Paris dresses, about how the poor dressed in 1337, about Fantin-Latour, about the Paris-Lyons-Mediterranee train-fancy, about whether it would be worth while to get off at Tarascon and go across the windswept suspension-bridge, over the Rhone to take another look at Beaucaire.

We never did take another look at Beaucaire, of course—beautiful Beaucaire, with the high, triangular white tower, that looked as thin as a needle and as tall as the Flatiron, between Fifth and Broadway—Beaucaire with the grey walls on the top of the peak surrounding an (area of land about 200 feet X 220 feet) and a half of blue (colored parts of the eye/flowers), beneath the tallness of the stone pines, What a beautiful thing the stone pine is!...

No, we never did go back anywhere. Not to Heidelberg, not to Hamelin, not to Verona, not to Mont Majour—not so much as to Carcassonne itself. We talked of it, of course, but I guess Florence got all she wanted out of one look at a place. She had the seeing eye.

I haven't, unfortunately, so that the world is full of places to which I want to return—towns with the very bright/extreme white sun upon them; stone pines against the blue of the sky; corners of gables, all carved and painted with stags and bright red flowers and crowstepped gables with the little saint at the top; and grey and pink palazzi and walled towns a mile or so back from the sea, on the Mediterranean, between Leghorn and Naples. Not one of them did we see more than once, so that the whole world for me is like spots of colour in a huge (strong cloth for paintings, building tents, etc.). Maybe if it weren't so I should have something to catch hold of now.

Is all this movement away from the main point or isn't it movement away from the main point? Again I don't know. You, the listener, sit opposite me. But you are so silent. You don't tell me anything. I am, at any rate, trying to get you to see what sort of life it was I led with Florence and what Florence was like. Well, she was bright; and she danced. She seemed to dance over the floors of (huge, fancy, stone houses) and over seas and over and over and over the salons of clothing fashion experts and over the plages of the Riviera—like a gay unsteady (and shaking) beam, reflected from water upon a ceiling. And my function in life was to keep that bright thing in existence. And it was almost as very hard as trying to catch with your hand that dancing reflection. And the job lasted for years.

Florence's aunts used to say that I must be the laziest man in Philadelphia. They had never been to Philadelphia and they had the New England sense of right and wrong. You see, the first thing they said to me when I called in on Florence in the little very old, colonial, wooden house beneath the high, thin-leaved elms—the first question they asked me was not how I did but what did I do. And I did nothing. I suppose I should have done something, but I didn't see any call to do it. Why does one do things? I just drifted in and wanted Florence. First I had drifted in on Florence at a Browning tea, or something like that in Fourteenth Street, which was then still (where there are lots of homes). I don't know why I had gone to New York; I don't know why I had gone to the tea. I don't see why Florence should have gone to that sort of spelling bee. It wasn't the place at which, even then, you expected to find a Poughkeepsie graduate. I guess Florence wanted to raise the culture of the Stuyvesant crowd and did it as she might have gone in slumming. Thinking-related slumming, that was what it was. She always wanted to leave the world a little more made higher than she found it. Poor dear thing, I have heard her lecture Teddy Ashburnham by the hour on the difference between a Franz Hals and a Wouvermans and why the Pre-Mycenaean statues were cubical with knobs on the top. I wonder what he made of it? Maybe he was thankful.

I know I was. For do you understand my whole attentions, my whole attempts/tries were to keep poor dear Florence on to topics like the finds at Cnossos and the mental (interest in religion/belief in a higher power) of Walter Pater. I had to keep her at it, you understand, or she might die. For I was seriously informed that if she became excited over anything or if her feelings of love, hate, fear, etc. were really stirred her little heart might stop to beat. For twelve years I had to watch every word that any person spoke in any conversation and I had to head it off what the English call "things"—off love, poorness, crime, religion and the rest of it. Yes, the first doctor that we had when she was carried off the ship at Havre promised to/certain me that this must be done. Good God, are all these fellows monster-like very stupid people, or is there a freemasonry between all of them from end to end of the earth?... That is what makes me think of that fellow Peire Vidal.

Because, of course, his story is culture and I had to head her towards culture and at the same time it's so funny and she hadn't got to laugh, and it's so full of love and she wasn't to think of love. Do you know the story? Las Tours of the Four (huge, fancy, stone houses) had for chatelaine Blanche Somebody-or-other who was called as a term of award, La Louve—the She-Wolf. And Peire Vidal the Troubadour paid his court to La Louve. And she wouldn't have anything to do with him. So, out of compliment to her—the things people do when they're in love!—he dressed himself up in wolfskins and went up into the Black Mountains. And the guards/guides of the Montagne Noire and their dogs mistook him for a wolf and he was torn with the fangs and beaten with clubs. So they carried him back to Las Tours and La Louve wasn't at all impressed. They polished him up and her husband objected seriously with her. Vidal was, you see, a great poet and it was not proper to treat a great poet with (not caring one way or the other).

So Peire Vidal declared himself Emperor of Jerusalem or somewhere and the husband had to kneel down and kiss his feet though La Louve wouldn't. And Peire set sail in a rowing boat with four companions to redeem the Holy Grave. And they struck on a rock somewhere, and, at great expense, the husband had to fit out a big, important trip to fetch him back. And Peire Vidal fell all over the Lady's bed while the husband, who was a most strong and scary warrior, objected some more about the kindness/politeness that is due to great poets. But I suppose La Louve was the more strong and scary of the two. Anyhow, that is all that came of it. Isn't that a story?

You haven't an idea of the queer old-fashionedness of Florence's aunts—the Misses Hurlbird, nor yet of her uncle. An amazingly lovable man, that Uncle John. Thin, gentle, and with a "heart" that made his life very much what Florence's later/after that became. He didn't reside at Stamford; his home was in Waterbury where the watches come from. He had a factory there which, in our queer American way, would change its functions almost from year to year. For nine months or so it would manufacture buttons out of bone. Then it would suddenly produce brass buttons for coachmen's uniforms. Then it would take a turn at embossed tin lids for candy boxes. The fact is that the poor old gentleman, with his weak and flapping wings/moving unsteadily heart, didn't want his factory to manufacture anything at all. He wanted to retire. And he did retire when he was seventy. But he was so worried at having all the street boys in the town point after him and shout: "There goes the laziest man in Waterbury!" that he tried taking a tour round the world. And Florence and a young man called Jimmy went with him. It appears from what Florence told me that Jimmy's function with Mr Hurlbird was to avoid exciting topics for him. He had to keep him, for instance, out of political discussions. For the poor old man was a violent Democrat in days when you might travel the world over without finding anything but a Republican. Anyhow, they went round the world.

I think a funny story is about the best way to give you an idea of what the old gentleman was like. For it is maybe important that you should know what the old gentleman was; he had a great deal of influence in forming the character of my poor dear wife.

Just before they set out from San Francisco for the South Seas old Mr Hurlbird said he must take something with him to make little presents to people he met on the trip. And it struck him that the things to take for that purpose were oranges—because California is the orange country—and comfortable folding chairs. So he bought I don't know how many cases of oranges—the great cool California oranges, and half-a-dozen folding chairs in a special case that he always kept in his cabin. There must have been half a (things carried by a ship, etc.) of fruit.

For, to every person on board the (more than two, but not a lot of) steamers that they employed—to every person with whom he had so much as a nodding casual friend/knowledge, he gave an orange every morning. And they lasted him right round the girdle of this mighty globe of ours. When they were at North Cape, even, he saw on the (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet), poor dear thin man that he was, a lighthouse. "Hello," says he to himself, "these fellows must be very lonely. Let's take them some oranges." So he had a boatload of his fruit out and had himself rowed to the lighthouse on the (line in the distance where the Earth and sky meet). The folding chairs he lent to any lady that he came across and liked or who seemed tired and invalidish on the ship. And so, guarded against his heart and, having his niece with him, he went round the world....

He wasn't annoying about his heart. You wouldn't have known he had one. He only left it to the physical laboratory at Waterbury for the benefit of science, since he thought about/believed it to be quite an amazing/very unusual kind of heart. And the joke of the matter was that, when, at the age of eighty-four, just five days before poor Florence, he died of swelling of the lung tubes there was found to be completely and totally nothing the matter with that organ. It had certainly jumped or squeaked or something just (good or well enough) to take in the doctors, but it appears that that was because of an odd (creation and construction/ group of objects) of the lungs. I don't much understand about these matters.

I received his money because Florence died five days after him. I wish I hadn't. It was a great worry. I had to go out to Waterbury just after Florence's death because the poor dear old fellow had left a good many helpful gives/gifts (in a will) and I had to (assign to a position) trustees. I didn't like the idea of their not being properly handled.

Yes, it was a great worry. And just as I had got things roughly settled I received the amazing/very unusual cable from Ashburnham begging me to come back and have a talk with him. And immediately later/after that came one from Leonora saying, "Yes, please do come. You could be so helpful." It was as if he had sent the cable without talking to her and had later/after that told her. In fact, that was pretty much what had happened, except that he had told the girl and the girl told the wife. I arrived, however, too late to be of any good if I could have been of any good. And then I had my first taste of English life. It was amazing. It was (overloading and surrounding with too much of something). I never will forget the polished cob that Edward, beside me, drove; the animal's action, its high-stepping, its skin that was like satin. And the peace! And the red cheeks! And the beautiful, beautiful old house.

Just near Branshaw Teleragh it was and we moved downward/originated on it from the high, clear, windswept waste of the New Forest. I tell you it was amazing to arrive there from Waterbury. And it came into my head—for Teddy Ashburnham, you remember, had cabled to me to "come and have a talk" with him—that it was unbelievable that anything (almost completely/basically) terrible could happen to that place and those people. I tell you it was the very spirit of peace. And Leonora, beautiful and smiling, with her coils of yellow hair, stood on the top doorstep, with a butler and footman and a maid or so behind her. And she just said: "So glad you've come," as if I'd run down to lunch from a town ten miles away, instead of having come half the world over at the call of two extremely important telegrams.

The girl was out with the dogs, I think. And that poor devil beside me was in an extreme pain. Complete and total, hopeless, dumb extreme pain such as passes the mind of man to imagine.

III

IT was a very hot summer, in August, 1904; and Florence had already been taking the baths for a month. I don't know how it feels to be a patient at one of those places. I never was a patient anywhere. I say the patients get a home feeling and some sort of anchorage in the spot. They seem to like the bath helpers, with their cheerful faces, their air of authority, their white linen. But, for myself, to be at Nauheim gave me a sense—what will I say?—a sense almost of nakedness—the nakedness that one feels on the sea-shore or in any great open space. I had no attachments, no (collections over time). In one's own home it is as if little, born-in (caring feelings about someone else's troubles/feelings of loyalty to something) draw one to particular chairs that seem to enfold one in a hug, or take one along particular streets that seem friendly when others may be hateful. And, believe me, that feeling is a very important part of life. I know it well, that have been for so long a wanderer upon the face of public resorts. And one is too polished up. Heaven knows I was never a sloppy man. But the feeling that I had when, while poor Florence was taking her morning bath, I stood upon the carefully swept steps of the Englischer Hof, looking at the carefully arranged trees in tubs upon the carefully arranged (mix of little rocks) while carefully arranged people walked past in carefully calculated party-like environment, at the carefully calculated hour, the tall trees of the public gardens, going up to the right; the reddish stone of the baths—or were they white half-timber chalets? Upon my word I have forgotten, I who was there so often. That will give you the measure of how much I was in the (wide view of a nature scene/wide area of beautiful land). I could find my way (covered the eyes of) to the hot rooms, to the douche rooms, to the fountain in the centre of the quadrangle where the rusty water gushes out. Yes, I could find my way (covered the eyes of). I know the exact distances. From the Hotel Regina you took one hundred and eighty-seven paces, then, turning sharp, left-handed, four hundred and twenty took you straight down to the fountain. From the Englischer Hof, starting on the sidewalk, it was ninety-seven paces and the same four hundred and twenty, but turning lefthanded this time.

And now you understand that, having nothing in the world to do—but nothing whatever! I fell into the habit of counting my footsteps. I would walk with Florence to the baths. And, of course, she entertained me with her conversation. It was, as I have said, wonderful what she could make conversation out of. She walked very lightly, and her hair was very nicely done, and she dressed beautifully and very expensively. (definitely/as one would expect) she had money of her own, but I shouldn't have minded. And yet you know I can't remember a single one of her dresses. Or I can remember just one, a very simple one of blue figured silk—a Chinese pattern—very full in the skirts and widening out over the shoulders. And her hair was copper-coloured, and the heels of her shoes were very high, so that she tripped upon the points of her toes. And when she came to the door of the washing/swimming place, and when it opened to receive her, she would look back at me with a little flirty smile, so that her cheek appeared to be sweetly and gently touching her shoulder.

I seem to remember that, with that dress, she wore a very broad Leghorn hat—like the Hat de Paille of Rubens, only very white. The hat would be tied with a lightly knotted scarf of the same stuff as her dress. She knew how to give value to her blue eyes. And round her neck would be some simple pink, coral beads. And her (skin color/skin tone) had a perfect clearness, a perfect smoothness...

Yes, that is how I most exactly remember her, in that dress, in that hat, looking over her shoulder at me so that the eyes flashed very blue—dark pebble blue...

And, what the devil! For whose benefit did she do it? For that of the bath attendant? of the passers-by? I don't know. Anyhow, it can't have been for me, for never, in all the years of her life, never on any possible occasion, or in any other place did she so smile to me, mockingly, warmly and kindly. Ah, she was a riddle; but then, all other women are riddles. And it enters my mind that some way back I began a sentence that I have never finished... It was about the feeling that I had when I stood on the steps of my hotel every morning before starting out to fetch Florence back from the bath. Neat and stylish, exact, well-brushed, aware of being rather small among the long English, the skinny Americans, the round Germans, and the (very overweight) Russian Jewesses, I should stand there, tapping a cigarette on the outside of my case, surveying for a moment the world in the sunlight. But a day was to come when I was never to do it again alone. You can imagine, therefore, what the coming of the Ashburnhams meant to me. I have forgotten the aspect of many things, but I will never forget the aspect of the dining-room of the Hotel Excelsior on that evening—and on so many other evenings. Whole (huge, fancy, stone houses) have disappeared from my memory, whole cities that I have never visited again, but that white room, decorated with papier-corn salad fruits and flowers; the tall windows; the many tables; the black screen round the door with three golden (devices for lifting heavy objects overhead) flying upward on each panel; the palm-tree in the centre of the room; the swish of the waiter's feet; the cold expensive rich beauty; the manner of the diners as they came in every evening—their air of serious honesty as if they must go through a meal prescribed by the Kur people in charge and their air of (seriousness/not being drunk) as if they must look (for) not by any means to enjoy their meals—those things I will not easily forget. And then, one evening, in the (the soft light just before sunrise or after sunset), I saw Edward Ashburnham lounge round the screen into the room. The head waiter, a man with a face all grey—in what underground nooks or corners do people help grow those completely and totally grey (skin color/skin tone)s?—went with the scared (the money, and other help, given to a person or organization) of these creatures towards him and held out a grey ear to be whispered into. It was generally an unpleasant struggle for newcomers but Edward Ashburnham bore it like an Englishman and a gentleman. I could see his lips form a word of three syllables—remember I had nothing in the world to do but to (see/hear/become aware of) these nice things—and immediately I knew that he must be Edward Ashburnham, Captain, Fourteenth Hussars, of Branshaw House, Branshaw Teleragh. I knew it because every evening just before dinner, while I waited in the hall, I used, by the thanks to/kindness of Monsieur Schontz, the owner, to inspect the little police reports that each guest was expected to sign upon taking a room.

The head waiter piloted him immediately to an empty table, three away from my own—the table that the Grenfalls of Falls River, N.J., had just left. It struck me that that was not a very nice table for the newcomers, since the sunlight, low though it was, shone straight down upon it, and the same idea seemed to come at the same moment into Captain Ashburnham's head. His face up until now had, in the wonderful English fashion, expressed nothing whatever. Nothing. There was in it neither joy nor feelings that there is no hope; neither hope nor fear; neither boredom nor happiness (from meeting a need or reaching a goal). He seemed to perceive no soul in that crowded room; he might have been walking in a jungle. I never came across such a perfect expression before and I never will again. It was disrespectful rudeness and not disrespectful rudeness; it was (not showing off/not acting proud/not showing lots of skin) and not (not showing off/not acting proud/not showing lots of skin). His hair was fair, amazingly ordered in a wave, running from the left temple to the right; his face was a light brick-red, perfectly uniform in color up to the roots of the hair itself; his yellow moustache was as stiff as a toothbrush and I truly believe that he had his black smoking jacket thickened a little over the shoulder-blades to give himself the air of the smallest possible step/dummy. It would be like him to do that; that was the sort of thing he thought about. Martingales, Chiffney bits, boots; where you got the best soap, the best brandy, the name of the chap who rode a plater down the Khyber cliffs; the spreading power of number three shot before a charge of number four powder... by heavens, I hardly ever heard him talk of anything else. Not in all the years that I knew him did I hear him talk of anything but these subjects. Oh, yes, once he told me that I could buy my special shade of blue ties cheaper from a firm in Burlington Arcade than from my own people in New York. And I have bought my ties from that firm ever since. Otherwise I should not remember the name of the Burlington Arcade. I wonder what it looks like. I have never seen it. I imagine it to be two huge rows of (tall supporting posts/important parts), like those of the Forum at Rome, with Edward Ashburnham quickly walking down between them. But it probably isn't—the least like that. Once also he (gave opinions about what could or should be done about a situation) me to buy Caledonian Put off/delayed, since they were due to rise. And I did buy them and they did rise. But of how he got the knowledge I haven't the faintest idea. It seemed to drop out of the blue sky.

And that was completely and totally all that I knew of him until a month ago—that and the large amount of his cases, all of football and stamped with his initials, E. F. A. There were gun cases, and collar cases, and shirt cases, and letter cases and cases each containing four bottles of medicine; and hat cases and helmet cases. It must have needed a whole group of animals of the Gadarene swine to make up his outfit. And, if I ever penetrated into his private room it would be to see him standing, with his coat and waistcoat off and the very long line of his perfectly rich and beautiful pants from waist to boot heel. And he would have an (a) little (mirror-like/related to carefully thinking about past events) air and he would be just opening one kind of case and just closing another.

Good God, what did they all see in him? for I swear there was all there was of him, inside and out; though they said he was a good soldier. Yet, Leonora deeply loved him with a passion that was like an extreme pain, and hated him with an extreme pain that was as bitter as the sea. How could he awaken/stimulate anything like a feeling, in anybody?

What did he even talk to them about—when they were under four eyes?—Ah, well, suddenly, as if by a flash of inspiration, I know. For all good soldiers are (a person, a story, or a situation that focuses a lot of attention on feelings)s—all good soldiers of that type. Their job/line of work, for one thing, is full of the big words, courage, loyalty, honor, faithfulness. And I have given a wrong impression of Edward Ashburnham if I have made you think that literally never in the course of our nine years of emotional closeness did he discuss what he would have called "the more serious things." Even before his final outburst to me, at times, very late at night, say, he has suddenly, loudly said something that gave an understanding of the emotional view of outer space that was his. He would say how much the (community of people/all good people in the world) of a good woman could do towards redeeming you, and he would say that faithfulness was the finest of the good qualities/the advantages. He said it very stiffly, of course, but still as if the statement admitted of no doubt.

Faithfulness! Isn't that the queer thought? And yet, I must add that poor dear Edward was a great reader—he would pass hours lost in novels of an emotional type—novels in which typewriter girls married Marquises and governesses Earls. And in his books, as a rule, the course of true love ran as smooth as buttered honey. And he liked poetry, of a certain type—and he could even read a perfectly sad love story. I have seen his eyes filled with tears at reading of a hopeless parting. And he loved, with an emotional wishing, all children, puppies, and the weak generally... .

So, you see, he would have plenty to gurgle about to a woman—with that and his sound common sense about martingales and his—still feelingal—experiences as a county judge; and with his intense, positive-thinking belief that the woman he was making love to at the moment was the one he was (already decided beforehand to happen), at last, to be forever constant to.... Well, I fancy he could put up a pretty good deal of talk when there was no man around to make him feel shy. And I was quite surprised and shocked, during his final burst out to me—at the very end of things, when the poor girl was on her way to that deadly Brindisi and he was trying to convince himself and me that he had never really cared for her—I was quite surprised and shocked to watch/ notice/ celebrate/ obey how book-related/writing-related and how just his expressions were. He talked like quite a good book—a book not in the least cheaply emotional. You see, I suppose he regarded me not so much as a man. I had to be thought of as a woman or a manager/person who asks for business. Anyhow, it burst out of him on that (very bad and upsetting) night. And then, next morning, he took me over to the Assizes and I saw how, in a perfectly calm and business-like way, he set to work to secure a legal decision of not guilty for a poor girl, the daughter of one of his (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.), who had been (charged with a crime) of murdering her baby. He spent two hundred pounds on her defence... Well, that was Edward Ashburnham.

I had forgotten about his eyes. They were as blue as the sides of a certain type of box of matches. When you looked at them carefully you saw that they were perfectly honest, perfectly plain/honest/easy, perfectly, perfectly stupid. But the brick pink of his (skin color/skin tone), running perfectly level to the brick pink of his inner eyelids, gave them a curious, evil expression—like an arrangement/structure of blue porcelain set in pink china. And that chap, coming into a room, bought/took the look of every woman in it, as skillfully as a magician pockets billiard balls. It was most amazing. You know the man on the stage who throws up sixteen balls at once and they all drop into pockets all over his person, on his shoulders, on his heels, on the inner side of his sleeves; and he stands perfectly still and does nothing. Well, it was like that. He had rather a rough, rough-sounding voice.

And, there he was, standing by the table. I was looking at him, with my back to the screen. And suddenly, I saw two clear/separate expressions flicker across his not moving eyes. How the deuce did they do it, those steady and strong blue eyes with the direct look? For the eyes themselves never moved, looking over my shoulder towards the screen. And the look was perfectly level and perfectly direct and perfectly unchanging. I suppose that the lids really must have rounded themselves a little and maybe the lips moved a little too, as if he should be saying: "There you are, my dear." At any rate, the expression was that of pride, of happiness (from meeting a need or reaching a goal), of the owner. I saw him once later/after that, for a moment, look at the sunny fields of Branshaw and say: "All this is my land!"

And then again, the look was maybe more direct, harder if possible—tough and strong too. It was a measuring look; a challenging look. Once when we were at Wiesbaden watching him play in a polo match against the Bonner Hussaren I saw the same look come into his eyes, balancing the possibilities, looking over the ground. The German Captain, Count (European title of honor) Idigon von Leloffel, was right up by their goal posts, coming with the ball in an easy run in that tricky German fashion. The rest of the field were just anywhere. It was only a scratch sort of affair. Ashburnham was quite close to the rails not five yards from us and I heard him saying to himself: "Might just be done!" And he did it. Goodness! he swung that pony round with all its four legs spread out, like a cat dropping off a roof....

Well, it was just that look that I (saw/heard/became aware of) in his eyes: "It might," I seem even now to hear him mumbling to himself, "just be done."

I looked round over my shoulder and saw, tall, smiling brilliantly and floatable/floating—Leonora. And, little and fair, and as glowing as the track of sunlight along the sea—my wife.

That poor miserable, awful person! to think that he was at that moment in a perfect devil of a fix, and there he was, saying at the back of his mind: "It might just be done." It was like a chap in the middle of the (sudden explosive shooting up and out of matter) of a (place on the Earth where red-hot liquid rocks, ash, and gas sometimes flow or explode out), saying that he might just manage to bolt into the (angry, noisy disturbance) and set fire to a haystack. Madness? Predestination? Who the devil knows?

Mrs Ashburnham showed at that moment more party-like environment than I have ever since known her to show. There are certain classes of English people—the nicer ones when they have been to many spas, who seem to make a point of becoming much more than usually given energy/given life when they are introduced to my loyal friends. I (have seen/have heard/have become aware of)d this often. Of course, they must first have accepted the Americans. But that once done, they seem to say to themselves: "Hallo, these women are so bright. We aren't going to be outdone in brightness." And for the time being they certainly aren't. But it wears off. So it was with Leonora—at least until she (saw/heard/became aware of) me. She began, Leonora did—and maybe it was that that gave me the idea of a touch of disrespectful rudeness in her personality, for she never later/after that did any one single thing like it—she began by saying in quite a loud voice and from quite a distance:

"Don't stop over by that hot and humid/snobby old table, Teddy. Come and sit by these nice people!"

And that was an amazing/very unusual thing to say. Quite amazing/very unusual. I couldn't for the life of me refer to total strangers as nice people. But, of course, she was taking a line of her own in which I at any rate—and no one else in the room, for she too had taken the trouble to read through the list of guests—counted any more than so many clean, bull terriers. And she sat down rather brilliantly at an empty table, beside ours—one that was reserved for the Guggenheimers. And she just sat completely and totally (unable to hear) to the objections/criticisms of the head waiter with his face like a grey ram's. That poor chap was doing his unstoppable duty too. He knew that the Guggenheimers of Chicago, after they had stayed there a month and had worried the poor life out of him, would give him two dollars fifty and grumble at the tipping system. And he knew that Teddy Ashburnham and his wife would give him no trouble whatever except what the smiles of Leonora might cause in his (based on what's seen or what seems obvious) unimpressionable bosom—though you never can tell what may go on behind even a not quite spotless plastron!—And every week Edward Ashburnham would give him a solid, sound, golden English sovereign. Yet this heavy/brave/strong fellow was focused on saving that table for the Guggenheimers of Chicago. It ended in Florence saying:

"Why shouldn't we all eat out of the same trough?—that's a nasty New York saying. But I'm sure we're all nice quiet people and there can be four seats at our table. It's round."

Then came, as it were, a (full of thanks) gurgle from the Captain and I was perfectly aware of a small/short hesitation—a quick sharp movement in Mrs Ashburnham, as if her horse had checked. But she put it at the fence all right, rising from the seat she had taken and sitting down opposite me, as it were, all in one movement. I never thought that Leonora looked her best in evening dress. She seemed to get it too clearly cut, there was no ruffling. She always affected black and her shoulders were too classical. She seemed to stand out of her corsage as a white marble bust might out of a black Wedgwood vase. I don't know.

I loved Leonora always and, today, I would very cheerfully lay down my life, what is left of it, in her service. But I am sure I never had the beginnings of a trace of what is called the sex gut feeling towards her. And I suppose—no I am sure that she never had it towards me. As far as I am concerned I think it was those white shoulders that did it. I seemed to feel when I looked at them that, if ever I should press my lips upon them that they would be (a) little cold—not icily, not without a touch of human heat, but, as they say of baths, with the chill off. I seemed to feel chilled at the end of my lips when I looked at her...

No, Leonora always appeared to me at her best in a blue tailor-made. Then her beautiful hair wasn't reduced/quieted by her white shoulders. Certain women's lines guide your eyes to their necks, their eyelashes, their lips, their breasts. But Leonora's seemed to conduct your look always to her wrist. And the wrist was at its best in a black or a dog-skin glove and there was always a gold circlet with a little chain supporting a very small golden key to a dispatch box. Maybe it was that in which she locked up her heart and her feelings.

Anyhow, she sat down opposite me and then, for the first time, she paid any attention to my existence. She gave me, suddenly, yet (in a carefully-planned way), one long stare. Her eyes too were blue and dark and the eyelids were so arched that they gave you the whole round of the (colored parts of the eye). And it was a most amazing and interesting, a most moving quick look, as if for a moment a lighthouse had looked at me. I seemed to perceive the fast questions chasing each other through the brain that was behind them. I seemed to hear the brain ask and the eyes answer with all the simpleness of a woman who was a good hand at taking in qualities of a horse—as in fact she was. "Stands well; has plenty of room for his oats behind the width. Not so much in the way of shoulders," and so on. And so her eyes asked: "Is this man (deserving people's trust because of honesty, etc.) in money matters; is he likely to try to play the lover; is he likely to let his women be troublesome? Is he, above all, likely to nonsense talk/talk like a baby about my affairs?"

And, suddenly, into those cold, (a) little angry and uncooperative, almost (related to actions that protect against attack) china blue spheres, there came a warmth, a tenderness, a friendly recognition... oh, it was very charming and very touching—and quite killing/extremely embarrassing. It was the look of a mother to her son, of a sister to her brother. It suggested trust; it suggested the lack of any need for (things that block or stop other things). By God, she looked at me as if I were an invalid—as any kind woman may look at a poor chap in a bath chair. And, yes, from that day forward she always treated me and not Florence as if I were the invalid. Why, she would run after me with a rug upon chilly days. I suppose, therefore, that her eyes had made a good/willing answer. Or, maybe, it wasn't a good/willing answer. And then Florence said: "And so the whole round table is begun." Again Edward Ashburnham gurgled (a) little in his throat; but Leonora shook (from fear or cold) a little, as if a goose had walked over her grave. And I was passing her the nickel-silver basket of rolls. Avanti!...

So began those nine years of (happening continuously or constantly) peace and calmness. They were seen as an amazing/very unusual lack of any communicativeness on the part of the Ashburnhams to which we, on our part, replied by leaving out quite as amazingly, and nearly as completely, the personal note. In fact, you may take it that what showed/described our relationship was an atmosphere of taking everything as something that will never go away. The given suggestion/possible plan of action was, that we were all "good people." We took as something that will never go away that we all liked beef underdone but not too underdone; that both men preferred a good liqueur brandy after lunch; that both women drank a very light Rhine wine qualified with Fachingen water—that sort of thing. It was also treated as something unimportant that will always be there that we were both (good or well enough) well off to afford anything that we could (well enough/good enough/in a smart way) want in the way of fun things (to do) fitting to our station—that we could take motor cars and (vehicles with wheels/acts of carrying things) by the day; that we could give each other dinners and dine our friends and we could indulge if we liked in (process of people making, selling, and buying things). So, Florence was in the habit of having the Daily Telegraph sent to her every day from London. She was always a (white American)-insane person, was Florence; the Paris edition of the New York Announce (with respect) was always good enough for me. But when we discovered that the Ashburnhams' copy of the London paper followed them from England, Leonora and Florence decided between them to hold back one subscription one year and the other the next. (in almost the same way) it was the habit of the Grand Duke of Nassau Schwerin, who came yearly to the baths, to dine once with about eighteen families of regular Kur guests. In return he would give a dinner of all the eighteen at once. And, since these dinners were rather expensive (you had to take the Grand Duke and a good many of his suite and any members of the polite/(to improve relationships with people) bodies that might be there)—Florence and Leonora, putting their heads together, didn't see why we shouldn't give the Grand Duke his dinner together. And so we did. I don't suppose the Calmness minded that (process of people making, selling, and buying things), or even (saw/heard/became aware of) it. At any rate, our combined dinner to the Royal Person slowly assumed the aspect of a yearly function. In fact, it grew larger and larger, until it became a sort of closing function for the season, at any rate as far as we were concerned. I don't in the least mean to say that we were the sort of people who wanted to mix "with royalty." We didn't; we hadn't any claims; we were just "good people." But the Grand Duke was a pleasant, friendly sort of royalty, like the late King Edward VII, and it was pleasant to hear him talk about the races and, very (every once in a while), as a bonne bouche, about his nephew, the Emperor; or to have him pause for a moment in his walk to ask after the progress of our cures or to be harmlessly interested in the amount of money we had put on Leloffel's hunter for the Frankfurt (wildly move around) Stakes.

But upon my word, I don't know how we put in our time. How does one put in one's time? How is it possible to have (accomplished or gained with effort) nine years and to have nothing whatever to show for it? Nothing whatever, you understand. Not so much as a bone penholder, carved to look like a chessman and with a hole in the top through which you could see four views of Nauheim. And, as for experience, as for knowledge of one's fellow beings—nothing either. Upon my word, I couldn't tell you unplanned whether the lady who sold the so expensive violets at the bottom of the road that leads to the station, was cheating me or no; I can't say whether the porter who carried our traps across the station at Leghorn was a thief or no when he said that the regular tax/import tax was a lira a parcel. The events of honesty that one comes across in this world are just as amazing as the events of dishonesty. After forty-five years of mixing with one's kind, one should have bought/have owned/have received the habit of being able to know something about one's fellow beings. But one doesn't.

I think the modern peaceful, law-obeying and productive habit—the modern English habit of taking every one as something that will never go away—is a good deal to blame for this. I have watched/followed this matter long enough to know the queer, difficult to notice/skillful thing that it is; to know how the (teachers/thinking ability), for what it is worth, never lets you down.

Mind, I am not saying that this is not the most desirable type of life in the world; that it is not an almost unreasonably high standard. For it is really nauseating, when you hate it, to have to eat every day (more than two, but not a lot of) slices of thin, slightly warm, pink india rubber, and it is unpleasant to have to drink brandy when you would prefer to be cheered up by warm, sweet Kummel. And it is nasty to have to take a cold bath in the morning when what you want is really a hot one at night. And it stirs a little of the faith of your fathers that is deep down within you to have to have it treated as something unimportant that will always be there that you are an Episcopalian when really you are an old-fashioned Philadelphia Quaker.

But these things have to be done; it is the cock that the whole of this (community of people/all good people in the world) owes to Aesculapius.

And the odd, queer thing is that the whole collection of rules applies to anybody—to the anybodies that you meet in hotels, in railway trains, to a less degree, maybe, in steamers, but even, in the end, upon steamers. You meet a man or a woman and, from tiny and intimate sounds, from the smallest of movements, you know at once whether you are concerned with good people or with those who won't do. You know, this is to say, whether they will go stiffly and strictly through with the whole programme from the underdone beef to the Anglicanism. It won't matter whether they be short or tall; whether the voice squeak like a marionette or rumble like a town bull's; it won't matter whether they are Germans, Austrians, French, Spanish, or even Brazilians—they will be the Germans or Brazilians who take a cold bath every morning and who move, roughly speaking, in polite/(to improve relationships with people) circles.

But the inconvenient—well, hang it all, I will say it—the (deserving curses) annoyance of the whole thing is, that with all the taking as something that will never go away, you never really get an inch deeper than the things I have catalogued.

I can give you a rather amazing/very unusual instance of this. I can't remember whether it was in our first year—the first year of us four at Nauheim, because, of course, it would have been the fourth year of Florence and myself—but it must have been in the first or second year. And that gives the measure at once of the incredibleness of our discussion and of the speed with which emotional closeness had grown up between us. On the one hand we seemed to start out on the big, important trip so naturally and with so little preparation, that it was as if we must have made many such trips before; and our emotional closeness seemed so deep....

Yet the place to which we went was obviously one to which Florence at least would have wanted to take us quite early, so that you would almost think we should have gone there together at the beginning of our emotional closeness. Florence was surprisingly expert as a guide to (related to studying people who lived a very long time ago) big, important trips and there was nothing she liked so much as taking people round ruins and showing you the window from which some one looked down upon the murder of some one else. She only did it once; but she did it quite beautifully. She could find her way, with the only help of Baedeker, as easily about any old monument as she could about any American city where the blocks are all square and the streets all numbered, so that you can go perfectly easily from Twenty-fourth to Thirtieth.

Now it happens that fifty minutes away from Nauheim, by a good train, is the very old city of M——, upon a great peak of volcano-rock related, girt with a triple road running sideways up its shoulder like a scarf. And at the top there is a (huge, fancy, stone house)—not a square (huge, fancy, stone house) like Windsor, but a (huge, fancy, stone house) all slate gables and high peaks with (covered with a very thin layer of gold) weathercocks flashing bravely—the (huge, fancy, stone house) of St Elizabeth of Hungary. It has the disadvantage of being in Prussia; and it is always unpleasant to go into that country; but it is very old and there are many double-spired churches and it stands up like a pyramid out of the green valley of the Lahn. I don't suppose the Ashburnhams wanted especially to go there and I didn't especially want to go there myself. But, you understand, there was no objection. It was part of the cure to make a trip three or four times a week. So that we were all quite (every single person agrees) in being thankful to Florence for providing the reason (for doing something) power. Florence, of course, had a reason (for doing something) of her own. She was at that time started/working at educating Captain Ashburnham—oh, of course, quite pour le (funny remark/joke)if! She used to say to Leonora: "I simply can't understand how you can let him live by your side and be so (having no knowledge)!" Leonora herself always struck me as being very well educated. At any rate, she knew ahead of time all that Florence had to tell her. Maybe she got it up out of Baedeker before Florence was up in the morning. I don't mean to say that you would ever have known that Leonora knew anything, but if Florence started to tell us how Ludwig the Brave wanted to have three wives at once—in which he was different from Henry VIII, who wanted them one after the other, and this caused a good deal of trouble—if Florence started to tell us this, Leonora would just nod her head in a way that quite pleasantly (shook, so noise is made) my poor wife.

She used to shout: "Well, if you knew it, why haven't you told it all already to Captain Ashburnham? I'm sure he finds it interesting!" And Leonora would look (mirror-like/related to carefully thinking about past events)ly at her husband and say: "I have an idea that it might hurt his hand—the hand, you know, used in connection with horses' mouths...." And poor Ashburnham would (go red in the cheeks from embarrassment) and mumble and would say: "That's all right. Don't you bother about me."

I fancy his wife's (a surprising and interesting event that's the exact opposite of what is expected) did quite alarm poor Teddy; because one evening he asked me seriously in the smoking-room if I thought that having too much in one's head would really interfere with one's quickness in polo. It struck him, he said, that smart Johnnies generally were rather muffs when they got on to four legs. I calmed him as best I could. I told him that he wasn't likely to take in enough to upset his balance. At that time the Captain was quite (based on facts and other evidence) enjoying being educated by Florence. She used to do it about three or four times a week under the approving eyes of Leonora and myself. It wasn't, you understand, well-thought-out. It came in bursts. It was Florence clearing up one of the dark places of the earth, leaving the world a little lighter than she had found it. She would tell him the story of Hamlet; explain the form of a (group of sounds that sound good together) / (complex music for a full orchestra), humming the first and second subjects to him, and so on; she would explain to him the difference between Arminians and Erastians; or she would give him a short lecture on the early history of the United States. And it was done in a way well calculated to arrest a young attention. Did you ever read Mrs Markham? Well, it was like that... .

But our trip to M—— was a much larger, a much more full dress affair. You see, in the storehouses (of old things) of the Schloss in that city there was a document which Florence thought would finally give her the chance to educate the whole lot of us together. It really worried poor Florence that she couldn't, in matters of culture, ever get the better of Leonora. I don't know what Leonora knew or what she didn't know, but certainly she was always there whenever Florence brought out any information. And she gave, somehow, the impression of really knowing what poor Florence gave the impression of having only picked up. I can't exactly define it. It was almost something physical. Have you ever seen a retriever rushing/running in play after a greyhound? You see the two running over a green field, almost side by side, and suddenly the retriever makes a friendly snap at the other. And the greyhound simply isn't there. You haven't watched/followed it quicken its speed or strain a limb; but there it is, just two yards in front of the retriever's outstretched (jaw and mouth/gun barrel). So it was with Florence and Leonora in matters of culture.

But on this occasion I knew that something was up. I found Florence some days before, reading books like Ranke's History of the Popes, Symonds' Renaissance, Assorted's Rise of the Dutch Republic and Luther's Table Talk.

I must say that, until the extreme surprise came, I got nothing but pleasure out of the little big, important trip. I like catching the two-forty; I like the slow, smooth roll of the great big trains—and they are the best trains in the world! I like being drawn through the green country and looking at it through the clear glass of the great windows. Though, of course, the country isn't really green. The sun shines, the earth is blood red and purple and red and green and red. And the oxen in the ploughlands are bright coated with clear paint brown and black and blackish purple; and the poor people are dressed in the black and white of magpies; and there are great Rocks of magpies too. Or the poor people' dresses in another field where there are little mounds of hay that will be grey-green on the sunny side and purple in the shadows—the poor people' dresses are dark red with emerald green ribbons and purple skirts and white shirts and black velvet stomachers. Still, the impression is that you are drawn through brilliant green (land areas of grass and flowers) that run away on each side to the dark purple fir-woods; the volcano-rock related peaks; the huge forests. And there is (land areas of grass and flowers)weet at the edge of the streams, and (cows, bulls, etc.). Why, I remember on that afternoon I saw a brown cow hitch its horns under the stomach of a black and white animal and the black and white one was thrown right into the middle of a narrow stream. I burst out laughing. But Florence was giving/communicating information so hard and Leonora was listening so intently that no one (saw/heard/became aware of) me. As for me, I was pleased to be off duty; I was pleased to think that Florence for the moment was absolutely out of (playful bad behavior)—because she was talking about Ludwig the Brave (I think it was Ludwig the Brave but I am not a history expert) about Ludwig the Brave of Hessen who wanted to have three wives at once and (gave money to/spent money at/talked down to) Luther—something like that!—I was so relieved to be off duty, because she couldn't possibly be doing anything to excite herself or set her poor heart a-flap wings/move unsteadilying—that the event of the cow was a real joy to me. I laughed over it from time to time for the whole rest of the day. Because it does look very funny, you know, to see a black and white cow land on its back in the middle of a stream. It is so just exactly what one doesn't expect of a cow.

I suppose I should have felt sorry for the poor animal; but I just didn't. I was out for enjoyment. And I just enjoyed myself. It is so pleasant to be drawn along in front of the amazing towns with the peaked (huge, fancy, stone houses) and the many double spires. In the sunlight shines come from the city—shines from the glass of windows; from the (covered with a very thin layer of gold) signs of pharmacies; from the ensigns of the student corps high up in the mountains; from the helmets of the funny little soldiers moving their stiff little legs in white linen pants. And it was pleasant to get out in the great big amazing Prussian station with the hammered (brown metal that's copper and tin) decorations and the paintings of poor people and flowers and cows; and to hear Florence (deal with a good price/agreement between people) (full of energy)ally with the driver of a very old droschka drawn by two lean horses. Of course, I spoke German much more correctly than Florence, though I never could rid myself quite of the (special way of speaking/mark that shows emphasis) of the Pennsylvania Duitsch of my (the time when a person is a child). Anyhow, we were drawn in a sort of victory, for five marks without any trinkgeld, right up to the (huge, fancy, stone house). And we were taken through the museum and saw the fire-backs, the old glass, the old swords and the old (thing) weird-looking machines. And we went up winding corkscrew staircases and through the Rittersaal, the great painted hall where the (person who works to improve something) and his friends met for the first time under the protection of the gentleman that had three wives at once and formed a friendly partnership with the gentleman that had six wives, one after the other (I'm not really interested in these facts but they have a bearing on my story). And we went through (places of worship), and music rooms, right up very high in the air to a large old room, full of presses, with heavily-closed windows all round. And Florence became positively electric. She told the tired, bored custodian what shutters to open; so that the bright sunlight streamed in real shafts into the dim old room. She explained that this was Luther's bedroom and that just where the sunlight fell had stood his bed. Actually, I believe that she was wrong and that Luther only stopped, as it were, for lunch, in order to get away from pursuit. But, no doubt, it would have been his bedroom if he could have been convinced to stop the night. And then, in spite of the protest of the custodian, she threw open another shutter and came tripping back to a large glass case.

"And there," she yelled with a (special way of speaking/mark that shows emphasis) of party-like environment, of victory, and of bold courage. She was pointing at a piece of paper, like the half-sheet of a letter with some faint pencil writes/writing that might have been a jotting of the amounts we were spending during the day. And I was very happy at her party-like environment, in her victory, in her bold courage. Captain Ashburnham had his hands upon the glass case. "There it is—the Protest." And then, as we all properly stage-managed our shock and confusion, she continued: "Don't you know that is why we were all called Protestants? That is the pencil draft of the Protest they drew up. You can see the signatures of Martin Luther, and Martin Bucer, and Zwingli, and Ludwig the Brave...."

I may have got some of the names wrong, but I know that Luther and Bucer were there. And her animation continued and I was glad. She was better and she was out of (playful bad behavior). She continued, looking up into Captain Ashburnham's eyes: "It's because of that piece of paper that you're honest, sober, hard-working, future-thinking, and clean-lived. If it weren't for that piece of paper you'd be like the Irish or the Italians or the Poles, but especially the Irish...."

And she laid one finger upon Captain Ashburnham's wrist.

I knew about something dangerous, something scary, something evil in the day. I can't define it and can't find a simile for it. It wasn't as if a snake had looked out of a hole. No, it was as if my heart had missed a beat. It was as if we were going to run and cry out; all four of us in separate directions, turning away/avoiding our heads. In Ashburnham's face I know that there was complete and total panic. I was horribly frightened and then I discovered that the pain in my left wrist was caused by Leonora's holding (in hand) it:

"I can't stand this," she said with a most amazing/very unusual passion; "I must get out of this." I was horribly frightened. It came to me for a moment, though I hadn't time to think it, that she must be a madly jealous woman—jealous of Florence and Captain Ashburnham, of all people in the world! And it was a panic in which we ran away/escaped! We went right down the winding stairs, across the huge Rittersaal to a little terrace that (ignores/doesn't notice) the Lahn, the broad valley and the huge plain into which it opens out.

"Don't you see?" she said, "don't you see what's going on?" The panic again stopped my heart. I mumbled, I stuttered—I don't know how I got the words out:

"No! What's the matter? Whatever's the matter?"

She looked me straight in the eyes; and for a moment I had the feeling that those two blue discs were huge, were (very big/very strong), were like a wall of blue that shut me off from the rest of the world. I know it sounds weird and ridiculous; but that is what it did feel like.

"Don't you see," she said, with a really (very bad and upsetting) anger, with a really (very bad and upsetting) sad complaint in her voice, "Don't you see that that's the cause of the whole terrible (and very unhappy) affair; of the whole sadness of the world? And of the never-ending hell of you and me and them... ."

I don't remember how she went on; I was too frightened; I was too amazed. I think I was thinking of running to fetch help—a doctor, maybe, or Captain Ashburnham. Or possibly she needed Florence's tender care, though, of course, it would have been very bad for Florence's heart. But I know that when I came out of it she was saying: "Oh, where are all the bright, happy, innocent beings in the world? Where's happiness? One reads of it in books!"

She ran her hand with an amazing/surprising (or: single) clawing movement upwards over her forehead. Her eyes were hugely stretched out; her face was exactly that of a person looking into the pit of hell and seeing horrors there. And then suddenly she stopped. She was, most surprisingly and shockingly, just Mrs Ashburnham again. Her face was perfectly clear, sharp and defined; her hair was beautiful in its golden coils. Her (openings at the bottom of the nose) twitched with a sort of hatred. She appeared to look with interest at a gypsy (a group of people traveling together) that was coming over a little bridge far below us.

"Don't you know," she said, in her clear hard voice, "don't you know that I'm an Irish Catholic?"

V THOSE words gave me the greatest relief that I have ever had in my life. They told me, I think, almost more than I have ever gathered at any one moment—about myself. I don't think that before that day I had ever wanted anything very much except Florence. I have, of course, had (desires to eat/desires for things), impatiences... Why, sometimes at a table d'hote, when there would be, say, (small fish eggs)e handed round, I have been completely and totally full of impatience for fear that when the dish came to me there should not be a happiness-causing (by meeting a need or reaching a goal) portion left over by the other guests. I have been very impatient at missing trains. The Belgian State Railway has a trick of letting the French trains miss their connections at Brussels. That has always (made very angry) me. I have written about it letters to The Times that The Times never printed; those that I wrote to the Paris edition of the New York Announce (with respect) were always printed, but they never seemed to make happy (by meeting a need or reaching a goal) me when I saw them. Well, that was a sort of rushed craziness with me.

It was a rushed craziness that now I can hardly (understand/make real/achieve). I can understand it (related to the mind and thinking). You see, in those days I was interested in people with "hearts." There was Florence, there was Edward Ashburnham—or, maybe, it was Leonora that I was more interested in. I don't mean in the way of love. But, you see, we were both of the same profession—at any rate as I saw it. And the job/line of work was that of keeping heart patients alive.

You have no idea how interesting such a job/line of work may become. Just as the (worker who makes horseshoes, metal objects, etc.) says: "By hammer and hand all Art does stand," just as the baker thinks that all the solar system revolves around his morning delivery of rolls, as the postmaster-general believes that he alone is the preserver of (community of people/all good people in the world)—and surely, surely, these false beliefs are necessary to keep us going—so did I and, as I believed, Leonora, imagine that the whole world should be arranged to secure/make sure of the keeping alive of heart patients. You have no idea how interesting such a job/line of work may become—how dummy, in view of that intense interest, appear the ways of princes, of republics, of cities. A rough bit of road beneath the motor tyres, a couple of succeeding "thank'ee-marms" with their quick jolts would be enough to set me quietly complaining to Leonora against the Prince or the Grand Duke or the Free City through whose (land area owned or controlled by someone) we might be passing. I would grumble like a stockbroker whose conversations over the telephone are incommoded by the ringing of bells from a city church. I would talk about (very old time in history) survivals, about the taxes being surely high enough. The point, by the way, about the missing of the connections of the Calais boat trains at Brussels was that the shortest possible sea trip is often of great importance to sufferers from the heart. Now, on the Continent, there are two special heart cure places, Nauheim and Spa, and to reach both of these baths from England if in order to secure/make sure of a short sea passage, you come by Calais—you have to make the connection at Brussels. And the Belgian train never waits by so much the shade of a second for the one coming from Calais or from Paris. And even if the French train, are just on time, you have to run—imagine a heart patient running!—along the unfamiliar ways of the Brussels station and to move (quickly)/mix up up the high steps of the moving train. Or, if you miss connection, you have to wait five or six hours.... I used to keep awake whole nights cursing that (very mean, unfair treatment). My wife used to run—she never, in whatever else she may have was dishonest to/lied to me, tried to give me the impression that she was not a strong and kind soul. But, once in the German Express, she would lean back, with one hand to her side and her eyes closed. Well, she was a good actress. And I would be in hell. In hell, I tell you. For in Florence I had at once a wife and an unattained mistress—that is what it comes to—and in the keeping/holding of her in this world I had my occupation, my career, my desire to do great things. It is not often that these things are united in one body. Leonora was a good actress too. By Jove she was good! I tell you, she would listen to me by the hour, changing (and getting better) my plans for a shock-proof world. It is true that, at times, I used to (see/hear/become aware of) about her an air of lack of attention as if she were listening, a mother, to the child at her knee, or as if, exactly, I were myself the patient.

You understand that there was nothing the matter with Edward Ashburnham's heart—that he had thrown up his commission and had left India and come half the world over in order to follow a woman who had really had a "heart" to Nauheim. That was the sort of emotional ass he was. For, you understand, too, that they really needed to live in India, to spend less, to let the house at Branshaw Teleragh.

Of course, at that date, I had never heard of the Kilsyte case. Ashburnham had, you know, kissed a servant girl in a railway train, and it was only the grace of God, the prompt functioning of the communication cord and the ready sympathy of what I believe you call the Hampshire Bench, that kept the poor devil out of Winchester Gaol for years and years. I never heard of that case until the final stages of Leonora's (things that are suddenly shown or understood)....

But just think of that poor miserable, awful person.... I, who have surely the right, beg you to think of that poor miserable, awful person. Is it possible that such an unlucky devil should be so tortured by blind and mysterious pre-planned future? For there is no other way to think of it. None. I have the right to say it, since for years he was my wife's lover, since he killed her, since he broke up all the pleasantnesses that there were in my life. There is no priest that has the right to tell me that I must not ask pity for him, from you, silent listener beyond the fireplace-stone, from the world, or from the God who created in him those desires, those madnesses....

Of course, I should not hear of the Kilsyte case. I knew none of their friends; they were for me just good people—lucky people with broad and sunny (areas of land about 200 feet X 220 feet) in a southern county. Just good people! By heavens, I sometimes think that it would have been better for him, poor dear, if the case had been such a one that I must needs have heard of it—such a one as young women/cleaning women and (people or businesses that carry messages) and other Kur guests whisper about for years after, until slowly it dies away in the pity that there is knocking about here and there in the world. Supposing he had spent his seven years in Winchester Gaol or whatever it is that mysterious and blind justice gives out/sets aside to you for following your natural but (bad or poorly)-timed tendencies—there would have arrived a stage when nodding talks (about other people's personal business) on the Kursaal terrace would have said, "Poor fellow," thinking of his ruined career. He would have been the fine soldier with his back now bent.... Better for him, poor devil, if his back had been (before it should) bent.

Why, it would have been a thousand times better.... For, of course, the Kilsyte case, which came at the very beginning of his finding Leonora cold and cold-hearted, gave him a nasty jar. He left servants alone after that.

It turned him, naturally, all the more loose among women of his own class. Why, Leonora told me that Mrs Maidan—the woman he followed from Burma to Nauheim—promised to/certain her he awakened her attention by swearing that when he kissed the servant in the train he was driven to it. I say he was driven to it, by the mad passion to find an (in the end) happiness-causing (by meeting a need or reaching a goal) woman. I say he was truly honest enough. Heaven help me, I say he was truly honest enough in his love for Mrs Maidan. She was a nice little thing, a dear little dark woman with long lashes, of whom Florence grew quite fond. She had a lisp and a happy smile. We saw plenty of her for the first month of our casual friend/knowledge, then she died, quite quietly—of heart trouble.

But you know, poor little Mrs Maidan—she was so gentle, so young. She cannot have been more than twenty-three and she had a boy husband out in Chitral not more than twenty-four, I believe. Such young things should have been left alone. (definitely/as one would expect) Ashburnham could not leave her alone. I do not believe that he could. Why, even I, at this distance of time am aware that I am a little in love with her memory. I can't help smiling when I think suddenly of her—as you might at the thought of something wrapped carefully away in lavender, in some drawer, in some old house that you have long left. She was so—so obedient. Why, even to me she had the air of being obedient—to me that not the youngest child will ever listen carefully to. Yes, this is the saddest story...

No, I cannot help wishing that Florence had left her alone—with her playing with (cheating on your spouse). I suppose it was; though she was such a child that one has the impression that she would hardly have known how to spell such a word. No, it was just obedience—to the begging, to the stormy forces that pushed that terrible (and very unhappy) fellow on to ruin. And I do not suppose that Florence really made much difference. If it had not been for her that Ashburnham left his loyalty for Mrs Maidan, then it would have been some other woman. But still, I do not know. Maybe the poor young thing would have died—she was bound to die, anyhow, quite soon—but she would have died without having to soak her noonday pillow with tears while Florence, below the window, talked to Captain Ashburnham about the Constitution of the United States.... Yes, it would have left a better taste in the mouth if Florence had let her die in peace....

Leonora behaved better in a sense. She just boxed Mrs Maidan's ears—yes, she hit her, in an uncontrollable access of extreme anger, a hard blow on the side of the cheek, in the hallway/travel path of the hotel, outside Edward's rooms. It was that, you know, that accounted for the sudden, odd emotional closeness that (suddenly jumped up, like a spring) up between Florence and Mrs Ashburnham. Because it was, of course, an odd emotional closeness. If you look at it from the outside nothing could have been more unlikely than that Leonora, who is the proudest creature on God's earth, would have struck up a casual friendship/knowledge with two casual Yankees whom she could not really have thought of as being much more than a carpet beneath her feet. You may ask what she had to be proud of. Well, she was a Powys married to an Ashburnham—I suppose that gave her the right to hate casual Americans as long as she did it not showyly. I don't know what anyone has to be proud of. She might have taken pride in her patience, in her keeping her husband out of the (event where someone or something had no money) court. Maybe she did.

At any rate that was how Florence got to know her. She came round a screen at the corner of the hotel hallway/travel path and found Leonora with the gold key that hung from her wrist caught in Mrs Maidan's hair just before dinner. There was not a single word spoken. Little Mrs Maidan was very pale, with a red mark down her left cheek, and the key would not come out of her black hair. It was Florence who had to untangle it, for Leonora was in such a state that she could not have brought herself to touch Mrs Maidan without growing sick.

And there was not a word spoken. You see, under those four eyes—her own and Mrs Maidan's—Leonora could just let herself go as far as to box Mrs Maidan's ears. But the moment a stranger came along she pulled herself wonderfully up. She was at first silent and then, the moment the key was disengaged by Florence she was in a state to say: "So awkward of me... I was just trying to put the comb straight in Mrs Maidan's hair...."

Mrs Maidan, however, was not a Powys married to an Ashburnham; she was a poor little O'Flaherty whose husband was a boy of country home (for a church member) origin. So there was no mistaking the cry she let go as she went lonely and emptyly away along the hallway/travel path. But Leonora was still going to play up. She opened the door of Ashburnham's room quite ridiculously, so that Florence should hear her address Edward in terms of emotional closeness and liking. "Edward," she called. But there was no Edward there.

You understand that there was no Edward there. It was then, for the only time of her career, that Leonora really damaged/agreed herself—She yelled.... "How scary!... Poor little Maisie!..."

She caught herself up at that, but (definitely/as one would expect) it was too late. It was a queer sort of affair....

I want to do Leonora every justice. I love her very dearly for one thing and in this matter, which was certainly the ruin of my small household cockle-shell, she certainly tripped up. I do not believe—and Leonora herself does not believe—that poor little Maisie Maidan was ever Edward's mistress. Her heart was really so bad that she would have gave in to anything like an emotional support. That is the plain English of it, and I suppose plain English is best. She was really what the other two, for reasons of their own, just pretended to be. Queer, isn't it? Like one of those evil jokes that Care (from God?) plays upon one. Add to this that I do not suppose that Leonora would much have minded, at any other moment, if Mrs Maidan had been her husband's mistress. It might have been a relief from Edward's emotional gurglings over the lady and from the lady's obedient acceptance of those sounds. No, she would not have minded.

But, in boxing Mrs Maidan's ears, Leonora was just striking the face of a terrible (and impossible to put up with) universe. For, that afternoon she had had a very painful scene with Edward.

As far as his letters went, she claimed the right to open them when she chose. She took (without the right to) to herself the right because Edward's affairs were in such a scary state and he lied so about them that she claimed the privilege of having his secrets that she can use. There was not, in fact, any other way, for the poor fool was too ashamed of his lapses ever to make a clean breast of anything. She had to drag these things out of him.

It must have been a pretty lifting up/raising up job for her. But that afternoon, Edward being on his bed for the hour and a half prescribed by the Kur people in charge, she had opened a letter that she took to come from a Colonel Hervey. They were going to stay with him in Linlithgowshire for the month of September and she did not know whether the date fixed would be the eleventh or the eighteenth. The address on this letter was, in handwriting, as like Colonel Hervey's as one blade of corn is like another. So she had at the moment no idea of secretly watching him.

But she certainly was. For she discovered that Edward Ashburnham was paying a criminal (who forces someone to pay money) of whom she had never heard something like three hundred pounds a year... It was a devil of a blow; it was like death; for she imagined that by that time she had really got to the bottom of her husband's (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages). You see, they were pretty heavy. What had really smashed them up had been a perfectly common-place affair at Monte Carlo—an affair with an intelligent harpy who passed for the mistress of a Russian Grand Duke. She took a twenty thousand pound pearl tiara from him as the price of her favours for a week or so. It would have pipped him a good deal to have found so much, and he was not in the ordinary way a gambler. He might, in fact, just have found the twenty thousand and the not small/short charges of a week at an hotel with the fair creature. He must have been worth at that date five hundred thousand dollars and a little over. Well, he must needs go to the tables and lose forty thousand pounds.... Forty thousand solid pounds, borrowed from sharks! And even after that he must—it was a very important passion—enjoy the favours of the lady. He got them, of course, when it was a matter of solid bargaining, for far less than twenty thousand, as he might, no doubt, have done from the first. I say ten thousand dollars covered the bill. Anyhow, there was a pretty solid hole in a fortune of a hundred thousand pounds or so. And Leonora had to fix things up; he would have run from money-lender to money-lender. And that was quite in the early days of her discovery of his (cheating on your wife or husband/dishonest behaviors)—if you like to call them (cheating on your wife or husband/dishonest behaviors). And she discovered that one from public sources. God knows what would have happened if she had not discovered it from public sources. I suppose he would have hidden it from her until they were very poor. But she was able, by the grace of God, to get hold of the actual lenders of the money, to learn the exact sums that were needed. And she went off to England.

Yes, she went right off to England to her lawyer and his while he was still in the arms of his Circe—at Antibes, to which place they had retired. He got sick of the lady quite quickly, but not before Leonora had had such lessons in the art of business from her lawyer that she had her plan as clearly drawn up as was ever that of General Trochu for keeping the Prussians out of Paris in 1870. It was about as effective at first, or it seemed so.

That would have been, you know, in 1895, about nine years before the date of which I am talking—the date of Florence's getting her hold over Leonora; for that was what it amounted to.... Well, Mrs Ashburnham had simply forced Edward to settle all his property upon her. She could force him to do anything; in his clumsy, good-natured, (unable to speak well) way he was as frightened of her as of the devil. And he liked and respected her hugely, and he was as fond of her as any man could be of any woman. She took advantage of it to treat him as if he had been a person whose huge houses are being managed by the Court of (not having enough money to pay bills). I suppose it was the best thing for him.

Anyhow, she had no end of a job for the first three years or so. Unexpected (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages) kept on coming up—and that sickened fool did not make it any easier. You see, along with the passion of the chase went a frame of mind that made him be amazingly ashamed of himself. You may not believe it, but he really had such a sort of respect for the (never having sex) of Leonora's imagination that he hated—he was positively revolted at the thought that she should know that the sort of thing that he did existed in the world. So he would stick out in an upset/angry way against the statement (that someone has done something bad) of ever having done anything. He wanted to preserve the virginity of his wife's thoughts. He told me that himself during the long walks we had at the last—while the girl was on the way to Brindisi.

So, of course, for those three years or so, Leonora had many upset/shakings. And it was then that they really argued.

Yes, they argued in a bad or angry way. That seems rather fancy. You might have thought that Leonora would be just (in a relaxed, controlled way) hatred and he sadly sorry. But that was not it a bit... Along with Edward's strong emotions and his shame for them went the violent conviction of the duties of his station—a conviction that was quite unreasonably expensive. I trust I have not, in talking of his (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages), given the impression that poor Edward was a highly sexual wild person. He was not; he was an (a person, a story, or a situation that focuses a lot of attention on feelings). The servant girl in the Kilsyte case had been pretty, but sad of appearance. I think that, when he had kissed her, he had desired rather to comfort her. And, if she had gave in to his compliments I say he would have set her up in a little house in Portsmouth or Winchester and would have been faithful to her for four or five years. He was quite capable of that.

No, the only two of his affairs of the heart that cost him money were that of the Grand Duke's mistress and that which was the subject of the (forcing someone to pay money so a secret isn't revealed) letter that Leonora opened. That had been a quite emotional (in a good way) affair with quite a nice woman. It had came after the one with the Grand Ducal lady. The lady was the wife of a brother officer and Leonora had known all about the passion, which had been quite a real passion and had lasted for (more than two, but not a lot of) years. You see, poor Edward's strong emotions were quite logical in their (development or increase over time/series of events or things) upwards. They began with a servant, went on to a prostitute and then to a quite nice woman, very poorly mated. For she had a quite nasty husband who, by means of letters and things, went on (forcing someone to pay money so a secret isn't revealed) poor Edward to the tune of three or four hundred a year—with threats of the Divorce Court. And after this lady came Maisie Maidan, and after poor Maisie only one more affair and then—the real passion of his life. His marriage with Leonora had been arranged by his parents and, though he always liked and respected her very, he had hardly ever pretended to be much more than tender to her, though he (very much/in an upset, hopeless way) needed her emotional support, too....

But his really trying (things you owe/things you're responsible for/disadvantages) were mostly in the nature of generosities proper to his station. He was, according to Leonora, always remitting his (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.)' rents and giving the (people or businesses who occupy a house, office, etc.) to understand that the reduction would be permanent; he was always redeeming people (who are always drunk) who came before his (like a king or queen) bench; he was always trying to put prostitutes into respectable places—and he was a perfect insane person about children. I don't know how many (bad or poorly)-used people he did not pick up and provide with careers—Leonora has told me, but I say she (stated that something is much bigger, worse, etc., than it really is) and the figure seems so ridiculous that I will not put it down. All these things, and the (when something keeps happening for a long time/delay in a court case) of them seemed to him to be his duty—along with impossible subscriptions to hospitals and Boy Scouts and to provide prizes at (cows, bulls, etc.) shows and antivivisection (communities of people)....

Well, Leonora saw to it that most of these things were not continued. They could not possibly keep up Branshaw Manor at that rate after the money had gone to the Grand Duke's mistress. She put the rents back at their old figures; discharged the people (who are always drunk) from their homes, and sent all the (communities of people) (see/hear/become aware of) that they were to expect no more subscriptions. To the children, she was more tender; nearly all of them she supported till the age of job (where you learn things) or domestic service. You see, she was childless herself.

Continental Papists are a dirty, happy and dishonest crew. But that, at least, lets them be (people who grab at any opportunity). They would have fixed poor dear Edward up all right. (Forgive my writing of these monster-like things in this silly and unimportant/not serious (in a disrespecful or inappropriate way) manner. If I did not I should break down and cry.) In Milan, say, or in Paris, Leonora would have had her marriage ended/stopped in six months for two hundred dollars paid in the right quarter. And Edward would have drifted about until he became a homeless person/flirty woman of the kind I have suggested. Or he would have married a female bartender who would have made him such scary scenes in public places and would so have torn out his moustache and left visible signs upon his face that he would have been faithful to her for the rest of his days. That was what he wanted to redeem him....

For, along with his strong emotions and his shames there went the fear (of a terrible future) of scenes in public places, of outcry, of excited physical violence; of (being talked about a lot on TV, online, etc.), in short. Yes, the female bartender would have cured him. And it would have been all the better if she drank; he would have been kept busy looking after her.

I know that I am right in this. I know it because of the Kilsyte case. You see, the servant girl that he then kissed was nurse in the family of the (person who doesn't follow social rules) head of the county—whatever that post may be called. And that gentleman was so decided to ruin Edward, who was the chairman of the Tory caucus, or whatever it is—that the poor dear sufferer had the very devil of a time. They asked questions about it in the House of Commons; they tried to get the Hampshire judges insulted/got worse; they suggested to the War Ministry that Edward was not the proper person to hold the King's commission. Yes, he got it hot and strong.

The result you have heard. He was completely cured of cheating among the lower classes. And that seemed a real blessing to Leonora. It did not (angrily fight against unfair authority) her so much to be connected—it is a sort of connection—with people like Mrs Maidan, instead of with a little kitchenmaid.

In a dim sort of way, Leonora was almost satisfied and happy when she arrived at Nauheim, that evening....

She had got things nearly straight by the long years of scraping in little stations in Chitral and Burma—stations where living is cheap in comparison with the life of a county leader, and where, more than that, representatives/sexual relationships of one sort or another are (usual/ commonly and regular/ healthy) and inexpensive too. So that, when Mrs Maidan came along—and the Maidan affair might have caused trouble out there because of the youth of the husband—Leonora had just (accepted or gave in) herself to coming home. With pushing and scraping and with letting Branshaw Teleragh, and with selling a picture and a (something that survived from the past) of Charles I or so, had got—and, poor dear, she had never had a really decent dress to her back in all those years and years—she had got, as she imagined, her poor dear husband back into much the same (related to managing money) position as had been his before the mistress of the Grand Duke had happened along. And, of course, Edward himself had helped her a little on the (related to managing money) side. He was a fellow that many men liked. He was so (looking good, neat, clean, etc.) and quite ready to lend you his cigar puncher—that sort of thing. So, every now and then some rich money-giving person whom he met about would give him a good, sound, money-making tip. And Leonora was never afraid of a bit of a gamble—English Papists almost never are, I do not know why.

So nearly all her investment turned up winning hands (of cards), and Edward was really in fit case to reopen Branshaw Manor and once more to assume his position in the county. This way Leonora had accepted Maisie Maidan almost with (quitting a job/accepting something bad that's happening or about to happen)—almost with a sigh of relief. She really liked the poor child—she had to like somebody. And, at any rate, she felt she could trust Maisie—she could trust her not to rook Edward for (more than two thousand)s a week, for Maisie had refused to accept so much as a piece of cheap jewelry ring from him. It is true that Edward gurgled and said great things about the girl in a way that she had never yet experienced. But that, too, was almost a relief. I think she would really have welcomed it if he could have come across the love of his life. It would have given her a rest.

And there could not have been anyone better than poor little Mrs Maidan; she was so ill she could not want to be taken on expensive trips.... It was Leonora herself who paid Maisie's expenses to Nauheim. She handed over the money to the boy husband, for Maisie would never have allowed it; but the husband was in extremely bad pains of fear. Poor devil!

I fancy that, on the trip from India, Leonora was as happy as ever she had been in her life. Edward was wrapped up, completely, in his girl—he was almost like a father with a child, running about with rugs and medicine and things, from deck to deck. He behaved, however, with great care, so that nothing leaked through to the other passengers. And Leonora had almost reached to the (point of view/way of behaving) of a mother towards Mrs Maidan. So it had looked very well—the kind, rich couple of good people, acting as rescuers to the poor, dark-eyed, dying young thing. And that (point of view/way of behaving) of Leonora's towards Mrs Maidan no doubt partly accounted for the smack in the face. She was hitting a naughty child who had been stealing chocolates at an inconvenient moment. It was certainly an inconvenient moment. For, with the opening of that (forcing someone to pay money so a secret isn't revealed) letter from that hurt brother officer, all the old terrors had redescended upon Leonora. Her road had again seemed to stretch out endless; she imagined that there might be hundreds and hundreds of such things that Edward was hiding from her—that they might require/result in more mortgagings, more pawnings of bracelets, more and always more horrors. She had spent an extremely painful afternoon. The matter was one of a divorce case, of course, and she wanted to avoid (being talked about a lot on TV, online, etc.) as much as Edward did, so that she saw the need of continuing the payments. And she did not so much mind that. They could find three hundred a year. But it was the horror of there being more such responsibilities/duties.

She had had no conversation with Edward for many years—none that went beyond the mere arrangements for taking trains or engaging servants. But that afternoon she had to let him have it. And he had been just the same as ever. It was like opening a book after ten years to find the words the same. He had the same reasons for doing things. He had not wished to tell her about the case because he had not wished her to dirty her mind with the idea that there was such a thing as a brother officer who could be a criminal (who forces someone to pay money)—and he had wanted to protect the credit of his old light of love. That lady was certainly not concerned with her husband. And he swore, and swore, and swore, that there was nothing else in the world against him. She did not believe him.

He had done it once too often—and she was wrong for the first time, so that he acted a rather creditable part in the matter. For he went right straight out to the after-office and spent (more than two, but not a lot of) hours in coding a telegram to his manager/person who asks for business, offering to pay for something that hard-headed man to threaten to take out at once a warrant against the fellow who was on his track. He said later/after that that it was a bit too thick on poor old Leonora to be ballyragged any more. That was really the last of his outstanding accounts, and he was ready to take his personal chance of the Divorce Court if the criminal (who forces someone to pay money) turned nasty. He would face it out—the (being talked about a lot on TV, online, etc.), the papers, the whole bally show. Those were his simple words....

He had made, however, the mistake of not telling Leonora where he was going, so that, having seen him go to his room to fetch the code for the telegram, and seeing, two hours later, Maisie Maidan come out of his room, Leonora imagined that the two hours she had spent in silent extreme pain Edward had spent with Maisie Maidan in his arms. That seemed to her to be too much. Actually, Maisie's being in Edward's room had been the result, partly of poorness, partly of pride, partly of sheer innocence. She could not, in the first place, afford a maid; she refrained as much as possible from sending the hotel servants on errands, since every penny was of importance to her, and she feared to have to pay high tips at the end of her stay. Edward had lent her one of his (very interesting) cases containing fifteen different sizes of scissors, and, having seen from her window, his departure for the after-office, she had taken the opportunity of returning the case. She could not see why she should not, though she felt a certain shame and guilt at the thought that she had kissed the pillows of his bed. That was the way it took her.

But Leonora could see that, without the shadow of a doubt, the event gave Florence a hold over her. It let Florence into things and Florence was the only created being who had any idea that the Ashburnhams were not just good people with nothing to their tails. She decided/figured out at once, not so much to give Florence the privilege of her emotional closeness—which would have been the payment of a kind of blackmail—as to keep Florence under (instance of watching, noticing, or making a statement) until she could have (showed/shown or proved) to Florence that she was not in the least jealous of poor Maisie. So that was why she had entered the dining-room arm in arm with my wife, and why she had so very (much) planted herself at our table. She never left us, in fact, for a minute that night, except just to run up to Mrs Maidan's room to beg her pardon and to beg her also to let Edward take her very very (much) out into the gardens that night. She said herself, when Mrs Maidan came rather sadly down into the lounge where we were all sitting: "Now, Edward, get up and take Maisie to the Casino. I want Mrs Dowell to tell me all about the families in Connecticut who came from Fordingbridge." For it had been discovered that Florence came of a line that had actually owned Branshaw Teleragh for two centuries before the Ashburnhams came there. And there she sat with me in that hall, long after Florence had gone to bed, so that I might witness her gay reception of that pair. She could play up.

And that enables me to fix exactly the day of our going to the town of M——. For it was the very day poor Mrs Maidan died. We found her dead when we got back—pretty awful, that, when you come to figure out what it all means....

At any rate the measure of my relief when Leonora said that she was an Irish Catholic gives you the measure of my feeling of love for that couple. It was a feeling of love so intense that even to this day I cannot think of Edward without sighing. I do not believe that I could have gone on any more with them. I was getting too tired. And I truly believe, too, if my (feeling that something is wrong or bad, but without proof) that Leonora was jealous of Florence had been the reason she gave for her outburst I should have turned upon Florence with the maddest kind of extreme anger. Jealousy would have been (not stoppable/not able to be destroyed). But Florence's mere silly jibes at the Irish and at the Catholics could be apologized out of existence. And that I appeared to repair in two minutes or so.

She looked at me for a long time rather firmly and queerly while I was doing it. And at last I worked myself up to saying:

"Do accept the situation. I confess that I do not like your religion. But I like you so intensely. I don't mind saying that I have never had anyone to be really fond of, and I do not believe that anyone has ever been fond of me, as I believe you really to be."

"Oh, I'm fond enough of you," she said. "Fond enough to say that I wish every man was like you. But there are others to be carefully thought about/believed." She was thinking, actually, of poor Maisie. She picked a little piece of pellitory out of the breast-high wall in front of us. She rubbed together/irritated it for a long minute between her finger and thumb, then she threw it over the coping.

"Oh, I accept the situation," she said at last, "if you can."

VI I REMEMBER laughing at the phrase, "accept the situation", which she seemed to repeat with a seriousness too intense. I said to her something like:

"It's hardly as much as that. I mean, that I must claim the freedom of a free American person (who lawfully lives in a country, state, etc.) to think what I please about your co-religious people. And I suppose that Florence must have freedom to think what she pleases and to say what politeness allows her to say."

"She had better," Leonora answered, "not say one single word against my people or my faith." It struck me at the time, that there was an unusual, an almost threatening, hardness in her voice. It was almost as if she were trying to bring across to Florence, through me, that she would seriously harm my wife if Florence went to something that was an extreme. Yes, I remember thinking at the time that it was almost as if Leonora were saying, through me to Florence:

"You may cause extreme anger me as you will; you may take all that I personally possess, but do not you care to say one single thing in view of the situation that that will set up—against the faith that makes me become the doormat for your feet."

But obviously, as I saw it, that could not be her meaning. Good people, be they ever so (many different kinds of people or things) in religious belief, do not threaten each other. So that I read Leonora's words to mean just no more than: "It would be better if Florence said nothing at all against my co-religious people, because it is a point that I am (grouchy/needing careful handling) about."

That was the hint that, in the same way/in that way, I brought across to Florence when, shortly later/after that, she and Edward came down from the tower. And I want you to understand that, from that moment until after Edward and the girl and Florence were all dead together, I had never the remotest short look, not the shadow of a (feeling that something is wrong or bad, but without proof), that there was anything wrong, as the saying is. For five minutes, then, I entertained the possibility that Leonora might be jealous; but there was never another flicker in that flame-like personality. How in the world should I get it?

For, all that time, I was just a male sick nurse. And what chance had I against those three hardened gamblers, who were all in league to hide their hands from me? What earthly chance? They were three to one—and they made me happy. Oh God, they made me so happy that I doubt if even paradise, that will smooth out all time-related wrongs, will ever give me the like. And what could they have done better, or what could they have done that could have been worse? I don't know....

I suppose that, during all that time I was a lied-to husband and that Leonora was pimping for Edward. That was the cross that she had to take up during her long Calvary of a life....

You ask how it feels to be a lied-to husband. Just Heavens, I do not know. It feels just nothing at all. It is not Hell, certainly it is not necessarily Heaven. So I suppose it is the (middle-position) stage. What do they call it? (place where something's trapped). No, I feel nothing at all about that. They are dead; they have gone before their Judge who, I hope, will open to them the springs of His kindness. It is not my business to think about it. It is simply my business to say, as Leonora's people say: "Song aeternam dona eis, Do mine, et lux perpetua luceat eis. In memoria aeterna erit...." But what were they? The just? The unfair? God knows! I think that the pair of them were only poor miserable, awful people, creeping over this earth in the shadow of a never-ending anger. It is very terrible....

It is almost too terrible, the picture of that judgement, as it appears to me sometimes, at nights. It is probably the suggestion of some picture that I have seen somewhere. But upon a huge plain, suspended in mid-air, I seem to see three figures, two of them held close in an intense hug/support, and one terribly/extremely single/alone. It is in black and white, my picture of that judgement, an etching, maybe; only I cannot tell an etching from a photographic reproduction. And the huge plain is the hand of God, stretching out for miles and miles, with great spaces above it and below it. And they are in the sight of God, and it is Florence that is alone.... And, do you know, at the thought of that intense quiet aloneness I feel a (very big/very strong) want to rush forward and comfort her. You cannot, you see, have acted as nurse to a person for twelve years without wishing to go on nursing them, even though you hate them with the hatred of the snake/something that adds, and even in the palm of God. But, in the nights, with that vision of judgement before me, I know that I hold myself back. For I hate Florence. I hate Florence with such a hatred that I would not spare her a (time going on forever) of loneliness. She need not have done what she did. She was an American, a New Englander. She had not the hot strong emotions of these People from Europe. She cut out that poor dummy of an Edward—and I pray God that he is really at peace, held close in the arms of that poor, poor girl! And, no doubt, Maisie Maidan will find her young husband again, and Leonora will burn, clear and calm, a northern light and one of the high-ranking angels of God. And me.... Well, maybe, they will find me an elevator to run.... But Florence... .

She should not have done it. She should not have done it. It was playing it too low down. She cut out poor dear Edward from sheer self-love; she interfered between him and Leonora from a sheer, dummy spirit of district visiting. Do you understand that, while she was Edward's mistress, she was constantly (forever) trying to reunite him to his wife? She would (talk quickly and unclearly)/(quick, unclear talk) on to Leonora about (state of mind where you no longer are angry at or want to punish someone)—treating the subject from the bright, American point of view. And Leonora would treat her like the whore she was. Once she said to Florence in the early morning:

"You come to me straight out of his bed to tell me that that is my proper place. I know it, thank you."

But even that could not stop Florence. She went on saying that it was her desire to do great things to leave this world a little brighter by the passage of her brief life, and how thankfully she would leave Edward, whom she thought she had brought to a right frame of mind, if Leonora would only give him a chance. He needed, she said, tenderness beyond anything.

And Leonora would answer—for she put up with this extreme anger for years—Leonora, as I understand, would answer something like:

"Yes, you would give him up. And you would go on writing to each other in secret, and doing/performing (cheating on your spouse) in hired rooms. I know the pair of you, you know. No. I prefer the situation as it is." Half the time Florence would ignore Leonora's statements. She would think they were not quite ladylike. The other half of the time she would try to convince Leonora that her love for Edward was quite (related to religion or the soul)—on account of her heart. Once she said:

"If you can believe that of Maisie Maidan, as you say you do, why cannot you believe it of me?" Leonora was, I understand, doing her hair at that time in front of the mirror in her bedroom. And she looked round at Florence, to whom she did not usually give/permit a quick look,—she looked round coolly and (in a relaxed, controlled way), and said:

"Never do you dare to talk about/say Mrs Maidan's name again. You murdered her. You and I murdered her between us. I am as much a criminal as you. I don't like to be reminded of it."

Florence went off at once into a nonsense talk/talk like a baby of how could she have hurt a person whom she hardly knew, a person whom with the best plans/desires, in (trying to reach the goal of/trying to complete the requirements of) her efforts to leave the world a little brighter, she had tried to save from Edward. That was how she figured it out to herself. She really thought that.... So Leonora said patiently:

"Very well, just put it that I killed her and that it's a painful subject. One does not like to think that one had killed someone. Naturally not. I ought never to have brought her from India." And that, in fact, is exactly how Leonora looked at it. It is stated a little baldly, but Leonora was always a great one for bald statements.

What had happened on the day of our trip to the very old city of M—— had been this:

Leonora, who had been even then filled with pity and regret for the poor child, on returning to our hotel had gone straight to Mrs Maidan's room. She had wanted just to pet her. And she had perceived at first only, on the clear, round table covered with red velvet, a letter (having an address/wrote an address) to her. It ran something like:

"Oh, Mrs Ashburnham, how could you have done it? I trusted you so. You never talked to me about me and Edward, but I trusted you. How could you buy me from my husband? I have just heard how you have—in the hall they were talking about it, Edward and the American lady. You paid the money for me to come here. Oh, how could you? How could you? I am going straight back to Bunny...." Bunny was Mrs Maidan's husband.

And Leonora said that, as she went on reading the letter, she had, without looking round her, a sense that that hotel room was cleared, that there were no papers on the table, that there were no clothes on the hooks, and that there was a strained silence—a silence, she said, as if there were something in the room that drank up such sounds as there were. She had to fight against that feeling, while she read the (something said afterwards) of the letter.

"I did not know you wanted me for a woman (who cheats on her husband)," the (something said afterwards) began. The poor child was hardly able to read and write. "It was surely not right of you and I never wanted to be one. And I heard Edward call me a poor little rat to the American lady. He always called me a little rat in private, and I did not mind. But, if he called me it to her, I think he does not love me any more. Oh, Mrs Ashburnham, you knew the world and I knew nothing. I thought it would be all right if you thought it could, and I thought you would not have brought me if you did not, too. You should not have done it, and we out of the same convent...."

Leonora said that she screamed when she read that.

And then she saw that Maisie's boxes were all packed, and she began a search for Mrs Maidan herself—all over the hotel. The manager said that Mrs Maidan had paid her bill, and had gone up to the station to ask the Reiseverkehrsbureau to make her out a plan for her immediate return to Chitral. He imagined that he had seen her come back, but he was not quite certain. No one in the large hotel had bothered his head about the child. And she, wandering solitarily in the hall, had no doubt sat down beside a screen that had Edward and Florence on the other side. I never heard then or after what had passed between that (very valuable/very dearly loved) couple. I fancy Florence was just about beginning her cutting out of poor dear Edward by dealing with to him some words of friendly warning as to the destructive actions he might be making in the girl's heart. That would be the sort of way she would begin. And Edward would have feelingally promised to/certain her that there was nothing in it; that Maisie was just a poor little rat whose passage to Nauheim his wife had paid out of her own pocket. That would have been enough to do the trick.

For the trick was pretty (in a way that produces a lot with very little waste) done. Leonora, with panic growing and with regret very large in her heart, visited every one of the public rooms of the hotel—the dining-room, the lounge, the schreibzimmer, the winter garden. God knows what they wanted with a winter garden in an hotel that is only open from May till October. But there it was. And then Leonora ran—yes, she ran up the stairs—to see if Maisie had not returned to her rooms. She had decided to take that child right away from that extremely ugly place. It seemed to her to be all (too terrible to speak about). I do not mean to say that she was not quite cool about it. Leonora was always Leonora. But the cold justice of the thing demanded that she should play the part of mother to this child who had come from the same convent. She figured it out to amount to that. She would leave Edward to Florence and to me—and she would give/reserve all her time to providing that child with an atmosphere of love until she could be returned to her poor young husband. It was naturally too late.

She had not cared to look round Maisie's rooms at first. Now, as soon as she came in, she perceived, sticking out beyond the bed, a small pair of feet in high-heeled shoes. Maisie had died in the effort to strap up a great (compound word). She had died so in a weird, ugly way that her little body had fallen forward into the trunk, and it had closed upon her, like the jaws of a gigantic large reptile. The key was in her hand. Her dark hair, like the hair of a Japanese, had come down and covered her body and her face.

Leonora lifted her up—she was the slightest featherweight—and laid her on the bed with her hair about her. She was smiling, as if she had just scored a goal in a hockey match. You understand she had not did/done/performed suicide. Her heart had just stopped. I saw her, with the long lashes on the cheeks, with the smile about the lips, with the flowers all about her. The stem of a white lily rested in her hand so that the spike of flowers was upon her shoulder. She looked like a bride in the sunlight of the mortuary candles that were all about her, and the white coifs of the two nuns that kneeled at her feet with their faces hidden might have been two swans that were to bear her away to kissing-kindness land, or wherever it is. Leonora showed her to me. She would not let either of the others see her. She wanted, you know, to spare poor dear Edward's feelings. He never could stand the sight of a dead body. And, since she never gave him an idea that Maisie had written to her, he imagined that the death had been the most natural thing in the world. He soon got over it. In fact, it was the one affair of his about which he never felt much shame and guilt.

report this content as inappropriate
Tips:
▶ Click the highlighted words to learn them and hear them. Click the non-highlighted words, too.
▶ Change how you learn on the settings page. Also, you can print vocab lists, quizzes, and more.
▶ When you log in, everything you rewordify is auto-saved and can be easily shared.

 
Enter English text or a web page to simplify:

Rewordify text
Read smarter now.
From frustration...	...to understanding
You will soon speak more eloquently about a greater number of contentious contemporary issues due to your erudition.	You will soon speak more beautifully about more argument-causing modern topics due to your (amazing knowledge).

Rewordify.com simplifies difficult English. Enter hard sentences (or whole chapters) into the yellow box at the top of the page. (You can also enter a web site URL.) Click Rewordify text and you'll instantly see an easier version, for fast understanding. The reworded words are highlighted— click them to hear and learn the original harder word. You can change how the highlighting works to match the way you learn!

Do you dislike dictionaries because they're confusing and unhelpful? You'll love Rewordify.com's clear, easy-to-understand definitions—they change to match the original word or phrase's part of speech, verb tense, and singular/plural form, so they make sense. Our amazing Rewordifying Engine is what makes it all possible, and no other web site has it.

Want to see something now? Click Classic Literature at the top and start reading—easier.

Read better tomorrow.

Learn more words faster. Our exclusive Learning Sessions actively teach you words so you learn them. Any time you paste in a block of text, our software finds all the hard words, lets you pick which ones you want to learn, and then teaches them to you in a Learning Session.

A Learning Session isn't an online quiz: it's an effective, step by step process where you hear words and phrases, type them, and read them. The software re-teaches you exactly what you need when you need it, and moves ahead when you're ready. When you've learned a word, the site stops "rewording" it, so the site grows with you as you learn! Learn more about Learning Sessions.

Learn your way.
Sample sentence:
"I used to loathe and eschew perusing English."
Style:
Reword; click to see original	I used to hate and avoid carefully reading English. Click/tap the highlighting
Style:
Don't reword; click to see definition	I used to loathe and eschew perusing English. Click/tap the highlighting
Style:
Inline	I used to loathe [hate] and eschew [avoid] perusing [carefully reading] English.
Style:
Two-column	I used to loathe and eschew perusing English.	I used to hate and avoid carefully reading English.

Learn the way you want—from what you want to read. You can change the way the site works to fit your learning style as you read and learn from almost any text passage or web page. See the different highlighting styles in the box? You can pick any of them, and lots more options. Click the Settings link (at the bottom of the page now, or at the top of any page) to see all the choices you have. (The demo text in the box here never changes.)

Chart your progress and have fun. You can keep track of your learning with lots of detailed charts that show how you're doing. Plus, as you use the site, you earn points and get Learning Stars—a fun reward for reading and learning!

Now you can easily get your students involved in their learning: let them select the text that interests them. Let them print and complete the activities with which they're most comfortable. Imagine each student learning vocabulary customized to his or her interests, while you have time to teach instead of typing. Could differentiation by interest or readiness be any easier? You can start doing it today, for free.

Teach more, type less.

You never have to type another vocabulary list or quiz again.

Type (or copy-paste) in any block of text in the yellow box at the top of this page, click Rewordify text, and click the Print/Learning activities button. Here's how. You (or your students!) can select from a rich variety of quizzes and learning activities, with or without answer keys.

Do you need to teach (or not teach) particular vocabulary words and phrases? Rewordify.com gives you the exact control you need for specialized vocabulary instruction. You can make customized word lists so the site rewords and teaches any word or phrase exactly the way you want.

Learn the way you want—from what you want to read. You can change the way the site works to fit your learning style as you read and learn from almost any text passage or web page. See the different highlighting styles in the box? You can pick any of them, and lots more options. Click the Settings link (at the bottom of the page now, or at the top of any page) to see all the choices you have. (The demo text in the box here never changes.)

Chart your progress and have fun. You can keep track of your learning with lots of detailed charts that show how you're doing. Plus, as you use the site, you earn points and get Learning Stars—a fun reward for reading and learning!

Now you can easily get your students involved in their learning: let them select the text that interests them. Let them print and complete the activities with which they're most comfortable. Imagine each student learning vocabulary customized to his or her interests, while you have time to teach instead of typing. Could differentiation by interest or readiness be any easier? You can start doing it today, for free.

Build a learning library.

Save all your documents online so anyone can read them and learn from them at any time.

Just log in, rewordify something, and click the Share button.

Select how public or private you want the document, enter the title, author, etc., and you're done!

You get a link that you can put in your online lesson plans, teacher web pages, or blog. No more rewordifying the same thing over and over again!

You can view, manage and edit all your documents from any computer. Just log in (or create a free, safe account) and start building your learning library. Here's how to do it.

Improve learning outcomes.

At Educator Central, you can create and manage student accounts, monitor your students' learning, and get detailed reading and learning analytics that help you make smart classroom decisions. For free. Now.

(In a hurry? Log in. Click Educator Central at the top.)

In a few minutes, you can create student accounts on Rewordify.com, and easily monitor your students' reading and learning progress. Get actionable learning and error analytics as your students read and learn from any document you post, or from any document or web page they want to read.

Imagine each student learning different words based on his or her interest or ability level. It's easy to do: Rewordify.com designs and teaches individualized vocabulary lessons with our highly effective Learning Sessions, so you have the time to teach students the important stuff: how to learn, how to break through obstacles, how to believe the words "I can do it."

As your students read and learn, get detailed charts and reports that tell you what you need to know—by student, by class, or for all your classes.

Effectively match interventions with students, based on detailed error breakdowns that let you see what you need to see in a few clicks.

Student accounts are anonymous, and they keep your students safe and focused on learning.

Start using it now: Log in and click on Educator Central at the top. Read more about Educator Central.

It's free, fast, and safe.

Rewordify.com is free online software. You're using it now. There's nothing to buy or install. It works on any computer, tablet, or smartphone. Just point your browser to Rewordify.com and start reading and learning. Yes, it's tablet-friendly—no mouse needed. Yes, your whole school district can create teacher and student accounts, without entering any personal information. When? Now.

It's fast. Wasting your (and your students' time) is bad. That's why Rewordify.com was designed from the ground up to be lightning-fast and use very little data. The site doesn't have a hundred images of puppies and kittens and a hundred links to a hundred lists. What it does have is speed and ease of use, which are very nice when you have to teach a room full of teenagers. Or adults.

It's an app. Want the app? You're using it. Wasn't that easy? The site is a web app, which is great for you, because you get almost-daily site updates automatically—so you can read and learn, not download and install app updates.

We keep kids safe online. Rewordify.com requires no personal information. Student accounts are completely anonymous and cannot post or share anything. Read more about how we protect children's privacy.

Rewordify.com can display simplified versions of web pages. Our state-of-the-art web filtering technology blocks millions of inappropriate sites and questionable language, to protect kids online and keep them reading only what they should be reading. Read more about how we protect children from inappropriate material.

Features & benefits
Features	Benefits	How to get it
Difficult English is intelligently simplified with our exclusive Rewordifying Engine	Saves time when reading hard text, improves comprehension and self-confidence, and increases total reading time	Copy-paste entire text passages into the yellow box and press Rewordify text. You'll see a simplified version. Read more.
Definitions are easy to understand, context-aware, and match verb tense and part of speech	Reduces frustration and improves comprehension by maximizing time spent reading versus dictionary research	Copy-paste any text passage into the yellow box and "rewordify" it. Click the highlighted words. Read more.
Learning Sessions actively teach individualized vocabulary lessons with research-proven multimodal techniques	Improves vocabulary and word retention	After you "rewordify" text, you'll see a purple bar at the top. Click the buttons to pick hard words and learn them in an effective Learning Session. Read more.
Site carefully monitors student reading time, learning progress, and learning errors, and gives educators full-color, real-time charts and reports	Gives actionable learning data that helps improve student learning outcomes	Create an account. Click on Educator Central. Create free student accounts. Post assignments online. Get learning data. Make smart classroom decisions based on valid data. Read more.
Site identifies and extracts over 58,000 difficult words and phrases from any text and creates a rich variety of learning activities with answer keys	Saves time when teaching and gives students individualized learning activities	Copy-paste any text passage into the yellow box and "rewordify" it. Click Print/Learning Activities. Pick the quizzes, activities, vocab lists, cloze activities you want, with keys. Print them. Read more.
Software allows users to change the difficulty level and presentation style of the output text	Improves engagement by allowing easy differentiation by learning style and readiness	Copy-paste any text passage and "rewordify" it. Click Settings. Change the text presentation style, "rewordifying level" (difficulty level), even the highlighting style. Read more.
Site works as an app on any device, using a minimum of data	Allows for easy district rollout on nearly any existing device while conserving Internet bandwith	Point any device's browser to Rewordify.com and it works like an app. Here's how to make an app icon on your home screen or desktop.
Site calculates accurate text complexity measures, including our exclusive READ score	Improves engagement and learning through the selection of appropriate reading materials	Rewordify any text passage. Click the Stats button. Read more.
Site's browser app (bookmarklet) extracts most web pages to Rewordify.com for learning in one click	Improves engagement and total reading time through independent selection of high-interest materials	Install our free browser app. Browse the web. At any page, click the "Rewordify text" button. Read the extracted text on Rewordify.com.
You can post any document and share it publicly, privately, or with a password	Increases reading time and organization of learning materials	Log in. Paste in a document and "rewordify" it. Click the Share button, share it, and get a link. Post the link to your teacher page. Or, add it as a Rewordify.com assignment. Here's how to post documents. Here's how to create assignments.
Site calculates points and displays Learning Stars based on total minutes read and words learned	Increases reading time and engagement by making the site more fun	Log in and start reading and clicking on the purple bar to do Learning Sessions. Points and Learning Stars will display. Click My Learning/My Documents to see charts of your progress. Read more.
Over 300 pieces of classic literature are available	Improves comprehension of the classics—from Shakespeare to Douglass to Austen	Click Classic literature at the top. Or, type a word like Frankenstein into the search box at the top.
Get started now!

Here's what to do next:

First, do the demo. You'll be an expert in five minutes: Click here for the demo.

Learn the site, step by step. Our First-Time User Guide clearly shows you how to get started.

Teachers: Learn about Educator Central and all it can do to help improve student learning outcomes. Also, you can print lots of free, full-color literature to help you get started in the classroom.

Have some fun. Are you up for a vocabulary challenge? Play Rewordo. Be aware: it's not easy.

Browse some classics. Want to be more sure of Shakespeare, or brush up on Bronte? Scroll to the top, and click the Classic Literature link. It's a fast way to get started using the site. Or, use the Search bar at the top. Try entering the word raven to understand the deal with Poe, that black bird, and the "Nevermore" thing.

Check out the goodies. You can install our One-Click Learning browser applet that lets you rewordify most web pages in one click. Our cool (and free, of course) School Clock tells you the current time and date, what class period you're currently in, countdowns to the next period, and more. You can customize it for any school's schedule, and make as many different School Clocks as you have different day schedules. Use it now.

Show the love! Please tell us about mistakes the site makes when "rewording" and defining words. That feedback is the single most valuable thing you can do to help the site (and learners around the world). Click here to contact us. Do you want to help defray the site's operating costs, and read a great thriller at the same time? You can! Get your copy of Electric Dawn.

Contact us. We want to help you! Please use the Contact page with any questions or comments.




Site summary: Rewordify.com helps with reading comprehension and vocabulary development by simplifying English to a lower reading level. It lets you reword a sentence or reword a paragraph. It will simplify English by reducing text complexity. It's a dictionary alternative that will improve comprehension and teach vocabulary. It's an important part of reading instruction and vocabulary instruction for ESL students, people with reading disabilities, people with a learning disability, or anyone who wants to improve reading skill.

Home About Educator Central Help Center Free Literature Privacy / Terms Word Games One-click Learning Contact Us School Clock Do not sell my personal information



35650 / 8.2
