Title: Controversy in 20th Century Museum Exhibits: A 21st Century Perspective

URL Source: https://digitalcommons.buffalostate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1014&context=museumstudies_theses

Published Time: Thu, 18 Apr 2024 23:22:15 GMT

Markdown Content:
State University of New York College at Buffalo - Buffalo State University State University of New York College at Buffalo - Buffalo State University 

# Digital Commons at Buffalo State Digital Commons at Buffalo State 

Museum Studies Theses  History and Social Studies Education 

5-2017 

# Controversy in 20th Century Museum Exhibits: A 21st Century Controversy in 20th Century Museum Exhibits: A 21st Century 

# Perspective Perspective 

Jennifer K. Weber 

jenniferkweber92@gmail.com 

Advisor Advisor 

Cynthia A. Conides, Ph.D., Associate Professor of History & Social Studies Education, Director of 

Museum Studies 

First Reader First Reader 

Cynthia A. Conides, Ph.D., Associate Professor of History & Social Studies Education, Director of 

Museum Studies 

Second Reader Second Reader 

Nancy Weekly, M.A., Head of Collections at the Burchfield Penney Art Center 

Department Chair Department Chair 

Andrew D. Nicholls, Ph.D. Professor and Chair 

To learn more about the History and Social Studies Education Department and its educational 

programs, research, and resources, go to  http://history.buffalostate.edu/museum-studies-ma .

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 

Weber, Jennifer K., "Controversy in 20th Century Museum Exhibits: A 21st Century Perspective" (2017). Museum Studies Theses . 12. 

https://digitalcommons.buffalostate.edu/museumstudies_theses/12    

> Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.buffalostate.edu/museumstudies_theses
> Part of the Archival Science Commons , and the History Commons

State University of New York 

College at Buffalo 

Department of History and Social Studies Education 

Controversy in 20 th Century Museum Exhibits: 

A 21 st Century Perspective 

A Thesis in 

Museum Studies 

by 

Jennifer Weber 

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 

of the Requirements 

for the Degree of 

Master of Arts 

May 2017 

Approved by: 

Cynthia A . Con ides, Ph .D, Associate Professor, 

Department of Histo ry and Social Studies Education 

Director Museum Studies 

Advisor 

Andrew D. Nicholls, Ph.D. 

Chair and Professor of History and Social Studies Education 

Kevin J. M iller, Ed.D. 

Interim Dean of the Graduate School Weber i

Table of Contents 

Abstract ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... ii 

Acknowledgements ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ iii 

Chapter 1: Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 1

Chapter 2: Literat ure Review ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 4

National Endowment for the Arts “Culture War” ................................ ................................ ....... 4

“Sensation” ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 10 

Chapter 3: The National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) ................................ ............................ 15 

NEA Background ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 15 

Cultural Context ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 17 

The Controversies ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 21 

The Fallout ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ 46 

Modern Point of View of Each Artist ................................ ................................ ....................... 49 

How the Modern Point of View Displays that Changing Culture Changes One’s Views on 

Controversies ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 54 

Chapter 4: “Sensation” ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 59 

“Sensa tion” Background ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 59 

Cultural Context ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 71 

Exhibition in England ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 73 

Exhibition in Brooklyn ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 76 

Effects/Fallout ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 83 

How this Poi nts Out that Two Cultures See Controversy in Different Factors ........................ 89 

Chapter 5: Conclusion and Why All of this Matters ................................ ................................ ..... 91 

Work Cited ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 95 

Figures Cited ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 105 Weber ii 

Abstract 

This paper examines how museums can be impacted by public responses to their exhibits. This 

is accomplished by studying two specific contexts from the late 20 th century : first , observing the 

changes and influences that occurred over a relatively short period of time involving th e National 

Endowment for the Arts funding in the late 1980s, and another compares the social responses to 

the same exhibition , “Sensation” as shown in two different countries. The social and political 

responses to museum exhibits can play a huge role in ho w the exhibits, the museums, and the 

artists are viewed. This can have long -lasting consequences for those involved. Twenty -first 

century museums have a different approach to controversial exhibits than museums of the past 

had. Instead of remaining neutra l or avoiding controversy, twenty -first century museums use 

some exhibits to ensure that social issues remain a topic of discussion. Weber iii 

Acknowledgements 

I would like to take the time to thank both Dr Cynthia Conides and Nancy Weekly for their 

pa tience and ad vice throughout the process of writing this thesis . I know that this would have 

been impossible without their guidance and I am extremely grateful. 

I would also like to thank my family and friends who had to deal with me throughout this 

proc ess. They helped encourage me when I was feeling that this thesis was going nowhere and 

were able to help encourage me to finish it on time. Weber 1

Chapter 1: Introduction 

People love a good controv ersy. The bigger the better. Controversy sparks interest ,

conve rsation, and people normally have strongly held beliefs at stake ; beliefs that in their 

defense fuel the social reactions, the interest , and conversation. We allow ourselves to be 

wrapped up in those events, we allow them to consume our thoughts for a period of time and 

then normally they fade back into the distant past and not thought about again. The fact that 

controversies often fade into relative obscurity means that it is easy to overlook the impact that 

social conte xt plays in what we see as controversial. 

Social context can be very subjective and dependent on time period. C ontinuing that train 

of thought, it should be of no surprise that things that were deemed socially acceptable at one 

point with in one social co ntext might not be seen as acceptable within another . Certain 

dynamics including what pol itical party is in power, the state of the economy, and the social 

movements occurring at a particular time all play a huge role in how people react to the world 

and events around them , often without people even realizing the source of their reaction to a 

certain trigger. People will react differently based on their experiences even if something is 

happening at the same time. So , while one person might react really p ositively to a piece of 

artwork , someone else might react really poorly due to their individual experiences within the 

larger social context. 

Museums are the preservers and presenters of material culture ; as community institutions 

museums often receive public scrutiny and responses to their programming and exhibits. 

Whether displaying ancient cultures for modern audiences or displaying and interpreting modern 

material culture —including art — for a wider audience , museums are open to public perceptions 

and reactions. Museums are not immune to controversy and the public’s changing viewpoints .Weber 2

In fact, museums, can easily find themselves at the heart of a controversy. Therefore , it is 

something that museums need to be aware of and prepared for. Knowin g the controversies that 

have plagued museums in the past and understanding their genesis including the ir social 

contexts , can help museum professionals in identifying potential issues for the future and will 

help them prepare for the potential fallout tha t may come from a publicly generated controversy 

at their institution. 

Museums are often dependent on charitable foundations and individual donors to hel p

cover their everyday costs. Public c ontroversy can act as a threat to that funding . It can also 

spa rk new interest , bringing awareness to the organization and its mission. There is a fine line 

that the organization needs to walk in order to protect its future and remain true to their mission. 

Knowing the factors that have impacted museums in the late 20 th century , the debates and 

cont roversy that have shaped museum s’ interactions with the public can help shape future 

decisions . Funding is always a concern for museums and is probably the item that is most 

vulnerable to controversy. 

Controversy is defined as “a prolonged public dispute, debate, or contention; disputation 

concerning a matter of opinion.” In terms of controversial exhibitions though, this dictionary 

definition isn’t necessarily sufficient. Controversial exhibitions tend to evoke strong emotions 

and often spirited conversation. They can include strong subject matter or be seen as 

exploitative. Finally, some controversial exhibitions are frank, even confrontational. 

Responses to c ontroversy can also come in many forms. It ca n be as simple as a bad 

review from a visitor to an exhibition or it can be a national or international news story. The size 

of the controversy depends on a number of factors, often depen ding on the social climate and the 

persons involved . This is not to say that there is not a level of predictability that can be found in Weber 3

many museum controversies , but often this prediction is fa r easier to see after the fact . There can 

be times when museums adapt to changing societal norms in a way that is preemptive to any 

serious controversy and , of course , that would always be ideal for an institution , but this relies on 

the institution to recognize the c ultural changes that are headed their way with enough time to 

prepare and adapt. 

Using examples from the late 20 th century , it is possible to track the social factors that 

lead to museum controversies and the impact that these controversies had on all that were 

involved. The National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) controversy of the late 1980s and early 

1990s is one suc h moment where a changing society clashed with the more conservative political 

establishment . In that particular case , because of the way that the NEA is funded, as well as the 

social and political issues at play , this controversy reached c ongressional de bate , becoming 

dubbed by the media as a ‘Culture War ’. This is an example of cultural context blowing a 

situation out o f proportion. Another controversy surrounds the “Sensation: Young British Artists 

of the Saatchi Collection ” exhibition , which was show n in London’s Royal Academy in 199 7

and then later in New York City’s Brooklyn Museum in 1999. In this case, there is one 

exhibition that was shown in two different cultural contexts. In each, it drew controversy , but for 

different reasons . Both examples had an impact on both the lives of the artists involved and the 

institutions involved. Weber 4

Chapter 2: Literature Review 

National Endowment for the Arts “Culture War” 

With the NEA controversy, there was a lot that needs to be unpacked. There are political 

and religious pressure s, a changing level of acceptance for certain individuals in society, and a 

renewed focus on how the arts were being funded and what those artists were making. The 

understanding of those cultural factors has changed over ti me as American society has gained 

perspective in the years since. 

The broader scope surrounding controversy in American art is well represented in the 

literature. The first is entitled Visual Shock: A History of Art Controversies in American Culture 

by Mi chael Kammen. Kammen is the Newton C . Farr Professor of American History and 

Culture at Cornell University. He is also the past president of the Organization of American 

Historians and an author and editor; and a Pulitzer Prize winning author. This book is focused 

on the controversies of the art world in the U.S. throughout its history. It gives a broad range of 

examples and has a great amount of discussion about why a particular exhibition or piece of art 

would ha ve been considered controversial at any given time. Everything from the Vietnam War 

Memorial to public murals were covered with each example described in its social context and 

greater place in American history. Some examples were shown in terms of a time range, since 

there were certain times in American history where art controversy was more common. Others 

were grouped by topic ; so , if a researcher is looking for a certain controversy , it is easily found. 

Kammen points out that the role of art has changed in American society by becoming 

inc reasingly public and diverse. He shows that the role of public monuments and art has 

changed from the traditions of honoring the past with relatively non -confrontational images to 

more modern incarnations where the artists and funders took greater risks. It is also shown that Weber 5

regardless of the images and placement , there is always some level of controversy that is found 

with public art. Generally, this book is a good introduction to the controversy in the art world 

and a good place to start. 1

The book Suspended License: Censorship and the Visual Arts edited by Dr. Elizabeth 

Childs also look ed at a wide range of examples. Childs teaches Art History at Washington 

University in St . Louis. The articles complied in this book are from a session Dr. Childs’ chaired 

at the 1991 annual meeting of the College Art Association in hopes to generate discussion and 

provide a brief overview of the issue of censorship throughout history. With this range of topics 

reaching all the way back to the reformation , there is a wide range of information available. 

However, in terms of this thesis , the last article written by Steve n C. Dubin, an associate 

professor of sociology at SUNY Purchase College , is the one that is the most relevant , since it 

was the only article that fo cused on even a part of the NEA controversy. With the focus of this 

book being on censorship over controversy , it is relevant to define the difference between those 

terms. Controversy is the reaction to an event that results in two or more sides that are both 

public and prolonged. Censorship has the goal of preventing something from being seen, read, or 

heard; which is often a part of controversy as one side of the issue pushes for that goal. 2

In terms of controversies related specifically to the NEA in th e late 1980s and early 

1990s , there is a distinct bias in the literature toward one artist in particular: Robert 

Mapplethorpe . There is a huge focus on the Mapplethorpe part of that controversy , quite 

possibly because his post humous exhibition “The Perfect Moment” was brought to court along 

with the Contemporary Arts Center (CAC) in Cincinnati during the larger NEA controversy.        

> 1Michael G. Kammen, Visual Shock: A History of Art Controversies in American Culture .(New York:
> Vintage Books, 2007.
> 2Elizabeth C. Childs, Suspended License: Censorship and the Visual Arts .(Seattle: A Samuel & Althea
> Stroum Book, 1998. ), 366 -385

Weber 6

That is not to say that there isn’t other research to be found surrounding the other artists such as 

Andres Serrano; and the NEA Four: Karen Finley, Holly Hughes, Tim Miller, and John Fleck 

and the controversy as a whole ; but this research is harder to find online. There are a few new 

articles that could be found online , but overall there is much less research easily ava ilable for 

these topics. In terms of a timeline for the NEA controversy and its artists , Andres Serrano was 

the artist that sparked the NEA controversy with “The Perfect Moment” and the debate followed 

with Mapplethorpe and the NEA Four acting as the caps tone s to this particular controversy. 

The book Interpreting LGBT History at Museums and Historic Places as a whole is an 

amazing book and was really helpful in providing some of the social context needed for 

understanding the controversies that developed around most of the artists involved in the NEA 

controversy. The controversy itself was never mentioned in this book , but the social issues that 

these artists lived with and dealt with were present. Much of the NEA controversy had a 

LGBTQA 3 influence eith er through the artistic subject matter or the artist s’ particular sexual 

identities and this book was able to provide some much needed historical context surrounding the 

events leading up to and including this controversy .4

Leaving Town Alive: Confession s of an Arts Warrior by John Frohnmayer had a great 

personal perspective on the NEA controversies and gave a great history into the NEA . Seeing all 

of this through the eyes of the man who was used as a scapegoat for these controversies was a 

very interest ing perspective because it showed quite clearly the impact of politics on this event. 

It also has the feel of a person who is trying to save their reputation by publishing their memoirs .       

> 3LQBTQA = Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer/Questioning, Asexual/Aromantic/Ally
> 4Susan Ferentinos, "Chapter 6: We're Here, We're Queer, Get Used to It: Mid -1960s to United States v.
> Windsor (2013)." In Interpreting LGBT History at Museums and Hist oric Sites ,(Interpreting History. Lanham:
> Rowman & Littlefield, 2015. ), 75 -98 .

Weber 7

This is telling in and of itself, suggesting that the controversy had such staying power and made a 

deep impact on those involved in it. 5

The usefulness of Richard Bolton’s Culture Wars: Documents from the R ecent 

Controversies in the Arts , published in 1992 cannot be overstated. Bolton is an arti st, writer, and 

associate professor and chairperson of the Department of Art Studio at the University of 

California, Santa Barbra. His work addresses social issues including mass media, popular 

culture, democratic participation and the social functions of art. It was a collection of documents 

from both sides of the argument displaying the NEA controversy in a comprehensive and mostly 

unbiased way. He did fall on one side of the argument that he mention ed in the introduction , but 

he also explained that he was going to be sure to include the other argument as much as possible 

to ensure that the reader got the full story. Bolton’s work makes everything easier because it 

places the arguments in temporal order and allows for a great amount of information to be found 

in one place. This book also included a timeline which was extremely helpful in putting all of 

these events into order; something that would have been extremely difficult without this source .6

The legal dictionary was extremely useful to find the Congressional legal statues that were 

referenced, but were not found in Bolton’s book. 7

The book Federalizing the Muse while in theory was very helpful with its history of the 

NEA , in reality was far from it. I t had only the barest information about the controversy that 

surrounded the NEA and even less on the modern implications on the endowment. The focus of 

this book was more on the early years of the NEA and the founding of the organization, losing its           

> 5John Frohnmayer, Leaving Town Alive: Confessions of an Arts Warrior .(Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
> 1993. )6Richard Bolton, Culture Wars: Documents from the Recent Controversies in the Arts .(New York: New
> Press, 1997. )
> 7"Miller v. California ,"The Free Dictionary . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://legal -
> dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Miller v. California.

Weber 8

detail when it reached the events of the 1980s , which is odd for a book published in 2004. The 

author of this book was Donna M. Binkiewicz a professor of history at California State 

University, Long Beach. According to her , she does not follow the history into the controversies 

because her focus is on the political and social reasoning for creating the NEA in response to the 

Cold War and President Ronald Rea gan’s cuts in 1980 at the end of the Cold War that mark a 

change in the reasoning behind the endowment and a change in the federal support for the a rts. 

Her tone in this section alludes to another section of the NEA history starting at that point , thus 

concluding her historical focus .8

Andr es Serrano was the first artist whose work came under fire during the late 1980s. 

Even though it was his work th at sparked this controversy and he is still an active artist today 

there is very limited information available surrounding his place at the start of the ‘Culture War.’ 

Serrano’s early history was hard to find and even finding some articles about his curre nt work 

was difficult. There were some biographies about him available online , mostly as previews for 

his more modern exhibits. Artnet’s biography was rather short focusing primarily on the pieces 

that had drawn the most attention throughout Serrano’s care er. 9 The International Center of 

Photography had more detail about Serrano’s career , but still focuses over half of the rather short 

biography on Piss Christ. 10 The RoGallery had the most detailed version of Serrano’s 

biography, with this being the only v ersion to address Serrano’s early life, which had a large 

influence on his later works. 11 His website had a biography which showed that he was active in              

> 8Donna M. Binkiewicz ,Federalizing the Muse: United States Arts Policy and the National Endowment for
> the Arts, 1965 -1980 .(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004. ) Page 5
> 9"Andres Serrano," Andres Serrano Biography –Andres Serrano on artnet. Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.artnet.com/artists/andres -serrano/biography.
> 10 "Andres Serrano," International Center of Photography . (March 02, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017.
> https://www.icp.org/browse/archive/constituents/andres -serrano?all%2Fall%2Fall%2Fall%2F0.
> 11 "A ndres Serrano –Biography," RoGallery . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://rogallery.com/Serrano_Andres/Andres_Serrano -Biography.html.

Weber 9

the art world after this exhibition , but there was little anywhere about his opinion surrounding the 

co ntroversy . Unlike “The Perfect Moment ,” his piece Piss Christ did not generate books upon 

books, and countless articles on the topic. 12 He seemed to have put the NEA controversy behind 

him and chose not to comment on it during future interviews. 

Robert Ma pplethorpe overall has drawn much attention from art critics and historians. In 

terms of looking at the exhibition “The Perfect Moment” and Robert Mapplethorpe in particular, 

the work of Deborah A. Levinson is a good place to start. While she was a student at 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) at the time, graduating in 1991 with her degree in 

creative writing, 13 her article, “Robert Mapplethorpe’s Extraordinary Vision ,” held a very 

complete description of the exhibition and i t was well written. Most of the articles written by 

other authors only focused or mentioned the photographs that later became the center of the 

controversy. It was rather surprising to realize that the most complete list would not be found in 

the books on the controversy. Levinson also provided a context for the Washington Project for 

the Arts in context of Washington, D.C. which is something that was very useful, especially if 

one is not familiar with the D.C. art scene. 14 

Playing with the Edge: The Ph otographic Achievement of Robert Mapplethorpe by 

Arthur C. Danto originally was just an article on the artist and the show The Perfect Moment ;

however, this article ended up becoming a book about his work that analyz ed the influences                 

> 12 "ANDRES SERRANO, "ANDRES SERRANO . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://andresserrano.org/Bio.htm.
> 13 Deborah Levinson, "Goodbye, MIT. Hello, World. -The Tech," The Tech -Online Edition. (June 1,
> 1992). Accessed April 30, 2017. http://tech.mit.edu/V112/N27/levinson.27o.html.
> 14 Deborah A .Levinson, "Robert Mapp lethorpe's extraordinary vision, "The Tech -Online Edition ,(August
> 6, 1989 ). http://tech.mit.edu/V110/N31/mapple.31a.html.

Weber 10 

behind the work and it s effects on the greater community. 15 Finally, there were a number of 

articles that were found that will be used to look at the continued posthumous exhibits of 

Mapplethorpe and how he and his work is currently perceived in the United States .

The NEA Four were the last group of artists involved in the ‘Culture Wars ,’ but 

information about them in relation to the controversy was difficult to find. Holly Hughes, Karen 

Finley, Tim Miller and John Fleck were each vocal before the controversy about their topics of 

choice. Tim Miller and Holly Hughes were extremely active during the controversy , but 

information about the others was sparse r. This continue d after the controversy as well with 

biographical information primarily focused on the work that they ha d created in recent years ,

which made finding their perspectives on the controversy difficult. 

“Sensation” 

Another aspect of this paper examines the Young British Artists from the Charles Saatchi 

Collection’s exhibition “Sensation.” The phrase “Young Bri tish Artists” refers to the artists 

involved in this controversy , but more broadly to a group of artists from Britain that were known 

for their shocking subjects, entrepreneurial attitude toward art, and their openness to different 

materials and processes. This term was used not only to describe them , but as a title and a way to 

market them and their art. 16 This exhibition drew ire on both sides of the Atlantic for completely 

different reasons. It exemplifies the notion that social context has a n impact on whether and why 

an exhibition is perceived as controversial. Even after it was controversial in the U.K. the 

Brooklyn Museum of Art still broug ht the exhibition to the U.S. I n fact , the museum almost          

> 15 Arthur C. Danto, and Robert Mapplethorpe, Playing with the edge: the photographic achievement of
> Robert Mapplethorpe .(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. )
> 16 Tate, "Young British Artists (Y BAs) –Art Term," Tate .. http://www.tate.org.uk/art/art -terms/y/young -
> british -artists -ybas .Accessed April 30, 2017

Weber 11 

encouraged the possibility of controversy via their ma rketing. 17 As with the NEA exhibition ,

there is a bias in the research available on this topic. There is more research available focusing 

on the Brooklyn Museum and the controversy that developed ther e, especially in terms of books, 

than there is surrounding the London controversy. This search had to extend pretty deep ly into 

newspaper archives to find the articles that were published during the exhibition .

The first book used for this section is the exhibition book aptly titled Sens ation: Young 

British Artists from the Saatchi Collection published as an exhibition catalog whe n the exhibition 

opened in the UK in 1997. The authors involved with this book were Norman Rosenthal, Richard 

Shone, Martin Maloney, Brook s Adams, and Lisa Jardi ne. Norman Rosenthal is the Exhibitions 

Secretary of the Royal Academy of Arts and had been since 1974. Richard Shone is an author 

and associate editor of The Burlington Magazine and was on the jury for the Turner Prize in1987 

and the purchasing committee for the Arts Council Collection between 1994 and 1996. Martin 

Maloney is an artist, critic and curator. He writes for Art Forum and Flash Art and lectures in 

fine art at Goldsmiths College, University of London. Brook s Adams is a Contributing Editor of 

Art in America. Lisa Jardine is a professor of Renaissance Studies at Queen Mary and Westfield 

College, University of London, and an Honorary Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. The vast 

majority of this work was focused on the imag es from the exhibition , but there was a section 

with articles in the first section of the book . These articles explained how they were hoping the 

exhibition would be seen ; but overall, they lacked much substance in terms of debate and 

discussion of the possibl y differen t views surrounding the exhibition . The authors did not seem 

concerned about the works and the exhibition being seen in a different light than the relatively 

positive views that they proposed. With artwork that was being marketed as being nontraditional    

> 17 Lawrence Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation: Arts -Policy Lessons from the Brooklyn Museum of Art
> Controversy . (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Uni versity Press, 2001)

Weber 12 

and shocking , it should have been assumed that there could be some who would not see the 

exhibition in such a positive light. 18 

Art & Outrage: Provocation , Controversy and the Visual Arts written by John A. Walker 

in 1999 give s some sense of the context be hind the British side of the “Sensation” controversy. 

Walker is Reader in Art and Design History at Middlesex University and an author of numerous 

books on art and popular culture. This book is focused on British art controversies from the late 

1940s unt il the 1990s so it covers a large amount of history. It has articles in it about three of the 

Young British Artists or their works; Damien Hirst, Dinos and Jack Chapman, and Marcus 

Harvey’s Myra . Since most of the other articles or books that can be foun d about this exhibition 

are primarily focused on the United States ’ side of the controversy , Walker’s volume was a 

valuable resource to convey another, greatly needed perspective. 19 

Unsettling Sensation: Arts -Policy Lessons from the Brooklyn Museum of Art Controversy 

edited by Lawrence Rothfield and published in 2001 centers on the United States. It gives only a 

cursory mention of the controversy in England , as reflected in the title. It is a compilation of 

different articles written for the “Taking Funds, Giving Offense, Making Money” Conference in 

Chicago on February 12, 2000 organized by the Cultural Policy Program at the University of 

Chicago . The contributors included: Carol Becker, Homi K. Bhabha, John Brewer, James Cuno, 

Gilbert S. Edelson Esq . Teri J. Edelstein, Richard A. Epstein, David Halle, D. Carroll Joynes, 

W.J.T. Mitchell, Stephen B. Presser, Kimberly Rorschach, David A. Ross, Lawrence Rothfield, 

J. Mark Schuster, Geoffrey R. Stone, David A. Strauss, Cass R. Sunstein, Andr ás Sz ánt ó,        

> 18 Brooks Adams, Johnnie Shand Kydd, and Norman Rosenthal, Sensation: Young British Artists from the
> Saatchi Collection ; Junge Britische K ü nstler aus der Sammlung Saatchi. Brooks Adams, Lisa Jardine, Martin
> Maloney, Norman Rosenthal, Richard Shone (Ostfildern: Cantz, 1998.)
> 19 John A Walker, Art & Outrage: Provoc ation, Controversy and the Visual Arts . (London: Pluto Press,
> 1999.)

Weber 13 

Eli sabeth Tiso, and Gihon Yi. This list is overwhelmingly comprised of college professors with 

some museum professionals or former museum professionals further rounding it out . Some 

articles were very clear and easy to understand the argument that they were attempting to 

explain . Other articles were hard to understand; the authors talked in circles, making their point s

hard to find or comprehend . The most useful articles were Carol Becker’s “The Brooklyn 

Controversy: A View from the Bridge,” J. Mark Schuste r’s “Who Should Pay (for the Arts and 

Culture)? Who Should Decide? And What Difference Should it Make?,” David A. Ross’s “An 

All -Too -Predictable Sensation,” Teri J. Edelstein’s “Sensational or Status Quo: Museums and 

Public Perception,” David Halle, Elisab eth Tiso, and Gihong Yi’s “The Attitude of the Audience 

for ‘Sensation’ and of the General Public toward Controversial Works of Art,” and James 

Cuno’s “Sensation’ and the Ethics of Funding Exhibitions.” Overall , most of the authors have a

rather similar point of view. Most felt that there was far too much media attention given to this, 

the governor should not be able to remove the state funding after it had already been promised, 

and the BMA mishandled how they went about funding this exhibition and the m edia. The vast 

majority stood behind the BMA , despite some feeling that the museum had made some mistakes. 

This work is acceptable if one is researching the U.S. perspective , but it is not the most well -

rounded discussion of the controversy. 20 

Each of th e Young British Artists, at least those that had drawn controversy and debate, 

have a presence online. There are interviews, biographies, modern works, and websites all that 

helped provide information about their current projects and work since the “Sensa tion” 

exhibition . As a whole they have been very forthcoming with their history, helping give some   

> 20 Lawrence Rothfield, Unsettling "Sensation": Arts -Policy Lessons from the Brooklyn Museum of Art
> Controversy . (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2001.)

Weber 14 

context as to how and why they create the art that they do and their opinions about the media 

attention that “Sensation” gave them. Weber 15 

Chapter 3 : The National Endowment for the Arts ( NEA )

The arts and funding for the arts have never been an easy discussion in America. Most of 

the country believes that there should be funding for the arts , but they often have very specific 

ideas as to what the arts ar e and which arts and artists should be funded. 21 There is also the 

question as to where the funding should be coming from, whether it should solely be through 

private donations and commissions , or if there should be a government funding source . This 

discu ssion then morphs into the question of what types of influence should the government have 

on the artists and organizations that it funds. 

America n politics has a huge impact on the lives of its citizens, including the funding for 

the arts. Those politi cs also gets intertwined with other aspects of American life such as 

religious ideas and is influenced by public opinion which in turn has its own set of influences 

including the media. In the late 1980s and early 1990s all of these influences combined to create 

a storm that is dubbed by the media a “Culture War” and results in a drastic change in how 

America funds the arts. 

NEA Background 

The National Endowment for the Ar ts has found itself at the heart of a lot of controversy 

throughout its existence , prima rily because it is a government funded organization that is not 

under direct control of a governmental body like Congress and is focused on the arts . The NEA 

was established in 1965 along with t he Nation al Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), in 

respon se to the Red Scare. Politicians saw the rise of Communism and what they perceived as 

the rising Communist sentiment in modern art as a threat to American ideals so they wanted to    

> 21 Kammen, Visual Shock 348 -349, 383.

Weber 16 

use these organizations to promote American ideals in the arts. 22 The Natio nal Endowment fo r

the Arts did this in two ways by creating policies to promote the arts and by funding grants to 

ensure that those policies were followed. Their support was not limit ed to one form of art or 

school; it was only based on artistic excellenc e. This support could be directed at individual 

artists, arts organizations , and communitie s as long as they were promoting art in some way and 

they met the criteria of excellence. 23 Their determination of what was considered excellence had 

nothing to do with the government though. Once they created the organization , politicians did 

not make the de cisions on who or what to fund; those decisions were made by the NEA itself, as 

the American government was only involved to provide the funding. This funding has been 

invaluable to hundr eds of artists across the U.S. and gave many people the support that they 

needed to start their careers. 24 Thanks to the NEA the art world was thriving and individuals 

who might not have been funded through traditional means were being supported. Gay, straight, 

black, white, men, and women creating all different art forms were being supported and making 

names for th emselves on a national stage. They were funded a s long as it could be argued that 

they were the best, that their work had meaning , and it was important , they were funded. 25 This 

means that the NEA wasn’t immune to controversy t hough. Over time the NEA has funded 

works and artists that the public did not agree s hould ha ve been funded and it had always 

weathered the storm , but in the 1980s that changed. In the late 1980s a controversy developed 

that would become known as a “Culture War, ” between Congress and the NEA and it would 

shake the NEA to its core.         

> 22 Binkiewicz, Federalizing the Muse , 1 -75, 162.
> 23 Ibid., 157.
> 24 Frohnmayer, Leaving Town Alive , 10 -11.
> 25 Binkiewicz, Federalizing the Muse , 192.

Weber 17 

Cultur al Context 

The time period leading up to the NEA controversy was filled with huge changes in the 

cultural landscape of America. New voices were being heard and this was creating rising 

tensions. That combined with the new changes in societal values crea ted a perfect storm for 

controversy as the opinions of the old culture clashed with the ideals of the new culture. These 

controversies started in 1989 and the end of this part of the NEA ’s history was in 1993 with the 

NEA Four settling out of court . The context leading up to these events had a major impact on 

the causes of the NEA controversy. 

During the lead up to 1989 , there was a sexual rev olution, the arts reached a new high in 

America, the homosexual r ights movements gained traction as did the “Save Our Children” 

campaign did too, and the AIDS crisis cost thousands of lives. America also reached a new 

heigh t in open -mindedness, for some topics. For example , in 1990 surveys asking if “sexual 

poses in art are pornographic” only received a 36% ag reement rate. A nother inquiring if , “nudity 

in art is usually pornographic” got a low 18% agreement rate. 26 These numbers would suggest 

that there was a broadminde dness directed to art that displayed the nude form, but it would 

quickly be refuted . As the events of 1989 and beyond gained traction it became obvious that the 

numbers seen in these surveys are not the whole story. 

The art world leading up to the events of 1989 not only featur ed more diverse voices ;

artists no longer shied away from making poli tical statement s. These were people who had 

lived through a very tumultuous and politically chaotic time period. They saw how well protests 

worked for the Civil Rights movement and made their opinions known about the Vietnam War. 

These were individuals who were unafraid to let their opinions be known , many times through   

> 26 Kammen, Visual Shock , 78,83.

Weber 18 

their artwork, using new techniques, and expressing new ideas. T hese were all increasingly 

prevalent in the art world of the 1980s while being supported both publicly through the N EA and 

privately through collectors. This truly was creating a unique art scene leading up to 1989. 27 

Contiguously, t he sexual revolution sparked in the 1960s by the population growth of 

baby boomers reaching college age and flying the nest, consisted of many w ho bucked against 

the traditions of their parents and made their own way in the world by becoming socially active .

The baby boomers leaving home helped spark a change in the American moral culture, bringing 

countercultures and grassroots political activis m to the forefront. People took to the streets, 

raising their voices in protest against the injustice that they saw in the world around them. They 

protested the Vietnam W ar and ma rched with Civil Rights leaders and they discussed these 

issue s on college campus es and in the streets. A ctivism was very much alive and present among 

this age group. This activism wasn’t limited to politics though, it also was taking on social 

issues. During the ‘60 ’s the homophile movement, was gaining momentum. This moveme nt was 

focused on promoting the fair treatment of homosexual peoples and increasing awareness of the 

discrimin ation that the group was facing and was a precursor to what is seen now as the 

LGBTQ A movement . Across the country activism was gaining more and more of a foothold in 

the American culture. 28 

Before 1969 the homophile movement’s main focus was to maintain privacy and to free 

what are now called LGBT individuals from the harassment that they face every day .29 It gave a 

sense of community to a group of people who had to hide a significant part of themselves in 

order to make it through the day. The se individuals , if revealed , faced police harassment, being           

> 27 Kammen, Visual Shock, 170 -180.
> 28 Ferentinos, Chapter 6: We're Here, We're Queer, Get Used to It ,76.
> 29 Ferentinos, Chapter 5: Creating Communities, 66 -70.

Weber 19 

kicked out from their homes, losing their jobs , and gene ral hatred . If not out , a person always 

feared the chance that someone could expose you, so many had to hide a part of themselves .

This was an exceptionally difficult existence , but the movement as well as the few b ars that 

catered to these in dividuals h elped make it more bearable. The homophile movement also was 

slowly helping raise awareness of those individuals ; but this was far from mainstream, far from 

something that everyone knew about. That changed rather suddenly in 1969 as the dam finally 

broke . The Stonewall Riot or the “unorganized protests against police harassment” 30 were 

sparked by the community fed up with the police harassment of LGBT -friendly establishments. 

This was not the first riot , but it was the one that gained the most publicity. It helped unite the 

different communities under one banner helping to create a louder voice for reform. The 

homophile movement’s goal changed as well because of this . No longer were they working on 

maintaining privacy ; now the focus was to help create a sense of pride in their orientation and to 

start to challenge the traditional view of sexual morality. These changes to the goal continued 

long after the homophile movement disbanded and were taken up in the new movements and 

groups that formed. Over the years this continued to gain traction and more and more visibility ,

but this progress was not linear. 

The “Save Our Children” campaign and the AIDS crisis that followed set back the 

progress that these LGBT movements had gained in many ways. The “Sa ve Our Children” 

campaign had been sparked by a law that was implemented in 1977, in Dade County, Florida, to 

prevent gay and lesbian discrimination. The “Save Our Children” campaign with their organizer, 

singer and spokesperson Anita Bryant , were working to g et this law repealed. She was opposed 

to LGBT persons gaining protections and having positive representation. This antigay    

> 30 Ferentinos, Chapter 6: We're Here, We're Queer, Get Used to It ,79.

Weber 20 

organization equated homosexuality with childhood molestation and used this incorrect 

association to lobby agains t the LGBT community. This organization gained traction with the 

religious right and helped launch a discourse that reached into the 1980s that promoted 

conservative Christian morals as opposition to the LGBT community. This event helped solidify 

the issu es of sex and sexuality as problems that polarized American politics. 31 

The AIDS crisis of the 1980s did not help this discussion in the slightest. With the 

disease disproportionally affecting gay men , it helped strengthen the hatred, fear, and revulsion 

that the “Save Our Children” campaign was promoting. This , combined with the glacial 

response by the government, even going as far as mocking those who would bring it up in press 

conferences at a presidential level; resulted in a colossal amount of misin formation. This in turn 

allowed for a stereotype to be born that AIDS was a “gay” disease helping lead to widespread 

victim blaming. There were many people who would say that if those infected had not been gay 

or been taking part in ‘amoral’ behaviors , th ey would not have died from this disease. They 

equated it with suicide. “By 1990, 31,129 people had died from AIDS in the United States.” 32 

This exponentially high number included Robert Mapplethorpe, an openly gay artist who died of 

AIDS in March of 1989 , whose work would soon find itself in the middle of the “Culture War ”

being waged against the NEA . The arts , however , did not stay silent when it came to this 

tragedy. I nstead the lives and fates of those affected by the disease were becoming inspiratio n

for plenty of artworks done both out of mourning and out of protest. These artworks and their 

artists would find themselves facing their own level of controversy separate from that faced by 

the artists involved in the NEA controversy.       

> 31 Ferentinos, Chapter 6: We’re Here, We’re Queer, Get Used to It, 84 –86.
> 32 Ferentinos, 86 -87.

Weber 21 

All of this was exacerbated by a more cons ervative government, both in Congress and in 

the White House. As America n politics were rolling back toward a more conservative stance, 

this meant that the individuals who were funded by NEA grants that did not fit conservative 

ideals were going to be under more scrutiny . S o would the NEA itself. Conservatives both in 

Washington D.C. and around the country were not afraid to make their voices heard and they 

knew how to do it. Letters to national newspapers, boycotts, protest marches , and finally 

bringing artwork and artists to the attention of Congress were all tools that were used to incite 

outrage against whatever did not fit the conservative ideal. They were questioning what their 

taxpayer money was being used for and argued that the arts were not necessarily a priority 

anymore. T his came a head on April 5 th 1989 when Andres Serrano’s work was brought before 

Congress by Senator Alfonse D’Amato and Senator Jesse Helms as an example of what is wrong 

with the NEA ; thereby starting what was dubbed in 

the media as a “Culture War.” 33 

The Controversies 

The controversy that sparked a “C ulture 

War ” against the NEA and what a rtists were funded 

was a c entered on the artist Andres Serrano and his 

work title d Piss Christ. (Figure 1) Serrano was a 

photographer working mainly out of New York. He 

wa s born in 1950 in New York City, an on ly child of 

a Honduran immigrant father and Af ro -Cuban      

> 33 Bolton, Culture Wars , 343.
> Figure 1Piss Christ Andres Serrano (1987)

Weber 22 

mother. His fam ily, as well as his surrounding community were primarily Catholic . This had a 

lasting impact on his life and career. Andres’ father left when he was young and his mother was 

hospitalized on numerous occasions throughout his youth . He left high school at 15 to pursue art ,

but later a ttended the Brooklyn Museum Art School from 1967 until 1969. 34 His art career was 

put on hold due to drugs; he quit that life at age 28 and worked a variety of odd jobs. 35 During 

this time, Serrano decided to get involved in art again. Not confid ent in his painting or sculpting 

abilities he ch ose to use photography as his medium. Photography is what made him famous. 

Se rrano is well -known for his large -scale photographs often including religious symbolism ,

influenced by his childhood . He does not use digital retouching on any of his photographs ,

instead letting the photograph s appear as they were. 36 Serrano is probably best known for the 

use of bodily fluids in his art including blood, semen, and urine; and comb in ing them with 

religious imagery. This practice drew some public ire in the past ; yet, he was still seen as an 

accomplished artist and he was awarded an NEA grant in 1987 and then later in 1989. 

Having been cho sen as a contributing artist by the Southeastern Center f or Contemporary 

Art (SECCA) in Winston -Salem, North Carolina as a part of a juried show, Serrano chose to 

display one of the images titled Piss Christ . Piss Christ is a photograph of a plastic cruci fix said 

to be submerged in urine. Without the title this work would not have garnered any controversy ,

but thanks to the inflammatory title , the image was placed in a national spotlight . Serrano had 

intended the work to be “A statement against commercia lized Christianity ;” but that was not how           

> 34 "ANDRES SERRANO," ANDRES SERRANO . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://andresserrano.org/Bio.htm.
> 35 "Andres Serrano –Biography," RoGallery . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://rogallery.com/Serrano_Andres/Andres_Serrano -Biography .html.
> 36 "Andres Serrano," Andres Serrano Biography –Andres Serrano on artnet. Accessed April 8,
> 2017. http://www.artnet.com/artists/andres -serrano/biography.

Weber 23 

it was seen by a section of the American public , including members of Congress. 37 Le d by 

Reverend Don ald Wildmon , the executive director of the American Family Association ; Senator 

Jesse Hel ms (Republican) from North Carolina ; and Senator Alfonse D’Amato (Republican) 

from New York , this opinion quickly morphed into a media controversy . Their main argument 

was that this piece and any like it were indecent and should not be supported by the gove rnment 

and the artist should not have been supported by the NEA . They claimed that this was anti -

religion, a sign of bigotry and bias against Christians, blasphemous, and both insulting and 

offensive to the American people whose tax dollars were being use d to fund the exhibition . As 

to why this piece was offensive , they felt that it didn’t really need further explanation other than 

the title and they felt that there was no reason for this piece to have ever been publicly funded or 

for that matter shown in publicly funded institutions. 38 

Rev. Donald Wil dmon was the director of the American Family Association , a religious 

organization dedicated to a “pro family” stance using a strict interpretation of the bible. Rev. 

Wildmon founded the organization in 197 7 in Mississippi and the organization claims to have 

“been on the front lines of America’s culture war” since then. 39 In a letter written April 5 th 1989 ,

he said that there had been a strong anti -Christian sentiment in the media for the decade or more 

before “Piss Christ” and this was the final straw, alluding to the idea that if this so -called 

persecution would be allowed to continue it would lead to physical persecution, further inflaming 

the debate. 40 These debates would use similar language to perpetuate the myth that the NEA was 

full of immoral persons who were working against the conservative agenda for American                

> 37 Frohnmayer, Leaving Town Alive, 34.
> 38 Bolton, Culture Wars 27 -31.
> 39 "Our Mission ,"AFA.net -Our Mission. https://www.afa.net/who -we -are/our -mission/. Accessed May 02,
> 2017 40 Bolton, Culture Wars, 27.

Weber 24 

Culture. Senators Helms and D’Amato on May 18 th of that year presented a letter to the Senate 

and the n to Mr. Hugh Southern , the head of the NEA at the time , claiming that this artist should 

never have been paid $15,000 for the work as a part of the SECCA exhibition and should never 

have been supported by the NEA They claimed that the work was a mockery of the American 

taxpayer and used the comments that had been sent to them by some of their constituents to back 

up their outrage. 41 

Other Senators including Senator Slade Gordon, a Republican from Washington State ,

backed up Helms and D’Amato, saying that he thought that the museum that supported Serrano 

should be deprived of funding for five years because while it was Serrano’s righ t to make and 

display this work, the support given to him through the SECCA and NEA displayed a 

discrimination against a reli gion. He felt that regardless of the fact that there is no national 

religion , the government could not support one faith over others and they could not propose to 

support the discrimination of a religion. 42 The public began contacting their representative s with 

support both for and against the NEA and there were continuing circular debates on the 

Congressional floor around what should be done about this ‘ rogue’ government funded 

organization. 

Between the public backlash fueled by Congressional support , th e NEA was already in 

trouble and the controversy was only just starting. Following Piss Christ was an exhibition that 

continued and strengthened the controversy surrounding the NEA . That exhibition which 

opened in December of 1988 and gained infamy in 19 89 was “The Perfect Moment” , a

posthumously displayed exhibition of Robert Mapplethorpe’s work.      

> 41 Bolton, Culture Wars, 28 -31.
> 42 Ibid, 33 -37.

Weber 25 

Robert Mapplethorpe was an openly gay artist and photographer, who lived from 1949 

until 1989 when he died of complications from HIV/AIDS. Mapplethorpe’s pho tography 

included celebrity portraits, self -portraits, flowers, sculpture, and portraits of children, women, 

and men. In theory , nothing on that list would draw the ire of those protesting the NEA there are 

other factors that need to be considered. Many of his portraits of men and women included at 

least partial nudity; some works d isplayed homosexual and/or interracial relationships; some of 

the images of men focused on the genitals and the most unorthodox were a number of images 

that unapologetically displayed elements of the BDSM (Bondage and Discipline, Domination 

and Submission, Sadism and Masochism) lifestyle and culture. Mapplethorpe was an active 

participant in this kind of sexual activity until his HIV/AIDS diagnosis , so he did not see these 

pieces as being controversial or problematic. Many people claimed that his work was purely 

pornographic and lacked any “redeeming social value” that would remove it from that definition ,

but Mappletho rpe challenged that view by saying : “I think it could be pornography and still have 

redeeming social value. It can be both, which is my whole point in doing it — to have all the 

elements of pornography and yet have a structure of lighting that makes it go beyond what it 

is.” 43 Art historian Arthur C. Danto claims that Mapplethorpe was not unaware of the criticisms 

of his work during his lifetime ; he just didn’t care about th em .44 While alive, h e pushed the 

envelope , yet avoided any serious controversy. This is probably because Mapplethorpe’s 

photographs were and are technically perfection . The composition and light ing put his work on a 

level that many other photographers strive to reach. Even today his work is immediately    

> 43 Arthur C. Danto, and Robert Mapplethorpe, Playing with the edge: the photographic achievement of
> Robe rt Mapplethorpe . (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.) 89 -90.
> 44 Ibid.

Weber 26 

recognizable; Britt Salvesen, Los A ngeles County Museum of Art’s head of photography had 

this to say about Mapplethorpe in 2016: 

“You can’t mistake a Mapplethorpe for anyo ne else, I find that really interesting because you 

could think about a floral still life or a black -and -white portrait as being quite a generic thing. In a 

way, it’s easier to think about Mapplethorpe in context to the slightly older figures of his time, 

say, Richard Avedon or Irving Penn.” 45 

However , after his death this was not enough to protect it . “The Perfect Moment” 

supported by a $10,000 National Endowment for the Arts Grant, opened in December of 1988 at 

the hosting institution, the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia. It contained 175 works 

spanning Mapplethorpe’s roughly 24 -year career, includin g his experiments with alternate media 

early in his career and the soon to be infamous XYZ P ortfolios. The works found in “The Perfect 

Moment” included works depicting sensual flowers, portraits that included both the gay and 

BDSM community, and self -port raits . All of these images were captured at a place in time to 

convey a fleeting instant. They wer e not intended to spark debate — at least not de bate at the 

Congressional scale; but they , like all art are not i ntended to be viewed passively. A descri ption 

by Deborah A. Levinson, of MIT, explains the exhibition as “ a study of the point where sex 

merges with sensuality, eroticism merges with the edges of pornography, fear of the camera 

merges with revelation of the inner self. Simply put, it is an extra ordinary collection of work by 

an extraordinary man.” 46 

At first the exhibition was a success, with no notable scandal in Philadelphia or Chicago. 

The potentially controversial images were interspersed with other works in the exhibition which 

helped place them in a less contentious context because the viewer remained focused on the       

> 45 "Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Medium," British Journal of Photography . (March 24, 2016).
> Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.bjp -online.com/2016/03/robert -mapplethorpe -the -perfect -medium/.
> 46 Deborah A. Levinson, "Robert Mapplethorpe's extraordinary vision," The Tech , (August 6, 1989.)
> http://tech.mit.edu/V110/N31/mapple.31a.html.

Weber 27 

more artistic aspects. With the relative success of the first two stops on its tour “The Perfect 

Moment” was expected to move through the last six stops with ease. But on June 8 th ,

Representative Richard Armey of Texas led Congress to take aim at the exhibition by sending a 

letter to the NEA criticizing their funding of this exhibition . This did not seem to effect the 

future of the exhibition because most of the focus was still on Serrano ; but that would quickly 

change once they placed Mapplethorpe firmly in the national spotlight. This was because on 

June 13, 1989, two weeks before it was set to open at the Corcoran Art Gallery in Washington 

D.C. , the third stop in the tour, the exhibition was cancelled. The Corcoran Art Gallery’s 

director Dr. Christina Orr -Cahall decided that , it was in the gallery’s best interest to cancel the 

exhibition , due to the growing controversy surrounding Serrano and the precariou s future of the 

National Endowment for the Arts. She feared that if she allowed the exhibition to be shown at 

the Corcoran, the gallery would be drawn into this greater controversy and would end up running 

the risk of losing their NEA funding . The board of trustees and former president ag reed with 

Orr -Cahall. S ince the Corcoran was in Washington, DC , they felt that presenting this exhibition 

in the political climate of the time , when other museums were losing their NEA funding, they 

would have been taking too great of a risk. 47 Orr -Cahall believed that she was going to prevent 

controversy by canceling the exhibition ahead of time. This was not the case. This action 

catapulted “The Perfect Moment ,” the Corcoran Art Gallery, and Mapplethorpe into the national 

spotlight and into the Congressional debate sparked by Serrano and Piss Christ . The art world 

couldn’t believe that the exhibition was cancelled out of fear or that suddenly the exhibition that 

had comfortabl y flown under the radar now was direct ly in the middle of a national debate over 

the future of arts and the NEA .   

> 47 Bolton, Culture Wars, 46 -47.

Weber 28 

It took very little time for Congress to take action against the NEA . On June 20 th 

Representative Sidney R. Yates of Ill inois proposed an amendment that would prevent 

organization s from regranting money that they were given via NEA grants. Th is was passed 

unanimously and would prevent organizations like the Southeastern Center for Contemporary 

Arts from passing the grant money down to the artist, which was how Serrano was funded. On 

June 27 th Representative Matthew J. Rinaldo of New Jersey introduced an amendment to the 

NEA le gislation that would prevent “the use of certain grants for a project which desecrates or 

denigrates a religious or national symbol .” The national symbol reference included here was due 

to another controversy that was occurring around the same time surrou nding an exhibition by 

Scott Tyler called What is the Proper Way to Display a U.S. Flag? that included a flag that was 

placed on the ground , thereby manipulating visitor s to step on or over it .48 

Mapplethorpe and his exhibition were soon the main focus of a Congressional debate as 

Helms, D’Amato, and their supporters claimed that “The Perfect Moment” was an example of 

the NEA encouraging the corruption of the American people. They rallied against the new head 

of the NEA John Frohnmayer , who was appointed by President George H.W. Bush on July 7 th ,

for funding what they considered to be despicable works ; completely ignoring the fact that the 

decision to fund “The Perfect Moment” had been made well before Frohnmayer was in charge of 

the NEA . They railed against Mapplethorpe, heedless of his dea th, and the debate grew more 

and more virulent as it continued. Mapplethorpe was called a pervert, pedophile, abusive, and 

some insinuated that he caused his own death and deserved it due to his sexuality and actio ns. 

On July 7 th , Judith Reisman, the associate director of research for t he American Family 

Association, in an article appearing in the Washington Times, equated some of Mapplethorpe’s    

> 48 Bolton, Culture Wars, 344 -345 .

Weber 29 

photographs to child por nography and claimed that his ve ry act of tak ing those photographs ,

particularly “Jesse McBride” and “Rosie” (or “Honey” ), was “an act of molestation. ” Reisman 

completely ignored the fact that the mothers of both children had given their permission for the 

images to be taken and used, as well as th e fact that similar photographs could be found country 

wide in family photo albums. She went on to claim that Mapplethorpe was a racist. Her 

argument was focused around one image, “Man in a Polyester Suit,” where an African American 

man was shown in a n o pened suit , but cropped to show his torso and top of his thighs with a 

focus on his exposed penis . Reisman claimed that since there was no name or face associated 

with this image , Mapplethorpe was red ucing this man to the racist portrayal of his genitals . Once 

again the artist’s intention was misunderstood, since Mapplethorpe followed his models’ wishes 

as to whether or not they wanted their names attached to each image. 49 

Judith Reisman only added fuel to the arguments being presented by Helms and his 

followers. They felt that the works in “The Perfect Moment” were obscene and therefore should 

never have been supported by the American people’s tax dollars. Much like their argument 

against Serrano and Piss Christ , they felt that the offensive nature of these works spoke for itself 

and made it clear that they should nev er have even been considered for support or display in 

publicly funded venues. One quote from the art critic, Grace Glueck, writing for the New York 

Times summed up the opposi ng argument beautifully. She wrote “although some Congressmen 

have argued that taxpayer’s money should not be used to support exhibitions containing material 

that many might find offensive, what some consider offensive is not regarded as such by all.” 50 

This quote dis plays what is probably the clearest argument against Helms ; but it is far from the      

> 49 Bolton, Culture Wars, 56 -58.
> 50 Bolton, Culture Wars , 62.

Weber 30 

only argument against him. There were others who argued that Congress could not dictate to the 

art world and they have no place trying to define art. 

On July 12 th the House of Representatives blocked a proposal to defund the NEA 

completely; but instead implement ed a cut of $45,000, a symbolic number that equaled the 

amount that was used to fund both the Serrano exhibition and “The Perfect Moment .”51 

Frohnmayer and the NEA were finding themselves more and more in front of the firing squad , as 

the public added their voices to the debate placing the future of the National Endowment for the 

Arts further in question. Reisman , while not a member of Congress , soon had her arg ument 

ad opted by them. Helms pushed for either a complete defunding of the NEA or strong sanctions 

on what the NEA could fund to prevent obscene works from being funded again. He propose d on 

July 26 th an amendment that became known as the “Helms Amendment .” This had strict limits 

as to what the National Endowment for the Arts funds could be used for and rang very much like 

censorship, stating: 

None of the funds authorized to be appropriated pursuant to this Act may be used to 

promote, disseminate, or produce - 1) obscene or indecent materials, including but not 

limited to depictions of sadomasochism, homoeroticism, the exploitation of children, or 

individuals engaged in sex acts; or 2) material which denigrates the objects or beliefs of 

the adherents of a particular religion or non -religion; or 3) material which denigrates, 

debases, or reviles a person, group, or class of citizens on the basis of race, creed, sex, 

handicap, age, or national origin. 52 

On September 13 th the House of Representatives voted n ot to include the Helms 

Amendment and Helms’ push to limit the funding to the arts was defeated in the Senate on 

September 28 th . That was not the end of this figh t though and a compromise passed the House 

on October 3 rd which wa s then approved by the Sena te and passed to President Bush to sign on 

October 7 th .    

> 51 Bolton, Culture Wars , 346.
> 52 Bolton, Culture Wars , 347.

Weber 31 

This compromise created a 12 -member commission that would study the NEA to 

determine if new standards for funding were needed and prohibit ed the funding for any project 

that could be considered obsc ene based on the 1973 Supreme Court case Miller v. California . It 

also gave the chairperson of the NEA the final say on whether “the merits of an application 

outweigh the agency’s concerns over any sexually explicit content.” 53 Miller v. California then 

be came a very important case ; the result of this case would mean that obscene material was not 

protected under the First Amendment and that the definition of obscene material was: 

a) Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would 

find the work, taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest, b) whether the w ork 

depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined 

by the applicable state law; and c) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks seriou s, 

literary, artistic, political, or scientific value 54 

This definition would play an extremely important role in the later parts of “The Perfect 

Moment” debate. Also , as of March 9 , 1990 all recipients of NEA grants must sign a clause that 

stated that they agreed with this anti -obscenity requirement. 

Throughout the Congressional debate, “The Perfect Moment” was still on tour. When the 

Cor cor an Art Gallery cancelled their show , the Washington Project for the A rts (WPA), another 

art museum in DC focused on contemporary artists during all stages of their caree r, 55 announced 

on June 26 th that they had chosen to host the exhibit ion instead from July 21 to August 13, 1990 .

They were one of the many groups that were appalled by the Corcoran’s actions and acted to 

ensure that the exhibit ion would still be displayed. The mission of the WPA is to focus on being 

for and by artists, acting as an alternative artist -run space that has brought together many of DC      

> 53 Bolton, Culture Wars , 348.
> 54 "Miller v. California," The Free Dictionary . Accessed February 1, 2017. htt p://legal -
> dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Miller v. California.
> 55 "About WPA, " About WPA | Washington Project for the Arts. Accessed May 03, 2017.
> https://www.wpadc.org/about.

Weber 32 

artists sin ce its founding in 1975. Even with the contro versy that was being fought in Congress 

and possibly due to that fight, the exhibition opening raised $125000 for the Design Industries 

Foundation Fighting AIDS. The exhibition had a record high attendance figure of 49,000; about 

30 times the normal rate , with donations over $40,000. The Washington Project for the Arts also 

sold out the catalogue. For the installation they separate d the XYZ portfolios into another room 

thereby allowing their patrons to make the decision whether or not to view the potentially 

offensive works. All of those images were not necessarily overtly sexual in nature though; at 

least one of his flower images was moved into that room as well. 56 Overall , th ere was very little 

protest surrounding the continued display of “The Perfect Moment” and the Washington Project 

for the Arts director of programs surprisingly had t his to say : “W e wouldn’t normally show 

[Mapplethorpe’s] work. It’s too safe, too well known .” 57 

The Corcoran, however, did face protests. Local artists forming a group called the 

National Committee Against Censorship picketed the gallery in a few ways , including projecting 

slides of Mapplethorpe’s artwork onto a nearby building and distributing petitions. 58 Orr -Cahall 

ended up stepping down from her position of director on December 18, 1989 . The exhibition left 

Washington an d moved onto its next two stops in Hartford and B erk eley with little fanfare. That 

was not the case with Cincinnati, Ohio where a new NEA controversy was sparked. 

On March 3, 1990 Representative Dana Roh rabacher of California announced that he 

planned to submit an amendment that would cut all funding for the arts; just in time for “The 

Perfect Moment” to be thrust back into the spotlight , adding more fuel to the bonfire against the         

> 56 Deborah A. Levinson, "Robert Mapplethorpe's extraordinary vision," The Tech ,(August 6, 1989).
> http://tech.mit.edu/V110/N31/mapple.31a.html.
> 57 "Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Moment," Catalyst RSS . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://catalyst.wpadc.org/?p=2845.
> 58 "Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Moment," Catalyst RSS . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://catalyst.wpadc.org/?p=2845.

Weber 33 

NEA . On March 7 th Citizens for Community Values sen t a letter to their members detailing 

ways to prevent “The Perfect Moment” from opening in Cincinnati. On March 21 st the 

Contemporary Arts Center (CAC) in Cincinnati announce d that they plan ned on moving forward 

regardless. This sparked Senator Helms to ask the General Acc ounting Office to look into 

whether the NEA was spending taxpayer funds wisely. Photographs o f the controversial works 

were to be labeled with a special warning to ensure that their women associates were not exposed 

to the works. They agree to do so three days later. 

With the CAC’s assertion that they were still going to display the exhibit ion , the Citizens 

for Community Values claimed that the works were criminally obscene ; thereby forcing the 

police to announce that they will look into the matter. The Citizens for Community Values 

protested , condemning the museum for even considering displaying something that they thought 

was so evidently offensive, so against their morals , and so sexual that it was unbelievable that it 

could possibly be shown to the general public. Others disagreed with this attempt at censorship. 

They wanted either to see it or have the choice to see it. These groups took to the streets to 

protest the opposite side , turning the streets of Cincinnati into the latest battle ground o f the 

already vicious culture war. 

The Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati did make some concessions to the protestors 

and the police. On March 27 th they , along with the Mapplethorpe Foundation and estate asked 

for a judge to determine whether these images were considered criminally offensive. However, 

on April 6 th an Ohio judge rejected the request. The CAC still moved forward with presenting the 

exhibition not knowing whether they were going to be brought up on charges for displaying the 

images or not. 59 The CAC tried to ensure that there would be as little nationa l controversy as   

> 59 Bolton, Culture Wars , 352.

Weber 34 

possible by limiting admission only to people age d eighteen and over , and sectioning off the 

most controversial section , the X P ortfolio , into another part of the space. They tried to avoid a 

funding debate by increasing ticket prices and getting local businesses to be sponsor s; thereby 

avoiding some of the issues Washington faced. They placed warning signs that some of the 

images were n ot appropriate for all visitors .60 In preparation for a fight , Dennis Barrie , the 

director of the CAC , also h ired a lawyer , H. Louis Skinner whose focus was First Amendment 

defense cases. Skinner also submitted an action to the local Ohio court that said th at “a 

legitimate museum such as the CAC could not be charged with obscenity.” 61 This failed the day 

before the exhibit ion was set to open. 

On April 6 th, the exhibit ion opened to thousands of members peacefully and Barrie said, 

“I thought we dodged a bull et.” 62 However , when the exhibition open ed to the general public the 

next day , it was met not only by record crowds , but also by the police. The police said was that 

there were photographs involved that were by a legal definition inappropriate to be includ ed in 

an exhibition that was open to the public , and that Dennis Barrie was to be arrested for two 

misdemeanor accounts of pandering obscenity and illegal use of a child in nudity related 

material; the CAC was also included in these charges. The 20 law en forcement personnel kicked 

out the visitors and videotaped the exhibition as evidence for the future court case. Once they 

were done , they reopened the doors. Out of 175 photographs , 7 were brought before court as 

being obscene and inappropriate for mus eum audiences. T hat is only four percent of the images        

> 60 Childs, Suspended License , 375 -376.
> 61 Grace Dobush, "25 Years Later: Cincinnati and the Obscenity Trial over Mapplethorpe Art," The
> Washington Post , (October 23, 2015). Acc essed February 1, 2017.
> https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/25 -years -later -cincinnati -and -the -obscenity -trial -over -
> mapplethorpe -art/2015/10/22/07c6aba2 -6dcb -11e5 -9bfe -e59f5e244f92_story.html?utm_term=.6e1aa7bda46b.
> 62 Alex Palmer, "When Art Fought the Law and the Art Won," Smithsonian.com . (October 02, 2015).
> Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/when -art -fought -law -and -art -won -
> 180956810/?no -ist.

Weber 35 

foun d in the exhibition . Four percent — that was all it took for the CAC to be the first museum 

charged with criminal obscenity. This decision caught Representative Rohrabacher’s attention ,

but he was not agreeing with the court in this case. He felt that this decision was a violation of 

the CAC’s First Amendment rights, claiming that he wanted federal control , not local. 

These were the same photo graphs that caused the controversy in Washin gton and that had 

le d to such a public outcry to Congress. Those seven photographs included two im ages of 

children and five that fell under the gay S&M banner. The two images of children were “Jesse 

McBride” and “Rosie,” also describ ed as “Honey” in some articles. “Jesse McBride” depicts a

little boy somewhere around five to seven years old , sitting on the bac k of a living room chair 

spread -legged to support himself, next to a re friger ator , naked, staring at the camera . “Rosie” is a 

little girl younger l ooking than Jesse, described by many as being about three years old. She is 

sitting outside on what looks to be a stone bench staring at the camera , on e hand on the arm of 

the bench , the other on her foot which is pulled up under her . Her other leg is ben t and 

perpendicu lar to the seat; her dress is pulled up and one can see that she is not wearing any 

underwear or a diaper .63 

As mentioned earlier , there are some like Judith Reisman who felt that these works were 

inappropriate and overly sexual ; therefore , perpetuating the child pornography industry. That 

was not the opinion of everyone who saw the exhibition by a long shot. There also was a 

response that proposed that these images were a “spoof of the intensely commercial market for 

illicit ‘kiddie porn’ being sold by mail.” 64 Since Mapplethorpe made it clear that he was 

uncomfortable photographing children and personally was coerced as a child t o be photographed 

in a state of undress against his will, it is conceivable to believe he had not intended these works     

> 63 Danto, Playing with the edge , 66,62 .
> 64 Kammen, Visual Shock , 79.

Weber 36 

to be explicit or sexual .65 In fact, there were a number of people who did not see anything 

explic it at all in these photo graph s. They would maintain that these photographs were just 

children being children and that there would be few mothers in the country who would not have 

similar photographs . In the end , it did not even matter that the police had pulled these 

photographs for one very important reason : parental approval. “Both mothers were not only 

present during the shoots, but delighted with the outcomes; they express their dismay over the 

whole controversy and their personal affection for Mappl ethorpe.” 66 They gave permission. This 

fact alter ed the case in Mapplethorpe ’s favor . It was ruled that t hose two photographs could not 

be used in the le gal case since the mothers had given permission for t hem to be taken and to be 

included in this exhibi tion .

This fact left the court with the five S&M based images. These included “Self -portrait” 

1978, which depicted Mapplethorpe standing hunched over, turned to the right to look at the 

camera wearing leather chaps, boots and vest, with his left leg sup ported up on a step and a 

bullwhip inserted into his anus .67 Another was “Jim and Tom, Sausalito ,” 1977, which depicted 

one man (Jim) standing, wearing only leather pants, boots and mask/hood, and leaning slightly 

back from another (Tom) , who was fully clot hed in leather jacket and jeans, kneeling in a 

concrete room with a ladder to the left; the standing man is urinating into the mouth of the 

kneeling man. 68 The court described the other photographs in this cas e as “a man shoving his 

arm and fist up another man’s rectum…a man with a cylindrical object inserted into his rectal          

> 65 Danto, Playing with the edge , 61.
> 66 Bolton, Culture Wars, 280.
> 67 Danto, Playing with the edge , 58.
> 68 Danto, Playing with the edge , 84.

Weber 37 

area…. [and] a man with a finger inserted into the head of his penis.” 69 All of these photographs 

were in black and white, most of them were f rom the X Portfolio .

As all of this took place debate and protest reigned in the streets . The police who were 

taking the images away and arresting Barrie were called “Gestapo .” Chants echo ed in the 

streets : “Not the church, not the sta te, we decide wha t art is great. ” People flooded the museum 

hall in many cases wanting to know what all the fuss was about. 70 It did not seem to matter if 

they had seen the exhibition or not , in reality , many protestors on either side mainly wanted their 

side heard. 71 The LGBT and anti -AIDS groups took to the streets as anti -gay rhetoric was being 

used more and more against Mapplethorpe and “The Perfect Moment .” Many saw these 

arguments against Mapplethorpe as governmental censorship and they felt that the government 

had no right to tell them what they could or couldn’t see within a museum . Many others who saw 

this exhibition as a sign of the moral corruption of the American society, were very anti -gay and 

religious ly conservative in their leanings. This created a lot of tension between the ideas of 

censorship and ‘moral corruption’ which continue d to be played out in the final i teration of the 

NEA controversy, as reported by Bolton 72 and Faherty and Motsinger. 73 

There were many factors that influenced the case’s final conclusion. The prosecutor, 

Frank H. Prouty Jr. fully believed that there was nothing beneficial to this exhibition and made 

sure that certain criteria were met. “He said the jury should only see the seven controversial         

> 69 Bolton, Culture Wars, 275.
> 70 John Faherty, and Carol Motsinger, "Pornography or art? Cincinnati decided," Cincinnati.co m.
> (March 29, 2015). Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/2015/03/28/pornography -art -
> cincinnati -decided -robert -mapplethorpe -trial -25 -year/70591342/.
> 71 Alex Palmer, "When Art Fought the Law and the Art Won," Smithsonian.com. (Octob er 02, 2015).
> Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/when -art -fought -law -and -art -won -
> 180956810/?no -ist.
> 72 Bolton, Culture Wars, 269 -282.
> 73 John Faherty and Carol Motsinger, "Pornography or art? Cincinnati decided," Cincinnati.com

Weber 38 

photographs and not the entire show… He said the CAC was a gallery, and not a museum, 

which meant it would not have many free speech protections. The judge agreed.” 74 These criteria 

would make it more difficult for the defense because without the entire exhibition , one lo st some 

of the context which softened the impact of these images . T he entire argument was based on free 

speech and the argument that the public should have a chance to make decisions for themselves 

on whether they want to see certain artwork .

Prouty al so ha d a rather interesting approach. He believed that the photographs we re able 

to speak for themselves. He showed the m to the j ury , had police officers corro borate that those 

images were on display , and then he sat back. He felt that “The obscenity is sue, the pictures 

must speak for themselves. The jury is the community…They set the standard. Let them make 

the decision.” 75 The definition of obscenity was the definition that had been decided in Miller v. 

California, the same standard that the NEA grant applicants had to reach. This jury was made up 

of eight people, four men and four women, with only one college graduate, most without much 

experience with museums , and none of whom had been to the CAC or the exhibition . It took 

four days of detaile d questioning to get these ei ght people together and it was rather difficult for 

the lawyers to build an impartial jury in this case, with everyone taking sides in th e community. 76 

Skinner , on the other hand, and his coworker Marc D. Mezibov who represen ted the 

CAC , also focus ed on the photographs ; however, they argued that Mapplethorpe was an artist 

and therefore these pieces were art. Working in their favor was their witness’s ability to explain 

that pornography and obscenity are not the same thing ; th at there is value i n art even if it is not 

pretty; and that in order for something to be defined as obscene based , the three criteria    

> 74 Ibid
> 75 Ibid
> 76 Bolton, Culture Wars, 269 -282.

Weber 39 

determined on a congressional level had to be met. The criteria are as follows: there is no serious 

artistic value, the av erage person using modern community standards would find the work as a 

whole having or encouraging excessive interest in sexual matters, and the work depicts in an 

offensive way sexual conduct as defined by the state law. When the jury went into deliberat ion ,

many thought that this was going to be not only the first time a museum was brought up on 

charges , but also the first time that a museum was convicted. On October 5, 1990, it took the jury 

two hours to reach a decision and it was a verdict of not guil ty on all counts. That did not mean 

that they liked the images . In fact , none of them did ; but they also felt that no one should dictate 

what art could be seen .77 

This was the end of “The Perfect Moment ’s ” role in the NEA controversy . At this point ,

the controversy as a whole was starting to wind down by October. The exhibition ’s last stop was 

Boston, the same city where the artist had died just a year prior . T he tour finished quietly. It 

faced only minor civil protest and nothing to the extent that it had faced in Washington or in 

Cincinnati .78 “The Perfect Moment ” would still be held up as an example of the depravity that 

the NEA was allowed to fund ; however, once it closed there were other artists for Congress to 

hold up as examples. 

The final add ition to the NEA controversies was a group of performance artists that 

became known as the NEA Four. This controversy began while the Cincinnati case against 

“The Perfect Moment ” was ongoing. Unlike the earlier controversies , this was not f ocused on a 

si ngle artist , but four different performance artists: Karen Finley, John Fleck, Tim Miller, and 

Holly Hughes . Unlike Serrano and Mapplethorpe, they did not become controversial because       

> 77 Bolton, Culture Wars, 269 -282.
> 78 Childs, Suspended License 380.

Weber 40 

they were funded . Congress , and Jesse Helms in particular , felt that they shouldn’t be. Instead ,

they were drawn into the controversy because in 1990 they were denied funding by NEA 

Chairman John Frohnmayer who went against the peer review panel to make that decision. The 

artists took the NEA to court .79 

Karen Finley was born in 1956 outside of Chicago . She grew up interested in 

performances. She took to the media far more seriously after her father’s suicide in 1978. She 

received her m aster’s degree in Fine Arts from the San Francisco Art Institute in 1982 a nd a year 

later was awarded her first NEA grant wh en she moved to New York City. Her work focused on 

the oppression of women, feelings of rage and self -loathing, domestic abuse, homosexuality, and 

sexual repression. She was confrontational and provocative . Finley’s work was recorded on an 

album in 1988. 80 

John Fleck grew up Roman Catholic, with five siblings and an alcoholic father. The 

family moved around a lot. Fleck traveled to California in 1973 to attended acting school and to 

get away from his fami ly. He worked as both a performance artist and an actor in California. His 

performance pieces include stories about his life as a gay man and can be rather provocative .81 

Tim Miller was born in September of 1958, the youngest of four children in California. 

His mother worked in a department store and his father was a traveling salesman. Miller realized 

that he was gay rather young and his family was supportive. He took classes in theater and 

dance while in high school. This passio n carried into adulthood and he traveled to NYC to study 

dance. In 1980 , Miller helped open a space for performance art in NYC and then after seven        

> 79 Childs, Suspended License, 383.
> 80 Steve Huey, "Karen Finley | Biography & History," AllMusic . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.allmusic.com/a rtist/karen -finley -mn0000302661/biography.
> 81 JAN BRESLAUER, "INTERVIEW : John Fleck's Radical Shtick," Los Angeles Times . (November 18,
> 1990.) Accessed April 8, 2017. http://articles.latimes.com/1990 -11 -18/entertainment/ca -7066_1_fleck -john -worked.

Weber 41 

years in New York, he returned to California where he opened another performance space. 

> 82

Throughout all of this Miller was an active member of ACT UP , AIDS Coalition to Unleash 

Power, one of the most vocal and successful AIDS activist groups, and he worked as a vocal 

activist for the LGBTQ community throughout his career. 83 

Holly Hughes was born in 1955 in Mic higan. She resented living in the Midwes t and two 

years after graduating from Kalamazoo College in 1977 she moved to NYC where she worked as 

a painter. She joined Women’s One World Café (WoW) which was a small lesbian feminist art 

collective. This is wh ere Hughes took off as a performance artist. She created performances 

focused on women’s and LGBTQ issues. She incorporated stereotypes and other tongue in 

cheek jokes, mocking those that mocked her community. 84 

On the political side of this controversy, members of Congress took actions against the 

National Endowment for the Arts. On May 16, 1990 Representatives Steve Gunderson of 

Wisconsin and Tom Coleman of Missouri proposed a change to the NEA which would alter the 

types of grants that they could besto w and would set aside sixty percent of their budget directly 

to state art agencies to be redistributed from there. 

On May 23, the New School for Social Research with their lawyer Floyd Adams filed in 

New York federal court against the NEA and John Frohnmayer asking for the organization to 

stop requiring its obscenity pledge. They had been forced to turn down a $45,000 grant for a 

redesign of the school’s courtyard. The requirement of this pledge was making things very 

difficult for organi zations that wanted to receive NEA grants , yet still felt that the pledge was a       

> 82 Linda Rapp, "Miller, Tim (b.1958)," glbtq . 2005. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.glbtq.com.
> 83 "Tim Miller," Tim Miller . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.timmillerperformer.com/about.html.
> 84 "Holly Hughes | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the U niversity of Michigan." Holly Hughes
> | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the University of Michigan. Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://stamps.umich.edu/people/detail/holly_hughes.

Weber 42 

form of censorship. 85 On June 6 th, the White House asked Congress to reauthorize the NEA for a 

year without any restrictions while the Independent Commission investigated the o rganization 

and hoped the noise would die down. Also , the General Accounting Office had its report as 

requested by Senator Jesse Helms, stating that the NEA had not violated federal law. Days 

afterwards became busy for the NEA in Congress because on June 12 th a Senate Subcommittee 

agree d to send on the NEA reauthorization bill without restrictions for 5 years. 86 

On June 13 th Representative Paul B Henry from Michigan and Senator Orrin Hatch from 

Utah circulate d two different proposals; one to ban funding f or art that deliberately denigrates 

“the cultural heritage of the United States, its religious tradition, or racial or ethnic groups …. or 

violates prevailing standards of obscenity or indecency” and the other to prevent artists who 

produce obscene works from being able to receive federal funding for up to ten years, 

respectfully. On the 19 th the reauthorization was put off until there was a me eting of the full 

House in July, just in time for the NEA Four controversy to gain ground. 87 

On June 9, 1990 John Frohnmayer vetoed the NEA Theater Program grants for the NEA 

Four. Frohnmayer may have been the one to make the decision not to fund these artists ; but 

according to his autobiography , he said , it was not a decision that he had made lightly. The 

National Council meeting was in Helms’ backyard . The applicants for the theater division — the 

group that would become the NEA Four — were all vocal about social issues that were a part of 

the prevailing social debate. T he fact that Helms and his supporters wer e openly homophobic, 

combined with other factors , placed Frohnmayer in the position that no matter what decisi on he 

chose, it would cause debate. 88           

> 85 Bolton, Culture Wars, 355.
> 86 Ibid, 356.
> 87 Bolton, Culture Wars, 355 -356.
> 88 Frohnmayer, Confessions of an Arts Warrior, 151 -152.

Weber 43 

He was well aware that the future of the NEA was in jeopardy, and every choice that the 

organization made was going to be analyzed and debated to death , both in the eyes of the public 

and in the halls of Congress. In the end , Frohnmayer made the decision not to fund them hoping 

that his justification (which in his own words was shallow ), would be a middle groun d that 

everyone could live with. He had hop ed to appease the conservatives and to preserve the NEA ,

stating, “I didn’t want to be the one to take the Endowment down in flames.” 89 He also claimed 

that some art was too confrontational or offensive to receiv e public funding or be exhibit ed in 

public places. To make his point, he used an image of Holocaust victims as an example, saying 

that it would be inappropriate to be shown in a museum entrance where all are required to see 

it. 90 Many of the museums that sh owed “The Perfect Moment” moved to have the controversial 

images separat ed from the rest of the exhibition ; however, the NEA Fo ur were all performance 

artists and there is nothing forcing a per son to go to their performances. The latter statement 

seems at odds to Frohnmayer’s intent , both to preserve the arts and the NEA .

By July 6 th members of the NEA Theater panel had asked Frohnmayer to reconsider his 

decision . Perhaps they were aware of how much frustration was already being felt in the art 

worl d at the time; perhaps they realized that by turning down these particular artists was painting 

the National Endowment for the Arts in a rather homophobic light ; or perhaps they merely felt 

that these artists were worth funding regardless of the potential risks . In 1990 , the NEA was 

being sued by other artists and institutions , mostly due t o the obscenity clause that the NEA was 

forcing them to sign. T his clause would eventually be deemed unconstitutional in January of 

1991.      

> 89 Ibid, 176.
> 90 Bolton, Culture Wars, 348.

Weber 44 

On September 11, 1991 , the Indepen dent Commission, recommend ed in its report that the 

obscenity pledge be removed and that the grant -making procedures be overhauled . This report 

was accepted the next day in the Senate along with a proposal for a five -year reauthorization 

without content re strictions . It also allowed the NEA to take back the money given via grants if 

the artist violates local obscenity and pornography laws, and it increase d power to both the NEA 

chairman and the C ouncil for the Arts. This plan was passed in the House with a 3-year 

re authorization. The Senate passed their version on October 24 th with the addition by Helms that 

would deny funds to any work that denigrates religion. The legislation was completely passed 

three days later and two days a fter that the NEA removed the requirement for the obscenity 

pledge. It was not until December 14 th that Frohnmayer announced that he would not reject any 

panel —approved grants on the grounds of decency. 91 

This may have been the end of the Congressional influence on the NEA controversy , but 

it was not the end of the legal battles. The NEA Four sue d the NEA on September 27th ,

claiming that they were turned down from funding because of political reasons , not because of 

their merits as artists .92 Karen Finley, known to be a vocal feminist , did not shy away from 

topics that would offend some of the more conservative members of Congress. She had been 

funded by the NEA before and she claimed that her performance was being taken out of context 

and sensationalized to ensure that it would not be funded as a part of the “witch -hunt of the arts .”

Her performance that Frohnmayer chose not to fund had three acts; in the first she was fully 

clothed and spoke about the rule of the patriarchy and the e ffect that this has on women; in the 

second she spoke about the oppression of minorities in cluding women and AIDS patients; and in 

the third she is in a white sheet near a death bed speaking about thos e who survive the AIDS      

> 91 Bolton, Culture Wars, 360 -363.
> 92 Frohnmayer, Confessions of an Arts Warrior, 186.

Weber 45 

crisis. 93 The time period surrounding this controversy mean t that speaking about the AIDS crisis 

in this way could be very contentious . She also was openly critical of Helms and his fellow anti -

art congressmen. Fin ley wrote a piece called “It ’s Only Art” that described what would happen 

if all art that could be considered offensive to someone were removed resulting in a world where 

creativity was punished severely. 94 

John Fleck is an openly gay man whose performances explored what that meant both 

personal ly and as a part of a larger experience. He is not shy about using religious symbolism, 

nudity, and body fluids in his work as a performance artist. With a ll of this combined , it is not 

surprising that he was wrapped into this greater dispute .

Tim Miller is an openly gay man and an AIDS activist with ACT UP, who was quick to 

point out that his socially relevant art was seen as extremely political at the time. He was very 

vocal during the court cases. He used each media opportunity as best he could to fu rther his 

causes. In fact , Miller wrote a statement on July 4, 1990 called “An Artist’s Declaration of 

Independence to Congress” that called out the government for trying to control what people 

thought and trying to silence the voices of the LGBT community .95 Much like the case of John 

Fleck , it is not a surprise that he was a part of this public debate .

Holly Hughes is a lesbian, out and proud. She too did not shy away from using the press 

that came with these court cases to make her point. Hughes used this event as a platform to bring 

the issues facing LGBT artists to the forefront, pointing out that the censorship th at was applied 

early in the controversy was fervently directed against homosexuals. She pointed out how often 

homophobia was influencing the decisions in these cases and remained an ongoing issue.         

> 93 Bolton, Culture Wars, 208 -210.
> 94 Ibid, 282 -284.
> 95 Bolton, Cultur e Wars, 244.

Weber 46 

Hughes was not shy in pointing out that since the controv ersy surrounding the NEA had begun 

and the media had covered the crusade against the arts, there had been a 128% increase in anti -

gay incidents – hardly just a coincidence. 96 

In 1991 , Holly Hughes and Tim Miller would receive $8,000 grants from the NEA . T his 

too dr ew the attention of some Congresspersons. Those who objected claimed they did so based 

on the homosexual ity of the supported artists and the notion that the American people did not 

want such works supported. Frohnmayer disagreed and managed to p revent further controversy 

in this case. 97 The NEA Four case took eight years to make its way through all levels of the 

judicial system. First , a ruling in 1992 favor ed the group, saying that the anti -obscenity clause in 

the NEA guidelines was not clear enough to prevent them from receiving funding . Then this was 

backtrack ed by the Supreme Court in 1998 as they decided that the decency clause was 

constitutional as a criterion for federal funding . In the long run , it didn’t matt er, they had still 

received the funding , but it did lengthen the conversation and continue the deba te on what and 

how the NEA should handle their funding. 

The Fallout 

After these events and all of this controversy , President George H.W. Bush highly 

encour aged John Frohnmayer to step down from his post as the head of the National Endowment 

for the Arts . H e did so in 1992 , after only two and a half years in the position. He ended up 

leaving before his last project was completed and , on paper , said that it was due to a desire to 

return to private life. In reality this decision was due to political pressure from people higher in       

> 96 Bolton, Culture Wars, 254.
> 97 Frohnmayer, Confessions of an Arts Warrior, 307 -312.

Weber 47 

the political hierarchy who wanted the stain of this scandal to disappear. 98 Ironically, 

Frohnmayer was punished for decisions that were made by his predecessors since he was the 

acting face of the organization throughout the scandal. He returned to Oregon and wrote two 

books, became a professor of history at Oregon State University , and in 2007 ran for Senate. 99 

The NEA ended up implementing a decency clause in an attempt to avoid future 

controversies. While not as intense as the decency clause that Helms’ had proposed, it did create 

limits on what the NEA could fund. The Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art and th e

Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia, t hat had originally planned both the Mapplethorpe 

and Serrano exhibits, were each fined and lost NEA funding for a few years thanks to Congress’s 

decision. This was described in Federalizing the Muse “thus, Congress expressed not only fiscal 

conservativism , but also cultural conservatism — criticizing the NEA first as elitist, then, during 

the Mapplethorpe and Serrano controversies, as corrupt.” 100 

Fortunately, t he NEA did weather this storm and as of 2016 c elebrated its 50 th year. 

Helms’ attempts to close down the NEA had failed , bu t his actions still significantly effect ed the 

future of the organization and how it works today. The organization no longer suppor ts artists 

directly; instead , it wi ll only wo rk through partnerships with “state art agencies, local leaders, 

other federal agencies, and the philanthropic sector.” 101 It still focuses on equal access to the 

arts , but it now faces limitations as to how it does that. Most destructively , the NEA faced a

major budget cut, primarily as a result of the bad press that it faced. Since this controversy, the 

NEA has overwhelmingly continued to play it safe with its funding for museum exhibits.          

> 98 Ibid, 1-6.
> 99 Andrew Theen, "John Frohnmayer Joins Senate Race ,"Oregon Public Broadcasting .(September 12,
> 2007 ). Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.opb.org/new s/article/john -frohnmayer -joins -senate -race/.
> 100 Binkiewicz, Federalizing the Muse, 225.
> 101 "National Endowment for the Arts," NEA. Accessed February 1, 2017. https://www.arts.gov/about -nea.

Weber 48 

Looking over the exhibits that have been funded since 1990, at least those that can be found 

online, there seems to be an avoidance of topics or exhibits that could possibly be seen as 

controversial. 102 

The art community pushed back throughout all of this turmoil . Many artists and their 

supporters felt tha t the acti ons being taken by Co ngress against the NEA were acts of censorship. 

Many found themselves and their artwork under the microscope as well. They wrote to Congress 

and newspapers , and stood at protests def ending their fellow artists and themselves. They a rgued 

that not everything that included nudity was sexual, and pointed out that the artists being 

attacked were disproportionally gay . They explained that a work by a gay artis t did not suddenly 

make it worthless. The art community and its supporters arg ued that these attacks were 

perpetuating homophobia under the guise of preserving moral values in art. There also were 

some people who reconsidered the value of the N EA grants, in particular when looking at art that 

was focu sed on the LGBT community. A ut hor Sarah Schulman was one such person 

questioning whether token grants were being awarded to gay artists so the endowment could 

claim that they fund diverse groups by pointing to a few rare examples. She felt that there 

needed to be a greater focus on th e problem of homophobia as a whole inst ead of focusing solely 

on whether the NEA was going to continue to receive funding. Her overarching theme was that 

the controversies were caused by Helms and his supporters trying to take control of the art world, 

wh ich was something that was out of their realm to control. 103 Helms wanted artists not to take 

risks, an act of self -censorship which could easily spill over into education , limiting both self -

expression and knowledge. 104 Helms did win reelection twice after these events.       

> 102 "NEA Online Grant Sea rch," NEA Online Grant Search, accessed May 18, 2017,
> https://apps.nea.gov/grantsearch/SearchMain.aspx.
> 103 Bolton, Culture Wars, 230 -239.
> 104 Ibid, 93.

Weber 49 

Modern Point of View of E ach Artist 

Andres Serrano is a well -regarded contemporary artist , though he still is not without his 

controversy. S ome of his art draw s the ire of those who are more religious ; but there has never 

been a controversy due to his art on the same scale again. Since the NEA controversy, h e has 

shown his work all over the world and did not shy away from creating and displaying religious 

themed artwork. 105 However, Serrano has moved beyond the se themes to create works cove ring 

violence, race, and poverty. Portraits of homeless pe ople , members of the Catholic clergy, 

members of the KKK, and dead bodies have all been featured as topics of his art in more recent 

years, according to the International Center for Photography 106 an d the RoGallery’s 

biographies. 107 Serrano’s art has been featured in many different g alleries and on album covers. 

Recently, h e has also branched out into music and video .108 Some of Serrano’s more modern 

works draw criticism ; while others are seen as being less confrontational . His show “Shit” in 

2008 drew plenty of criticism , primarily due to the subject matter. 109 Yet other series like 

“America” 110 cause d little if any negative criticism. He has not avoided t he religious as pect of 

his work; in fact , it remains a driving force in his artwork. In 2012, he created a series dedicated 

as “Holy Works” to that topic. 111 His most recent exhibition in 2017 is focused on torture and  

> 105

"ANDRES SERRANO," ANDRES SERRANO . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://andresserrano.org/Bio.htm.  

> 106

"Andres Serrano," International Cente r of Photography. (March 02, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://www.icp.org/browse/archive/constituents/andres -serrano?all%2Fall%2Fall%2Fall%2F0.  

> 107

"Andres Serrano – Biography," RoGallery . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://rogallery.com/Serrano_Andres/And res_Serrano -Biography.html.  

> 108

"Andres Serrano," Andres Serrano Biography – Andres Serrano on artnet . Accessed April 8, 

2017. http://www.artnet.com/artists/andres -serrano/biography. 

> 109

Jerry Saltz, "Looking Out for No. 2, " NYMag.com . (September 12, 2008 ). Ac cessed May 03, 2017. 

http://nymag.com/arts/art/reviews/50479/. 

> 110

Ken Johnson, "Andres Serrano -- 'America ,'" The New York Times . (December 18, 2003 ). Accessed May 

03, 2017. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/19/arts/art -in -review -andres -serrano -america.html. 

> 111

Selina Ting , "Interview : Andres SERRANO, " Initiartmagazine . (April 5, 2012 ). Accessed May 03, 

2017. http://www.initiartmagazine.com/interview.php?IVarchive=87. Weber 50 

bares that as its title. Here Serrano has once agai n attracted critics who claim that the exhibition 

is “an unseemly aestheticization of heinous crimes.” Serrano counters that argument by pointing 

out that these crimes have been part of human history for millennia and are therefore fair game 

for artists t o work with. 112 

Robert Mapplethorpe is still seen as a notable artist. His works are displayed 

countrywide, including works from the now infamous XYZ Portfolios . However , it is worth 

noting that no record of the seven photographs that were brought before a judge in Cincinnati, 

being shown currently in an exhibition can be found. The XYZ P ortfolios that include these 

images are owned by the J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles, and were jointly acquired by the J. 

Paul Getty Trust and the Los Angeles County Mu seum of Art. Those seven images were 

accessioned into their collection and information can be found on each image through their 

collection search , although the image itself cannot be seen. 113 A complete list of all 175 images 

from “The Perfect Moment” does not exist online . It is only in the exhibit ion catalog that can be 

purchased t hrough the Robert Mapplethorpe F oundation or from Amazon. 114 In 2000 , a

docu drama titled “Dirty Pictures” was directed by Frank Pierson based on the teleplay by Ilene 

Chaik en about the 1990 coverage of the Cincinnati trial 115 Inspired by this movie the Santa 

Monica Museum of Art recreated “The Perfect Moment” in 2000 , and described it as “an almost 

photograph b y photography reconstruction .” Since there was no online record of the images              

> 112 Michael Kurcfeld, "(Photographer Spotlight) An Art of Uncomfortable Truths: Michael Kur cfeld O n
> Andres Serrano [Video], "Los Angeles Review of Books .(February 22, 2017 ). Accessed May 03, 2017.
> https://lareviewofbooks.org/av/photographer -spotlight -art -uncomfortable -truths -michael -kurcfeld -andres -serrano -
> video/. 113 "Robert Mapplethorpe (American, 194 6-1989) (Getty Museum) ,"The J. Paul Getty in Los Angeles .
> Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/artists/2928/robert -mapplethorpe -american -1946 -1989/.
> 114 Exhibition -E.com, The Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation . Accessed March 03, 2016.
> http://www.mapplethorpe.org/.
> 115 "Dirty Pictures (TV Movie 2000)," IMDb . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0217363/.

Weber 51 

used, there was no way to verify if changing retrospective mentalities resulted in those seven 

photographs being shown again. In 2012 , the X Portfolio was displayed with the Y and Z

Portfolios at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. This was mirrored by a gallery show at 

the Getty with its own focus on Mapplethorpe. 116 

There has b een a resurgence of interest in the life and works of Mapplethorpe in recent 

years. Authors and filmmakers are b eing far more honest about his character than they had been 

in the past. The y are now admitting the obvious — that Mapplethorpe had a fascination with 

darkness, a fascination that blended over into his work. Mapplethorpe cultivated this persona of 

creepi ness that helped act as a brand for him, something that he was able to market very well. 117 

He helped force curators into acknowledging that photography was an art form as legitimate as 

painting or sculpture through his benefactor Sam Wagstaff .118 Mappletho rpe was one of the first 

to use African American figure models in his photographs and brought up the question of race in 

his photographs in very direct ways , according to Holland Cotter 119 and Jack Fritscher. 120 

While h is traditional portraits had been acknow ledged as beautiful during his life time ,

after his death and events surrounding “The Perfect Moment” exhibit ion, the focus was on his 

more sexualized work . At the e nd of his life , he created series with themes of flowers and 

> 116

Edgar Arceneaux, Brian Droitcour, Carrie Rickey, and Colin Westerbeck, "Putting Mapplethorpe in his 

Place," Putting Mapplethorpe in his Place - Magazine - Art in America . (March 1, 2016). Accessed February 1, 

2017.http://www.artinamericamagazine.com/news -feature s/magazine/putting -mapplethorpe -in -his -place/. 

> 117

Tim Murphy, "Mapplethorpe, Prince of Darkness," The Nation . (April 04, 2016). Accessed April 8, 

2017. https://www.thenation.com/article/mapplethorpe -prince -of -darkness/. 

> 118

Jack Fritscher, "'He was a sexual out law': my love affair with Robert Mapplethorpe," The Guardian .

(March 09, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert -

mapplethorpe -photography -jack -fritscher -look -at -the -pictures. 

> 119

Holland Cotter, "Why Mappleth orpe Still Matters," The New York Times . (March 31, 2016). Accessed 

April 8, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/01/arts/design/why -mapplethorpe -still -matters.html. 

> 120

Jack Fritscher, "'He was a sexual outlaw': my love affair with Robert Mapplethorpe," The Guardian .

(March 09, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert -

mapplethorpe -photography -jack -fritscher -look -at -the -pictures. Weber 52 

statues. He had made great st rides in pushing the art form forward , yet most of the writing about 

him remains focused on his themes of sex and sexuality. 121 Today, even many of the images 

found in the X portfolio have lost some of their offensiveness, so Mapplethorpe is now seen as 

less of a rebel and more of a classic artist. 122 

The NEA Four have probably had the most varied liv es since the NEA “Culture War” 

erupted. Holly Hughes reached international acclaim for her performance artwork, presented all 

over the world. She published two books: Clit Notes: A Sapphic Sampler and O Solo Homo: The 

New Queer Performance and received numerous awards. She is now teaching at the University 

of Michigan as a professor in the School of Art and Design , is co -editing another book and is 

working o n a new solo piece, according to her bio from the University of Michigan 123 and her 

own words. 124 

Karen Finley is still working as a performance artist and is the author of eight books .125 

She has worked as an actress and has received a number of awards and grants for her art over the 

years , including a Guggenheim Fellowship. 126 In 2016 , she turned the political candidates into 

pieces of performance art so she clearly has not ‘mellowed’ with time. 127 Finley also works as 

an art professor for the Tisch School of the Arts in New York City.  

> 121

"Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Medium," British Journal of Photography , (Ma rch 24, 2016). 

Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.bjp -online.com/2016/03/robert -mapplethorpe -the -perfect -medium/. 

> 122

Cotter, 2016.  

> 123

"Holly Hughes | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the University of Michigan," Holly 

Hughes | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the University of Michigan. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://stamps.umich.edu/people/detail/holly_hughes. 

> 124

Holly Hughes, "Reverberations of the NEA Four Affair," The Harvard Gay & Lesbian Review 3, no. 3 

(July 31, 1996): 33.  

> 125

"Karen Finley," Karen Finley. Accessed February 1, 2017. http://karenfinley.com/events.php.  

> 126

"High School Programs," Karen Finley . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://tisch.nyu.edu/about/directory/app/101925210.  

> 127

Anthony Haden -Guest, "How Karen Finley Turned Trump and Hillary Into Brilliant Performance Art," 

The Daily Beast . (August 21, 2016). Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/08/21/how -karen -finley -turned -trump -and -hillary -into -brilliant -

performance -art.html. Weber 53 

As for the men, Tim Miller is now an internationally acclaimed performance artist and a 

writer. His works have received multiple rewards and he has taught performance at various 

colleges throughout the c ountry. Miller is also the co -founder of two very influential 

performances spaces in the U.S. on opposite coasts. He still works on promoting LGBT rights 

from his home in California with his partner. 128 He is very vocal both online and in the greater 

comm unity. 129 

Finally, John Fleck , is still a performance artist , who also worked as an actor in “Star 

Trek: Enterprise,” “Carnivale,” “Waterworld,” “True Blood,” and “Weeds” according to his 

IMDb record 130 and Reed Johnson’s article. 131 He said that after the events surrounding the NEA 

controversy , he did not want to apply for another grant again. Unlike his contemporaries, h e was 

not an activist by nature; so all of the attention focused on him due to these events was 

apparently rather drainin g. 132 He is still performing , receiving rave reviews from the New York 

Times and has received a number of awards for outstanding performance. 133 In 2015 , Fleck, was 

the subject of a documentary , John Fleck is Who You Want Him to Be. 134 All in all , the events o f

the National Endowment for the Arts controversy had very little long term negative 

consequences for the artists involved . These events made these artists household names , at least  

> 128

"Tim Miller ," Tim Miller. Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.timmillerperformer.com/about.html. 

> 129

Tim Miller, Tim Miller Queer Performer. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://timmillerperfomer.blogspot.com/.  

> 130

"John Fleck Biography," IMDb . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

htt p://www.imdb.com/name/nm0281387/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm. 

> 131

Reed Johnson, "John Fleck dons a distinctive garland," Los Angeles Times , (May 15, 2011). 

http://articles.latimes.com/2011/may/15/entertainment/la -ca -john -fleck -20110515.  

> 132

JAN BRESLAUER and "INTERVIE W: John Fleck's Radical Shtick," Los Angeles Times . (November 

18, 1990). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://articles.latimes.com/1990 -11 -18/entertainment/ca -7066_1_fleck -john -

worked. 133 "Bio," John Fleck . (December 31, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://johnfleck.net.cp -

38.webhostbox.net/bio/. 

> 134

Lisa Derrick, "Controversial John Fleck Documentary Screens July 18 at Brand Library," The Huffington 

Post. (July 17, 2015). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa -derrick/controversial -john -fleck -

_b_7814978.html. Weber 54 

for a short time . They also drew attention for the role of the government funding the arts , if not 

for the artists’ causes themselves. This history shows that political conservatism and publicly 

funded art do not tend to mix well , especially when controversial content is at stake. Yet, this 

does not necessarily res ult negative ly for the artists involved. Yes, the controversy can bring 

about inflammatory, critical press and even the denial or removal of grant money . It also ensures 

that there can be positive, supportive publicity for both the artist s and their work . The NEA 

controversy made national news and was debated in Congress for years. While one would be 

hesitant to say that all publicity can be positive because there certainly are both risks and 

benefits, it appears that it helps, especially in the art wor ld where so much of an artist’s success 

relies on having a recognizable name. 

How the Modern P oint of View Displays that Changing Culture Changes One ’s Views on 

Controversies 

With the turn of the century and the increased social acceptance of LGBTQA+ 

ind ividuals , many of the types of exhibits and performances that drew controversy solely for 

being works by LGBTQA+ individuals no longer draw the same level of discussion. This has 

been proven by the many subsequent exhibits of Mapplethorpe’s works that hav e been presented 

since the initial controversy without any major discussion. Mapplethorpe’s art including works 

from the XY Z P ortfolio s, tend not to be publicized. Nevertheless, some of those seven 

photographs are the easiest to find online while searching for images from “The Perfect 

Moment .” It is actually quite hard to figure out which of Mapplethorpe’s other works were 

included in more current exhibit ions , without the paper exhibit ion catalog, which is rath er ironic 

because the formerly censored images are now even more a ccessible in books , exhibition Weber 55 

catalogues, and on line. There are no warnings surrounding the images ; merely the context of 

the text. If one is searching for “The Perfect Moment” in G oogle images , the censored images 

do not necessarily show up ; although if one continues to scroll down , the results may appear 

where there is no context .

As a whole , the goal of many regarding contemporary Mapplethorpe exhibit ions is to 

bring these works bac k into discussion under a different political climate that is more LGBTQA+ 

friendly so it will allow for a more in -depth conversation about the artist and his influence. In 

2015 , the Contemporary Arts Center had an exhibit ion of forty -two artists 135 who se artwork s

were influenced by the Mapplethorpe controversy and his work, as well as a two -day symposium 

on Mapplethorpe’s work and censorship, with one panel focusing on the trial. 136 The artists were 

tasked with creating pieces that displayed what Mapplethorp e, controversy, and censorship 

mean t to them . 137 Four of the artists were supposed to have exhibits at the CAC around the 

same time as “The Perfect Moment .” Thanks to that controversy , they felt that they had to 

change the proposals they were submitting t o the CAC , so they would be asked to take part in 

this exhibition .138 Perhaps most interesting, HBO released a documentary on Mapplethorpe  

> 135

The artists were: Terry Berlier, Michael Bill Smith, Mary Carothers, Barbara Crawford, Alison Crocetta, 

Matthew Dayler, Molly Donnermeyer, Anita Douthat, Jenny Fine, Jesse Fox, Rosalind Fox Solomon, Mark Harris, 

Laura Hartford, Stephen Irwin, Mark Flanigan and Joseph Winterhalter, Kevin T. Kelly, Cal Kowal, Anthony 

Luensman, Merrilee Luke -Ebbeler, Leslie Lyons, Sally Mann, Maurice Mattei, Joel McDonald, William Messer, 

Emily Hanako Momohara, Todd Pavlisko, Arno Rafael Minkinnen, Kristin Rogers, Katy Rucker, Mark Sawrie, 

Brad Austin Smith, Sheida Soleimani, Tim Stegmaier, Jordan Tate, Diana Duncan Holmes and Timothy Riordan, 

Peter Huttinger and Tony Walsh, Joey Versoza, Joel Whitaker, Michael Wilson, Joel -Peter Witkin, Jeffrey Wol in, 

Anna Wu 

> 136

Grace Dobush "25 Years Later: Cincinnati and the Obscenity Trial over Mapplethorpe Art," The 

Washington Post , (October 23, 2015). Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/25 -years -later -cincinnati -and - th e-obscenity -trial -over -

mapplethorpe -art/2015/10/22/07c6aba2 -6dcb -11e5 -9bfe -e59f5e244f92_story.html?utm_term=.6e1aa7bda46b. 

> 137

BWW News Desk, "Robert Mapplethorpe Exhibition Opens 11/6 at Contemporary Arts Center ,"

Broadway World (October 30, 2015 ). Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.broadwayworld.com/bwwart/article/Robert -Mapplethorpe -Exhibition -Opens -116 -at -Contemporary -

Arts -Center -20151030.  

> 138

"After The Moment, " Contemporary Arts Center . Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.contemporaryartscenter.org/exhibitio ns/2015/11/after -the -moment. Weber 56 

starting in April 2016 . Preceding this documentary , there was a callback to the protests that 

surrounded “The Perfect Moment .” During the protests that occurred around the Corcoran Art 

Gallery and the CAC , in 1989 and 1990, people were projecting images of Mapplethorpe’s 

artwork onto sides of buildings. Partly as advertisement for the documentary , a pop -up 

installation featured a series of larger -than -life projections of some of Mapplethorpe’s famous 

and lesser known works , with commentary from the artist himself. It debuted in Miami, then 

moved to New York, and then went on to San Francisco. 139 Anot her exhibit ion that chose to 

follow the documentary series, Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Medium open ed at the Getty 

and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art until July 2016 .140 This exhibition did not avoid the 

controversial images including works from t he X Portfolio , such as the now infamous bullwhip 

photo graph . On one level, t his resurgence in Mapple thorpe’s popularity proves that attempts at 

censorship and persecution of art do not work. Artists and museums alike remain inspired by 

Mapplethorpe, his work and his life. The Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation keeps his legacy 

alive both in terms of his artwork and to support medical research surrounding HIV/AIDS. 141 

Probably thanks to the renewed interest in his life , those who were closest to Mapplethorpe —

models, lovers, and friends — are telling their stories of the man and the artist. Jack Fritscher 

spoke about being in a relationship with Mapplethorpe, his obsession with his art and sending 

letters back and forth. 142 Tim Murphy looks at how Mapplethorp e was being portrayed in that            

> 139 Curtis M Wong, "A Larger -Than -Life Celebration of Robert Mapplethorpe Comes To New York," The
> Huffington Post. (March 18, 2016). Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/mapplethorpe -new -york -exhibition_us_56ec2d79e4b03a640a6a4be2.
> 140 Tanja M Laden, "Penises and Parrot Tulips: Robert Mapplethorpe's Most Iconic Works," Creators .
> (March 17, 2016) . Accessed February 1, 2017. https://creators.vice.com/en_us/article/robert -mapplethorpe -most -
> iconic -works -exhibition?utm_source=tcpfbus.
> 141 Exhibition -E.com, The Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation. Accessed March 03, 2016.
> http://www.mapplethorpe.org/.
> 142 Jack Fritscher, "'He was a sexual outlaw': my love affair with Robert Mapplethorpe." The Guardian.
> (March 09, 2016). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert -
> mapplethorpe -photography -jack -fritscher -look -at -the -picture s.

Weber 57 

HBO documentary and explores how Mapplethorpe knew that his work was going to draw the 

attention that it did. 143 Finally, Dominick Dunne writes about interviewing a dying man and the 

end of the artist’s life, having interviewed and sat for a photograph by Mapplethorpe not long 

before his death from AIDS in 1989. 144 

With 27 years of distance and social change , some of what stimulated the majority of the 

controversy in 1989 would not generate the same reaction in 2017. Sex and nudity will draw 

interest when displayed in museums and might draw the ire of some communities ; but as a 

whole , there have not been attempts to censor the photographs or the language used surrounding 

Mapplethorpe and his images. Even the more taboo topics such as BDSM have become almost 

mainstream with the popularity of films such as “50 Shades of Grey .” Its immediate shock and 

awe factor widespread in the early ‘90s has diminished .

However , despite this evolution , during the past year in America , an ob servable rise in 

behaviors, speech, and ideology have challenged these trends of acceptance and open -

mindedness. Instead there is a distinct rise in hate groups and crimes, a growing level of focus 

on conservatism, and a devaluing of the arts at a nationa l level. With the election of President 

Donald J. Trump leading a majority Republican Congress, the NEA is under threat again. 

Trump’s proposed budget would cut the NEA funding in its entirety. 145 Hate c rimes against 

minorities including LGBTQA+ persons h ave increased and there are threats to remove        

> 143 Tim Murphy, "Mapplethorpe, Prince of Darkness," The Nation . (April 04, 2016). Accessed April 8,
> 2017. https://www.thenation.com/article/mapplethorpe -prince -of -darkness/.
> 144 Dominick Dunne, "Robert Mapplethorpe's Finale: The AIDS -Stricke n Photographer's L ast Interview, "
> Vanity Fair .(January 30, 2015 ). Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/1989/02/robert -
> mapplethorpe -aids -dominick -dunne.
> 145 United States, Office of Management and Budget, America First: A Budget Blueprint to Make America
> Great Again.

Weber 58 

discriminati on protections for those groups, as reported by NBC News, 146 CNN, 147 and The New 

York Times. 148 The trends that had placed these works from the 1980s and 1990s as stories of 

history are being reversed. History has the potential to repeat itself. Artists are among those 

protesting the current administration ; so, with President Trump’s ideal budget putting the future 

of the NEA in jeopardy, this means that the next four years could see very similar debate s. 

Modern religious ly themed artwork still draw s attention ; people have very strong 

opinions about it. Recently there has been no controversy that has reached the same scale as the 

NEA “Culture Wa r,” but there was another exhibition in 1999 that in clud ed religio us works, 

titled “Sensation ,” and its controversy shook Brooklyn , N ew York . 

> 146

Reuters, "U.S. Hate Crimes Up 20 Percent in 2016, Fueled by Election Campaign: Report ,"

NBCNews.com . (March 14, 2017 ). Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us -news/u -s-hate -

crimes -20 -percent -2016 -fueled -election -campaign -n73330 6. 

> 147

Elizabeth Landers, and Jeremy Diamond, "Trump expected to sign religious liberty executive order ,"

CNN . (May 03, 2017 ). Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.cnn.com/2017/05/03/politics/trump -pence -religious -

liberty -executive -order/.  

> 148

Editorial Boa rd, "The L.G.B.T. Trump Fallacy, " The New York Times . (April 17, 2017 ). Accessed May 

03, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/17/opinion/the -lgbt -trump -fallacy.html. Weber 59 

Chapter 4: “Sensation” 

The exhibit ion “Young British Artists from the Saatchi Collection: Sensation ,” often 

shortened to “Sensation ,” was displayed both in London, England and in Brooklyn , New York .

“Sensation” opened in the Royal Academy of Art in London during 1997 and in the Brooklyn 

Museum of Art two years later. The exhibition included the same artists and the same images .

Each ar tist was someone who was seen as a little nontraditional either in their topic of focus or in 

their media , and all were collected by Charles Saatchi. Yet the identical exhibition s received two 

extremely distinct and different reactions and responses ; each with its own media backlash and 

implications. A mix of public outcry, media attention, religious beliefs, and funding controversy 

all combined within the scope of these two controversies creating a fascinating comparison. 

“Sensation” Background 

Charles Saatchi is a British advertiser turned art collector . Saatchi was the cofounder of 

one of the world’s largest advertising agencies wi th his brother, Maurice Saatchi . Famous in the 

British art world , Saatchi , much like many of the artists that he collect s, is often found in the 

public spotlight, stirring the waters of controversy. Saatchi was born on June 9, 1943 in 

Baghdad and was raised in London. 149 In 1970 Charles and his brother started their first 

ad vertising agency , Saatchi & Saatchi, which grew into a superpower , creating campaigns for 

Margaret Thatcher, British Airways, and more .150 In 1985 Charles opened the Saatchi Gallery in 

Chelsea, bringing his marketing prowess to the art world. He had been collecting art ever since 

1963 , building his coll ection with his first wife Doris Lockhart. They collected and displayed     

> 149 Lisa S Wainwright, "Charles Saatchi," Encyclopædia Britannica . (June 06, 2008). Accessed Apr il 7,
> 2017. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charles -Saatchi.
> 150 "Charles Saatchi," Art Bios . (March 08, 2011). Accessed April 7, 2017. https://artbios.net/2 -en.html.

Weber 60 

leading artists including Andy Warhol and Cindy Sherman. Starting around 1990 with his 

second marriage to Kay Hartenstein, Charles Saatchi started focusing on up -and -coming British 

artists. 151 They traveled around the country amassing a huge collection, and by 1997 they had 

acquired nine hundred “Young British Art ists” works which Saatchi would later resell for greatly 

increased prices. During this change in his collecting , th e Saatch i brothers were forced to restart 

their advertising business in 1995 as M&C Saatchi , after Maurice was kicked out of the Saatchi 

& Saatchi and lost his position as chairman of the board .152 

The Young British Artists w eren’t a formal group, a specific exhibition , or art form. 

Instead , it was a term coined in 1992 by Michael Corris in the magazine Artforum to describe the 

works of Damien Hurst and other young artists . It was abbreviated in 1996 to YBA by Art 

Monthly , another magazine. This really defin ed an era of British art when the artists were taking 

risks in the form , process, and materials of art. M any of them used found objects or imagery that 

could be defined as shocking , but that was about the limit of their similarity. Many of them , but 

not all , had attended Goldsmiths College , which had “been fostering new forms of creativity 

through its courses which abolished the traditional separation of media into painting, sculpture, 

printmaking etc.” 153 Only s ome of the artists knew each other , though grouped together by 

critics. All of them profited greatly from Saatchi’s attention. Roughly the same age, they 

explored a range of skills and choice of media . Few of these artists were par ticularly well known 

before “Sensation ;” little did they realize this exhibition would become, for many of them , their 

way to gain greater notoriety in the British art world.          

> 151 Elizabeth Day, "Charles Saatchi: Art Supremo with an Image Problem | The Observer pro file," The
> Guardian . (June 22, 2013). Accessed April 7, 2017.
> https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jun/23/observer -profile -charles -saatchi -nigella -lawson.
> 152 "Charles Saatchi," Art Bios ,(March 08, 2011). Accessed April 7, 2017. https://artbios.net/ 2-en.html.
> 153 Tate, "Young British Artists (YBAs) –Art Term," Tate . Accessed April 30, 2017.
> http://www.tate.org.uk/art/art -terms/y/young -british -artists -ybas .

Weber 61 

The artists that drew the greatest attention in “Sensation” were Damien Hi rst, Tracy 

Emin, Marcus Harvey, Chris Ofili, Jack and Dinos Chapman, Matt Collishaw, and Marc Quinn .

Each of these artists had a different style and focus. Some of these artists gain ed more attention 

than others, with Chris Ofili dominating the media frenzy in America and Marcus Harvey 

dominating in London. 

Each of these artists brought something different to the Saatchi collection in terms of 

artwork and drama. Damien Hi rst was represented by the most pieces in the collection with 

eigh t of his works being displayed, many of them inc luding preserv ed animal remains. 154 The 

Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living (1991) is a tiger shark suspended 

in a steel and glass box, preserved in formaldehyde. Argininosuccinic Acid (1995) is a painting 

on canvas of multicolored circles in ro ws. Isolated Elements Swimming in the Same Direction for 

the Purpose of Understanding (1991) is a school of fish suspended in glass and Perspex cases on 

shelves of steel and wood preserved in formaldehyde, all facing one direction. A Thousand Years 

(1990) is a large steel and glass rectangle divided in half with a white cube with a black dot in 

the middle of each side . On the other side of the glass partition with four holes is a large metal 

and light insect trap hanging from the ceiling and a real cow’s he ad on the floor. There also are 

live flies and maggots in this piece. Some Comfort Gained from the Acceptance of the Inherent 

Lies in Everything (1996) is a cow bisected into twelve sections and placed into glass and steel 

tanks preserved in formaldehyde. Away from the Flock (1994) is a lamb preserved via 

formaldehyde in a glass and steel case. This little piggy went to market, this little piggy stayed 

home (1996) is a pig that was cut in half vertically and each half was preserved in formaldehyde   

> 154 Adams, Sensation .

Weber 62 

in a separate steel and glass case. Finally, beautiful, kiss my fucking ass painting (1996) is a 

multicolor , abstract , round canvas painting with the co lors radiating from the center. 

Damien Hirst also brought prior personal drama and baggage to the exhibition . He was 

born June 7, 1965 in Bristol England and spent his childhood in Leeds. His parents split when he 

was twelve and as a teen he was arrested twice for shoplifting. He came of age in the late 70s 

early 80s and became interest ed in the new , emerging, gritty and confrontational punk scene .

This interest likely helped to shape his personality in the art world. Hirst attended Goldsmiths, 

Univers ity of London from 1986 to 1989. While there he was extremely involved in the student 

life around campus and over summer he worked part time at a mortuary in Leeds. This job ga ve 

him the technical knowledge and inspiration to create his taxidermy based, provocative works. 155 

While at Goldsmiths, Hirst acted as curator and organizer for a group exhibit ion titled 

Freeze. In addition to Hirst , it included sixteen other emerging postmodernist artists who would 

become known for their “ta ke no prisoners ” approa ch to art. Some of them , Mat Collishaw for 

example, would later be a part of Saatchi’s collection of Young British Artists. Freeze was held 

in a warehouse in the London Docklands which was definitely not an art center at the time. This 

exhibit ion was as varied as the artists themselves and was presented in three phases. In the first 

phase , Hirst installed a painted cardboard box piece aptly named, Boxes and in the final phase 

Hirst painted onto the warehouse walls two spot paintings Edge and Row , which are as the names 

imply, lines of multicolored dots. 156 One of Hirst ’s professors persuaded a number of notable 

influential art people in Britain to attend , including Saatchi. This combined with future          

> 155 "Damien Hirst Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works," The Art Story. Acces sed April 4, 2017.
> http://www.theartstory.org/artist -hirst -damien.htm#biography_header.
> 156 Science Ltd, "Freeze -Damien Hirst ,"Freeze -Damien Hirst . Accessed May 04, 2017.
> http://www.damienhirst.com/exhibitions/group/1988/freeze.

Weber 63 

warehouse exhibits helped persuade Saatchi to inv est in this new brand of Young British 

Artists. 157 

Hirst was no stranger to c ontroversy . There were plenty of critics at the time who felt that 

his work was not worthy of the attention that it was being shown. They claimed it was simplistic 

bordering on sim ple -minded , and that Hirst was manipulating the art world into valuing his 

works. Animal rights activist s have numerous problems with many of his works , especially the 

ones that were shown in Sensation , due to their inclusion of animal remains. Over the years ,

animals have been a constant theme in Hirst’s work, resulting in an estimate of 913,450 animals 

who died as a part of Hirst’s work. 158 The larger animals such as the tiger shark, lambs, and 

pigs were dead before they were found inside of museum halls , but the majority of animal deaths 

come in the form of much smaller creatures, butterfli es, flies, and other insects. S ome of these 

creatures lived their lives and died as a part of the art piece, either from being released inside a 

museum ga llery or from a bug zapper suspended over a rotting cow skull .159 That isn’t even 

touching some of the other discussions surrounding him in later years. Hirst is very good at 

marketing himself and ensuring that he remains in the public eye. He was the “po p star” of the 

British art world and that was not phrased as a compliment by many. 160 He partied hard and 

worked the media in his favor. 161 His work sometimes sold for high prices set by the artist who                  

> 157 "Damien Hirst Biography , Art, and Analysis of Works," The Art Story . Accessed April 4, 2017.
> http://www.theartstory.org/artist -hirst -damien.htm#biography_header.
> 158 Caroline Goldstein, "How Many Animals Have Died for Damien Hirst's Art to Live? We Counted, "
> Artnet News .(April 13, 2017 ). Accessed May 04, 2017. https://news.artnet.com/art -world/damien -whats -your -beef -
> 916097. 159 Adrian Hamilton, "Damien Hirst: The maestro of the macabre ,"The Independent .(April 02, 2012 ).
> Accessed May 04, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk/arts -entert ainment/art/features/damien -hirst -the -maestro -of -
> the -macabre -7608846.html.
> 160 Catherine Mayer, "Damien Hirst: 'What have I done? I've created a monster' | Catherine Mayer," The
> Guardian . (June 30, 2015). Accessed April 5, 2017.
> https://www.theguardian.com/ar tanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien -hirst -what -have -i-done -ive -created -a-monster.
> 161 Science Ltd,"Damien Hirst." A Conversation -Damien Hirst. 2004. Accessed April 4, 2017.
> http://www.damienhirst.com/texts/2004/march --irvine -welsh.

Weber 64 

made it clear that he was in th e artmaking business for th e money. He worked very hard to 

create his brand and to use it to ensure that his works would sell. A few main types of his early 

work includes : spin art, ‘dot’ paintings; (which were often done by one of his assistants ),

canvases with dead butterflies, and dead animal presentations or sculptures. 162 Death seems to 

be an ever present theme in his work . Though a long -standing tradition in the art world , Hirst 

seems to have a unique way to represent it. 163 Hirst forces the viewer to look at death directly. 

In our modern society , we tend to be disconnected from death and decay which can create a 

taboo around representing it in a candid manner . Yet many of us benefit from death every day ,

whenever we eat a piece of bacon or a burger. Hirst takes death, and t urns it into something that 

we want to look at, something that we are curious about. H e takes something that is ever 

present , but avoided and puts it into a large glass box for us to stare at and contemplate . Death is 

a popular theme in art history , but it rarely is shown as dramatically as a tiger shark staring down 

at you suspended in a glass box. 164 

For the exhibition , Tracy Emin contributed Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963 -1995 

(1995) which was a tent with a mattress and light . T he names of every person that she allegedly 

had slept with , innocently or otherwise , during that time period were appli ed to the inside 

surfaces of the tent. 165 

Tracy Emin at this time was known as the “ bad girl of British art” for not falling into line 

with the traditional British art world. Emin was born in London in 1963. Her father left her and             

> 162 Simon Hattenstone, "Damien H irst: 'Anyone can be Rembrandt,'" The Guardian . (November 13, 2009).
> Accessed April 5, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/nov/14/damien -hirst -interview.
> 163 John A Walker, Art and outrage: Provocation, Controversy and the Visual Arts . London: Pluto Press,
> 1999. 164 Brian Dillon, "Damien Hirst: He laughs in the face of death ,"The Telegraph .(April 04, 2012 ). Accessed
> May 04, 2017. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/art -features/9177026/Damien -Hirst -He -laughs -in -the -face -of -
> death.html.
> 165 Adams ,Sensation.

Weber 65 

her mother poor while she was still very young. When she was thirteen , she was raped . The 

event had a fundamental impact on her art. She studied fashion as an undergrad and received her 

MA in painting from the Royal Academy in 1989. However , due to an emotionally traumatic 

experience after graduation , she destroyed all of the artwork that she had created while at the 

Royal Academy. 

Emin did return to art and i n 1993 had her first solo exhibit ion, which was 

autobiographical and became a recurring theme in her later work. In the mid -90s , she was in a 

relationship with Carl Freedman , a curator and art world figure, which meant that she also was in 

contact with Dam ien Hirst , a friend of Freedman’s . Encouraged by Freedman, in 1995 Emin 

created her most famous work, Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963 -1995 . In 1997 she gained 

the title of “the bad girl of British art” after she appeared drunk and argumentative on a live 

television show about the Turner Prize , Britain’s most highly publicized art award, given to an 

artist based on their work from a previous year . Two years later , she w as nominated for the prize 

herself, helping to fuel the discussion about her an d her work and acting as a catalyst for her 

notoriety. Emin is known for using traditionally fe male techniques like needlework, to raise 

questions about feminist and sexuality. 166 

There were three paintings by Marcus Harvey in Sensation . Myra (1995) was a black and 

white portrait made out of hand prints while Proud of His Wife (1994); and Dudley, Like What 

You See? Then Call Me (1996) bot h depict a nude woman , painted with very sharp , visible 

brush strokes, each in a different pose against a flo ral background. In Proud of His Wife (1994) 

the woman is sitting back on her heels with her legs spread and chest pushed out and in Dudley,   

> 166 "Tracey Emin Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works," The Art Story . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.theartstory.org/artist -emin -tracey.htm.

Weber 66 

Like What You See? Then Call Me (1996) the woman balances one leg and her opposite forearm 

on a chair pulling aside one of her butt cheeks with her other hand .167 

Harvey was born in 1963 in Leeds. While growing up when the British economy 

declined, his father ’s advertising company went bankrupt and they lost thei r home . He grew up 

in a religious family and saw art as a calling. Much like many of the other “Young British 

Artists” he attended Goldsmiths ; but unlike many of his contemporaries he then spent seven 

years employed as a care worker for people with autism during the day and painting by night. 

Harvey did not think that he was going to be a popular artist and surely did not see many 

similarities between himself and the other “Young British Art ist s” as he was only friends with 

Hirst. Harvey uses a variety o f media not just staying with painting ; but also incorporating 

sculpture and other mixed media elements. 168 

Saatchi added five paintings by Chris Ofili to the collection . Spaceshit (1995) has a 

primarily blue backg round and is filled with mosaic -like circl es . Near the top of the work and 

supporting it from the bott om are globs of elephant dung. In fact, elephant dung is found in 

every work by Chris Ofili in this exhibit ion . Afrodizzia (1996) is a psychedelic mix of color and 

paper images of African Americ an men with afros. This image also painted with names and 

circles has globs of elephant dung both on the canvas and supporting the canvas from the bottom .

Popcorn Tits (1996) is red and warm colors in -radiating patterns surrounding the dung ,

resembling water ripples or the shape of popcorn popping. Afrobluff (1996) is a mostly black 

canvas with a white connecting pattern traveling around the image and four globs of elephant 

dung are on the canvas in the shape of a cross. The Holy Virgin Mary (1996), ha s a yellow      

> 167 Adams, Sensation.
> 168 Simon Hattenstone, "Simon Hattenstone views Marcus Harvey's new artwork," The Guardian.
> (February 20, 2009). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/21/marcus -
> harvey -margaret -thatcher.

Weber 67 

background and the figure in the center is mostly blue and black . Surrounding the figure and on 

top of the figure in some places are collaged cutout images of buttocks. Elephant dung is on what 

would be the abstract figure’s breast and it suppor ts the image. 169 

Chris Ofili was born in 1968 in Manchester, England to immigrant parents. His father 

left, going back to Nigeria, when Ofili was eleven. Chris Ofili grew up as an altar boy and 

hadn’t considered art as a living when he graduated high schoo l. Instead he wanted to focus on 

furniture design ; but i n order to do that , he needed to study one year in an art foundation course. 

That one year changed the trajectory of his life. He chose to focus on painting, at first producing 

portraits and se lf -portraits. Ofili continue d his education in art in London. At the time , he felt 

that he had little in common with the “Young British Artists” not knowing that in a few years he 

would be seen as one of them. He saw the Young British Artists who had talent for self -

promotion and used nontraditional materials, but he didn’t see the similarities in his work . For 

him , elephant dung, resin, and oil paints w ere all equally art materials . Starting in 1992 after 

visiting Africa , Ofili began using balls of elephant dung in his paintings , which would soon bring 

him both fame and controversy. He graduated from the Royal College in 1993 with work that 

was more abstract and rested on balls of dung instead of being hung on the wall. This was his 

way to connect his paintings back to the earth, instead of leaving them hanging on a wall. People 

and other recognizable forms started to return in his work with more of a collage form in the 

mid -1990s . He also warmed up with watercolor and pencil drawings . He had his first solo show 

in 1996 in London. He received mixed re views from critics at this time. Some suggested that 

you had to look deeply at this works, as a quick reading would mean that you would miss the 

entire point; others saw his art as denigrating, prete ntious , and stupid . Despite receiving a wide   

> 169 Adams, Sensation.

Weber 68 

variety of reviews for a relatively new artist , Ofili won the Turner prize in 1996 , becoming the 

first black artist to do so. 170 

Four sculptures by Jack and Dinos Chapman were brought to the collection. Great Deeds 

Against the Dead (1994) depicts three bodies tied to a tree with brown earth as a base. One body 

at the back is upside down, another is tied upright to the tree and is missing his genitals, and the 

final , partially dismembered , hanging body al so is missing his genitals, and is tied to a branch 

with its arms dangling separately and head impaled. Ubermensch (1995) features a replica of 

Steven Hawking balancing at the edge of a black cliff. Zygotic acceleration, biogenetic, de -

sublimated libidin al model (enlarged x 1000) (1995) shows naked girls resembling Barbie dolls 

with out real definition, all merged as one into a circle. Some are upside down, others are 

connected at the waist in odd wa ys and all wear the same pair of black and white sneakers .

Tragic Anatomies (1996) varies this model with female forms morphed and connected in 

increasingly odd ways, like conjoined twins from a mad s cientist laboratory in a forest -like 

setting. 171 

Dinos Chapman was born in London in 1962 and his brother , Jack, wa s born in 

Cheltenham in 1966. 172 They both attended the Royal Academy of Art as postgraduates , quickly 

deciding that the school’s traditions were not going to lead them to the fame that they desired. 

They also were quick to realize that while technique and beauty might eventually lead to fame ,

they were going to focus on creating pieces that would lead to the most discussion and media       

> 170 "Biography for Chris Ofili (Born 1968)," Chris Ofili Biography . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.chrisofiliprints.info/biography.php?cur=.
> 171 Adams, Sensation.
> 172 John Walsh, "Sibling ribaldry: What next for Britart's notorious duo, Jake and Dinos Chapman?," The
> Independen t. (June 17, 2011). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk /arts -
> entertainment/art/features/sibling -ribaldry -what -next -for -britarts -notorious -duo -jake -and -dinos -chapman -
> 2297785.html.

Weber 69 

coverage to give them the fame that they desired. Violence, sex, and mutilations all featured 

heavily in their work ; so it is no surprise that th ey were seen as controversial. 173 

The brothers also welcome d the commercial aspect of the art world , sold merchandise 

including t -shirts alongside their sculptures, and accompani ed their exhibits with talks covering 

other taboo topics and welcome d discussion. Much like Hirst , the Chapman brothers decided 

that in order to be popular in the 90s -art world , they had to be marketable and shocking. The 

critics had very similar issues with both sets of artists , claiming the ir works we re little more than 

trash ; and yet the artists still remain ed objects of interest to the viewing public. 174 

Mat Collishaw ’s image titled Bullet Hole (1988 -93), is a cibachrome photograph 

mounted on fifteen light boxes that displays a close -up of a n ice pick wound in a person’s 

scalp. 175 

Mat Collishaw was born in 1966 and attended Goldsmith’s C ollege . In fact , he was one 

of the artists who took part in Freeze , the exhibition curated by Hirst. He grew up in a highly 

structured and religious household. This meant that he did not have some things that most 

people take for granted like ac cess to a television and books . The type of religion that his 

parents followed also meant that the sacred was everywhere , not limited to the four walls of a 

church. Those experiences helped shape his work making him more likely to push boundaries 

and see beauty and value in nontraditional images . 176 During and after college, he worked 

laying f oundations for buildings in the area. When he was 23 , he became a father , which was           

> 173 John A. Walker, Art and O utrage .
> 174 Walker, Art & Outrage, 201
> 175 Adams, Sensation.
> 176 "Mat Collishaw," Blain|Southern | Mat Collishaw . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.blainsouthern.com/artists/mat -collishaw.

Weber 70 

something that many of his other “Young British Artist” companions would not experience for 

some time. 177 

Marc Quinn was represented by three works in the exhibition . Self (1991) is a self -

portrait sculpture made out of blood refrigerated so that it maintains its shape. The Morphology 

of Speci fic s (1996) is a silver sculpture of a h ead and arm on a silver tadpole -like shape with 

silver droplets scattered around it. No Visible Means of Escape (1996) depicts a man hanging 

from his feet with his skin appearing flayed off in places and hanging from the hip. 178 

Marc Quinn is the only one of the controversial “Young British Artists” who was not 

formally trained in art. He did not study at Goldsmiths and he never got a degree in art; instead 

his degrees from the University of Cambridge were focused on history and art history. Born in 

London in 1964 to a French mother and a British physicist father , Quinn joined the “Young 

Briti sh Artists” with a slightly different perspective than the others. 179 He had worked as an 

assistant to a sculptor Barry Flanagan , and with that training gained an appreciat ion for pushing 

the limits of what a medium could do, which he then transferred into his art. Quinn’s first 

famous work Self (1991) certainly achieved the goal of using unorthodox media . It was 

composed of blood frozen into the shape Quinn’s self -portrait. 180 Such novelty threw the artist 

into the art world head first and ensured that with his friendship with Hirst . Quinn would also be 

seen as one of the founders of the British contemporary art movement that the “Young British 

Artists” exemplified. Both men have a fascination with death and the macabre that they depict in        

> 177 Jonathan Jones, "Mat Collishaw: still sensational," The Guardian . (April 26, 2013). Accessed April 8,
> 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/26/mat -collishaw -st ill -sensational.
> 178 Adams, Sensation.
> 179 Elizabeth Fullerton, "Young British Artist Hits Middle Age: Catching up with Marc Quinn," ARTnews .
> (May 12, 2014). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.artnews.com/2014/05/12/marc -quinn -as -middle -aged -young -
> british -artis t/.
> 180 "Biography ,"Biography . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://marcquinn.com/read/biography.

Weber 71 

their work, creating some works even border on nightmarish. For both artists, the works that 

were showcased in “Sensation” can easily be defined as hard to look at. 181 

Marcus Harvey ‘s Myra drew the majority of the ire in London while Chis Ofili’s painting 

The Holy Vir gin Mary drew the majority of the ire in the United States. That is not to say that 

the other artists mentioned did not play a role in the controversies that follow ed ; (especially the 

con troversy in the United States ); but the main media story were based on these two works .

Critics used t he other images and artists to show how far from the norm the exhibit ion was, 

debated how little of this exhibition was actual ‘art’, and asserted that this collection was put 

together for its shock factor rather than to benefit the art world. 

Cultural Context 

The United States is founded on the ideas of religious freedom, the separation of church 

and state, and the right of freedom of speech. As i deal as this seems, these principles should 

protect citizens’ freedom and support a country where religion doesn’t play a role in political and 

social arguments. Unfortunately, t hat is not the case . T here is a very strong , unquestioned 

religious presence in this count ry . A presidential candidate cannot be elected unless they 

mention God at least once, they often ha ve to be some form of Christian. Many of the federal 

holidays are Christian holidays ; other faiths have no federal holidays. As well as religious ideas 

often have an impact on policy de cisions for the entire country or at least the arguments 

surrounding them . Although the country professes that it is based on the separation of church 

and state, Christian religion is very much a part of the political process . With a 2014 poll stating 

tha t “53 percent of Americans said they would be less likely to support a presidential candidate   

> 181 Widewalls, "Marc Quinn," WideWalls . Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.widewalls.ch/artist/marc -
> quinn/.

Weber 72 

who does not believe in God” and “ in 2013, more than half of Americans said religion was “very 

important” in their lives and that it “can answer all or most of to day’s problems.” 182 It would be 

naïve to believe that this does not have an influence on our culture and cultural interactions .

Religion is both a connecting and divisive force in this country. A s can be seen with the 

National Endowment for the Arts protes ts , it is often a very powerful force against art in some 

cases. 

New York City , and by extension Brooklyn is a very diverse area of the country, 

overwhelmingly liberal and full of different generations, cultures, and class groups; it is hard to 

find a mor e diverse area of the country in such a small physical footprint. As an international 

center, i t also has a n impressive number of museums . The Brooklyn Museum of Art was known 

as one of the region’s least elitist art museums , in part because it served a large racially and 

ethnically diverse population. No other museum in the United States was open to hosting 

Sensation , suggesting the level of risk that this museum took in its attempts to attract more 

visitors and make a name for itself. 183 

Although Great Britain is similar to the United States in many ways , it lack s the 

militaristic support for and defense of religion that can be found in the United States. This i s one 

reason why the controversies took such different paths in the two countries. The orga nization 

that displayed “Sensation” in London is called the Royal Academy of the Arts . It is held in high 

esteem and is lauded as a home of the nati ons most accomplished artists. 184        

> 182 Julie Butters, "Why America Can't Separate Religion an d Politics and What that Means for the 2016
> Election," Arts & Sciences Boston University , Fall 2015, , accessed May 11, 2017,
> http://www.bu.edu/cas/magazine/fall15/america/.
> 183 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation.
> 184 Anthony Gardner, "NOT A PICKLED SHARK IN SIGHT; The 1997 Sensation exhibition made
> controversial multimillionaires....," Sunday Times (London, England), November 22, 2009.

Weber 73 

The art world surrounding the Saatchi coll ection in Britain, was thriving . P eople were 

collecting more and more art by a wide variety of artists working in different media. In this 

Saatchi was not alone. Some articles indicate that there was a sense of economic certainty and a

love for that arts that was present at the time. The more outrageous or eye -catching artists were 

gaining popularity as well as challenging the status quo in this prosperous time. 

Exhibition in England 

When Saatchi decided that it was time to showcase his collection of “Young British 

Artists” he chose the Royal Academy of the Arts in London. A prestigious institution that is 

supp orted solely by its visitors and run by artists, it holds th e first British art school and 

consistently supports a wide range of artists and art forms. Their recent successful shows have 

included everyone from 19 th -century 

expressionist Vincent van Gogh to 

contemporary activist Ai Weiwei .185 Saatchi 

decided this ve nue would provide the perfect 

start for his collection’s exhibition, “Sensation.” 

“Sensation” opened at the Royal 

Academy of the Arts in London on September 

18, 1997 and it immediately drew public ire 

targeting was one artwork , Myra . (Figure 2) 

This painting, created by Marcus Harvey in        

> 185 "About the RA," Royal Academy of Arts. Accessed February 1, 2017.
> https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/about -the -ra .
> Figure 2Myra Marcus Harvey (1995)

Weber 74 

1995 was an acrylic on canvas measuring 396 cm by 320 cm. The portrait of a British chil d

murdere ss by the name of Myra Hindley was comprised of child size handprints of various 

colors. The artist had intended it to stimulate a discussion on child abuse and the media’s role in 

the criminal case ; but the public misunderstood his critical stance due to the heinous nature of 

Hindley’s crime .

Myra Hindley was the lover and accomplice to Ian Bradley , a serial torture r and child 

killer in the 1960s. The bodies of their victims were buried on the moors in Yorkshire and one 

victim has never been found. In the eyes of the British public , Hindley was worse than her lover 

because most people believe that all women natural ly care for and will always protect children ,

which is a sexist assumption . Therefore, Hindley was more reviled for her in actions than the 

actual murderer. 186 

Her crime , 33 years earlier , had shaken the country ; so when people learned that this 

image was going to be displayed at the Royal Academy of the Arts , they were not pleased. 

Winnie Johnson, a mother of one of the victim s joined a protest in front of the museum begging 

patrons not to enter and support this wo rk. Johnson and others felt that Harvey was wrong to use 

this event to benefit himself with fame and money . Her plight grabbed national headlines , but 

ultimately worked against her efforts b ecause this exhibit ion broke attendance records. While on 

displ ay , the painting was splattered with ink and eggs ; but these actions backfire d. 187 The image 

was not damaged and instead the assaults added to a media frenzy. 188 Rocks were thrown at the 

advertisements for the exhibition . Even when a member of the Royal Academy explained to       

> 186 Walker, Art and Outrage .
> 187 Tamsin Blanchard, "Arts: Sensation as ink and egg are thrown at Hindley portrait," The Independent .
> (September 18, 1997). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/ar ts -sensation -as -ink -and -egg -
> are -thrown -at -hindley -portrait -1239892.html.
> 188 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 107 -108.

Weber 75 

Johnson that this work was not honoring Myra Hindley and she was welcome to come in and see 

it for herself, Johnson disagreed and was insulted that they proposed that option. The protest got 

larger ; but so had the line for visitors , p roving that controversy can sometimes be very good for 

business. 189 

A little known fact about the painting was that it wasn’t complete. It was a work in 

progress, a proof of concept that had liv ed in Harvey’s studio for years – unknown and 

unimportant befo re it made its way to Saatchi and then “Sensation.” Harvey had intended for the 

painting to be a critique of the media’s preoccupation with the Myra Hindley story ; but 

obviously , the controversy steered it in the opposite direction which took on a life of its own. 

The final version is three -dimensional. Harvey has said that while he was appalled by the public 

response to this painting , he also feels that is what art is for. It should no t be a pleasant 

distraction ; it should confront and make you think. 190 

Curious humans always want to know what is going on and they often want to see 

something for themselves ; especially if it is drawing virulent controversy. This was illustrated in 

America with the National Endowment for the Arts controversy . The moment a media frenzy 

started, people flocked to the museums wanting to see t he controversial exhibition for themselves 

and make their own judgements. The similar effect in Britain, especially where people attempted 

to deface the symbolic image , proves that findi ng a middle ground on this topic is extremely 

difficult .191         

> 189 Louise Jury, "Royal Academy's `Sensation' proves to be a shockingly good crowd -puller," The
> Independent . (December 29, 1997). Accessed A pril 8, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk/news/royal -academys -
> sensation -proves -to -be -a-shockingly -good -crowd -puller -1291068.html.
> 190 Simon Hattenstone, "Simon Hattenstone views Marcus Harvey's new artwork," The Guardian . (February
> 20, 2009). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/21/marcus -harvey -
> margaret -thatcher.
> 191 Hillary Bowker, "Young Artists Making a "Sensation" in London," CNN . (October 26, 1997). Accessed
> April 8, 2017. http://www.cnn.com/WORLD/9710/26/brit.shock.art /.

Weber 76 

Another level of controversy that can be found here, not nearly as emotionally charged as 

the Myra controversy , surrounds accusations about the presenting institution. There were a 

number of people who claimed that the Royal Academy intentionally presented “ Sensa tion” to 

draw outrageous public attention and create controversy. Critics accused the Royal Academy of 

accepting this exhibition to draw in more visitors ; eve n though it did not reach their typical 

standards for art . Many other people argued the opposite. They felt that while the art found in 

“Sensation” might not be as timeless as in some of the previous Royal Academy exhibitions, it 

reflected the art of the time and therefore deserved to be supported and shown. In their opinion, 

the record -breaking crowds just happened to be a bonus. The media wasn’t universally 

convinced on either side of “ the pond .” In Brooklyn , a major part of the controversy surrounded 

how the exhibition was funded, the source of that money , and whether this was solely a publicity 

stunt for both the Brooklyn Museum and Saatchi. 192 

The other “Sensation” image that result ed in controversy , The Holy Virgin Mary by Chris 

Ofili , did not raise any alarm in London or in the second stop, Berlin ; but in Brooklyn it made 

the news with just as much ferocity as Myra did in London. 

Exhibition in Brooklyn 

Before the exhibition “Sensation: Young British Artists from the Saatchi collecti on” 

even opened in the Brooklyn Museum of Art i n September of 1999, a controversy was brewing. 

This controversy divided itself into two main parts: one was focused on the exhibition and its 

contents, and the other was focused on how this exhibit ion was fu nded. The controversy focused   

> 192 David Tomas, "Sensations & Dickheads (Sensations: Young British Artists from the Saatchi
> Collection,." Parachute: Contemporary Art Magazine , (Winter 1998); 28 -34.

Weber 77 

on the funding drew more attention from academics and museum personnel , and the other drew 

the attention of the general public. The problem of funding resulted in quite a lot of discussion 

and made other museums reconsider how they were going to fund their fut ure exhibits. 

Controversy surrounding the exhibition’s contents was almost encouraged by the Brooklyn 

Museum before and dur ing its run, possibly under the guise of believing “ any press is good 

press .” It also result ed in thrown paint and other defacements, as well as mayoral distain, threats 

of no funding and eviction, protests, and most certainly debate. 

When “Sensation” c ame to the States , it began drawing media attention well before the 

exhibit ion was set to open. The Brooklyn Museum of the Art was not as well -known as some of 

its contemporaries ; but with Director Arnold Lehman at the helm , constituents felt that was 

goi ng to change. He was implementing programs that were proving relevant and interesting to 

the extremely diverse neighborhood around him. Lehman was interested in the community’s 

concerns and their cultural interests. The Brooklyn Museum of Art had a solid reputation for its 

standards as a museum and was gai ning new and younger audiences - forever a challenge for 

museums. 193 This challenge was probably the driving force behind bringing “Sensation” to the 

United States. While educational in n ature , museums ar e not competing with other educational 

institutions for visitors ; but increasingly they do compete with the diverse multibillion dollar 

entertainment industry . Lehman realized this and made the decision to bring in a very unique 

exhibit ion to help his org anization stay relevant in these changing times. 

New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani hated this exhibit ion without even having seen it. He 

wasted no time moving against the Brooklyn Museum of Art. He temporarily took away the 

museum’s operating funds and threatened both to withdraw funding and to evict th e museum   

> 193 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 97 -98.

Weber 78 

from city -owned property. He attempted to censor the museum . He rationalized that since the 

museum was on city land and received city fu nding, that meant that the museum could not 

display anything that could possibly offend others. Instead he wanted the exhibition to be 

censored. Giuliani knew that this ploy was not going to hold up in court legally, but it likely 

would hold up in the “co urt of public opinion ,” which, for this politician , was the court that 

mattered most . His actions against the museum resulted in examining the Constitution to 

consider the concepts of Freedom of Speech and censorship .

The growing controversy had many di fferent foc i, also including the relationship between 

religion and blasphemy, ethical issue s surrounding museums and art dealers, and the socio -

political legality and ethics of a government entity withdraw ing and withhold ing already 

allocated funds from an institution. 

At this point , Giuliani was competing with Hillary Clinton over the New York Senate 

seat ; so by playing the conservative protector of the moral high ground , he hoped to gain support. 

Pollsters predicted he would beat her , so his anti -arts fight made national news since New York 

is traditionally liberal and a supporter of the arts. 194 His political conservatism combined with 

personal ambition resulted in his being against this exhibit ion . This is a vital point in explaini ng 

why he so vehementl y opposed this exhibit ion and why it sparked the discussion that followed. 

Giuliani’s grandstanding , added to the museum’s own marketing , made it inevitable that this 

exhibition would draw major attention. 

Marketing plays a huge role in how an exhibition will be received. Everything from the 

title , to the posters, and the advertising media help shape how the public will respond . Media 

professionals can take a controversial topic and lessen its sensationalism and they can take a   

> 194 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 53.

Weber 79 

rather unassuming exhibiti on and ramp up the interest and discussion. The second approach 

appears to have been utilized for what happened in Brooklyn . The vast majority of the American 

public did not have any idea what the Saatchi collection was . T hey had no idea why they should 

care about a group of British artists whose work was going on display in a museum that wasn’t 

terribly well known , and the phrase “Young British Artists” seem ed a descriptor , not a title . This 

exhibit ion had every chance to be unnoticed except for the marketing by the Brooklyn Museum 

of Art, which emphasized the fact that the art was nontraditional and ran the risk of being 

controversial . They accentuated the possibility of disturbing reactions, stating that it “may cause 

shock, vomiting, confu sion, panic, euphoria, and anxiety” 195 That language drew attention and 

curiosity. In a time before widespread internet and well before the social media juggernaut that 

plays such a major role today; this meant that people either had to visit themselves or wait for the 

newspaper to publish a review to learn what was on view. As seen with the earlier National 

Endowment for the Arts exhibit ions and the London reaction to this exhibition , the hint of 

controversy enticed people to want to see it for themselves . T he marketing campaign results 

add ed to the discussion , increase d museum revenue , and eventually add ed to the controversy. 

Universally debatable topics that will spark discussion across the United States include 

religion. When you add religion to a discussion about art , there is even mor e of a possibility of 

controversy. Previously, t his was seen with the religious right’s debate against the works of 

Serrano and Mapplethorpe , among other historical examples. So , it should not be a surprise that 

one of the main controversies surround “Sensation” in the United States was a painting title d The 

Virgin Mary . People objected to several works, but this painting was by far the one that faced 

the greatest hatred.   

> 195 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 17.

Weber 80 

The Virgin Mary in the Christian 

tradition is revered by many as much as 

her son, Jesus Christ . For centuries, 

classical Western European art has been 

filled with depictions of her as a greatly 

revered sacred figure. She is often shown 

as a young beautiful, Caucasian with a 

serene gentle look, clothed modestly in a 

blue head cover and dress, sometimes 

bathed in bright light while holding her 

son. Chris Ofili’s The Virgin Mary 

(Figure 3) does not look like the classical ,

traditional evocations of this holy figure. Instead , she is a black woman, abstractly rendered with 

different sized eyes and an amorphous body shap e. There is a suggestion that her breast is bared 

(as in Renaissance paintings) , but it is not clear exact ly what is what on this body form other than 

the head . The shape resembling a breast is comprised of elephant dung. Surrounding the figure 

and partially overlapping the dress are images taken from adult magazines depicting the 

backsides and genital ia of various individuals . The entire background o f Ofili’s painting is 

yellow. Obviously, t his does not match the traditional image s of Mary . While some people 

accepted Ofili’s image, a vociferous group objected strenuously using actions and words. 

Much like Myra in London, The Virgin Mary was vandalized by the public. The 

Brooklyn Museum of Art had placed a P lexiglass barrier in front the painting to limit vandalism, 

but it did not stop a 72 -year -old man from sneaking around the barrier and covering the pai nting    

> Figure 3The H oly Virgin Mary Chris Ofili 1996

Weber 81 

with white paint. Dennis Heiner faked an illness so he could lean on the wall near the painting. 

He waited until the security guard had turned away , then took out a plastic bottle filled with 

white paint , snuck around the protective shield , and spra yed and smeared the w hite paint over the 

image. Mean while , someone took a photo graph of this littl e old man painting over an artist ’s

work. When he was arrested, he tried to justify his action by reasoning that the image was 

“blasphemous” in the eyes of this devout Catholic. 196 This clearly premeditat ed action shows 

exactly how powerful this controversy bec ame. In the end the image was restored , reversing the 

defacer’s destructive actions .

The med ia played this up too, by neglecting to explain the artist’s intentions. Ofili used 

elephant dung in the image because of its value in African culture as a sign of fertility and the 

nurturing of “Mother Earth” that creates a connection between African and Christian cultures. 

Instead , the media took this to be insulting or mocking. Subsequent discussion s devolved into a 

class warfare argument by people who were offended by the depiction (after being rallied by 

Giuliani ) and those who considered the artist ’s intentions and personal symbols. 197 Yet another 

label was “ elitist ” — a claim that is often thrown at museums for showing objects that challenge 

preconceptions about what art should be. It becam e a running theme of critics who claimed th at 

the Brooklyn Museum of Art was out of touch with its audience, and the artists themselves, and 

certainly Saatchi , were also culpable . The tired argument tha t museums are just for the rich and 

the elites unfortunately prevails, especially for art museums . People ask, if museums are funded 

by public money , shouldn’t they be reflective of the views of the people? That mentality 

provoked this controversy . A single artwork should not cause the level of media frenzy that 

erupted . In retrospect, many people felt that the public should have more of a say in how    

> 196 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 15.
> 197 Ibid , 18.

Weber 82 

museum s make decisions, according to James Cuno. 198 This resulted in increased awareness of a 

need for a greater transparency in a museum’s actions, which in turn would help get people 

involved. They could help preve nt controversies in the future. 

Funding exhibitions can be difficult; but the id ea of bringing such a controversial 

exhibition to America posed more obstacles than usual . Add to this the fact that “Sensation” was 

scheduled to open in September of 1999 — just ten years after the National Endowment for the 

Arts controversy — and the challenge became even greater . When funds did materialize, the 

Brooklyn Museum of Art made a deal with Charles Saatchi in which he would front a major 

portion of the funds. Without this initial funding , the exhibit ion would never have been able to 

travel to Brooklyn. Once it opened, “Sensation” brought a n unexpected number of people into 

the museum, breaking the institution’s records . The media frenzy also helped draw in people ,

many of whom had never been to the museum before. This also helped solidify the BMA as a 

notable arts institution. However, Saatchi’s personal funding was problematic because of his 

undisclosed intentions : Saatchi was planning to auction off part of this exhibition , which made 

the Brooklyn Museum complicit in inflating any work’s value by all the media attention it 

received. Put another way, any advertisement that the museum made for the exhibit ion also 

acted as advertisement for the sale of its high -profile art. The American Association of Museums 

frowns on such unethical practices. Sponsorship of exhibitions must not be used for personal 

gain. 199 Essentially, Saatchi bought the opportunity to showcase his collection, confident the 

exhibition wou ld increase the art’s value through controversy and free media attention, and then 

reap personal benefits by the sale of works. 200    

> 198 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation, 162 -170.
> "Code of Ethics for Museums," Code of Ethics for Museums, accessed May 18, 2017, http://aam -
> us.org/resources/ethics -standar ds -and -best -practices/code -of -ethics. 199
> 200 Rothfield, Unsettling Sensation , 164 -168.

Weber 83 

Evaluating all of these issues leads to a bette r understanding of the complex r ole a 

museum plays in serving its public, and h ighlights ways in which the public can take a greater 

role in shaping a museum’s mission and practices. 

Effects/Fallout 

Both the Royal A cademy and the Brooklyn Museum of Art survived these controversies. 

The sheer irony in all of this was the report that only 4 percent of surveyed visitors to the 

Brooklyn Museum of Art saw the overall exhibition as being offensive at all. 201 The controversy 

was blown out of proportion. In fact, even though Chris Ofili’s The Virgin M ary was the mo st 

talked about sectio n of “Sensation ,” it was not what was seen as the most controversial. That 

‘honor’ fell to the Chapman brother’s Zygotic acceleration, biogenetic, de -sublimated libidinal 

model and even the n, the majority of those surveyed did not see it as being offensive .202 The 

Royal Academy is still a well -regarded institution in England and has since continued to host 

artists who have been controversial. The Brooklyn Museum of Art has continued its programs 

with community outreach and obviously never was evicted from its building by Giuliani. They 

still feature ‘adult’ exhibits and ask that parents and teachers preview the exhibits before 

bringing small children to the museum ; but this is standard practice. 203 It seems that the events 

surrounding “Sensation” left no la sting scars on either institution. 

In terms of the “Young British Artists” their fate was a little more varied. Some of them 

achieved art fame, some became Royal Academicians themselves ( professor level artists at the 

Royal Academy ), and others , primari ly those who did not find themselves at the center of       

> 201 Rothfield Unsettling “Sensation” 140.
> 202 Ibid , 141 -142.
> 203 "FAQ," Brooklyn Museum: FAQ . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/about/faq/.

Weber 84 

controversy, fell into relative obscurity. Many of the artists who were the focus o f the most 

media frenzy stay ed in the art world, reaching great heights. Damien Hirst had already started to 

mak e a na me for himself before “Sensation” and only added to his fame through the museum 

world. Hirst spent some years dealing with drug addiction and his art style changed over the 

years ; alth ough the themes of death, among others , are still found in his newer wo rks. When he 

was younger , Hirst regularly made the ta bloids, and offend ed people by his actions, normally 

under the influence. Now in his early 50s , Hirst has seem ed to put the majority of that r ock star 

lifestyle behind him. 204 He faced backlash from the public and the art community over the years, 

partly because of his use of other artists to complete some of his pieces, the exorbitant pricing of 

his works, and the moral and social issues that arise in his art . His shark and o ther such projects 

made the news again in 2016 due to a fear of the formaldehyde used to preserve them that is now 

leaking through the cases. 205 After taking some time off, he remains an active artist included in 

exhibit ion s being shown around the world .206 Hirst also owns hi s own gallery where he displays 

other artist s’ works alongside his own. Due to the market issues in 2008 , his career has been on 

hold. T he high prices of his p ieces combined with their size mean that there are few people who 

are able or willing to invest in them. 207 He briefly dabb led in paint , but plans to make a 

comeback to the art world in 2017 . His newest installation, Treasures from the Wreck of the 

Unbelievable , involves huge sculptures and other artifacts, more than 100 in total, c reated to look               

> 204 Science Ltd,"Damien Hirst," A Conversation -Damien Hirst. (2004). Accessed April 4, 2017.
> http://www.damienhirst.com/texts/2004/march --irvine -welsh.
> 205 Agence France -Presse in London, "Damien Hirst's preserved carcasses leaked formaldehyde gas, study
> claims, "The Guardian. (April 20, 2016 ). Accessed May 04, 2017.
> https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/damien -hirsts -preserved -carcasses -leaked -formaldehyde -
> gas -study -claims.
> 206 Science Ltd,"Damien Hirst," Solo Exhibit ions -Damien Hirst . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.damienhirst.com/biography/solo -exhibitions.
> 207 Mark Hudson, "Damien Hirst's moment has passed," The Telegraph. (October 09, 2014). Accessed April
> 4, 2017. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/11150 706/Damien -Hirst -review.html.

Weber 85 

as if they were discovered after years of bei ng on the bottom of the ocean. Expensive to produce, 

it will be expensive to purchase. Wo rks range in price from $500,000 to $5 million. Even though 

this installation doesn’t include any animals , alive or dead , it has already drawn the ire of animal 

activists claiming that it is “an insult to a city of REAL a rt, :” Venice, Italy. 208 Regardless, Hirst 

again seeks the limelight, especially if that means that his art is going to continue to be sold on a

large scale. 

Chris Ofili also is extremely well known and has received a number of awards for his 

work, including the Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, awarded by 

the Queen of England in 2016. He had his first major solo exhib it ion in the United States in 

2014 -2015 , titled “Day and Night” .209 It showcased the span of Ofili’s career with examples 

from all of his experimental media in painting, sculpture, and drawings. 210 He weathered the 

storm caused by “Sensation” in Brooklyn and continued to paint. He branched out with 

sculpture in 2005 and has not shied away from using religious themes in his work. He also 

diversified with ballet, where he works for the Royal Ballet painting set s and designing costume s

for “Diana and Actaeon.” While “Sensation” helped propel his career forward, the controversy 

that he faced in Brooklyn has faded with time. 211 

Marcus Harvey still lives and works in London , but he has kept a low profile since 

“Sensation ,” avoiding any major shows since 2005. 212 He has been married once and has a total                

> 208 Carol Vogel, "Damien Hirst Is Back With an Underwater Fantasy. Will Collectors Care?," The New York
> Times . (April 06, 2017). Accessed April 10, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/06/arts/design/damien -hirst -
> francois -pinaul t-palazzo -grassi.html?_r=1.
> 209 "Chris Ofili biography," David Zwirner . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.davidzwirner.com/artists/chris -ofili/biography/.
> 210 "Chris Ofili: Night and Day ,"Chris Ofili: Night and Day :: New Museum .(Fall, 2014 ). Accessed Ma y
> 04, 2017. http://www.newmuseum.org/exhibitions/view/chris -ofili.
> 211 Calvin Tomkins, "Chris Ofili Returns," The New Yorker. (January 25, 2017). Accessed April 18, 2017.
> http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/10/06/unknown -6.
> 212 Saatchi Gallery, "Marcus Harvey ," Artist's Profile -The Saatchi Gallery. Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/marcus_harvey.htm.

Weber 86 

of three children between that first relationship and his current long term one. Harvey quit his 

job as a care worker and spent some time as a full -time artist befo re cutting back to being a part -

time art teacher a s well. He launched a magazine for painters focusing on art history. He created 

a number of works as of 2009 that focus on former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , in a 

variety of art media, including bronzes, paintings , and a mosaic. He wasn’ t mocking Thatcher in 

his works; he just started a series that focuses on British hi story and he sees her as an icon in that 

history .213 

The Chapman brothers, remain very active in the art world with exhibit ion s and movies 

as well. 214 Their work still has the dark and disturbing tone that they were known for in the 

1990s with “Sensation,” questioning innocence, death, and other serious topics. 215 In 2010 , they 

released a children’s coloring book to go along with their children’s exhibition , “Gigantic Fun .”

Even though it was being marketed for children , the elements had the same disturbing themes of 

their normal work. When questioned the men merely said that the imaginations of children are 

just as dark as the images that they have created, pointing to their lives as fat hers and their 

experiences with their own children as the basis for their position .216 In 2011 , they took a break 

from creating together to work solo for the first time since they started their artistic careers. 217              

> 213 Simon Hattenstone, "Simon Hattenstone views Marcus Harvey's new artwork," The Guardian . (February
> 20, 2009). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/21/marcus -harvey -
> margaret -thatcher.
> 214 Jake & Dinos Chapman, "Jake & Dinos Chapman," Jake & Dinos Chapman . Accessed February 1,
> 2017. http://jakeanddinoschapman.com/.
> 215 Kate Abbott, "Jake and Dinos Chapm an: how we made Hell," The Guardian. (June 16, 2015). Accessed
> April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/16/jake -and -dinos -chapman -how -we -made -hell.
> 216 Stuart Jeffries, "How the Chapman Brothers became the brothers grim," The Guardian .(August
> 03, 2010). Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/03/jake -dinos -chapman -
> childrens -art.
> 217 John Walsh, "Sibling ribaldry: What next for Britart's notorious duo, Jake and Dinos Chapman?,"
> The Independent . (June 17, 2011). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk/arts -
> entertainment/art/features/sibling -ribaldry -what -next -for -britarts -notorious -duo -jake -and -dinos -chapman -
> 2297785.html.

Weber 87 

They pushed the limits of the art world and laughed at their critics; they are as famous as they are 

infamous. 

Marc Quinn is an internationally recognized artist and has been shown all around the 

world. His most recent exhibit ion was in London in 2015. 218 His works continue to push 

boundaries . Quin n has frozen flowers into sculptures, made huge inflatable figures, and forced 

audiences to confront their ideals of beauty. H is body of work focused on the forms of people 

with disabilities, who have reconfigured themselves via body modification and tatt oos, as well as 

transgender persons. His continued self -portraits made in blood have expanded to paintings of 

his fingerprints and iris. 219 The British media has dubbed some of his scupltures a “freak show,” 

but that has not diminished either his work or po pularity. He is now married with three children 

and lives and works in London. 220 

Mat Colli shaw also is internationally recognized and his most recent solo exhibition was 

in 2015 as well. 221 He had a five -year relationship with Tracy Emin , but as of 2013 was in a 

relationship with taxidermist Polly Morgan with whom he was creating an exhibition .222 His 

work has been varied since “Sensation ,” ranging from religious to explicit with almost every 

alteration in between. Collishaw , though , is more i ntroverted than most of the other “Young 

British Artists ,” which means that he missed some of the more extreme fame of his companions ,          

> 218 "Biography," Biography . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://marcquinn.co m/read/biography.
> 219 Elizabeth Fullerton, "Young British Artist Hits Middle Age: Catching up with Marc Quinn," ARTnews .
> (May 12, 2014). Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.artnews.com/2014/05/12/marc -quinn -as -middle -aged -young -
> british -artist/.
> 220 Widewalls, "M arc Quinn," WideWalls . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.widewalls.ch/artist/marc -quinn/.
> 221 Shed, "Biography," Mat Collishaw . N.p., n.d. Web. 1 Feb. 2017.
> 222 Jonathan Jones, "Mat Collishaw: still sensational," The Guardian . (April 26, 2013). Accessed April 8,
> 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/26/mat -collishaw -still -sensational.

Weber 88 

and , therefore , some of the financial success that they reaped. Four years ago, he was working to 

change that. 223 

The “Sen sation” artist who is the most successful is Tracey Emin. Not only is she 

internationally acclaimed and exhibiting work, s he als o has three honorary doctorates. In 2007, 

Emin was only the second female artist to represent Britain at the 52 nd Venice Bienna le, a nd was 

made a Royal Academician . In 2011, she became a professor of Drawing for the Royal 

Academy and in 2012 she was awarded Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British 

Empire by Queen Elizabeth. 224 In 2015, she “got married” to a rock in he r garden and made a 

dedicated decision to focus on her work and love. 225 Out of all of the controversial artists , she 

seems to have been the most awarded after those colorful years .226 

Charles Saatchi has a varied history with the art world since then too. He gained a 

reputation for both helping ar tists and ruining artists. He spend s huge amounts of money for 

artists’ works and take s risks acquiring work by up -and-coming artists ; yet he also is known for 

selling these pieces as soon as they are worth more money . In some cases , he flooded the market 

with one artist ; thereby lowering the value of their work for a time. This behavior precipitated a 

falling out between Saatchi and Hirst in 2003 which has yet to fully heal. His gallery still hosts 

thousands of visitors a year, although his exhibit ion s have been hit or miss. 227 

Saatchi was not perturbed by the controversy that Sensation drew. I n fact in 2010 he put 

together a second “Sensation ” titled “Newspeak: British Art ” Now which was a two -part              

> 223 Hermione Eyre, "Mat Collishaw is art's Mr Nasty," Evening Standard . (April 10, 2012). Accessed April
> 8, 2017. http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/mat -collishaw -is -art -s-mr -nasty -6720511.html.
> 224 Tracey Emin, "Tracey Emin," Tracey Emin Studio . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.traceyeminstudio.com/biography/.
> 225 "Tracey Emin Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works," The Art Story . Accessed April 8, 2017.
> http://www.theartstory.org/artist -emin -tracey.htm.
> 226 Tracey Emin, "Tracey Emin," Tracey Emin Studio . Accessed February 1, 2017.
> http://www.traceyeminstudio.com/bio graphy/.
> 227 "Charles Saatchi," Art Bios . (March 08, 2011). Accessed April 7, 2017. https://artbios.net/2 -en.html.

Weber 89 

exhibit ion . It included a few of the original , but older “Young British Artists” and other artists. 

Unlike “Sensation ,” there was no unifying theme or connecting factors among these artis ts, 

losing the very branding quality that existed for the original “Young British Artists.” Not that 

the original “Sensation ” was seen favorably by all, but this new version lacked the popularity 

that “Sensation” had . All of the news reports saw this exhibition as unexciting especially when 

compared to the larger than li fe media frenzy that Sensation sparked. The reviews in British 

papers claim ed that the exhibition was stale ,228 poorly curated, and lackluster. 229 Saatchi is still 

changing the art world , now going online with his collection and marketing. By removing the 

external art dealer from equation , the website Saatchi Online makes Saatchi an art dealer himself. 

Saatchi Online displays artists’ works and offers it for sale, with 70% of the sale goi ng back to 

the artists , and the site displays digital exhibits. As a result, young artists are especially 

fascinated by Saatchi and are interested in his potential assistance to fame , which has even some 

of the former “Young British Artists” disappointed. 230 

How this Points Out that Two Cultures See Controversy in Different Factors 

The American side of the controversy was very much driven by political conservatism 

and economic issues surrounding funding the exhibit ion s. This was then fed by the media who 

use d Giuliani’s disapproval to generate interest for the exhibition and their newspapers . Ofili’s 

The Holy Virgin Mary acted as the catalyst for this controversy since Giuliani disapproved of             

> 228 Sean O'Hagan, "Newspeak: British Art Now at t he Saatchi Gallery | art review, "The Observer .(June 05,
> 2010 ). Accessed May 04, 2017. https:// www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/06/newspeak -british -art -now -
> saatchi. 229 Laura McLean -Ferris, "Newspeak: British Art Now, Part 2, Saatchi Gallery, London, "The Independent .
> (November 11, 2010 ). Accessed May 04, 2017. http://www.independent.co.uk/ar ts -
> entertainment/art/reviews/newspeak -british -art -now -part -2-saatchi -gallery -london -2131717.html.
> 230 Elizabeth Day, "Charles Saatchi: art supremo with an image problem | The Observer profile," The
> Guardian. (June 22, 2013). Accessed April 7, 2017.
> https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jun/23/observer -profile -charles -saatchi -nigella -lawson.

Weber 90 

that piece; but that did not prevent other artists from being se en as disturbing or controversial 

when the exhibition was viewed as a whole. 

There is nothing that would prevent an issue similar to Myra from proving to be as much 

of a media storm if it occurred in the United States. The American audience lacked the hi storical 

context to understand and feel connected with that image when it came to the States. (Ironically, 

they may have understood the artist’s true intention.) The controversy in Britain was due to a 

specific event and the impact that the related murder of children, had on the cultural landscape. 

That is far different than the controversy in the States. In both cases, there was a level of 

perceived elitism in museums , perpetrating the question: how dare they show art l ike this, art that 

is offensive? However, the reasons behind the offense were completely different. With both 

images and both controversies , the media, and others push ed other agendas. Mayor Giuliani 

used controversy for political gain, the BMA used it to attract new visitors and gain attention in 

the competitive N ew York art world , the Royal Academy for the Arts used it to enhance its 

notoriety in Britain , and Charles Saatchi personally profited from it. Weber 91 

Chapter 5 : Conclusion and Why All of this Matters 

Public controversy over art is something that is going to happen regardless of the social 

context and time period. C hanging context s and shifting social norms , especially when 

combined with art , are going to provoke debate. Museums as houses of material cultur e, will be 

permanently intertwined with public controversy. Museums no longer act as impassionate 

observers to the world around them ; their visitors want to see exhibits about the reality of the 

modern world and museums are adapting to meet those needs. Social issues play an increasingly 

volatile role in American society, something that artists reflect in their artwork and in their 

exhibitions. So , what does that mean for museums? Do they avoid these conversations? Do they 

play it safe and pretend that these issues do not matter to the museum, the public they are 

serving, or the artists that are creating? For some museums , taking the risks with potentially 

controversial exhibits is beyond what they feel comfortable doing. Whenever there is a 

controvers y surrounding an exhibition or museum there is always a potential threat to the 

museum’s funding. O ne could alienate one’s visitors, one’s board members, or damage one’s 

reputation. However, by entertaining potentially controversial exhibit ion s, museums also open 

their doors for greater diversity and new interest. 231 These controversies were risks for all of 

those involved ; but for the most part , the museums and artists benefited from taking those risks .

These events of the past matter because th e issues seen here are not fully resolved ; and 

so , they cannot be ignored. NEA and its sister the NEH are still under threat. There has been a 

cultural devaluing of the arts and humanities on a national level and there is a credible risk that 

these organ izations will be defunded. This time it would not be because of a controversy , but 

due to an extremely small cut to the federal budget. The NEA is currently supported by 0.012%    

> 231 Lonnie Bunch, "Embracing Controversy: Museum Exhibitions and the Politics of Change," The Public
> Historian 14, n o. 3 (1992): 63 -65. doi:10.2307/3378230.

Weber 92 

of the budget. Combined, the National Endowment for the Arts, the National End owment for the 

Humanities, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and the Institute of Museum and Library 

Services are allocated 0.02% of the budget – that is two hundredths of one percent. 232 

On June 26, 2015 , the Supreme Court ruled that same sex marriage w as legal for the 

entire country. It was a massive and long -awaited step forward for the LGBTQA community. 

Yet, despite this advance, widespread homophobia pervades America and effects the arts 

community. For example , there are now treatments for HIV/AIDS ; however, they still cost an 

exorbitant amount of money , which impacts a wide swath of the population. The issue parallels 

the experiences of the NEA artists who lost their funding decades ago by protesti ng sexual parity 

issues. The times haven’t changed that much .

Religion and religious difference have always been hot button issue s in America. This 

was easily seen with the attempts to defund both the National Endowment for the Arts and the 

Brooklyn Museum of Art for their support of artists whose used religion in their artwork in a 

non -traditional sense. Today, r eligion continues to be a powerful , often divisive force in 

American culture , especially when it intersects with politics . Once again , th e current political 

climate has created a distrust of an entire multibillion person religion; a distrust that is so 

powerful , it is leading a c all of isolation by some – although they remain a minority .

These are just some of the social issues that museu ms encounter. In fact, there is an 

almost never -ending list of topics that museums can present that could draw controversy. Social 

context explains why some of these topics might draw strong reactions. It does not forgive or   

> 232 Philip Kennicott and Peggy McGlone, "Trump wants to cut the NEA and NEH. This is the worst -case
> scenario for arts groups," The Washington Post , (March 16, 2017), accessed May 11, 2017,
> https://www.washingtonpost.c om/lifestyle/style/with -elimination -of -nea -and -neh -trumps -budget -is -worst -case -
> scenario -for -arts -groups/2017/03/15/5291645a -09bb -11e7 -a15f -
> a58d4a988474_story.html?utm_term=.3e4bb7b90548.

Weber 93 

render those involved blamel ess , but it does explain why. It explains why certain topics will 

create a media firestorm. It explains why books upon books will be written about a part of a 

larger controversy while the other sections are forgotten. It explains why these themes repeat 

themselves ov er generations. The one thing social and cultural context do not explain , though is 

what to do with this knowledge. It doesn’t say that museums have to avoid or have to show 

potentially controversial exhibits. There is no right or wrong an sw er to that; it depends on what 

the museum is willing to risk. H istory does tell us that museums are taking greater risks in 

modern years. They are taking on more and more complex exhibitions that cause strong re actions 

and great discussion. 

Twenty -first century museums are redefining their roles as neutral institutions, and 

becoming more comfortable with controversy in the name of political justice. Some modern 

museums and galleries are taking the risk to bring up uncomfortable topics like ra cism, white 

privilege, child exploitation and more. A La s Vegas art gallery, the Arts Factory displayed 

artwork of a convicted serial killer, John Wayne Gacey, in “Multiples : The Artwork of John 

Wayne Gacey.” It claimed to reflect the multiple aspects of his life and the works were to be 

sold to benefit various charities. 233 Erik Ravelo created a digital exhibition , “Los Intocables” 

(translated to “The Untouchables”) featuring a series of photographs of sculptures where a child 

is being crucified on the ba ck of an adult, with the child’s face blurred, and is meant to display 

situations where children have been exploited by adults. 234 The Gallery Guichard presented a 

show, “Confronting Truths: Wake Up!” which featured fifty works by Ti -Rock Moore which     

> 233 CNN Wire Staff, "Controversial serial killer's paintings go on disp lay in Las Vegas," CNN , (May 13,
> 2011), accessed May 11, 2017, http://www.cnn.com/2011/US/05/13/serial.killer.art/.
> 234 Priscilla Frank, "Controversial Art Project Addressing Violence Against Children Is Censored By
> Facebook (NSFW PHOTOGRAPHS)," The Huffingt on Post , (September 10, 2013), accessed May 11, 2017,
> http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/09/10/erik -ravelo_n_3900061.html.

Weber 94 

dealt w ith racial injustice in America, including a life size sculpture of the Michael Brown 

shooting. This combined with the fact that Moore is white resulted in a fair amount of media 

attention. 235 These exhibitions are drawing more me dia attention than “Sensatio n,” in part 

accelerated by the internet, and yet museums are persisting. These two events, the NEA 

controversy and the “Sensation” controversies, are just some of the many events that place 

museums in the national spotlight. In the twenty first -century , museums are no longer sat isfied 

with playing it safe. Instead , the twenty -first century museum s are less concerned with 

sensationalism for the sake of it; rather they are poised to encourage and support a growing 

generation of artists that are increasingly connected to real world issues, committed to keeping 

them front and center of a larger national discourse. In the words of Lisa Phillips, director of the 

New Museum, “…when people have hostile reactions to things, it is a good sign they might be 

importan t.” 236        

> 235 Steve Johnson, "Michael Brown exhibition sparks controversy," Chicagotribune.com ,(July 23, 2015)
> accessed May 11, 2017, http://www .chicagotribune.com/entertainment/museums/ct -michael -brown -art -chicago -
> gallery -guichard -20150722 -column.html.
> 236 Randy Kennedy, "Under the Art World Radar," The New York Times , May 7, 2017, Arts & Leisure sec.

Weber 95 

Work Cited 

Abbott, Kate. "Jake and Dinos Chapman: H ow We Made Hell." The Guardian . June 16, 2015. 

Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/16/jake -

and -dinos -chapman -how -we -made -hell. 

"About." Tim Miller. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.timmillerperformer.com/about.html. 

"About the RA." Royal Academy of Arts . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/about -the -ra. 

"About WPA." About WPA | Washington Project for the Arts . Accessed May 03, 2017. 

https://www.wpadc.org/about. 

Adams, Brooks, Johnnie Shand Kydd, and Norman Rosenthal. Sensation: Young British Artists 

from the Saatchi Collection ; Junge Britische K ü nstler aus der Sammlung Saatchi. 

Brooks Adams, Lisa Jardine, Martin Maloney, Norman Rosenthal, Richard Shone ; .

Ostfildern: Cantz, 1998. 

"After The Moment." Contemporary Arts Center . Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.contemporaryartscenter.org/exhibitions/2015/11/after -the -

moment. 

"ANDRES SERRANO." ANDRES SERRANO . Acc essed February 1, 2017. 

http://andresserrano.org/Bio.htm. 

"Andres Serrano." Andres Serrano Biography – Andres Serrano on artnet. Accessed April 8, 

2017. http://www.artnet.com/artists/andres -serrano/biography. 

"Andres Serrano." International Center of P hotography . March 02, 2016. Accessed April 8, 

2017. https://www.icp.org/browse/archive/constituents/andres -

serrano?all%2Fall%2Fall%2Fall%2F0. 

"Andres Serrano - Biography." RoGallery . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://rogallery.com/Serrano_Andres/Andres_S errano -Biography.html. 

Arceneaux, Edgar, Brian Droitcour, Carrie Rickey, and Colin Westerbeck. "Putting 

Mapplethorpe in his Place." Art in America . March 1, 2016. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.artinamericamagazine.com/news -features/magazine/putting -mapplethorpe -in -

his -place/. 

Binkiewicz, Donna M. Federalizing the Muse: United States Arts Policy and the National 

Endowment for the Arts, 1965 -1980 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 

2004. 

"Bio." John Fleck . December 31, 2016. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://johnfleck.net.cp -Weber 96 

38.webhostbox.net/bio/. 

"Biography." Biography . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://marcquinn.com/read/biography. 

"Biography for Chris Ofili (Bor n 1968)." Chris Ofili Biography. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.chrisofiliprints.info/biography.php?cur=. 

Blanchar d, Tamsin. "Arts: Sensation as Ink and Egg are Thrown at Hindley P ortrait." The 

Independent. September 18, 1997. Accessed April 8, 2017 .

http://www.independent.co.uk/news/arts -sensation -as -ink -and -egg -are -thrown -at -

hindley -portrait -1239892.html. 

Bolton, Richard. Culture Wars: Documents from the Recent Controversies in the Arts . New 

York: New Press, 1997. 

Bowker, Hillary. "Young Artist s Making a "Sensation" in London." CNN . October 26, 1997. 

Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.cnn.com/WORLD/9710/26/brit.shock.art/. 

Bunch, Lonnie. "Embracing Controversy: Museum Exhibitions and the Politics of Change." The 

Public Historian 14, no. 3 (19 92): 63 -65. doi:10.2307/3378230. 

Butters, Julie. "Why America Can't Separate Religion and Politics and What that Means for the 

2016 Election." Arts & Sciences Boston University . Fall 2015. Accessed May 11, 2017. 

http://www.bu.edu/cas/magazine/fall15/america/. 

Chapman, Jake & Dinos. "Jake & Dinos Chapman." Jake & Dinos Chapman . Accessed February 

1, 2017. http://jakeanddinoschapman.com/. 

"Charles Saatchi." Charles Saatchi • Art Bios. March 08, 2011. Accessed Apr il 7, 2017. 

https://artbios.net/2 -en.html. 

Childs, Elizabeth C. Suspended License: Censorship and the Visual Arts . Seattle: A Samuel & 

Althea Stroum Book, 1998. 

"Chris Ofili biography." David Zwirner . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.davidzwirner .com/artists/chris -ofili/biography/. 

"Chris Ofili: Night and Day." Chris Ofili: Night and Day :: New Museum . Fall, 2014. Accessed 

May 04, 2017. http://www.newmuseum.org/exhibitions/view/chris -ofili. 

CNN Wire Staff. "Controversial serial killer's paintin gs go on display in Las Vegas." CNN . May 

13, 2011. Accessed May 11, 2017. http://www.cnn.com/2011/US/05/13/serial.killer.art/. 

"Code of Ethics for Museums." Code of Ethics for Museums . Accessed May 18, 2017. 

http://aam -us.org/resources/ethics -standards -and -best -practices/code -of -ethics. Weber 97 

Cotter, Holland. "Why Mapplethorpe Still Matters." The New York Times . March 31, 2016. 

Accessed April 8, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/01/arts/design/why -

mapplethorpe -still -matters.html. 

"Damien Hirst Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works." The Art Story . Accessed April 4, 2017. 

http://www.theartstory.org/artist -hirst -damien.htm#biography_header. 

Danto, Arthur C., and Robert Mapplethorpe. Playing with the Edge: The P hotographic 

Achievem ent of Robert Mapplethorpe . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 

Day , Elizabeth. "Charles Saatchi: A rt Supremo with an Image P roblem | The Observer profile." 

The Guardian. June 22, 2013. Accessed April 7, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/the observer/2013/jun/23/observer -profile -charles -saatchi -

nigella -lawson. 

Derrick, Lisa. "Controversial John Fleck Documentary Screens July 18 at Brand Library." The 

Huffington Post . July 17, 2015. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa -derrick/controversial -john -fleck -_b_7814978.html. 

Desk, BWW News. "Robert Mapplethorpe Exhibition Opens 11/6 at Contemporary Arts Center." 

Broadway World . October 30, 2015. Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.broadwayworld.com/bwwart/article/Robert -Mapple thorpe -Exhibition -Opens -

116 -at -Contemporary -Arts -Center -20151030. 

Dillon, Brian. "Damien Hirst: He laughs in the face of death." The Telegraph . April 04, 2012. 

Accessed May 04, 2017. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/art -

features/9177026/Damien -Hi rst -He -laughs -in -the -face -of -death.html. 

"Dirty Pictures (TV Movie 2000)." IMDb . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0217363/. 

Dobush, Grace. "25 Years Later: Cincinnati and the Obscenity Trial over Mapplethorpe Art." 

The Washington Post , October 23, 2015. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/museums/25 -years -later -cincinnati -and -

the -obscenity -trial -over -mapplethorpe -art/2015/10/22/07c6aba2 -6dcb -11e5 -9bfe -

e59f5e244f92_story.html?utm_term=.6e1aa 7bda46b. 

Dunne, Dominick. "Robert Mapplethorpe's Finale: The AIDS -Stricken Photographer's Last 

Interview." Vanity Fair. January 30, 2015. Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/1989/02/robert -mapplethorpe -aids -dominick -dunne. 

Editoria l Board. "The L.G.B.T. Trump Fallacy." The New York Times . April 17, 2017. Accessed 

May 03, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/17/opinion/the -lgbt -trump -

fallacy.html. 

Emin, Tracey. "Tracey Emin." Tracey Emin Studio . Accessed February 1, 2017. Weber 98 

http:/ /www.traceyeminstudio.com/biography/. 

Eyr e, Hermione. "Mat Collishaw is A rt's Mr Nasty." Evening Standard. April 10, 2012. 

Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/mat -collishaw -is -art -s-mr -

nasty -6720511.html. 

Exhibition -E.com. The R obert Mapplethorpe Foundation . Accessed March 03, 2016. 

http://www.mapplethorpe.org/. 

Faherty, John, and Carol Motsinger. "Pornography or art? Cincinnati decided." Cincinnati.com .

March 29, 2015. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.cincinnati.com/story/news/2015/03/28/pornography -art -cincinnati -decided -

robert -mapplethorpe -trial -25 -year/70591342/. 

"FAQ." Brooklyn Museum: FAQ. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/about/faq/. 

Ferentinos, Susan. "Chap ter 6: We're Here, We're Queer, Get Used to It: Mid -1960s to United 

States v. Windsor (2013)." In Interpreting LGBT History at Museums and Historic Sites ,

75 -98. Interpreting History. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015. 

Fox, Madeline, and Katie Wismer. "HOLLY HUGHES." Adrian College Department of Art & 

Design Blog. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.adrianartblog.com/holly -hughes.html. 

Frank, Priscilla. "Controversial Art Project Addressing Violence Against Children Is Censored 

By Facebook (NSFW PHOTOGRAPHS )." The Huffington Post. September 10, 2013. 

Accessed May 11, 2017. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/09/10/erik -

ravelo_n_3900061.html. 

Fritscher, Jack. "'He was a sexual outlaw': my love affair with Robert Mapple thorpe." The 

Guardian. March 09, 2016. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/09/robert -mapplethorpe -

photography -jack -fritscher -look -at -the -pictures. 

Frohnmayer, John. Leaving Town Alive: Confessions of an Arts Warrior . Boston: Houghton 

Mifflin, 1993. 

Fullerton, Elizabeth . "Young British Artist Hits Middle Age: Catching up with Marc Quinn." 

ARTnews . May 12, 2014. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.artnews.com/2014/05/12/marc -quinn -as -middle -aged -young -british -artist/. 

Gallery, Saatchi. "Marcus Harvey." Marcus Harvey - Artist's Profile - The Saatchi Gallery. 

Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/marcus_harvey.htm. 

Gardner, Anthony. "NOT A PICKLED SHARK IN SIGHT; The 1997 Sensation exhibition 

made controversial multimillionaires...." Sunday Times (London, England), November Weber 99 

22, 2009. 

Goldstein, Caroline. "How Many Animals Have Died for Damien Hirst's Art to Live? We 

Counted." Artnet News . April 13, 2017. Accessed May 04, 2017. 

https://news.artnet.com/art -world/damien -whats -your -beef -916097. 

Haden -Guest, Anthony. "How Karen Finley Turned Trump and Hillary Into Brilliant 

Performance Art." The Daily Beast . August 21, 2016. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/08/21/how -karen -finley -turned -trump -and -

hillary -into -brilliant -performance -art.html. 

Hamilton, Adrian. "Damien Hirst: The maestro of the macabre." The Independent . April 02, 

2012. Accessed May 04, 2017. http:/ /www.independent.co.uk/arts -

entertainment/art/features/damien -hirst -the -maestro -of -the -macabre -7608846.html. 

Hattenstone, Simon. "Damien Hirst: 'Anyone can be Rembrandt'" The Guardian . November 13, 

2009. Accessed April 5, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/nov/14/damien -hirst -interview. 

Hattenstone, Simon. "Simon Hattenstone views Marcus Harvey's new artwork." The Guardian .

February 20, 2009. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/200 9/feb/21/marcus -harvey -margaret -

thatcher. 

"High School Programs." Karen Finley . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://tisch.nyu.edu/about/directory/app/101925210. 

"Holly Hughes | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the University of Michigan." Holly 

Hughes | Penny W. Stamps School of Art & Design at the University of Michigan. 

Accessed February 1, 2017. http://stamps.umich.edu/people/detail/holly_hughes. 

Hughes, Holly. "Reverberations of the NEA Four Affair." The Harvard Gay & Lesbian Review 

3, no . 3 (July 31, 1996): 33. 

Hudson, Mark. "Damien Hirst's moment has passed." The Telegraph . October 09, 2014. 

Accessed April 4, 2017. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/11150706/Damien -Hirst -

review.html. 

Huey, Steve. "Karen Finley | Biography & Histo ry." AllMusic . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.allmusic.com/artist/karen -finley -mn0000302661/biography. 

JAN BRESLAUER | INTERVIEW: John Fleck's Radical Shtick." Los Angeles Times .

November 18, 1990. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://articles.latimes.com/1990 -11 -

18/entertainment/ca -7066_1_fleck -john -worked. 

Jeffries, Stuart. "How the Chapman Brothers became the brothers grim." The Guardian . August Weber 100 

03, 2010. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010 /aug/03/jake -dinos -chapman -childrens -

art. 

"John Fleck Biography." IMDb . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0281387/bio?ref_=nm_ov_bio_sm. 

Johnson, Ken. "Andres Serrano — 'America'" The New York Times . December 18, 2003. 

Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.nytimes.com/2003/12/19/arts/art -in -review -andres -

serrano -america.html. 

Johnson, Reed. "John Fleck dons a distinctive garland." Los Angeles Times , May 15, 2011. 

http://articles.latimes.com/2011/may/15/entertain ment/la -ca -john -fl eck -20110515. 

Johnson, Steve. "Michael Brown exhibition sparks controversy." Chicagotribune.com . July 23, 

2015. Accessed May 11, 2017. 

http://www.chicagotribune.com/entertainment/museums/ct -michael -brown -art -chicago -

gallery -guichard -20150722 -column.htm l. 

Jones, Jonathan. "Mat Collishaw: still sensational." The Guardian . April 26, 2013. Accessed 

April 8, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/26/mat -collishaw -

still -sensational. 

Jury, Louise. "Royal Academy's `Sensation' proves to be a shockingly good crowd - puller." The 

Independent . December 29, 1997. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.independent.co.uk/news/royal -academys -sensation -proves -to -be -a-

shockingly -good -crowd -puller -1291068.html. 

Kammen, Michael G. Visual Shock: A History of Art Controversies in American Culture . New 

York: Vintage Books, 2007. 

"Karen Finley." Karen Finley. Accessed February 1, 2017. http://karenfinley.com/events.php. 

Kennicott, Philip, and Peggy M cGlone. "Trump wants to cut the NEA and NEH. This is the 

worst -case scenario for arts groups." The Washington Post . March 16, 2017. Accessed 

May 11, 2017. https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/with -elimination -of -nea -

and -neh -trumps -budget -is -wo rst -case -scenario -for -arts -groups/2017/03/15/5291645a -

09bb -11e7 -a15f -a58d4a988474_story.html?utm_term=.3e4bb7b90548. 

Kennedy, Randy. "Under the Art World Radar." The New York Times , May 7, 2017, Arts & 

Leisure sec. 

Kurcfeld, Michael. "(Photographer Spo tlight) An Art of Uncomfortable Truths: Michael 

Kurcfeld On Andres Serrano [Video]." Los Angeles Review of Books . February 22, 

2017. Accessed May 03, 2017. https://lareviewofbooks.org/av/photographer -spotlight -

art -uncomfortable -truths -michael -kurcfeld -andres -serrano -video/. Weber 101 

Laden, Tanja M. "Penises and Parrot Tulips: Robert Mapplethorpe's Most Iconic Works." 

Creators . March 17, 2016. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://creators.vice.com/en_us/article/robert -mapplethorpe -most -iconic -works -

exhibition ?utm_source=tcpfbus. 

Landers, Elizabeth, and Jeremy Diamond. "Trump expected to sign religious liberty executive 

order." CNN . May 03, 2017. Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.cnn.com/2017/05/03/politics/trump -pence -religious -liberty -executive -order/. 

Levinson, Deborah. "Goodbye, MIT. Hello, World. - The Tech." The Tech - Online Edition .

June 1, 1992. Accessed April 30, 2017. http://tech.mit.edu/V112/N27/levinson.27 o.html. 

Levinson, Deborah A. "Robert Mapplethorpe's extraordinary vision." The Tech , August 6, 1989. 

http://tech.mit.edu/V110/N31/mapple.31a.html. 

London, Agence France -Presse in. "Damien Hirst's preserved carcasses leaked formaldehyde 

gas, study clai ms." The Guardian . April 20, 2016. Accessed May 04, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/damien -hirsts -preserved -

carcasses -leaked -formaldehyde -gas -study -claims. 

"Mat Collishaw." Blain|Southern | Mat Collishaw . Accessed April 8, 201 7. 

http://www.blainsouthern.com/artists/mat -collishaw. 

Mayer, Catherine. "Damien Hirst: 'What have I done? I've created a monster' | Catherine Mayer." 

The Guardian . June 30, 2015. Accessed April 5, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/30/damien -hirst -what -have -i-done -

ive -created -a-monster. 

McLean -Ferris, Laura. "Newspeak: British Art Now, Part 2, Saatchi Gallery, London." The 

Independent . November 11, 2010. Accessed May 04, 2017. 

htt p://www.independent.co.uk/arts -entertainment/art/reviews/newspeak -british -art -now -

part -2-saatchi -gallery -london -2131717.html. 

"Miller v. California." The Free Dictionary . Accessed February 1, 2017. http://legal -

dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Miller v. California. 

Miller, Tim. Tim Miller Queer Performer . Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://timmillerperfomer.blogspot.com/. 

Murphy, Tim. "Mapplethorpe, Prince of Darkness." The Nation . April 04, 2016. Accessed April 

8, 2017. https://www.thenation.com/article /mapplethorpe -prince -of -darkness/. 

"National Endowment for the Arts." NEA . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

https://www.arts.gov/about -nea. Weber 102 

"NEA Online Grant Search." NEA Online Grant Search . Accessed May 18, 2017. 

https://apps.nea.gov/grantsearch/SearchMai n.aspx. 

O'Hagan, Sean. "Newspeak: British Art Now at the Saatchi Gallery | art review." The Observer .

June 05, 2010. Accessed May 04, 2017. 

https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/06/newspeak -british -art -now -

saatchi. 

"Our Mission." AFA.net - Our Mission . Accessed May 02, 2017. https://www.afa.net/who -we -

are/our -mission/. 

Palmer, Alex. "When Art Fought the Law and the Art Won." Smithsonian.com . October 02, 

2015. Accessed February 1, 2017. http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/when -art -

fo ught -law -and -art -won -180956810/?no -ist. 

Rapp, Linda. "Miller, Tim (b.1958)." Glbtq. 2005. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.glbtq.com. 

Reuters. "U.S. Hate Crimes Up 20 Percent in 2016, Fueled by Election Campaign: Report." 

NBCNews.com . March 14, 2017. Accessed May 03, 2017. 

http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us -news/u -s-hate -crimes -20 -percent -2016 -fueled -

election -campaign -n733306. 

"Robert Mapplethorpe (American, 1946 - 1989) (Getty Museum)." The J. Paul Getty in Los 

Angeles. Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.getty.edu/art/collection/artists/2928/robert -

mapplethorpe -american -1946 -1989/. 

"Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Medium." British Journal of Photography . March 24, 2016. 

Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.bjp -online.c om/2016/03/robert -mapplethorpe -the -

perfect -medium/. 

"Robert Mapplethorpe: The Perfect Moment." Catalyst RSS . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://catalyst.wpadc.org/?p=2845. 

Rothfield, Lawrence. Unsettling "Sensation": Arts -Policy Lessons from the Brooklyn Museum of 

Art C ontroversy . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2001. 

Saltz, Jerry . "Looking Out for No. 2." NYMag.com . September 12, 2008. Accessed May 03, 

2017. http://nymag.com/arts/art/reviews/50479/. 

Science Ltd. "Damien Hirst." A Conversation - Damien Hirst. 2004 . Accessed April 4, 2017. 

http://www.damienhirst.com/texts/2004/march —irvine -welsh. 

Science Ltd. "Damien Hirst." Solo Exhibitions - Damien Hirst . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.damienhirst.com/biography/solo -ex hibitions. Weber 103 

Science Ltd. "Freeze - Damien Hirst." Freeze - Damien Hirst . Accessed May 04, 2017. 

http://www.damienhirst.com/exhibitions/group/1988/freeze. 

Shed. "Biography." Mat Collishaw . N.p., n.d. Web. 1 Feb. 2017. 

Tate. "Young British Artists (YBAs) – Art Term." Tate . Accessed April 30, 2017. 

http://www.tate.org.uk/art/art -terms/y/young -british -artists -ybas .

Theen, Andrew. "John Frohnmayer Joins Senate Race." Oregon Public Broadcasting . September 

12, 2007. Accessed May 03, 2017. http://www.opb.org/news/article/john -frohnmayer -

joins -senate -race/. 

"Tim Miller." Tim Miller . Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.timmillerperformer.com/about.html. 

Ting, Selina. "Interview : Andres SERRANO." Initiartmagazine . April 5, 2012. Accessed May 

03, 2017. http://www.initiartmagazine.com/interview.php?IVarchive=87. 

Tomkins, Calvin. "Chris Ofili Returns." The New Yorker . January 25, 2017. Accessed April 18, 

2017. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/10/06/unknown -6. 

Tomas, David. "Sensations & Dickheads (Sensations: Young British Artists from the Saatchi 

Collection)." Parachute: Contemporary Art Magazine , Winter 1998, 28 -34. 

"Tracey Emin Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works." The Art Story . Accessed April 8, 2 017. 

http://www.theartstory.org/artist -emin -tracey.htm. 

United States. Office of Management and Budget,. America First: A Budget Blueprint to Make 

America Great Again. 

Vogel, Carol. "Damien Hirst Is Back With an Underwater Fantasy. Will Collectors Care ?" The 

New York Times . April 06, 2017. Accessed April 10, 2017. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/06/arts/design/damien -hirst -francois -pinault -palazzo -

grassi.html?_r=1. 

Wainwright, Lisa S. "Charles Saatchi." Encyclopædia Britannica . June 06, 2008. Accessed April 

7, 2017. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charles -Saatchi. 

Walker, John A. Art and outrage: Provocation, Controversy and the Visual Arts . London: Pluto 

Press, 1999. 

Walsh, John. "Sibling ribaldry: What next for Britart's notorious duo, Jake and Dinos Chapman?" 

The Independent . June 17, 2011. Accessed April 8, 2017. 

http://www.independent.co.uk/arts -entertainment/art/features/sibling -ribaldry -what -next -

for -britarts -notorious -duo -jake -and -dinos -chapman -2297785.html. Weber 104 

Weber, Jennifer . “Leather, Legality, and the Perfect Controversy: Robert Mapplethorpe and 

the Perfect Moment. ” Manuscript on file, Department of History and Social 

Studies Education, Museum Studies Progra m. April 16, 2016 

Wong, Curtis M. "A Larger -Than -Life Celebration Of Robert Mapplethorpe Comes To New 

York." The Huffington Post . March 18, 2016. Accessed February 1, 2017. 

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/mapplethorpe -new -york -

exhibition _us_56ec2d 79e4b03a640a6a4be2. Weber 105 

Figures Cited 

Figure 1

"Piss Christ by Andres Serrano (1987)." Wikipedia. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piss_Christ#/media/File:Piss_Christ_by_Serrano_Andres_( 

1987).jpg. 

Figure 2 

Gallery, Saatchi. "Marcus Harvey." Marcus Harvey - Myra - Contemporary Art . Accessed May 

09, 2017. http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/artpages/aipe_marcus_harvey_myra.htm. 

Figure 3 

Gallery, Saatchi. "Chris Ofili." Chris Ofili . Accessed May 09, 2017. 

http://www.saatchigallery.com/aipe/chris_ofili.htm.
