Title: Incidents with Migrants and USC&BP

URL Source: https://www.justice.gov/d9/2023-05/03.10.23.%20--%20Incidents%20With%20Migrants%20and%20USCBP%20-%20Part%201.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 19 May 2023 14:29:03 GMT

Markdown Content:
01570-000001 From: Watson, Theresa (OAG) 

Subject: Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning DIgest 

To: Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: Ju y 20, 2022 7:21 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: July 20, 2022 at 6:50:16 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning DIgest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# July 20, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

National Security 

3. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

4. 

Criminal Law 

5. 

Civil Rights 

6. 

Civil Law 

7. 

Immigration & Border Security 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000002

## •

## •

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Antitrust 

Environment 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

US Supreme Court 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

Native American Affairs 

Marijuana Legalization 

Opioid Crisis 

Administration 

Congress 

Network Evening News L

Morning Headlines 

ineup 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JULY 20, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

CONGRESS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000003

## •

10:00  AM: Senate Judiciary Committee: After the Highland Park Attack: Protecting Our 

Communities from Mass Shootings. 

10:00  AM: House Judiciary Committee: H.R. 2814, the Equal Access to Justice for Victims 

of Gun Violence Act; H.R. 1808, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2021. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

AP: US disrupts North Korean hackers that targeted hospitals, Eric Tucker, July 19, 2022, 

3:30  PM 

The FBI and Justice Department recently disrupted the activities of a hacking group that was 

sponsored by the North Korean government and that targeted U.S. hospitals with ransomware, 

ultimately recovering half a million dollars in ransom payments, Deputy Attorney General Lisa 

Monaco said Tuesday. Monaco revealed new details of the attacks during a speech in which she 

encouraged organizations hit by ransomware to report the crime to law enforcement, both so that 

officials can investigate and so that they can help victim companies try to get ransom payments 

back. In this case, Monaco said, a Kansas hospital that paid a ransom last year after being 

attacked by ransomware also contacted the FBI, which traced the payment and identified China-based money launderers who assisted the North Korean hackers in cashing out the illicit 

proceeds. [Continue Reading] See also: Axios, Bloomberg,  CNN , Law360 , UPI , VOA ,

Washington Examiner , WIBW-AM (Topeka, KS) , WSJ 

WaPo: [VIDEO] Garland highlights ATF's role in responses to mass shootings, 

Unattributed, July 20, 2022, 5:04 AM 

Attorney General Merrick Garland spoke July 19 at the swearing in of Steve Dettelbach as 

director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. [Watch ]

USA Today: A.G. Merrick Garland memo suggests no federal indictment of Donald 

Trump before November election, David Jackson, July 19, 2022, 7:11 PM 

Don't expect a federal indictment of Donald Trump over the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection before the 

November election, legal analysts say a newly revealed Justice Department memo suggests. 

Attorney General Merrick Garland reminded U.S. Department of Justice officials that extra steps 

are required before action can be taken in politically sensitive cases during the fall election 

season and unprecedented charges against a former president would certainly seem to qualify. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  Insider , MSNBC , WaPo 

Bloomberg : DOJ Says Probe of Trump’s Jan. 6 Role Will Continue If He Declares 2024 

Run, Chris Strohm, July 19, 2022, 10:14 PM 

The Justice Department’s investigation into efforts by Donald Trump and his allies to overturn the 

2020 election results won’t be deterred if the former president declares his intention to run again, 

Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco said. “We’re going to continue to do our job, to follow the 

facts wherever they go, no matter where they lead, no matter to what level,” Monaco said Tuesday 

at a cybersecurity conference in New York. “We’re going to continue to investigate what was 

fundamentally an attack on our democracy.” [Continue Reading ] See also:  The Hill , Rolling 

Stone , Washington Examiner 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000004

MSNBC: [VIDEO] Justice Department offers assurances on investigation of Trump and 

Big Lie cohort, Adam Lidgett, July 20, 2022, 1:00 AM 

Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco said that the Justice Department's investigation of efforts 

by Donald Trump and his supporters to overturn Trump's 2020 election loss will not be altered if 

Trump declares his candidacy for 2024, after Rachel Maddow shared a Justice Department 

memo outlining policies regarding candidates for office. Joyce Vance, former U.S. attorney, 

offers her perspective. [Watch ]

Washington Times: [OPINION] Biden’s DOJ increases power and rewards political allies, 

Zack Smith, Paul J. Larkin, July 19, 2022, 6:30 PM 

Bad news doesn’t get better with age, and neither does a bad legal argument. Unfortunately, the 

Biden Justice Department recently proposed resurrecting a bad and illegal Obama-era 

practice that let left-wing operatives control a slush fund to reward their political allies with the 

public’s money. And they want to do it without even making any effort to persuade Congress to 

authorize the giveaway. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: DOJ pitches Senate on use of anti-mafia laws to seize Russian assets , Tobias 

Burns, July 19, 2022, 4:48 PM 

The Department of Justice (DOJ) asked Congress for permission on Tuesday to use a sweeping 

set of laws originally designed to break up the mafia as part of their efforts to pursue the assets 

of the Russian elite following the country’s war in Ukraine. The DOJ wants to include violations of 

sanctions and export controls in its definition of racketeering under the Racketeer Influenced and 

Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO Act, which allowed federal prosecutors in the 1980s and 

1990s to go after organized crime rings on charges of extortion and murder for hire. [Continue 

Reading ]

KRMG-AM (Tulsa, OK): 3 Oklahoma prosecutors receive exceptional service awards 

during Annual Attorney General’s Awards, Dana Nickel, July 19, 2022, 6:55 PM 

Attorney General Merrick B. Garland recently announced the recipients for the 69th Annual 

Attorney General’s Awards, recognizing Department of Justice employees and partners for 

extraordinary contributions to the enforcement of our nation’s laws. this year, 298 Justice 

Department employees received awards, while 54 non-department people were also honored for 

their work. Assistant U.S. Attorneys Shannon Cozzoni, Ryan Roberts and Edward Snow, of the 

Northern District of Oklahoma, were all recognized for Exceptional Service in Indian Country. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  KZRG (Joplin, MO) 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

Reuters: Romanian man extradited to U.S. on hacking charges over virus that hit NASA ,

Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 4:34 PM 

A Romanian man accused of helping distribute a computer virus that infected more than 1 million 

computers and caused big financial losses worldwide has been extradited to the United States, 

federal prosecutors said on Tuesday. Mihai Paunescu, 37, is accused of running a hosting 

service that helped distribute the Gozi virus, which stole personal bank account information while 

remaining virtually undetectable. He made an initial appearance on Monday in federal court in 

Manhattan, where he was ordered detained. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000005

AP: Trial delayed for man pictured in Pelosi’s office at riot, Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 1:00 

PM 

A federal trial has been delayed for an Arkansas man who was photographed with his feet on a

desk in House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office during the Jan. 6 U.S. Capitol riot. A federal judge 

on Monday moved the trial for Richard Barnett, of Gravette, from Sept. 6 to Dec. 12. The delay 

was requested because Barnett’s attorney has been recovering from COVID-19 and Lyme 

disease. [Continue Reading ]

AP: Second inmate sentenced in stabbing death at federal prison, Unattributed, July 19, 

2022, 12:00 PM 

A second federal inmate formerly housed in West Virginia has been sentenced to 25 years after 

pleading guilty in the fatal stabbing of another inmate. Northern West Virginia Chief U.S. District 

Judge Thomas S. Kleeh sentenced Michael Owle, 33, on Monday after he pleaded guilty to 

aiding and abetting second-degree murder and assault with a deadly weapon, The Exponent 

Telegram reported. [Continue Reading] See also:  Fox , WBOY-NBC/ABC (Clarksburg, WV) ,

WDTV-CBS (Weston, WV) 

AP: Biden order aims to punish captors of Americans held abroad, Eric Tucker, July 19, 

2022, 8:30 AM 

President Joe Biden signed an executive order Tuesday aimed at increasing the flow of 

information to families of Americans detained abroad and at imposing sanctions on the criminals, 

terrorists or government officials who hold them captive. It is unclear if the new order will result in 

bringing home more Americans jailed in foreign countries, but senior Biden administration 

officials who previewed the action to reporters said they regard it as an important way to raise the 

cost of hostage-taking and to punish captors. [Continue Reading ]

USA Today: How aggressive border control tactics in Texas contributed to inaction 

during Uvalde shooting , Celina Tebor, July 19, 2022, 9:14 PM 

Robb Elementary students were used to lockdowns. From February to May, the school in Uvalde, 

Texas, had been secured or locked down 47 times. When a lockdown alert came May 24 the 

day an 18-year-old shooter killed 19 students and two teachers many administrators, teachers 

and law enforcement responders initially assumed it was like the 47 other lockdowns, according 

to a report by the Texas House of Representatives outlining the most grievous failures during the 

shooting response. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Intelligence Agencies Say Russia Election Threat Persists Amid Ukraine War, Adam 

Goldman, July 19, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Top national security officials warned on Tuesday about the continuing threat of election 

interference from abroad, emphasizing that Russia could still seek to meddle or promote 

disinformation during the 2022 midterm races even as it wages war in Ukraine. “I am quite 

confident the Russians can walk and chew gum,” Christopher A. Wray, the F.B.I. director, said 

during a cybersecurity conference in Manhattan, where he spoke alongside Gen. Paul M. 

Nakasone, the head of the National Security Agency and U.S. Cyber Command. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  CNN , WSJ 

NYT: ISIS Fighters’ Children Are Growing Up in a Desert Camp. What Will They Become?, 

Charlie Savage, July 19, 2022, 4:30 PM 

Viewed from a helicopter, this enormous camp that holds the wives and children of dead or 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000006

captured Islamic State fighters was a sea of white tents against the desolate landscape of 

drought-stricken northeastern Syria. From the ground, the human dimension of this tragedy came 

into focus. As a convoy of armored vehicles made its way up a dusty road, children emerged to 

stand at the fence amid garbage. Some waved. One boy, in a faded “Star Wars” shirt, stood with 

hands clasped behind his back. Another, in an oversize polo shirt, held aloft a star folded from 

paper. Al Hol is a detention camp for people displaced by the ISIS war guards do not let 

residents walk out its gates.. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: Top spokeswoman for Nevada Republican Senate nominee marched on Jan. 6

with Oath Keepers, including one charged with sedition, Andrew Kaczynski, July 19, 2022, 

8:14  PM 

The new communications director for the Republican Senate nominee in Nevada -- a key state 

that could determine control in Washington -- marched to the US Capitol on January 6, 2021, with 

two members of the far-right extremist group the Oath Keepers including one who was later 

charged with sedition and another with breaking into the Capitol and at least two others who were 

charged for illegally entering the building, according to videos reviewed by CNN's KFile. 

[Continue Reading ]

ABC: Man arrested after attempting to access closed roadway near first lady's 

motorcade, Pierre Thomas and Ben Gittleson, July 19, 2022, 6:24 AM 

A man was arrested on Monday after allegedly attempting to access a roadway closed off for Jill 

Biden's motorcade, according to the United States Secret Service. The man was charged with 

assault on police, failure to obey, crossing a police line and resisting arrest, officials said. "The 

individual struggled with uniform division officers and was ultimately placed into custody," the 

Secret Service told ABC News. "Two officers were sent to an area hospital for evaluation 

following the minor physical confrontation." The first lady’s office declined to comment on 

Tuesday. [Continue Reading] 

CNN: Biden administration pushes to close the growing cybersecurity workforce gap, 

Brian Fung, July 19, 2022, 2:57 PM 

The Biden administration is pushing to fill hundreds of thousands of cybersecurity jobs in the 

United States as part of a bid to close a talent shortage US officials describe as both a national 

security challenge and an economic opportunity. On Tuesday, the administration announced a

multi-agency plan to create hundreds of registered apprenticeship programs with the private 

sector to flesh out the nation's cybersecurity workforce and defend against a rising tide of data 

breaches, ransomware attacks and other hacking incidents. [Continue Reading] 

The Hill: Twitter gets a win against Musk with fast-tracked trial, Rebecca Klar, Chris Mills 

Rodrigo and Ines Kagubare, July 19, 2022, 6:45 PM 

[...] In other news, the Department of Justice and the FBI disrupted ransomware operations of a

North Korean state-sponsored group that targeted U.S. medical facilities, recovering roughly a

half-million dollars in ransom payments. [Continue Reading ]

Roll Call: Senate support builds to seize, liquidate Russian oligarch assets, Rachel 

Oswald, July 19, 2022, 6:14 PM 

Senators are making headway on a potentially significant piece of bipartisan legislation that would 

give the Justice Department new authorities to seize and liquidate ill-gotten assets of Russian 

oligarchs and use the proceeds to benefit the people of Ukraine. At a Senate Judiciary 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000007

Committee hearing on Tuesday, Democrats and Republicans debated the pros and cons of the 

legislation from Sens. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., and Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., which would 

create a narrow and expiring authority for the Justice Department to open civil forfeiture 

proceedings against the frozen assets of Russian individuals found to be tied to criminal activities 

and to redirect the proceeds of forfeitures to humanitarian and economic aid for Ukraine. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Action Advances $5.4B Google Cybersecurity Co. Deal, Elaine Briseño, July 

19, 2022, 5:24 PM 

The U. S. Department of Justice gave Google the greenlight to proceed with its purchase of 

cybersecurity firm Mandiant after the proposed $5. 4 billion deal was placed under a microscope 

following investor concerns, according to a filing with the U. S. Securities and Exchange 

Commission. The companies still expect the merger to wrap up by the end of 2022, according to 

the Friday filing. The DOJ granted early termination of the waiting period required for the merger 

under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. [Continue Reading ]

NPR: He Tracked Down Nazi War Criminals. Now He's Investigating Atrocities In Ukraine, 

Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 5:05 PM 

How serious is the U.S. about investigating Russian war crimes in Ukraine? They put Eli 

Rosenbaum on the case. He's best known for directing the Department of Justice special 

investigations unit which tracked down Nazis who had gone into hiding after World War II. He lays 

out the challenges of conducting an investigation in the midst of an ongoing war. [Continue 

Reading ]

Detroit Free Press: Meet Ryan Kelley, the Republican candidate for governor who got a

boost from FBI arrest, Paul Egan, July 19, 2022, 5:42 PM 

When Hillary Clinton lost the 2016 presidential election to Donald Trump, many Democrats 

blamed the FBI for disclosing, 11 days before the vote, that they had reopened an investigation 

into her handling of emails. But if Ryan Kelley wins the Republican primary for governor Aug. 2, 

his supporters may thank the FBI, which arrested and charged him June 9 for his involvement in 

the Jan. 6, 2021, riot at the U.S. Capitol. [Continue Reading ]

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel: The FBI says cyber threats are on the rise in Milwaukee. 

Here's what to do if you're attacked., Hannah Hernandez, July 19, 2022, 4:38 PM 

The volume of cyber threats is climbing, according to the FBI. All types of businesses in 

Milwaukee are at risk, from Fortune 500 giants to mom-and-pop retailers. The two most common 

cyber attacks are ransomware and business email compromise, though cryptocurrency theft has 

also become a growing trend. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WITI-Fox (Milwaukee, WI) 

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

Reuters: Trump ex-adviser Bannon felt he was 'above the law,' prosecution tells jury, 

Sarah N. Lynch, July 19, 2022, 8:30 AM 

Federal prosecutors are due to start presenting their case on Tuesday in the trial of Steve 

Bannon, a prominent former presidential adviser to Donald Trump, on charges of contempt of 

Congress for defying a subpoena from the committee investigating last year's attack on the U.S. 

Capitol. Bannon, 68, is facing two misdemeanor counts after he declined last year to provide 

testimony or documents to the Democratic-led House of Representatives select committee. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000008

Prosecutors and Bannon's defense are set to present opening statements in the trial once jury 

selection is completed. U.S. District Judge Carl Nichols is presiding. [Continue Reading] See 

also: Bloomberg, Fox, The Hill,  Insider , Law360 , NBC , NYT , Politico , Reuters -2,  USA Today ,

WaPo , WSJ , WUSA-CBS (Washington, DC) 

LAT: [OPINION] There is a gap in the evidence we’ve seen against Trump. We have to 

rely on the DOJ to fill it, Harry Litman, July 20, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The criticism of the Department of Justice continues to grow: Detractors see the department as 

too far behind the Jan. 6 committee. They want to know why Atty. Gen. Merrick Garland and the 

Justice Department have yet to come forward with a serious criminal charge against Donald 

Trump. These gloomy observations miss at least one crucial point: There is a gap in the 

committee’s development of the Jan. 6 evidence for the most serious yet fitting charge against 

Trump. And it seems likely that only the Justice Department can fill it. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: Secret Service Records Provided to Jan. 6 Committee Include No New Texts , Alexa 

Corse and Scott Patterson, July 19, 2022, 11:39 PM 

Documents provided by the Secret Service to the Jan. 6 select committee on Tuesday didn’t 

include any previously undisclosed text messages from Jan. 5 or 6, 2021, according to a person 

familiar with the matter and a document reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. [Continue Reading ]

See also : CNN , The Hill , NYT , WaPo 

Bloomberg: National Archives Demands Report on Lost Secret Service Texts, Chris 

Strohm and Erik Wasson, July 19, 2022, 5:13 PM 

The keeper of federal records asked the Secret Service to determine whether any text messages 

by agents around the time of the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the US Capitol were improperly deleted. 

The National Archives and Records Administration said in a letter Tuesday to the agency that it 

must submit a report within 30 days documenting what occurred. “This report must include a

complete description of the records affected, a statement of the exact circumstances 

surrounding the deletion of messages, a statement of the safeguards established to prevent 

further loss of documentation, and details of all agency actions taken to salvage, retrieve, or 

reconstruct the records,” the National Archives wrote. [Continue Reading ]

LAT: Jan. 6 committee Chairman Bennie Thompson has COVID-19, is likely to miss 

Thursday hearing, Sarah D. Wire, July 19, 2022, 11:02 AM 

Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.), chairman of the House Jan. 6 committee, is likely to miss the 

panel’s Thursday hearing after contracting COVID-19. Thompson tested positive for the 

coronavirus Monday and has mild symptoms, he said in a statement. He plans to isolate for 

several days in accordance with federal guidelines. Committee staff said Thompson has 

instructed them to proceed with Thursday’s prime-time hearing, scheduled for 5 p.m. Pacific. The 

hearing will examine in detail what former President Trump was doing in the 187 minutes between 

when the attack on the Capitol began and when Trump released a video urging rioters to go 

home. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Times: ‘Gutless’: Steve Bannon rips Bennie Thomson for not showing up for 

contempt trial, Joseph Clark, July 19, 2022, 5:42 PM 

Stephen K. Bannon ripped House Jan. 6 Committee Chairman Bennie G. Thompson as “gutless” 

for sending a staff member to testify as the prosecution’s first witness in the former Trump 

adviser’s trial on charges of criminal contempt of Congress. Kristin Amerling, the Jan. 6

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000009

committee’s deputy staff director and chief counsel, began outlining the case against Mr. Bannon 

on Tuesday in federal court. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: [OPINION] Last-chance hearing: Jan. 6 committee has yet to establish a criminal 

case against Trump, Jonathan Turley, July 19, 2022, 11:10 AM 

The eighth and final scheduled hearing of the House Jan. 6 select committee is scheduled for 

Thursday, and its members reportedly will present a time line of events on that day, particularly 

the 187 minutes between the end of then-President Trump’s speech on the Ellipse and his call 

for supporters to leave the Capitol. It will again replay moments from the horrific to the heroic. 

What it has not shown thus far, however, is what was promised at the outset: a clear criminal case 

against Trump. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

Reuters: Georgia Republicans challenge subpoenas in Trump fake elector probe ,

Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 8:15 PM 

Georgia Republicans accused of playing a role in attempts by ex-President Donald Trump and 

his supporters to overturn his 2020 election defeat asked a judge to throw out subpoenas issued 

for upcoming hearings, court papers showed on Tuesday. Trump has falsely claimed that 

rampant voter fraud caused his loss in Georgia, a key battleground state where President Joe 

Biden was victorious, helping him win the White House. [...] The Justice Department has been 

investigating an alleged plan by Trump and his supporters to submit alternative slates of state 

electors to reverse Biden's victory in the election. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN , NBC , NYT ,

WaPo 

AP : Californian sentenced for $27M phony COVID aid attempt , Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 

8:00  PM 

A Southern California man who tried to obtain $27 million in unemployment benefits by falsely 

claiming his business was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic was sentenced Tuesday to more 

than 11 years in federal prison. Robert Benlevi, 53, of the Encino area of Los Angeles received a

135-month sentence following his March conviction for bank fraud, money laundering and making 

false statements to a financial institution, the U.S. Department of Justice said in a statement. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : City News Service , Courthouse News 

Richmond Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA): Former Reynolds College financial aid director 

gets 5-plus years in $230K theft of student aid funds, Mark Bowes, July 19, 2022, 2:30 PM 

In what federal authorities described as a “monumental betrayal of the public trust,” the former 

financial aid director at Reynolds Community College was sentenced Tuesday to more than five 

years in prison for orchestrating a scheme that resulted in the theft of at least $230,850 in federal 

and state student loan and grant funds. The loss may have been as high as $397,602. Kiesha 

Lashawn Pope, 48, “used her sensitive government position to enrich herself to the detriment of 

the public trust and the students she was meant to serve,” Assistant U.S. Attorney Avi Panth said 

in arguing the gravity of Pope’s corruption requires a stiff punishment. [Continue Reading ]

Boston Globe: New Bedford gang leader sentenced to seven years in prison , Camilo 

Fonseca, July 19, 2022, 10:00 PM 

A New Bedford gang leader received seven years in prison for racketeering on Tuesday, officials 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000010

said the latest sentencing in a broad federal case against members of the Latin Kings. 

[Continue Reading ]

New Haven Register: Feds: Missouri man pleads guilty in fraud scheme that swindled 

Darien investment company , Liz Hardaway, July 19, 2022, 10:00 PM 

A Missouri man pleaded guilty in federal court Tuesday to a $7 million fraud scheme related to his 

commercial aircraft supply businesses, according to federal prosecutors. As part of the scheme, 

Kyle J. Wine, 41, of Lee’s Summit, Mo., induced an investment firm based in Darien to put $4.5 

million into the supposed acquisition and sale of an Airbus A320-231 airframe and two aircraft 

engines, U.S. Attorney Vanessa Roberts Avery said in a news release Tuesday. [Continue 

Reading ]

Times of San Diego : Tijuana Man Arrested in Campo, Charged with Smuggling 249 

Pounds of Fentanyl , Elizabeth Ireland, July 19, 2022, 9:30 PM 

A Tijuana man arrested in eastern San Diego County for allegedly smuggling nearly 250 pounds 

of fentanyl into the U.S. was charged Tuesday by San Diego federal prosecutors. Alexis Benito 

Nuno, 24, was allegedly driving a pickup truck at around 3 a.m. Monday when he was stopped by 

U.S.  Border Patrol Agents on eastbound Interstate 8 near Golden Acorn Casino in the Campo 

area. [Continue Reading ]

Roanoke-Chowan News-Herald: Como man sentenced to 150 months in prison, 

Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Craig Wayne Simpson, 53, of Como was sentenced here July 11 to 150 months in prison and 

five years of supervised release for producing and trafficking meth. The sentencing judge noted 

several factors contributing to the sentence including the substantial risk to human life caused by 

the production of meth, Simpson’s possession of a loaded shotgun, and the fact that, during the 

sentencing hearing, the defendant admitted he had lied under oath during the trial. [Continue 

Reading ]

Philadelphia Inquirer: Two ex-SEPTA managers sent to prison for fraud scheme that cost 

the agency nearly $1M, Jeremy Roebuck, July 19, 2022, 12:30 PM 

Two former senior SEPTA maintenance managers were sentenced to prison Tuesday for leading 

a scheme in which they and nine of their subordinates bilked the transit agency out of hundreds of 

thousands of dollars over six years. A federal judge ordered David Abell the agency’s former 

senior director for maintenance to spend five years behind bars for originating the scheme, 

which involved colluding with vendors to charge for goods that were never provided and 

pocketing the proceeds. [Continue Reading ]

Buffalo News: Retired school psychologist sentenced to prison on child pornography 

charge , Dale Anderson, July 19, 2022, 6:00 PM 

A retired school psychologist has been sentenced to five years in prison and 15 years of 

supervised release by U.S. District Judge Lawrence J. Vilardo following his conviction on a child 

pornography charge, U.S. Attorney Trini E. Ross reported. David M. Calaiacovo, 65, of Hamburg, 

pleaded guilty of possession of child pornography involving a prepubescent minor, Ross said. He 

had worked in elementary schools in the West Seneca School District for 35 years. [Continue 

Reading ] See also : WGRZ-NBC (Buffalo, NY) 

New Jersey Advance Media: N.J. man admits creating fake company to steal $500K in 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000011

COVID relief funds , Chris Sheldon, July 19, 2022, 5:41 PM 

A New Jersey man admitted Tuesday that he created a fake company to get COVID-19 relief 

funds and also admitted fraudulently obtaining unemployment benefits and having a ghost gun, 

federal prosecutor said. Stephen Bennett, 46, of Berlin, pleaded guilty in Camden federal court to 

one count of bank fraud conspiracy, one count of wire fraud, and one count of being a felon in 

possession of a firearm, according to U.S. Attorney Philip R. Sellinger. [Continue Reading ]

State Journal-Register (Springfield, IL): Springfield man sentenced to seven years in 

prison for possession of child porn , Steven Spearie, July 19, 2022, 4:38 PM 

A Springfield man was sentenced in federal court last week to seven years in prison for receipt 

and possession of child pornography. Donald Dorosheff, 75, will also face 10 years of 

supervised release and was ordered to pay $12,500 in restitution. [Continue Reading ] See also :

WCIA-CBS (Champaign, IL) , WICS-ABC (Springfield, IL) 

Hartford Courant : Ring leader in burglary gang that stole millions in merchandise, 

terrorized CT businesses sentenced to prison , Edmund H. Mahony, July 19, 2022, 1:24 PM 

One of the ring leaders of a brazen gang of thieves that made off with at least $4 million in high-end automobiles, cellphones and cash-stuffed ATM machines in more than 180 break-ins along 

the shoreline was sentenced to 7 ½ years in prison Tuesday FBI agents said Josepher 

Cartagena, with his brother Alexander Santiago, 27, both of the Bronx, terrorized car dealerships 

and high end electronics stores along the shore while leading police on dozens of high speed 

pursuits for much of 2020 before their arrests the following January. [Continue Reading ]

The Mitchell Republic (Mitchell SD): Kyle woman pleads not guilty to child abuse, murder 

in 2020 malnutrition death of 2-month-old child, Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 12:18 PM 

A Kyle woman is facing life in prison after a federal grand jury charged her with murder and child 

abuse in the 2020 death of a child. Billie Jean Red Owl, 34, of Kyle, was indicted Nov. 18, 2021, 

on one count of first-degree murder and one count of felony child abuse. On Monday, the U.S. 

Attorney's Office for the District of South Dakota announced she pleaded not guilty to both 

charges before U.S. Magistrate Judge Daneta Wollmann. [Continue Reading] 

KMIZ-ABC (Columbia, MO): Fulton man pleads guilty in federal court to secretly recording 

teen victims , Karl Wehmhoener, July 19, 2022, 9:35 PM 

A Fulton man who secretly recorded two teenage victims pleaded guilty in federal court to 

attempting to produce child pornography. Craig Michael Glover, 52, pleaded guilty to one count of 

attempting to produce child pornography. [Continue Reading ] See also : KCRG-ABC (Cedar 

Rapids, IA) 

WXIX-Fox (Cincinnati, OH): 27 years for Tri-State man who used Snapchat to get child 

porn from victims , Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 7:51 PM 

A Warren County man could spend the next 27 years in federal prison after authorities say he 

solicited sexual images of minor victims over Snapchat,. Steven Richard Stiles, 34, received his 

sentence Tuesday from U.S. District Judge David Bunning. [Continue Reading ]

WAVY-NBC (Portsmouth, VA): 2 Chesapeake men plead guilty to possessing firearms as 

convicted felons, Julius Ayo, July 19, 2022, 7:44 PM 

Two men from Chesapeake have pleaded guilty to possessing firearms as convicted felons. 

According to court documents, 28-year-old Brian Ellis and 30-year-old Raymond Wyche bought 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000012

and sold firearms as convicted felons between October 2021 and January 2022. Wyche was 

serving a federal term of supervised release from a previous federal conviction for possessing a

firearm as a convicted felon. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WVEC-ABC (Hampton, VA) 

WDIV-NBC (Detroit, MI): Former Highland Park detective sentenced to 2 years for 

conspiring to distribute fentanyl-laced heroin , Brandon Carr, July 19, 2022, 6:11 PM 

A former Highland Park police detective has been sentenced to two years in federal prison for 

conspiring to distribute fentanyl-laced heroin. Grosse Pointe resident Tiffany Lipkovitch, 47, was 

convicted of conspiring to distribute the controlled substance. Lipkovitch has been a detective 

with the Highland Park Police Department since 2011. [Continue Reading ]

KRMG-AM (Tulsa, OK): Prostitution sting arrest results in 9-year prison sentence for 

Norman man, Dana Nickel, July 19, 2022, 5:43 PM 

Earlier this week, 41-year-old Eugene Deshon Hall, of Norman, was sentenced to serve more 

than nine years in federal prison for illegal possession of a firearm after previously being 

convicted of a felony, according to U.S. Attorney Robert J. Troester. On Oct. 19, 2021, a federal 

grand jury returned a two-count Superseding Indictment that alleged illegal possession of a

firearm and witness tampering. According to federal law, it’s prohibited for a person who has 

been previously convicted of a felony to possess a firearm or ammunition. On Jan. 9, 2022, Hall 

plead guilty to illegal possession of a firearm. [Continue Reading ]

KYTX-CBS (Tyler, TX): Lufkin man sentenced to 22 years in prison for trafficking over 

one kilogram of methamphetamine, Sam Searles, July 19, 2022, 5:35 PM 

A Lufkin man was sentenced to more than 22 years in federal prison for trafficking 

methamphetamine in East Texas today, according to records. According to documents from the 

United States Department of Justice, Alexander Timia Jones, 38, of Lufkin, was sentenced to a

total of 270 months in federal prison today by U.S. District Judge Michael Truncale. [Continue 

Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Hugo man pleads guilty to possession of methamphetamine 

and firearms in drug trafficking crime , Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 4:31 PM 

A Hugo man, Brannen Michael Stafford, 34, pleaded guilty to possession with intent to distribute 

methamphetamine and possession of a firearm in relation to a drug trafficking crime. A report 

from U.S. Attorney Andrew M. Luger state that law enforcement responded to the Robbinsdale 

and Crystal area after receiving multiple calls of shots fired on Mar. 1, 2022. [Continue Reading ]

WNCN-CBS (Goldsboro, NC): NC felon sentenced 10 years for possession of firearm, 

attempt to flee feds , Kayla Morton, July 19, 2022, 4:23 PM 

A Kannapolis man will spend 10 years in prison with three more years of supervised release after 

pleading guilty to possession of firearm by felon and having multiple drugs on his person, the 

Department of Justice said. Court documents said Kannapolis police spotted Gerrell Laquan 

McRae, 39, out walking when he had an active warrant out for his arrest. Officers said he tried to 

flee, but was eventually caught and searched. [Continue Reading ] See also : WBTV-CBS 

(Charlotte, NC) 

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): Ohio man sentenced to 14 years in prison on Kentucky 

child porn charges , Jessica Patterson, July 19, 2022, 4:10 PM 

An Ohio man will spend the next 14 years behind bars after pleading guilty to child pornography 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000013

charges in Kentucky. According to the office of the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of 

Kentucky, Shakir Aswad Little, 30, of Fairfield, Ohio was sentenced to 168 months in federal 

prison after he pleaded guilty to “transporting visual depictions of a minor engaged in sexually 

explicit conduct.” [Continue Reading ]

WICS-ABC (Springfield, IL): Mechanicsburg man sentenced for meth distribution ,

Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 4:00 PM 

A Mechanicsburg man will spend half a decade behind bars for selling meth. Gerald Hurley, 47, 

was sentenced on Monday to five years in federal prison, followed by five years of supervised 

release for possession of 50 grams of methamphetamine with intent to distribute. Hurley was 

indicted in November 2020 and pleaded guilty to the charges in March 2022. [Continue Reading ]

WGXA-Fox/ABC (Macon, GA): Macon man sentenced for sexually exploiting juvenile 

through social media , Claire Helm, July 19, 2022, 4:00 PM 

A 27-year-old Macon man will spend the next 20 years in federal prison in a child sex assault 

case. The Department of Justice states that Anthony Sparks Brown was sentenced to 20 years, 

plus a lifetime of supervised release after he leaves prison. [Continue Reading ]

WEVV-CBS/Fox (Evansville, IN): Evansville man gets 14 months in prison for sex offender 

violation , Brian Miller, July 19, 2022, 2:00 PM 

According to the United States Attorney’s Office Southern District of Indiana, Michael Crane was 

sentenced to 14 months in federal prison. Court documents reveal the 24-year-old man plead 

guilty to the charge of failure to register as a sex offender. Investigators say Crane was convicted 

of felony aggravated criminal sexual abuse and felony indecent solicitation of a child in Perry 

County, IL back in December of 2017. [Continue Reading ] See also : WEHT-ABC (Evansville, 

IN) , WFIE-NBC (Evansville, IN) 

WBND-ABC (South Bend, IN): Mishawaka man sentenced to over five years for firearms 

offense , Maura Johnson, July 19, 2022, 2:09 PM 

A Mishawaka man was sentenced to over five years in prison after pleading guilty to being a felon 

in possession of a firearm, the U.S. Attorney's Office announced. Terrell Howard, 32, was 

sentenced to five years and 10 months in prison followed by two years of supervised release. 

[Continue Reading ]

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): 2 men indicted for June Wounded Knee murder, Rae Yost, 

July 19, 2022, 12:33 PM 

A grand jury has indicted two Wounded Knee men for beating death of a man in June. Eugene 

Acorn High Hawk, 59, and Spencer High Hawk, 25, were indicted on charges of first degree 

murder, assault resulting in serious bodily injury, and assault with a dangerous weapon, according 

to the Department of Justice in South Dakota. [Continue Reading ]

KOLR-CBS (Springfield, MO): 18 indicted in Missouri multi-county meth conspiracy ,

Carrie Winchel, July 19, 2022, 10:50 AM 

A federal grand jury indicted 18 people in what investigators call a conspiracy to distribute 

methamphetamine in southwest Missouri. Law enforcement officers seized 29 pounds of 

methamphetamine, $57,000 in cash, and guns in the investigation. The federal indictment 

charged the defendants with being a part of a conspiracy to distribute methamphetamine in Barry, 

Greene, Jasper, Lawrence, Newton, Polk and Stone Counties. Investigators said this happened 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000014

between November 2020 to April 2022. [Continue Reading] 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

NYT, The Daily: [AUDIO] How Abortion Bans Are Restricting Miscarriage Care , July 20, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

Across the United States, Republicans emboldened by the overturning of Roe v. Wade are 

passing laws intended to stop medical staff from providing an abortion. But those same laws may 

also be scaring health workers out of providing basic care for miscarriages. [Listen ]

WaPo: Doctor in 10-year-old’s abortion case takes legal step against Indiana AG , Timothy 

Bella, July 19, 2022, 6:26 PM 

Attorneys for the Indianapolis doctor who helped a 10-year-old Ohio rape victim obtain an 

abortion took the first legal step Tuesday in a possible defamation lawsuit against Indiana 

Attorney General Todd Rokita (R) for his comments in a story that has captured international 

attention. Kathleen DeLaney filed a notice of tort claim against Rokita on behalf of her client, 

Caitlin Bernard, for “false and misleading statements” about the obstetrician/gynecologist in the 

days after she shared how she helped the child, who traveled to Indiana for an abortion. [Continue 

Reading ]

WaPo: Biden warns schools not to overpunish students with disabilities , Donna St. 

George, July 19, 2022, 6:08 PM 

The Biden administration issued new school discipline guidelines Tuesday aimed at cutting back 

on high rates of suspension and expulsion for students with disabilities by clarifying rules that the 

nation’s schools are required to follow. Federal officials called the guidance “the most 

comprehensive ever released” on the civil rights of students with disabilities and said it would 

help as schools continue to try to rebound from more than two years of pandemic learning. 

[Continue Reading ]

New Jersey Advance Media : N.J. man sentenced for racist, threatening text sent to Black 

woman in Maryland , Matt Gray, July 19, 2022, 6:13 PM 

A federal judge has sentenced a New Jersey man to 30 days of confinement, in-patient drug 

treatment and three years of probation after he admitted sending racist and threatening 

messages to a Black woman in Maryland. In a plea agreement, Michael Marotta, 26, of Sewell, 

acknowledged that he used an anonymous text messaging app to threaten the woman and her 

family on April 14, 2020, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Maryland. [Continue Reading] 

See also : WBFF-Fox (Baltimore, MD) 

WTTW (Chicago, IL): Decision to Allow Metal Scrapper to Move from North Side to 

Southeast Side Violated Residents’ Civil Rights: Federal Officials , Heather Cherone, July 

19, 2022, 4:38 PM 

Federal officials determined Mayor Lori Lightfoot’s administration violated the civil rights of Black 

and Latino Chicagoans by allowing a metal shredding and recycling operation to move from the 

North Side to the Southeast Side, according to a letter obtained by WTTW News Tuesday. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : WFLD-Fox (Chicago, IL) 

WXYZ-ABC (Detroit, MI): U.S. Attorney: Hartland schools took steps to address concerns 

of race discrimination allegations, Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 12:03 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000015

The U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of Michigan said it has resolved its investigation 

into allegations of racial discrimination by the Hartland Consolidated School District. According to 

the Department of Justice, an investigation began after a complaint was filed by someone who 

was a student and her guardian, alleging that the district failed to address racial harassment 

against her and other Black students. [Continue Reading ] See also : Detroit News 

CIVIL LAW 

CNN: Justice Department opens civil probe into Amazon's workplace safety practices, 

Kara Scannelll, July 19, 2022, 2:33 PM 

The US attorney's office in Manhattan has opened a civil investigation into workplace safety at 

Amazon warehouses and possible "fraudulent" conduct to hide worker injuries from federal 

regulators, a spokesperson for the prosecutor's office said. Investigators with the Occupational 

Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Monday morning went to warehouses around New York 

City, Chicago and Orlando to conduct worker safety inspections on behalf of the US attorney's 

office, according to the spokesperson. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : 5th Circ. Urged Not To Rehear SEC In-House Courts Challenge , Jon Hill, July 19, 

2022, 9:08 PM 

A hedge fund manager who is battling the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission over its use 

of in-house courts has urged the Fifth Circuit to leave in place a recent panel [...] [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360 : Vilsack Backs Pandemic-Era Subsidies For Minority Farmers , Caleb Symons, 

July 19, 2022, 6:53 PM 

U.S.  Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack is defending a federal loan relief program for minority 

farmers, arguing in court Monday that the pandemic-era initiative is meant to redress the 

government's past discrimination and is an appropriate remedy for its misdeeds. 

[Continue Reading ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): ‘Reach a just verdict, regardless of the 

consequences,’ judge tells Flint water crisis jury , Ron Fonger, July 19, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A federal court judge has given the jury in a civil Flint water crisis trial plenty to think about before 

they return to hear closing arguments from attorneys representing four Flint children and two 

companies they are suing starting Wednesday, July 20. “You, not I, have the duty to determine 

the facts ... Reach a just verdict, regardless of the consequences,” U.S. District Court Judge 

Judith E. Levy told the eight-person jury on Tuesday, July 19. [Continue Reading] 

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

CNN: Man arrested in California for allegedly smuggling nearly $3.7 million of fentanyl in 

his car tire and gas tank, Elizabeth Wolfe and Jarrod Wardwell, July 20, 2022, 3:27 AM 

US Border Patrol agents arrested a man allegedly attempting to smuggle approximately 250 

pounds of fentanyl in his truck's spare tire and gas tank near the Mexican-California border 

Monday, the agency said. Agents who searched the man's vehicle found several bundles of pills 

that tested positive for fentanyl, US Customs and Border Protection announced in a news 

release. The agency estimates the stash has a street value of $3,679,000. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000016

See also: Newsweek 

Fox : LexisNexis faces pressure to terminate contract with ICE , Haley Chi-Sing, July 19, 

2022, 4:29 PM 

Database company LexisNexis is coming under fire regarding its contract with U.S. Immigration 

and Customs Enforcement (ICE) following reports that the agency used the database to track 

down illegal immigrants. Internal documents obtained by Just Futures Law and Mijente show that 

ICE conducted 1.2 million searches, including "Advanced Person Search" and "Real Time Phone 

Search," between March and September 2021 using the Accurint Virtual Crime Center (AVCC). 

AVCC is specifically geared towards police agencies, using nationwide crime data to "detect 

patterns and deploy resources efficiently," according to the LexisNexis site. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Biden Issues Order To Fight Unlawful Detentions Abroad , Rae Varona, July 19, 

2022, 8:24 PM 

President Joe Biden on Tuesday signed an executive order aimed at bolstering U.S. efforts in 

bringing Americans held hostage or wrongfully detained abroad home, while also authorizing the 

government to impose sanctions on foreign actors involved in such unlawful detentions. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: Biden Administration Accused Of Covering Up Migrant Abuse , Alyssa Aquino, 

July 19, 2022, 5:24 PM 

Immigration advocacy groups accused the Biden administration of conducting a cover-up by 

clearing federal officers of claims that they struck Haitian migrants at the U.S.-Mexico border, 

saying Tuesday that officials "ghosted" Haitian migrants' offer to participate in an investigation. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360: 9th Circ. Tells BIA Past Torture Isn't A Must For Removal Relief , Rae Varona, July 

19, 2022, 3:51 PM 

The Ninth Circuit ordered the Board of Immigration Appeals to reconsider a Guatemalan citizen's 

bid for removal relief, saying that past torture, though relevant, was not required in determining 

whether he'd likely face future torture in Guatemala. [Continue Reading ]

KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX): El Paso area CBP makes multiple hard narcotic seizures ,

Gabriela Rodríguez, July 19, 2022, 6:15 PM 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection officers working at El Paso area ports of entry seized 

fentanyl, cocaine and methamphetamine over the last week. “CBP officers are working hard every 

day to stop the flow of narcotics from entering the U.S. from Mexico,” said CBP El Paso Director 

Field Operations Hector A. Mancha. “In triple digit heat or the coldest of winter days CBP officers 

remain vigilant and stand ready to meet the challenge.” [Continue Reading ]

WTKR-CBS (Norfolk, VA) : Customs and Border Protection seized $1.9 million worth of 

counterfeit socks , Margaret Kavanagh, July 19, 2022, 4:26 PM 

You may be able to buy counterfeit items cheaper from vendors online, but Custom and Border 

Protection officials say you could be putting yourself at risk. News 3 spoke to the CBP about a

recent case and the overall problem of counterfeit items. In recent weeks, nearly 120,000 pairs of 

counterfeit diabetic socks were seized by CBP officials in Hampton Roads. [Continue Reading ]

WBRC-Fox (Birmingham, Al) : K-9 helps border patrol agents seize 250 lbs. of fentanyl ,

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000017

Debra Worley, July 19, 2022, 11:13 AM 

A Border Patrol K-9 alerted agents to about 250 pounds of fentanyl stashed inside a truck at the 

Campo Border Patrol Station on Monday morning. U.S. Customs and Border Protection said in a

news release that agents found several bundles of fentanyl concealed within the vehicle’s spare 

tire and gas tank. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

The Hill: Mozilla urges Congress to pass antitrust law in full page ad , Rebecca Klar, July 

20, 2022, 6:00 AM 

Mozilla, the company behind the Firefox browser, took out a full page ad in The Washington Post 

Wednesday to urge Congress to pass a key antitrust bill that aims to rein in the power of tech 

giants. The ad is an open letter to Congress calling for lawmakers to immediately pass the 

American Innovation and Choice Online Act, a bipartisan bill sponsored by Sens. Amy Klobuchar 

(D-Minn.) and Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa). [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Google Antitrust Judge Jumps Into Rare 'Hot Tub' Hearing , Bonnie Eslinger, July 

19, 2022, 11:43 PM 

A California federal judge peppered economic experts with questions Tuesday during a rare "hot 

tub" hearing over a proposed antitrust class action for potentially 90 million consumers accusing 

Google of unlawfully blocking competition to its Google Play app store and levying excessive 

fees on developers that were passed on to consumers. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: FTC, Labor Board Team Up On Gig Economy, Noncompetes , Braden Campbell, 

July 19, 2022, 7:56 PM 

The National Labor Relations Board and the Federal Trade Commission are teaming up to take 

on the gig economy, worker misclassification and restrictive covenants such as noncompete 

agreements, the agencies said Tuesday. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: [ANALYSIS] The Broad M&A Implications Of DOJ's Booz Allen Challenge , Lisa 

Rumin, Jon Dubrow and Anthony Ferrara, July 19, 2022, 3:41 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice challenge to Booz Allen's acquisition of EverWatch focuses on 

the transaction's impact on one specific bidding opportunity, but introduces new theories with 

broad implications for other government contractor mergers and acquisitions, changing 

competitive incentives whenever the merging parties are competitors, say attorneys at 

McDermott. [Continue Reading ]

Wilson Sonsini: DOJ Files Emergency Preliminary Injunction Motion Against Booz Allen 

and EverWatch Merger, Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 9:30 PM 

On July 8, 2022, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) filed a motion for an emergency 

preliminary injunction to abrogate Booz Allen Hamilton Holding Corporation's (Booz Allen's) 

merger agreement with EverWatch Corp. (EverWatch), and prevent the parties from proceeding 

with their proposed merger.1 The DOJ's motion comes nine days after it filed a complaint 

alleging the proposed merger would substantially lessen competition for an upcoming National 

Security Agency (NSA) contract award for signal intelligence operational modeling and simulation 

support services (Optimal Decision). [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000018

ENVIRONMENT 

Law360: Calif. Community Group Wants EPA Action On Clean Bus Plan ,Juan Carlos 

Rodrigu, July 19, 2022, 6:00 PM 

A California community group on Tuesday sued the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 

accusing it of dragging its feet on approving a state program to transition to a 100% zero-emission bus fleet. [Continue Reading] 

Law360 : EPA Says Pesticide Disapproval Didn't Require Public Input , Juan Carlos 

Rodriguez, July 19, 2022, 5:13 PM 

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on Monday told the Ninth Circuit that no public notice 

and comment period was required for its decisions to revoke approval of the pesticide sulfoxaflor 

and then reapprove its use because it was merely complying with a court order. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: Biden Urges 5th Circ. To Revive Carbon Metric Rule , Clark Mindock, July 19, 2022, 

4:51  PM 

The Biden administration panned an effort by Republican-led states to kill changes in how the 

government uses estimates for the costs related to greenhouse gas emissions, telling the Fifth 

Circuit the plaintiffs haven't shown standing after 18 months. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : EPA Says Pesticide Disapproval Didn't Require Public Input , Matt 

Delaney, July 19, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Thousands of beagles that were bred for research are getting a new leash on life after the 

Virginia facility where they were housed was sued by the Department of Justice for multiple 

alleged animal welfare violations. The DOJ said 4,000 beagles from the Envigo RMS, LLC facility 

in Cumberland, Virginia, are being given to the Humane Society following a consent decree 

entered Friday that the research organization will no longer allow any activity that would require an 

Animal Welfare Act license. [Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

LAT: $5,000 reward offered after mistaken release of suspect in shooting of Lady Gaga’s 

dog walker, Gregory Yee, July 19, 2022, 9:04 PM 

Months after a 19-year-old suspected of shooting Lady Gaga’s dog walker in Los Angeles was 

mistakenly released from jail, federal authorities are offering a reward for information on his 

whereabouts. The U.S. Marshals Service announced Monday that it would provide up to $5,000 

for information that leads to the arrest of James Howard Jackson one of five people arrested 

in connection with the February 2021 incident. [Continue Reading] See also:  CBS , CBS -2,  Fox ,

Patch (Hollywood, CA),  WTVD-ABC (Durham, NC) 

CBS: New ATF director says there's "no one solution" to ending gun violence, Caitlin 

Yilek, July 19, 2022, 8:43 PM 

Steven Dettelbach, the newly sworn-in director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 

Explosives, said there is no overarching answer to solving the nation's gun violence, even as 

guns have become the leading cause of death for children in the U.S. "One of the things that 

makes this problem so hard is that it looks way different depending on where you are," Dettelbach 

told "CBS Evening News" anchor and managing editor Norah O'Donnell in an interview Tuesday. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000019

[Continue Reading ]

CNN: Steve Dettelbach sworn in to lead ATF after 7 years of acting directors, Hannah 

Rabinowitz and Veronica Stracqualursi, July 19, 2022, 3:45 PM 

Former federal prosecutor Steve Dettelbach was ceremonially sworn in on Tuesday as the new 

director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, marking the first time in 

seven years that the agency has a permanent, Senate-approved leader at the helm. Dettelbach 

assumes control of the agency, which imposes and issues federal firearm regulations, during a

surge of gun violence and mass shootings in the United States. He will also be tasked with 

enforcing the country's new sprawling gun legislation, the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, 

which is the most significant new federal legislation to address gun violence in decades. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  ABC , NPR , Politico 

Law360: Attys Say DEA Stonewalled Drug-Related FOIA Requests, Sam Reisman, July 19, 

2022, 4:53 PM 

The U. S. Drug Enforcement Administration has been unlawfully stonewalling Freedom of 

Information Act requests seeking clarity about terminally ill patients' right to try psilocybin, 

according to a new lawsuit filed Tuesday in Texas federal court. According to the complaint, the 

DEA "has adopted an unlawful policy and pattern or practice. Specifically, the agency deems any 

FOIA request that requires the FOIA office to obtain a document from any other office 'complex' 

and, on that basis, categorizes virtually all FOIA requests as raising 'unusual circumstances. 

[Continue Reading ]

Daily Voice (York, PA): US Marshals Nab Central Pennsylvania Nightclub Shooter: Police, 

Jillian Pikora, July 19, 2022, 3:49 PM 

A 34-year-old man has been arrested in connection with a shooting at a central Pennsylvania 

nightclub, authorities say. The United States Marshal’s Fugitive Task Force arrested Jorge Soba-Torres, of York, on a warrant for Criminal Attempt Homicide and Aggravated Assault on Monday, 

July 18, according to a release by Springettsbury Township police department. [Continue 

Reading ]

WDTN-NBC (Dayton, OH): FBI finds missing Ohio teen with kidnapper in Texas, Sarah 

Bean, July 19, 2022, 10:46 PM 

The Cincinnati and El Paso FBI rescued an Ohio teen on Monday after she was found with her 

kidnapper at a Texas bus station. According to a release by the El Paso FBI, FBI El Paso and 

Cincinnati Field Offices found the 15-year-old girl and her kidnapper, Roman Nguyen at the 

Greyhound Bus Station in central El Paso on July 18. Authorities said Nguyen was possibly on his 

way to San Diego, California, where he lives. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WXIX-Fox 

(Cincinnati, OH) 

KCBS-CBS (Los Angeles, CA): $10 million worth of jewelry stolen from Brink's tractor-trailer, FBI investigating, Sarah Bean, July 19, 2022, 9:00 PM 

An estimated $10 million of jewelry and gems were taken from a Brink's tractor-trailer parked at a

remote Southern California rest stop prompting the Federal Bureau of investigation and local law 

enforcement agencies to continue an investigation Monday into the heist. The tractor-trailer had 

been traveling overnight from a jewelry show in the San Francisco Bay Area down to the Los 

Angeles region for another event. It was not immediately clear whether the suspects followed the 

vehicle along its 375-mile journey or stumbled across it at the rest stop in a crime of opportunity, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000020

according to Los Angeles Sheriff's Sgt. Michael Mileski. [Continue Reading ]

WBOY-NBC/ABC (Clarksburg, WV): FBI Pittsburgh opens applications for ‘Teen Academy 

Program’, Makayla Schindler, July 19, 2022, 7:57 PM 

The Federal Bureau Investigation (FBI) Pittsburgh Field Office is now accepting applications for 

the 2022 Teen Academy Program. This program is free for high school seniors with a GPA of 3.0 

and higher. Students are able to apply for any of the four locations. [Continue Reading] 

WKYC-NBC (Cleveland, OH): FBI seeking suspect in Cuyahoga Falls bank robbery, Justin 

McMullen, July 19, 2022, 7:25 PM 

Law enforcement authorities are seeking information related to a Summit County bank robbery 

allegedly committed by a lone male last Thursday. The FBI Cleveland Division said in a news 

release that around 3:30 p.m. on July 14, the unidentified man threatened a teller at a Peoples 

Bank located on State Road in Cuyahoga Falls before leaving with an undisclosed sum of money. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : WOIO-CBS (Cleveland, OH) 

KSL-NBC (Salt Lake City, UT): FBI determines suspicious substance sent to lawmaker not 

to be a threat, Becky Bruce, July 19, 2022, 6:46 PM 

A letter sent to a Utah lawmaker with a suspicious substance turned out not to be a credible 

threat, according to the FBI. The Republican state lawmaker who received the letter with the 

suspicious substance is not known. However, a spokesperson for the House of Representatives 

says state investigators were notified. The state investigators then informed the FBI, who was 

able to determine the substance did not pose a threat to anybody. They say it was some kind of 

powder, but nothing hazardous. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

Forbes : Outgoing Federal Bureau Of Prisons Director Carvajal Subpoenaed By Senate 

Subcommittee , Walter Pavlo, July 19, 2022, 9:45 AM 

The Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) is in disarray. Relations between management and labor is 

at an all time low, the agency is failing at implementing the First Step Act and COVID-19 

continues to ravage its institutions.. A recent survey by Partnership for Pubic Service, which ranks 

best places to work within the US government, ranked the BOP near last among 432 federal 

agencies. It ranked dead last in Effective Leadership category. [Continue Reading] 

Colorado Springs Gazette : Aurora mass murderer remains incarcerated in Pennsylvania 

federal prison , Michael Karlik, July 19, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Ten years after he murdered 12 people and wounded many others at an Aurora movie theater, 

the man convicted of the massacre remains 1,600 miles away from Colorado, incarcerated at a

federal prison in Allenwood, Pa. The Federal Bureau of Prisons confirmed the convicted 

murderer is still at the Allenwood facility, news that was first revealed in September 2017, two 

years after a jury reached its guilty verdict. The Colorado Department of Corrections at the time 

acknowledged it sought to place James Holmes in a federal facility that could provide 

"appropriate security." [Continue Reading] 

US SUPREME COURT 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000021

WaPo: Brett Kavanaugh’s neighbors: For abortion rights but tired of protests , Dan Morse 

and Ellie Silverman, July 19, 2022, 8:00 PM 

On paper at least, Emily Strulson might seem a welcoming host to the weekly protests outside 

Supreme Court Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh’s home. The 46-year-old artist, who lives a half-block 

away, first marched for abortion rights as a middle-schooler with her mom on the National Mall. 

The court’s recent moves to overturn Roe v. Wade prompted her to chalk out a message on her 

driveway: “Reproduction Rights are Human Rights.” And she has had more than 200 yard signs 

printed and distributed that echo the widely held sentiments of her left-leaning jurisdiction just 

north of Washington: “Chevy Chasers for Choice.” [Continue Reading ]

CNN: 60% of Americans approved of the Supreme Court last July. Now, it's 38%, 

according to a new poll , Devan Cole, July 20, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Americans' approval of the Supreme Court has fallen again, according to a new poll released 

Wednesday, with just 38% of the country saying it approves of the nation's highest court after it 

overturned Roe v. Wade -- a dramatic shift in public opinion from one year ago. The Marquette 

Law School poll provides key insight into how the country views the Supreme Court after its 

controversial decision to reverse nearly 50 years of precedent. Taken between July 5 and 12, just 

days after the court reversed Roe, the survey found that 61% of respondents said they 

disapproved of the nine justices and 38% said they approved.. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill : [OPINION] SCOTUS gutted part of the EPA, but it won’t stop climate progress ,

Kevin Samy, July 19, 2022, 5:30 PM 

Among the Supreme Court’s recent string of backward decisions, the conservative supermajority 

undercut the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) authority to regulate carbon pollution 

from the power sector a key approach in achieving domestic (and international) climate goals. I

served on President Obama’s White House climate team and helped launch the EPA’s Clean 

Power Plan, the climate rule aimed at curbing carbon pollution from power plants and the 

subject of the Supreme Court’s latest assault, this time on our right to clean air and healthy lives. 

[Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Could Congress impeach Supreme Court justices for perjury?, Brad Dress, July 

19, 2022, 4:32 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court’s decision last month to overturn the 50-year constitutional right to 

abortion prompted an outcry from activists who said they were misled during the justices’ 

confirmation hearings. Conservative Justices Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney 

Barrett, who voted to overturn Roe v. Wade in a 5-4 vote, have been accused of misleading the 

public and members of the Senate about their intentions during their respective confirmation 

hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee. [Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

Reuters : GOP senator opposes Biden's Wisconsin prosecutor nominee, likely dooming 

pick , Nate Raymond, July 19, 2022, 4:52 PM 

Republican U.S. Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin on Tuesday said he will oppose President 

Joe Biden's selection of a lawyer at law firm Perkins Coie to serve as the top federal prosecutor 

in Madison, potentially dooming her nomination. Johnson cited now-deleted "partisan" tweets by 

Sopen Shah about Republicans and the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol in declaring he 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000022

would not return a so-called "blue slip" supporting her nomination to become the second woman 

to serve as the U.S. attorney for the Western District of Wisconsin. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ : Michelle Childs Is Confirmed by Senate for U.S. Appeals Bench in Washington , Jan 

Wolfe, July 19, 2022, 9:14 PM 

The Senate on Tuesday confirmed U.S. District Judge J. Michelle Childs for a seat on the U.S. 

Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, a prominent appeals court where several 

Supreme Court justices have served. Confirmed on a vote of 64-34, Judge Childs is set to 

replace Judge David Tatel, who in May took senior status, a form of semiretirement that creates a

judicial vacancy. [Continue Reading ] See also : Law360 , Washington Examiner 

Courthouse News : Biden nominee is first Hispanic woman confirmed to Illinois federal 

judgeship , Rose Wagner, July 19, 2022, 9:14 PM 

The Senate gave its seal of approval Tuesday to two federal court judges, including one 

appointee who will be the first Hispanic woman to ever serve as a federal judge in Illinois. Nancy 

L.  Maldonado was confirmed by a vote of 53-45 to a vacancy at the Northern District of Illinois. “It 

marks yet another proud accomplishment, and our efforts to build a judiciary that really reflects 

America,” Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said on 

the Senate floor Tuesday. [Continue Reading ] See also : Chicago Sun Times 

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360: Treasury Urges DC Circ. To Nix Tribes' COVID-19 Funding Suit, Joyce Hanson, 

July 19, 2022, 8:34 PM 

The federal government has asked the D. C. Circuit to back its summary judgment win in an 

appeal filed by Native American tribes challenging its distribution of COVID-19 relief, saying a

lower court properly held that the U. S. Department of the Treasury's funding allocation was well 

within its discretion. In its Friday appellate brief, the government argued its final allocation was not 

"arbitrary and capricious," as the Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation and the Miccosukee Tribe of 

Indians of Florida claim in their consolidated suits. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Ex-Canadian police officer sentenced for sex abuse of 

minors on Indian reservation , Unattributed, July 19, 2022, 6:00 PM 

A former Canadian police officer was sentenced Tuesday for sexually abusing minors on an 

Indian reservation in northern Minnesota. The U.S. Attorney’s Office says 33-year-old Brady John 

Hillis, a Canadian citizen who used to be an Ontario Provincial police officer, was sentenced to 10 

years in federal prison, followed by 10 years of supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Marijuana Moment: Senate Schedules Marijuana Hearing In Committee Chaired By Cory 

Booker, With Legalization Bill Set To Drop Any Day, Kyle Jaeger, July 19, 2022, 9:00 PM 

With a Senate bill to federally legalize marijuana expected to be introduced imminently, a key 

subcommittee chaired by one of the measure’s prime sponsors has scheduled a hearing for next 

week on cannabis reform and the harms of criminalization. The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee 

on Crime and Terrorism, chaired by Sen. Cory Booker (D-NJ), will meet on July 26 for a meeting 

titled “Decriminalizing Cannabis at the Federal Level: Necessary Steps to Address Past Harms.” 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000023

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Times: Congress brokering deal to help legal marijuana industry by easing 

banking rules, Susan Ferrechio, July 19, 2022, 10:00 PM 

The Senate agenda has gone to pot. Senate Majority Leader Charles E. Schumer, New York 

Democrat, promised to introduce a bill to legalize marijuana ahead of the August recess, and he 

has more time to take up the cause now that a miniature “Build Back Better” bill has been largely 

scrapped. Democratic senators are drafting legislation that would pair decriminalization of 

marijuana at the federal level with criminal justice reforms, and they plan to introduce it as early as 

this week. [Continue Reading ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

Law360: J&J Wants Opioid Claims From NY Towns, Cities Tossed, Adam Lidgett, July 19, 

2022, 7:04 PM 

Johnson & Johnson wants an Ohio federal court to toss opioid claims made against the company 

by a host of New York municipalities, saying a change to an Empire State law bars those 

allegations. As part of sprawling multidistrict litigation over the opioid crisis in Ohio federal court, 

J&J and its Janssen Pharmaceuticals unit said in a motion Monday that it shouldn't have to face 

opioid cases that have been filed by dozens of New York cities, towns, villages and even fire and 

water districts. [Continue Reading ]

Law Street Media: DOJ Announces Resolution to Opioid Kickbacks Case Involving 

Purdue, Guy DeMarco, July 19, 2022, 3:00 PM 

On Monday, the Department of Justice announced via a press release that a California pain 

specialist paid to resolve allegations he violated the False Claims Act. According to the press 

release, the allegations against Dr. Gerald M. Sacks, the pain specialist, concern the prescription 

of specific pain medications to Medicare beneficiaries in exchange for payment from those 

medication’s manufacturer, the now-notorious Purdue Pharma LP and Depomed Inc. [Continue 

Reading ]

WDBJ-CBS (Roanoke, VA): Roanoke-based opioid treatment center settles civil case with 

US, Pat Thomas, July 19, 2022, 1:19 PM 

A Roanoke-based opioid treatment center has agreed to pay $348,934 to resolve allegations that 

it “violated the False Claims Act by billing Medicaid for addiction treatment services that were not 

provided by the required licensed individuals,” according to the US Attorney’s Office. Virginia 

Treatment Center, LLC, doing business as Roanoke Comprehensive Treatment Center (RCTC) 

in Roanoke, agreed to the payment. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WFXR-Fox (Roanoke, VA) 

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters : Biden to announce executive actions on climate , Unattributed, July 20, 2022, 4:41 

AM 

President Joe Biden will announce a set of executive actions aimed at addressing climate change 

on Wednesday in a visit to the site of a former coal-fired plant in Massachusetts that is playing a

role in supporting the state's offshore wind industry. Democratic lawmakers and environmental 

groups have been calling for the White House to take aggressive measures on climate change 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000024

## •

## •

## ••

after Democratic Senator Joe Manchin said last week he was not ready to support key climate 

provisions in Congress, a critical loss in the evenly divided Senate. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

AP: House passes same-sex marriage bill in retort to high court , Lisa Mascaro, July 19, 

2022, 7:00 PM 

The U.S. House overwhelmingly approved legislation Tuesday to protect same-sex and interracial 

marriages amid concerns that the Supreme Court ruling overturning Roe v. Wade abortion 

access could jeopardize other rights criticized by many conservatives. In a robust but lopsided 

debate, Democrats argued intensely and often personally in favor of enshrining marriage equality 

in federal law, while Republicans steered clear of openly rejecting gay marriage. Instead leading 

Republicans portrayed the bill as unnecessary amid other issues facing the nation. [Continue 

Reading ] See also : ABC , Bloomberg , CNBC , NBC , NYT , Reuters , USA Today , WaPo , WSJ 

Washington Times: Democrats roll out wish list of climate change executive orders for 

Biden, Ramsey Touchberry, July 19, 2022, 7:18 PM 

Democratic lawmakers and their environmentalist allies have a laundry list of executive actions on 

climate change that they want President Biden to take because Congress can’t get the job done. 

[...] Direct the Department of Justice to get involved in ongoing local and state climate litigation 

against the fossil fuel industry. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 19, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

More than 120 million Americans are under excessive heat warnings as 20 states are 

expected to hit more than 60 new record highs by the end of the week. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Britain has shattered its record for the highest temperature ever registered, with 34 

locations across the country breaking previous highs amid a European heat wave that is a

one in 1,000 year event, according to climate scientists. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The Secret Service says those missing text messages from January 5th and 6th are 

presumably permanently deleted. Now, the National Archives is calling for an investigation 

into how those records could have been erased. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Emotions ran high at the school board meeting in Uvalde following the release of a report 

on the failed police response to the massacre at Robb Elementary school. Some parents 

are demanding the school’s police chief be fired immediately, he is currently on leave. 

[ABC , CBS , NBC ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000025

## •

## ••

## ••

## •

## •

## ••••

Vladimir Putin took a rare trip outside Russia today in which he met with Iran’s supreme 

leader, who gave his support of the invasion of Ukraine, and the two countries announced 

an oil deal. Meanwhile, Ukrainian first lady Olena Zelenska visited the White House on 

Tuesday, part of her high-profile trip to Washington as the Russian war in her country enters 

its sixth month. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

NYC police are searching for a gunman who shot and killed a crew member working on the 

TV show “Law and Order: Organized Crime.” Police say the crew member was saving 

parking spaces for filming in Brooklyn when he was shot in the head and neck. [CBS , NBC ]

Authorities say a mechanical problem caused a transformer to catch fire at Hoover Dam, 

startling visitors at the peak of tourist season. No injuries were reported. [ABC , NBC ]

Advocacy group Everytown for Gun Safety is alleging the company that made the weapon 

used in the Uvalde shooting, Daniel Defense, “preys on at-risk young men” in their 

advertising. Now, they’re encouraging the FTC to investigate its marketing practices. [CBS ]

Steve Dettelbach is the newest Director of the ATF, marking the first time the agency will 

have a permanent leader in more than seven years. Dettelbach spoke about taking over the 

agency at such a critical time in America. [CBS ]

The Democrat-led House of Representatives on Tuesday voted to pass a bill that would 

enshrine protections for same-sex marriage into federal law. [ABC ]

Steve Bannon, an advisor to former President Trump, is now on trial. Bannon is charged 

with contempt of Congress for failing to comply with the January 6th investigation. “All hell is 

going to break loose tomorrow,” Bannon said the day before the Capitol insurrection. [NBC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Putin Says Russia Will Honor Europe Gas Commitments” [WSJ , WaPo ]

“War and Warming Upend Global Energy Supplies and Amplify Suffering” [NYT ]

“Secret Service says it can’t recover Jan. 6 texts; National Archives seeks details” [WaPo ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147 01570-000026

“L.A. County’s push for mask rules ignites a familiar debate” [LAT ]

END 

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5147

From:  FEDagent 

Subject:  [EXIERNl\L) First Senate Coofinraion cl AlF llrector in o.e- $8',81 Years  Plus CSP OPR Finds Excessi-.e Force in Border P!EUI ncident N:> 

To: 

El.idence c:I Striking 

Guttertag w:as (OOA.G) 

Sent  -Uy 14 2022 6 CY2 PM (UTC 04 00) 

Juy14 , 2022   

> Vew

n Bro.vser 

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000027 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Top News 

The First Senate Confirmation of ATF Director in Over Seven Years 

The Senate conf rmed Steven Dette bach, a fonner U.S. Attorney n Oho , as D rector of 

01570-000028 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 the Bureau of A coho, Tobacco, F rearms and Expos ves (A TF) th s week, end ng the 

agency's seven years w thout a conf rmed d rector. Dette bach was conf rmed n a 48 -

to-46 vote across party nes and was sworn 

non Wednesday by Attorney Genera (AG) Merr ck Garand. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000029 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000030 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Top News 

CBP-OPR Finds Excessive Force in Bord er Patrol Incdt, No Evidence of Striking Migrants 

The Customs and Border Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of Profess ona Respons b ty (QPR) fol.fld no ev dence that Border Patro (B P) agents struck m grants but noted an ''Lnnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000031 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000032 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Top News 

Class Action Suit Reaches Preliminary Settlement with OPM, Contractor 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contractor Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000033 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000034 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Top News 

NASA 's Newes t Tele scope Captur es Images of Distant 

Galaxi es 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). 

> Read More

01570-000035 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000036 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 The Takedown 

Seve n Indi vi duals Charged with Gamecock Fighting, Illegal Gambling Op eration 

Federa aw enforcement off c as recent yarrested seven nd v dua s n South Caro na on rM:> vement charges n a gamecock f ght ng verm.re and ega gamb ng operaton. 

> Read More

01570-000037 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

FEDforum 

The Morale of Women in Federal 

Law Enforcement 

01570-000038 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 There s no better t me to d scuss team mora e for women n federa aw enforcement-and what exact y has the 

ab ty to d m n sh t After a , ;ou do not ask for much n exchange for ,Ol.l" hard work. 

Read More 

# X 01570-000039 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 □

# X

01570-000040 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Li ves ofFederal Employ ee s

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

Read More 

01570-000041 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000042 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Case Law Update 

Fifth, Sixth Circuits Split on DHS Immigration Enf . Guidance 

The U.S. Coll't of Appea s for the F fth and S xlh C rcu ts are d vded on temporar y

ha t ng the Department of Ho me and Seru- ty ( OH S) from enforc ng ts pr or ty 

a rr est and deportat on gu dance. 

> Read More
> 01570-000043

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000044 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 The Spotlight 

Caught Up in Media Exposure 

For better or worse, aw enforcement persome often f nd themse ves n the pub cspot ght. Unfortunate y, even off cers w th exce ent conduct aren t mmune to a egat ons of wrongdo ng. 

> Read More

01570-000045 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 X

01570-000046 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Educate Yourself 

## The Policy Challenges of Techno logi cal Advancerrent 

The Nat ona Academy of Pub cAdm n strat on hosts an expert pane Fr day, Juy 15th to exam ne po cy cha enges that emerge n the face of techno og ca advancement. 

Register Now 

01570-000047 

Docmnent ID: 0. 7 .1088.31623 X

01570-000048 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 v1aeo ot the week uu 

## In spectors General, Explained 

It seems ke nspectors genera are a over the news these days, but Vvilat exacty s an nspector genera , arrywa'{? The Project on 

Goverrvnent Overs ght breaks t down. 

Watch Now 

# V 01570-000049 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 I Leader ship Quote 

Donald H. McGannon-Leadership is action not position. 

01570-000050 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 Advert se Webs te  

> O,pyng/11

er 2022 FElligerrl 

l\Jda:e preferences or unsubscribc. 

01570-000051 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31623 From:  FEDagent 

Subject:  [EXIERNl\L) First Senate Coofinraion cl AlF llrector in o.e- $8',81 Years  Plus CSP OPR Finds Excessi-.e Force in Border P!EUI ncident N:> 

El.idence c:I Striking 

To:  Heinzelman Kate (OAG) 

Sent  -Uy 14 2022 6 01 PM (UTC 04 00) 

Juy14 , 2022   

> Vew

n Bro.vser 

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000052 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Top News 

The First Senate Confirmation of ATF Director in Over Seven Years 

The Senate conf rmed Steven Dette bach, a fonner U.S. Attorney n Oho , as D rector of 

01570-000053 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 the Bureau of A coho, Tobacco, F rearms and Expos ves (A TF) th s week, end ng the 

agency's seven years w thout a conf rmed d rector. Dette bach was conf rmed n a 48 -

to-46 vote across party nes and was sworn 

non Wednesday by Attorney Genera (AG) Merr ck Garand. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000054 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000055 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Top News 

CBP-OPR Finds Excessive Force in Bord er Patrol Incdt, No Evidence of Striking Migrants 

The Customs and Border Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of Profess ona Respons b ty (QPR) fol.fld no ev dence that Border Patro (B P) agents struck m grants but noted an ''Lnnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000056 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000057 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Top News 

Class Action Suit Reaches Preliminary Settlement with OPM, Contractor 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contractor Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000058 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000059 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Top News 

NASA 's Newes t Tele scope Captur es Images of Distant 

Galaxi es 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). 

> Read More

01570-000060 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000061 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 The Takedown 

Seve n Indi vi duals Charged with Gamecock Fighting, Illegal Gambling Op eration 

Federa aw enforcement off c as recent yarrested seven nd v dua s n South Caro na on rM:> vement charges n a gamecock f ght ng verm.re and ega gamb ng operaton. 

> Read More

01570-000062 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

FEDforum 

The Morale of Women in Federal 

Law Enforcement 

01570-000063 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 There s no better t me to d scuss team mora e for women n federa aw enforcement-and what exact y has the 

ab ty to d m n sh t After a , ;ou do not ask for much n exchange for ,Ol.l" hard work. 

Read More 

# X 01570-000064 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 □

# X

01570-000065 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Li ves ofFederal Employ ee s

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000066 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000067 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Case Law Update 

Fifth, Sixth Circuits Split on DHS Immigration Enf . Guidance 

The U.S. Coll't of Appea s for the F fth and S xlh C rcu ts are d vded on temporar y

ha t ng the Department of Ho me and Seru- ty ( OH S) from enforc ng ts pr or ty 

a rr est and deportat on gu dance. 

> Read More
> 01570-000068

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000069 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 The Spotlight 

Caught Up in Media Exposure 

For better or worse, aw enforcement persome often f nd themse ves n the pub cspot ght. Unfortunate y, even off cers w th exce ent conduct aren t mmune to a egat ons of wrongdo ng. 

> Read More

01570-000070 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000071 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Educate Yourself 

## The Policy Challenges of Techno logi cal Advancerrent 

The Nat ona Academy of Pub cAdm n strat on hosts an expert pane Fr day, Juy 15th to exam ne po cy cha enges that emerge n the face of techno og ca advancement. 

Register Now 

01570-000072 

Docmnent ID: 0.7.1088.21278 X

01570-000073 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 v1aeo ot the week uu 

## In spectors General, Explained 

It seems ke nspectors genera are a over the news these days, but Vvilat exacty s an nspector genera , arrywa'{? The Project on 

Goverrvnent Overs ght breaks t down. 

Watch Now 

# V 01570-000074 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 I Leader ship Quote 

Donald H. McGannon-Leadership is action not position. 

01570-000075 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 Advert se Webs te  

> Q,pyng/11

er 2022 FElligerrl 

L.vda:e preferences or unsubscribc. 

01570-000076 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21278 From:  FEDagent 

Subject:  [EXIERNl\L) First Senate Coofinraion cl AlF llrector in o.e- $8',81 Years  Plus CSP OPR Finds Excessi-.e Force in Border P!EUI ncident N:> 

El.idence c:I Striking 

To:  Klaw&r Matthew B (OAG) 

Sent  -Uy 14 2022 6 01 PM (UTC 04 00) 

Juy14 , 2022   

> Vew

n Bro.vser 

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000077 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Top News 

The First Senate Confirmation of ATF Director in Over Seven Years 

The Senate conf rmed Steven Dette bach, a fonner U.S. Attorney n Oho , as D rector of 

01570-000078 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 the Bureau of A coho, Tobacco, F rearms and Expos ves (A TF) th s week, end ng the 

agency's seven years w thout a conf rmed d rector. Dette bach was conf rmed n a 48 -

to-46 vote across party nes and was sworn 

non Wednesday by Attorney Genera (AG) Merr ck Garand. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000079 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000080 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Top News 

CBP-OPR Finds Excessive Force in Bord er Patrol Incdt, No Evidence of Striking Migrants 

The Customs and Border Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of Profess ona Respons b ty (QPR) fol.fld no ev dence that Border Patro (B P) agents struck m grants but noted an ''Lnnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000081 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000082 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Top News 

Class Action Suit Reaches Preliminary Settlement with OPM, Contractor 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contractor Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000083 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000084 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Top News 

NASA 's Newes t Tele scope Captur es Images of Distant 

Galaxi es 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). 

> Read More

01570-000085 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000086 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 The Takedown 

Seve n Indi vi duals Charged with Gamecock Fighting, Illegal Gambling Op eration 

Federa aw enforcement off c as recent yarrested seven nd v dua s n South Caro na on rM:> vement charges n a gamecock f ght ng verm.re and ega gamb ng operaton. 

> Read More

01570-000087 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

FEDforum 

The Morale of Women in Federal 

Law Enforcement 

01570-000088 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 There s no better t me to d scuss team mora e for women n federa aw enforcement-and what exact y has the 

ab ty to d m n sh t After a , ;ou do not ask for much n exchange for ,Ol.l" hard work. 

Read More 

# X 01570-000089 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 □

# X

01570-000090 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Li ves ofFederal Employ ee s

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000091 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000092 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Case Law Update 

Fifth, Sixth Circuits Split on DHS Immigration Enf . Guidance 

The U.S. Coll't of Appea s for the F fth and S xlh C rcu ts are d vded on temporar y

ha t ng the Department of Ho me and Seru- ty ( OH S) from enforc ng ts pr or ty 

a rr est and deportat on gu dance. 

> Read More

01570-000093 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000094 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 The Spotlight 

Caught Up in Media Exposure 

For better or worse, aw enforcement persome often f nd themse ves n the pub cspot ght. Unfortunate y, even off cers w th exce ent conduct aren t mmune to a egat ons of wrongdo ng. 

> Read More

01570-000095 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000096 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Educate Yourself 

## The Policy Challenges of Techno logi cal Advancerrent 

The Nat ona Academy of Pub cAdm n strat on hosts an expert pane Fr day, Juy 15th to exam ne po cy cha enges that emerge n the face of techno og ca advancement. 

Register Now 

01570-000097 

Docmnent ID: 0.7.1088.21852 X

01570-000098 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 v1aeo ot the week uu 

## In spectors General, Explained 

It seems ke nspectors genera are a over the news these days, but Vvilat exacty s an nspector genera , arrywa'{? The Project on 

Goverrvnent Overs ght breaks t down. 

Watch Now 

# V 01570-000099 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 I Leader ship Quote 

Donald H. McGannon-Leadership is action not position. 

01570-000100 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 Advert se Webs te  

> O,pyng/11

er 2022 FElligerrl 

l\Jda:e preferences or unsubscribc. 

01570-000101 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21852 From:  FEDagent 

Subject:  [EXIERNl\L) First Senate Coofinraion cl AlF llrector in o.e- $8',81 Years  Plus CSP OPR Finds Excessi-.e Force in Border P!EUI ncident N:> 

El.idence c:I Striking 

To:  Goodander Margaret V (OAG) 

Sent  -Uy 14 2022 6 00 PM (UTC 04 00) 

Juy14 , 2022   

> Vew

n Bro.vser 

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000102 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Top News 

The First Senate Confirmation of ATF Director in Over Seven Years 

The Senate conf rmed Steven Dette bach, a fonner U.S. Attorney n Oho , as D rector of 

01570-000103 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 the Bureau of A coho, Tobacco, F rearms and Expos ves (A TF) th s week, end ng the 

agency's seven years w thout a conf rmed d rector. Dette bach was conf rmed n a 48 -

to-46 vote across party nes and was sworn 

non Wednesday by Attorney Genera (AG) Merr ck Garand. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000104 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000105 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Top News 

CBP-OPR Finds Excessive Force in Bord er Patrol Incdt, No Evidence of Striking Migrants 

The Customs and Border Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of Profess ona Respons b ty (QPR) fol.fld no ev dence that Border Patro (B P) agents struck m grants but noted an ''Lnnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000106 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000107 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Top News 

Class Action Suit Reaches Preliminary Settlement with OPM, Contractor 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contractor Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000108 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000109 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Top News 

NASA 's Newes t Tele scope Captur es Images of Distant 

Galaxi es 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). 

> Read More

01570-000110 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000111 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 The Takedown 

Seve n Indi vi duals Charged with Gamecock Fighting, Illegal Gambling Op eration 

Federa aw enforcement off c as recent yarrested seven nd v dua s n South Caro na on rM:> vement charges n a gamecock f ght ng verm.re and ega gamb ng operaton. 

> Read More

01570-000112 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

FEDforum 

The Morale of Women in Federal 

Law Enforcement 

01570-000113 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 There s no better t me to d scuss team mora e for women n federa aw enforcement-and what exact y has the 

ab ty to d m n sh t After a , ;ou do not ask for much n exchange for ,Ol.l" hard work. 

Read More 

# X 01570-000114 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 □

# X

01570-000115 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Li ves ofFederal Employ ee s

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

Read More 

01570-000116 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000117 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Case Law Update 

Fifth, Sixth Circuits Split on DHS Immigration Enf . Guidance 

The U.S. Coll't of Appea s for the F fth and S xlh C rcu ts are d vded on temporar y

ha t ng the Department of Ho me and Seru- ty ( OH S) from enforc ng ts pr or ty 

a rr est and deportat on gu dance. 

> Read More

01570-000118 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000119 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 The Spotlight 

Caught Up in Media Exposure 

For better or worse, aw enforcement persome often f nd themse ves n the pub cspot ght. Unfortunate y, even off cers w th exce ent conduct aren t mmune to a egat ons of wrongdo ng. 

> Read More

01570-000120 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000121 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Educate Yourself 

## The Policy Challenges of Techno logical Advancerrent 

The Nat ona Academy of Pub cAdm n strat on hosts an expert pane Fr day, Juy 15th to exam ne po cy cha enges that emerge n the face of techno og ca advancement. 

Register Now 

01570-000122 

Docmnent ID: 0.7.1088.30879 X

01570-000123 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 v1aeo ot the week uu 

## In spectors General, Explained 

It seems ke nspectors genera are a over the news these days, but Vvilat exacty s an nspector genera , arrywa'{? The Project on 

Goverrvnent Overs ght breaks t down. 

Watch Now 

# V 01570-000124 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 I Leader ship Quote 

Donald H. McGannon-Leadership is action not position. 

01570-000125 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 Advert se Webs te 

O.,pyng/11 :c 2022 FElligent 

L.vdate preferences or unsubscribc. 

01570-000126 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30879 From: FEll'naiager Subject: [EXIERNl\L) mages ct Distant Galaxies CaJ:iured by NASAs Wetb Telescope To: Heinzelman Kate (OAG) 

Sent -Uy 12 2022 6 31 PM (UTC 04 00)    

> July 12, 2022
> View in Browser

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000127 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Top News 

hna ges of Distant 

Galaxies C~tured by 

## NASA' s Webb 

Telescope 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the 

01570-000128 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space 

te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). Astronomers expect the JWST w f n a myster ous gap n our know edge about the f rst 400 m on years after the B g Bang as we as prov de c ues to the ex stence of fe forms e sewhere n the 1..11 verse. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000129 Document ID: 0 .7 .1088. 21268 X

01570-000130 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Top News 

CBP-OPR Identifie sUnnecessary Force in Border Patrol Incdt. , No Evidence of Striking 

Migrant s

The Customs and Bo rd er Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of P ro fess ona Respons b ty (Q PR ) fol.fld no ev dence that the Border Patro (B P) agents stru:k the m grants but noted an "unnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000131 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000132 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Top News 

OPM, Contractor Reach Preliminary Settlement in Data Breach Cla ss Action 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contracto r Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000133 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000134 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Top News 

Biden Administration Reports Progre ss in Achie ving Workforce, Cu stomer Service Goal s

Fo r the th rd quarter off sea year (FY) 2022, the Off ce of Management (0MB) reported so d progress towa rd advanc ng 

the customer expe r ence mperat ves and workforce pr or t es. 

> Read More
> 01570-000135

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000136 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Lives of Federal Employees 

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000137 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000138 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 From the HIii 

## Exemplary Staffers 

Believe Congress Isn't 

Functioning Properly, 

Citing Polarization 

A recent r epo rt from the Congress ona Management Fol.fldat on (C MF) and the 

r:, ...,.,. .......... _ .... ,... , ....... o . .&-. .... c- ........ ........ , ..... -..I 7C:. 

01570-000139 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 r Cl u ,c: ~· • fJ V r \&J \,,, ~c: V \,,C, vu IU ' V

percent out of 128 congress ona staffers be eve Congress s not ftnct on ng. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000140 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Case Law Update 

## MSPB Explains Corrective Action Options for Term Appointees 

The Mer t Sy.;tems Protect on Board (MSPB) has rued that term appo ntees are not ent t ed to serve beY".)nd the roe exp rat on date, nor to a permanent post on as re ef n a personne act on. 

> Read More

01570-000141 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000142 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Manager Matters 

Issues at IRS Highlight Federal Managers Profe ss ional Vulnerabiliti es 

The hterna Reverue Servce (RS) s l.flder f re for a eged poor perfonnance. No matter where these a egat ons ead, good managers are bol.fld to get caught ~ n the controversy. 

> Read More

01 570 -0001 43 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000144 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 Video of the Week DD 

## What is the Appropriation sComrrnttee ?

Congress can be comp cated. Rep. Che e

P ngree (D-ME) exp a ns what the 

Appropr at ons Comm ttee s and how 

Congress fin:ls the goverrment every year. 

> Watch Now

01 570 -000145 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 X

01570-000146 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 I In Federal H is to ry 

On July 12 , 1984, Fonner V ce Pres dent and pres dent a cand date Water Monda e amounces Rep, Gera d ne Ferraro (D -NY) as h s runn ng mate n the upcom ng 

eecton. 

# IHeard Inside the Beltway 

''You have a co-equa branch of government 

do ng d p omacy overseas, Vvi1 ch s

ncred b y mportant, espec a y when you re 

ook ng to re nforce a message," said Naz 

Durakoglu, the Ass stant Secretary of 

State for Leg sat ve Affa rs, concern ng the 

strategy be nd Congress ona Member 

Deegatons. 

# I Leadership quotation 

I.M.  Pe i-Success is a collection of problems solved. 

# ■■■ Advert se Webs te     

> Copyright© 2022 FEDmanager .
> Update preferences or unsubscribc.

01570-000147 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21268 From : FEll'naiager Subj ect: [EXIERNl\L) mages ct Distant Galaxies CaJ:iured by NASAs Wetb Telescope To: Klawer Matthew B (OAG) 

Sent -Uy 12 2022 6 30 PM (UTC 04 00)   

> July 12, 2022
> View in Browser

Top News Columns Contact 

01570-000148 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Top News 

hna ges of Distant 

Galaxies C~tured by 

## NASA' s Webb 

Telescope 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the 

01570-000149 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space 

te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). Astronomers expect the JWST w f n a myster ous gap n our know edge about the f rst 400 m on years after the B g Bang as we as prov de c ues to the ex stence of fe forms e sewhere n the un verse. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000150 

Document ID: 0 .7 .1088. 21825 X

01570-000151 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Top News 

CBP-OPR Identifie sUnnecessary Force in Border Patrol Incdt. , No Evidence of Striking 

Migrant s

The Customs and Bo rd er Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of P ro fess ona Respons b ty (Q PR ) fol.fld no ev dence that the Border Patro (B P) agents stru:k the m grants but noted an "unnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000152 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000153 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Top News 

OPM, Contractor Reach Preliminary Settlement in Data Breach Cla ss Action 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contracto r Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000154 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000155 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Top News 

Biden Administration Reports Progre ss in Achie ving Workforce, Cu stomer Service Goal s

Fo r the th rd quarter off sea year (FY) 2022, the Off ce of Management (0MB) reported so d progress towa rd advanc ng 

the customer expe r ence mperat ves and workforce pr or t es. 

> Read More
> 01570-000156

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000157 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Lives of Federal Employees 

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000158 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000159 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 From the HIii 

## Exemplary Staffers 

Believe Congress Isn't 

Functioning Properly, 

Citing Polarization 

A recent r epo rt from the Congress ona Management Fol.fldat on (C MF) and the 

r:, ...,.,. .......... _ .... ,... , ....... o . .&-. .... c- ........ ........ , ..... -..I 7C:. 

01570-000160 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 r Cl u ,c: ~· • fJ V r \&J \,,, ~c: V \,,C, vu IU ' V

percent out of 128 congress ona staffers be eve Congress s not ftnct on ng. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000161 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Case Law Update 

## MSPB Explains Corrective Action Options for Term Appointees 

The Mer t Sy.;tems Protect on Board (MSPB) has rued that term appo ntees are not ent t ed to serve beY".)nd the roe exp rat on date, nor to a permanent post on as re ef n a personne act on. 

> Read More

01570-000162 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000163 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Manager Matters 

Issues at IRS Highlight Federal Managers Profe ss ional Vulnerabiliti es 

The hterna Reverue Servce (RS) s l.flder f re for a eged poor perfonnance. No matter where these a egat ons ead, good managers are bol.fld to get caught ~ n the controversy. 

> Read More

01 570 -00016 4Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000165 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 Video of the Week DD 

## What is the Appropriation sComrrnttee ?

Congress can be comp cated. Rep. Che e

P ngree (D-ME) exp a ns what the 

Appropr at ons Comm ttee s and how 

Congress fin:ls the goverrment every year. 

> Watch Now

01 570 -000166 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 X

01570-000167 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 I In Federal H is to ry 

On July 12 , 1984, Fonner V ce Pres dent and pres dent a cand date Water Monda e amounces Rep, Gera d ne Ferraro (D -NY) as h s runn ng mate n the upcom ng 

eecton. 

# IHeard Inside the Beltway 

''You have a co-equa branch of government 

do ng d p omacy overseas, Vvi1 ch s

ncred b y mportant, espec a y when you re 

ook ng to re nforce a message," said Naz 

Durakoglu, the Ass stant Secretary of 

State for Leg sat ve Affa rs, concern ng the 

strategy be nd Congress ona Member 

Deegatons. 

# I Leadership quotation 

I.M.  Pe i-Success is a collection of problems solved. 

# ■■■ Advert se Webs te     

> Copyright© 2022 FEDmanager .
> Update preferences or unsubscribc.

01570-000168 Document ID: 0.7.1088.21825 From: FEll'naiager Subject: [EXIERNl\L) mages ct Distant Galaxies CaJ:iured by NASAs Wetb Telescope To: Guttertag w:as (OOA.G) Sent -Uy 12 2022 6 30 PM (UTC 04 00)   

> July 12, 2022
> View in Br owser

Top News Columns Contact 

01570-000169 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Top News 

hna ges of Distant 

Galaxies C~tured by 

## NASA' s Webb 

Telescope 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the 

01570-000170 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space 

te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). Astronomers expect the JWST w f n a myster ous gap n our know edge about the f rst 400 m on years after the B g Bang as we as prov de c ues to the ex stence of fe forms e sewhere n the 1..11 verse. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000171 Document ID: 0 .7 .1088. 31617 X

01570-000172 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Top News 

CBP-OPR Identifie sUnnecessary Force in Border Patrol Incdt. , No Evidence of Striking 

Migrant s

The Customs and Bo rd er Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of P ro fess ona Respons b ty (Q PR ) fol.fld no ev dence that the Border Patro (B P) agents stru:k the m grants but noted an "unnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000173 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000174 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Top News 

OPM, Contractor Reach Preliminary Settlement in Data Breach Cla ss Action 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contracto r Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000175 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000176 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Top News 

Biden Administration Reports Progre ss in Achie ving Workforce, Cu stomer Service Goal s

Fo r the th rd quarter off sea year (FY) 2022, the Off ce of Management (0MB) reported so d progress towa rd advanc ng 

the customer expe r ence mperat ves and workforce pr or t es. 

> Read More
> 01570-000177

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000178 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Lives of Federal Employees 

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000179 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000180 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 From the HIii 

## Exemplary Staffers 

Believe Congress Isn't 

Functioning Properly, 

Citing Polarization 

A recent r epo rt from the Congress ona Management Fol.fldat on (C MF) and the 

r:, ...,.,. .......... _ .... ,... , ....... o . .&-. .... c- ........ ........ , ..... -..I 7C:. 

01570-000181 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 r Cl u ,c: ~· • fJ V r \&J \,,, ~c: V \,,C, vu IU ' V

percent out of 128 congress ona staffers be eve Congress s not ftnct on ng. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000182 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Case Law Update 

## MSPB Explains Corrective Action Options for Term Appointees 

The Mer t Sy.;tems Protect on Board (MSPB) has rued that term appo ntees are not ent t ed to serve beY".)nd the roe exp rat on date, nor to a permanent post on as re ef n a personne act on. 

> Read More

01570-000183 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000184 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Manager Matters 

Issues at IRS Highlight Federal Managers Profe ss ional Vulnerabiliti es 

The hterna Reverue Servce (RS) s l.flder f re for a eged poor perfonnance. No matter where these a egat ons ead, good managers are bol.fld to get caught ~ n the controversy. 

> Read More

01 570 -000185 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000186 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 Video of the Week DD 

## What is the Appropriation sComrrnttee ?

Congress can be comp cated. Rep. Che e

P ngree (D-ME) exp a ns what the 

Appropr at ons Comm ttee s and how 

Congress fin:ls the goverrment every year. 

> Watch Now

01 570 -000187 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 X

01570-000188 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 I In Federal H is to ry 

On July 12 , 1984, Fonner V ce Pres dent and pres dent a cand date Water Monda e amounces Rep, Gera d ne Ferraro (D -NY) as h s runn ng mate n the upcom ng 

eecton. 

# IHeard Inside the Beltway 

''You have a co-equa branch of government 

do ng d p omacy overseas, Vvi1 ch s

ncred b y mportant, espec a y when you re 

ook ng to re nforce a message," said Naz 

Durakoglu, the Ass stant Secretary of 

State for Leg sat ve Affa rs, concern ng the 

strategy be nd Congress ona Member 

Deegatons. 

# I Leadership quotation 

I.M.  Pe i-Success is a collection of problems solved. 

# ■■■ Advert se Webs te     

> Copyright© 2022 FEDmanager .
> Update preferences or unsubscribc.

01570-000189 Document ID: 0.7.1088.31617 From: FEll'naiager Subject: [EXIERNl\L) mages ct Distant Galaxies CaJ:iured by NASAs Wetb Telescope To: Goodander Margaret V (OAG) 

Sent -Uy 12 2022 6 30 PM (UTC 04 00)    

> July 12, 2022
> View in Browse r

Top News Columns Conta ct 

01570-000190 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Top News 

hna ges of Distant 

Galaxies C~tured by 

## NASA' s Webb 

Telescope 

Th s week, the Nat ona Aeronaut cs and Space Adm n strat on (NASA) re eased the 

01570-000191 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 f rst fu -co or mages from ts newest space 

te escope: the James Webb Space Te escope (JWST). Astronomers expect the JWST w f n a myster ous gap n our know edge about the f rst 400 m on years after the B g Bang as we as prov de c ues to the ex stence of fe forms e sewhere n the 1..11 verse. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000192 

Document ID: 0 .7 .1088. 30864 X

01570-000193 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Top News 

CBP-OPR Identifie sUnnecessary Force in Border Patrol Incdt. , No Evidence of Striking 

Migrant s

The Customs and Bo rd er Protect on s (CBP) Off ce of P ro fess ona Respons b ty (Q PR ) fol.fld no ev dence that the Border Patro (B P) agents stru:k the m grants but noted an "unnecessary use of force ." 

> Read More

01570-000194 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000195 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Top News 

OPM, Contractor Reach Preliminary Settlement in Data Breach Cla ss Action 

The Off ce of Persome Management (OPM) and ts secur ty contracto r Peraton R sk Dec s on reached a pre m nary sett ement w th a c ass act on awsu tconcern ng data breaches. 

> Read More

01570-000196 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000197 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Top News 

Biden Administration Reports Progre ss in Achie ving Workforce, Cu stomer Service Goal s

Fo r the th rd quarter off sea year (FY) 2022, the Off ce of Management (0MB) reported so d progress towa rd advanc ng 

the customer expe r ence mperat ves and workforce pr or t es. 

> Read More
> 01570-000198

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000199 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 FEDforum 

United We Stand: Changing the Lives of Federal Employees 

Last year, the Federa Empoyee Educaton and Ass stance Fl.lld (FEEA) ce ebrated 35 years of stand ng w th federa emp oyees. W th ~ur support, we stand comm tted to ths m sson. 

> Read More

01570-000200 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000201 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 From the HIii 

## Exemplary Staffers 

Believe Congress Isn't 

Functioning Properly, 

Citing Polarization 

A recent r epo rt from the Congress ona Management Fol.fldat on (C MF) and the 

r:, ...,.,. .......... _ .... ,... , ....... o . .&-. .... c- ........ ........ , ..... -..I 7C:. 

01570-000202 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 r Cl u ,c: ~· • fJ V r \&J \,,, ~c: V \,,C, vu IU ' V

percent out of 128 congress ona staffers be eve Congress s not ftnct on ng. 

Read More 

# X

01570-000203 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Case Law Update 

## MSPB Explains Corrective Action Options for Term Appointees 

The Mer t Sy.;tems Protect on Board (MSPB) has rued that term appo ntees are not ent t ed to serve beY".)nd the roe exp rat on date, nor to a permanent post on as re ef n a personne act on. 

> Read More

01570-000204 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000205 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Manager Matters 

Issues at IRS Highlight Federal Managers Profe ss ional Vulnerabiliti es 

The hterna Reverue Servce (RS) s l.flder f re for a eged poor perfonnance. No matter where these a egat ons ead, good managers are bol.fld to get caught ~ n the controversy. 

> Read More

01 570 -000206 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000207 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 Video of the Week DD 

## What is the Appropriation sComrrnttee ?

Congress can be comp cated. Rep. Che e

P ngree (D-ME) exp a ns what the 

Appropr at ons Comm ttee s and how 

Congress fin:ls the goverrment every year. 

> Watch Now

01 570 -000208 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 X

01570-000209 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 I In Federal H is to ry 

On July 12 , 1984, Fonner V ce Pres dent and pres dent a cand date Water Monda e amounces Rep, Gera d ne Ferraro (D -NY) as h s runn ng mate n the upcom ng 

eecton. 

# IHeard Inside the Beltway 

''You have a co-equa branch of government 

do ng d p omacy overseas, Vvi1 ch s

ncred b y mportant, espec a y when you re 

ook ng to re nforce a message," said Naz 

Durakoglu, the Ass stant Secretary of 

State for Leg sat ve Affa rs, concern ng the 

strategy be nd Congress ona Member 

Deegatons. 

# I Leadership quotation 

I.M.  Pe i-Success is a collection of problems solved. 

# ■■■ Advert se Webs te     

> Copyright© 2022 FEDmanager .
> Update preferences or unsubscribc.

01570-000210 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30864 01570-000211 From: 

Subject: (b)(6) Theresa Watson (OAG)  Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

To: Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: Ju y 12, 2022 7:56 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: July 12, 2022 at 6:45:57 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# July 12, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

National Security 

3. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

4. 

Criminal Law 

5. 

Civil Rights 

6. 

Civil Law 

7. 

Immigration & Border Security 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000212

## ••

8. 

Antitrust 

9. 

Environment 

10. 

Tax 

11. 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

12. 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

13. 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

14. 

Native American Affairs 

15. 

Marijuana Legalization 

16. 

Administration 

17. 

Congress 

18. 

Network Evening News L

19. 

Morning Headlines 

ineup 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JULY 12, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

CONGRESS 

10:00  AM: Senate Judiciary Committee: A Post-Roe America: The Legal Consequences of 

the Dobbs Decision. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000213

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

WSJ: DOJ’s Criminal Chief Places Prevention at Forefront of Agency’s White-Collar 

Crime Efforts, Dylan Tokar , July 12, 2022, 5:30 AM 

A key figure in the Justice Department’s campaign to crack down on white-collar crime is looking 

to use a tool he brought to bear both as a prosecutor fighting gang violence in New Orleans and 

as a lawyer for the city’s sole Fortune 500 company. Stopping crime before it happens should be 

a central goal of the more than 1,150 employees of the department’s criminal division, said 

Assistant Attorney General Kenneth Polite, who took charge of it last year. [Continue Reading ]

NY Post: AG Merrick Garland shows ‘little urgency’ in protecting SCOTUS justices: Ted 

Cruz, Mark Moore, July 11, 2022, 4:34 PM 

Sen. Ted Cruz has asked for Attorney General Merrick Garland to come to Capitol Hill and explain 

why the Justice Department isn’t enforcing a federal law banning protests outside the homes of 

Supreme Court justices. In a July 7 letter to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Dick Durbin 

(D-Ill.), Cruz wrote that Garland “has shown little urgency to protect Supreme Court Justices 

despite calls from the Supreme Court Marshal and multiple governors to do so.” [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  Fox 

Washington Examiner: Pressure grows on DOJ to stop Supreme Court justice 'bounties' 

and harassment, Kaelan Deese, July 11, 2022, 2:52 PM 

A group offering bounty payments for sightings of conservative Supreme Court justices is the 

latest harassment campaign prompting Republican lawmakers to call for immediate action by the 

Justice Department. Piling on top of recent protests outside the homes of Supreme Court 

justices, the activist group known as ShutDownDC tweeted July 8 that it would offer to pay 

bounties of up to $200 for anyone who reports the whereabouts of Justices Amy Coney Barrett, 

Brett Kavanaugh, Neil Gorsuch, Clarence Thomas, and Chief Justice John Roberts, part of a

pressure campaign against the court's members who voted to overturn Roe v. Wade last month. 

[Washington Examiner ] See also:  WaPo 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

NBC : Secret Service says it's 'aware' of alleged Hunter Biden iCloud hack , Tom Winter 

and Dareh Gregorian, July 11, 2022, 5:45 PM 

The Secret Service said Monday it's "aware" of a potential hack of an iCloud owned by Hunter 

Biden, the son of President Joe Biden, after some of its alleged contents were posted to the 

online forum 4Chan. "At this time we are not in a position to make public comments on potential 

investigative actions but I can assure you the Secret Service along with other federal law 

enforcement partners are aware of the social media posts and claims referencing Mr. Biden,” 

U.S.  Secret Service spokesperson Anthony Guglielmi said in a statement. [Continue Reading ]

Al Jazeera: US still seeks ex-Palestinian prisoner’s extradition from Jordan, Unatributted, 

July 11, 2022, 6:00 PM 

The United States has said ahead of President Joe Biden’s visit to Israel and the occupied West 

Bank that it is still seeking the extradition from Jordan of a Palestinian woman convicted of aiding 

in a bomb attack in Jerusalem in 2001. The family of an Israeli-American girl killed in the attack 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000214

has urged Biden to press Jordan, a close US ally, to send Ahlam al-Tamimi to the US for trial. 

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : Indictment reveals new details of Chinese targeting of dissidents , Bill 

Gertz, July 11, 2022, 5:00 PM 

China’s government used American private investigators to harass dissidents in the United 

States, according to a federal indictment of five people made public last week. The indictment 

identified five men who are charged with acting as foreign agents of China in a scheme to monitor 

and harass three dissidents who were not identified by name. Breon Peace, U.S. attorney for the 

Eastern District of New York, said the case involves “a multifaceted campaign to silence, harass, 

discredit and spy on U.S. residents for exercising their freedom of speech. [Continue Reading] 

New York Law Journal: FBI Warns of New Cyber Threat To Clients, Peter Brown, July 11, 

2022, 11:45 AM 

While the Internet offers a convenient means of communication, it also exposes every individual 

and business organization to an alarming variety of potential criminal activity. The confidential data 

and financial security of every substantial business, private organization, and government entity is 

under a persistent and relentless attack by cyber criminals searching for vulnerabilities in their 

most essential business systems. These criminals use sophisticated tools to find technical flaws 

in an organization’s computer system. They also test every employee with access to a computer 

with ingenious deceptions seeking passwords or other entry points to business computer 

systems. [Continue Reading ]

WESH-NBC (Orlando, FL): DOJ: Central Florida men among those who knew explosives 

were in D.C.-bound vehicle, Anika Hope, July 11, 2022, 8:24 PM 

Explosives. A "death list." And recipes to make bombs. That's just some of the evidence the 

Department of Justice argued they deserve to bring to trial against 9 people prosecutors say are 

members of the Oath Keepers. [Continue Reading ]

WTAE-ABC (Pittsburgh, PA): FBI Pittsburgh spotlights cyber crime dangers, Bob Mayo, 

July 11, 2022, 7:50 PM 

The FBI in Pittsburgh is spotlighting concerns about cyber crimes. "In the past few years, we've 

seen a massive surge in cyber threats. Director (Christopher) Wray recently drew parallels 

between the current cyber threat environment and 9/11. Cyber threats are more pervasive. They 

hit a wider range of victims and they have the potential for greater devastation and impact than 

ever before," said FBI Pittsburgh Special Agent In Charge Mike Nordwall. [Continue Reading ]

WPXI-NBC (Pittsburgh, PA): FBI: Cybercrimes on the rise with amount of victims in 

Pittsburgh region, Nicole Ford, July 11, 2022, 4:28 PM 

You’ve seen it on your social media pages or a friend at work said, “I got hacked.” Cybercrimes 

are on the rise with the amount of victims in our region nearly doubling from 2019 to 2021. “One 

of the biggest threats we see to western Pennsylvania is ransomware and that tracks nationally,” 

said Supervisory Special Agent Jonathan Holmes with the FBI Pittsburgh Cyber Criminal Squad. 

[Continue Reading ]

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

AP: Jan. 6 panel probes Trump’s ‘siren call’ to extremists, Lisa Mascaro, July 11, 2022, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000215

12:00  PM 

The Jan. 6 committee is preparing to highlight the way violent far-right extremists answered 

Donald Trump’s “siren call” to come to Washington for a big rally, as some now facing rare 

sedition charges over the deadly U.S. Capitol attack to overturn the presidential election. The 

panel investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol siege is set to convene Tuesday for a public hearing 

probing what it calls the final phase of Trump’s multi-pronged effort to halt Joe Biden’s victory. As 

dozens of lawsuits and false claims of voter fraud fizzled, Trump tweeted the rally invitation, a

pivotal moment, the committee said. The far-right Proud Boys, Oath Keepers and others now 

facing criminal charges readily answered. [Continue Reading] See also:  ABC , CNN , CNN -2, 

Insider , NBC , NPR , USA Today , WVIT-NBC (New Britain, CT) 

AP: Judge won’t delay trial for Trump ex-adviser Steve Bannon, Nomaan Merchant, July 

11, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A federal judge on Monday declined to delay the upcoming trial of Steve Bannon, a one-time 

adviser to former President Donald Trump who faces contempt of Congress charges after 

refusing for months to cooperate with the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 Capitol 

insurrection. Bannon is still scheduled to go on trial next week despite telling the House 

committee late Saturday that he is now prepared to testify. It’s unclear whether Bannon will again 

decline to appear before the committee with the trial pending. [Continue Reading] See also: 

ABC , Bloomberg Law,  Courthouse News , Forbes , Insider , NBC , Politico,  USA Today , WaPo ,

WSJ 

WaPo: Jan. 6 hearing expected to focus on link between militants, White House ,

Jacqueline Alemany and Hannah Allam, July 11, 2022, 7:44 PM 

The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection plans to hold its seventh 

public hearing on Tuesday, with an expected focus on the ways in which former president Donald 

Trump and his allies summoned far-right militant groups to Washington as he grew increasingly 

desperate to hold on to power. The hearing is likely to drill down on the period after states cast 

their electoral college votes on Dec. 14, 2020, action that confirmed Joe Biden’s victory. Trump, 

the committee is expected to argue, then shifted his focus to using the date of the congressional 

counting of the votes, Jan. 6, 2021, to block a peaceful transfer of power. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Raskin Brings Expertise on Right-Wing Extremism to Jan. 6 Inquiry , Luke 

Broadwater, July 11, 2022, 6:00 PM 

When Representative Jamie Raskin enters a Capitol Hill hearing room on Tuesday to lay out what 

the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack has uncovered about the role of domestic 

extremists in the riot, it will be his latest and potentially most important step in a five-year 

effort to crush a dangerous movement. Long before the Jan. 6, 2021, assault, Mr. Raskin, 

Democrat of Maryland, had thrown himself into stamping out the rise of white nationalism and 

domestic extremism in America. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Hutchinson Testimony Jolts Justice Dept. to Discuss Trump’s Conduct More 

Openly, Katie Benner and Glenn Thrush, July 11, 2022, 3:26 PM 

For the past year and a half, the Justice Department has approached former President Donald J. 

Trump’s effort to overturn the 2020 election results with a follow-the-evidence strategy that to 

critics appeared to border on paralysis and that limited discussions of his role, even inside the 

department. Then came Cassidy Hutchinson. The electrifying public testimony delivered last 

month to the House Jan. 6 panel by Ms. Hutchinson, a former White House aide who was witness 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000216

to many key moments, jolted top Justice Department officials into discussing the topic of Mr. 

Trump more directly, at times in the presence of Attorney General Merrick B. Garland and Deputy 

Attorney General Lisa O. Monaco. In conversations at the department the day after Ms. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  Fox 

LAT: Connecting Trumpworld to extremist groups could be Jan. 6 committee’s biggest 

moment, Sarah D. Wire, July 11, 2022, 2:16 PM 

The committee investigating the Capitol insurrection will focus for the first time this week on the 

relationship between people in former President Trump’s orbit and the extremist groups that 

planned and orchestrated the violence on Jan. 6, 2021. The hearing could be one of the most 

consequential held by the panel, potentially answering the long unresolved question of whether 

Trump knew that far right extremist groups such as the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers would 

storm the Capitol, and whether the president was in contact through intermediaries with the 

groups’ leaders, who have since been indicted for seditious conspiracy. Rep. [Continue Reading ]

See also:  NBC 

Bloomberg: Jan. 6 Committee Postpones Prime-Time Hearing Planned for Thursday , Billy 

House, July 11, 2022, 12:37 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6 assault on the US Capitol by a mob of Donald 

Trump’s supporters has decided to delay a hearing planned for prime time Thursday, a person 

familiar with the move said. The Thursday hearing was to explore the former president’s actions 

and activities on Jan. 6 during the 187 minutes the committee it says it took between when the 

Capitol attack began and Trump tweeted for supporters to go home. [Continue Reading ]

NBC: A Jan. 6 defendant who’s expected to testify before the House panel posted 

Trump’s ‘will be wild’ tweet, Ryan J. Reilly and Kristen Welker, July 11, 2022, 8:21 PM 

A Donald Trump supporter who posted the former president’s tweet encouraging supporters to 

go to Washington on Jan. 6, 2021, before he stormed the U.S. Capitol is expected to testify 

Tuesday before the committee investigating the insurrection, a source familiar with the matter 

said. Stephen Ayres of Ohio pleaded guilty last month to disorderly and disruptive conduct in a

restricted building. His sentencing hearing is scheduled for Sept. 13. [Continue Reading ] See 

also : ABC 

MSNBC: Bannon's offered Jan. 6 testimony is designed to provide chaos, not clarity, 

Hayes Brown, July 11, 2022, 6:09 PM 

I think it’s safe to say that Steve Bannon thinks of himself as a very clever person. The former 

White House adviser and Breitbart executive chairman has been throwing bombs and dodging 

consequences fairly successfully for years now. So how, then, to respond to Bannon’s offer over 

the weekend to finally testify before the House Jan. 6 committee after refusing to cooperate? 

Answer: with a grain of salt big enough to coat a lifetime supply of pretzels, my friends. [Continue 

Reading ]

ABC: Trump never invoked executive privilege over Bannon's Jan. 6 testimony, his 

attorney tells investigators, Alexander Mallin and Katherine Faulders, July 11, 2022, 8:44 PM 

The Justice Department revealed in an early Monday morning court filing that federal investigators 

interviewed former President Donald Trump's attorney Justin Clark two weeks ago in connection 

with former Trump adviser Steve Bannon's criminal contempt case. Prosecutors say that Clark 

confirmed in the interview that at no point did Trump ever invoke executive privilege over 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000217

Bannon's testimony -- and directly contradicted other claims made by Bannon's defense team in 

their case. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Newsweek , Washington Examiner 

The Hill : The Memo: Jan. 6 panel looks to build on big Hutchinson moment , Nial Stanage, 

July 12, 2022, 5:25 AM 

The congressional investigation into Jan. 6 returns for its seventh public hearing on Tuesday, two 

weeks to the day since former White House aide Cassidy Hutchinson stunned Washington with 

bombshell testimony. The panel will be hoping to build on the details Hutchinson provided. The 

forthcoming hearing will apparently be focused on the role played by the Proud Boys, the Oath 

Keepers and other extremist groups around the Capitol insurrection. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

AP: Ex-bank manager accused of stealing $1M from customers, Unatributted, July 11, 

2022, 4:55 PM 

A former southwestern Washington bank manager is accused of stealing more than $1 million 

from vulnerable customers. The Columbian reports Brian Davie, 43, was arrested Friday in 

Yakima on charges of bank fraud and aggravated identity theft, according to a U.S. Attorney’s 

Office statement. [Continue Reading] See also:  KATU-ABC (Portland, OR) , KOIN-CBS 

(Portland, OR) , KPTV-Fox (Portland, OR) 

CBS : "Real Housewives of Salt Lake City" star Jen Shah pleads guilty in wire fraud case ,

Caitlin O'Kane, July 11, 2022, 1:21 PM 

Jennifer Shah, who stars on Bravo's "Real Housewives of Salt Lake City," pleaded guilty Monday 

to conspiracy to commit wire fraud in connection with telemarketing. Shah, 48, now faces a

maximum sentence of 30 years in prison, according to the Department of Justice. Shah pleaded 

guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit wire fraud in connection with telemarketing through 

which she victimized 10 or more persons over the age of 55. She also agreed to forfeit $6.5 

million and to pay restitution up to $9.5 million. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN , KMSP-Fox 

(Minneapolis, MN),  NBC 

Baltimore Sun: Baltimore man gets 12 years in federal prison for armed robberies in 

Baltimore City and Baltimore and Anne Arundel counties , Lilly Price, July 11, 2022, 9:38 

PM 

A federal judge sentenced a Baltimore man Monday to 12 years in federal prison with five years 

of supervised probation for a series of armed robberies in Baltimore City, Baltimore County and 

Anne Arundel County from 2018 to 2019. Marquis Moore, 35, pleaded guilty to participating in at 

least 10 armed robberies, nine of which were conducted with two co-defendants, Milek Rankin, 

29 and Dontrell Glover, 30, both of whom are from Baltimore. The men used handguns to rob 

fast-food restaurants, video game stores, cellphone stores and discount stores in the region. 

[Continue Reading ]

New Jersey Advance Media: Man sentenced for making phony massage therapy 

certificates for prostitution businesses , y Chris Sheldon, July 11, 2022, 8:10 PM 

A man was sentenced Monday to two years and nine months in prison for making and selling fake 

massage therapy training certificates so they could be used in several New Jersey massages 

parlors that engaged in prostitution, federal prosecutors said. Naresh Rane, 68, of Tewksbury, 

previously pleaded guilty to knowingly and intentionally using and causing use of facilities in 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000218

interstate commerce or to promote, manage, establish, carry on, and facilitate the business of 

prostitution, U.S. Attorney Philip R. Sellinger said in a statement. [Continue Reading] 

Wyoming Tribune Eagle (Laramie County, WY): Ex-business head gets 30 months for wire 

fraud, employee endangerment, Unatributted, July 11, 2022, 7:00 PM 

A federal judge has sentenced a former Cheyenne business owner to prison following his 

conviction on wire fraud and on knowing-endangerment charges. In an April trial in the U.S. District 

Court of Wyoming, a jury found 47-year-old John Eldon Rimmasch, as well as his now-defunct 

company, Wasatch Railroad Contractors, guilty of five counts of wire fraud and one count of 

knowing endangerment. [Continue Reading] See also:  KGAB-AM (Orchard Valley, WY) 

Breaking AC (Atlantic City, NJ): Ex-Ventnor man admits fleeing federal custody, 

defrauding women , Lynda Cohen, July 11, 2022, 6:45 PM 

An Atlantic County man admitted to escaping federal custody and scheming to defraud women 

over telephone dating services. Patrick Giblin, 57, escaped July 23, 2020, after serving nearly 

three years of a five-year plea deal in a case in which he was charged with scamming anywhere 

from $15,000 to $40,000 from 10 women. [Continue Reading ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): Man sentenced to prison as part of federal drug 

sting in Muskegon that nabbed six others , Lynn Moore, July 11, 2022, 6:31 PM 

A Muskegon man sentenced to 20 years for drug trafficking and firearms offenses is the latest 

among several who were nabbed as part of a targeted federal investigation. Delando Johnson of 

Muskegon was among seven individuals convicted of drug trafficking in the Muskegon area. 

Johnson, known as “Fox,” was sentenced to 15 years for drug trafficking and a 5-year 

consecutive sentence for possessing a firearm to further the drug sales. [Continue Reading ]

Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN) : Cottonwood County farmer charged in $46 million 

organic grain fraud scheme, Christopher Vondracek, July 11, 2022, 4:50 PM 

A flame cultivator at work on an organic grain farm in Minnesota. Federal prosecutors say a

southwestern Minnesota farmer reaped up to $46 million in payments selling conventionally-grown corn and soybeans that he told buyers was organic. Federal prosecutors say a

southwestern Minnesota farmer reaped up to $46 million in payments selling conventionally-grown corn and soybeans that he told buyers were organic. [Continue Reading ]

Press of Atlantic City : Millville man sentenced for meth distribution , Eric Conklin, July 11, 

2022, 4:00 PM 

A Millville man will spend over 12 years in prison after pleading guilty to selling 

methamphetamine, U.S. District Judge Robert Kugler ruled Monday. Joan Benitez, 41, was 

sentenced to 12 years and seven months and must undergo five years of supervised release, 

U.S.  District Attorney Phillip Sellinger said in a Monday news release. [Continue Reading] 

KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA): OC man pleads guilty to stalking pro gamer online for 

years , Unattributed, July 11, 2022, 9:53 PM 

An Orange County man pleaded guilty Monday to stalking a professional online gamer for years, 

according to the U.S. Attorney's Office. Evan Baltierra, 29, of Trabuco Canyon, could face a

maximum sentence of five years in federal prison. Baltierra met the victim at a gaming convention 

in Anaheim in 2019, according to his plea agreement. After the two met, Baltierra asked the 

woman to meet in her hometown in Canada, which court documents say made her feel 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000219

uncomfortable. The woman then blocked Baltierra across social media, starting in June 2020, 

according to court documents. [Continue Reading ]

WINS-AM (New York, NY): Veterinarian sentenced to 11 years in prison for role in 

racehorse doping scheme , Emily Nadal, July 11, 2022, 9:42 PM 

A Florida man was sentenced to 11 years in prison Monday for his role in a nearly 20-year 

scheme where dozens of people made, marketed and sold “untestable” performance enhancing 

drugs used on racehorses both nationally and internationally, officials said. [Continue Reading ]

See also : Horse Racing Nation 

WMBD-CBS ( Peoria, IL): Galesburg father and son will serve federal time for meth 

possession , Maggie Strahan, July 11, 2022, 9:10 PM 

A Galesburg father and son, Gilbert Dean Bicknell, 53, and Michael Gilbert Dean Bicknell, 28, 

were sentenced to federal prison for possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine. 

Father Gilbert Bicknell was sentenced to 156 months, while his son Michael Bicknell was 

sentenced to 165 months. Both sentences will be followed by a five-year term of supervised 

release. [Continue Reading] 

WVNS-CBS/Fox (Lewisburg, WV): Man sentenced to prison for participation in multi-state 

drug ring, Danielle Sandler, July 11, 2022, 7:47 PM 

A Charleston man, Ricky Lee Taylor, who also goes by the alias “RT, 58 was sentenced to two 

years in prison, to be followed by one year of supervised release today for his main role in a drug 

trafficking organization that was responsible for distributing large amounts of methamphetamine, 

fentanyl, and other illegal drugs that were dealt in the Huntington area. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV) 

WFLA-NBC (Tampa, FL): Florida foster parent convicted for nude recordings of children ,

Nathaniel Rodriguez, July 11, 2022, 7:10 PM 

A Florida man pleaded guilty to producing child pornography of children he had access to as a

foster parent Monday, according to the U.S. Department of Justice. United States Attorney Roger 

B.  Handberg said Justin Dwayne Johnson Sr., 47, of Sanford pleaded guilty to five counts of 

producing and attempting to produce videos depicting children being sexually exploited and one 

count of possessing child sexual abuse materials. [Continue Reading ]

KVIA-ABC (El Paso, TX): El Paso man pleads guilty to producing child porn; admits 

coercing 4-year-old victim, David Gonzalez, July 11, 2022, 6:44 PM 

A 30-year-old El Paso man pleaded guilty to producing child pornography involving a 4-year-old 

victim, officials say. According to court documents, Jorge Mario Manjarrez-Reyes use a peer-to -

peer program to share images of child pornography. Homeland Security Investigators say they 

found about 513 images and 619 videos depicting child pornography on Manjarrez-Reyes' 

electronic devices. [Continue Reading ]

WDAF-Fox (Kansas City, MO): KCK man sentenced in international drug smuggling ring ,

Brian Dulle, July 11, 2022, 6:26 PM 

A Kansas City, Kansas, man has been sentenced for his role in an international drug trafficking 

ring. Back in April 2022, Jovanny Medina, 24, pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to 

possess with intent to distribute 50 grams or more of methamphetamine. He was sentenced 

Monday to 144 months (12 years) in prison. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000220

KYMA-NBC (Yuma, AZ): Man sentenced to 25 months for assaulting a woman with a

dangerous weapon , Faith Rodriquez, July 11, 2022, 6:21 PM 

A man from Sells, Arizona was sentenced 25 months in prison along with three years of 

supervised release for assault with a dangerous weapon. Kyle Devan Cachora is a 28-year-old 

man who is an enrolled member of the Tohono O'odham Nation and stabbed a Tohono O'odham 

woman in San Xavier, Arizona on July 2, 2020. [Continue Reading] 

KCAU-ABC (Sioux City, IA): Man pleads guilty to distributing drugs in Siouxland , Ariel 

Pokett, July 11, 2022, 6:08 PM 

A man who admitted to distributing methamphetamine in the Siouxland area pleaded guilty on 

Friday. According to a release from the United States Attorney’s Office, Shawn Gaston, 32, of 

Illinois, was convicted of possession and intent to distribute methamphetamine as well as 

additional firearm charges. [Continue Reading ] See also : KICD-AM (Spencer, IA) 

KCBS-CBS (Los Angeles, CA): Former postal carrier admits to identity, mail theft in $250K 

COVID fraud scheme , Darleene Powells, July 11, 2022, 6:00 PM 

A former postal carrier pleaded guilty Monday to charges of stealing more than $250,000 in 

COVID-19 unemployment funds by filing fraudulent claims with the identities of residents on his 

mail route, then taking those debit cards and those sent legitimately when they arrived. Stephen 

Glover, 32, of Palmdale, pleaded guilty to mail fraud and theft of mail matter by an officer or 

employee. [Continue Reading] See also : KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA) 

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): Michigan man who pointed firearm at woman at 

Huntington bar sentenced, Isaac Taylor, July 11, 2022, 5:23 PM 

A man who pointed a firearm at a woman outside of a Huntington bar in Oct. 2021 has been 

sentenced to three years and five months behind bars on Monday. According to the Department 

of Justice (DOJ), the 34-year-old Detroit, Michigan resident Terrell Jerome Greenlee, also known 

as Julian Johnson, will spend three years and five months in prison followed by three years of 

supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (Windsor Locks-East Windsor, CT): East Windsor Man Pleads Guilty To Federal 

Oxycodone Offense , Tim Jensen, July 11, 2022, 4:28 PM 

An East Windsor resident has pleaded guilty in federal court to a charge of conspiracy to 

possess with intent to distribute, and to distribute, oxycodone, according to Vanessa Roberts 

Avery, United States Attorney for the District of Connecticut. Jayson Kemp, 45, admitted his role 

in a scheme to acquire and distribute oxycodone obtained through fraudulent prescriptions before 

U.S.  District Judge Victor A. Bolden. He is released on a $150,000 pending sentencing, which is 

not yet scheduled, Avery said. [Continue Reading ]

WBTW-CBS (Florence, SC): 2 sentenced to federal prison for roles in distributing drugs 

in Horry County, Dennis Bright, July 11, 2022, 2:56 PM 

A Conway man and a Nichols woman have been sentenced to federal prison for their roles in 

distributing drugs in Horry County, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Florence. Dan 

Howard Spivey, Jr., 42, was sentenced to 10 years in prison, and Jasmine McKenith, 32, of 

Nichols, was sentenced to four years in federal prison after pleading guilty to conspiracy to 

possess with intent to distribute and to distribute controlled substances. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000221

KCAU-ABC (Sioux City, IA): Kingsley man sentenced to prison after several guns found at 

his residence , Ariel Pokett, July 11, 2022, 2:37 PM 

A Kingsley man was sentenced for possessing guns as a known user of controlled substances. 

According to a release from the United States Attorney’s Office, Levi Dimmitt, 35, of Kingsley, 

pleaded guilty on December 2, 2021, to being a prohibited person in possession of multiple 

firearms. [Continue Reading ]

WISH-CW (Indianapolis, IN): Indiana man goes to prison after he bilked education 

software investors of $1.4M , Gregg Montgomery, July 11, 2022, 2:30 PM 

An investment scheme of companies developing educational software has put a southern Indiana 

man behind bars for 40 months, the U.S. Justice Department says. Anthony Todd Leonard, 55, of 

Clarksville, was sentenced Monday to federal prison for wire fraud and money laundering. He had 

pleaded guilty to the offenses. [Continue Reading ]

WPMT-Fox (York, PA): Former Camp Hill lawyer gets probation, fine for obstructing Dept. 

of Labor investigation, Keith Schweigert, July 11, 2022, 2:13 PM 

A former Camp Hill attorney will serve 12 months of probation and pay a $50,000 fine for 

concealing documents and records concerning miscalculations of a pension plan for a plumbers 

and pipefitters union his firm represented, prosecutors said Monday. Charles W. Johnston, age 

75, of Fairfax County, VA, was sentenced on July 8 by United States District Court Judge 

Jennifer P. Wilson. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WHTM-ABC (Harrisburg, PA) 

WHAM-ABC (Rochester, NY): Spencerport man going to prison for attempting to have sex 

with minor , Unattributed, July 11, 2022, 1:00 PM 

A Spencerport man convicted of attempted receipt of child pornography was sentenced Monday 

to 10 years in prison. Federal prosecutors say Dale Trimmer, 47, used a chat app starting in 

December 2020 to communicate with minors online, including someone who he believed was a

13-year-old girl but was actually an undercover officer. [Continue Reading ]

WKMG-CBS (Orlando, FL): Osceola County man sentenced to 25 years for producing 

child pornography , Samantha Dunne, July 11, 2022, 12:40 PM 

An Osceola County man was sentenced to 25 years in federal prison for producing and 

possessing child pornography, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of 

Florida. Judge Carlos E. Mendoza sentenced 63-year-old Michael Belmares, of St. Cloud, after 

evidence showed he took lewd pictures of multiple children in shopping center parking lots 

across the county as well as had thousands of pictures of children being sexually abused as far 

back as 1996. [Continue Reading] 

WTAJ-CBS (Altoona, PA): Philipsburg man pleads guilty in 38-person drug bust, Bill 

Shannon, July 11, 2022, 12:22 PM 

A Philipsburg resident has pleaded guilty in a federal court after being involved in a 38-person 

drug bust that spanned multiple counties. Keegan McChesney, 24, pleaded guilty to a lesser 

included offense before Senior United States District Judge Kim R. Gibson. In connection with 

the guilty plea, from July 2019 to June 2020, McChesney did conspire to distribute 50 grams or 

more of methamphetamine. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000222

AP : 3 ex-Hawaii prison guards convicted of assaulting inmate , Unattributed, July 11, 2022, 

6:00  PM 

Three former Hawaii prison guards were found guilty of civil rights violations for assaulting an 

inmate and trying to cover it up, the U.S. Department of Justice said Monday. A U.S. judge 

ordered Jason Tagaloa, Craig Pinkney and Jonathan Taum into custody after a jury convicted 

them last week, the department said. A fourth former correctional officer, Jordan DeMattos, 

previously pleaded guilty for his role in the 2015 assault and cover-up, and testified for the 

government at the three-week trial, federal prosecutors said. [Continue Reading] See also :

Honolulu Star-Advertiser , KHON-Fox/CW- (Honolulu, HI) , KITV-ABC (Honolulu, HI) 

AP: Another US appeals court upholds right to record police , Colleen Slevin, July 11, 2022, 

5:00  PM 

People have a right protected by the First Amendment to film police while they work, a Western 

U.S.  appeals court ruled Monday in a decision that concurs with decisions made by six of the 

nation’s other 12 appeals court. The 10th Circuit Court of Appeals in Denver ruling came in the 

case of a YouTube journalist and blogger who claimed that a suburban Denver officer blocked 

him from recording a 2019 traffic stop. Citing decisions from the other courts over about two 

decades as well as First Amendment principles, the 10th Circuit said the right to record police 

was clearly established at the time and reinstated the lawsuit of the blogger, Abade Irizarry. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : Denver Post 

Law360: Texas Presses Court To Nix Federal Gender Identity Guidance, Anne Cullen, July 

11, 2022, 6:31 PM 

Texas state officials have called on a federal court to wipe out guidance from federal agencies on 

gender- and sexuality-based workplace discrimination and gender-affirming care, arguing that the 

government is stretching the U. S. Supreme Court's watershed Bostock ruling too far. The Lone 

Star State fired off a summary judgment bid Friday in its legal challenge to documents published 

by the U. S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the U. S. Department of Health and 

Human Services that interpreted the U. S. Supreme Court's 2020 ruling in Bostock v. Clayton 

County. [Continue Reading ]

NACAP.org:  U.S. Assistant Attorney General Kristen Clarke to Address 113th NACAP 

National Convention, Unatributted, July 11, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Assistant Attorney General Clarke will address the efforts by the Department of Justice to defend 

democracy and civil rights at the 113th National NAACP convention in New Jersey. The Assistant 

Attorney General will also receive this year's prestigious Williams Robert Ming Award, an annual 

accolade honoring legal professionals who exemplify the spirit of financial and personal sacrifice 

that Mr. Ming displayed in his legal work for the NAACP. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL LAW 

AP: Federal judge blocks Arizona’s ‘personhood’ abortion law , Bob Christie, July 11, 2022, 

8:00  PM 

A federal judge in Phoenix on Monday blocked a 2021 state “personhood” law that gives all legal 

rights to unborn children and that abortion rights groups said put providers at risk of prosecution 

for a variety of crimes. U.S. District Judge Douglas Rayes said in his written ruling that the groups 

that sued to block the law are right it is “anyone’s guess,” as the state acknowledged, what 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000223

criminal laws abortion providers may be breaking if they perform otherwise-legal abortions. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : Fox 

Reuters: Subway can be sued over its tuna, U.S. judge rules , Jonathan Stempel, July 11, 

2022, 7:17 PM 

A federal judge said Subway can be sued for allegedly deceiving customers about its tuna 

products, including a claim it uses other fish species, chicken, pork and cattle instead of the 

advertised "100% tuna." U.S. District Judge Jon Tigar in San Francisco called it premature to 

accept Subway's argument that any presence of non-tuna DNA might result from eggs in 

mayonnaise, or cross-contact with other ingredients that its restaurants' employees handle. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Gov't Tells 10th Circ. EPA Ruling Shouldn't Halt Wage Hike , Irene Spezzamonte, 

July 11, 2022, 6:35 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court decision on the EPA's ability to regulate greenhouse gas emissions 

doesn't back two outdoor groups' argument that a rule increasing federal contractors' hourly 

minimum wage to $15 is unlawful, the government told the Tenth Circuit on Monday. [Continue 

Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Reuters: Presidents of U.S., Mexico to meet after summit tensions , Ted Hesson and 

Alexandra Alper, July 12, 2022, 4:26 AM 

Mexico's leader will visit the White House on Tuesday, a month after snubbing an invitation to a

U.S-hosted summit that sought to craft regional consensus on how to stem migrant border 

crossings that are piling pressure on the Biden administration. Mexican President Andres Manuel 

Lopez Obrador skipped the Summit of the Americas in Los Angeles to protest Biden's decision 

to exclude the leftist governments of Cuba, Venezuela and Nicaragua. [Continue Reading ] See 

also : CNN , The Hill , UPI 

AP: US extends legal protection for Venezuelans for 18 months , Julie Watson, July 11, 

2022, 10:00 PM 

Hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans who fled their country’s humanitarian crisis and are in the 

United States under temporary legal protection will be allowed to remain for another 18 months, 

the Biden administration announced Monday. But advocates expressed disappointment that the 

government has left another 250,000 Venezuelans who made it to the United States at risk of 

being sent back. [Continue Reading ] See also : Bloomberg , Law360 , NBC 

AP : Gov. Cooper vetoes 4 bills, 1 directing sheriffs to aid ICE , Gary D. Robertson, July 11, 

2022, 4:00 PM 

Gov. Roy Cooper vetoed legislation Monday for the second time in four years that would demand 

North Carolina sheriffs learn the immigration status of their jails' inmates and make an effort to 

hold those whom federal agents want to pick up. The Democratic governor vetoed a similar 

Republican measure in 2019, which came on the heels of newly elected sheriffs in several urban 

counties deciding against working closely with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 

agents who are seeking suspects they believe are in the country unlawfully. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo : Lawsuit over covid outbreak at Farmville immigrant detention center settled ,

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000224

Antonio Olivo, July 11, 2022, 2:29 PM 

An immigrant detention center in Virginia’s Farmville community that saw more than 300 inmates 

infected by the coronavirus in 2020, one of whom died, will be limited to a quarter of its capacity 

under a federal court settlement. Under the terms of the settlement last week between detainees 

who sued the site’s operator, Immigration Centers of America, and U.S. Immigration and 

Customs Enforcement, no more than 180 detainees will be allowed inside the facility at a time, 

with empty dormitory halls spaced between those that are occupied with no more than 30 people. 

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner : Biden throws the Border Patrol under the bus , Unattributed, July 12, 

2022, 12:00 AM 

Two Border Patrol agents tried to help the Texas Department of Public Safety secure the 

southern border last September. For that crime, President Joe Biden wants them punished. 

Customs and Border Protection’s Office of Professional Responsibility released a 500-page 

report last Friday, summarizing the findings of a 10-month investigation into a 15-minute incident 

involving two Horse Patrol Unit agents on the bank of the Rio Grande near Del Rio, Texas. 

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : Biden’s DHS pushes to build technology part of Trump’s border wall ,

Stephen Dinan, July 11, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The Homeland Security Department said Monday it will push to finish the technology that was 

supposed to be part of President Trump’s border wall, and use other remaining money to fix 

issues the Biden administration says have emerged from previous construction. Secretary 

Alejandro Mayorkas said the department has found “significant” problems with the more than 450 

miles of wall built under former President Trump. The problems include “life, safety and 

environmental hazards,” the department said. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: 9th Circ. Says Gov't Reasons For Denying Man Asylum Fail , Rae Varona, July 11, 

2022, 7:02 PM 

A Ninth Circuit panel has sent an Armenian man's asylum request back to the U.S. Board of 

Immigration Appeals, saying nearly all purported inconsistencies the board relied upon when 

shutting down the man's asylum bid were not supported by the record. [Continue Reading] 

Law360 : Fla. Man Trafficked Fake Cisco Devices Worth $1B, Feds Say , Khadrice Rollins, 

July 11, 2022, 5:17 PM 

A Florida man has been indicted in New Jersey federal court, accused of selling counterfeit 

Cisco networking equipment worth over $1 billion through various online storefronts. [Continue 

Reading ]

KVEO-NBC (Brownsville, TX): Migrant criminal case referrals are up along Southwest 

border , Sandra Sanchez, July 11, 2022, 10:04 PM 

Federal authorities are referring more migrant cases to criminal federal courts, putting them at the 

highest levels since the coronavirus pandemic began, according to new data. Syracuse 

University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) reports that the number of 

cases referred to federal prosecutors exceeded 2,000 in April, up significantly from just 700 

cases that were referred to criminal courts at the height of the pandemic in July 2020. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000225

WCIA-CBS (Champaign, IL): CBP officers discover 2 destructive pests for first time ever 

at California border , Salvador Rivera, July 11, 2022, 9:55 PM 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection agriculture specialists intercepted two different species of 

destructive pests, in two different shipments of fruits and flowers, making it the first time these 

bugs had ever been seen at the Mexico-California border. The most recent discovery was on 

June 22 at the Otay Mesa Port of Entry, when a shipment of rambutan fruit arrived at the cargo 

facility. [Continue Reading ]

KVIA-ABC/CW (El Paso, TX): Fugitive arrested at Bridge of the Americas for sexual 

assault of a child , David Gonzalez, July 11, 2022, 7:58 PM 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection officers arrested a Mexican citizen for an outstanding 

warrant for sexual assault of a child Saturday. According to CBP, the 47-year-old man was 

entering the U.S. from Mexico when questioning led to the discovery of the outstanding warrant. 

[Continue Reading ]

WRAL-NBC (Raleigh, NC) : Cooper rejects bill compelling local officials to work more 

closely with ICE , Bryan Anderson, July 11, 2022, 4:50 PM 

A renewed effort to bolster collaboration in North Carolina between local law enforcement and 

federal immigration enforcement officials has failed again. Proposed legislation vetoed Monday 

by Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper would have required local sheriffs and jail administrators to find 

out the immigration status of some inmates and assist U.S. Immigration and Customs 

Enforcement in keeping them detained before possible deportation. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

AP : Report: DOJ inquiring about antitrust in PGA-LIV dispute , Doug Ferguson, July 11, 

2022, 4:00 PM 

The dispute between the PGA Tour and the Saudi-funded LIV Golf series now has the attention 

of the U.S. Department of Justice, according to the Wall Street Journal, and the PGA Tour said 

Monday it was confident it would prevail. “This was not unexpected,” the tour said in a statement. 

The Journal said players’ agents have received inquiries from the Justice Department’s antitrust 

division that involve PGA Tour regulations on competing events and the tour suspending players 

in recent months for playing in LIV Golf events. The Journal cited a person familiar with the 

inquiries. [Continue Reading] See also: ABC, Axios, BBC, CBS, Daily Beast, ESPN, Financial 

Times, Fox, Golf Channel, Golf Magazine,  The Hill , Law360 , NY Post , NYT , Reuters , Sports 

Illustrated , Washington Times,  USA Today , WSJ 

Law360 : DOJ Accused Of 'Overzealous' Contract Merger Challenge , Bryan Koenig, July 

11, 2022, 9:24 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice asked a Maryland federal judge to preliminarily undo the 

underlying merger agreement through which Booz Allen Hamilton is trying to acquire government 

technologies contractor EverWatch Corp., only to be accused by the companies of flouting court 

document safeguards and misrepresenting their intentions. [Continue Reading ]

Axios : Companies want DOJ's Apple investigation to pick up pace , Margaret Harding 

McGill, July 12, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The Justice Department’s Apple investigation is taking too long, allowing harm to competitors and 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000226

consumers to continue, several companies say. Why it matters: Big Tech's dual D.C. threats are 

antitrust lawsuits and bills that would rewrite the rules for how they operate, but Apple has yet to 

feel the full brunt of either. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Law360 : Va. Freight Biz Sues EPA For $6.2M Over Superfund Site , Faith Williams, July 11, 

2022, 6:31 PM 

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was hit with a $6.2 million suit Monday by a Virginia-based freight company that claims the agency wrongfully accused it of releasing hazardous 

substances into the environment and designated a 30-acre site it owns as a Superfund site. 

[Continue Reading ]

TAX 

Reuters : U.S. tax committees to question IRS chief over audits of ex-FBI officials , David 

Lawder, July 11, 2022, 7:19 PM 

U.S.  tax commissioner Charles Rettig will face questions from legislators over how two former 

FBI officials vilified by former President Donald Trump were targeted for intensive tax audits, 

lawmakers and the Internal Revenue Service said on Monday. The Senate Finance Committee 

will hold a closed-door hearing on July 26 into the circumstances of tax audits for former FBI 

director James Comey and FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe, said Senator Ron Wyden, the 

panel's chairman, in an emailed statement. [Continue Reading ] See also: Bloomberg Tax 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

Fox: Texas murder suspect Kaitlin Armstrong escapes charge for unlawful flight to 

avoid prosecution, Michael Ruiz, July 11, 2022, 7:05 PM 

A federal judge has dismissed a charge against Texas murder suspect Kaitlin Armstrong, who is 

being held in Travis County in connection with the shooting death of pro cyclist Anna Moriah "Mo" 

Wilson. But it's just a formality, and she could face the charge again in the future if prosecutors 

deem it necessary. [Continue Reading ]

CBS: More than 5,000 pounds of methamphetamine found in record-breaking seizure in 

Southern California, Emily Mae Czachor, July 11, 2022, 9:03 AM 

Four residents of Tijuana, Mexico, face federal drug trafficking charges in connection with a

Southern California methamphetamine seizure that authorities say was "record-breaking" 

because of its size. The suspects identified as 37-year-old Rafael Alzua, 41-year-old Galdrino 

Contreras, 41-year-old Mario Contreras, and 44-year-old Ethgar Velazquez are accused of 

attempting to transport large quantities of meth after police found them unloading a vehicle filled 

with the illegal substance on Thursday. [Continue Reading] See also:  NBC , NYT 

The Indianapolis Star (Indianapolis, IN): Indiana FBI agents are working on these 6 cases. 

Can you help solve one?, Hannah Brock, July 12, 2022, 5:49 AM 

The Indianapolis FBI is looking for information in six cases ranging from missing people, 

unsolved homicides and crimes against children. There are two types of cases that warrant FBI 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000227

involvement, FBI Indianapolis special agent in charge Herbert J. Stapleton said via email. 

[Continue Reading ]

NY Post: Mexican cartel smugglers nabbed with $1.2M worth of meth in NYC — then 

released thanks to lax bail laws: feds, Larry Celona and Jorge Fitz-Gibbon, July 11, 2022, 

4:49  PM 

A pair of suspected Mexican drug-cartel smugglers was busted with a $1.2 million stash of crystal 

meth but had to be freed thanks to New York’s lax bail laws, authorities said Monday. The two 

California men, Luis Estrada and Carlos Santos, were allegedly caught red-handed by the US 

Drug Enforcement Administration as part of a multi-agency investigation. Yet frustrated agents 

had to stand by and watch as the suspects were cut loose on just supervised release, the federal 

agency said. [Continue Reading ]

WREG-CBS (Memphis, TN): Marshals capture fugitive during operation in Whitehaven, 

Jessica Gertler, July 11, 2022, 11:25 PM 

Dozens have been arrested for the most violent crimes in the Mid-South, and WREG got an 

exclusive look at how the U.S. Marshals Service tracked down some of those fugitives during a

special operation. “We launched Operation North Star, which is a department of justice initiative to 

reduce violent crime by apprehending dangerous fugitives,” said Tyreece Miller, the U.S. Marshal 

for the Western District of Tennessee. “Memphis was selected as one of 10 cities where this 

initiative is happening.” [Continue Reading] 

WWLP-NBC/CW (Springfield, MA): AG Healey backs ATF rule on ghost guns, Matt Murphy, 

July 11, 2022, 10:38 PM 

With a Texas gun parts manufacturer challenging the Biden administration’s new rule regulating 

“ghost guns,” Attorney General Maura Healey joined a coalition of 20 top state prosecutors in 

supporting the ability of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to regulate the sale of the 

currently untraceable guns. Healey signed on to a brief filed last week in U.S. District Court for the 

Southern District of Texas supporting the final rule issued by the ATF in April that would give law 

enforcement the ability to trace “ghost guns” and prevent unqualified individuals from purchasing 

parts to make their own weapons. [Continue Reading ]

WIBW-AM (Topeka, KS): Ahead of crime stat update, City Manager says Topeka is safe, 

Melissa Brunner, July 11, 2022, 10:14 PM 

Interim City Manager Bill Cochran says he believes crime stats due out this week will provide a

positive picture of the direction crime is headed in Topeka. Cochran took issue with a real estate 

marketing company’s recent report that listed Topeka as one of the least-safe cities in the nation. 

Cochran says even the FBI disputed the site’s data. [Continue Reading ]

KMGH-ABC (Denver, CO): Man arrested in large Colorado fentanyl seizure last month 

escaped, Blair Miller, July 11, 2022, 9:40 PM 

A man who was arrested last month on I-70 in what Colorado State Patrol and the Drug 

Enforcement Administration touted as the largest U.S. highway fentanyl seizure in history remains 

at large after he ditched agents while they were tracking a “controlled delivery” they asked him to 

make following his arrest. The arrest and escape of David Maldonado, 26, was first reported last 

week by the Denver Gazette. Denver7 obtained the warrant for his arrest from a court 

administrator on Monday morning. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000228

KATV-ABC (Little Rock, AR): CEO for U.S. Marshals Museum could be hired in August, 

Tina Alvey Dale, July 11, 2022, 9:00 PM 

The search for a new president and CEO of the Fort Smith-based U.S. Marshals Museum is 

“going well,” and the board hopes a new CEO will be named by end of summer, according to 

Museum Board Chair Doug Babb. Patrick Weeks, who faces two felony charges of aggravated 

assault with a firearm, resigned as president and CEO of the U.S. Marshals Museum on March 4. 

Babb said the board in April hired Boston-based executive search firm Lindaurer, which 

specializes in non-profit organizations. The Lindauer firm recruited USMM Foundation President 

and Chief Development Officer Anthony Meyer earlier this year, Babb said. [Continue Reading ]

KOMU-NBC/CW (Columbia, MO): Retired Wardsville priest under FBI investigation for 

misappropriation of funds in excess of $300k, Dmitry Martirosov, July 11, 2022, 4:00 PM 

A retired priest is under an FBI investigation for allegedly embezzling $320,000 from a Wardsville 

church. According to a statement released by the Diocese of Jefferson City, Father Ignazio 

Medina, who was pastor of St. Stanislaus Parish in Wardsville from 2012 to 2021, is at the center 

of the investigation. [Continue Reading ]

KRNV-NBC (Reno, NV): Two men arrested on drug charges in Gardnerville Walmart 

parking lot, Unatributted, July 11, 2022, 3:00 PM 

Two men from California were arrested in the Walmart parking lot in Gardnerville on drug charges. 

The Douglas County Sheriff’s Office Street Enforcement Team (SET) working in conjunction with 

the Tri-Net Task Force and the FBI Safe Streets Task Force arrested two people in the Walmart 

parking lot on Grant Avenue July 7. Authorities say the arrests were the culmination of a short 

investigation into the drug trafficking activities of David Wright, a 56-year-old man from the 

southern California area. [Continue Reading ]

KMIZ-ABC (Columbia, MO): Former Wardsville priest under FBI investigation for 

embezzlement, Matthew Sanders, July 11, 2022, 2:33 PM 

A Jefferson City Diocese priest is heading to a church trial and being investigated by the FBI for 

allegedly mismanaging money at a Wardsville church, the diocese said in a statement Sunday. 

The church trial has been suspended because of an ongoing FBI investigation, according to the 

statement. Father Ignazio Medina, who retired July 1, is being investigated for his actions while he 

was pastor of St. Stanislaus Parish from 2012 to 2021. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

NYT: Justice Department Taps Oregon Official to Run Troubled Bureau of Prisons, Glenn 

Thrush, July 11, 2022, 8:00 PM 

Colette S. Peters, the longtime director of the Oregon Department of Corrections, has been 

tapped to lead the chronically mismanaged and understaffed federal Bureau of Prisons, 

according to two people familiar with the decision. The Justice Department, which oversees the 

bureau, is expected to announce her appointment this week, perhaps as early as Tuesday. The 

bureau, a sprawling network of 122 facilities with an annual budget of around $10 billion, houses 

about 158,000 inmates. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: A Texas death row inmate is seeking a 30-day reprieve to donate a kidney. An 

appeals court has issued an execution stay for a different reason , Dakin Andone, July 12, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000229

2022, 1:00 AM 

A Texas death row inmate -- who recently asked the governor for a 30-day delay of his execution 

so he can make a kidney donation -- has been granted a stay for a different reason, the state's 

appeals court announced Monday. Attorneys for Ramiro Gonzales, 39, who was sentenced to 

death for the 2001 murder of Bridget Townsend, claimed in a motion filed June 30 that 

prosecutors presented "false and materially inaccurate expert testimony" at the penalty phase of 

his trial. [Continue Reading] 

WPRI-CBS (Providence, RI): Man who torched police cruiser in Providence riot to be 

sentenced Thursday , Tim White, July 11, 2022, 5:08 PM 

Federal prosecutors are asking a judge to sentence a Cranston man who admitted to setting a

Providence police cruiser on fire to more than three-and-a-half years in prison. Nicholas 

Scaglione, 32, is set to be sentenced Thursday for his role in the arson that took place during the 

June 2020 riot in Providence. The unrest was sparked in the wake of the killing of George Floyd 

by then-Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin. [Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

WaPo : [OPINION] Confirm Hanes to the Eastern District , Carl Tobias, July 11, 2022, 9:00 AM 

When the Senate returns today from its July Fourth Recess, the upper chamber should 

expeditiously confirm U.S. Magistrate Judge Elizabeth Wilson Hanes to the U.S. District Court for 

the Eastern District of Virginia. Hanes, whom President Biden nominated on April 27, is very 

experienced. She has served as a magistrate judge since 2020, when the court’s Article III 

judges appointed her to help them resolve its substantial docket, as a litigator for consumers in 

civil disputes across four years and as an assistant federal public defender for seven years. 

[Continue Reading ]

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360: Three Affiliated Tribes Get Member's $46M RICO Suit Axed, Andrew Westney, July 

11, 2022, 9:03 PM 

A North Dakota federal judge on Monday tossed a suit by a Three Affiliated Tribes member 

claiming the tribe's governing business council defrauded her company of nearly $46 million from 

a concrete business, saying the council never waived the tribe's sovereign immunity to suit. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360: 56 Tribes, Fishers Wade Into Alaska Fishing Dispute, Clark Mindock, July 11, 

2022, 5:58 PM 

Subsistence fishers and an alliance of 56 tribes say a state order that would have opened a

stretch of Alaskan river to gill net fishing would directly harm them and other rural residents. In an 

intervenor complaint filed with an Alaska federal court Friday, the Association of Village Council 

Presidents and several subsistence fishers backed the U. S. government in its suit filed earlier 

this year against the state over its order related to the Kuskokwim River. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Alaska Sport Fishing Co. Sued Over $1M Fire On Native Lands , Joyce Hanson, 

July 11, 2022, 4:27 PM 

The United States is suing a sport fishing company in Alaska federal court, accusing one of its 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000230

guides of lighting an illegal campsite fire that grew to burn 176 acres of Native and federal public 

lands, costing $1 million in fire suppression efforts. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Marijuana Moment: Pennsylvania Governor Signs Marijuana Banking And Insurance 

Reform Bill Into Law, Kyle Jaeger, July 11, 2022, 3:00 PM 

The governor of Pennsylvania on Monday signed a bill that includes provisions to protect banks 

and insurers in the state that work with licensed medical marijuana businesses. Pro-legalization 

Gov. Tom Wolf (D) approved the measure sent to his desk by the Republican-controlled 

legislature, which mirrors a standalone bill that previously advanced before being attached to a

separate measure. [Continue Reading ]

Marijuana Moment: Feds Must Defend Historical Rationale Of Banning Guns For Medical 

Marijuana Patients, Revised Lawsuit Argues After SCOTUS Ruling, Kyle Jaeger, July 11, 

2022, 2:00 PM 

A recent U.S. Supreme Court ruling overturning state gun restrictions has raised new questions 

about the constitutionality of the federal ban on guns for medical marijuana patients and a

lawsuit that a top Florida official filed against the Justice Department over the issue has been 

revised to make new arguments based on the high court’s latest decision. [Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

AP : Biden admin: Docs must offer abortion if mom’s life at risk , Zeke Miller, July 11, 2022, 

9:00  PM 

The Biden administration on Monday told hospitals that they “must” provide abortion services if 

the life of the mother is at risk, saying federal law on emergency treatment guidelines preempts 

state laws in jurisdictions that w ban the procedure without any exceptions following the Supreme 

Court’s decision to end a constitutional right to abortion. The Department of Health and Human 

Services cited requirements on medical facilities in the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor 

Act, or EMTALA. The law requires medical facilities to determine whether a person seeking 

treatment may be in labor or whether they face an emergency health situation or one that could 

develop into an emergency and to provide treatment. [Continue Reading ] See also:  CNN ,

NBC 

Reuters : Biden pushes to ban assault weapons, gets heckled at gun violence event , Jeff 

Mason, July 11, 2022, 6:26 PM 

A man whose son was killed in the 2018 school shooting in Parkland, Florida, interrupted 

President Joe Biden's remarks at the White House on Monday during an event to herald the 

passage of the first major federal gun safety law in three decades. Manuel Oliver, whose son 

Joaquin was murdered in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School massacre, shouted "we've 

already gone through this for years and years" at the event, during which Biden lauded the new 

law but said more needed to be done. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000231

# •••••

Reuters: Judge orders Lindsey Graham to testify before grand jury in Trump election 

probe , Kanishka Singh, July 11, 2022, 3:42 PM 

A judge ordered U.S. Senator Lindsey Graham to testify in front of a special grand jury in Georgia 

investigating former President Donald Trump’s alleged attempts to overturn the results of the 

2020 election. Fulton County Superior Court Judge Robert McBurney ordered that Graham will be 

required to testify on Aug. 2. The judge’s certification filed on Monday described Graham as a

“necessary and material witness” to the grand jury probe. [Continue Reading ]

USA Today : 'It wouldn’t be my choice for judge': Senate Democrats slam Biden's 

planned anti-abortion pick , Joey Garrison, Dylan Wells, Joe Sonka and Andrew Wolfson, July 

12, 2022, 12:31 AM 

Several Senate Democrats said they would vote against the confirmation of a conservative, anti -

abortion federal judge nominee if President Joe Biden follows through with a purported deal with 

Republican Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. The strong reaction from Democrats on 

Biden's planned nomination of attorney Chad Meredith in Kentucky raised the prospects of the 

president’s own party blocking the pick should he move forward. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 11, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

A fast-growing wildfire in Yosemite National Park is threatening its famous Giant Sequoia 

trees, some of the largest and oldest trees in the world. Hundreds of firefighters are battling 

the flames under brutal conditions in an effort to protect the historic trees. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Victims of gun violence joined President Biden at the White House to celebrate the 

passage of the nation’s first major gun legislation in nearly three decades. But in Texas, 

there’s growing frustration over the investigation into the Uvalde school shooting. [ABC ,

CBS , NBC ]

The Jan. 6th committee will hold another public hearing tomorrow, focusing on the 

“mobilization of the mob” in the days leading up to the attack. Members of the committee 

say it will connect the dots between far-right groups and then-President Trump. [ABC , CBS ,

NBC ]

Russian forces are intensifying their attacks on many fronts in Ukraine, including strikes on 

three civilian apartment buildings that killed 30 people. Multiple missile attacks also killed at 

least six people, but they’re not the only threats that civilians are facing. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

A private wake for former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is being held at a Tokyo temple, 

following his shocking assassination. Hundreds of mourners are paying respect to the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000232

## •••

## •

## •

## ••

## ••

former leader of Japan, including Secretary of State Antony Blinken who is making his way 

to Japan. [ABC , NBC ]

Twitter’s stock dropped more than 11% today in the first day of trading after Elon Musk said 

he wanted to pull out of a deal to buy the social media company. Twitter now plans to take 

Musk to court to enforce the $54 per share price that both sides agreed upon. [ABC , CBS ]

Thousands of protesters stormed the presidential residence in Sri Lanka over their 

country’s shortages of fuel, food and medicine. Now, the President and Prime Minister have 

both promised to leave office, following days of demonstrations. [CBS ]

A Spirit Airlines plane had a terrifying landing after one of its brakes overheated and caught 

fire. Panic erupted on board, as the plane landed in Atlanta. No one was hurt. [CBS ]

Health officials warn that the BA.5 subvariant could be the most transmissible omicron 

variant yet. [ABC ]

Just weeks after the reversal of Roe v. Wade, a French company is asking the FDA to 

approve an over-the-counter version of the birth control pill. In the Supreme Court’s ruling, 

they said the right to contraception would not be affected. [NBC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Stock Futures Fall, Dollar Firms on Growth Concerns” [WSJ , NYT ]

“Ukraine Digs for Survivors in Rubble of Residential Attacks by Russian Missiles” [WSJ ,

NYT , WaPo ]

“Half of G.O.P. Voters Ready to Leave Trump Behind, Poll Finds” [NYT ]

“Jan. 6 committee to connect Oath Keepers, Proud Boys and QAnon to Trump allies” [LAT ,

NYT , WaPo ]

END 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 01570-000233

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days.            

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31989 From: The Marsha Project
> Subject: [EXTERNAL] A doctor's doubts about a death pena ty
> To: Good ander, Margaret V. (OAG)
> Sent :Juy 11 , 2022 7:35 AM (UTC-04:00)

PICK OF THE NEWS 

· More proof there's no scientific way to predict a defendant's future dangerousness. The Texas justice system trusted psychiatrist Edward Gripon 16 years ago when he predicted that convicted murderer Ramiro Gonzales would pose a threat to others if he did not get the death penalty. Will the Texas justice system trust Gripon now that he says that 

Gonzales should not be executed this week because he has so transformed himself behind bars? The case highlights Texas's particularly harsh capital sentencing standard that requires an estimate of future dangerousness to dictate a defendant's fate. In collaboration with The Independent, TMP's Maurice Chammah and Keri Blakinger have our story. THE MARSHALL 

> PROJECT

The FBI failed to complete one million background checks in 2020 and  202 1. 

Federal agents could not keep up with the pandemic-fueled surge in gun buying, failing to stop sales to some purchasers who should have been denied a firearm because of mental illness or a

> 01570-000234 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30857 01570-000235

criminal record. NBC NEWS Feds say their “Operation North Star,” prioritizing gun offenses, 

resulted in 1,500 arrests across the U.S. THE WASHINGTON POST More: Previewing some of the 

legal battles over the next generation of gun laws. POLITICO Finally: An interactive look at a

month of gun violence in the U.S. THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Border agents used “unnecessary force” on Haitian migrants at the Texas border last 

year, a federal investigation concludes. “There is no justification for the actions of some of our 

personnel, including unprofessional and deeply offensive conduct,” Customs and Border 

Protection Commissioner Chris Magnus said Friday. LOS ANGELES TIMES Federal prosecutors 

earlier this year said they would not charge any federal agents. THE WASHINGTON POST 

Related: Read the report. HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT More: Border crossers are 

arriving in Arizona from more countries and in greater numbers than ever. THE WASHINGTON 

> POST

“What we’re heading toward is an insurgency, which is a form of a civil war.” 

Political extremists are leading the country toward a violent, existential clash, says an expert on 

civil wars. “There are definitely lots of groups on the far right who want war. They are preparing 

for war. And not talking about it does not make us safer.” THE WASHINGTON POST More: The 

Department of Homeland Security can do more “to address the threats of domestic terrorism," 

the agency’s inspector general concluded last week. CBS NEWS Related: Read the report.   

> HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT

Taking it to the streets. Thousands marched in Washington, D.C. on Saturday to keep 

political pressure on the Biden administration to do more to protect abortion rights. NBC NEWS 

The president signed an executive order on Friday designed to protect access to abortion 

medication in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court decision striking down Roe v. Wade.  

> POLITICO

Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer gears up for a long fight for abortion rights in her 

state and beyond. THE WASHINGTON POST More: Nine questions (and some answers) about 

how police and prosecutors can (and will) enforce new abortion bans. BOLTS 

N/S/E/W 

The police discipline process in Vallejo, California is so slow officers who are suspected of 

misconduct are back on patrol, and back using deadly force, before the initial investigations into 

their work are done. PROPUBLICA 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30857 01570-000236

Eric Smith, once a “tough-on-crime” prosecutor in Macomb County, Michigan , is now a

federal prisoner in Indiana. He also faces a state embezzlement case in which he is accused of 

misusing drug and forfeiture funds. DETROIT FREE PRESS 

Police, prosecutors, and judges in Boston, Massachusetts , are trying a new approach to the 

old problem of what to do with “Mass and Cass,” an area of the city known for its public drug 

use. The new plan includes ordering drug users who cycle in and out of jail to stay away from 

the area. BOSTON GLOBE 

Vincent Simmons, who spent 44 years in prisons in Louisiana after a wrongful conviction, has 

filed a federal civil rights lawsuit claiming police and prosecutors fabricated evidence against 

him. CBS NEWS 

Utah Highway Patrol officers appeared to break protocol and give special treatment to a young 

woman accused of killing two people while driving drunk. KUTV 

COMMENTARY 

Criminal justice reform isn’t dead. But it sure is different than it was five years ago. 

“Voter sentiment can be boiled down to three words: Accountability, proportionality and 

redemption.” WASHINGTON TIMES 

Duty calls. U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland “cannot restore the dignity of the 

Department of Justice without” addressing “Trump’s central role.” WASHINGTON MONTHLY Guns 

at the insurrection. LAWFARE More: Why Trump still has allies in Congress. THE ATLANTIC 

New York’s highest court is no friend to justice reform. A four-justice bloc on the New 

York Court of Appeals consistently votes against criminal defendants and in favor of police 

immunity. CITY AND STATE NY/CITY FOCUS 

Why shouldn’t gun owners be required to carry liability insurance? Maybe holding 

people financially responsible for gun violence will reduce the number of tragic deaths. LOS   

> ANGELES TIMES

More: The U.S. Supreme Court’s gun-license decision last month will lead to 

more violent crime. THE WASHINGTON POST 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30857 01570-000237

ETC. 

A showdown looms. Officials in Los Angeles County, California, plan to ask voters this 

November for the authority to remove an elected sheriff from office. The effort comes amid 

relentless hostility between county officials and sheriff Alex Villanueva. LOS ANGELES TIMES 

Reporting on mass shootings has tragically become routine. “This is how we cover a

mass shooting. Divide into teams. Victims. Shooter. Community. Gun. Investigation. The next 

time will not be any easier. The next time could be any time. Who is working tonight?” USA  

> TODAY

More: Six reasons why murder clearance rates are so low right now. THE ATLANTIC 

It’s now illegal in Arizona to film within eight feet of the police. USA TODAY Advocates 

and others say the measure violates the First Amendment rights of protesters. REASON 

A new retrospective on the landmark death penalty ruling handed down 50 years ago 

by the U.S. Supreme Court. “Fifty years after Furman, few of the death penalty’s flaws have 

been corrected; its opponents argue even more have come to light.” THE WASHINGTON POST 

TMP Context: Capital punishment has been limited by states, instead. THE MARSHALL 

> PROJECT

The Bureau of Prisons continues to hold some prisoners for longer than the law 

allows. We can blame the BOP’s computer system, in part, for the failure. FORBES TMP 

Context: The scandal-plagued Bureau of Prisons. THE MARSHALL PROJECT 

Opening Statement curates timely articles on criminal justice and immigration; these links 

are not endorsements of specific articles or points of view. 

Want less email? Update your preferences. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30857 01570-000238

This email was sent to (b)(6) (Margaret Goodlander) 

why did I get this? 

unsubscribe from this list 

update subscription preferences 

The Marshall Project · 156 West 56th Street · Suite 701 · New York, NY 10019 · USA 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30857 01570-000239

From: Watson, Theresa (OAG) 

Subject: Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

To: Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: Ju y 11, 2022 6:45 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: July 11, 2022 at 6:43:12 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# July 11, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

National Security 

3. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

4. 

Criminal Law 

5. 

Civil Rights 

6. 

Civil Law 

7. 

Immigration & Border Security 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000240

## •

8. 

Antitrust 

9. 

Environment 

10. 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

11. 

US Supreme Court 

12. 

Opioid Crisis 

13. 

Administration 

14. 

Congress 

15. 

Network Evening News Lineup 

16. 

Morning Headlines 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JULY 11, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

NYT: [OPINION] Merrick Garland Should Investigate Trump’s 2020 Election Schemes as 

a ‘Hub and Spoke’ Conspiracy, April Fisher, Emilia Cardona, July 11, 2022, 5:00 AM 

The tenacious work of the Jan. 6 committee has transformed how we think about the Jan. 6

rebellion. It should also transform the Justice Department’s investigation into efforts to overturn 

the 2020 election. Before the hearings, federal agents and prosecutors were performing a

classic “bottom up” criminal investigation of the Jan. 6 rioters, which means prosecuting the 

lowest-ranking members of a conspiracy, flipping people as it proceeds and following the 

evidence as high as it goes. [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000241

Reuters: Oath Keeper brought explosives to D.C. ahead of Jan. 6 attack, prosecutor 

says, David Morgan, July 11, 2022, 5:47 AM 

A member of the Oath Keepers extremist group brought explosives to the Washington, D.C., 

area ahead of the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol by supporters of former President 

Donald Trump, according to the U.S. Justice Department. In a court filing, federal prosecutors 

alleged that Jeremy Brown, an Oath Keepers member from Florida, drove explosives to a Virginia 

hotel in his recreational vehicle on Jan. 6. A second member of the group, Thomas Caldwell, was 

later found in possession of a "death list" that included the name of a Georgia election official, 

according to the document. [Continue Reading ]

AP: West Virginia man charged with felony in US Capitol riot, Unattributed, July 10, 2022, 

7:13  PM 

A West Virginia man has been arrested on charges that he participated in violence during the 

breach of the U.S. Capitol in January 2021. John Thomas Gordon, 47, of Bayard, is accused of 

repeatedly throwing a hard object at a Capitol door as police officers tried to secure the building 

on the other side of the glass window, according to court documents. Gordon allegedly also 

kicked the door in order to gain entry and yelled obscenities at officers. [Continue Reading ]

NYT : Defense Firm Said U.S. Spies Backed Its Bid for Pegasus Spyware Maker , Mark 

Mazzetti and Ronen Bergman, July 10, 2022, 9:00 PM 

A team of executives from an American military contractor quietly visited Israel numerous times in 

recent months to try to carry out a bold but risky plan: purchasing NSO Group, the cyber hacking 

firm that is as notorious as it is technologically accomplished. The impediments were substantial 

for the team from the American company, L3Harris, which also had experience with spyware 

technology. They started with the uncomfortable fact that the United States government had put 

NSO on a blacklist just months earlier because the Israeli firm’s spyware, called Pegasus, had 

been used by other governments to penetrate the phones of political leaders, human rights 

activists and journalists. [Continue Reading ]

USA Today: IRS audits of former FBI officials James Comey, Andrew McCabe prompt 

watchdog review, Kevin Johnson, July 10, 2022, 3:00 PM 

A Treasury Department watchdog was asked to examine decisions by the Internal Revenue 

Service to subject former FBI Director James Comey and former Deputy Director Andrew 

McCabe to rigorous financial audits. "The IRS has referred the matter to the Treasury Inspector 

General for Tax Administration for review," the agency said in a brief statement Thursday after a

report in The New York Times outlining how the two ardent critics of former President Donald 

Trump raised questions about how they were selected for the National Research Program audits. 

[Continue Reading ]

Fox: Florida man who spread bomb-making video, pledged his allegiance to ISIS gets 20 

years in prison, Paul Best, July 10, 2022, 9:48 AM 

A Florida man who pledged his allegiance to ISIS and distributed an instructional video online 

about making explosives was sentenced to 20 years in prison this week. Romeo Xavier 

Langhorne pleaded guilty to attempting to provide material support to ISIS last year after his 

arrest in 2019. [Continue Reading ]

Politico: Trump attorney Justin Clark interviewed with FBI last month, prosecutors say, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000242

Kyle Cheney, July 11, 2022, 6:10 AM 

Former President Donald Trump’s attorney Justin Clark interviewed with federal investigators two 

weeks ago, the Justice Department revealed in a court filing early Monday morning, a significant 

development that could reverberate in multiple investigations facing Trump’s inner circle. DOJ 

prosecutors revealed the June 29 FBI interview in a court filing connected to the criminal 

contempt case of Steve Bannon, who is set to go on trial July 18 for defying a subpoena from the 

Jan. 6 select committee. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Politico -2 

Financial Times: FBI director warns China espionage is greatest threat to US and allies, 

Demetri Sevastopulo, July 11, 2022, 12:00 AM 

FBI director Christopher Wray often uses US speeches and congressional testimony to warn 

about Chinese espionage, but in a rare move last week he took his message to London to raise 

global awareness of the threat. In an interview in London ahead of meetings with MI5, the UK 

intelligence agency, Wray stressed the importance of staying focused on China even though 

America and its allies were heavily invested in responding to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. 

[Continue Reading ]

Daily Caller: The US Is Trying To Deport A Russian Political Dissident Back To Moscow, 

Micaela Burrow, July 10, 2022, 1:09 PM 

The U.S. has allegedly complied with a Russian request to aid in the arrest of a political dissident, 

engaging in a lengthy court battle that could ultimately see him sent back to Russia, according to 

the victim. Grigorii Duralev applied for asylum in the U.S. in January 2016 after he learned that 

Russia had charged him with large-scale fraud, Duralev told the Daily Caller News Foundation in 

an interview. [Continue Reading ]

Roanoke Times (Roanoke, VA): Prosecutors: Covington defendant in Capitol riots may be 

linked to extremist group, Laurence Hammack, July 10, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Federal prosecutors are not ruling out a connection between a Covington man charged in the U.S. 

Capitol riots and an extremist group accused of helping to organize the uprising. The attorney for 

Joshua Dillon Haynes says his client is not a member of the Proud Boys, and has asked in court 

papers that prosecutors not be allowed to suggest otherwise when he goes on trial. [Continue 

Reading ]

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

AP: Trump associates' ties to extremists probed by Jan. 6 panel, Alanna Durkin Richer, 

Michelle R. Smith and Michael Kunzelman, July 11, 2022, 5:18 AM 

After members of the far-right Oath Keepers extremist group stormed the U.S. Capitol on Jan 6, 

2021, their leader called someone on the phone with an urgent message for then-President 

Donald Trump, another extremist told investigators. While gathered in a private suite at the 

Phoenix Park Hotel, an Oath Keeper member says he heard their leader, Stewart Rhodes, 

repeatedly urge the person on the phone to tell Trump to call upon militia groups to fight to keep 

the president in power. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters : Links between Trump associates, militants in focus at Jan 6 hearings this week ,

Richard Cowan and Katanga Johnson, July 10, 2022, 8:28 PM 

Congressional investigators into the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol expect this week to 

draw connections between militant groups that took part and government officials, possibly 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000243

including then-President Donald Trump, a member of the committee conducting the investigation 

said on Sunday. "We are going to be connecting the dots during these hearings between these 

groups and those who were trying in government circles to overturn the election," Democratic 

Representative Zoe Lofgren said on CNN's "State of the Union." [Continue Reading ]

AP: Trump ally Bannon now willing to testify before Jan. 6 panel, Hope Yen And Farnoush 

Amiri, July 10, 2022, 3:00 PM 

Steve Bannon, a former White House strategist and ally of Donald Trump who faces criminal 

charges after months of defying a congressional subpoena over the Capitol riot, has told the 

House committee investigating the attack that he is now willing to testify. Bannon’s turnabout was 

conveyed in a letter late Saturday from his attorney, lawmakers said, as the committee prepares 

to air some of its most striking revelations yet this week against Trump in what may be its final set 

of hearings. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , Epoch Times , Fox , NBC , Newsweek , NYT ,

Politico , Reuters , USA Today , WaPo , WSJ 

NYT: Cassidy Hutchinson: Why the Jan. 6 Committee Rushed Her Testimony , Robert 

Draper, July 10, 2022, 5:00 PM 

The day before Cassidy Hutchinson was deposed for a fourth time by the Jan. 6 committee, the 

former Trump White House aide received a phone message that would dramatically change the 

plans of the panel and write a new chapter in American politics. On that day in June, the caller told 

Ms. Hutchinson, as Liz Cheney, the committee’s vice chairwoman, later disclosed: A person “let 

me know you have your deposition tomorrow. He wants me to let you know he’s thinking about 

you. [Continue Reading ]

NBC: Here are the major revelations from the Jan. 6 committee hearings so far, Jonathan 

Allen, July 11, 2022, 4:30 AM 

Each revelation in public testimony before the Jan. 6 committee has been more explosive than 

the last from former President Donald Trump’s direct role in organizing “fake electors” to 

tirades that left ketchup oozing down a White House wall. As the panel resumes its televised 

public hearings this week, lawmakers are focused on demonstrating how Trump’s actions merged 

with and culminated in the violence at the Capitol. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: The big win the January 6 committee has already scored, Stephen Collinson, July 11, 

2022, 3:14 AM 

Whether or not Donald Trump ends up facing criminal charges, the House committee probing the 

US Capitol insurrection has scored a critical win over the ex-President by thwarting his effort to 

cover up the true horror of that day of infamy. The committee takes center stage in Washington 

again this week with its Tuesday televised hearing amid indications it will seek to make a direct 

connection between Trump and the far-right extremists who helped rioters smash their way into 

the halls of Congress on January 6, 2021. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: January 6 committee members preview Tuesday's hearing on role of extremist 

groups in Capitol riot, Devan Cole, Morgan Rimmer and Aaron Pellish, July 10, 2022, 8:53 PM 

Members of the House select committee investigating the January 6, 2021, attack on the US 

Capitol previewed on Sunday the panel's next public hearing, which will zero in on how the violent 

mob came together and the role of extremist groups in the deadly insurrection. "We are going to 

be connecting the dots during these hearings between these groups and those who were trying --

in government circles -- to overturn the election. So, we do think that this story is unfolding in a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000244

way that is very serious and quite credible," Democratic Rep. Zoe Lofgren of California said of 

Tuesday's hearing and another that hasn't been scheduled in an interview with CNN's Jake 

Tapper on "State of the Union." [Continue Reading] 

CBS : How to watch Tuesday's Jan. 6 committee hearing focused on extremists at the 

Capitol , Caroline Linton, July 10, 2022, 7:52 PM 

The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol will be holding 

another public hearing on Tuesday, this time focusing on the role of extremists that day. 

Committee member Rep. Jamie Raskin said Sunday on "Face the Nation" that the upcoming 

hearing will "continue the story of Donald Trump's attempt to overthrow the 2020 presidential 

election." CBS News will broadcast the hearing as a Special Report starting at 1 p.m. ET. 

[Continue Reading ]

CNN: The January 6 insurrection: Minute-by-minute, Marshall Cohen and Avery Lotz, July 

10, 2022, 2:19 PM 

One and a half years later, the minute-by-minute horrors of the January 6 insurrection, and then-President Donald Trump's role in fomenting the violence, are still coming into focus, thanks in 

large part to recent public hearings from the House committee investigating the attack. Reporting 

from CNN and other outlets have also filled in the key details of what unfolded that day, 

specifically within the Trump White House, while the right-wing rioters overran the Capitol and 

temporarily delayed Congress' formal certification of President Joe Biden's election victory. 

[Continue Reading ]

Politico: Meet the key players in the next Jan. 6 hearings, Kyle Cheney, Betsy Woodruff 

Swan and Nicholas Wu, July 11, 2022, 4:31 AM 

Phil Waldron. Bobby Engel. Sarah Matthews. They’re all key figures in the Jan. 6 select 

committee’s sprawling investigation, but there’s a fair chance you’ve never heard of them. House 

investigators have named dozens and dozens of witnesses as they probe the tumultuous final 

weeks of former President Donald Trump’s administration. While some of those have become 

household names, there are many more offering consequential pieces of evidence behind the 

scenes, which the panel has gradually released at each public hearing. [Continue Reading ]

Newsweek: Trump Never Invoked Executive Privilege Over Steve Bannon Subpoena: 

DoJ, Ewan Palmer, July 11, 2022, 4:09 AM 

The Department of Justice (DoJ) has said that Donald Trump never invoked executive privilege 

with regards to Steve Bannon and the former White House adviser's apparent willingness to 

testify to the January 6 committee is merely a "last-ditch attempt" to avoid accountability. Bannon, 

who is charged with contempt of congress for defying a subpoena issued by the panel 

investigating the insurrection, is reported to now be prepared to testify at a public hearing after the 

former president said he would waive executive privilege. [Continue Reading ]

NPR: [PODCAST] The Jan. 6 hearings happening this week, Ryan Lucas, July 10, 2022, 

5:06  PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol is expected to hold two 

more hearings this week, including one in primetime. [Listen ]

The Hill: Raskin, Kinzinger detail plans for Jan. 6 hearings this week, Brad Dress, July 10, 

2022, 3:39 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000245

Members of the House panel investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol laid out 

their plans for hearings this week, which will focus on testimony from former White House 

Counsel Pat Cipollone, plotting by far-right extremist groups and discussions about using the 

military to seize voting machines. The House panel has confirmed it will hold a hearing on 

Tuesday morning and is planning to hold a prime time hearing on Thursday, a source told 

Reuters. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

AP: Man charged with buying gun used to kill Detroit officer, Unattributed, July 10, 2022, 

5:53  PM 

A 26-year-old man was charged Sunday with buying a firearm that police say a 19-year-old later 

used to fatally shoot a Detroit police officer last week. U.S. Attorney Dawn Ison said the Detroit 

man is charged with making a false statement in the acquisition of the firearm. He appeared in 

federal court Sunday and is being held until a detention hearing on Tuesday, according to a news 

release from prosecutors. It was unclear Sunday if the man has a defense attorney who could 

comment on his behalf. [Continue Reading] See also: Detroit Free Press (Detroit, MI),  WDIV -

NBC (Detroit, MI),  WJBK-Fox (Detroit, MI) , WXYZ-ABC (Detroit, MI) 

Detroit News : Ex-state Rep. Inman can faces bribery, extortion charges again, court 

rules , Hayley Harding, July 10, 2022, 7:45 PM 

Former Michigan state Rep. Larry Inman can face a new trial after the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of 

Appeals reversed a lower court's decision to dismiss bribery and extortion charges. U.S. District 

Judge Robert Jonker ruled in 2021 that Inman's constitutional rights to speech would be violated 

and to retry him could be barred by the double jeopardy clause of the Constitution if he faced 

another trial on charges of soliciting a bribe and attempted extortion. [Continue Reading ]

Daily Independent (Ashland, KY ): Louisville woman charged in federal meth case , Henry 

Culvyhouse, July 10, 2022, 8:57 PM 

A Louisville woman could face life in prison after a federal grand jury handed up an indictment 

against her Thursday. Shelly Collins, 33, was indicted on one count of possession with the intent 

to distribute 500 grams or more of meth, after already having a serious drug felony conviction. 

[Continue Reading ]

The Albany Herald (Albany, NY): Felon with violent criminal history pleads guilty to gun 

charges, Unattributed, July 10, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A south Georgia resident with a violent criminal history found in possession of numerous stolen 

firearms and who released his dog to attack deputies before he fled arrest has pleaded guilty to a

federal gun charge in a Project Safe Neighborhoods case. James Currin, 44, of Bainbridge, 

pleaded guilty to possession of a firearm by a convicted felon before U.S. District Judge Leslie 

Gardner. Currin is facing a maximum 10 years in prison to be followed by three years of 

supervised release and a $250,000 fine. There is no parole in the federal system. [Continue 

Reading ]

WBIW-AM (Bedford, IN): Indianapolis man sentenced to 20 years for trafficking 

methamphetamine, Unattributed, July 10, 2022, 11:00 PM 

39-year-old Richard Hornsby, of Indianapolis, was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison after 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000246

pleading guilty to possession with intent to distribute 175 grams of methamphetamine. He was 

also charged with carrying a firearm during a drug trafficking crime. On December 9, 2020, 

Indiana State Police troopers stopped Hornsby for driving with an expired license plate. During 

the stop, troopers discovered that Hornsby was also driving with an expired license. [Continue 

Reading ]

WRIC-ABC (Petersburg, VA): Pharmacy owner, pharmacist sentenced to prison for 

unlawfully distributing opioids, Tannock Blair, July 10, 2022, 2:34 PM 

Three men have been sentenced to federal prison after illegally dispensing opioids and other 

controlled substances through a pharmacy in Texas, according to the Department of Justice 

(DOJ). Clint Carr, 33, was convicted in March for drug and money laundering conspiracies, along 

with other related charges. According to the DOJ, Carr co-owned and operated three different 

pharmacies in the Austin area. [Continue Reading ]

KZRG (Joplin, MO): Oklahoma man gets 10 year sentence for firing at man who was 

fleeing from him, Steve Smith, July 10, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A Bartlesville, Oklahoma man who shot a firearm at a victim during a crime of violence was 

sentenced in federal court Wednesday, announced U.S. Attorney Clint Johnson. U.S. District 

Judge Claire V. Eagan sentenced 29-year-old David Edward Sayre, II to 120 months in federal 

prison followed by 5 years of supervised release. [Continue Reading] 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

NYT : [OPINION] Children Should Not Have to Suffer the State’s Injustice , Margaret Renkl, 

July 11, 2022, 8:28 AM 

Last year, two families in Wilson County, Tenn., signed on as plaintiffs in a federal civil rights 

lawsuit challenging Tennessee legislation that prohibits transgender students from using 

bathrooms that align with their gender identities. But as WPLN News reported last week, both 

families have since left the state, believing their children would not be safe here long enough to 

see the lawsuit through. Now that the plaintiffs have moved away, a district judge has dismissed 

the suit. In many ways, this development tells us more about the state of human rights in the red 

states than either the lawsuit or the law it challenges. [Continue Reading ]

Fox : Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey signs law banning video recording within 8 feet of 'police 

activity' , Anders Hagstrom, July 10, 2022, 1:41 PM 

Republican Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey signed legislation banning residents from recording video 

within eight feet of "police activity" on Sunday. The law classifies knowingly filming within eight 

feet of officers as a class 3 misdemeanor, which is punishable by up to 30 days in jail, $500 in 

fines and up to a year in probation, according to Arizona law. The law says officers must warn 

anyone filming at least once before they can be charged with a crime. [...] "One of the highest 

priorities of the Civil Rights Division is to ensure that every person in this country benefits from 

policing that is lawful, effective, transparent, and free from discrimination," Assistant Attorney 

General Kristen Clarke said at the time. "Police officers across the country must use their 

authority in a manner that adheres to the Constitution, complies with federal civil rights laws, and 

respects human dignity." [Continue Reading ]

Florida Politics : Judge allows challenge to Stop WOKE Act to move forward , Jacob Ogles, 

July 10, 2022, 11:00 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000247

A federal judge will allow a case challenging Florida’s “Stop WOKE Act.” to proceed. While U.S. 

District Judge Mark Walker last month declined to stop the enforcement of the law, he denied a

motion to dismiss the case entirely. A group of teachers has sued the state law (HB 7), which 

went into effect at the beginning of July, as an infringement of their First Amendment rights in the 

classroom. Walker’s order makes clear the First Amendment does protect classroom discussion 

to a degree. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL LAW 

NYT, The Daily: On Abortion Laws, It All Goes Back to 2010 , July 11, 2022, 6:00 AM 

When the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, the court’s conservative majority argued it 

was simply handing the question of abortion to the states and their voters to decide for 

themselves. But in reality, the court was ensuring that many states, from Arizona to Ohio, would 

immediately ban the procedure without much debate, because their legislatures are now 

dominated by hard-line Republicans. Today, we tell the story of how those Republican legislators 

achieved that dominance. [Listen] 

WSJ : Doctors Struggle With State Abortion Restrictions at Odds With Federal Law ,

Melanie Evans, July 10, 2022, 10:22 PM 

Doctors and hospitals are rushing to reconcile laws in their states barring abortion with a federal 

law that may require the procedure as part of emergency treatment. Since the Supreme Court 

overturned Roe v. Wade, laws have taken effect, or soon will, in several states that prohibit 

abortions except when necessary to save a pregnant women’s life. Yet under federal law, doctors 

and hospitals may need to perform the procedure in other medical emergencies, such as for 

women at risk of kidney failure from an infection. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Fox : DHS anticipates an average of 441 unaccompanied children per day at border this 

year, a new record , Anders Hagstrom, July 10, 2022, 9:39 AM 

An average of 441 unaccompanied children will cross the U.S.-Mexico border into border patrol 

custody every day this year, according to estimates from the Department of Homeland Security. 

President Joe Biden's administration is reportedly expecting between 148,000 and 161,000 

unaccompanied minors to cross the border in the fiscal year 2022, according to documents 

obtained by the Washington Examiner. [Continue Reading ]

Burlington Free Press (Vermont): 10 of Vermont's immigrant farmworkers petition ICE to 

stop their deportations, April Fisher and Emilia Cardona, July 11, 2022, 5:25 AM 

Ten of Vermont’s immigrant farmworkers filed a joint petition on June 20 for Immigration and 

Customs Enforcement to stop their deportations. The 10 farmworkers are all men from Mexico 

who have lived in Vermont for years. Some arrived to U.S. on the H-2A visa for temporary 

agricultural workers, but those visas have since expired, and the workers are now unable to obtain 

legal permission to live in the country.The 10 workers are also active members of Migrant Justice, 

a Burlington-based nonprofit that works for the human rights of Vermont’s immigrant communities. 

[Continue Reading ]

WCIA-CBS (Champaign, IL): CBP head: Horse patrol units in Del Rio were 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000248

‘unprofessional,’ shouldn’t have been part of crowd control , Sandra Sanchez, July 10, 

2022, 3:59 PM 

Ten months after U.S. Border Patrol agents on horseback were accused of mistreating migrants 

under the international bridge in Del Rio, Texas, the head of the agency said an investigation 

found fault with the agents’ crowd-control methods and said they used “deeply offensive 

conduct,” but said they did not “whip” the migrants. U.S. Customs and Border Protection 

Commissioner Chris Magnus also said the border agents shouldn’t have taken part in the 

operation at the request of Texas Department of Public Safety officials. [Continue Reading] 

ANTITRUST 

Tech Times : Alleged Google Ad Tech Business Separation Expected To Happen To 

Evade Lawsuit — Will DOJ Accept the Proposal?, Griffin Davis, July 10, 2022, 4:07 PM 

Google reportedly proposed to separate its ad tech business just to avoid a possible anti-trust 

lawsuit from the U.S. Department of Justice. This business adjustment proposal appeared after 

some U.S. senators said they plan to introduce a new law that will focus on the advertising 

technologies of various tech firms. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

WSJ: [EDITORIAL] Pete Buttigieg’s Climate Toll Road, Editorial Board, July 10, 2022, 5:53 

PM 

To adapt what Stalin said of the Pope, how many divisions does the Supreme Court have? That 

seems to be the implicit slogan of Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg, who on Thursday 

ignored the High Court’s recent ruling with a proposed rule requiring states to reduce CO2 

emissions on highways that is, banish gas-powered vehicles. In West Virginia v. EPA, the Court 

ruled that regulatory agencies can’t impose costly new regulations without a clear direction from 

Congress. The feds had interpreted an obscure corner of the Clean Air Act to impose costly 

climate rules on power plants. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Is federal government dooming efforts to address climate change?, Morgan 

Chalfant and Zack Budryk, July 10, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A 6-3 ruling by the Supreme Court restricting the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) 

authority to limit power plant emissions is the latest blow to U.S. efforts to fight climate change, 

contributing to a renewed sense of pessimism that the U.S. political system will address the issue 

at the federal level. While the decision backed by the new conservative majority on the court does 

not negate efforts by state governments to take action for the planet, it puts a new limitation on the 

EPA. [Continue Reading ]

KTUL-ABC (Tulsa, OK): Endangered Species Act restoration helps Oklahoma Wildlife ,

Sam Gelfand, July 10, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A federal judge reversed a Trump Administration rollback of the Endangered Species Act this 

week, restoring protections to native wildlife. The Act was passed in 1973, but many of its 

protections were changed or removed in 2019. A lawsuit filed as soon as the rollback was 

announced restored those protections on July 5th. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000249

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

USA Today: Federal agents seize over 5K pounds of meth in record-breaking Southern 

California bust, Jordan Mendoza, July 10, 2022, 5:48 PM 

Four men were arrested in a record-breaking drug bust after authorities seized over two and a half 

tons of methamphetamine in Southern California, officials said. Officials said a commercial 20 -

foot box truck passed through the U.S.-Mexico border just before 5 p.m. on Thursday. Law 

enforcement surveilled the truck as it drove to National City, California, just south of San Diego. 

[Continue Reading ]

NY Daily News: Queens man, killed in gunfight with NYPD, may have wanted to die of 

‘suicide by cop,’ sources say, Brittany Kriegstein, Rocco Parascandola and John Annese, July 

10, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A Queens man cut down in a hail of 131 NYPD bullets after threatening to “blow the head off” the 

first police officer he saw may have been looking to stage a “suicide by cop,” police sources said 

Sunday. [...] Police and the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives are 

also trying to trace how the Walther PK380 got into Hardy’s hands, a police source said. 

[Continue Reading ]

Guam Pacific Daily News (Hagåtña, GU): FBI: Guam saw $1.5M in elder fraud last year, 

Joe Taitano, July 11, 2022, 12:30 AM 

Guam’s manamko' lost about $1.5 million to fraud in 2021, according to officials from the Federal 

Bureau of Investigation who spoke with the Guam Police Department on Monday. One victim lost 

close to three-quarters of a million dollars through an online fraud scheme last year. The case has 

since been handed off to the U.S. Secret Service, GPD Police Chief Stephen Ignacio said. 

[Continue Reading ]

KUAM-NBC/CBS (Guam): FBI shares how to spot deepfake videos, Joan Aguon Charfauros, 

July 11, 2022, 12:00 AM 

Recently, the FBI Internet Crime Complaint Center warned of an increase in complaints reporting 

the use of deepfakes and stolen Personal Identifiable Information. But what exactly is a

deepfake? Special Agent in Charge Steven Merrill explains. "Either audio or video or even a still 

image, in which we call synthetic content and something that has been altered or manipulated," he 

said. "So something what you'd expect to see and what the image and/or audio really is are two 

different things." [Continue Reading ]

KZRG (Joplin, MO): Federal arrest warrant in Galena nets alleged child predator, 

Unattributed, July 10, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A woman with a federal arrest warrant was taken into custody at the Galena Motel last night. Read 

the full press release below: On the evening of Friday, July 8, 2022 the Simpson County 

Mississippi Sheriff’s Office alerted Galena Police Department that a female with a federal arrest 

warrant and an endangered runaway juvenile may be in the Galena area. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

USA Today: Here's how the Supreme Court's decision in a major election case could 

affect voting in 2024 , John Fritze, July 11, 2022, 5:02 AM 

On the final day of its historic 2021-2022 term, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a significant 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000250

case from North Carolina about how states set the rules for federal elections. Some groups worry 

the ruling will fundamentally alter elections. [Continue Reading ]

NYT : The Right to Travel in a Post-Roe World , Adam Liptak, July 11, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh signed the recent majority opinion that overruled Roe v. Wade. He 

also issued a 12-page concurring opinion, writing only for himself. He wanted to discuss, he 

wrote, “the future implications” of the decision. “Some of the other abortion-related legal 

questions raised by today’s decision are not especially difficult as a constitutional matter,” he 

wrote. “For example, may a state bar a resident of that state from traveling to another state to 

obtain an abortion? In my view, the answer is no based on the constitutional right to interstate 

travel.” [Continue Reading ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

St. Louis Post-Dispatch : [EDITORIAL] Ignoring vast predatory evidence, a judge lets 

opioid distributors off the hook , Editorial Board, July 10, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Everyone connected to the opioid industry is to blame, yet it’s getting harder and harder to hold 

anyone accountable for the nation’s ongoing addiction crisis. A federal judge has ruled that the 

nation’s three largest drug distributors, which flooded a small West Virginia county with 81 million 

painkillers, were not responsible for the addiction and overdose cases that predictably resulted. 

[Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters: Biden weighs authority to declare abortion-related public health emergency ,

Nandita Bose, July 11, 2022, 4:52 AM 

U.S.  President Joe Biden on Sunday said he has asked his administration to consider whether he 

has authority to declare an abortion-related public health emergency after the Supreme Court 

overturned the Roe v. Wade decision that legalized abortion nationwide. The comments come 

after Biden on Friday signed an executive order to ease access to services to terminate 

pregnancies. [Continue Reading] 

AP : Biden celebration of new gun law clouded by latest shooting , Zeke Miller, July 10, 

2022, 12:00 PM 

President Joe Biden is hosting a “celebration” of a new bipartisan law meant to reduce gun 

violence that, after just 16 days in effect, already has been overshadowed by yet another mass 

shooting. The bill, passed after recent gun rampages in Buffalo, New York, and Uvalde, Texas, 

incrementally toughens requirements for young people to buy guns, denies firearms to more 

domestic abusers, and helps local authorities temporarily take weapons from people judged to 

be dangerous. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN 

Fox: VP Harris calls for 'assault weapons ban' on guns 'intentionally designed to kill' 

people, Jessica Chasmar, July 10, 2022, 1:44 PM 

Vice President Kamala Harris on Sunday called for the reinstatement of the Federal Assault 

Weapons Ban arguing that certain semi automatic firearms are "intentionally designed" to kill 

people and only belong on the battlefield. During an appearance on CBS News’ "Face the 

Nation," Harris spoke about her visit last week to Highland Park, Illinois, where a man armed with a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000251

## ••••

semi-automatic rifle opened fire on a Fourth of July parade, killing 7 and injuring 46. [Continue 

Reading ]

CONGRESS 

WSJ : Congress Juggles China Bill, Democrats’ Climate and Drug-Pricing Ambitions ,

Natalie Andrews and Richard Rubin, July 10, 2022, 9:39 PM 

Congress returns on Monday with Democrats aiming to revive central pieces of President Biden’s 

stalled economic agenda while trying to keep on track a separate, bipartisan bill targeted at 

boosting competitiveness with China that top Republicans are threatening to block. [Continue 

Reading ]

WGNO-ABC (New Orleans, LA): Lawmakers face pressure to address rise in violent 

crime, mass shootings, Alexandra Limon, July 10, 2022, 1:42 PM 

The Biden administration is facing mounting pressure to address a spike in violent crime in major 

cities across the country. The Justice Department says it has been working to take violent 

criminals off the streets including a 30-day operation conducted by the U.S. Marshals Service 

resulting in a large number of arrests including of three suspects in the mass shooting that 

happened in July in Philadelphia. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 10, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with Lindsay Davis 

CBS: Evening News with Jericka Duncan 

NBC: Nightly News with Kate Snow 

The House Jan. 6 committee will resume public hearings this week, days after Trump White 

House counsel Pat Cipollone testified before the committee for several hours. Stephen 

Bannon is willing to testify publicly before the House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 

2021, Capitol riot, his lawyer told the panel in a letter Saturday, in a stark change of course 

after former President Trump said he would waive executive privilege. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Dozens of Ukrainian emergency workers labored Sunday to pull people out of the rubble 

after a Russian rocket attack smashed into apartment buildings in eastern Ukraine, killing at 

least 15 people. More than 20 people were believed still trapped. [ABC , CBS ]

Firefighters are working around the clock to stay ahead of the flames and save the 

treasured California native sequoias of Yosemite National Park. The fire has scorched 

nearly 1,600 acres and forced evacuations in nearby communities. This is the hottest 

climate these trees have seen in their 3000-year lifetime. [ABC , NBC ]

Concerns of a COVID summer surge are rising as new daily infections have surpassed 

108,000 and hospitalizations are also up 18%. [ABC , CBS ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000252

## •

## •••••••

President Biden penned an op-ed in the Washington Post overnight ahead of a

controversial visit to the Middle East, writing “fundamental freedoms are always on the 

agenda when I travel abroad.” It’s his first visit to the area since the killing of Jamal 

Khashoggi, an effort U.S. intelligence concluded was coordinated by Saudi leadership. [NBC ]

The tributes have been ongoing and it has been a long emotional week for so many after 

the deadly July 4 Highland Park parade shooting. After a week of investigation and 

businesses shutting their doors, Uptown Highland Park is back open again. Barricades 

were lifted near 2nd Street and Central Avenue. [NBC ]

At Sunday's WNBA All-Star game, players started the second half wearing a jersey with 

Brittney Griner's #42, honoring the athlete who is imprisoned in Russia. This comes as a

former U.S. Diplomat announces plans to travel to Moscow to negotiate for Griner's 

release. [CBS ]

Japanese voters headed to the polling stations on Sunday for an election billed as a

defense of democracy, just two days after former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was 

assassinated while on the campaign trail. Police arrested 41-year-old Tetsuya Yamagami at 

the site of the shooting on Friday. They say he is suspected of murder but has not been 

formally charged. [ABC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Most Democrats Don’t Want Biden in 2024, New Poll Shows” [NYT ]

“Uber used covert tech to thwart government probes and advance its ambitions” [WaPo ]

“Elon Musk’s Twitter Flip-Flop Cues Up Strange Legal Feud” [WSJ , WaPo ]

“Five takeaways from the Trump Jan. 6 documentary ‘Unprecedented’” [LAT ]

END     

> RENDON Media News Alert Notice:
> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115 01570-000253

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5115

From:  Imm grat on Law360 

Subject:  [EXTERNAL] B den Urges Just ces To Restore Pr or ty Deportat on Memo 

To:  OHerron, Margy (OOAG) 

Sent:  Ju y 11 , 2022 4:09 AM (UTC-04:00) 

# ■ IMMIGRATION 

Monday, July 11 , 2022 

TOP NEWS 

Biden Urges Justices To Restore Priority Deportation Memo 

The Biden adrrinistration on Friday filed an emergency application with the U.S. Supreme Court, asking the justices to shut down a Texas federal court order blocking its policy for irmigration enforcement and arguing that Texas and Louisiana haven't justified such "disruptive" relief. "' Order attached I Read full article » 

Feds Say Border Patrol Used Needless Force Against Haitians 

U.S. Border Patrol agents used reckless and unnecessary force against Haitian rrigrants to push them towards the U.S.-Mexico border last year, including dangerously maneuvering a horse around a small child, according to an internal investigation report released Friday. "' Report attached I Read full article » 

ICE Agrees To Stop Use Of Contractors In California Arrests 

Private contractors will no longer be used by U.S. lrmigration and Customs Enforcement to make irmigration arrests at California jails and prisons, as part of a settlement ICE reached with a detainee represented by the Arrerican Civil Liberties Union. 0

2 documents attached I Read full article » 

Kilpatrick N.ty Aids Fellow Ukrainians In War Relief Effort 

When one of Kilpatrick Townsend & Stockton LLP's Atlanta-based attorneys entered the United States in 1988 as a 9-year-old refugee from Soviet-era Ukraine, she couldn't have imagined she'd end up helping her fellow countrymen flee a Russian invasion 34 years later. Read full article » LITIGATION 

9th Circ. Says Man's Residency Bid Nixed By Retroactiv e Law 

The Ninth Circuit on Friday declined to review a Mexican man's bid to vacate                   

> ,..,, ,.. ____ ....,,...+;_.,.. ,..,,,,.,..,..,,,,. ,...-, ,:,,...-h-r-h,..,,, ,I,.. hru. ,,_ "" __ a;,..,,,-1 f,..,,,,. -_,,.,..,,,..,,.,.. ,..-,,.,.. h-f,..,,,,.,..,, ,....

LAW FIRMS IN TODAY'S NEWS Addleshaw Goddard Ahmad Zavitsanos Al len & Overy CMS Cameron McKenna Nabarro 

> 01570-000254

Document ID: 0.7.1088.29560 cl Ut::!JVI lclUUI I UI Ut::1, :::;c1y111y I It:: :::;1 IUUIU I lclVt:: clf.lf.lllt::U IUI cl YI t::t::11 \A::11 U Ut::IUI t:: cl 

law preventing inadmssible individuals from becomng lawful permanent residents took effect. "' Opinion attached I Read full article » 

Legal Writer Says Firing Was Revenge For OT Complaints 

A legal writer for a team of immgration lawyers accused a pair of staffing firms of schemng to fire him in retaliation for complaints he raised about tardy bonuses and insufficient overtime pay. "' Complaint attached I Read full article» ADMINISTRATIVE DISPUTES 

DOL Board Says Biz's Hiring Woes Don't Show H-2B Need 

A U.S. Department of Labor appeals body rejected an Arizona construction company's request to hire 10 mgrant workers, saying the company's difficulties hiring U.S. workers amd a labor shortage don't show that it needed telll)Orary foreign workers. "' Order attached I Read full article » EXPERT ANALYSIS 

How Congr ess Is Addressing Employment Visa Backlog 

.AJthough immgration reform is far from reach, six bills recently proposed in Congress represent an increased interest in solving the employment-based immgration backlog that currently affects more than 1 mllion people and puts strain on employers to extend telll)Orary work authorizations, say attorneys at F aegre Drinker. Read full article » 

Opinion Law School Admissions Shouldn't Hing e On Test Scores 

The American Bar Association recently granted law schools some latitude on which tests it can consider in admssions decisions, but its continued emphasis on test scores harms student diversity and is an obstacle to holistic admssions strategies, says Aaron Taylor at Accesslex. Read full article »    

> u1::,vvc1 11y

Cl yde & Co DAC Beachcroft 

DLA Pipe r

Davidoff Hutcher Do r sey & Whitney Faegre Drinker Gibson Dunn Go ldberg Sega lla 

GowlingWLG 

Hunton Andr ews Jones Day Katten Muchin Kilpatr ick Town send King & Spaldi ng Kirkland & Ellis Lat ham & Watkins Law Offices of Stacy Tolchin Linklaters Maye r Brown McDermott Will Michelmores LLP Mo rgan L ew is Mo rrison Foerster Munge r Tolles Paul Hastings Proskauer Rose Reed Sm th Ropes & Gray Saul Ewing Scott+Scott Sidley Austin Silverman T hompson Simpson T hacher Skadden Arps Strong Law Firm Sullivan & Cromwell 

Weil Gotsha l

Wiggin LLP gunnercooke LLP 

COMPANIES IN TODAY'S NEWS 

Abu Dhab i National Energy Co .American Bar Association American Civil Liberties Union American Civil Liberties Union of 

Nort he rn California American Red Cross As ian Ame ri can Center for 

Advancing Justice 

> 01570-000255

Document ID: 0.7.1088.29560 LEGAL INDUSTRY 

Texas Pol Threatens Sidley With Charges Over Abortion Policy 

The chair of the Texas Freedom Caucus warned Sidley Austin LLP in a letter on Thursday that the firm could face criminal liability and that its attorneys would be disbarred for aiding errployees that need abortions, under legislation they plan to introduce in the next session. 

Read full article »

Legal Sector Adds 3K Jobs In June As Industry Rebounds 

The legal industry added 3,000 jobs in June as errployment in the sector 

continued to rebound after a slow start to the year, according to preliminary 

data released Friday by the U.S. Department of Labor. 

Read full article »

Bannon Attorn ey 'Reluctantly' Seeks To Exit Cont empt Cas e

A Davidoff Hutcher & Citron LLP partner said Friday that he was withdrawing from defending former Trurrp White House aide Steve Bannon against crirrinal contermt charaes over Bannon's refusal to coooerate with the 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.29560 

As ian Ame ri cans Advancing Justice Bouygues Construction SA Centerra Group LLC De loitte Touche Tohmatsu Ltd. Endo International PLC Ernst & Young LLP 

G4S 

Getty Images Inc. Grant Thornton LLP 

IVECO SpA 

lmpax Laboratories, Inc. KPMG International Lev i Strauss & Co .LexisNexis Group Inc. Major Lindsey & Africa LLC Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia 

Inc. MasterCard Inc. Mazor Robotics Medtronic PLC NFL Enterpri ses LLC N at ional Australia Bank Ltd. N at ional Distri ct Attorneys 

Association Netflix Inc. PGA TOUR Inc. Paragon Offshore PLC Skyworks So lutions Inc. StoneTurn Group LLP T he Gap Inc. TransUni on LLC United Farm Workers Virgin Media Inc. Vodafone Group PLC Warne r Bros. Entertainment Inc. White Cast le Management Co. 

GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN TODAY'S NEWS 

Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services Bureau of Labor Statistics Ca lifornia Department of Co rr ect i ons and Rehabilitation Ill inois Supreme Court State Bar of Texas 

U.S.  Attorney's Office 

U.S.  Census Bur ea u

U.S.  Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 

> 01570-000256 01570-000257

criminal contempt charges over Bannon s refusal to cooperate with the 

House committee investigating the Jan. 6 insurrection, saying he might be 

called to testify at Bannon's trial this month in D.C. federal court. 

Read full article »

Biden Orders Agencies To Protect Abortion Access 

President Joe Biden has told his top health official to take measures to make sure patients have access to safe abortions, like medication abortions, in the 

wake of the U.S. Supreme Court decision erasing the constitutional right to 

the procedure. 

Read full article »

Allen & Overy To Expand Outsourcing Platform To California 

Allen & Overy LLP said Friday that it is poised to bring its flexible sourcing platform Peerpoint to California, after introducing the service in New York last fall, as firms grapple with turmoil in the job market sparked by the pandemic and amid growing economic strains. 

Read full article »

Mayer Brown Adds Private Equity Pro From Katten 

Mayer Brown LLP has hired a private equity specialist in London from Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP as part of an effort to expand its global practice. 

Read full article »

Security Guards Union Loses COVID Protocol Suit For Good 

A lawsuit alleging federal courthouses weren't properly cleaned and sterilized 

during the COVID-19 pandemic met its end in New York federal court Friday, with a judge ruling that the union behind the litigation failed to show how it 

was harmed by the alleged uncleanliness. 

Read full article »

1 In 20 Death Row Reversals Tied To Prosecutor Misconduct 

Over the last 50 years, prosecutor misconduct has played a role in 550 sentence reversals and exonerations of prisoners on death row, a recent study shows. 

Read full article »

GC Cheat Sheet: The Hottest Corporate News Of The Week 

A former Goldman top lawyer is helping the NFL's Dan Snyder as a U.S. House committee tries to subpoena the embattled Washington Commanders owner, and BigLaw leaders said they're focusing on retaining talent, investing 

in new technologies and growing. These are some of the stories in corporate legal news you may have missed in the past week. 

Read full article »

UK Litigation Roundup: Here's What You Missed In London 

The past week in London has seen Warner Bros in two separate suits over 

copyright, Visa facing another competition suit over its fees, and a Scottish businessman suing a finance company for professional negligence over afailed Scottish news venture. Here, Law360 looks at these and other new 

claims in the U.K. 

Read full article »

In Case You Missed It: Hottest Firms And Stories On Law360 

For those who missed out, here's a look back at the law firms, stories and 

expert analyses that generated the most buzz on Law360 last week. 

Read full article »

U.S.  Customs and Border 

Protection 

U.S.  Department of Agriculture 

U.S.  Department of Homeland 

Security 

U.S.  Department of Justice 

U.S.  Department of Labor 

U.S.  District Court for the Central 

District of California 

U.S.  District Court for the District of 

Columbia 

U.S.  District Court for the Southern 

District of New York 

U.S.  District Court for the Western 

District of Pennsylvania 

U.S.  House of Representatives 

U.S.  Immigration and Customs Enforcement 

U.S.  Securities and Exchange Commission 

U.S.  Senate 

U.S.  Supreme Court 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.29560

JOBS 

Search full listings or advertise ~ur job opening 

Business lrnnigration Paralegal (New York, Newark NJ , or Starrlord CT Offices) M::Carter & Eng sh , LLP 

New York, New York 

l\klt sure fyourfrm swscrbes? Ask yru-1 braran. We hope yru fooo:l th s message to be useful. 

lb\el.er  f yrud rather not race w Mure ema Is cl th s sat you may lJ'lSubscrbe here. 

Please DO NOTreply toths emal. For customer slW(Xt nqu r es please call +1646783 7100 orvs t our Contact Us page .  

> Pr1.0cy Pol

cy Q:xJk e Pol cy 

l...aW360 Patkll o Med a nc 111 West 19th Street 5th Floor New York NY 10011 

01570-000258 Document ID: 0.7.1088.29560 From:  Imm grat on Law360 

Subject:  [EXTERNAL] B den Urges Just ces To Restore Pr or ty Deportat on Memo 

To:  Good ander, Margaret V. (OAG) 

Sent:  Ju y 11 , 2022 4:09 AM (UTC-04:00) 

# ■ IMMIGRATION 

Monday, July 11 , 2022 

TOP NEWS 

Biden Urges Justices To Restore Priority Deportation Memo 

The Biden adrrinistration on Friday filed an emergency application with the U.S. Supreme Court, asking the justices to shut down a Texas federal court order blocking its policy for irmigration enforcement and arguing that Texas and Louisiana haven't justified such "disruptive" relief. "' Order attached I Read full article » 

Feds Say Border Patrol Used Needless Force Against Haitians 

U.S. Border Patrol agents used reckless and unnecessary force against Haitian rrigrants to push them towards the U.S.-Mexico border last year, including dangerously maneuvering a horse around a small child, according to an internal investigation report released Friday. "' Report attached I Read full article » 

ICE Agrees To Stop Use Of Contractors In California Arrests 

Private contractors will no longer be used by U.S. lrmigration and Customs Enforcement to make irmigration arrests at California jails and prisons, as part of a settlement ICE reached with a detainee represented by the Arrerican Civil Liberties Union. 0

2 documents attached I Read full article » 

Kilpatrick N.ty Aids Fellow Ukrainians In War Relief Effort 

When one of Kilpatrick Townsend & Stockton LLP's Atlanta-based attorneys entered the United States in 1988 as a 9-year-old refugee from Soviet-era Ukraine, she couldn't have imagined she'd end up helping her fellow countrymen flee a Russian invasion 34 years later. Read full article » LITIGATION 

9th Circ. Says Man's Residency Bid Nixed By Retroactiv e Law 

The Ninth Circuit on Friday declined to review a Mexican man's bid to vacate                   

> ,..,, ,.. ____ ....,,...+;_.,.. ,..,,,,.,..,..,,,,. ,...-, ,:,,...-h-r-h,..,,, ,I,.. hru. ,,_ "" __ a;,..,,,-1 f,..,,,,. -_,,.,..,,,..,,.,.. ,..-,,.,.. h-f,..,,,,.,..,, ,....

LAW FIRMS IN TODAY'S NEWS Addleshaw Goddard Ahmad Zavitsanos Al len & Overy CMS Cameron McKenna Nabarro 

> 01570-000259

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30855 cl Ut::!JVI lclUUI I UI Ut::1, :::;c1y111y I It:: :::;1 IUUIU I lclVt:: clf.lf.lllt::U IUI cl YI t::t::11 \A::11 U Ut::IUI t:: cl 

law preventing inadmssible individuals from becomng lawful permanent residents took effect. "' Opinion attached I Read full article » 

Legal Writer Says Firing Was Revenge For OT Complaints 

A legal writer for a team of immgration lawyers accused a pair of staffing firms of schemng to fire him in retaliation for complaints he raised about tardy bonuses and insufficient overtime pay. "' Complaint attached I Read full article» ADMINISTRATIVE DISPUTES 

DOL Board Says Biz's Hiring Woes Don't Show H-2B Need 

A U.S. Department of Labor appeals body rejected an Arizona construction company's request to hire 10 mgrant workers, saying the company's difficulties hiring U.S. workers amd a labor shortage don't show that it needed telll)Orary foreign workers. "' Order attached I Read full article » EXPERT ANALYSIS 

How Congr ess Is Addressing Employment Visa Backlog 

.AJthough immgration reform is far from reach, six bills recently proposed in Congress represent an increased interest in solving the employment-based immgration backlog that currently affects more than 1 mllion people and puts strain on employers to extend telll)Orary work authorizations, say attorneys at F aegre Drinker. Read full article » 

Opinion Law School Admissions Shouldn't Hing e On Test Scores 

The American Bar Association recently granted law schools some latitude on which tests it can consider in admssions decisions, but its continued emphasis on test scores harms student diversity and is an obstacle to holistic admssions strategies, says Aaron Taylor at Accesslex. Read full article »    

> u1::,vvc1 11y

Cl yde & Co DAC Beachcroft 

DLA Pipe r

Davidoff Hutcher Do r sey & Whitney Faegre Drinker Gibson Dunn Go ldberg Sega lla 

GowlingWLG 

Hunton Andr ews Jones Day Katten Muchin Kilpatr ick Town send King & Spaldi ng Kirkland & Ellis Lat ham & Watkins Law Offices of Stacy Tolchin Linklaters Maye r Brown McDermott Will Michelmores LLP Mo rgan L ew is Mo rrison Foerster Munge r Tolles Paul Hastings Proskauer Rose Reed Sm th Ropes & Gray Saul Ewing Scott+Scott Sidley Austin Silverman T hompson Simpson T hacher Skadden Arps Strong Law Firm Sullivan & Cromwell 

Weil Gotsha l

Wiggin LLP gunnercooke LLP 

COMPANIES IN TODAY'S NEWS 

Abu Dhab i National Energy Co .American Bar Association American Civil Liberties Union American Civil Liberties Union of 

Nort he rn California American Red Cross As ian Ame ri can Center for 

Advancing Justice 

> 01570-000260

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30855 LEGAL INDUSTRY 

Texas Pol Threatens Sidley With Charges Over Abortion Policy 

The chair of the Texas Freedom Caucus warned Sidley Austin LLP in a letter on Thursday that the firm could face criminal liability and that its attorneys would be disbarred for aiding errployees that need abortions, under legislation they plan to introduce in the next session. 

Read full article »

Legal Sector Adds 3K Jobs In June As Industry Rebounds 

The legal industry added 3,000 jobs in June as errployment in the sector 

continued to rebound after a slow start to the year, according to preliminary 

data released Friday by the U.S. Department of Labor. 

Read full article »

Bannon Attorn ey 'Reluctantly' Seeks To Exit Cont empt Cas e

A Davidoff Hutcher & Citron LLP partner said Friday that he was withdrawing from defending former Trurrp White House aide Steve Bannon against crirrinal contermt charaes over Bannon's refusal to coooerate with the 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30855 

As ian Ame ri cans Advancing Justice Bouygues Construction SA Centerra Group LLC De loitte Touche Tohmatsu Ltd. Endo International PLC Ernst & Young LLP 

G4S 

Getty Images Inc. Grant Thornton LLP 

IVECO SpA 

lmpax Laboratories, Inc. KPMG International Lev i Strauss & Co .LexisNexis Group Inc. Major Lindsey & Africa LLC Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia 

Inc. MasterCard Inc. Mazor Robotics Medtronic PLC NFL Enterpri ses LLC N at ional Australia Bank Ltd. N at ional Distri ct Attorneys 

Association Netflix Inc. PGA TOUR Inc. Paragon Offshore PLC Skyworks So lutions Inc. StoneTurn Group LLP T he Gap Inc. TransUni on LLC United Farm Workers Virgin Media Inc. Vodafone Group PLC Warne r Bros. Entertainment Inc. White Cast le Management Co. 

GOVERNMENT AGENCIES IN TODAY'S NEWS 

Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services Bureau of Labor Statistics Ca lifornia Department of Co rr ect i ons and Rehabilitation Ill inois Supreme Court State Bar of Texas 

U.S.  Attorney's Office 

U.S.  Census Bur ea u

U.S.  Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 

> 01570-000261 01570-000262

criminal contempt charges over Bannon s refusal to cooperate with the 

House committee investigating the Jan. 6 insurrection, saying he might be 

called to testify at Bannon's trial this month in D.C. federal court. 

Read full article »

Biden Orders Agencies To Protect Abortion Access 

President Joe Biden has told his top health official to take measures to make sure patients have access to safe abortions, like medication abortions, in the 

wake of the U.S. Supreme Court decision erasing the constitutional right to 

the procedure. 

Read full article »

Allen & Overy To Expand Outsourcing Platform To California 

Allen & Overy LLP said Friday that it is poised to bring its flexible sourcing platform Peerpoint to California, after introducing the service in New York last fall, as firms grapple with turmoil in the job market sparked by the pandemic and amid growing economic strains. 

Read full article »

Mayer Brown Adds Private Equity Pro From Katten 

Mayer Brown LLP has hired a private equity specialist in London from Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP as part of an effort to expand its global practice. 

Read full article »

Security Guards Union Loses COVID Protocol Suit For Good 

A lawsuit alleging federal courthouses weren't properly cleaned and sterilized 

during the COVID-19 pandemic met its end in New York federal court Friday, with a judge ruling that the union behind the litigation failed to show how it 

was harmed by the alleged uncleanliness. 

Read full article »

1 In 20 Death Row Reversals Tied To Prosecutor Misconduct 

Over the last 50 years, prosecutor misconduct has played a role in 550 sentence reversals and exonerations of prisoners on death row, a recent study shows. 

Read full article »

GC Cheat Sheet: The Hottest Corporate News Of The Week 

A former Goldman top lawyer is helping the NFL's Dan Snyder as a U.S. House committee tries to subpoena the embattled Washington Commanders owner, and BigLaw leaders said they're focusing on retaining talent, investing 

in new technologies and growing. These are some of the stories in corporate legal news you may have missed in the past week. 

Read full article »

UK Litigation Roundup: Here's What You Missed In London 

The past week in London has seen Warner Bros in two separate suits over 

copyright, Visa facing another competition suit over its fees, and a Scottish businessman suing a finance company for professional negligence over afailed Scottish news venture. Here, Law360 looks at these and other new 

claims in the U.K. 

Read full article »

In Case You Missed It: Hottest Firms And Stories On Law360 

For those who missed out, here's a look back at the law firms, stories and 

expert analyses that generated the most buzz on Law360 last week. 

Read full article »

U.S.  Customs and Border 

Protection 

U.S.  Department of Agriculture 

U.S.  Department of Homeland 

Security 

U.S.  Department of Justice 

U.S.  Department of Labor 

U.S.  District Court for the Central 

District of California 

U.S.  District Court for the District of 

Columbia 

U.S.  District Court for the Southern 

District of New York 

U.S.  District Court for the Western 

District of Pennsylvania 

U.S.  House of Representatives 

U.S.  Immigration and Customs Enforcement 

U.S.  Securities and Exchange Commission 

U.S.  Senate 

U.S.  Supreme Court 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30855

JOBS 

Search full listings or advertise ~ur job opening 

Business lrnnigration Paralegal (New York, Newark NJ , or Starrlord CT Offices) M::Carter & Eng sh , LLP 

New York, New York 

l\klt sure fyourfrm swscrbes? Ask yru-1 braran. We hope yru fooo:l th s message to be useful. 

lb\el.er  f yrud rather not race w Mure ema Is cl th s sat you may lJ'lSubscrbe here. 

Please DO NOTreply toths emal. For customer slW(Xt nqu r es please call +1646783 7100 orvs t our Contact Us page .  

> Pr1.0cy Pol

cy Q:xJk e Pol cy 

l...aW360 Patkll o Med a nc 111 West 19th Street 5th Floor New York NY 10011 

01570-000263 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30855 From : Kapper , Matthew B. (OAG) Subject : Fv.d: Abbreviated Weekend C ips 

To : J"li:1111111  (OAG)      

> Sent: u y 1 , :20 PM (UTC-04:00)

Sent from my iP hone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Coley, Anthony D.  (PAO)" <Anthony.D.Coley@usdoj.gov> 

Date: July 10, 2022 at 2:53:53 PM EDT 

To: "Klapper, Matthew B. (OAG)" 

(b)  (6) , "B r '"Goodlander, Margaret V. (OAG)" on, Tamarra D. (OAG)" G)" 

'Dickerson, Julie (OAG)" @usdoj.gov>, 

"Miller, Marshall (ODAG)" 

Cc:  "Iverson, Dena (PAO)" <Dena.I.DeBonis@usdoj.go v>

Subject: Abbreviated Weekend Clips 

AFTERNOON HEADLINES 

• "B iden weighs authority to declare abortion-related public health emergency" [Reuters, Bloomberg] 

• "Bannon, Facing Jail and Fines, Agrees to Testify to Jan. 6 Panel" [NYT, WaPo ]

• " Two long weeks: Inside Biden's struggle to respond to abortion ruling" [ Wa Po] 

• "The staggering scope of U.S. gun deaths goes far beyond mass shootings" [WaPo] 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

WaPo : Domestic terror cases increasingly cross borders, FBI director says, Devlin Barrett, July 8, 2022, 3:20 PM Many domestic terrorism cases now have an international component, as would-be killers are "egging each other on" and drawing inspiration from racist or neo-Nazi attacks overseas, the head of the FBI and his British counterpart said Friday. FBI Director Christopher A. Wray, speaking to reporters alongside Ken McCallum, director general of the British domestic sec uri ty agency Ml5, said their agencies have spent decades devel op ing tip-sharing systems to handle international te rrorism cases, but that "muscle memory" is now being applied to domestic te rrorism investigations. [Continue Reading] 

WSJ : Calls for TikTok Probe Widen, Adding to Pressure on Biden to Weigh In, John D. McKinnon, July 8, 2022, 8:05 AM Calls for an investigation into the security risks posed by the video app TikTok are widening, adding to pressure on President Biden to make good on hi s year-old promise to get tough on apps that co uld share Americans' personal data with foreign adversaries. The Democratic chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee and the panel's top Republican sent a joint le tter to the Federal Trade Commission this week urging an investigation of TikTok's data -  

> 01570-000264
> Docmnent ID: 0. 7.1088.11111 01570-000265

handling and other practices. TikTok’s parent, ByteDance Ltd., has its headquarters in 

Beijing. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Biden Lauds CIA for Punching ‘Gigantic Hole’ in Putin’s Playbook, Akayla 

Gardner, Justin Sink, and Jordan Fabian, July 8, 2022, 5:43 PM President Joe Biden praised the Central Intelligence Agency’s efforts to expose Russia’s 

plans to invade Ukraine, telling the staff that they had “punched a gigantic hole” in President 

Vladimir Putin’s objectives.“It was thanks to the incredible work of our intelligence 

professionals that we were able to forewarn the world what Vladimir Putin was planning in 

Ukraine,” Biden said during his first visit as president to CIA headquarters in Langley, 

Virginia. [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: Putin warns West: sanctions risk energy price spike catastrophe, Guy 

Faulconbridge, July 8, 2022, 12:23 PM President Vladimir Putin warned the West on Friday that continued sanctions against Russia 

over the war in Ukraine risked triggering catastrophic energy price rises for consumers 

around the world. Putin, who casts the sanctions imposed on Russia as a declaration of 

economic war, said that Western calls to reduce reliance on Russian energy had made 

global markets "feverish" with spikes in oil and gas. [Continue Reading ] See also: 

Bloomberg 

NYT: Florida Man Sentenced to 20 Years for Uploading Bomb-Making Video , Vimal 

Matel, July 9, 2022, 9:25 AM A Florida man who had pledged support to ISIS was sentenced on Thursday to 20 years in 

prison for uploading a video he believed would help the terrorist group make bombs, the 

federal authorities said on Thursday. The man, Romeo Xavier Langhorne, 32, of St. 

Augustine, Fla., pleaded guilty in March 2021 to one count of providing material support to 

ISIS, according to a statement from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of 

Florida. The sentence, handed down in U.S. District Court in Jacksonville, also included an 

additional 15 years of supervised release, the statement said. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: Here's how North Korean operatives are trying to infiltrate US crypto firms, Sean 

Lyngaas, July 10, 2022, 12:02 AM Devin, the founder of a cryptocurrency startup based in San Francisco, woke up one day in 

February to the most bizarre phone call of his life. The man on the other end, an FBI agent, 

told Devin that the seemingly legitimate software developer he'd hired the previous summer 

was a North Korean operative who'd sent tens of thousands of dollars of his salary to the 

country's authoritarian regime. [Continue Reading ]

JAN. 6

AP: Trump WH counsel Cipollone meets with 1/6 panel for 8 hours, Lisa Mascaro and 

Farnoush Amiri, July 8, 2022, 6:26 PM Former White House counsel Pat Cipollone met for a private interview with the Jan. 6

committee for about eight hours Friday regarding his role in trying to prevent then-President 

Donald Trump from challenging the 2020 presidential election and joining the violent mob that 

laid siege to the Capitol. Cipollone, once a staunch presidential confidant who had defended 

Trump during his first impeachment trial, had been reluctant to appear formally for an on-record interview. [Continue Reading] See also:  ABC , CNN , LAT , NBC , Politico WSJ 

Reuters: Oath Keeper brought explosives to D.C. ahead of Jan. 6 attack, prosecutor 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000266

says , David Morgan, July 9, 2022, 11:57 AM A member of the Oath Keepers extremist group brought explosives to the Washington, D.C., 

area ahead of the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol by supporters of former President 

Donald Trump, according to the U.S. Justice Department. In a court filing, federal 

prosecutors alleged that Jeremy Brown, an Oath Keepers member from Florida, drove 

explosives to a Virginia hotel in his recreational vehicle on Jan. 6. A second member of the 

group, Thomas Caldwell, was later found in possession of a "death list" that included the 

name of a Georgia election official, according to the document. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Politico  , Axios , UPI 

Reuters: Steve Bannon's lawyer asks to leave Jan. 6-related case, says he may be 

witness, Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 10:13 AM 

A lawyer for Steve Bannon is seeking to withdraw from representing the adviser to former 

President Donald Trump in his criminal contempt case, citing the possibility of being called as 

a witness at trial, a court document on Friday showed. Bannon was charged last year with 

two counts of contempt of Congress for defying a subpoena issued by a House of 

Representatives committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol by 

Trump supporters. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Oath Keepers Founder Offers Jan. 6 Testimony If Hearing Public, Billy 

House, July 8, 2022, 4:02 PM The founder of the Oath Keepers militia group, Elmer Stewart Rhodes, is willing to testify to 

the House Committee investigating the Jan. 6 assault on the US Capitol, his attorney said, 

but only if it is during a public session. “He’s willing to waive his Fifth Amendment rights, he 

wants to testify in public, and he wants to testify live,” James Lee Bright said in a telephone 

interview. “I don’t think they’ll go along with that.” [Continue Reading] 

WABE-NPR (Atlanta, GA): DOJ: Oath Keeper's 'death list' targeted Georgia elections 

official, Patrick Saunders, July 9, 2022, 2:26 PM 

Federal prosecutors on Friday released new details about several Oath Keepers charged 

with seditious conspiracy in the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, saying one co-defendant 

kept a ”death list” that included the name of a Georgia elections official and their family 

member. The Justice Department cited the list in a previous filing in Feb. 2021, but did not 

reveal that it included a Georgia official until Friday. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Jan. 6 Committee Is Considering a Prime-Time Hearing for Next Week, Billy House, July 8, 2022, 9:58 AM The House committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol is considering a second 

televised hearing next week, this one in prime time on Thursday, people familiar with the 

planning said. Those people did not provide a specific topic, or say whether the tentative 

hearing, which would be the committee’s eighth since June, would be its last one until a late 

August or September presentation of a report on its findings. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: Evidence of firearms in Jan. 6 crowd grows as arrests and trials mount, Tom 

Jackman, Rachel Weiner and Spencer S. Hsu, July 8, 2022, 9:40 AM Some of the startling revelations of the recent blockbuster Jan. 6 House committee hearing came in snippets of police radio traffic captured during President Donald Trump’s rally on the 

Ellipse and from Trump’s purported response to being told there were armed protesters just 

outside a secured area. The chatter included reports of a man with an AR-15 in a tree on 

Constitution Avenue who was accompanied by two men with pistols on their hips. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000267

LAT: [OPINION] Prosecute Trump? Merrick Garland is investigating aggressively but prosecuting cautiously, Doyle McManus, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

The House committee on the Jan. 6, 2021, insurgency, whose hearings resume this week, 

has produced impressive evidence that could allow prosecutors to argue that former 

President Trump committed crimes as he tried to overturn the 2020 election. Thanks to the 

hearings, we now know more clearly that Trump tried to bully Vice President Mike Pence into 

blocking Congress’ count of electoral votes, tried to bully Justice Department officials into 

declaring the election fraudulent even though they knew it wasn’t and stood by with seeming 

approval while his armed supporters sacked the Capitol. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL LAW 

Reuters: Florida man charged with selling fake Cisco equipment in $1 bln scheme, 

Jonathan Stempel, July 8, 2022, 4:55 PM 

U.S.  prosecutors on Friday announced the arrest of a Florida man accused of importing 

counterfeit Cisco networking equipment that if authentic would be worth more than $1 billion, 

and reselling the fake products on Amazon.com,  eBay and elsewhere. Onur Aksoy, 38, of 

Miami, allegedly worked with suppliers in China and Hong Kong from 2013 to 2022 to import tens of thousands of fake devices through at least 19 entities in New Jersey and Florida 

dubbed the Pro Network. [Continue Reading] 

Times Leader (Wilkes-Barre, PA): Hazleton man sentenced on federal drug, fraud 

charges , Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 10:00 PM 

A Hazleton man was sentenced on Friday to 25 years imprisonment on combined drug 

trafficking and pandemic unemployment fraud offenses. Fredy Mendoza, 34, was sentenced 

by District Judge Malachy E. Mannion to 300 months in prison for methamphetamine 

trafficking and 18 months for pandemic unemployment fraud, to be served concurrent with 

the meth trafficking sentence. [Continue Reading] See also : WOLF-Fox (Hazleton, PA) 

Sacramento Bee (Sacramento, CA): Seven indicted for drug trafficking in South Lake 

Tahoe during ‘Operation Bear Trap’ , Dante Motley, July 8, 2022, 6:58 PM (EDT) A federal grand jury has indicted six South Lake Tahoe residents and one Sacramento resident in connection with a drug trafficking ring, the U.S. Attorney’s Office said Friday. 

Prosecutors say the seven worked together from August 2020 to May of this year, according 

to court documents, in an intertwined effort to sell methamphetamine and heroin around 

South Lake Tahoe. [Continue Reading] 

WCYB-NBC/CW- (Bristol, VA): Man who conspired to traffic 200 pounds of meth into SW Virginia convicted, DOJ says , Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 3:00 PM 

A former California man, who had recently moved to Southwest Virginia, was found guilty of 

conspiracy and drug distribution charges, according to the U.S. Department of Justice. Guy 

Benjamin Bowman, 56, of Meadowview, was convicted following a three-day jury trial in 

United States District Court in Abingdon, United States Attorney Christopher Kavanaugh and 

Virginia Attorney General Jason Miyares announced Friday. [Continue Reading] 

LAT: La Luz del Mundo dissidents pressure authorities, seek more charges against ‘apostle’, Libor Jany, July 10, 2022, 8:00 AM Holding her sons tight, Deborah Contreras shuddered with sobs as the women in a Los 

Angeles courtroom recounted years of sexual abuse inflicted by the man they once believed 

was an “apostle” of Jesus Christ. [...] Local or even federal authorities could become 

involved if they could prove widespread reports that abuse allegations were ignored or 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000268

covered up at the highest echelons of La Luz del Mundo, said Levenson, who has studied 

other recent clergy scandals. [Continue Reading ]

KOTV-CBS (Tulsa, OK): Inmate Convicted Of Murdering Cellmate At McAlester Prison, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 8:39 PM (EDT) A man serving a life sentence in prison for manslaughter has now been convicted of murder 

while in prison. A federal jury found William Brown guilty of killing his cellmate, Mark 

Lawhead, by beating and strangling him. It happened in the Oklahoma State Penitentiary in 

McAlester in 2019. Brown was a member of the Indian Brotherhood prison gang and 

prosecutors said he committed the murder to boost his reputation. [Continue Reading ]

Law360; Checking In On DOJ's Promised White Collar Crackdown, Ilan Graff, July 8, 

2022, 5:17 PM                               

> In October 2021, Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General John P. Carlin announced that the
> U.S. Department of Justice was building up asurge in resources for white collar enforcement,[1]
> atheme… [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

AP: Family of man hurt in police van seeks civil rights charges, Pat Eaton-Robb, July 8, 

2022, 6:47 PM 

The family of a Black man in Connecticut, paralyzed when a police van without seatbelts 

braked suddenly, asked federal authorities Friday to file civil rights charges against the 

officers involved. The driver was taking Randy Cox, 36, to a police station in New Haven, 

Connecticut, on June 19 for processing on a weapons charge when he braked hard to avoid 

a collision, police said, causing Cox to fly headfirst into the wall of the van. His family said he 

remains paralyzed from the chest down. [Continue Reading ] See also:  ABC 

NYT: [OPINION] Why Does Is It Take Federal Intervention to Fix the N.Y.P.D.?, Mara 

Gay, July 9, 2022, 11:00 AM The saga of the Special Victims Division is the latest illustration of the extraordinary measures required to meaningfully reform the nation’s largest police department. When the 

N.Y.P.D.  conducted sweeping surveillance of Muslim communities in the years after the Sept. 

11 attacks, class-action litigation was needed to put an end to the practice. When the 

department violated the civil rights of millions of innocent Black and Latino men by targeting 

them for unconstitutional police searches, years of lawsuits were needed to curb the tactic. 

[Continue Reading] 

WaPo: New Arizona law criminalizes filming police from less than 8 feet away , Lindsey 

Bever, July 8, 2022, 4:20 PM 

A new Arizona law will make it illegal to film law enforcement encounters from closer than 8

feet away except in certain circumstances, such as when the person recording is the one 

being questioned by the authorities. Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey (R) signed the bill into law on 

Wednesday, which will make it a misdemeanor offense to record police activity at close 

range after officers have issued a verbal warning. [Continue Reading] 

Colorado Politics: 10th Circuit reinstates student's First Amendment lawsuit over anti-Semitic 'joke' , Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 9:05 PM A Cherry Creek High School student has credibly alleged school officials violated his First 

Amendment rights when they expelled him for an offensive social media post, the federal 

appeals court based in Denver decided on Wednesday. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 

10th Circuit reinstated the lawsuit of a teenager identified as C.G., largely due to a U.S. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000269

Supreme Court ruling from last year limiting the authority of administrators to regulate 

students' off-campus speech. Senior Judge Paul J. Kelly Jr., writing for the three-judge panel 

that heard C.G.'s appeal, called the two cases "materially similar." [Continue Reading] 

WTHR-NBC (Indianapolis, IN) : Former New Castle police officer charged for excessive 

use of force in 3 arrests , Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 11:00 AM 

A federal grand jury in Indianapolis charged a former New Castle Police Department officer 

for excessive use of force against three people. According to the indictment, 44-year-old 

Aaron Strong violated three people's civil rights by using unreasonable force when he 

arrested them, with all three injured in the incidents. The indictment also alleged Strong used 

dangerous weapons against two of the victims. [Continue Reading ] See also : WISH-CW 

(Indianapolis, IN) 

CIVIL LAW 

Law360 : DOJ Says Aerojet Cybersecurity FCA Settlement Worth $9M , Daniel Wilson, 

July 8, 2022, 6:47 PM Aerojet Rocketdyne has paid $9 million to end a high-profile False Claims Act suit alleging the 

company misled the government about its cybersecurity compliance, the U.S. Department of 

Justice said Friday as it touted a whistleblower's role in the case. [Continue Reading] See 

also : Business Journals (Sacramento, CA),  City News Service , My News LA 

TAX 

WKMG-CBS (Orlando, FL): Convicted felon, former US Rep. Corrine Brown on why 

she’s running for Congress again, Justin Warmoth, July 10, 2022, 8:52 AM 

One month after pleading guilty to one count of tax evasion, longtime U.S. Rep. Corrine 

Brown filed to run for Congress again. The former Democratic congresswoman from 

Jacksonville was facing retrial after her conviction on 18 counts of fraud and corruption was 

overturned on appeal. As part of the plea agreement with the U.S. Justice Department, 

Brown was given time served and ordered to pay restitution to the IRS. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Reuters: Four U.S. border agency employees could face discipline over treatment of 

Haitian migrants, Mica Rosenberg and Ted Hesson, July 8, 2022, 5:44 PM 

Four employees from U.S Customs and Border Protection (CBP) have been referred for disciplinary review over their treatment of Haitian migrants who they sought to push back 

across the Rio Grande using horses last September, officials said on Friday as the agency 

released a more than 500-page report on the widely filmed and photographed incident. CBP 

Commissioner Chris Magnus in a press conference stressed the disciplinary process related 

to the Sept. 19 incident was ongoing, and he did not identify the employees. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  LAT , NYT , WSJ 

NYT: Review Finds Agents Used Unnecessary Force Against Black Migrants, Eileen 

Sullivan and Zolan Kanno-Youngs, July 9, 2022, 2:22 AM Border Patrol agents on horseback used “unnecessary” force in September against Black 

migrants who crossed into Del Rio, Texas, en masse, amid a humanitarian crisis that 

exposed the Biden administration’s struggle to manage a record number of southwestern 

border crossings. In the absence of clear instructions from their supervisors, the agents took 

commands from the Texas state police and improperly “used force or the threat of force” to 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000270

drive migrants back into the Rio Grande. [Continue Reading] 

LAT: Children separated from relatives at the border could be reunited under new Biden program, Hamed Aleaziz, July 8, 2022, 5:59 PM (EDT) 

After the girl’s grandfather died, she traveled from Guatemala to the Texas border with her 

uncle. Border Patrol agents separated them. The girl, then 10, ended up in foster care, while 

her uncle was deported, according to her attorney, Miriam Enriquez. Such painful separations 

could be avoided under a new Biden administration program that will allow children to quickly 

reunite with relatives like uncles and grandparents at the border. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Leaked data show US bracing for 161,000 unaccompanied children at border this year, Anna Giaritelli, July 9, 2022, 7:00 AM 

The Department of Homeland Security anticipates as many as 161,000 children coming 

across the border alone without a parent or guardian this year, surpassing last year’s record, 

according to federal data obtained by the Washington Examiner. The soaring numbers of 

children traveling north to the United States with the aid of cartels, which charge families 

thousands of dollars each to transport a child, has remained unchecked since President Joe 

Biden took office a year and a half ago. [Continue Reading ]

KFOX-Fox (El Paso, TX): 93 migrants, 3 stash houses found by El Paso Sector Border 

Patrol, Fallon Fischer, July 8, 2022, 11:16 PM (EDT) 

U.S.  Border Patrol Agents from the El Paso Sector found 93 migrants and three stash 

houses over the last several days, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection. On 

Tuesday, agents received information of possible smuggled migrants being in the Segundo 

Barrio area in El Paso. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

WSJ: Google Offers Concessions to Fend Off U.S. Antitrust Lawsuit , Miles Kruppa, Sam 

Schechner, and Brent Kendall, July 8, 2022 Alphabet Inc.’s Google has offered concessions in an attempt to head off a possible U.S. antitrust lawsuit aimed at its massive ad-tech business, according to people familiar with the 

matter, a sign that legal and regulatory pressures on the tech giant are coming to a head. As part 

of one offer, Google has proposed splitting parts of its business that auctions and places ads on websites and apps into a separate company under the Alphabet umbrella, some of the people said. That entity could potentially be valued at tens of billions of dollars, depending on what 

assets it contained. [Continue Reading ]

AP: 5 poultry industry execs found not guilty of price fixing , Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 

12:00  PM 

Five executives from the poultry processing industry have been found not guilty of conspiring 

to fix prices. A jury in a Denver federal court acquitted former Pilgrim’s Pride CEOs Jayson 

Penn and William Lovette; Roger Austin, a former Pilgrim’s vice president; Mikell Fries, 

president of Claxton Poultry and Scott Brady, a Claxton vice president. In October 2020 

Pilgrim’s Pride reached a plea agreement with the U.S. government over charges of price-fixing in the chicken industry. [Continue Reading] See also:  Bloomberg , WSJ 

Law360: [ANALYSIS] 2 Mistrials, 1 Acquittal & A DOJ Listening Problem, Bryan Koenig, 

July 8, 2022, 7:50 PM The defense said the case should have never been brought. The judge told the U.S. 

Department of Justice's top antitrust official to "reflect" on the evidence after two separate 

juries deadlocked on price-fixing charges against chicken industry executives. [Continue 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000271

Reading ]

CBS: Millions in refunds await those who used Western Union to pay scammers , Kate 

Gibson, July 8, 2022, 3:56 PM People tricked into wiring money to fraudsters through Western Union have until the end of 

August to file for a full refund as part of a $586 million settlement reached by the company 

and the government. The Department of Justice has already distributed more than $366 

million to more than 148,000 victims, many of them elderly, and refunds are still available, 

with the deadline to file a claim recently extended, according to the Federal Trade 

Commission. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Defends Army Swag Bid Rigging Case Against Dismissal , Matthew 

Perlman, July 8, 2022, 5:03 PM The U.S. Department of Justice has urged a Florida federal court not to toss antitrust 

charges against a man accused of rigging bids for customized promotional products sold to 

the U.S. Army, saying his dismissal bid misconstrues the law. [Continue Reading ]

CORRECTIONS/CRIMINAL JUSTICE 

WQAD-ABC: Sen. Durbin says USP Thomson conduct is 'a reasonable situation' during 

prison visit, Shelby Kluver and Connor Day July 9

Illinois U.S. Senator Dick Durbin paid a visit to the USP Thomson federal prison on Friday 

following conduct allegations made against Warden Thomas Bergami. Durbin spoke with staff, 

inmates, and management as he was given a tour of the facility to assess conditions after Thomson's staff union reported instances of inmate abuse and death and called it one of the 

deadliest federal prisons in the country…. Following the tour, Sen. Durbin spoke to the press, but 

refused to comment on the union's allegations, saying, "I'm not gonna engage in that 

conversation." [Continue Reading]. See also:  KWQC-NBC 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

CNN: 5,000 pounds of meth seized in San Diego County when truck is followed after crossing border, officials say, Sharif Paget, July 9, 2022, 6:23 AM 

More than 5,000 pounds of methamphetamine were seized this week after authorities in San 

Diego County tracked and intercepted a truck that crossed the US border from Mexico, 

officials said Friday. [...] "This monumental seizure represents another win against drug 

cartels that fuel addiction in the United States," said Shelly S. Howe, a Special Agent in 

Charge at the US Drug Enforcement Administration. [Continue Reading ]

CNN : FBI Director Wray tells CNN there are 'way, way too many people' acting 

violently on political grievances , Evan Perez and Hannah Rabinowitz, July 8, 2022, 2:00 

PM 

Hours after the assassination of former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe on Friday, top 

US and British law enforcement leaders decried threats facing public figures around the 

globe in an exclusive interview with CNN, saying that there is a "right way" to protest political 

grievances. "There are way, way too many people in today's world who are taking their very 

passionately held views and manifesting them through violence," FBI Director Christopher 

Wray told CNN. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: FBI investigates ‘potential threat’ against Texas synagogue, Caroline Vakil, 

July 9, 2022, 6:55 PM The FBI announced on Saturday that it was looking into a “potential threat” against an 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000272

unidentified Texas synagogue months after a hostage situation took place at a synagogue in 

the state. “The FBI is investigating a potential threat targeting an unidentified synagogue in 

Texas. We are working to determine the credibility of the threat and sharing information with 

our law enforcement partners and our partners in the Jewish community,” the FBI said in a

statement. [Continue Reading] See also:  KABB-Fox (San Antonio, TX) , Laredo Morning 

Times (Laredo, TX) 

Salisbury Post (Salisbury, NC): Suspect arrested in Kannapolis homicide at daycare, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 8:29 PM 

U.S.  Marshals made an arrest Saturday in the June killings of two people of a daycare 

operating at a James Street residence. Officials had responded to a report of gunfire at a

house in the 200 block of James Street on June 2. Sharon Chambers, 61, and her nephew, 

Benny Sloan, Jr., 46, were found dead from injuries. [Continue Reading] See also:  WBTV -

CBS (Charlotte, NC) , WCCB-CW (Charlotte, NC), WCNC-NBC (Charlotte, NC) 

Vallejo Times-Herald (Vallejo, CA): Two men charged for alleged federal bribery, 

conspiracy with Vallejo official, Thomas Gase, July 9, 2022, 6:18 PM (EDT) The City of Vallejo announced that it assisted the Federal Bureau of Investigation in an 

investigation that led to two men being charged with federal bribery and conspiracy after 

allegedly paying a city building inspector to look the other way concerning the growth of 

illegal marijuana. According to a Friday news release, in early to mid-2020, the city contacted 

the FBI to report an attempted bribe of city officials. As a result, the city and city employees 

assisted the FBI in an investigation into an illegal marijuana grow operation within the Vallejo 

city limits. [Continue Reading] 

WSIL-ABC (Harrisburg, IL): US Marshals apprehend 13 sex offenders in Iowa wanted for crimes against children, Alaa Elassar, July 9, 2022, 5:14 PM (EDT) The US Marshals Service has arrested 13 of the most wanted sex offenders in Iowa, 

authorities say. All of the fugitives were non-compliant with Iowa's Sex Offender Registry, 

and seven had former convictions for "crimes against children under the age of 13," US 

Marshals said in a news release on Friday. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

WSJ: Biden Administration Asks Supreme Court to Rule on Immigration Enforcement, 

Jess Bravin and Michelle Hackman, July 8, 2022, 5:36 PM The Biden administration asked the Supreme Court Friday to reinstate immigration 

enforcement guidelines that a lower court blocked after Texas and Louisiana filed suit arguing 

that the policy lets too many noncitizens with criminal records go free while their cases are 

processed. The guidelines focus detention efforts on noncitizens deemed to threaten national 

security, public safety and border security. [Continue Reading] See also:  Law360 , Roll Call, 

USA Today , Washington Times 

Reuters : States’ top lawyers ask Supreme Court to review charity-only class 

settlements , Alison Frankel, July 8, 2022, 4:12 PM State attorneys general are once again calling on the U.S. Supreme Court to restrict the use 

of charitable donations as an alternative to class payouts in class action settlements. Led by 

Arizona’s Mark Brnovich, 20 state AGs filed an amicus brief on Thursday, backing a petition 

for Supreme Court review of a $13 million privacy class-action settlement that called for 

Google Inc to donate money to universities and non-profits dedicated to internet privacy 

issues instead of paying the funds to class members. [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000273

WaPo : Brett Kavanaugh is the latest target of protests at D.C. restaurant s, Emily Heil 

and Tim Carman, July 8, 2022, 4:13 PM After the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, eliminating the fundamental right to 

abortion, comedian Samantha Bee floated a plan for targeting the conservatives on the court 

who made up the majority opinion: “We have to raise hell — in our cities, in Washington, in 

every restaurant Justice Alito eats at for the rest of his life,” she implored viewers of her late-night show, “Full Frontal with Samantha Bee.” “Because if Republicans have made our lives 

hell, it’s time to return the favor.”[Continue Reading] 

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

WGBH (Boston, MA ): Mass. marijuana equity advocates say federal action would ‘level 

the playing field ’, Kana Ruhalter, July 8, 2022, 11:00 AM 

After a six-month wait, the Department of Justice finally responded to Sen. Elizabeth Warren 

and Sen. Cory Booker’s letter to the White House asking President Joe Biden’s 

administration to effectively decriminalize marijuana and pardon all non-violent cannabis-related offenses. Warren’s office called the 230-word, half-page response “extraordinarily 

disappointing” and issued another statement with five fellow senators on Wednesday urging 

the administration to take federal action. [Continue Reading] 

ADMINISTRATION 

NYT: At 79, Biden Is Testing the Boundaries of Age and the Presidency, Peter Baker, 

July 10, 2022, 6:38 PM When President Biden leaves Tuesday night for a four-day swing through the Middle East, he 

will presumably be more rested than he would have been had he followed the original plan. 

The trip was initially tacked onto another journey last month to Europe, which would have 

made for an arduous 10-day overseas trek until it became clear to Mr. Biden’s team that 

such extended travel might be unnecessarily taxing for a 79-year-old president, or “crazy,” as 

one official put it. [Continue Reading] 

AP: Impassioned Biden signs order on abortion access, Seung Min Kim, Zeke Miller, and 

Chris Megerian, July 8, 2022, 6:43 PM President Joe Biden on Friday condemned the “extreme” Supreme Court majority that ended 

a constitutional right to abortion and delivered an impassioned plea for Americans upset by 

the decision to “vote, vote, vote vote” in November. Under mounting pressure from fellow 

Democrats to be more forceful in response to the ruling, he signed an executive order to try 

to protect access to the procedure. [Continue Reading ] See also:  ABC , Bloomberg , LAT ,

NYT , Politico , Reuters , WSJ, WaPo 

Reuters: U.S. women should be wary of period-tracking apps, White House says, Jeff 

Mason, July 8, 2022, 1:47 PM Women in the United States should be wary of apps that track their menstrual periods after 

the rollback of federal abortion rights, a White House official said Friday. "I think people 

should be really careful about that," Jen Klein, the director of the White House's Gender 

Policy Council told reporters Friday, when asked whether the administration recommended 

that women delete such apps. [Continue Reading] 

NYT: [EDITORIAL] What the Biden Administration Could Do Now to Protect Abortion Rights, Editorial Board, July 8, 2022, 6:36 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000274

Less than three weeks have passed since the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, and 

already chaos reigns. Several states are moving to ban abortion almost completely, abortion-rights proponents are challenging those bans in court and in some cases, judges have been 

asked to issue injunctions that could, for a time, prevent the bans from going into effect. 

[Continue Reading] 

NYT: More Than 1,000 Protesters at White House Call on Biden to Protect Abortion 

Rights, Stephanie Lai and Ava Sasani, July 9, 2022, 4:42 PM 

One day after President Biden issued an executive order designed to ensure access to 

abortion medication and emergency contraception, more than a thousand protesters 

gathered in front of the White House, with hundreds risking arrest by sitting at the building’s 

gates, to urge Mr. Biden to do more. Despite rainy weather and the threat of flash flooding in 

the area on Saturday, the protesters sat on the wet concrete wearing green bandannas that 

read “bans off our bodies” and chanting “Disobey!” and “My body, my choice!” [Continue 

Reading ]

WaPo: The Democratic left is frustrated with Biden. How much could it matter?, Dan 

Balz, July 9, 2022, 2:13 PM Two weeks after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, President Biden stood in the 

Roosevelt Room in the White House on Friday to announce an executive order aimed at 

preserving, where possible, the right to an abortion. The moment illustrated the tension 

between the president and a portion of his party’s base frustrated by his leadership. 

[Continue Reading] 

CBS: Vice President Kamala Harris stresses need for "pro-choice Congress" to 

protect abortion rights, Melissa Quinn, July 10, 2022, 10:20 AM 

Vice President Kamala Harris underscored the importance of voters casting their ballots in 

the November midterm elections for a "pro-choice Congress" that will enshrine the right to an 

abortion into law after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. In an interview with 

"Face the Nation" that aired Sunday, Harris said the ruling from the high court last month 

cleared the way for states to enact new laws restricting or outright banning abortion. 

[Continue Reading] 

WaPo: [OPINION] Joe Biden: Why I’m going to Saudi Arabia, Joe Biden, July 9, 2022, 

6:35  PM 

Next week, I’ll travel to the Middle East to start a new and more promising chapter of 

America’s engagement there. This trip comes at a vital time for the region, and it will advance 

important American interests. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Biden Brags There Are More Private-Sector Jobs Now Than Under Trump, 

Justin Sink, July 8, 2022, 10:06 AM President Joe Biden said Friday’s jobs report showed that “our private sector has recovered 

all of the jobs lost during the pandemic, and added jobs on top of that” but predicted 

employment gains would slow in the coming months as the country transitions to “stable 

growth.” “We have more Americans working in the private sector today than any day during 

Donald Trump’s Presidency -- more people than any time in our history,” Biden said in a

statement, adding that the employment situation left the US “uniquely well positioned to 

tackle a range of global economic challenges – from global inflation to the economic fallout 

from Putin’s war” in Ukraine. [Continue Reading] 

CONGRESS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000275

## •••••

## •

## •••

NYT: The Fight Over Truth Also Has a Red State-Blue State Divide, Steven Lee Myers 

and Cecilia Kang, July 10, 2022, 5:00 AM 

To fight disinformation, California lawmakers are advancing a bill that would force social 

media companies to divulge their process for removing false, hateful or extremist material 

from their platforms. Texas lawmakers, by contrast, want to ban the largest of the 

companies — Facebook, Twitter and YouTube — from removing posts because of political 

points of view. [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: U.S. House panel to investigate companies sharing reproductive data, Rose 

Horowitch, July 8, 2022, 4:53 PM 

A U.S. congressional committee has asked data brokers and personal health apps to explain 

how they handle users' reproductive health data amid concerns states will use the information 

to track patients seeking abortion where it is illegal. Democrats on the House of 

Representatives Oversight Committee said they were concerned that location data, search 

history and other information on mobile phones could create "digital bread crumbs" that 

reveal interest in an abortion. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 8, 2022 

Japan's  Former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was assassinated as he gave a campaign speech for his party’s candidate on Friday in Nara, Japan. The alleged suspect, 41 y/o Tetsuya Yamagami admitted to shooting Abe with a handmade firearm fashioned out of 

metal and wood. World leaders expressed condolences, President Biden stating, “I am 

stunned, outraged, and deeply saddened by the news that my friend Abe Shinzo, former Prime Minister of Japan, was shot and killed while campaigning.” [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

President  Biden under pressure signed an Executive Order aimed at protecting access to reproductive health services even while admitting his power on the issue was limited. Biden 

spoke of a 10y/o seeking an abortion having to travel to another state to obtain an abortion, 

urging women to vote for Democrats in the midterm to make the right to an abortion federal law. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  Biden Administration is celebrating the June Jobs Report which noted 372K new jobs 

added with an unemployment rate of 3.6%, exceeding expectations. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  first two funerals and a memorial service for 3 of the 7 victims shot and killed at the 

July 4th Highland Park parade. One of the youngest victims, 8 y/o Cooper Roberts is awake 

and off a ventilator asking for his twin brother who was wounded by shrapnel, even as the 

community attempts to come together and heal from the shootings. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

Former  White House counsel Pat Cipollone, a key witness to the chaos inside the West 

Wing as the events of Jan. 6 unfolded, testified in front of the House Jan. 6 Committee. 

Cipollone told the Jan. 6 Committee he would not discuss his direct conversations with 

former President Donald Trump but was expected to testify to the things he saw and heard 

on Jan. 6 and the days leading up to it. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  US is sending an additional $400 Million dollars in military aid to Ukraine. Ukraine has 

received 4 long range high precision rocket systems, as well as a thousand precision 

military rounds which may help tip the scales against the Russians. [ABC] 

Calls  to bring Brittney Griner home have increased, 24 hours after Griner pled guilty to 

charges brought against her in Russia. Cherelle,Griner thanked President Biden for his 

hand delivered letter to Griner, while it was also revealed Biden called Paul Wheelan’s 

sister [ABC] 

COVID  cases are on the rise, fueled by the BA.5 Omicron strain, which appears to be 3 to 

4 times resistant to antibodies, and is responsible for 53.6% of new infections. The rise in 

infections is forcing some cities to reconsider mask mandates. [CBS] 

As  abortion laws change from state to state there are growing concerns regarding IVF and 

reproductive rights. Several clinics are working with women to transfer fertilized eggs of 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000276

# •••••••••       

> women in states with restrictive abortion laws. [NBC ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 09, 2022 

Thousands  of protestors swarmed outside the White House demanding more action on 

abortion rights. The call to action came 24 hours after President Biden signed an 

Executive Order protecting reproductive rights, all of this as at least 14 states banned 

or severely restricted abortion. President Biden telling voters to vote for Democrats to 

get the votes to codify Roe v. Wade. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

In  Japan, a 90 member task force is investigating the assassination of Japan’s longest 

serving Prime Minister Shinzo Abe with questions regarding security lapses and how 

the gunman, Tetsuya Yamagami, could get so close to Abe. A vigil will be held for Abe 

on Monday and a funeral on Tuesday for family and close friends. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  Sri Lanka Government is in turmoil as the Prime Minister and President vowed to 

resign as violent protestors stormed into Government offices, the Presidential Palace, 

and the Prime Minister's home. Demonstrations were taking place all over the country's 

worsening economic crisis and food shortages. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  US announced sending a $400 Million dollar package, including 4 long range high 

precision rocket systems allowing Ukraine to strike behind enemy lines. The US also 

promised precision guided shells for US provided Howitzers capable of hitting targets 

far away with deadly precision, as Russia’s attacks continue to be unrelenting. [ABC ,

CBS] 

Former  White House counsel Pat Cipollone met with the Jan. 6 committee for about 

eight hours answering questions as to what he saw in the White House in the events 

leading up to Jan. 6. Committee members state Cipollone was careful and honest, “did 

not contradict the testimony of other witnesses.” [ABC] 

Businesses  in Highland Park acted as Bunkers protecting fleeing people and providing 

a safe place from the shooter. [CBS ]

SUNDAY MORNING TALK SHOWS 

ABC This Week with George Stephanopoulos 

In  an Interview, GOP Rep. Adam Kinzinger tells that Trump White House counsel Pat 

Cipollone, who sat for a transcribed interview with the Jan. 6 Committee, didn't 

contradict previous testimony by other witnesses. “Anybody that wants to come in, that 

knows information to talk to the select committee, we welcome them to do so. We 

welcome them to do so under oath,” Jan. 6 Committee member Rep. Adam Kinzinger 

tells. [Watch] 

President  Biden delivered an emotional speech Friday announcing an array of steps 

aimed at bolstering abortion rights in the aftermath of a Supreme Court ruling that 

struck down the precedent set by Roe v. Wade. [Watch ]

CBS Face the Nation with Robert Costa 

Vice  President Kamala Harris spoke of gun violence; gun reform; abortion rights; the 

codifying of Roe v. Wade; voting rights; the Administration’s plans to codify Roe v. Wade; Justice’s misleading Senators; Brittany Griner and others imprisoned in Russia; Democracy on the ballot as the issue of midterm elections; police reform; speculation 

President Biden won't run for re-election in 2024; Texas Governor Abbot and 

immigration issues. [Watch -1] [Watch -2] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000277

# ••••

NBC Meet the Press with Chuck Todd 

The  Secretary of Commerce, Gina Raimondo discusses President Biden’s plans to relieve economic pressure and the administration’s views on abortion rights. Gina 

Raimondo says criticism of President Biden’s performance after the Dobbs decision 

isn’t justified. [Watch, Watch-2] 

During  an exclusive interview, Governor Larry Hogan discusses Republican views on 

former President Trump, the debate over gun violence and his plans for a potential 

presidential run. “I'm going all around the country helping people Trump is attacking and 

we’re winning most of them.” Hogan said. [Watch] 

Stephanie  Murphy, member of the Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th 

Attack on the U.S. Capitol, discusses testimony from former Trump White House 

counsel Pat Cipollone and questions over coordination between the White House and 

groups like the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers. [Watch ]

FOX News Sunday with Mike Emanuel 

“President  bowed to pressure, signing an Executive Order protecting reproductive 

rights even as he made clear he had little power with the issue. This as Biden prepares 

for his trip to Saudi Arabia, penning a Washington Post Op-ed stating, he was looking 

to reorient not rupture long-standing relations with an important ally in the region.” 

[Watch ]                        

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11111 01570-000278 From:
> Subject:
> To:
> Sent:
> Watson, Theresa (OAG)
> Weekend Digest
> Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); Figures, Shomari (OAG);
> Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG)
> Ju y10, 2022 6:19 PM (UTC-04:00)

# Department of Justice Weekend News Digest JULY 10, 2022 

# 2:00 PM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1.  US Department of Justice News 

2.  National Security 

3.  Jan. 6 Committee 

4.  Criminal Law 

5.  Civil Rights 

6.  Immigration & Border Security 

7.  Environment 

8.  Tax 

9.  Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

10.  US Supreme Court 

11.  Opioid Crisis 

12.  Administration 

13.  Congress 

14.  Network Evening News Lineup 

15.  Sunday Morning Talk Shows 

16.  Afternoon Headlines 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

LAT: [OPINION] Prosecute Trump? Merrick Garland is investigating aggressively but prosecuting cautiously, Doyle McManus, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM The House committee on the Jan. 6, 2021, insurgency, whose hearings resume this week, has produced 

impressive evidence that could allow prosecutors to argue that former President Trump committed 

crimes as he tried to overturn the 2020 election. Thanks to the hearings, we now know more clearly that 

Trump tried to bully Vice President Mike Pence into blocking Congress’ count of electoral votes, tried to 

bully Justice Department officials into declaring the election fraudulent even though they knew it wasn’t 

and stood by with seeming approval while his armed supporters sacked the Capitol. [Continue Reading] 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

USA Today: Florida man sentenced to 20 years for trying to help ISIS with bomb-making video, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 4:11 PM 

A Florida man accused of wanting to help ISIS by demonstrating how to make and use an explosive, 

was sentenced to prison for 20 years. Romeo Xavier Langhorne, 32, was charged with attempting to 

provide material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization, and was also sentenced Thursday 

to 15 years of supervised release, according to a news release from the U.S. Attorney's Office in the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000279

Middle District of Florida. [Continue Reading] 

CNN: Here's how North Korean operatives are trying to infiltrate US crypto firms, Sean Lyngaas, 

July 10, 2022, 12:02 AM Devin, the founder of a cryptocurrency startup based in San Francisco, woke up one day in February to 

the most bizarre phone call of his life. The man on the other end, an FBI agent, told Devin that the 

seemingly legitimate software developer he'd hired the previous summer was a North Korean operative 

who'd sent tens of thousands of dollars of his salary to the country's authoritarian regime. [Continue 

Reading ]

Finger Lakes Times (Geneva, NY): Colorado man who served as a pastor faces charges in Jan. 6

riot, David Mullen, July 9, 2022, 5:44 PM 

Federal prosecutors have charged a Colorado Springs man in connection with the deadly Jan. 6 riot at 

the U.S. Capitol. Prosecutors in the District of Columbia charged Tyler Ethridge, 33, civil disorder, a

felony, and related misdemeanor offenses. [Continue Reading] 

Patch (CT): Connecticut Ranks 19th For Data Breaches Costing Billions Of Dollars, Rich Kirby, 

July 9, 2022, 3:33 PM Corporate data breaches have compromised the personal data of Connecticut residents, amounting to 

multi-billion-dollar losses, according to a new analysis of FBI internet crime data. 

In Connecticut, corporations reporting data breaches from 2017-2021 have led to losses of 

$11,592,098. The number of breaches has decreased by 77.78 percent, but the amount of money 

Connecticut corporations have been taken for has increased dramatically — up 14.57 percent. [Continue 

Reading ]

WABE-NPR (Atlanta, GA): DOJ: Oath Keeper's 'death list' targeted Georgia elections official, 

Patrick Saunders, July 9, 2022, 2:26 PM Federal prosecutors on Friday released new details about several Oath Keepers charged with seditious 

conspiracy in the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, saying one co-defendant kept a ”death list” that 

included the name of a Georgia elections official and their family member. The Justice Department cited 

the list in a previous filing in Feb. 2021, but did not reveal that it included a Georgia official until Friday. 

[Continue Reading ]

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

Reuters: Links between Trump associates, militants in focus of Jan. 6 hearings this week, 

Richard Cowan and Katanga Johnson, July 10, 2022, 12:24 PM 

Congressional investigators into the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol expect this week to draw 

connections between militant groups that took part in the riot and government officials, possibly including 

then-President Donald Trump, a panel member said on Sunday. "We are going to be connecting the dots 

during these hearings between these groups and those who were trying in government circles to overturn 

the election," Democratic Representative Zoe Lofgren said on CNN's "State of the Union." [Continue 

Reading ]

AP: 4 days in January: Trump push for Capitol coda to 2020 vote, Lisa Mascaro, July 9, 2022, 2:58 

PM 

It would have been something never quite before seen in America — a defeated president, Donald 

Trump, standing at the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, with a mob of supporters, some armed, contesting the 

election outcome. [...] The Jan. 6 hearings are providing dramatic new insight about Trump’s intentions as he told loyalists he would join them on a march down Pennsylvania Avenue to “fight like hell” for his 

presidency. [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000280

WaPo: Bannon says he will testify at public hearing as contempt trial looms, Isaac Stanley-Becker, 

Josh Dawsey and Jacqueline Alemany, July 10, 2022, 11:04 AM 

Former president Donald Trump sent a letter on Saturday to Stephen K. Bannon saying he will waive his 

claim of executive privilege if his former chief strategist can agree on terms to testify before the House 

select committee investigating the pro-Trump riot at the Capitol. The letter was quickly communicated to 

the House panel by Bannon’s lawyer, Robert J. Costello, who said Bannon “is willing to, indeed prefers, 

to testify at your public hearing.” [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg 

NYT: Jan. 6 Panel Questions Cipollone on Pardons and Trump’s Election Claims, Luke 

Broadwater and Maggie Haberman, July 9, 2022, 3:46 PM Pat A. Cipollone, who served as White House counsel for President Donald J. Trump, was asked 

detailed questions on Friday about pardons, false election fraud claims and the former president’s 

pressure campaign against Vice President Mike Pence, according to three people familiar with his 

testimony before the House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol. The panel did not 

press him to either corroborate or contradict some specific details of explosive testimony by Cassidy 

Hutchinson, a former White House aide who captivated the country late last month with her account of an 

out-of-control president willing to embrace violence and stop at nothing to stay in power, the people said. 

[Continue Reading ]

CBS: Raskin says Cipollone gave "valuable" testimony to Jan. 6 committee, Melissa Quinn, July 

10, 2022, 1:15 PM 

Rep. Jamie Raskin, a member of the House select committee probing the Jan. 6 assault on the U.S. 

Capitol, said Sunday that former White House counsel Pat Cipollone provided the panel with "valuable" 

testimony during a closed-door interview last week. "We're going to get to use a lot of Mr. Cipollone's 

testimony to corroborate other things we've learned along the way," Raskin told "Face the Nation" of the 

panel's upcoming hearings. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL LAW 

LAT: La Luz del Mundo dissidents pressure authorities, seek more charges against ‘apostle’, 

Libor Jany, July 10, 2022, 8:00 AM Holding her sons tight, Deborah Contreras shuddered with sobs as the women in a Los Angeles courtroom recounted years of sexual abuse inflicted by the man they once believed was an “apostle” of 

Jesus Christ. [...] Local or even federal authorities could become involved if they could prove widespread 

reports that abuse allegations were ignored or covered up at the highest echelons of La Luz del Mundo, 

said Levenson, who has studied other recent clergy scandals. [Continue Reading] 

Rock Hill Herald (Rock Hill, SC): Convicted ex-Chester County sheriff Underwood, 2 deputies to 

be sentenced Monday, Andrew Dys and John Monk, July 10, 2022, 12:00 AM 

More than a year after a South Carolina jury convicted him of corruption in office, former Chester County 

Sheriff Alex “Big A” Underwood is expected to find out Monday if he will go to prison. Sentencing by U.S. 

District Court Judge Michelle Childs for Underwood and two deputies is set for federal court Monday 

afternoon. [Continue Reading] 

The Republican (Springfield, MA): Violence in Boston nonprofit shuts down amid federal fraud investigation into owners Monica Cannon-Grant, Clark Grant, Tom Matthews, July 9, 2022, 5:19 PM 

The nonprofit Violence in Boston has shut down amid a federal fraud investigation into its husband and 

wife owners Monica Cannon-Grant and Clark Grant. Cannon-Grant announced the organization’s closing 

in a Facebook post on Wednesday, July 6. [...] Cannon-Grant, 41, was arrested on Tuesday, March 15 

morning following the pair’s indictment by a federal grand jury on charges of defrauding Violence in 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000281

Boston, its donors and the Massachusetts Department of Unemployment Assistance, according to the 

United States Attorney’s office. [Continue Reading ]

Mercury News (San Jose, CA): Fed grand jury indicts Vallejo man, 38, on drug, we, Richard 

Bammer, July 9, 2022, 7:40 PM (EDT) A federal grand jury on Friday in Sacramento returned a two-count indictment against a 38-year-old 

Vallejo man, charging him with possessing methamphetamine with intent to distribute and being a felon in 

possession of a firearm, the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of California said. Christopher 

Matthew Rougeau will return to court for a status conference at 9 a.m. Aug. 22, when he will face Senior 

Judge William B. Shubb. [Continue Reading] 

WVII: Man sentenced to 41 months for triple manslaughter charges, Clark Grant, Beth Jones, July 10, 2022, 2:00 AM 

A man from New Jersey was sentenced in U.S. District Court in Bangor Friday to roughly three-and-a -

half years in prison for an alcohol related crash that killed three people. According to the U.S. Attorney, 

30-year-old Praneeth Manubolu, was sentenced to 41 months in prison and 3 years of supervised 

release. Manubolu pleaded guilty Jan. 31, 2022 to charges including three counts of manslaughter, two 

counts of operating under the influence, and one count of unsafe operation of a motor vehicle. [Continue 

Reading ]

WTHR-NBC (Indianapolis, IN): 2 Indiana men charged with trafficking, making fentanyl-laced 'fake' 

pills, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 10:45 PM Two southern Indiana men are facing federal charges for obtaining "pound quantities" of fentanyl powder 

and using a pill press to make fentanyl-laced "fake pills," Drug Enforcement Administration officials said. 

A federal grand jury returned an indictment charging Ethan Parker, 29, of Evansville, and Joshua Harvey, 

30, of Evansville, with conspiracy to distribute fentanyl, illegal distribution of a tableting machine, and 

illegal possession of a tableting machine. [Continue Reading] 

KOTV-CBS (Tulsa, OK): Claremore Man Receives 15-Year Prison Sentence For Rape, Unattributed, 

July 9, 2022, 8:45 PM (EDT) A Claremore man is going to federal prison for 15 years for raping a woman in 2018. 

Investigators said Travis Condry and the woman knew each other and the sexual encounter began 

consensually, but she quickly changed her mind. Condry recorded audio of the assault on his phone. 

[Continue Reading ]

KOTV-CBS (Tulsa, OK): Inmate Convicted Of Murdering Cellmate At McAlester Prison, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 8:39 PM (EDT) A man serving a life sentence in prison for manslaughter has now been convicted of murder while in 

prison. A federal jury found William Brown guilty of killing his cellmate, Mark Lawhead, by beating and 

strangling him. It happened in the Oklahoma State Penitentiary in McAlester in 2019. Brown was a

member of the Indian Brotherhood prison gang and prosecutors said he committed the murder to boost 

his reputation. [Continue Reading ]

KETK-NBC (Jacksonville, TX): Elementary teacher sentenced for receiving child pornography 

from overseas, Steven Masso, July 9, 2022, 6:17 PM (EDT) An elementary school teacher was sentenced for receiving child pornography from the Phillipines. Rico 

Giovanni Machietto was sentenced to 80 months in federal prison for receiving child pornography, 

according to a release from Cameron County District Attorney Luis V. Saenz. [Continue Reading ]

WTKR-CBS (Norfolk, VA): Hampton man sentenced for COVID-19 loan fraud while in halfway 

house, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 4:43 PM A Hampton man was sentenced Thursday for falsely applying for loans intended to grant COVID-19 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000282

relief to small businesses. According to court documents, in August 2020 and January and February 2021, 44-year-old Marlon McKnight, falsely applied for four loans administered by the Small Business 

Administration. He was sentenced to 27 months in prison. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

WaPo: [ANALYSIS] The new threat to good schooling for minority Americans, Rann Miller, July 10, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

The school shooting in Uvalde, Tex., generated international attention to the vulnerability of children, 

particularly children of color, in a state with few gun regulations. But gun violence is not the only threat 

students of color are facing in the classroom. Shortly after the May leak of the Supreme Court’s majority 

opinion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the case that overturned Roe v. Wade, Gov. 

Greg Abbott (R-Tex.) wondered whether Plyler v. Doe — the landmark decision that requires states to 

offer public education free of charge to all children, including children of undocumented migrants — could 

be next. [Continue Reading] 

USA Today: Prison guards forced a Black inmate to chop off his dreadlocks. Now he's suing, 

Tami Abdollah, July 10, 2022, 5:46 AM The House committee on the Jan. 6, 2021, insurgency, whose hearings resume this week, has produced 

impressive evidence that could allow prosecutors to argue that former President Trump committed 

crimes as he tried to overturn the 2020 election. Thanks to the hearings, we now know more clearly that 

Trump tried to bully Vice President Mike Pence into blocking Congress’ count of electoral votes, tried to 

bully Justice Department officials into declaring the election fraudulent even though they knew it wasn’t 

and stood by with seeming approval while his armed supporters sacked the Capitol. [Continue Reading] 

Epoch Times: Hawaii Veteran Pleads With 9th Circuit to Comply With Supreme Court’s Second Amendment Ruling, Matthew Vadum, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

A 72-year-old Vietnam War veteran is asking an appeals court to speed up processing of a gun permit 

he first sought 11 years ago now that the Supreme Court has ruled Hawaii’s gun-permitting system is 

unconstitutional. The Supreme Court determined June 23 that there is a constitutional right to carry 

firearms in public for self-defense. On June 30 it found Hawaii’s burdensome permitting process violates 

the Second Amendment and ordered the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals to review the man’s case, but it 

has not wrapped up the case and it is unclear when it will do so. [Continue Reading] 

The Des Moines Register (Des Moines, IA): [OPINION] Why Iowa needs a new law to protect your right to free expression on matters of public concern, Carol Hunter, July 10, 2022, 7:30 AM 

As the Des Moines Register’s William Morris reported last week, metro restaurateur Steve McFadden, 

owner of establishments such as the Tipsy Crow, Grumpy Goat and Dough Mama's Pizzeria, has filed 

lawsuits against at least 11 people, accusing them of defamation and invasion of privacy. Several 

defendants have filed counterclaims accusing McFadden of misusing the legal process to pursue 

unrelated grudges. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Daily Caller: ‘Empty Promises’: Border Patrol Agents Lose Faith In Biden Admin After Debunked Whipping Allegations, Brianna Lyman, July 9, 2022, 10:49 PM 

The Daily Caller News Foundation’s (DCNF) Jennie Taer said border patrol agents do not believe the 

Biden administration has their backs after the DCNF reported that the agents accused of whipping 

migrants will still be punished even after the allegations were proven false. Speaking Friday on 

NewsNation, Taer was asked how border patrol agents are feeling in light of the disciplinary measures 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000283

and whether agents feel the Biden Administration has their back. [Continue Reading ]

Florida PhoenixNews (Tallahassee, FL): Courts take the lead role as U.S. immigration policy 

remains in limbo, Ariana Figueroa, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Eighteen months into the Biden administration, immigration reform has stalled despite campaign 

promises to reform the system, with the most recent movement on immigration policy doled out by the 

U.S.  Supreme Court and in lower federal courts. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Biden 

administration in a 5-4 decision on June 30 that the U.S. Department of Homeland Security did not violate 

federal immigration law when it moved to end the Trump administration’s “Remain in Mexico” policy, 

known as the Migrant Protection Protocols. [Continue Reading] 

Insider (New York, NY): Arizona police investigating sex trafficking at massage parlor solicited sex acts from potential victims: report, Katherine Tangalakis-Lippert, July 9, 2022, 9:48 PM 

During the course of an investigation into possible sex trafficking in Arizona massage parlors, two 

Flagstaff Police Department officers repeatedly allowed or solicited sexual contact from women who 

may have been trafficking victims, ABC 15 reported. The months-long investigation, called "Operation 

High Country Hydra" by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents who were jointly involved in 

the operation, sought information about suspected human trafficking, sex trafficking and prostitution in 

massage businesses. [Continue Reading ]

MyNewsLA (Los Angeles, CA): Man Allegedly Caught Smuggling Fentanyl, Meth to Seek Bail 

Reduction, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 6:09 PM (EDT) A 20-year-old man accused of hauling large quantities of methamphetamine and fentanyl into Riverside 

County will ask a judge Monday to consider lowering his bail so he can get out of jail. 

Joshua Lamar Chamberlain was arrested last month by U.S. Border Patrol agents in Indio following a

traffic stop on Interstate 10. Chamberlain is charged with distribution of controlled substances, 

transportation of illegal narcotics and two counts of possession of controlled substances for sale, with 

sentence-enhancing allegations of possessing in excess of 20 kilograms of illegal drugs. [Continue 

Reading ]

KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX): Customs & Border Protection recap the week’s drug seizures, Luis 

Barrio, July 9, 2022, 5:56 PM (EDT) 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection officers working at El Paso area ports of entry seized fentanyl, 

cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine over the last week. The week included a mix of concealment 

methods utilized to hide drugs. Regardless of the methods employed by smugglers CBP officers were up 

to the challenge and prevented these drug loads from entering the country. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Arkansas Democrat-Gazette: Michigan seeks details on pipeline plan, Rann Miller, July 10, 2022, 

1:00  AM 

A Michigan regulatory panel said Thursday that it needs more information about safety risks before it can 

rule on Enbridge Energy's plan to extend an oil pipeline through a tunnel beneath a waterway linking two 

of the Great Lakes. [...] Enbridge is defying Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer's 2020 order to shut down 

the line, a move long sought by environmental groups and Native American tribes who fear a rupture would devastate the lakes. The company says the line is in good condition and contends in a federal 

lawsuit that the Democratic governor doesn't have the jurisdiction to shut it down. [Continue Reading] 

TAX 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000284

WKMG-CBS (Orlando, FL): Convicted felon, former US Rep. Corrine Brown on why she’s running 

for Congress again, Justin Warmoth, July 10, 2022, 8:52 AM 

One month after pleading guilty to one count of tax evasion, longtime U.S. Rep. Corrine Brown filed to 

run for Congress again. The former Democratic congresswoman from Jacksonville was facing retrial 

after her conviction on 18 counts of fraud and corruption was overturned on appeal. As part of the plea 

agreement with the U.S. Justice Department, Brown was given time served and ordered to pay 

restitution to the IRS. [Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

AP: Remains found in eastern Indiana in 2003 those of Ohio man, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 8:48 

PM 

A man whose body was found nearly 19 years ago behind an abandoned gas station in eastern Indiana 

has been identified. The man was Daniel Diaz of Columbus, Ohio, and he was born Sept. 18, 1977, 

Henry County Coroner Stacey Guffey said Saturday, making him 26 at the time his body was found Oct. 

2, 2003, near the Interstate 70 interchange with State Road 109. [...] “In February, I was notified by the 

FBI that a fingerprint confirmation was made, Guffey said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WBNS-CBS 

(Columbus, OH), WTTV-CBS (Bloomington, IN) 

Fox: Federal agents in California seize record breaking 5,000 pounds of meth crossing from Mexico, Andrew Mark Miller, July 9, 2022, 8:18 PM 

Four men have been charged with federal drug trafficking after authorities seized a record-breaking 

5,000 pounds of methamphetamine in southern California. The U.S. Attorney’s Office said in a press release that federal agents observed a 20-foot box truck cross into the United States from Mexico 

through a San Diego area port of entry around 5 p.m. on Thursday night. [Continue Reading ] See also: 

WWCP-Fox (Johnstown, PA) 

The Hill: FBI investigates ‘potential threat’ against Texas synagogue, Caroline Vakil, July 9, 2022, 

6:55  PM 

The FBI announced on Saturday that it was looking into a “potential threat” against an unidentified Texas 

synagogue months after a hostage situation took place at a synagogue in the state. “The FBI is 

investigating a potential threat targeting an unidentified synagogue in Texas. We are working to 

determine the credibility of the threat and sharing information with our law enforcement partners and our 

partners in the Jewish community,” the FBI said in a statement. [Continue Reading] See also:  KABB-Fox 

(San Antonio, TX) , Laredo Morning Times (Laredo, TX) 

Boston Herald (Boston, MA): Springfield Armory to regain lost marksmanship medals won in the late 1800s by Massachusetts Volunteer Militia members, Flint McColgan, July 9, 2022, 8:30 PM 

In the late 19th century, the Massachusetts Volunteer Militia had at least two world-class crack shot 

members — brothers Milan Bull and Freeman Bull — whose marksmanship medals disappeared from 

The Springfield Armory sometime in the 1990s. Now the feds have seized them back. “Massachusetts is 

the birthplace of the American Revolution, a war that gained our nation’s independence. Protecting and 

preserving artifacts of our Commonwealth’s history is of fundamental importance to this,” said Rachael 

Rollins, the U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts. “The recovery of these important artifacts is the result of 

the excellent collaborative work between my office’s Asset Recovery Unit, the FBI, and the National Park 

Service.” [Continue Reading ]

Salisbury Post (Salisbury, NC): Suspect arrested in Kannapolis homicide at daycare, Unattributed, 

July 9, 2022, 8:29 PM 

U.S.  Marshals made an arrest Saturday in the June killings of two people of a daycare operating at a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000285

James Street residence. Officials had responded to a report of gunfire at a house in the 200 block of 

James Street on June 2. Sharon Chambers, 61, and her nephew, Benny Sloan, Jr., 46, were found 

dead from injuries. [Continue Reading] See also:  WBTV-CBS (Charlotte, NC) , WCCB-CW (Charlotte, 

NC) , WCNC-NBC (Charlotte, NC) 

Vallejo Times-Herald (Vallejo, CA): Two men charged for alleged federal bribery, conspiracy with 

Vallejo official, Thomas Gase, July 9, 2022, 6:18 PM (EDT) 

The City of Vallejo announced that it assisted the Federal Bureau of Investigation in an investigation that 

led to two men being charged with federal bribery and conspiracy after allegedly paying a city building 

inspector to look the other way concerning the growth of illegal marijuana. According to a Friday news 

release, in early to mid-2020, the city contacted the FBI to report an attempted bribe of city officials. As 

a result, the city and city employees assisted the FBI in an investigation into an illegal marijuana grow 

operation within the Vallejo city limits. [Continue Reading ]

WSIL-ABC (Harrisburg, IL): US Marshals apprehend 13 sex offenders in Iowa wanted for crimes 

against children, Alaa Elassar, July 9, 2022, 5:14 PM (EDT) The US Marshals Service has arrested 13 of the most wanted sex offenders in Iowa, authorities say. All 

of the fugitives were non-compliant with Iowa's Sex Offender Registry, and seven had former convictions 

for "crimes against children under the age of 13," US Marshals said in a news release on Friday. 

[Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

NYT: [OPINION] If Only John Roberts Would Retire, Pamela Paul, July 10, 2022, 6:00 AM 

If liberal dreams — so endearing, so enduring — really did come true, Chief Justice John Roberts would 

resign. He’s been at it for 17 years. And he’s been incapable of tempering the Federalist Society-stamped fanatics on the right or leading the court toward any semblance of justice for all. [Continue 

Reading ]

NYT: [OPINION] What a Reckoning at the Supreme Court Could Look Like, Ezra Klein, July 10, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

Late in the lead-up to the 2020 presidential election, as Mitch McConnell rushed to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg with Amy Coney Barrett, the left began pushing Joe Biden to endorse adding seats to the 

Supreme Court. Biden, in response, did what politicians do when faced with an issue they don’t want to 

think about: He promised to create a commission to study the issue. [Continue Reading] 

The Hill: [OPINION] The Supreme Court’s impact on the midterms and American democracy, 

Douglas E. Schoen, July 10, 2022, 9:30 AM The Supreme Court has just concluded what will most likely be remembered as one of the most 

consequential terms in modern history. The Supreme Court’s 6-3 conservative majority delivered major 

victories for the right’s agenda — on abortion, guns, and environmental regulations — that were in many 

ways at odds with the American public’s own views. [Continue Reading 

Washington Examiner: [VIDEO] The Debrief: Conn Carroll on protecting the safety of Supreme Court justices from protesters, Unattributed, July 9 2022, 6:00 PM 

Washington Examiner Commentary Editor Conn Carroll joins Sarah Westwood to discuss the lack of 

assistance from Congress or the Biden administration on protecting the safety of Supreme Court 

justices. [Watch ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000286

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pittsburgh, PA): [EDITORIAL] Editorial: Opioid lawsuit should support 

effective drug treatment, Editorial Board, July 10, 2022, 11:00 AM 

Allegheny County sued CVS, Rite Aid and Walgreens this week, alleging the pharmacies knowingly flooded the market with prescription painkillers and contributed to the local and national opioid epidemic. 

The lawsuit is one of thousands filed nationwide in recent years to collect damages stemming from a

public health crisis that has killed more than a half million people. [Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters: Biden defends decision to visit Saudi Arabia, says rights are on his agenda, Nandita 

Bose, July 10, 2022, 12:27 AM President Joe Biden on Saturday defended his decision to travel to Saudi Arabia saying human rights 

would be on his agenda as he gave a preview of a trip on which he aims to reset ties with the crown 

prince, who he previously denounced as a pariah. Biden will hold bilateral talks with Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz and his leadership team, including Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman on his visit to the Middle East next week. [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: Biden weighs authority to declare abortion-related public health emergency, Nandita 

Bose, July 10, 2022, 12:16 PM 

U.S.  President Joe Biden on Sunday said he has asked his administration to consider whether he has 

authority to declare an abortion-related public health emergency after the Supreme Court overturned the 

Roe v. Wade decision that legalized abortion nationwide. The comments come after Biden on Friday 

signed an executive order to ease access to services to terminate pregnancies. [Continue Reading] 

AP: In Mideast, Biden struggling to shift policy after Trump, Aamer Madhani and Darlene Superville, 

July 10, 2022, 9:14 AM Joe Biden took office looking to reshape U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, putting a premium on 

promoting democracy and human rights. In reality, he has struggled on several fronts to meaningfully separate his approach from former President Donald Trump’s. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Boston 

Globe , Breitbart 

AP: US eyes counter-China moves in Southeast Asia, Matthew Lee, July 10, 2022, 12:21 AM 

U.S.  Secretary of State Antony Blinken is visiting Thailand as the Biden administration moves to show its 

commitment to Southeast Asia in the face of a relentless push for influence in the region from China. 

Blinken was meeting with senior Thai officials and democracy activists from neighboring Myanmar on 

Sunday in Bangkok. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden Says Emergency to Defend Abortion Rights Is Still on Table, Nancy Cook, July 

10, 2022,, 12:27 PM 

President Joe Biden said he has asked his team to explore the possibility of declaring a public health 

emergency to safeguard abortion rights after the US Supreme Court overturned the Roe v. Wade 

decision. “I’ve asked the folks on the medical -- people in the administration to look at whether I have the 

authority to do that and what impact it would have,” Biden told reporters on Sunday. [Continue Reading] 

NYT: Biden Will Find a Changed Middle East on His Coming Visit, Patrick Kingsley, July 10, 2022, 

11:46  AM 

When President Biden arrives in the Middle East this week, on his first visit as American head of state, 

he will find a region where alliances, priorities and relations with the United States have shifted 

significantly since his last official trip, six years ago. His visit opens in Israel and the occupied West 

Bank, once at the center of American policy in the Middle East, and is expected to focus on Israel’s fast -

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000287

strengthening ties with Arab countries and an emerging Arab-Israeli military partnership to combat 

threats from Iran. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden Says Action on China Import Tariffs Still Being Discussed, Nancy Cook and Leah 

Nylen, July 10, 2022, 10:00 AM President Joe Biden said his administration is still discussing possible action on US tariffs on Chinese 

imports, after Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo said she expects a decision “shortly.” “No, we are 

having further discussions on that,” Biden told reporters in Delaware on Sunday when asked if there was 

a decision. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: Saudi trip captures competing demands of rights agenda, ‘great power’ contest 

Image without a caption, Missy Ryan, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

The Biden administration faces an intensifying reckoning over its record on human rights as the 

emergence of a bellicose Russia and an increasingly powerful China places new, often discordant 

demands on President Biden’s promise to place American ideals at the center of U.S. dealings with the 

world. Biden’s talks with Middle Eastern leaders this week will offer a vivid demonstration of the 

competing considerations between that pledge and what officials describe as an existential ‘great power’ 

contest — most starkly in the president’s encounter with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, 

whom the U.S. government blamed for the brutal 2018 killing of journalist and U.S. resident Jamal 

Khashoggi. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: At 79, Biden Is Testing the Boundaries of Age and the Presidency, Peter Baker, July 10, 

2022, 6:38 PM 

When President Biden leaves Tuesday night for a four-day swing through the Middle East, he will 

presumably be more rested than he would have been had he followed the original plan. 

The trip was initially tacked onto another journey last month to Europe, which would have made for an 

arduous 10-day overseas trek until it became clear to Mr. Biden’s team that such extended travel might 

be unnecessarily taxing for a 79-year-old president, or “crazy,” as one official put it. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: [OPINION] Opinion Joe Biden: Why I’m going to Saudi Arabia, Joe Biden, July 9, 2022, 

6:35  PM 

Next week, I’ll travel to the Middle East to start a new and more promising chapter of America’s 

engagement there. This trip comes at a vital time for the region, and it will advance important American 

interests. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Biden-Xi Call Likely to Take Place in Coming Weeks, Blinken Says, Iain Marlow 

July 10, 2022, 6:15 AM US President Joe Biden and his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping are set to speak again in the coming 

weeks, Secretary of State Antony Blinken said on Sunday. Blinken spoke with Chinese Foreign Minister 

Wang Yi a day earlier for more than five hours to help lay the groundwork for a call between the leaders. 

While Biden said last month he would speak with Xi “soon,” Blinken suggested it was getting closer. 

[Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden’s Quest for Saudi Oil Faces Reality-Check of Slim Capacity, Grant Smith, July 10, 2022, 4:00 AM 

Even if Joe Biden secures a pledge for more oil when he visits Saudi Arabia this week, it may do little to 

drive down the high fuel prices roiling the global economy. The US president’s visit to a country he once 

vowed to isolate represents a significant thawing of relations, but the Saudis and their OPEC partners 

have limited spare production capacity to offer in return for this political concession. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Three-star general who mocked Jill Biden is suspended, Meena Venkataramanan, July 9, 

2022, 5:41 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000288

The U.S. Army has suspended retired Lt. Gen. Gary Volesky, its former head of communications, from 

his mentorship role and placed him under investigation after he posted a tweet that appeared to mock 

first lady Jill Biden’s tweet about the Supreme Court’s recent decision on abortion. The tweet was in 

response to Biden’s June 24 tweet about the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, in 

which the first lady lamented the decision’s impact on women. [Continue Reading] 

NYT: More Than 1,000 Protesters at White House Call on Biden to Protect Abortion Rights, 

Stephanie Lai and Ava Sasani, July 9, 2022, 4:42 PM One day after President Biden issued an executive order designed to ensure access to abortion 

medication and emergency contraception, more than a thousand protesters gathered in front of the 

White House, with hundreds risking arrest by sitting at the building’s gates, to urge Mr. Biden to do more. 

Despite rainy weather and the threat of flash flooding in the area on Saturday, the protesters sat on the 

wet concrete wearing green bandannas that read “bans off our bodies” and chanting “Disobey!” and “My 

body, my choice!” [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Two long weeks: Inside Biden’s struggle to respond to abortion ruling, Ashley Parker, 

Yasmeen Abutaleb and Tyler Pager, July 9, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Three days after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, President Biden used a break between 

Group of Seven summit meetings at the luxury Schloss Elmau resort in Germany to get an update on the 

stunning and sudden loss of abortion rights for millions of Americans back home. Huddling with top aides, 

including some who dialed in from the White House, Biden declared at the outset of the call that he 

wanted to endorse ending the Senate filibuster to codify Roe into law, a position he so far had refused to 

take, angering many Democrats in the process. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: The Democratic left is frustrated with Biden. How much could it matter?, Dan Balz, July 9, 

2022, 2:13 PM 

Two weeks after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, President Biden stood in the Roosevelt 

Room in the White House on Friday to announce an executive order aimed at preserving, where 

possible, the right to an abortion. The moment illustrated the tension between the president and a portion 

of his party’s base frustrated by his leadership. [Continue Reading ]

CBS: Vice President Kamala Harris stresses need for "pro-choice Congress" to protect abortion 

rights, Melissa Quinn, July 10, 2022, 10:20 AM Vice President Kamala Harris underscored the importance of voters casting their ballots in the November 

midterm elections for a "pro-choice Congress" that will enshrine the right to an abortion into law after the 

Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. In an interview with "Face the Nation" that aired Sunday, Harris 

said the ruling from the high court last month cleared the way for states to enact new laws restricting or 

outright banning abortion. [Continue Reading] 

CNN: [OPINION] Opinion: Biden is heading to the Middle East for one simple reason, Aaron David 

Miller, July 10, 20222, 9:43 AM Presidential visits to the Middle East come in all different shapes and sizes. Exhausted and ill but 

enamored of kings, deserts and oil, President Franklin D. Roosevelt met King Ibn Saud, founder of 

modern Saudi Arabia, on his way home from Yalta in 1945. In 1974, Richard Nixon, the first sitting US 

president to visit both Israel and the Arab states, took what proved to be a farewell foray two months before he resigned the presidency. [Continue Reading ]

Fox: Republican, Democratic strategists weigh in on what Biden needs to change to stop GOP in November, Jayme Chandler and Thomas Phippen, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Midterms are just four months away, and President Biden’s approval ratings are at a historical low —

spelling trouble for Democrats seeking to maintain slim majorities in Congress. Numerous polls have 

indicated the economy, inflation and high prices for gas and food are the top concern of voters, and a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000289

Fox News poll from June shows a more voters trust Republicans over Democrats to address economic 

concerns. [Continue Reading ]

New York Magazine: Democrats Have a Biden Problem, Ross Barkan, July 10, 2022, 9:00 AM 

Donald Trump is so hungry for a comeback that he’s reportedly willing to kick off a presidential campaign 

before the midterm elections, violating decades of political orthodoxy and potentially costing himself 

campaign cash. The damning revelations of the January 6 hearings are no deterrent — he wants another 

shot at Joe Biden, and he’s probably going to get it. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Biden’s Middle East policy shows echoes of Trump, Laura Kelly and Morgan Chalfant, July 

10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

President Biden’s trip to Israel and Saudi Arabia next week is expected to show how the administration 

is putting its stamp on relations with the region, but some experts argue the president has largely 

continued the policies of former President Trump in the Middle East. Biden sought to reverse Trump’s 

decision to pull out of the Iran nuclear deal, but absent reviving the agreement, is leaning into closer 

coordination between Israel, Saudi Arabia and the anti-Iran coalition in the region to deter an Iranian 

nuclear threat. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Biden bogeyman: White House escalates attacks on Supreme Court over 

abortion, Naomi Lim, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM President Joe Biden and his White House aides are increasingly venting their frustrations with the 

Supreme Court for overturning Roe v. Wade, putting the decision on the ballot in the midterm elections. 

But the condemnations, at odds with Biden's reputation for defending institutions, cements a precedent 

for politicizing the highest court in the land when he promised to encourage unity and a return to civility if 

elected. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Biden sets up legal battle with red states over abortion pills, Cassidy 

Morrison, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM Anti-abortion advocates are gearing up to fight President Joe Biden’s pledge to secure access to 

abortion-inducing medication by exercising his federal authority over states that have restrictions in place. 

Biden signed an executive order Friday aimed at bolstering access to abortion now that the Supreme 

Court ruled in the case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization that the Constitution does not 

guarantee the right to abortion. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Teachers unions say Biden plan to recruit 250,000 tutors supports public 

schools, July 10, 2022, 6:00 AM 

A Biden administration plan to recruit 250,000 tutors was unveiled with the blessing of the nation's two 

largest teachers unions , which believe the effort will drive a "groundswell of support" for public schools. 

The administration announced the "National Partnership for Student Success" earlier this week, claiming 

it was a necessary effort to help students make up for lost learning caused by pandemic school 

closures. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Biden’s woke attack on energy, Jessica Anderson, July 10, 2022, 12:00 AM 

Saule Omarova, whom President Joe Biden picked to regulate the banking industry, opened a new front 

in the relentless campaign of woke capital last May. Speaking about oil and gas companies, she stated 

that “the way we basically get rid of those carbon financiers is we starve them of their sources of 

capital." Omarova’s threat to weaponize banking rules against traditional energy companies wasn’t just 

talk. It was the most public admission yet of a behind-the-scenes strategy growing in power on the Left. 

[Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Bidens wish Muslims celebrating Eid al-Adha ‘a joyous holiday’, Caroline Vakil, July 9, 

2022, 5:15 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000290

President Biden said on Saturday that he and first lady Jill Biden wished “a joyous holiday” to Muslims in 

the United States and around the world who are observing the holiday of Eid al-Adha. “Jill and I send our 

warmest greetings to Muslims across the United States and around the world celebrating Eid al-Adha. 

[Continue Reading ]

Daily Caller: Biden Admin Funnels Taxpayer Dollars Into ‘Programming Curriculum’ For 

Transgender Inmates, Reagan Reese, July 9, 2022, 3:26 PM ET 

The Department of Justice invested almost $1.5 million of taxpayer dollars into a “transgender 

programming curriculum” focused on transgender inmates’ needs. The curriculum is designed to help 

transgender inmates with their gender “identity,” sexual health and safety, according to a summary of the 

government contract. Though it’s unclear if the curriculum has been implemented, the program could be 

available for up to 1,200 transgender inmates, according to Justice Department estimates. [Continue 

Reading ]

The Hill: Harris says Democrats believed ‘certain issues were just settled’ when asked about 

failure to codify Roe v. Wade, Jared Gans, July 9, 2022, 3:12 PM Vice President Harris said Democrats believed Roe v. Wade to be a settled issue when asked about 

party lawmakers’ failure to codify abortion protections into federal law over the past 50 years. “We 

certainly believed that certain issues are just settled,” Harris told CBS News’s Robert Costa, in an 

interview that was shown on “CBS Evening News with Norah O’Donnell” on Friday and will be shown on 

“Face the Nation” on Sunday. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Texas AG demands Biden apologize to border agents over 'whipping' 

claim, Jenny Goldsberry, July 9, 2022, 2:41 PM Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton has demanded an apology from President Joe Biden for 

perpetuating the story of Border Patrol agents whipping Haitian migrants in 2021. "I just think it's really wrong," Paxton said Friday of the White House's characterization of the story. "I would expect instead 

that Joe Biden and some of these political leaders should come out and actually apologize to these guys 

for what they've been through." [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Biden speaks with Whelan family after outcry over ‘uneven’ Griner 

treatment, Mike Brest, July 9, 2022, 2:30 PM President Joe Biden spoke with the family of an American wrongfully detained in Russia a day after there 

was an outcry because he communicated with the family of another American imprisoned there. Biden 

spoke with Cherelle Griner, the wife of WNBA superstar Brittney Griner, on Thursday following a

significant public push for such a call from the president, though the family of Paul Whelan, an American 

who is serving a 16-year prison sentence for allegedly being a U.S. spy, expressed frustration with what 

Elizabeth Whelan, his sister, described as "uneven" treatment for the families of Americans wrongfully 

detained abroad. [Continue Reading ]

Santa Barbara News-Press (Santa Barbara, CA): Biden administration is withholding Hunter Biden 

documents, oversight Republican says, Casey Harper, July 10, 2022, Ranking Member of the House Oversight Committee Rep. James Comer, R-Ky., sent a letter to U.S. 

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen this week alleging that the federal agency is withholding documents that 

detail the foreign transactions conducted by the president’s son, Hunter Biden. 

Mr. Biden has been the focus of controversy for his foreign business dealings, especially how his father 

may have been involved. He is currently under investigation by the Department of Justice. [Continue 

Reading ]

KAKE-ABC (Wichita, KS): President Biden angers environmental groups with decision on Alaska 

oil drilling, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 10:26 PM (EDT) 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000291

## •••••

The Biden administration has taken a key step forward on a controversial proposed oil drilling project in 

Alaska's North Slope, angering climate advocates who say the project would release tons of emissions 

and doom the President's climate goals. The US Department of Interior released a draft environmental 

impact statement for the ConocoPhillips oil drilling project, known as Willow, on Friday night. [Continue 

Reading ]

CONGRESS 

NYT: The Fight Over Truth Also Has a Red State-Blue State Divide, Steven Lee Myers and Cecilia 

Kang, July 10, 2022, 5:00 AM To fight disinformation, California lawmakers are advancing a bill that would force social media 

companies to divulge their process for removing false, hateful or extremist material from their platforms. 

Texas lawmakers, by contrast, want to ban the largest of the companies — Facebook, Twitter and 

YouTube — from removing posts because of political points of view. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Durbin says its ‘not realistic’ to consider impeaching Clarence Thomas, Brad Dress, July 10, 2022, 10:51 AM 

Sen. Dick Durbin (D-Ill.), the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said on Sunday said it would 

be “a mistake” to impeach Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, who has drawn national scorn for 

suggesting the court reconsider case precedents that affirmed the constitutional right to same-sex 

marriage, contraception and the right to privacy in the bedroom. “I don’t think it’s realistic,” Durbin told 

“Fox News Sunday” anchor Mike Emanuel. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 09, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with Whit Johnson 

CBS: Weekend News with Adriana Diaz 

NBC: Nightly News with Jose Diaz-Balart 

Thousands  of protestors swarmed outside the White House demanding more action on abortion 

rights. The call to action came 24 hours after President Biden signed an Executive Order protecting 

reproductive rights, all of this as at least 14 states banned or severely restricted abortion. 

President Biden telling voters to vote for Democrats to get the votes to codify Roe v. Wade. 

[ABC, CBS, NBC] 

In  Japan, a 90 member task force is investigating the assassination of Japan’s longest serving 

Prime Minister Shinzo Abe with questions regarding security lapses and how the gunman, Tetsuya 

Yamagami, could get so close to Abe. A vigil will be held for Abe on Monday and a funeral on 

Tuesday for family and close friends. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

Across  the country more than 50 Million people are under heat alerts, strong winds, record high 

temperatures and bone dry humidity are driving the high fire danger. This as firefighters in 

California are battling a fast moving wildfire in Yosemite Park threatening the famed sequoia 

trees. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  Sri Lanka Government is in turmoil as the Prime Minister and President vowed to resign as 

violent protestors stormed into Government offices, the Presidential Palace, and the Prime 

Minister's home. Demonstrations were taking place all over the country's worsening economic 

crisis and food shortages. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

A $44 Billion dollar legal battle may be taking place between Elon Musk and Twitter’s Board. The 

Stakes are high with a Billion dollar break up fee, as Musk alleges Twitter is in material breach of 

the agreement because the company did not provide the number of fake accounts on the platform, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000292

## •••••••••

## •••

while  Twitter says it did. [ABC, CBS] 

The US announced sending a $400 Million dollar package, including 4 long range high precision 

rocket systems allowing Ukraine to strike behind enemy lines. The US also promised precision 

guided shells for US provided Howitzers capable of hitting targets far away with deadly precision, 

as Russia’s attacks continue to be unrelenting. [ABC, CBS] 

Business  owners were allowed to return today, even as a funeral was held for Eduardo Uvaldom, 

one of the seven people who was killed in the attack. Uvaldo, who would have turned 70 on Friday 

is survived by his wife, Maria, four daughters, four siblings, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

[ABC, CBS] 

Former  White House counsel Pat Cipollone met with the Jan. 6 committee for about eight hours 

answering questions as to what he saw in the White House in the events leading up to Jan. 6. 

Committee members state Cipollone was careful and honest, “did not contradict the testimony of 

other witnesses.” [ABC] 

Officials  are stepping up patrols after shark attacks have increased, even as authorities emphasize 

beaches are safe but they need to stay on alert. Shark patrols monitor the water with boats, 

helicopters, and drones, as reports that none of the shark attacks have resulted in fatalities. [ABC] 

Businesses  in Highland Park acted as Bunkers protecting fleeing people and providing a safe place 

from the shooter. [CBS] 

Gas  Prices are dropping off, the largest weekly drop seen in 2 years due to fears of an economic 

slowdown causing lower oil prices. The National Average is still high at $4.69/ gallon. [NBC ]

SUNDAY MORNING TALK SHOWS 

ABC This Week with George Stephanopoulos 

While  inflation and the Federal Reserve’s path to fight it have raised recession fears, so far job 

creation hasn’t faltered. Demand for workers in most industries remains robust. "We shouldn't be 

'talking ourselves into a recession" , said Gina Raimondo, Commerce Secretary in an Interview. 

[Watch] 

A series of events have rocked some of America's closest allies: after three years in office, Boris 

Johnson’s political career comes to an end and Shinzo Abe, Japan's former prime minister, is 

assassinated while giving a speech. [Watch] 

In  an Interview, GOP Rep. Adam Kinzinger tells that Trump White House counsel Pat Cipollone, 

who sat for a transcribed interview with the Jan. 6 Committee, didn't contradict previous testimony 

by other witnesses. “Anybody that wants to come in, that knows information to talk to the select 

committee, we welcome them to do so. We welcome them to do so under oath,” Jan. 6 Committee 

member Rep. Adam Kinzinger tells. [Watch] 

President  Biden delivered an emotional speech Friday announcing an array of steps aimed at 

bolstering abortion rights in the aftermath of a Supreme Court ruling that struck down the 

precedent set by Roe v. Wade. [Watch ]

CBS Face the Nation with Robert Costa 

Face  the Nation began with a review of British Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s resignation; the 

assassination of former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe; the Chicago Highland Park shooting 

and Vice President Kamala Harris’s visit to HIghland Park. [Watch] 

Vice  President Kamala Harris spoke of gun violence; gun reform; abortion rights; the codifying of 

Roe v. Wade; voting rights; the Administration’s plans to codify Roe v. Wade; Justice’s misleading 

Senators; Brittany Griner and others imprisoned in Russia; Democracy on the ballot as the issue of 

midterm elections; police reform; speculation President Biden won't run for re-election in 2024; 

Texas Governor Abbot and immigration issues. [Watch -1] [Watch -2] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000293

## ••••••••

NBC Meet the Press with Chuck Todd 

The Secretary of Commerce, Gina Raimondo discusses President Biden’s plans to relieve 

economic pressure and the administration’s views on abortion rights. Gina Raimondo says criticism 

of President Biden’s performance after the Dobbs decision isn’t justified. [Watch, Watch-2] 

During an exclusive interview, Governor Larry Hogan discusses Republican views on former 

President Trump, the debate over gun violence and his plans for a potential presidential run. “I'm 

going all around the country helping people Trump is attacking and we’re winning most of them.” 

Hogan said. [Watch] Stephanie Murphy, member of the Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the 

U.S.  Capitol, discusses testimony from former Trump White House counsel Pat Cipollone and 

questions over coordination between the White House and groups like the Proud Boys and Oath 

Keepers. [Watch ]

FOX News Sunday with Mike Emanuel 

President bowed to pressure, signing an Executive Order protecting reproductive rights even as he 

made clear he had little power with the issue. This as BIden prepares for his trip to Saudi Arabia, 

penning a Washington Post Op-ed stating, he was looking to reorient not rupture long-standing 

relations with an important ally in the region. [Watch] Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg discussed airline cancellations and delays amid a Pilot 

shortage; mandatory airline pilot retirement and plans to address the issue; planned airport 

improvements; infrastructure investments; Justices facing public protests; and expectations of 

President Biden running for re-election in 2024. [Watch -1] [Watch -2] 

AFTERNOON HEADLINES 

“”Twitter, Elon Musk Set for Unprecedented Legal Battle Over Deal Collapse” [WSJ] “The Stock Market Faces Next Test as Inflation Looms Over Earnings Season” [WSJ ]“Desperate for Recruits, Russia Launches a ‘Stealth Mobilization’” [NYT ]

END 

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the 

subject line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5114 01570-000294

From: 

Subject: 

To: 

Sent: 

DOJ Digests 

[EXTERNAL] Weekend Digest 

DoJ-Digests3 Rendon 

Ju y 10, 2022 2:00 PM (UTC-04:00) 

# Department of Justice 

# Weekend News Digest 

# JULY 10, 2022 

# 2:00 PM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

National Security 

3. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

4. 

Criminal Law 

5. 

Civil Rights 

6. 

Immigration & Border Security 

7. 

Environment 

8. 

Tax 

9. 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

10. 

US Supreme Court 

11. 

Opioid Crisis 

12. 

Administration 

13. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000295

Congress 

14. 

Network Evening News Lineup 

15. 

Sunday Morning Talk Shows 

16. 

Afternoon Headlines 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

LAT: [OPINION] Prosecute Trump? Merrick Garland is investigating aggressively but prosecuting 

cautiously, Doyle McManus, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

The House committee on the Jan. 6, 2021, insurgency, whose hearings resume this week, has produced 

impressive evidence that could allow prosecutors to argue that former President Trump committed crimes as 

he tried to overturn the 2020 election. Thanks to the hearings, we now know more clearly that Trump tried to 

bully Vice President Mike Pence into blocking Congress’ count of electoral votes, tried to bully Justice 

Department officials into declaring the election fraudulent even though they knew it wasn’t and stood by with 

seeming approval while his armed supporters sacked the Capitol. [Continue Reading] 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

USA Today: Florida man sentenced to 20 years for trying to help ISIS with bomb-making video, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 4:11 PM 

A Florida man accused of wanting to help ISIS by demonstrating how to make and use an explosive, was 

sentenced to prison for 20 years. Romeo Xavier Langhorne, 32, was charged with attempting to provide 

material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization, and was also sentenced Thursday to 15 years 

of supervised release, according to a news release from the U.S. Attorney's Office in the Middle District of 

Florida. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: Here's how North Korean operatives are trying to infiltrate US crypto firms, Sean Lyngaas, July 

10, 2022, 12:02 AM 

Devin, the founder of a cryptocurrency startup based in San Francisco, woke up one day in February to the 

most bizarre phone call of his life. The man on the other end, an FBI agent, told Devin that the seemingly 

legitimate software developer he'd hired the previous summer was a North Korean operative who'd sent tens 

of thousands of dollars of his salary to the country's authoritarian regime. [Continue Reading ]

Finger Lakes Times (Geneva, NY): Colorado man who served as a pastor faces charges in Jan. 6

riot, David Mullen, July 9, 2022, 5:44 PM 

Federal prosecutors have charged a Colorado Springs man in connection with the deadly Jan. 6 riot at the 

U.S.  Capitol. Prosecutors in the District of Columbia charged Tyler Ethridge, 33, civil disorder, a felony, and 

related misdemeanor offenses. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (CT): Connecticut Ranks 19th For Data Breaches Costing Billions Of Dollars, Rich Kirby, July 9, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000296

2022, 3:33 PM 

Corporate data breaches have compromised the personal data of Connecticut residents, amounting to multi -

billion-dollar losses, according to a new analysis of FBI internet crime data. 

In Connecticut, corporations reporting data breaches from 2017-2021 have led to losses of $11,592,098. 

The number of breaches has decreased by 77.78 percent, but the amount of money Connecticut 

corporations have been taken for has increased dramatically up 14.57 percent. [Continue Reading] 

WABE-NPR (Atlanta, GA): DOJ: Oath Keeper's 'death list' targeted Georgia elections official, Patrick 

Saunders, July 9, 2022, 2:26 PM 

Federal prosecutors on Friday released new details about several Oath Keepers charged with seditious 

conspiracy in the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, saying one co-defendant kept a ”death list” that included 

the name of a Georgia elections official and their family member. The Justice Department cited the list in a

previous filing in Feb. 2021, but did not reveal that it included a Georgia official until Friday. [Continue 

Reading ]

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

Reuters: Links between Trump associates, militants in focus of Jan. 6 hearings this week, Richard 

Cowan and Katanga Johnson, July 10, 2022, 12:24 PM 

Congressional investigators into the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol expect this week to draw 

connections between militant groups that took part in the riot and government officials, possibly including then-President Donald Trump, a panel member said on Sunday. "We are going to be connecting the dots during 

these hearings between these groups and those who were trying in government circles to overturn the 

election," Democratic Representative Zoe Lofgren said on CNN's "State of the Union." [Continue Reading] 

AP: 4 days in January: Trump push for Capitol coda to 2020 vote, Lisa Mascaro, July 9, 2022, 2:58 PM 

It would have been something never quite before seen in America a defeated president, Donald Trump, 

standing at the Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021, with a mob of supporters, some armed, contesting the election 

outcome. [...] The Jan. 6 hearings are providing dramatic new insight about Trump’s intentions as he told 

loyalists he would join them on a march down Pennsylvania Avenue to “fight like hell” for his presidency. 

[Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Bannon says he will testify at public hearing as contempt trial looms, Isaac Stanley-Becker, 

Josh Dawsey and Jacqueline Alemany, July 10, 2022, 11:04 AM 

Former president Donald Trump sent a letter on Saturday to Stephen K. Bannon saying he will waive his claim 

of executive privilege if his former chief strategist can agree on terms to testify before the House select 

committee investigating the pro-Trump riot at the Capitol. The letter was quickly communicated to the House 

panel by Bannon’s lawyer, Robert J. Costello, who said Bannon “is willing to, indeed prefers, to testify at your 

public hearing.” [Continue Reading] See also:  Bloomberg 

NYT: Jan. 6 Panel Questions Cipollone on Pardons and Trump’s Election Claims, Luke Broadwater 

and Maggie Haberman, July 9, 2022, 3:46 PM 

Pat A. Cipollone, who served as White House counsel for President Donald J. Trump, was asked detailed 

questions on Friday about pardons, false election fraud claims and the former president’s pressure campaign 

against Vice President Mike Pence, according to three people familiar with his testimony before the House 

committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol. The panel did not press him to either corroborate or 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000297

contradict some specific details of explosive testimony by Cassidy Hutchinson, a former White House aide 

who captivated the country late last month with her account of an out-of-control president willing to embrace 

violence and stop at nothing to stay in power, the people said. [Continue Reading ]

CBS: Raskin says Cipollone gave "valuable" testimony to Jan. 6 committee, Melissa Quinn, July 10, 

2022, 1:15 PM 

Rep. Jamie Raskin, a member of the House select committee probing the Jan. 6 assault on the U.S. Capitol, 

said Sunday that former White House counsel Pat Cipollone provided the panel with "valuable" testimony 

during a closed-door interview last week. "We're going to get to use a lot of Mr. Cipollone's testimony to 

corroborate other things we've learned along the way," Raskin told "Face the Nation" of the panel's upcoming 

hearings. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

LAT: La Luz del Mundo dissidents pressure authorities, seek more charges against ‘apostle’, Libor 

Jany, July 10, 2022, 8:00 AM 

Holding her sons tight, Deborah Contreras shuddered with sobs as the women in a Los Angeles courtroom 

recounted years of sexual abuse inflicted by the man they once believed was an “apostle” of Jesus Christ. [...] 

Local or even federal authorities could become involved if they could prove widespread reports that abuse 

allegations were ignored or covered up at the highest echelons of La Luz del Mundo, said Levenson, who has 

studied other recent clergy scandals. [Continue Reading ]

Rock Hill Herald (Rock Hill, SC): Convicted ex-Chester County sheriff Underwood, 2 deputies to be 

sentenced Monday, Andrew Dys and John Monk, July 10, 2022, 12:00 AM 

More than a year after a South Carolina jury convicted him of corruption in office, former Chester County 

Sheriff Alex “Big A” Underwood is expected to find out Monday if he will go to prison. Sentencing by U.S. 

District Court Judge Michelle Childs for Underwood and two deputies is set for federal court Monday 

afternoon. [Continue Reading ]

The Republican (Springfield, MA): Violence in Boston nonprofit shuts down amid federal fraud 

investigation into owners Monica Cannon-Grant, Clark Grant, Tom Matthews, July 9, 2022, 5:19 PM 

The nonprofit Violence in Boston has shut down amid a federal fraud investigation into its husband and wife 

owners Monica Cannon-Grant and Clark Grant. Cannon-Grant announced the organization’s closing in a

Facebook post on Wednesday, July 6. [...] Cannon-Grant, 41, was arrested on Tuesday, March 15 morning 

following the pair’s indictment by a federal grand jury on charges of defrauding Violence in Boston, its donors 

and the Massachusetts Department of Unemployment Assistance, according to the United States Attorney’s 

office. [Continue Reading ]

Mercury News (San Jose, CA): Fed grand jury indicts Vallejo man, 38, on drug, we, Richard Bammer, 

July 9, 2022, 7:40 PM (EDT) 

A federal grand jury on Friday in Sacramento returned a two-count indictment against a 38-year-old Vallejo 

man, charging him with possessing methamphetamine with intent to distribute and being a felon in possession 

of a firearm, the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of California said. Christopher Matthew Rougeau will 

return to court for a status conference at 9 a.m. Aug. 22, when he will face Senior Judge William B. Shubb. 

[Continue Reading ]

WVII: Man sentenced to 41 months for triple manslaughter charges, Clark Grant, Beth Jones, July 10, 

2022, 2:00 AM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000298

A man from New Jersey was sentenced in U.S. District Court in Bangor Friday to roughly three-and-a-half 

years in prison for an alcohol related crash that killed three people. According to the U.S. Attorney, 30-year -

old Praneeth Manubolu, was sentenced to 41 months in prison and 3 years of supervised release. Manubolu 

pleaded guilty Jan. 31, 2022 to charges including three counts of manslaughter, two counts of operating 

under the influence, and one count of unsafe operation of a motor vehicle. [Continue Reading ]

WTHR-NBC (Indianapolis, IN): 2 Indiana men charged with trafficking, making fentanyl-laced 'fake' 

pills, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 10:45 PM 

Two southern Indiana men are facing federal charges for obtaining "pound quantities" of fentanyl powder and 

using a pill press to make fentanyl-laced "fake pills," Drug Enforcement Administration officials said. A federal 

grand jury returned an indictment charging Ethan Parker, 29, of Evansville, and Joshua Harvey, 30, of 

Evansville, with conspiracy to distribute fentanyl, illegal distribution of a tableting machine, and illegal 

possession of a tableting machine. [Continue Reading] 

KOTV-CBS (Tulsa, OK): Claremore Man Receives 15-Year Prison Sentence For Rape, Unattributed, 

July 9, 2022, 8:45 PM (EDT) 

A Claremore man is going to federal prison for 15 years for raping a woman in 2018. 

Investigators said Travis Condry and the woman knew each other and the sexual encounter began 

consensually, but she quickly changed her mind. Condry recorded audio of the assault on his phone. 

[Continue Reading ]

KOTV-CBS (Tulsa, OK): Inmate Convicted Of Murdering Cellmate At McAlester Prison, Unattributed, 

July 9, 2022, 8:39 PM (EDT) 

A man serving a life sentence in prison for manslaughter has now been convicted of murder while in prison. A

federal jury found William Brown guilty of killing his cellmate, Mark Lawhead, by beating and strangling him. It 

happened in the Oklahoma State Penitentiary in McAlester in 2019. Brown was a member of the Indian 

Brotherhood prison gang and prosecutors said he committed the murder to boost his reputation. [Continue 

Reading ]

KETK-NBC (Jacksonville, TX): Elementary teacher sentenced for receiving child pornography from 

overseas, Steven Masso, July 9, 2022, 6:17 PM (EDT) 

An elementary school teacher was sentenced for receiving child pornography from the Phillipines. Rico 

Giovanni Machietto was sentenced to 80 months in federal prison for receiving child pornography, according 

to a release from Cameron County District Attorney Luis V. Saenz. [Continue Reading ]

WTKR-CBS (Norfolk, VA): Hampton man sentenced for COVID-19 loan fraud while in halfway house, 

Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 4:43 PM 

A Hampton man was sentenced Thursday for falsely applying for loans intended to grant COVID-19 relief to 

small businesses. According to court documents, in August 2020 and January and February 2021, 44-year -

old Marlon McKnight, falsely applied for four loans administered by the Small Business Administration. He 

was sentenced to 27 months in prison. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

WaPo: [ANALYSIS] The new threat to good schooling for minority Americans, Rann Miller, July 10, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

The school shooting in Uvalde, Tex., generated international attention to the vulnerability of children, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000299

particularly children of color, in a state with few gun regulations. But gun violence is not the only threat students 

of color are facing in the classroom. Shortly after the May leak of the Supreme Court’s majority opinion in 

Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, the case that overturned Roe v. Wade, Gov. Greg Abbott 

(R-Tex.) wondered whether Plyler v. Doe the landmark decision that requires states to offer public 

education free of charge to all children, including children of undocumented migrants could be next. 

[Continue Reading ]

USA Today: Prison guards forced a Black inmate to chop off his dreadlocks. Now he's suing, Tami 

Abdollah, July 10, 2022, 5:46 AM 

The House committee on the Jan. 6, 2021, insurgency, whose hearings resume this week, has produced 

impressive evidence that could allow prosecutors to argue that former President Trump committed crimes as 

he tried to overturn the 2020 election. Thanks to the hearings, we now know more clearly that Trump tried to 

bully Vice President Mike Pence into blocking Congress’ count of electoral votes, tried to bully Justice 

Department officials into declaring the election fraudulent even though they knew it wasn’t and stood by with 

seeming approval while his armed supporters sacked the Capitol. [Continue Reading ]

Epoch Times: Hawaii Veteran Pleads With 9th Circuit to Comply With Supreme Court’s Second 

Amendment Ruling, Matthew Vadum, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

A 72-year-old Vietnam War veteran is asking an appeals court to speed up processing of a gun permit he first 

sought 11 years ago now that the Supreme Court has ruled Hawaii’s gun-permitting system is unconstitutional. 

The Supreme Court determined June 23 that there is a constitutional right to carry firearms in public for self-defense. On June 30 it found Hawaii’s burdensome permitting process violates the Second Amendment and 

ordered the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals to review the man’s case, but it has not wrapped up the case and it is 

unclear when it will do so. [Continue Reading ]

The Des Moines Register (Des Moines, IA): [OPINION] Why Iowa needs a new law to protect your right 

to free expression on matters of public concern, Carol Hunter, July 10, 2022, 7:30 AM 

As the Des Moines Register’s William Morris reported last week, metro restaurateur Steve McFadden, owner 

of establishments such as the Tipsy Crow, Grumpy Goat and Dough Mama's Pizzeria, has filed lawsuits 

against at least 11 people, accusing them of defamation and invasion of privacy. Several defendants have 

filed counterclaims accusing McFadden of misusing the legal process to pursue unrelated grudges. [Continue 

Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Daily Caller: ‘Empty Promises’: Border Patrol Agents Lose Faith In Biden Admin After Debunked 

Whipping Allegations, Brianna Lyman, July 9, 2022, 10:49 PM 

The Daily Caller News Foundation’s (DCNF) Jennie Taer said border patrol agents do not believe the Biden 

administration has their backs after the DCNF reported that the agents accused of whipping migrants will still 

be punished even after the allegations were proven false. Speaking Friday on NewsNation, Taer was asked 

how border patrol agents are feeling in light of the disciplinary measures and whether agents feel the Biden 

Administration has their back. [Continue Reading ]

Florida PhoenixNews (Tallahassee, FL): Courts take the lead role as U.S. immigration policy remains 

in limbo, Ariana Figueroa, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Eighteen months into the Biden administration, immigration reform has stalled despite campaign promises to 

reform the system, with the most recent movement on immigration policy doled out by the U.S. Supreme 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000300

Court and in lower federal courts. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Biden administration in a 5-4 

decision on June 30 that the U.S. Department of Homeland Security did not violate federal immigration law 

when it moved to end the Trump administration’s “Remain in Mexico” policy, known as the Migrant Protection 

Protocols. [Continue Reading ]

Insider (New York, NY): Arizona police investigating sex trafficking at massage parlor solicited sex 

acts from potential victims: report, Katherine Tangalakis-Lippert, July 9, 2022, 9:48 PM 

During the course of an investigation into possible sex trafficking in Arizona massage parlors, two Flagstaff 

Police Department officers repeatedly allowed or solicited sexual contact from women who may have been 

trafficking victims, ABC 15 reported. The months-long investigation, called "Operation High Country Hydra" by 

US Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents who were jointly involved in the operation, sought 

information about suspected human trafficking, sex trafficking and prostitution in massage businesses. 

[Continue Reading ]

MyNewsLA (Los Angeles, CA): Man Allegedly Caught Smuggling Fentanyl, Meth to Seek Bail 

Reduction, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 6:09 PM (EDT) 

A 20-year-old man accused of hauling large quantities of methamphetamine and fentanyl into Riverside 

County will ask a judge Monday to consider lowering his bail so he can get out of jail. 

Joshua Lamar Chamberlain was arrested last month by U.S. Border Patrol agents in Indio following a traffic 

stop on Interstate 10. Chamberlain is charged with distribution of controlled substances, transportation of 

illegal narcotics and two counts of possession of controlled substances for sale, with sentence-enhancing 

allegations of possessing in excess of 20 kilograms of illegal drugs. [Continue Reading ]

KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX): Customs & Border Protection recap the week’s drug seizures, Luis Barrio, 

July 9, 2022, 5:56 PM (EDT) 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection officers working at El Paso area ports of entry seized fentanyl, cocaine, 

heroin, and methamphetamine over the last week. The week included a mix of concealment methods utilized 

to hide drugs. Regardless of the methods employed by smugglers CBP officers were up to the challenge 

and prevented these drug loads from entering the country. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Arkansas Democrat-Gazette: Michigan seeks details on pipeline plan, Rann Miller, July 10, 2022, 1:00 

AM 

A Michigan regulatory panel said Thursday that it needs more information about safety risks before it can rule 

on Enbridge Energy's plan to extend an oil pipeline through a tunnel beneath a waterway linking two of the 

Great Lakes. [...] Enbridge is defying Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer's 2020 order to shut down the line, a

move long sought by environmental groups and Native American tribes who fear a rupture would devastate 

the lakes. The company says the line is in good condition and contends in a federal lawsuit that the 

Democratic governor doesn't have the jurisdiction to shut it down. [Continue Reading ]

TAX 

WKMG-CBS (Orlando, FL): Convicted felon, former US Rep. Corrine Brown on why she’s running for 

Congress again, Justin Warmoth, July 10, 2022, 8:52 AM 

One month after pleading guilty to one count of tax evasion, longtime U.S. Rep. Corrine Brown filed to run for 

Congress again. The former Democratic congresswoman from Jacksonville was facing retrial after her 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000301

conviction on 18 counts of fraud and corruption was overturned on appeal. As part of the plea agreement with 

the U.S. Justice Department, Brown was given time served and ordered to pay restitution to the IRS. 

[Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

AP: Remains found in eastern Indiana in 2003 those of Ohio man, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 8:48 PM 

A man whose body was found nearly 19 years ago behind an abandoned gas station in eastern Indiana has 

been identified. The man was Daniel Diaz of Columbus, Ohio, and he was born Sept. 18, 1977, Henry County 

Coroner Stacey Guffey said Saturday, making him 26 at the time his body was found Oct. 2, 2003, near the 

Interstate 70 interchange with State Road 109. [...] “In February, I was notified by the FBI that a fingerprint 

confirmation was made, Guffey said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WBNS-CBS (Columbus, OH) , WTTV -

CBS (Bloomington, IN) 

Fox: Federal agents in California seize record breaking 5,000 pounds of meth crossing from 

Mexico, Andrew Mark Miller, July 9, 2022, 8:18 PM 

Four men have been charged with federal drug trafficking after authorities seized a record-breaking 5,000 

pounds of methamphetamine in southern California. The U.S. Attorney’s Office said in a press release that 

federal agents observed a 20-foot box truck cross into the United States from Mexico through a San Diego 

area port of entry around 5 p.m. on Thursday night. [Continue Reading] See also:  WWCP-Fox (Johnstown, 

PA) 

The Hill: FBI investigates ‘potential threat’ against Texas synagogue, Caroline Vakil, July 9, 2022, 6:55 

PM 

The FBI announced on Saturday that it was looking into a “potential threat” against an unidentified Texas 

synagogue months after a hostage situation took place at a synagogue in the state. “The FBI is investigating a

potential threat targeting an unidentified synagogue in Texas. We are working to determine the credibility of 

the threat and sharing information with our law enforcement partners and our partners in the Jewish 

community,” the FBI said in a statement. [Continue Reading] See also: KABB-Fox (San Antonio, TX), 

Laredo Morning Times (Laredo, TX) 

Boston Herald (Boston, MA): Springfield Armory to regain lost marksmanship medals won in the late 

1800s by Massachusetts Volunteer Militia members, Flint McColgan, July 9, 2022, 8:30 PM 

In the late 19th century, the Massachusetts Volunteer Militia had at least two world-class crack shot members 

brothers Milan Bull and Freeman Bull whose marksmanship medals disappeared from The Springfield 

Armory sometime in the 1990s. Now the feds have seized them back. “Massachusetts is the birthplace of the 

American Revolution, a war that gained our nation’s independence. Protecting and preserving artifacts of our 

Commonwealth’s history is of fundamental importance to this,” said Rachael Rollins, the U.S. Attorney for 

Massachusetts. “The recovery of these important artifacts is the result of the excellent collaborative work 

between my office’s Asset Recovery Unit, the FBI, and the National Park Service.” [Continue Reading] 

Salisbury Post (Salisbury, NC): Suspect arrested in Kannapolis homicide at daycare, Unattributed, July 

9, 2022, 8:29 PM 

U.S.  Marshals made an arrest Saturday in the June killings of two people of a daycare operating at a James 

Street residence. Officials had responded to a report of gunfire at a house in the 200 block of James Street 

on June 2. Sharon Chambers, 61, and her nephew, Benny Sloan, Jr., 46, were found dead from injuries. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000302

[Continue Reading] See also:  WBTV-CBS (Charlotte, NC) , WCCB-CW (Charlotte, NC) , WCNC-NBC 

(Charlotte, NC) 

Vallejo Times-Herald (Vallejo, CA): Two men charged for alleged federal bribery, conspiracy with 

Vallejo official, Thomas Gase, July 9, 2022, 6:18 PM (EDT) 

The City of Vallejo announced that it assisted the Federal Bureau of Investigation in an investigation that led to 

two men being charged with federal bribery and conspiracy after allegedly paying a city building inspector to 

look the other way concerning the growth of illegal marijuana. According to a Friday news release, in early to 

mid-2020, the city contacted the FBI to report an attempted bribe of city officials. As a result, the city and city 

employees assisted the FBI in an investigation into an illegal marijuana grow operation within the Vallejo city 

limits. [Continue Reading] 

WSIL-ABC (Harrisburg, IL): US Marshals apprehend 13 sex offenders in Iowa wanted for crimes 

against children, Alaa Elassar, July 9, 2022, 5:14 PM (EDT) 

The US Marshals Service has arrested 13 of the most wanted sex offenders in Iowa, authorities say. All of the 

fugitives were non-compliant with Iowa's Sex Offender Registry, and seven had former convictions for 

"crimes against children under the age of 13," US Marshals said in a news release on Friday. [Continue 

Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

NYT: [OPINION] If Only John Roberts Would Retire, Pamela Paul, July 10, 2022, 6:00 AM 

If liberal dreams so endearing, so enduring really did come true, Chief Justice John Roberts would 

resign. He’s been at it for 17 years. And he’s been incapable of tempering the Federalist Society-stamped 

fanatics on the right or leading the court toward any semblance of justice for all. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: [OPINION] What a Reckoning at the Supreme Court Could Look Like, Ezra Klein, July 10, 2022, 

6:00  AM 

Late in the lead-up to the 2020 presidential election, as Mitch McConnell rushed to replace Ruth Bader 

Ginsburg with Amy Coney Barrett, the left began pushing Joe Biden to endorse adding seats to the Supreme 

Court. Biden, in response, did what politicians do when faced with an issue they don’t want to think about: He 

promised to create a commission to study the issue. [Continue Reading] 

The Hill: [OPINION] The Supreme Court’s impact on the midterms and American democracy, Douglas 

E. Schoen, July 10, 2022, 9:30 AM 

The Supreme Court has just concluded what will most likely be remembered as one of the most 

consequential terms in modern history. The Supreme Court’s 6-3 conservative majority delivered major 

victories for the right’s agenda on abortion, guns, and environmental regulations that were in many ways 

at odds with the American public’s own views. [Continue Reading 

Washington Examiner: [VIDEO] The Debrief: Conn Carroll on protecting the safety of Supreme Court 

justices from protesters, Unattributed, July 9 2022, 6:00 PM 

Washington Examiner Commentary Editor Conn Carroll joins Sarah Westwood to discuss the lack of 

assistance from Congress or the Biden administration on protecting the safety of Supreme Court justices. 

[Watch ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000303

OPIOID CRISIS 

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pittsburgh, PA): [EDITORIAL] Editorial: Opioid lawsuit should support 

effective drug treatment, Editorial Board, July 10, 2022, 11:00 AM 

Allegheny County sued CVS, Rite Aid and Walgreens this week, alleging the pharmacies knowingly flooded 

the market with prescription painkillers and contributed to the local and national opioid epidemic. The lawsuit is 

one of thousands filed nationwide in recent years to collect damages stemming from a public health crisis that 

has killed more than a half million people. [Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters: Biden defends decision to visit Saudi Arabia, says rights are on his agenda, Nandita Bose, 

July 10, 2022, 12:27 AM 

President Joe Biden on Saturday defended his decision to travel to Saudi Arabia saying human rights would 

be on his agenda as he gave a preview of a trip on which he aims to reset ties with the crown prince, who he 

previously denounced as a pariah. Biden will hold bilateral talks with Saudi King Salman bin Abdulaziz and his 

leadership team, including Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman on his visit to the Middle East next week. 

[Continue Reading ]

Reuters: Biden weighs authority to declare abortion-related public health emergency, Nandita Bose, 

July 10, 2022, 12:16 PM 

U.S.  President Joe Biden on Sunday said he has asked his administration to consider whether he has 

authority to declare an abortion-related public health emergency after the Supreme Court overturned the Roe 

v.  Wade decision that legalized abortion nationwide. The comments come after Biden on Friday signed an 

executive order to ease access to services to terminate pregnancies. [Continue Reading ]

AP: In Mideast, Biden struggling to shift policy after Trump, Aamer Madhani and Darlene Superville, July 

10, 2022, 9:14 AM 

Joe Biden took office looking to reshape U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, putting a premium on 

promoting democracy and human rights. In reality, he has struggled on several fronts to meaningfully separate 

his approach from former President Donald Trump’s. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Boston Globe , Breitbart 

AP: US eyes counter-China moves in Southeast Asia, Matthew Lee, July 10, 2022, 12:21 AM 

U.S.  Secretary of State Antony Blinken is visiting Thailand as the Biden administration moves to show its 

commitment to Southeast Asia in the face of a relentless push for influence in the region from China. Blinken 

was meeting with senior Thai officials and democracy activists from neighboring Myanmar on Sunday in 

Bangkok. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden Says Emergency to Defend Abortion Rights Is Still on Table, Nancy Cook, July 10, 

2022,, 12:27 PM 

President Joe Biden said he has asked his team to explore the possibility of declaring a public health 

emergency to safeguard abortion rights after the US Supreme Court overturned the Roe v. Wade decision. 

“I’ve asked the folks on the medical -- people in the administration to look at whether I have the authority to do 

that and what impact it would have,” Biden told reporters on Sunday. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Biden Will Find a Changed Middle East on His Coming Visit, Patrick Kingsley, July 10, 2022, 11:46 

AM 

When President Biden arrives in the Middle East this week, on his first visit as American head of state, he will 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000304

find a region where alliances, priorities and relations with the United States have shifted significantly since his 

last official trip, six years ago. His visit opens in Israel and the occupied West Bank, once at the center of 

American policy in the Middle East, and is expected to focus on Israel’s fast-strengthening ties with Arab 

countries and an emerging Arab-Israeli military partnership to combat threats from Iran. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden Says Action on China Import Tariffs Still Being Discussed, Nancy Cook and Leah 

Nylen, July 10, 2022, 10:00 AM 

President Joe Biden said his administration is still discussing possible action on US tariffs on Chinese 

imports, after Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo said she expects a decision “shortly.” “No, we are having 

further discussions on that,” Biden told reporters in Delaware on Sunday when asked if there was a decision. 

[Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Saudi trip captures competing demands of rights agenda, ‘great power’ contest 

Image without a caption, Missy Ryan, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

The Biden administration faces an intensifying reckoning over its record on human rights as the emergence of 

a bellicose Russia and an increasingly powerful China places new, often discordant demands on President 

Biden’s promise to place American ideals at the center of U.S. dealings with the world. Biden’s talks with 

Middle Eastern leaders this week will offer a vivid demonstration of the competing considerations between 

that pledge and what officials describe as an existential ‘great power’ contest most starkly in the president’s 

encounter with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, whom the U.S. government blamed for the brutal 

2018 killing of journalist and U.S. resident Jamal Khashoggi. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: At 79, Biden Is Testing the Boundaries of Age and the Presidency, Peter Baker, July 10, 2022, 

6:38  PM 

When President Biden leaves Tuesday night for a four-day swing through the Middle East, he will presumably 

be more rested than he would have been had he followed the original plan. 

The trip was initially tacked onto another journey last month to Europe, which would have made for an arduous 

10-day overseas trek until it became clear to Mr. Biden’s team that such extended travel might be 

unnecessarily taxing for a 79-year-old president, or “crazy,” as one official put it. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: [OPINION] Opinion Joe Biden: Why I’m going to Saudi Arabia, Joe Biden, July 9, 2022, 6:35 

PM 

Next week, I’ll travel to the Middle East to start a new and more promising chapter of America’s engagement 

there. This trip comes at a vital time for the region, and it will advance important American interests. [Continue 

Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden-Xi Call Likely to Take Place in Coming Weeks, Blinken Says, Iain Marlow 

July 10, 2022, 6:15 AM 

US President Joe Biden and his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping are set to speak again in the coming weeks, 

Secretary of State Antony Blinken said on Sunday. Blinken spoke with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi a

day earlier for more than five hours to help lay the groundwork for a call between the leaders. While Biden 

said last month he would speak with Xi “soon,” Blinken suggested it was getting closer. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Biden’s Quest for Saudi Oil Faces Reality-Check of Slim Capacity, Grant Smith, July 10, 

2022, 4:00 AM 

Even if Joe Biden secures a pledge for more oil when he visits Saudi Arabia this week, it may do little to drive 

down the high fuel prices roiling the global economy. The US president’s visit to a country he once vowed to 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000305

isolate represents a significant thawing of relations, but the Saudis and their OPEC partners have limited 

spare production capacity to offer in return for this political concession. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Three-star general who mocked Jill Biden is suspended, Meena Venkataramanan, July 9, 2022, 

5:41  PM 

The U.S. Army has suspended retired Lt. Gen. Gary Volesky, its former head of communications, from his 

mentorship role and placed him under investigation after he posted a tweet that appeared to mock first lady 

Jill Biden’s tweet about the Supreme Court’s recent decision on abortion. The tweet was in response to 

Biden’s June 24 tweet about the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, in which the first lady 

lamented the decision’s impact on women. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: More Than 1,000 Protesters at White House Call on Biden to Protect Abortion Rights, Stephanie 

Lai and Ava Sasani, July 9, 2022, 4:42 PM 

One day after President Biden issued an executive order designed to ensure access to abortion medication 

and emergency contraception, more than a thousand protesters gathered in front of the White House, with 

hundreds risking arrest by sitting at the building’s gates, to urge Mr. Biden to do more. Despite rainy weather 

and the threat of flash flooding in the area on Saturday, the protesters sat on the wet concrete wearing green 

bandannas that read “bans off our bodies” and chanting “Disobey!” and “My body, my choice!” [Continue 

Reading ]

WaPo: Two long weeks: Inside Biden’s struggle to respond to abortion ruling, Ashley Parker, 

Yasmeen Abutaleb and Tyler Pager, July 9, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Three days after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, President Biden used a break between Group 

of Seven summit meetings at the luxury Schloss Elmau resort in Germany to get an update on the stunning 

and sudden loss of abortion rights for millions of Americans back home. Huddling with top aides, including 

some who dialed in from the White House, Biden declared at the outset of the call that he wanted to endorse 

ending the Senate filibuster to codify Roe into law, a position he so far had refused to take, angering many 

Democrats in the process. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: The Democratic left is frustrated with Biden. How much could it matter?, Dan Balz, July 9, 

2022, 2:13 PM 

Two weeks after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, President Biden stood in the Roosevelt Room 

in the White House on Friday to announce an executive order aimed at preserving, where possible, the right to 

an abortion. The moment illustrated the tension between the president and a portion of his party’s base 

frustrated by his leadership. [Continue Reading ]

CBS: Vice President Kamala Harris stresses need for "pro-choice Congress" to protect abortion 

rights, Melissa Quinn, July 10, 2022, 10:20 AM 

Vice President Kamala Harris underscored the importance of voters casting their ballots in the November 

midterm elections for a "pro-choice Congress" that will enshrine the right to an abortion into law after the 

Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. In an interview with "Face the Nation" that aired Sunday, Harris said 

the ruling from the high court last month cleared the way for states to enact new laws restricting or outright 

banning abortion. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: [OPINION] Opinion: Biden is heading to the Middle East for one simple reason, Aaron David 

Miller, July 10, 20222, 9:43 AM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000306

Presidential visits to the Middle East come in all different shapes and sizes. Exhausted and ill but enamored 

of kings, deserts and oil, President Franklin D. Roosevelt met King Ibn Saud, founder of modern Saudi 

Arabia, on his way home from Yalta in 1945. In 1974, Richard Nixon, the first sitting US president to visit both 

Israel and the Arab states, took what proved to be a farewell foray two months before he resigned the 

presidency. [Continue Reading ]

Fox: Republican, Democratic strategists weigh in on what Biden needs to change to stop GOP in 

November, Jayme Chandler and Thomas Phippen, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Midterms are just four months away, and President Biden’s approval ratings are at a historical low spelling 

trouble for Democrats seeking to maintain slim majorities in Congress. Numerous polls have indicated the 

economy, inflation and high prices for gas and food are the top concern of voters, and a Fox News poll from 

June shows a more voters trust Republicans over Democrats to address economic concerns. [Continue 

Reading ]

New York Magazine: Democrats Have a Biden Problem, Ross Barkan, July 10, 2022, 9:00 AM 

Donald Trump is so hungry for a comeback that he’s reportedly willing to kick off a presidential campaign 

before the midterm elections, violating decades of political orthodoxy and potentially costing himself 

campaign cash. The damning revelations of the January 6 hearings are no deterrent he wants another shot 

at Joe Biden, and he’s probably going to get it. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Biden’s Middle East policy shows echoes of Trump, Laura Kelly and Morgan Chalfant, July 10, 

2022, 7:00 AM 

President Biden’s trip to Israel and Saudi Arabia next week is expected to show how the administration is 

putting its stamp on relations with the region, but some experts argue the president has largely continued the 

policies of former President Trump in the Middle East. Biden sought to reverse Trump’s decision to pull out 

of the Iran nuclear deal, but absent reviving the agreement, is leaning into closer coordination between Israel, 

Saudi Arabia and the anti-Iran coalition in the region to deter an Iranian nuclear threat. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: Biden bogeyman: White House escalates attacks on Supreme Court over 

abortion, Naomi Lim, July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

President Joe Biden and his White House aides are increasingly venting their frustrations with the Supreme 

Court for overturning Roe v. Wade, putting the decision on the ballot in the midterm elections. But the 

condemnations, at odds with Biden's reputation for defending institutions, cements a precedent for politicizing 

the highest court in the land when he promised to encourage unity and a return to civility if elected. [Continue 

Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Biden sets up legal battle with red states over abortion pills, Cassidy Morrison, 

July 10, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Anti-abortion advocates are gearing up to fight President Joe Biden’s pledge to secure access to abortion-inducing medication by exercising his federal authority over states that have restrictions in place. Biden signed 

an executive order Friday aimed at bolstering access to abortion now that the Supreme Court ruled in the 

case Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization that the Constitution does not guarantee the right to 

abortion. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Teachers unions say Biden plan to recruit 250,000 tutors supports public 

schools, July 10, 2022, 6:00 AM 

A Biden administration plan to recruit 250,000 tutors was unveiled with the blessing of the nation's two largest 

teachers unions , which believe the effort will drive a "groundswell of support" for public schools. The 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000307

administration announced the "National Partnership for Student Success" earlier this week, claiming it was a

necessary effort to help students make up for lost learning caused by pandemic school closures. [Continue 

Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Biden’s woke attack on energy, Jessica Anderson, July 10, 2022, 12:00 AM 

Saule Omarova, whom President Joe Biden picked to regulate the banking industry, opened a new front in the 

relentless campaign of woke capital last May. Speaking about oil and gas companies, she stated that “the way 

we basically get rid of those carbon financiers is we starve them of their sources of capital." Omarova’s threat 

to weaponize banking rules against traditional energy companies wasn’t just talk. It was the most public 

admission yet of a behind-the-scenes strategy growing in power on the Left. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Bidens wish Muslims celebrating Eid al-Adha ‘a joyous holiday’, Caroline Vakil, July 9, 2022, 

5:15  PM 

President Biden said on Saturday that he and first lady Jill Biden wished “a joyous holiday” to Muslims in the 

United States and around the world who are observing the holiday of Eid al-Adha. “Jill and I send our warmest 

greetings to Muslims across the United States and around the world celebrating Eid al-Adha. [Continue 

Reading ]

Daily Caller: Biden Admin Funnels Taxpayer Dollars Into ‘Programming Curriculum’ For 

Transgender Inmates, Reagan Reese, July 9, 2022, 3:26 PM ET 

The Department of Justice invested almost $1.5 million of taxpayer dollars into a “transgender programming 

curriculum” focused on transgender inmates’ needs. The curriculum is designed to help transgender inmates 

with their gender “identity,” sexual health and safety, according to a summary of the government contract. 

Though it’s unclear if the curriculum has been implemented, the program could be available for up to 1,200 

transgender inmates, according to Justice Department estimates. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Harris says Democrats believed ‘certain issues were just settled’ when asked about failure 

to codify Roe v. Wade, Jared Gans, July 9, 2022, 3:12 PM 

Vice President Harris said Democrats believed Roe v. Wade to be a settled issue when asked about party 

lawmakers’ failure to codify abortion protections into federal law over the past 50 years. “We certainly 

believed that certain issues are just settled,” Harris told CBS News’s Robert Costa, in an interview that was 

shown on “CBS Evening News with Norah O’Donnell” on Friday and will be shown on “Face the Nation” on 

Sunday. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Texas AG demands Biden apologize to border agents over 'whipping' claim, 

Jenny Goldsberry, July 9, 2022, 2:41 PM 

Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton has demanded an apology from President Joe Biden for perpetuating 

the story of Border Patrol agents whipping Haitian migrants in 2021. "I just think it's really wrong," Paxton said 

Friday of the White House's characterization of the story. "I would expect instead that Joe Biden and some of 

these political leaders should come out and actually apologize to these guys for what they've been through." 

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Biden speaks with Whelan family after outcry over ‘uneven’ Griner treatment, 

Mike Brest, July 9, 2022, 2:30 PM 

President Joe Biden spoke with the family of an American wrongfully detained in Russia a day after there was 

an outcry because he communicated with the family of another American imprisoned there. Biden spoke with 

Cherelle Griner, the wife of WNBA superstar Brittney Griner, on Thursday following a significant public push 

for such a call from the president, though the family of Paul Whelan, an American who is serving a 16-year 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000308

# •

prison sentence for allegedly being a U.S. spy, expressed frustration with what Elizabeth Whelan, his sister, 

described as "uneven" treatment for the families of Americans wrongfully detained abroad. [Continue 

Reading ]

Santa Barbara News-Press (Santa Barbara, CA): Biden administration is withholding Hunter Biden 

documents, oversight Republican says, Casey Harper, July 10, 2022, 

Ranking Member of the House Oversight Committee Rep. James Comer, R-Ky., sent a letter to U.S. Treasury 

Secretary Janet Yellen this week alleging that the federal agency is withholding documents that detail the 

foreign transactions conducted by the president’s son, Hunter Biden. 

Mr. Biden has been the focus of controversy for his foreign business dealings, especially how his father may 

have been involved. He is currently under investigation by the Department of Justice. [Continue Reading ]

KAKE-ABC (Wichita, KS): President Biden angers environmental groups with decision on Alaska oil 

drilling, Unattributed, July 9, 2022, 10:26 PM (EDT) 

The Biden administration has taken a key step forward on a controversial proposed oil drilling project in 

Alaska's North Slope, angering climate advocates who say the project would release tons of emissions and 

doom the President's climate goals. The US Department of Interior released a draft environmental impact 

statement for the ConocoPhillips oil drilling project, known as Willow, on Friday night. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

NYT: The Fight Over Truth Also Has a Red State-Blue State Divide, Steven Lee Myers and Cecilia Kang, 

July 10, 2022, 5:00 AM 

To fight disinformation, California lawmakers are advancing a bill that would force social media companies to 

divulge their process for removing false, hateful or extremist material from their platforms. Texas lawmakers, 

by contrast, want to ban the largest of the companies Facebook, Twitter and YouTube from removing 

posts because of political points of view. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Durbin says its ‘not realistic’ to consider impeaching Clarence Thomas, Brad Dress, July 10, 

2022, 10:51 AM 

Sen. Dick Durbin (D-Ill.), the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, said on Sunday said it would be “a 

mistake” to impeach Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, who has drawn national scorn for suggesting 

the court reconsider case precedents that affirmed the constitutional right to same-sex marriage, 

contraception and the right to privacy in the bedroom. “I don’t think it’s realistic,” Durbin told “Fox News 

Sunday” anchor Mike Emanuel. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 09, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with Whit Johnson 

CBS: Weekend News with Adriana Diaz 

NBC: Nightly News with Jose Diaz-Balart 

Thousands of protestors swarmed outside the White House demanding more action on abortion rights. 

The call to action came 24 hours after President Biden signed an Executive Order protecting 

reproductive rights, all of this as at least 14 states banned or severely restricted abortion. President 

Biden telling voters to vote for Democrats to get the votes to codify Roe v. Wade. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000309

## ••••

# •

# ••••

In Japan, a 90 member task force is investigating the assassination of Japan’s longest serving Prime 

Minister Shinzo Abe with questions regarding security lapses and how the gunman, Tetsuya Yamagami, 

could get so close to Abe. A vigil will be held for Abe on Monday and a funeral on Tuesday for family 

and close friends. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Across the country more than 50 Million people are under heat alerts, strong winds, record high 

temperatures and bone dry humidity are driving the high fire danger. This as firefighters in California are 

battling a fast moving wildfire in Yosemite Park threatening the famed sequoia trees. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The Sri Lanka Government is in turmoil as the Prime Minister and President vowed to resign as violent 

protestors stormed into Government offices, the Presidential Palace, and the Prime Minister's home. 

Demonstrations were taking place all over the country's worsening economic crisis and food shortages. 

[ABC , CBS , NBC ]

A $44 Billion dollar legal battle may be taking place between Elon Musk and Twitter’s Board. The 

Stakes are high with a Billion dollar break up fee, as Musk alleges Twitter is in material breach of the 

agreement because the company did not provide the number of fake accounts on the platform, while 

Twitter says it did. [ABC , CBS ]

The US announced sending a $400 Million dollar package, including 4 long range high precision rocket 

systems allowing Ukraine to strike behind enemy lines. The US also promised precision guided shells 

for US provided Howitzers capable of hitting targets far away with deadly precision, as Russia’s attacks 

continue to be unrelenting. [ABC , CBS ]

Business owners were allowed to return today, even as a funeral was held for Eduardo Uvaldom, one of 

the seven people who was killed in the attack. Uvaldo, who would have turned 70 on Friday is survived 

by his wife, Maria, four daughters, four siblings, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. [ABC , CBS ]

Former White House counsel Pat Cipollone met with the Jan. 6 committee for about eight hours 

answering questions as to what he saw in the White House in the events leading up to Jan. 6. 

Committee members state Cipollone was careful and honest, “did not contradict the testimony of other 

witnesses.” [ABC ]

Officials are stepping up patrols after shark attacks have increased, even as authorities emphasize 

beaches are safe but they need to stay on alert. Shark patrols monitor the water with boats, helicopters, 

and drones, as reports that none of the shark attacks have resulted in fatalities. [ABC ]

Businesses in Highland Park acted as Bunkers protecting fleeing people and providing a safe place 

from the shooter. [CBS ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000310

## ••••••••

Gas Prices are dropping off, the largest weekly drop seen in 2 years due to fears of an economic 

slowdown causing lower oil prices. The National Average is still high at $4.69/ gallon. [NBC ]

SUNDAY MORNING TALK SHOWS 

ABC This Week with George Stephanopoulos 

While inflation and the Federal Reserve’s path to fight it have raised recession fears, so far job creation 

hasn’t faltered. Demand for workers in most industries remains robust. "We shouldn't be 'talking 

ourselves into a recession" , said Gina Raimondo, Commerce Secretary in an Interview. [Watch ]

A series of events have rocked some of America's closest allies: after three years in office, Boris 

Johnson’s political career comes to an end and Shinzo Abe, Japan's former prime minister, is 

assassinated while giving a speech. [Watch ]

In an Interview, GOP Rep. Adam Kinzinger tells that Trump White House counsel Pat Cipollone, who 

sat for a transcribed interview with the Jan. 6 Committee, didn't contradict previous testimony by other 

witnesses. “Anybody that wants to come in, that knows information to talk to the select committee, we 

welcome them to do so. We welcome them to do so under oath,” Jan. 6 Committee member Rep. 

Adam Kinzinger tells. [Watch ]

President Biden delivered an emotional speech Friday announcing an array of steps aimed at bolstering 

abortion rights in the aftermath of a Supreme Court ruling that struck down the precedent set by Roe v. 

Wade. [Watch ]

CBS Face the Nation with Robert Costa 

Face the Nation began with a review of British Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s resignation; the 

assassination of former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe; the Chicago Highland Park shooting and 

Vice President Kamala Harris’s visit to HIghland Park. [Watch ]

Vice President Kamala Harris spoke of gun violence; gun reform; abortion rights; the codifying of Roe v. 

Wade; voting rights; the Administration’s plans to codify Roe v. Wade; Justice’s misleading Senators; 

Brittany Griner and others imprisoned in Russia; Democracy on the ballot as the issue of midterm 

elections; police reform; speculation President Biden won't run for re-election in 2024; Texas Governor 

Abbot and immigration issues. [Watch -1] [Watch -2] 

NBC Meet the Press with Chuck Todd 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000311

# •••••••

The Secretary of Commerce, Gina Raimondo discusses President Biden’s plans to relieve economic 

pressure and the administration’s views on abortion rights. Gina Raimondo says criticism of President 

Biden’s performance after the Dobbs decision isn’t justified. [Watch , Watch -2] 

During an exclusive interview, Governor Larry Hogan discusses Republican views on former President 

Trump, the debate over gun violence and his plans for a potential presidential run. “I'm going all around 

the country helping people Trump is attacking and we’re winning most of them.” Hogan said. [Watch ]

Stephanie Murphy, member of the Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the U.S. 

Capitol, discusses testimony from former Trump White House counsel Pat Cipollone and questions 

over coordination between the White House and groups like the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers. [Watch ]

FOX News Sunday with Mike Emanuel 

President bowed to pressure, signing an Executive Order protecting reproductive rights even as he 

made clear he had little power with the issue. This as BIden prepares for his trip to Saudi Arabia, 

penning a Washington Post Op-ed stating, he was looking to reorient not rupture long-standing relations 

with an important ally in the region. [Watch ]

Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg discussed airline cancellations and delays amid a Pilot 

shortage; mandatory airline pilot retirement and plans to address the issue; planned airport 

improvements; infrastructure investments; Justices facing public protests; and expectations of 

President Biden running for re-election in 2024. [Watch -1] [Watch -2] 

AFTERNOON HEADLINES 

“”Twitter, Elon Musk Set for Unprecedented Legal Battle Over Deal Collapse”  [WSJ ]

“The Stock Market Faces Next Test as Inflation Looms Over Earnings Season” [WSJ ]

“Desperate for Recruits, Russia Launches a ‘Stealth Mobilization’” [NYT ]

END                                 

> RENDON Media News Alert Notice:
> This RENDON product is distributed as part of adeliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 15JPSS18RQZM00005
> for for DOJ.News.Clips2@usdoj.gov.
> The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips2@usdoj.gov
> Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 01570-000312

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject line. Your 

request will be processed within 7 business days. 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.19456 From:  Mike A en 

Subject:  [EXTERNAL]  Axios PM: New hornebuyer math 

To:  Good ander, Margaret V. (OAG) 

Sent:  Juy 8, 2022 4:17 PM (UTC-04:00) 

Open in app 

PR ESENTED BY BLACKROCK® 

# Aafl\/1 

By Mike A en · Ju 08, 2022 

Good Friday afternoon. Today's PM - edited by Justin Green - is 582 words, a 2 -m inute read. 

# 1 big thing: New homebuyer math 

01570-000313 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

Data: Fredde Mac; Oiart: Smra, Parwai/Axoo 

Get ready for a crazy ride: The era ofludicrously cheap and uncomplicated mortgages is over, my Axios business colleagues tell me. 

Why it matters: Strategy is now back in the picture, with real differences in rates and costs based on your decisions. 

• There are fixed rates and adjustables. 30 years, 2os and 1os. The 5/1, 7/ 1 and 10 /L Conventionals or jumbos? 

• Axios' Emily Peck notes that rates on a 5/1 ARM (adjustable, meaning a fixed rate now that resets to market rates after five years) are more than a point lower than a 30-year fixed rate right now. 

Some people are paying big for predictability, Bloomberg re po rts .

01570-000314 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 • The typical mortgage "rate lock" - where your rate today is the same as when you close - is being stretched out from 45 to 60 days to as long as 180 .

• That' s great if you're scared of rates going from 5% through the roof. But most locks won't let you unlock into a lower rate. 

• These extended locks can cost up to 1% of the total loan value. 

The bottom line: All that money that would have been spent on a rate lock could instead be put toward refinancing expenses instead, if /w hen rates come back down, Axios' Felix Salmon tells me. 

> ~

# 2.  □ □ Abe's final minutes 

> 01570-000315

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

A lllcl'l pays tr bute outs de the tra n stat on n Nara, Japan, where Sh nzo Abe was assass nated. Photo: Yu ch Yamazak /Get.t:y Images 

Moments before he was shot from behind, former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was doing what he'd & ne l'fo ~~ ~ 'gefting ~l e& R, df e cr &r c!- a§-he st'6.n\i>al f& d< l~ l candidate, Reuters reports. 

# In'7e'sfOO>iJri' th'~~ VOf~Mlt~ are scarce, security appeared to be light as 

Abe, 67, spoke at an intersection outside a train station in the western city of Nara. 

The setting: Members of Japan's version of the Secret Service, the elite Security Police, stood at Abe's right and just behind him in dark suits as he lauded a candidate for Sunday's upper house election. 

• "During the pandemic, he heard everyone's concerns," Abe said, as the younger politician bowed and waved. "He was the type of person who didn't look for reasons not to do something." 

• Those were Abe's last public words. 

01570-000316 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

At BlackRock, we are serving the communities that help the country thrive. 

We are proud to invest in the projects that build our economy, with $20 billion in U.S. roads, bridges and transportation invested on behalf of our clients. 

Learn mor e. 

# 3.  Catch up quick 

01570-000317 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

At. today's s gn ng on abort on access, Pres dent B den was accompan ed by V ce Pres dent Kama a ar s and S Secretary Xaver Becerra Photo: Kevn Lamarque/Reuters 

1.  Above: President Biden signed an executive order aimed at protecting post-Roe abortion access. The order will not restore access to abortion in the states that have already banned or restricted the procedure. But it could mitig ate penalties or help people know what rights they do have. Go dee per ... Read the order. 

2.  Border Patrol agents on horseback acted unprofessionally, unsafely and used unnecessary force toward Haitian migrants last September, - but did not strike them with horse reins, Axios' Stef Kight writes from a500-page re po rt released by the Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Customs and Border Protection. 

Go deeper. 

01570-000318 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 s s s el 

# 4.  □ To show your kids: Jurassic beach 

01570-000319 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

Photo: Y\€5 erman/Reuters 

This is a so-dinosaur "Dinos in the Sand" sa nd-sculpture festival in Middelkerke, Belgium, on the North Sea. 

01570-000320 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 X

Photo: Y\€5 erman/Reuters 

Artists from 30 countries are digging on the beach for the Jul y to Se ptember festival. 

el el 

01570-000321 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 A MESSAGE FROM BLACKROCK ®

# Invested in the future of first responders 

# X

01570-000322 

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 We're proud to manage the pensions of those who serve others. 

All acrOs.5 the country, we're helping Americans invest for their future. 

Meet Joshua , one of the hundreds of thousands of first responders whose retirement plan assets are managed by 

BlackRock. 

Learn more. 

Are you a fan of this email format? 

It's ca ed Smart Brev ty®. Over 300 orgs use t n a too ca ed Axos Q to dr ve product v ty wlh c earer 'M:lrkp ace corrrnun cat ons. 

Ax os thanks our partners for support ng our news etters. If you re nterested n adverts ng , earn more~ Sponsorsh p has no nf uence on ed tor a content. 

Axos, 3100 C arendon Bvd, At ngton VA22201 

You rece ved th s erna because you s gned up for news etters from Ax os. Change your preferences or unsubscr be here .

Was th s erna forwarded to you? S gn up now to get Ax os n your nbox. 

Fo ow Ax os on soc a med a: 

> 01570-000323

Document ID: 0.7.1088.30841 From:  The Wash ington Post 

Subject:  [EXTERNAL] News Aert : Border Patro agents on horseback behaved inappropri atey in Texas case but did not 

strike migrants, interna inquiry finds 

To:  Good ander, Margaret V. (OAG) 

Sent:  Juy 8, 2022 1:38 PM (UTC-04:00) 

Sig n up for ale rt s

News Alert July 8, 1:37 p.m. EDT 

01570-000324 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30838 Border Patrol agents on horseback behaved inappropriately in Texas case but did not strike migrants, internal inquiry finds 

The confrontation along the Rio Grande sparked angry denunciations from President Biden and many Democrats after images showed U.S. agents swinging reins and pushing Haitian migrants back into the river. An internal investigation blamed leadership failures and a lack of clear guidelines about the use of reins by agents on horseback. The findings have been sent to a review board that will consider punishment for four agents who were reassigned after the incident last September in Del Rio. 

> Read more
> ADVERTISEl'JENT
> 01570-000325 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30838

01570-000326 Document ID: 0.7.1088.30838 From : Kapper , Matthew B. (OAG) 

Subject: Fv.d: Abbreviated AM C ips 

To : g:t::qt:!~lf'  ( OAG )

Sent: uy , :14 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my i Ph one 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Coley, Anthony D.  (PAO)" <An th on y. D.Coley@usdo j. gov >Date: July 8, 2022 at 7: 2 6: 12 AM EDT To: "Klapper, Matthew B. (OAG)" llilm~ 

(b)  (6) , "B r '"Goodlander, Margaret V. (OAG)" o n, Tamarra D. (OAG)" G)" 

'D ic kerson, Julie (OA G)" ~I.Iii @us do j. gov >, "Miller, Marshall (ODAG) " 

Cc: "Iv er so n, Dena (PAO )" <Dena.I.DeBonis@usdoj .gov >

Subject: Abbreviated AM Clips 

MORNING HEADLINES 

• "Shinzo Abe, Former Japanese Premier, Is Assassinated" [WSJ , NYT , WaPo, LA I] 

• "Biden to sign ex ecutive order Friday aimed at safeguarding abortion rights" [CN N] 

• "Hiring Slowed , in June From Robust Pace, Economists Estimate" [WSJ., NY I] 

• "Boris Johnson Resignation Caps Stunning Fall From Grace" [WSJ. , NYT, WaPo ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

Reuters: U.S. charges two Homeland Security workers in Chinese spying scheme ,

Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 5:39 PM 

U.S.  prosecutors charged two men tied to the U.S. Department of l-lomela nd Security (DHS) as part of what federal law enforcement officials have called a "transnational repression sc heme" on behalf of the Chinese go vernment to spy on and har as s dissidents living in the United States. Asked for comment, aspokesman for China's embassy in Washington said it was "not aware of the specific situation" but that Beijing ''firmly opposes acts by the U.S. that groundlessly malign and smear Clina ." [Continue Reading]. See also: Axios, Daily Beast, 

Law360, Newsday 

Reuters: U.S. charges Haitian for role in 2021 kidnapping of missionaries, Costas Pitas, July 7, 2022, 3:22 PM 

The U.S. Justice Department on Thursday said it had charged a l-laitian gang member with hostage-taking for his role in the kidnapping of 16 American missionaries last ye ar. Jean Pelice is a member of the 400 Mawozo gang and was transferred into U. S. custody on May 16, according to the stat ement from the department, wli ch also said the criminal complaint was unsealed on Thursday. [Continue Reading] See also: Al Jazeera, CBS , Miami Herald, uet , WL WT -NBC (Cincinnati. OH) 

> 01570-000327

Docmnent ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000328 WSJ : Brittney Griner Pleads Guilty to Russian Drug Charges in Bid for Leniency , Evan 

Gershkovich and Louise Radnofsky, July 7, 2022, 4:46 PM 

Women’s basketball star Brittney Griner pleaded guilty to drug charges in court outside 

Moscow on Thursday, hoping to secure a more lenient sentence, her lawyers said, in what 

has become a thorny geopolitical fight between the U.S. and Russia. Russian prosecutors 

have said Ms. Griner was carrying two vape cartridges containing a total of 0.702 grams of hashish oil when she was stopped at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport in mid-February while 

traveling back to play for the Russian team where she has long spent the WNBA off-season, 

UMMC Ekaterinburg. [Continue Reading] See also : NBC , NYT , USA Today 

Washington Times: Feds warn of North Korean ransomware attacks on the health care 

sector, Ryan Lovelace, July 7, 2022, 4:20 PM North Korea-sponsored cyberattackers have targeted the health care sector with crushing 

ransomware, U.S. national security officials warned. The cyberattackers have targeted 

health care organizations since at least May 2021 using Maui ransomware, according to a

joint advisory from the FBI, Treasury and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 

Agency. [Continue Reading ]

St. Augustine Record (St. Augustine, FL) : Former St. Augustine man sentenced to 20 

years for trying to help ISIS, Briana Ross-Williams, July 7, 2022, 8:01 PM 

A former St. Augustine resident accused of wanting to help ISIS by demonstrating how to 

make and use an explosive, was sentenced to prison for 20 years, according to a news 

release from the U.S. attorney's office in the Middle District of Florida. Romeo Xavier 

Langhorne, 32, was charged with attempting to provide material to support to a designated 

foreign terrorist organizations, and was also sentenced Thursday to 15 years of supervised 

release. [Continue Reading ] See also : The Bharat Express News , WJXT-CW (Jacksonville, 

FL) 

JAN. 6

CNN: Justice Department closes in on documents subpoenaed from GOP operatives connected to Trump fake electors plan, Katelyn Polantz, Sara Murray and Holmes 

Lybrand, July 7, 2022, 2:51 PM 

Republican operatives connected to the plan to put forward "alternate" electors for Donald 

Trump are set to turn over information to the Justice Department as soon as this week -- as 

criminal investigations examining efforts to overturn the 2020 election pick up pace. The DOJ 

issued numerous subpoenas in the past few weeks and is seeking information in all seven 

battleground states where Trump's campaign convened the false electors as part of the 

effort to subvert the Electoral College. Some of the subpoenas called for Republicans 

connected to the scheme to provide documents by Friday, sources familiar with the 

investigation told CNN. [Continue Reading] 

Courthouse News: Fresh off debate, Michigan gubernatorial candidate pleads not guilty to Capitol riot charges, Emily Zantow, July 7, 2022, 6:00 PM “Trump has done amazing things for our country,” Michigan Republican candidate Ryan 

Kelley said during a gubernatorial debate, one day before entering a not guilty plea to 

charges in connection with the former president’s rally-turned-riot last year. On the eve of his 

telephonic arraignment Thursday, the Donald Trump loyalist told his five GOP opponents that 

he believes the 2020 election was stolen from the 45th president, who has repeatedly 

pushed the false claim without proof. [Continue Reading] See also:  The Hill 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000329

CNN: Jan. 6 committee gets its most important witness yet as Trump White House counsel testifies, Stephen Collinson, July 8, 2022, 12:03 AM 

The House select committee investigating the US Capitol insurrection on Friday could land 

some of its most critical testimony yet -- from former White House Counsel Pat Cipollone, 

who was present for some of the most fraught moments in Donald Trump's West Wing. The 

committee hopes Cipollone can provide insider details about what went on among key 

officials on January 6, 2021, when Trump refused to call off his mob as lawmakers ran for 

their lives. [Continue Reading] See also : NPR , The Hill,  MSNBC 

CRIMINAL LAW 

WSJ: Theranos’s Ramesh ‘Sunny’ Balwani Found Guilty on All 12 Fraud Counts ,

Heather Somerville and Meghan Bobrowsky, July 7, 2022, 6:20 PM A federal jury convicted Ramesh “Sunny” Balwani, the former top lieutenant to Theranos Inc. 

founder Elizabeth Holmes, on all 12 charges that he helped perpetuate a yearslong fraud scheme at the blood-testing startup. The verdict is the second conviction against Theranos leadership and comes six months after a jury found Ms. Holmes guilty of fraud; it secures 

another major victory for the U.S. government, which brought the case against the pair in 

2018. [Continue Reading ] See also : WaPo 

WaPo : Former ‘Cheer’ star Jerry Harris gets 12 years in child pornography case , Sonia 

Rao, July 7, 2022, 10:49 AM Jerry Harris, former star of the Netflix docuseries “Cheer,” was sentenced Wednesday to 12 

years in prison for requesting explicit photos and soliciting sex from teenagers at 

cheerleading competitions, according to the Associated Press. U.S. District Judge Manish 

Shah directed Harris to view the sentence as “an expression of the seriousness of your 

crimes, tempered with some hope that all is not lost for you or for your victims, and that in 

the future some healing can occur,” the AP reported, noting that the prison time would be 

followed by eight years under court supervision. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN 

Reuters: Ex-JPMorgan traders face U.S. trial on racketeering charges, Jody Godoy, 

July 8, 2022, 6:08 AM Three former JPMorgan Chase & Co employees face a U.S. federal trial in Chicago on 

Friday on accusations they helped turn their trading desk into a criminal enterprise that faked 

precious metals futures orders to manipulate prices. The bank's former global precious 

metals desk head Michael Nowak, precious metals trader Gregg Smith and salesperson 

Jeffrey Ruffo are charged with racketeering and conspiracy in the U.S. Justice Department's 

most aggressive case to date targeting the manipulative trading tactic known as spoofing. 

[Continue Reading] See also:  Bloomberg 

NYT: Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini Acquitted of Fraud , Tariq Panja, July 8, 2022, 6:01 

AM 

Sepp Blatter, the former president of FIFA, and his onetime ally Michel Platini were acquitted 

of fraud on Friday in the latest attempt by Swiss prosecutors to win a conviction in a

sprawling, seven-year investigation into corruption at the highest levels of world soccer. The 

criminal charges of fraud, criminal mismanagement and forgery against Blatter and Platini 

came after a multiyear investigation into the $2 million payment, which came to light in 2015 

after prosecutors at the U.S. Department of Justice revealed corrupt practices at FIFA 

dating back at least two decades. [Continue Reading ]

Times of San Diego : Man Pleads Guilty to Selling Fentanyl Pill That Killed Coronado 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000330

15-Year-Old , Debbie L. Sklar, July 7, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A San Diego man pleaded guilty Thursday to a federal distribution of fentanyl count for selling 

a laced oxycodone pill to a 15-year- old Coronado High School sophomore, leading to the 

teen’s death. Kaylar Junior Tawan Beltranlap, 21, admitted to selling a counterfeit oxycodone 

pill that led to the May 12, 2021, death of the victim, identified as C.J.S. in court documents. 

[Continue Reading] See also:  San Diego Union-Tribune 

Telegraph (Macon, GA) : Middle GA pastor sentenced to 10 years in prison for sexually assaulting minor in Uganda , Micah Johnston, July 7, 2022, 1:26 PM 

A former pastor was sentenced to 10 years in prison by a federal judge Wednesday for 

sexually assaulting a minor while on a mission trip in Uganda. 45-year-old Eric Tuininga, who 

is originally from Oregon but was living in Milledgeville at the time of his arrest, pleaded guilty 

to the crime in February. Judge Marc T. Treadwell sentenced Tuininga following a hearing 

Wednesday afternoon at the federal courthouse in Macon. [Continue Reading] See also :

WFXL-Fox (Albany, GA) 

KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA): Jamaican man sentenced to 14 years in prison for supplying flight attendant with cocaine, money , Alexi Chidbachian, July 7, 2022, 4:50 PM 

A Jamaican national who supplied a flight attendant with nearly 60 pounds of cocaine to 

smuggle on board an LAX flight was sentenced Wednesday to 14 years in prison. In January 

2017, Gaston Brown, 42, was charged with two counts of conspiracy to possess and 

distribute cocaine, one count of unlawful use of a means of identification, one count of use of 

a counterfeit access device, and one count of aggravated identity theft. He was found guilty 

on all counts a year later. [Continue Reading] 

WOIO-CBS (Cleveland, OH): Akron man sentenced to 25 years in prison for armed 

robbery, carjacking, Maddi Hebebrand, July 7 2022, 3:42 PM 

The Department of Justice has reported that Aaron J. Gaines, 39, of Akron, was sentenced 

yesterday to 25 years in prison for robbery, carjacking and illegal possession of a firearm 

that took place in 2021. According to a release from the DOJ, Judge James S. Gwin gave 

the sentence after Gaines’ plea to a seven-count indictment. [Continue Reading ]

KRIS-NBC (Corpus Christi, TX): 34-year-old man sentenced to 27 years for drug 

trafficking, Shane Rackley, July 7 2022, 3:07 PM 

U.S.  Attorney Jennifer B. Lowery announced today that 34-year-old Henry Wilkinson has 

plead guilty to drug trafficking and was sentenced to 27 years in federal prison. The time 

served will be immediately followed by five years of parole. At the hearing, the court heard 

evidence that Wilkinson had organized a drug trafficking operation in which methamphetamine 

had been distributed. [Continue Reading ]

WJLA-ABC (Washington, DC) : Maryland man faces 10 years after using ghost guns to shoot at US Secret Service guards , Anna Lunt, July 7, 2022, 11:00 AM 

Jeremiah Peter Watson, 24 of Hanover, Maryland was sentenced to 10 years in federal 

prison by U.S. District Judge Paula Xinis on July 5, after shooting at two United States 

Secret Service guards. The 10 years in prison will be followed by five years of supervised 

release. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: Minneapolis ex-cop Chauvin gets 21 years in prison for violating George Floyd's rights, Jonathan Allen, July 7 2022, 4:40 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000331

Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, convicted last year of murdering George 

Floyd, was sentenced on Thursday to 21 years in prison on separate federal charges of 

violating Floyd's civil rights during the deadly May 2020 arrest, with the judge calling the ex-cop's actions unconscionable. Chauvin, who pleaded guilty to the federal charges in 

December, already is serving a sentence of 22-1/2 years in a Minnesota prison for Floyd's 

murder after a trial in state court last year. The federal sentence will run concurrently and will 

see Chauvin moved to a federal prison. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , CBS , CNN ,

Guardian , The Hill , NBC , NPR , NYT , Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN),  WaPo , WSJ 

WaPo: Buffalo mass-shooting suspect may pursue psychiatric defense, lawyers say, 

Shayna Jacobs, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM Payton Gendron, who is charged with carrying out a racially-motivated massacre at a Tops 

Friendly Markets store here in May, might seek to introduce a psychiatric defense in his state 

terrorism and hate crimes case, his attorneys said at a court appearance Thursday. [...] 

While New York does not allow state-sponsored executions, the federal gun charge makes 

him eligible for the federal death penalty. Attorney General Merrick Garland has not yet said 

whether he will seek it. [Continue Reading] 

USA Today: Facing DOJ lawsuit, Arizona could be model for states to require proof of citizenship to vote , Rick Rouan, July 8, 2022, 5:01 AM 

Lawmakers in as many as one in five states have considered legislation to require voters 

show proof of citizenship – a requirement that drew a federal lawsuit this week and that 

voting access advocates worry could disenfranchise millions of voters. A new Arizona law 

that Gov. Doug Ducey hailed as a victory for “election integrity” – and that could be a model 

for similar restrictions across the country – now is being challenged as a “textbook violation” 

of federal law. The Justice Department on Tuesday sued the state to stop the law requiring 

voters to provide documented proof of citizenship from going into effect in January 2023, 

saying it could disenfranchise thousands of voters. [Continue Reading] 

BuzzFeed: A Guy Who Googled "How To Get Away With Murder In Real Life" After 

Shooting A Gay Teen Pleaded Guilty To A Hate Crime, David Mack, July 7 2022, 4:00 

PM 

A 26-year-old man in Kansas City, Missouri, has pleaded guilty to a federal hate crime after 

he shot a gay teen eight times after the boy made sexual advances toward him. In a hearing 

at the US District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Malachi Robinson admitted using 

a gun to willfully injure the teen because of his sexual orientation on May 29, 2019. [Continue 

Reading ] See also: Kansas City Star, KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO), KOAM-CBS 

(Pittsburg, KS) , KSHB-NBC (Kansas City, MO) , NY Daily News , Patch (Kansas City, MO) 

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

AP : Texas governor authorizes state to return migrants to border, Paul Weber, July 7, 

2022, 11:00 PM 

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott on Thursday authorized state forces to apprehend migrants and 

return them to the U.S.-Mexico border, pushing the boundaries of their enforcement powers 

and the Republican’s escalating efforts to curb the rising number of crossings. The federal 

government is responsible for enforcement of immigration. The White House criticized the 

move and one immigrant rights group called for swift intervention from the Justice 

Department. [Continue Reading] See also: Bloomberg, CBS, Courthouse News,  Dallas 

Morning News , KDFW-Fox (Dallas, TX) , Law360 , NYT , USA Today , WaPo 

Fox: CBP proposes discipline for Texas agents accused of 'whipping' Haitian 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000332

migrants, Louis Casiano, July 7, 2022, 8:41 PM 

The U.S. Customs and Border Protection has sent out disciplinary proposals for border 

agents on horseback accused of "whipping" Haitian migrants in Texas last year, an event that 

caused a firestorm among lawmakers in Washington, D.C. Details of the punishments have not been released but CBP is expected to imminently announce the results of the 

administrative investigation, a source told Fox News. [Continue Reading] 

KFOX-Fox (El Paso, TX): Number of migrants facing consequences for entering U.S. illegally is rising, report shows , Nasya Mancini, July 7, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The number of migrants facing criminal consequences for entering the country illegally is 

going up, according to a new report from Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, also 

known as TRAC immigration, at Syracuse University. The report specifically shows an 

increase in criminal referrals for unlawful entry into the country and unlawful re-entry. 

[Continue Reading] 

ANTITRUST 

Bloomberg: Chicken Industry Executives Found Not Guilty of Price-Fixing , Bob Van Boris, 

July 7, 2022 Five chicken industry executives were found not guilty of conspiring to fix prices from 2012 to 

2019, a defeat for prosecutors that came after two mistrials and a major setback for the Biden 

administration’s attempts to police rising meat costs. [Continue Reading] See also : Law 360 ,

Reuters 

WSJ: Justice Department Urges Judge Not to Dismiss College Financial Aid Antitrust 

Case, Melissa Korn, July 7, 2022, 7:36 PM The Justice Department weighed in Thursday on an antitrust lawsuit against 17 colleges and 

universities, challenging the schools’ legal arguments in a request to dismiss the case. The 

lawsuit, filed in Illinois federal court in January and seeking class-action status, names as 

defendants prestigious institutions including Columbia University, Vanderbilt University and the 

University of Chicago. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: DOJ Urges Against Exemption In Financial Aid Antitrust Case, Matthew 

Perlman, July 7 2022, 8:00 PM The U. S. Department of Justice is looking to wade into a suit accusing more than a dozen 

top private universities, including Brown, Duke and Yale, of conspiring to limit financial aid, to 

argue that an antitrust exemption applies only if all the involved schools meet its 

requirements. The DOJ filed a motion Thursday in Illinois federal court seeking to lodge a

statement of interest in a case from former students accusing 17 universities of unlawfully 

conspiring to reduce the amount of financial aid they provide. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law : FTC’s Khan Eyes Old Weapon to Crack Down on New Market Players, 

Dan Papscun, July 7, 2022, 4:00 AM The FTC is mulling the use of a rarely used anti-price discrimination law to potentially crack 

down on dominant companies’ unfair use of market power. The Federal Trade Commission is 

ramping up enforcement against illegal bribes and rebate schemes involving pharmacy 

benefits managers, it announced in a June enforcement policy statement. The statement 

pointed to one of its legal authorities—the Robinson-Patman Act, a Great Depression-era 

price discrimination law referred to as the “Magna Carta of Small Business"—that could be 

exercised by the agency. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000333

ENVIRONMENT 

NYT: E.P.A. Describes How It Will Regulate Power Plants After Supreme Court 

Setback , Lisa Friedman, July 7, 2022, 12:00 PM 

Following the Supreme Court’s landmark ruling last week limiting the government’s ability to 

restrict the pollution that is causing global warming, the Biden administration is planning to 

use other regulatory tools in hopes of achieving similar goals. A key part of the plan: Further 

restrict other pollutants that coal-burning power plants emit such as soot, mercury and 

nitrous oxides — a move that also will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. [Continue Reading ]

TAX 

AP: IRS asks Treasury watchdog to probe Comey, McCabe tax audits, Fatima Hussein, 

July 7, 2022, 5:59 PM The IRS commissioner has asked the Treasury Department’s internal watchdog to 

immediately review the circumstances surrounding intensive tax audits that targeted ex-FBI 

Director James Comey and former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, frequent targets of 

Donald Trump’s ire during his presidency. IRS spokesperson Jodie Reynolds said Thursday 

the agency has officially referred the matter to the inspector general for tax administration 

after Commissioner Charles Rettig, who was nominated to the job by Trump and is a close 

ally of the former president, personally reached out. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Bloomberg,  CBS , CNN , CNN -2, The Hill,  NYT , Politico , USA Today , WaPo , Washington 

Times 

WaPo : IRS chief faces questions over audits of Trump foes , Jeff Stein, July 7, 2022, 

4:55  PM 

The commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service faces a new onslaught of questions after 

a report Wednesday showed that two foes of President Donald Trump had been selected for 

a rare audit. Charles Rettig, whose elevation by Trump to lead the service in 2018 surprised 

many tax professionals when it was announced, faced new scrutiny after the New York 

Times revealed that both former FBI director James B. Comey and his deputy, Andrew 

McCabe, were the subjects of highly unusual audits for which the IRS says were selected at 

random. [Continue Reading ]

WJZY-Fox (Belmont, NC): North Carolina tax preparer sentenced to prison after arranging over $5M in false refund claims , Ciara Lankford, July 8, 2022, 1:12 AM A North Carolina man was sentenced Thursday to 15 months in prison for preparing false 

trust tax returns on behalf of his Washington, D.C.-based and other clients. According to court documents, Thy Muhammad owned and operated Seventh Millennium International, a

Rocky Mount, NC, tax preparation business. [Continue Reading ]

Birmingham News (Birmingham, AL): Birmingham grocery store manager ordered to repay $4.6 million in food stamp, tax fraud, Carol Robinson, July 7, 2022, 5:26 PM 

The manager of a Birmingham grocery store has pleaded guilty to tax and wire fraud charges 

and must repay the federal government more than $4.6 million. Omar Motley, 42, was the 

manager of the Big B Food Mart at 4012 24th Street North when he was indicted in March 

2021. [Continue Reading] 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

NBC: The FBI didn’t finish over 1 million gun background checks in time to stop a sale in 2020 and 2021 , Josua Eaton, July 8, 2022, 4:25 AM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000334

There were over 1 million opportunities for someone to buy a gun from a licensed dealer 

without a completed background check in 2020 and 2021, according to an FBI report 

released last month. In all, 1,002,274 background checks — or 4.2 percent — took longer 

than three business days in 2020 and 2021, a higher share than any other period since at 

least 2014, according to data compiled by NBC News. After the third business day, federal 

law allows dealers to sell weapons while the background check is still pending, which 

potentially puts weapons in the hands of people who can’t legally own a gun because of mental illness or their criminal history. [Continue Reading] 

ABC: US Marshals director says protecting Supreme Court justices 'a top priority', 

Luke Barr, July 7, 2022, 4:20 PM 

U.S.  Marshals Service Director Ronald Davis said protecting Supreme Court justices from 

threats has been a key part of his agency's mission even before the leaked draft of the 

opinion overturning Roe v. Wade in May, noting there were more than 4,500 threats to 

federal judges last year, including against those on the nation's high court. "It is something 

that is a top priority of the agency," Davis told ABC News Chief Justice Correspondent Pierre 

Thomas in an interview set to air on ABC News Live "Prime" on Thursday. [Continue 

Reading ]

Fox: 'Operation North Star': US Marshals capture 1,500 fugitives over 30 days across 10 cities, Audrey Conklin, July 7, 2022, 2:34 PM 

The U.S. Marshal Services (USMS) has arrested 1,500 fugitives stemming from its 

"Operation North Star" initiative to reduce violent crime in 10 U.S. cities over 30 days. Across 

Chicago; Washington, D.C.; New York City; Memphis; New Orleans; Los Angeles; Houston; 

Indianapolis; Philadelphia; and Baltimore, the USMS arrested 1,501 fugitives, violent 

criminals, sex offenders and self-identified gang members over the month of June, USMS 

said in a press release. [Continue Reading] 

WXYZ-ABC (Detroit, MI): FBI data: Intentional killings of law enforcement hit 20-year 

high in 2021, Brett Kast, July 7, 2022, 10:37 PM 

According to FBI data, last year, the intentional killing of law enforcement officers reached a

20-year high, the most since the 9/11 attacks in 2001. In 2021, 73 police officers were 

intentionally killed in the line of duty. In 2020, that 

KSL-NBC (Salt Lake City, UT): Utahn working with DEA sought to tip off suspect about wiretap, but not for obvious reasons, Annie Knox, July 7, 2022, 12:56 PM 

A longtime interpreter who used to work on federal narcotics cases in Utah admitted he tried 

to warn a suspect last year about a wiretap, but not to protect any criminal network or for a

kickback. No one disputes it was a bad idea. But all parties agree that Jose Araujo simply wanted to lighten his crushing workload that involved weeding through an onslaught of text 

messages and calls. [Continue Reading ]

WKRC-CBS (Cincinnati, OH): DEA: Tri-State area seeing record number of fentanyl 

overdoses, deaths, Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 8:00 AM 

Just a speck of fentanyl can kill someone, but area law enforcement is seizing the deadly 

drug in record numbers. More than 21,000 items containing the deadly drug were seized 

through May of this year. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

Washington Examiner: Grassley and Johnson say DOJ must investigate Joe Biden’s funding of Hunter’s participation in escort ring tied to Russia, Jerry Dunleavy, July 7, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000335

2022, 6:37 PM 

Two top Republican senators have demanded the Justice Department and FBI launch a full 

investigation into Hunter Biden's laptop, including the revelation unearthed on Hunter Biden’s 

laptop by the Washington Examiner that President Joe Biden apparently unwittingly financed 

his son’s participation in an escort ring tied to Russia. [Continue Reading] 

US SUPREME COURT 

CNN : [OPINION] The dangerous election theory the Supreme Court may be poised to endorse, Joshua A. Douglas, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM 

On the heels of groundbreaking decisions on Roe v. Wade and gun rights, the US Supreme 

Court appears poised to take up another case with the potential to profoundly reshape 

American life -- this time at the ballot box. The case in the upcoming Court session could 

make it easier for political incumbents to entrench themselves in office and could even put the 

2024 election in peril. After already making it harder for voting rights advocates to secure 

protection for the right to vote through restrictive rulings that defer to state legislatures, the 

Court now seems poised to cut off protection from state courts as well. [Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

Reuters : Biden's planned anti-abortion judicial nominee 'strong' conservative, ex-boss 

wrote, Nate Raymond, July 7, 2022, 5:40 PM A Republican lawyer considered by President Joe Biden for a Kentucky federal judgeship 

despite his opposition to abortion would be a "strong and dependable conservative" voice on 

the bench for decades, his ex-boss said in a letter released Thursday. That assessment 

came in a 2018 letter from former Republican Kentucky Governor Matt Bevin's general 

counsel recommending that now-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell support Chad 

Meredith becoming a federal district court judge.. [Continue Reading] 

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Washington Times: Democratic senators urge Biden to move faster on marijuana 

policy, Tom Howell Jr., July 7, 2022, 5:59 PM 

Six liberal senators are prodding President Biden to pardon prior cannabis offenders and 

compel the Department of Justice to reclassify the drug, a sign that members of the 

president’s own party are disappointed by a lack of progress on the issue. “The 

administration’s failure to coordinate a timely review of its cannabis policy is harming 

thousands of Americans, slowing research, and depriving Americans of their ability to use 

marijuana for medical or other purposes,” wrote Sens. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, 

Cory Booker of New Jersey, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, Ed Markey of Massachusetts Ron Wyden of Oregon and Bernard Sanders, Vermont independent. [Continue Reading ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

WaPo: American Cartel: Inside the battle to bring down the opioid industry, Scott 

Higham and Sadi Horwitz, July 7, 2022, 7:00 AM Late on his last day as a DEA agent, Joe Rannazzisi grabbed a mailroom cart to wheel a few 

boxes of personal belongings to his Ford Excursion. He had turned in his badge earlier that 

day — one without a formal goodbye lunch that was now an evening without farewell drinks. 

Almost everyone had already cleared out of the Drug Enforcement Administration’s sleek 

office complex in Arlington, and the silent corridor was a numbing coda to a career that for all 

its accolades seemed to have ended in defeat. It was an unusual feeling for the muscled, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000336

## ••••••••

tough-talking New Yorker who’d spent 30 years bringing down bad guys. [Continue Reading] 

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 7, 2022 

WNBA  star Brittney Griner has pleaded guilty to drug charges saying she accidentally 

packed cannabis oil in her bag. She’s been detained in Russia since February and the White House says they are working on her release. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

Former  Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was sentenced on federal civil rights 

charges today in the murder of George Floyd. He was sentenced to 21 years to run 

concurrently with his state sentence. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  father of the alleged Highland Park parade shooter has told that he is not culpable 

in the Independence Day attack, in spite of having signed a consent form for his son to 

apply for gun ownership. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

British  Prime Minister Boris Johnson is stepping down following months of scandals. 

But the embattled leader says he will stay on until his successor is chosen in early 

September. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

Elite  US veterans in Ukraine: American volunteer medics now operating near the front 

lines, preparing for a top secret mission. [ABC] 

Mississippi’s  only abortion clinic, which was at the center of the Supreme Court’s 

decision to overturn Roe v. Wade, is closed tonight. Physicians at the clinic saw their 

last patients for follow-up visits today. [NBC] 

Officials  are facing mounting concern that the U.S. is heading toward a summer Covid -

19 surge. Omicron’s subvariant, BA-5, is the most contagious version of the virus yet 

and is now the dominant strain, making up more than 50 percent of new cases. [NBC ]

In  an exclusive interview, New York City Mayor Adams said New York is not a

dangerous city, despite overall crime rising nearly 40 percent this year. Adams, a

Democrat, also agreed with Republican criticism of progressive prosecutors, and said 

that the far-right and far-left are “co-conspirators to the public safety crisis.” [NBC ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11064 01570-000337

From: 

Subject: (b)(6) Theresa Watson (OAG)  Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

To: Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: Ju y 8, 2022 7:50 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: July 8, 2022 at 6:50:20 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# July 8, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

US Attorneys 

3. 

National Security 

4. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

5. 

Criminal Law 

6. 

Civil Rights 

7. 

Civil Law 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000338

## •

8. 

Immigration & Border Security 

9. 

Antitrust 

10. 

Environment 

11. 

Tax 

12. 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

13. 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

14. 

US Supreme Court 

15. 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

16. 

Native American Affairs 

17. 

Marijuana Legalization 

18. 

Opioid Crisis 

19. 

Network Evening News Lineup 

20. 

Morning Headlines 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JULY 8, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000339

ABC : Texas immigration initiative 'Operation Lone Star' being probed for potential 

federal civil rights violations , Armando Garcia, Luke Barr, and Amanda Su, July 7, 2022, 11:00 

AM 

The U.S. Department of Justice is investigating Texas’ "Operation Lone Star" border security 

initiative for potential civil rights violations, according to a letter obtained by ABC News. The 

operation, a Texas Department of Public Safety program, targets migrants coming across the 

U.S.-Mexico border. It was rolled out by Texas Gov. Greg Abbott in March 2021 to curb migrant 

traffic into the state. [Continue Reading ]

US ATTORNEYS 

AOL : Phillip Talbert sworn in as U.S. Attorney for Sacramento’s Eastern District of 

California , Sam Stanton, July 7, 2022, 6:22 PM 

Phillip A. Talbert was sworn in Thursday as the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of California, 

a post he held on an interim basis twice before being nominated in April by President Joe Biden. 

Talbert, who was sworn in by Chief U.S. District Judge Kimberly J. Mueller, was confirmed to the 

post by the U.S. Senate last month and will oversee an office that has more than 90 lawyers with 

jurisdiction stretching from the Oregon state line to Kern County. [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: IRS asks Treasury watchdog to probe Comey, McCabe tax audits, Fatima Hussein, 

July 7, 2022, 5:59 PM 

The IRS commissioner has asked the Treasury Department’s internal watchdog to immediately 

review the circumstances surrounding intensive tax audits that targeted ex-FBI Director James 

Comey and former Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, frequent targets of Donald Trump’s ire 

during his presidency. IRS spokesperson Jodie Reynolds said Thursday the agency has officially 

referred the matter to the inspector general for tax administration after Commissioner Charles 

Rettig, who was nominated to the job by Trump and is a close ally of the former president, 

personally reached out. [Continue Reading] See also:  Bloomberg , CBS , CNN , CNN -2,  The Hill ,

NYT , Politico , USA Today , WaPo , Washington Times 

Reuters: U.S. charges two Homeland Security workers in Chinese spying scheme ,

Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 5:39 PM 

U.S.  prosecutors charged two men tied to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) as 

part of what federal law enforcement officials have called a "transnational repression scheme" on 

behalf of the Chinese government to spy on and harass dissidents living in the United States. 

Asked for comment, aspokesman for China's embassy in Washington said it was "not aware of 

the specific situation" but that Beijing "firmly opposes acts by the U.S. that groundlessly malign 

and smear China." [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: U.S. charges Haitian for role in 2021 kidnapping of missionaries, Costas Pitas, 

July 7, 2022, 3:22 PM 

The U.S. Justice Department on Thursday said it had charged a Haitian gang member with 

hostage-taking for his role in the kidnapping of 16 American missionaries last year. Jean Pelice is 

a member of the 400 Mawozo gang and was transferred into U.S. custody on May 16, according 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000340

to the statement from the department, which also said the criminal complaint was unsealed on 

Thursday. [Continue Reading] See also:  Al Jazeera , CBS , Miami Herald,  UPI , WLWT-NBC 

(Cincinnati, OH) 

WaPo: Buffalo mass-shooting suspect may pursue psychiatric defense, lawyers say, 

Shayna Jacobs, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM 

Payton Gendron, who is charged with carrying out a racially-motivated massacre at a Tops 

Friendly Markets store here in May, might seek to introduce a psychiatric defense in his state 

terrorism and hate crimes case, his attorneys said at a court appearance Thursday. [...] While 

New York does not allow state-sponsored executions, the federal gun charge makes him eligible 

for the federal death penalty. Attorney General Merrick Garland has not yet said whether he will 

seek it. [Continue Reading ]

USA Today: Secret Service Director James Murray announces retirement, taking job at 

Snapchat, Kevin Johnson, July 7, 2022, 5:34 PM 

Secret Service Director James Murray announced his retirement Thursday following a nearly 

three-decade career at the agency he has led for the past three years. "It has been the highest 

honor and privilege to call this exceptional agency my home for more than half my life," Murray 

said in a statement. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WSJ 

WSJ : Brittney Griner Pleads Guilty to Russian Drug Charges in Bid for Leniency , Evan 

Gershkovich and Louise Radnofsky, July 7, 2022, 4:46 PM 

Women’s basketball star Brittney Griner pleaded guilty to drug charges in court outside Moscow 

on Thursday, hoping to secure a more lenient sentence, her lawyers said, in what has become a

thorny geopolitical fight between the U.S. and Russia. Russian prosecutors have said Ms. Griner 

was carrying two vape cartridges containing a total of 0.702 grams of hashish oil when she was 

stopped at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport in mid-February while traveling back to play for the 

Russian team where she has long spent the WNBA off-season, UMMC Ekaterinburg. [Continue 

Reading ] See also : NBC , NYT , USA Today 

CNN: Justice Department closes in on documents subpoenaed from GOP operatives 

connected to Trump fake electors plan, Katelyn Polantz, Sara Murray and Holmes Lybrand, 

July 7, 2022, 2:51 PM 

Republican operatives connected to the plan to put forward "alternate" electors for Donald Trump 

are set to turn over information to the Justice Department as soon as this week -- as criminal 

investigations examining efforts to overturn the 2020 election pick up pace. The DOJ issued 

numerous subpoenas in the past few weeks and is seeking information in all seven battleground 

states where Trump's campaign convened the false electors as part of the effort to subvert the 

Electoral College. Some of the subpoenas called for Republicans connected to the scheme to 

provide documents by Friday, sources familiar with the investigation told CNN. [Continue 

Reading ]

Courthouse News: Fresh off debate, Michigan gubernatorial candidate pleads not guilty 

to Capitol riot charges, Emily Zantow, July 7, 2022, 6:00 PM 

“Trump has done amazing things for our country,” Michigan Republican candidate Ryan Kelley 

said during a gubernatorial debate, one day before entering a not guilty plea to charges in 

connection with the former president’s rally-turned-riot last year. On the eve of his telephonic 

arraignment Thursday, the Donald Trump loyalist told his five GOP opponents that he believes 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000341

the 2020 election was stolen from the 45th president, who has repeatedly pushed the false claim 

without proof. [Continue Reading ] See also:  The Hill 

Washington Times: Feds warn of North Korean ransomware attacks on the health care 

sector, Ryan Lovelace, July 7, 2022, 4:20 PM 

North Korea-sponsored cyberattackers have targeted the health care sector with crushing 

ransomware, U.S. national security officials warned. The cyberattackers have targeted health care 

organizations since at least May 2021 using Maui ransomware, according to a joint advisory from 

the FBI, Treasury and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. [Continue Reading ]

St. Augustine Record (St. Augustine, FL) : Former St. Augustine man sentenced to 20 years 

for trying to help ISIS, Briana Ross-Williams, July 7, 2022, 8:01 PM 

A former St. Augustine resident accused of wanting to help ISIS by demonstrating how to make 

and use an explosive, was sentenced to prison for 20 years, according to a news release from 

the U.S. attorney's office in the Middle District of Florida. Romeo Xavier Langhorne, 32, was 

charged with attempting to provide material to support to a designated foreign terrorist 

organizations, and was also sentenced Thursday to 15 years of supervised release. [Continue 

Reading ] See also : The Bharat Express News , WJXT-CW (Jacksonville, FL) 

Louisville Courier Journal (Kentucky): He claimed police let him into the Capitol. Now 

Kentucky man going to jail for Jan. 6 riot, Billy Kobin, July 7, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A Western Kentucky man who claimed a police officer "let us in" to the U.S. Capitol building 

during the deadly Jan. 6, 2021, riot in Washington, D.C., was sentenced Thursday to 14 days in 

jail. U.S. District Judge James E. Boasberg ordered Jordan Revlett, of Island, Kentucky, to also 

serve one year of supervised probation and 80 hours of community service as well as pay $500 

in restitution and not possess firearms while on probation. [Continue Reading ]

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

CNN: Jan. 6 committee gets its most important witness yet as Trump White House 

counsel testifies, Stephen Collinson, July 8, 2022, 12:03 AM 

The House select committee investigating the US Capitol insurrection on Friday could land some 

of its most critical testimony yet -- from former White House Counsel Pat Cipollone, who was 

present for some of the most fraught moments in Donald Trump's West Wing. The committee 

hopes Cipollone can provide insider details about what went on among key officials on January 6, 

2021, when Trump refused to call off his mob as lawmakers ran for their lives. [Continue Reading ]

See also : NPR 

CNN : Pat Cipollone to meet with January 6 committee behind closed doors Friday , Annie 

Grayer, Zachary Cohen and Ryan Nobles, July 8, 2022, 12:00 AM 

The House select committee investigating the January 6, 2021, insurrection is expected to ask 

Trump White House Counsel Pat Cipollone during a closed-door interview on Friday about what 

he witnessed in the waning days of Donald Trump's administration when the former President and 

his allies tried to overturn the election. The interview will be videotaped and could be featured at 

upcoming hearings, including one on Tuesday about how the violent mob came together and the 

role of extremist groups as well as another hearing -- which hasn't yet been scheduled -- on the 

187 minutes of Trump's inaction as rioters stormed the US Capitol. [Continue Reading ] See also :

The Hill , MSNBC 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000342

The Hill : Secret Service denial of Hutchinson story fuels attacks from both sides , Mike 

Lillis and Rebecca Beitsch, July 8, 2022, 5:27 AM 

The Secret Service is doubling down on its denial of an alleged altercation between former 

President Trump and his security detail on Jan. 6 of last year, providing a rare defense of 

Trump’s actions that day amid mounting evidence that he tried to orchestrate a coup from the 

White House. The extraordinary anecdote of a clash in the presidential SUV recounted last 

week in public testimony from former White House aide Cassidy Hutchinson has received 

outsized attention in the days since then. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

Reuters: Ex-JPMorgan traders face U.S. trial on racketeering charges, Jody Godoy, July 8, 

2022, 6:08 AM 

Three former JPMorgan Chase & Co employees face a U.S. federal trial in Chicago on Friday on 

accusations they helped turn their trading desk into a criminal enterprise that faked precious 

metals futures orders to manipulate prices. The bank's former global precious metals desk head 

Michael Nowak, precious metals trader Gregg Smith and salesperson Jeffrey Ruffo are charged 

with racketeering and conspiracy in the U.S. Justice Department's most aggressive case to date 

targeting the manipulative trading tactic known as spoofing. [Continue Reading ] See also: 

Bloomberg 

AP: Former Maine woman gets 4 year sentence in $580,000 theft, Unattributed, July 7 2022, 

3:55  PM 

A former company office manager was sentenced Thursday to four years in federal prison for 

stealing over $580,000 from the business, including COVID-19 relief funds, and using the money 

to buy a boat and other items. Jessica Pechtel, 35, had pleaded guilty in court in New Hampshire 

to one count of fraud. Pechtel, of Andover, Massachusetts, had full access to the company’s 

finances. Prosecutors said she made unauthorized purchases and transfers of funds to accounts 

that she controlled over 18 months. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini Acquitted of Fraud , Tariq Panja, July 8, 2022, 6:01 AM 

Sepp Blatter, the former president of FIFA, and his onetime ally Michel Platini were acquitted of 

fraud on Friday in the latest attempt by Swiss prosecutors to win a conviction in a sprawling, 

seven-year investigation into corruption at the highest levels of world soccer. The criminal 

charges of fraud, criminal mismanagement and forgery against Blatter and Platini came after a

multiyear investigation into the $2 million payment, which came to light in 2015 after prosecutors 

at the U.S. Department of Justice revealed corrupt practices at FIFA dating back at least two 

decades. [Continue Reading] 

WSJ: Theranos’s Ramesh ‘Sunny’ Balwani Found Guilty on All 12 Fraud Counts , Heather 

Somerville and Meghan Bobrowsky, July 7, 2022, 6:20 PM 

A federal jury convicted Ramesh “Sunny” Balwani, the former top lieutenant to Theranos Inc. 

founder Elizabeth Holmes, on all 12 charges that he helped perpetuate a yearslong fraud scheme 

at the blood-testing startup. The verdict is the second conviction against Theranos leadership and 

comes six months after a jury found Ms. Holmes guilty of fraud; it secures another major victory 

for the U.S. government, which brought the case against the pair in 2018. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000343

See also : WaPo 

WaPo : Former ‘Cheer’ star Jerry Harris gets 12 years in child pornography case , Sonia 

Rao, July 7, 2022, 10:49 AM 

Jerry Harris, former star of the Netflix docuseries “Cheer,” was sentenced Wednesday to 12 

years in prison for requesting explicit photos and soliciting sex from teenagers at cheerleading 

competitions, according to the Associated Press. U.S. District Judge Manish Shah directed Harris 

to view the sentence as “an expression of the seriousness of your crimes, tempered with some 

hope that all is not lost for you or for your victims, and that in the future some healing can occur,” 

the AP reported, noting that the prison time would be followed by eight years under court 

supervision. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN 

Law360: ICE Agent Charged In Scheme To Harass China's Critics, Jack Queen, July 7

2022, 8:54 PM 

A 15-year U. S. Department of Homeland Security veteran and an agent who retired from the 

agency gave secret information to Chinese spies engaged in a harassment and repression 

campaign against U. S. -based critics of the Chinese government, the U. S. Department of 

Justice said Thursday. Craig Miller, who is an agent with the U. S. Immigration and Customs 

Enforcement in Minnesota, and Derrick Taylor, who is retired from the agency and works as a

private investigator in California, were charged in a superseding indictment in New York federal 

court Wednesday. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , Daily Beast , Newsday , Patch (Oyster 

Bay, NY) , UPI 

Courthouse News: Sinaloa Cartel ‘plaza boss’ sues Justice Department for torture, 

supermax solitary confinement, Amanda Pampuro, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM 

A Mexican man who pleaded guilty to distributing more than 2,200 pounds of marijuana for the 

Sinaloa Cartel sued the U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Prisons in the U.S. 

District of Colorado on Thursday for subjecting him to overly harsh supermax prison conditions 

and solitary confinement after he refused to provide intelligence. “No similarly situated cartel 

member under the jurisdiction of the BOP has received the ‘notorious’ designation that Mr. 

Paredes-Machado received. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law : Medical Director Sentenced in Addiction Treatment Fraud Scheme ,

Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 3:27 PM 

Jose Santeiro, a Florida doctor, was sentenced to 54 months in prison for his role in billing 

around $112 million worth of addiction treatment services that were never rendered or were 

medically unnecessary at two addiction treatment facilities, the Department of Justice said 

Thursday. [Continue Reading ]

Times of San Diego: Siblings from Chula Vista, Tijuana, Accused in $42 M Scheme to 

Launder Drug Money, Debbie L. Sklar, July 7, 2022, 10:00 PM 

Federal authorities on Thursday announced the indictment of a local brother and sister for 

allegedly laundering more than $42 million in proceeds from drug trafficking. Jesus Vazquez 

Padilla, 50, of Tijuana, and Monica Vazquez, 48, of Chula Vista, are accused of using at least 22 

California-based shell corporations and around 85 U.S. bank accounts to transfer drug money to 

Mexican bank accounts. [Continue Reading] 

The Register Citizen (Torrington, CT): Feds: Five men charged in connection with Enfield -

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000344

area drug trafficking organization; 2 plead not guilty , Liz Hardaway, July 7, 2022, 10:00 PM 

Two men pleaded not guilty to drug trafficking offenses Thursday in connection with an 

organization out of Enfield that allegedly had ties to a Mexican drug cartel, according to federal 

prosecutors. A federal grand jury in Hartford returned an indictment in mid-May charging the two 

men Juan Sanchez-Razon, also known as “Juanito,” 27, of Enfield, and Guillermo Capetillo-Cervantes, 34, of Enfield and three others Sergio Horta-Molina, 46, of Suffield; Octavio 

Razon-Mejia, also known as “Pachas,” 36, of Enfield; and Carlos Gutierrez-Fernandez, also 

known as “Shaggy,” 38, of Enfield, the U.S. Attorney’s office said in a news release Thursday. 

[Continue Reading ]

Cincinnati Enquirer (Cincinnati, OH): Cincinnati man who hid fentanyl inside teddy bear 

sentenced to 19 years in prison, Brook Endale, July 7 2022, 8:21 PM 

A Cincinnati man who hid fentanyl inside a teddy bear was sentenced to 19 years in prison, 

according to the office of the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Ohio. In May of 2021, a

federal grand jury returned a nine-count indictment against Bryce Montrea Hodges. [Continue 

Reading ]

Birmingham News (Birmingham, AL): Birmingham grocery store manager ordered to 

repay $4.6 million in food stamp, tax fraud, Carol Robinson, July 7, 2022, 5:26 PM 

The manager of a Birmingham grocery store has pleaded guilty to tax and wire fraud charges and 

must repay the federal government more than $4.6 million. Omar Motley, 42, was the manager of 

the Big B Food Mart at 4012 24th Street North when he was indicted in March 2021. [Continue 

Reading ]

Laredo Morning Times (Laredo, TX): Woman pleads guilty in $12M marijuana conspiracy 

laredo crime, Cesar G Rodriguez, July 7 2022, 4:47 PM 

An Illinois woman has pleaded guilty to her role in a conspiracy to import over 3.7 tons of 

marijuana, announced U.S. Attorney Jennifer B. Lowery on Thursday. Patricia Pinto, 46, pleaded 

guilty to conspiracy to import and conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute marijuana. She is 

expected to be sentenced at a later date. Pinto faces up to life in prison. She was allowed to 

remain out on bond. [Continue Reading ]

Laredo Morning Times (Laredo, TX): Man guilty of possessing, sharing child porn on Kik, 

Cesar G Rodriguez, July 7 2022, 4:08 PM 

A Laredo man has pleaded guilty to possessing and viewing child pornography on the messaging 

app Kik, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office. Ricardo Reyna, 22, pleaded guilty to possession 

of child pornography and receipt of child pornography. His sentencing is set for Oct. 18. At that 

time, Reyna faces up to 20 years in prison and a possible $250,000 maximum fine. [Continue 

Reading ]

Times Union (New York): Meth conviction brings prison term of nearly eight years, Tim 

Blydenburgh, July 7 2022, 4:00 PM 

An Albany man was sentenced Thursday to 94 months in prison following his convictions for the 

distribution of methamphetamine, making fake government identification documents, using 

others’ identification information to open a post office box and aggravated identity theft, federal 

prosecutors said. Matthan Carroll, 36, admitted to selling over 277 grams of meth and sending a

portion of that drug through the mail, the Justice Department said. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000345

Times of San Diego : Man Pleads Guilty to Selling Fentanyl Pill That Killed Coronado 15 -

Year-Old , Debbie L. Sklar, July 7, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A San Diego man pleaded guilty Thursday to a federal distribution of fentanyl count for selling a

laced oxycodone pill to a 15-year- old Coronado High School sophomore, leading to the teen’s 

death. Kaylar Junior Tawan Beltranlap, 21, admitted to selling a counterfeit oxycodone pill that led 

to the May 12, 2021, death of the victim, identified as C.J.S. in court documents. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  San Diego Union-Tribune 

Telegraph (Macon, GA) : Middle GA pastor sentenced to 10 years in prison for sexually 

assaulting minor in Uganda , Micah Johnston, July 7, 2022, 1:26 PM 

A former pastor was sentenced to 10 years in prison by a federal judge Wednesday for sexually 

assaulting a minor while on a mission trip in Uganda. 45-year-old Eric Tuininga, who is originally 

from Oregon but was living in Milledgeville at the time of his arrest, pleaded guilty to the crime in 

February. Judge Marc T. Treadwell sentenced Tuininga following a hearing Wednesday 

afternoon at the federal courthouse in Macon. [Continue Reading ] See also : WFXL-Fox (Albany, 

GA) 

WJAR-NBC (Providence, RI): Attorney submits additional statements to feds about North 

Kingstown coaches, Unattributed, July 8, 2022, 1:00 AM 

An attorney who represents clients who allege inappropriate behavior by coaches in the North 

Kingstown School District said Thursday that he sent additional witness statements to federal 

prosecutors. Attorney Tim Conlon said in a letter to the U.S. Department of Justice that he is now 

representing two young adults who accuse a third coach in the school district of misconduct. 

[Continue Reading ]

KTBC-Fox (Austin, TX): [VIDEO] Kaitlin Armstrong moved around while in Costa Rica, 

used several aliases, officials say, Scott Brown, July 8, 2022, 1:00 AM 

In the media briefing Thursday, new details were shared that shed more light on the 43 days 

leading up to Armstrong’s arrest. [Watch ]

WVEC-ABC (Hampton, VA): Hampton man sentenced for COVID-19 loan fraud, 

Unattributed, July 7 2022, 8:56 PM 

A Hampton man was sentenced to 27 months in prison for falsely applying for loans intended for 

COVID-19 relief to small businesses, according to the Dept. of Justice. According to a press 

release from the DOJ, 44-year-old Marlon McKnight falsely applied for four loans administered by 

the Small Business Administration in August 2020 and January and February 2021. [Continue 

Reading ]

WRGT (Dayton, OH): Dayton man accused of fatally shooting girlfriend's ex-husband 

receives life in prison, Maxwell Shilling, July 7 2022, 8:21 PM 

Sterling H. Roberts, 39, of Dayton has been sentenced to life in prison for fatally shooting his 

girlfriend’s ex-husband in front of the victim’s children. Roberts was accused of shooting Robert 

Caldwell multiple times in front of his children. Caldwell died at the scene. [Continue Reading ]

WRAL-NBC (Raleigh, NC): Citing 'collective malevolence' court upholds Raleigh gang 

leaders' life sentences, Anthony Reyes, July 7 2022, 5:38 PM 

Gang-related murder, racketeering and drug trafficking charges were upheld for two Raleigh gang 

leaders on Thursday. Demetrice "Respect" Devine and Brandon "B-Easy" Mangum were 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000346

convicted in 2019 for conspiracy to participate in a pattern of racketeering, also know as RICO 

conspiracy, two counts of murder in aid to racketeering, two counts of murder with a firearm 

during and in relation to a crime of violence, conspiracy to distribute and possess with the intent to 

distribute controlled substances and conspiracy to commit witness tampering. [Continue Reading ]

WHAS-ABC (Louisville, KY): Louisville man sentenced to 7 years in federal prison for 

dealing drugs in Indiana, Sarah Magin, July 7, 2022, 5:29 PM 

Louisville resident Anthony Shanklin was sentenced to seven years in federal prison on July 6 for 

trafficking drugs in Indiana. The 41-year-old pleaded guilty to one count of distribution of 

methamphetamine. According to a Department of Justice press release, New Albany Police and 

the FBI began investigating Shanklin's drug trafficking in 2021. [Continue Reading ] See also :

WTTV-CBS (Indianapolis, IN) , WXIN-Fox (Indianapolis, IN) 

KSWB-Fox (San Diego, CA): Pair admits ripping off San Diego seniors in ‘grandparent 

scam’ , Matt Meyer, July 7, 2022, 5:26 PM 

Two more members of a national “grandparent scam” network have admitted their roles in the 

scheme, which took San Diego elders for hundreds of thousands of dollars. The U.S. Attorney’s 

Office shared the update in a news release Thursday, saying that Lyda Harris of Laveen, Arizona 

pleaded guilty that day in federal court and that Tracy Glinton of Orlando, Florida admitted her role 

last month. [Continue Reading ]

WOKV (Jacksonville, FL): Haitian gang member charged in kidnapping of missionaries, 

Briana Ross-Williams, July 7, 2022, 5:06 PM 

A Clay County man has been arrested and accused of distributing methamphetamine, 

possessing two firearms linked to a drug trafficking crime and possessing a firearm as a felon. 

The State Attorney’s Office confirmed that Shawntae Jamell Clark, 41, could face between 15 

years and life in prison if convicted.. [Continue Reading ]

WWBT-NBC (Richmond, VA): Previously convicted self-avowed gang member sentenced 

for firearm possession, Will Gonzalez, July 7 2022, 5:06 PM 

A Richmond man and self-avowed member of the Bloods Gang was sentenced Thursday for 

possession of a firearm. Alexander O’Neal Jackson, 36, was sentenced to six and a half years in 

prison on the firearm charge after he was previously convicted of discharging a firearm in a public 

space on two separate occasions. [Continue Reading ]

WRIC-ABC (Richmond, VA): Richmond felon sentenced for federal gun possession 

charge, Will Gonzalez, July 7 2022, 5:00 PM 

A Richmond man and “self-avowed” member of the Bloods gang was sentenced in federal court 

for unlawful gun possession after being arrested for a shooting that took place near the Richmond 

Raceway in September of 2021. According to the Department of Justice, 36-year-old Alexander 

O’Neal Jackson was arrested on Sept. 25, 2021, two days after shooting six rounds at the St 

Luke’s Apartments parking lot, hitting an occupied car and apartment. [Continue Reading ]

KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA): Jamaican man sentenced to 14 years in prison for 

supplying flight attendant with cocaine, money , Alexi Chidbachian, July 7, 2022, 4:50 PM 

A Jamaican national who supplied a flight attendant with nearly 60 pounds of cocaine to smuggle 

on board an LAX flight was sentenced Wednesday to 14 years in prison. In January 2017, 

Gaston Brown, 42, was charged with two counts of conspiracy to possess and distribute cocaine, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000347

one count of unlawful use of a means of identification, one count of use of a counterfeit access 

device, and one count of aggravated identity theft. He was found guilty on all counts a year later. 

[Continue Reading ]

Patch (Pottstown, PA): Montco Man Gets Federal Prison Term For Philly Pharmacy Armed 

Robbery, Jon Campisi, July 7 2022, 4:13 PM 

A local man will be spending nearly a decade in federal prison after he pleaded guilty to a

November 2021 gunpoint robbery of a Rite-Aid pharmacy on the border of Philadelphia and 

Montgomery County. Patrick Harrison, 39, of Pottstown, was handed sentence Thursday by U.S. 

District Court Judge Chad F. Kenney for the Nov. 18, 2021, armed robbery of the Rite-Aid along 

City Avenue in Philadelphia, according to the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of 

Pennsylvania. [Continue Reading ]

KRQE-CBS/Fox (Albuquerque, NM): Deming man pleads guilty to making child porn, Scott 

Brown, July 7 2022, 3:55 PM 

Guillermo Rodriguez Garcia, of Deming, New Mexico, pleaded guilty on Wednesday to producing 

child pornography. Garcia will remain in police custody until his sentencing, which has not been 

scheduled. [Continue Reading ]

WOIO-CBS (Cleveland, OH): Akron man sentenced to 25 years in prison for armed 

robbery, carjacking, Maddi Hebebrand, July 7 2022, 3:42 PM 

The Department of Justice has reported that Aaron J. Gaines, 39, of Akron, was sentenced 

yesterday to 25 years in prison for robbery, carjacking and illegal possession of a firearm that 

took place in 2021. According to a release from the DOJ, Judge James S. Gwin gave the 

sentence after Gaines’ plea to a seven-count indictment. [Continue Reading ]

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Kyle, SD woman sentenced for meth trafficking, Jazzmine 

Jackson, July 7 2022, 3:17 PM 

A Kyle, South Dakota woman is facing 10 years in federal prison after being convicted in a U.S. 

District Court. 26-year-old Christine Richards was convicted of Conspiracy to Distribute a

Controlled Substance and sentenced to 10 years in prison and 5 years of supervised release. 

[Continue Reading ]

KGBT-CBS (Harlingen, TX): Brownsville man sentenced for transporting migrants in 

“near-freezing” trailer, Steven Masso, July 7 2022, 3:14 PM 

A Brownsville man was sentenced after pleading guilty to a smuggling incident involving 

“dangerous and life-threatening conditions.” Carlos Alberto Avila, 39, was sentenced to 21 

months in prison for transporting over 20 migrants in a trailer that was near-freezing in 

temperature, according to a release from the U.S. Department of Justice. [Continue Reading ]

KRIS-NBC (Corpus Christi, TX): 34-year-old man sentenced to 27 years for drug 

trafficking, Shane Rackley, July 7 2022, 3:07 PM 

U.S.  Attorney Jennifer B. Lowery announced today that 34-year-old Henry Wilkinson has plead 

guilty to drug trafficking and was sentenced to 27 years in federal prison. The time served will be 

immediately followed by five years of parole. At the hearing, the court heard evidence that 

Wilkinson had organized a drug trafficking operation in which methamphetamine had been 

distributed. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000348

WICS-ABC (Springfield, IL): Ford County man pleads guilty to attempted kidnapping, 

Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 3:00 PM 

A Ford County man who tried to kidnap a Gibson City woman has pleaded guilty to the charges. 

Paul Theesfield, 37, of Roberts, Illinois, pleaded guilty on Wednesday to attempted kidnapping. 

His sentencing has been set for November 14. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WCIA-CBS 

(Champaign, IL) 

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): White River man pleads not guilty to sex abuse, Rae Yost, July 

7 2022, 3:00 PM 

A White River man is awaiting trial on a charge of aggravated sexual abuse. Justin Moreno, 33, 

pled not guilty to the charge on July 5, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office in South Dakota. 

Moreno was indicted on May 10. [Continue Reading ]

WHAV-FM (Haverhill, MA): Man Who Worked with Lawrence, Haverhill and Methuen Gang 

Pleads Guilty to Federal Drug Charges, Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 3:00 PM 

A Chelmsford man pleaded guilty Wednesday in federal court in Boston to working with local 

gangs to sell counterfeit oxycodone and Adderall pills that actually contained fentanyl and 

methamphetamine. Officials characterized the operation as “centering around the Gangster 

Disciples in Lawrence, Haverhill and Methuen.” Twenty-nine-year-old Vando Gvozdarevic, 

pleaded guilty to possession with intent to distribute 500 grams or more of methamphetamine 

and 40 grams or more of fentanyl. U.S. Senior District Court Judge Douglas P. Woodlock 

scheduled sentencing for Nov. 7. [Continue Reading ]

KPAX-CBS/CW (Missoula, MT): Alberton man sentenced for trafficking controlled 

substances, Unattributed, July 7 2022, 2:57 PM 

A man who admitted to dealing controlled substances in the Missoula area was sentenced 

Thursday to 10 years in prison, to be followed by five years of supervised release. Jamie Scott 

Chandler, 48, of Alberton, pleaded guilty in February to conspiracy to distribute controlled 

substances, U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich said. [Continue Reading ]

KSL-NBC (Salt Lake City, UT): Las Vegas man charged with theft after blood found at 

robbery in St. George gun shop, Madison Swenson, July 7 2022, 2:54 PM 

A 41-year-old man from Las Vegas has been charged by a federal grand jury in Utah after he 

allegedly damaged a gun shop in St. George and then stole 17 firearms from the business. 

“According to the allegations in the criminal complaint and law enforcement affidavit filed by 

federal prosecutors, (Brett Clinton) Combs used a rock to break into the Dixie Gun & Fish store in 

St. George during the early morning hours of March 4, 2022,” a press release from the District of 

Utah stated Thursday. [Continue Reading ] See also:  KSTU-Fox (Salt Lake City, UT) , KTVX-ABC 

(Salt Lake City, UT) 

WKBW-ABC (Buffalo, NY): West Falls man pleads guilty to child exploitation charge, 

Anthony Reyes, July 7 2022, 2:46 PM 

A West Falls man has pleaded guilty to a child exploitation charge as jury selection was 

scheduled to get underway in his federal trial. The U.S. Attorney's Office announced that 36-year -

old Nicholas Turnquist pleaded guilty before U.S. District Judge John L. Sinatra, Jr. to 

transportation and attempted transportation of a minor with the intent to engage in criminal sexual 

activity. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000349

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Pine Ridge man sentenced for mailing meth to South Dakota, 

Jazzmine Jackson, July 7 2022, 2:10 PM 

A Pine Ridge man has been sentenced in a federal case involving the distribution and sale of 

methamphetamine across state lines. Thomas Prado, 57, pleaded guilty to the charge of 

Conspiracy to Distribute a Controlled Substance in March. Last week, he was sentenced to 10 

years in federal prison, 5 years supervised release, and must pay $100 to the Federal Crime 

Victims Fund. [Continue Reading ]

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Rapid City man sentenced for illegal gun possession, Marissa 

Lute, July 7 2022, 1:40 PM 

A federal grand jury has indicted a Rapid City man for illegally owning a gun while being a

previously convicted felon. The United State’s Attorney’s Office says 31-year-old Jackson 

Bissonette was sentenced to 24 months, followed by three years of supervised release and 

ordered to pay a $100 special assessment to the Federal Crime Victims Fund. [Continue 

Reading ]

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Texas man sentenced for bringing cocaine to Sioux Falls, 

Hannah Olsen, July 7 2022, 1:34 PM 

One of two Texas men charged, in a historic cocaine bust in Sioux Falls, is headed to federal 

prison. A judge has sentenced 30-year-old Isaias Santos Escamilla to 10 years behind bars for 

dealing drugs. [Continue Reading] 

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): 42-year-old man sentenced for assaulting an officer, Mitch 

Klein, July 7 2022, 1:14 PM 

A Rosebud man has been convicted of assaulting a federal officer. The U.S. Attorney’s Office 

says the conviction stemmed from a July 15, 2021 incident in Todd County. Rosebud authorities 

responded to a call to remove 42-year-old Todd Kal Wilcox from a residence for being under the 

influence and disorderly. [Continue Reading] 

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Rapid City man facing illegal drug, firearm possession, Eric 

Mayer, July 7 2022, 1:05 PM 

A 22-year-old Rapid City man has been indicted by a federal grand jury for illegal possession of a

firearm and drugs. The U.S. Attorney’s Office for the District of South Dakota says Harold Salway 

Jr. was indicted on June 23 and pleaded not guilty. A pending trial date has not been set. 

[Continue Reading ]

WKYT-CBS/CW (Lexington, KY): Ky. man sentenced for production of child pornography ,

Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 11:40 AM 

A Franklin County man has been sentenced after pleading guilty to producing child pornography. 

The U.S. Attorney’s Office says 54-year-old Edward Leonidas Lewis was sentenced to 300 

months on Wednesday. According to Lewis’ guilty plea, on February 25, 2021, law enforcement 

found images of child pornography on four different electronic devices in his possession. Lewis 

then admitted to using “spy cameras,” hidden in bathrooms and bedrooms of his residences, to 

produce child pornography images of a victim. [Continue Reading] 

WJLA-ABC (Washington, DC) : Maryland man faces 10 years after using ghost guns to 

shoot at US Secret Service guards , Anna Lunt, July 7, 2022, 11:00 AM 

Jeremiah Peter Watson, 24 of Hanover, Maryland was sentenced to 10 years in federal prison by 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000350

U.S.  District Judge Paula Xinis on July 5, after shooting at two United States Secret Service 

guards. The 10 years in prison will be followed by five years of supervised release. [Continue 

Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: Minneapolis ex-cop Chauvin gets 21 years in prison for violating George 

Floyd's rights, Jonathan Allen, July 7 2022, 4:40 PM 

Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, convicted last year of murdering George Floyd, 

was sentenced on Thursday to 21 years in prison on separate federal charges of violating Floyd's 

civil rights during the deadly May 2020 arrest, with the judge calling the ex-cop's actions 

unconscionable. Chauvin, who pleaded guilty to the federal charges in December, already is 

serving a sentence of 22-1/2 years in a Minnesota prison for Floyd's murder after a trial in state 

court last year. The federal sentence will run concurrently and will see Chauvin moved to a federal 

prison. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , CBS , CNN , Guardian , The Hill , NBC , NPR , NYT ,

Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN),  WaPo , WSJ 

USA Today: Facing DOJ lawsuit, Arizona could be model for states to require proof of 

citizenship to vote , Rick Rouan, July 8, 2022, 5:01 AM 

Lawmakers in as many as one in five states have considered legislation to require voters show 

proof of citizenship a requirement that drew a federal lawsuit this week and that voting access 

advocates worry could disenfranchise millions of voters. A new Arizona law that Gov. Doug Ducey 

hailed as a victory for “election integrity” and that could be a model for similar restrictions 

across the country now is being challenged as a “textbook violation” of federal law. The Justice 

Department on Tuesday sued the state to stop the law requiring voters to provide documented 

proof of citizenship from going into effect in January 2023, saying it could disenfranchise 

thousands of voters. [Continue Reading ]

BuzzFeed: A Guy Who Googled "How To Get Away With Murder In Real Life" After 

Shooting A Gay Teen Pleaded Guilty To A Hate Crime, David Mack, July 7 2022, 4:00 PM 

A 26-year-old man in Kansas City, Missouri, has pleaded guilty to a federal hate crime after he 

shot a gay teen eight times after the boy made sexual advances toward him. In a hearing at the 

US District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Malachi Robinson admitted using a gun to 

willfully injure the teen because of his sexual orientation on May 29, 2019. [Continue Reading] 

See also: Kansas City Star, KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO), KOAM-CBS (Pittsburg, KS),  KSHB -

NBC (Kansas City, MO) , NY Daily News,  Patch (Kansas City, MO) 

CIVIL LAW 

Law360 : 5th Circ. Sends Tyson COVID Suits Back To State Court , Mike Curly, July 7, 2022, 

5:39  PM 

The Fifth Circuit on Thursday sent back to state court a pair of suits from a group of Tyson Foods 

Inc. workers alleging the company's negligence in the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic 

led to them contracting the disease, saying the company was never operating under the direction 

of a federal officer. [Continue Reading ]

WTRF-CBS/ABC (Wheeling, WV): Weirton Medical Center responds to $1.5 million DOJ 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000351

settlement, Karen Compton, July 7 2022, 4:27 PM 

Earlier today, officials announced that Weirton Medical Center, a hospital located in Weirton, 

West Virginia, has agreed to pay $1.5 million to resolve allegations that it violated the False 

Claims Act by knowingly submitting or causing the submission of claims to Medicare in violation 

of the Physician Self-Referral Law (commonly referred to as the Stark Law), according to the 

Department of Justice (DOJ). [Continue Reading ] See also:  WV News (Charleston, WV) 

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

AP : Texas governor authorizes state to return migrants to border, Paul Weber, July 7, 

2022, 11:00 PM 

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott on Thursday authorized state forces to apprehend migrants and return 

them to the U.S.-Mexico border, pushing the boundaries of their enforcement powers and the 

Republican’s escalating efforts to curb the rising number of crossings. The federal government is 

responsible for enforcement of immigration. The White House criticized the move and one 

immigrant rights group called for swift intervention from the Justice Department. [Continue 

Reading] See also: Bloomberg, CBS, Courthouse News,  Dallas Morning News , KDFW-Fox 

(Dallas, TX) , Law360 , NYT , USA Today , WaPo 

Fox: CBP proposes discipline for Texas agents accused of 'whipping' Haitian migrants, 

Louis Casiano, July 7, 2022, 8:41 PM 

The U.S. Customs and Border Protection has sent out disciplinary proposals for border agents 

on horseback accused of "whipping" Haitian migrants in Texas last year, an event that caused a

firestorm among lawmakers in Washington, D.C. Details of the punishments have not been 

released but CBP is expected to imminently announce the results of the administrative 

investigation, a source told Fox News. [Continue Reading ]

NBC: Number of Haitians deported plunged in June as more are allowed to seek asylum, 

Julia Ainsley, July 7, 2022, 12:00 PM 

The number of Haitians deported by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement fell dramatically 

in June as the Biden administration has allowed more to enter the country through legal ports of 

entry to seek asylum, according to an internal planning document obtained by NBC News. The 

policy is meant to incentivize Haitians to come through legal ports of entry along the border rather 

than attempting to cross undetected, according to the document. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: ICE Agrees To Restrictions In COVID-19 Hot Spot Settlement , Rae Varona, July 7, 

2022, 8:00 PM 

The federal government agreed to follow COVID-19 safety protocols and put housing restrictions 

in a Virginia-based immigration detention center that once had nearly 90% of its detainees test 

positive for the coronavirus, as part of a settlement with current and former detainees.. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: DHS Watchdog Rebukes Conditions At Ga. Detention Center, Rosie Manins, July 

7, 2022, 6:21 PM 

Immigrants detained at a Georgia facility have been plagued by unsanitary and dilapidated 

conditions that violate federal government standards, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security 

Office of Inspector General said in a report based on an unannounced inspection. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000352

The Center Square: CBP seizes more than 1,000 lbs of meth in New Mexico, Robert Davis, 

July 7, 2022, 5:29 PM 

Federal agents along the U.S. border with Mexico recently seized more than 1,000 pounds of 

methamphetamine, officials said Thursday. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) agents 

working at New Mexico's Santa Teresa border checkpoint made the seizure on June 30 after a

person driving a dump trailer truck tried to enter the U.S. from Mexico. CBP discovered more than 

208 bundles of methamphetamine totaling 1,037 inside after pulling the truck over for additional 

inspection. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: 5th Circ. Won't Reinstate Biden's Bid To Narrow ICE Ops , Alyssa Aquino, July 7, 

2022, 6:19 PM 

The Fifth Circuit refused to reinstate the Biden administration's attempt to narrow the number of 

immigrants prioritized for removal, splitting sharply from the Sixth Circuit to find that the effort 

likely violated federal immigration law. [Continue Reading ] See also: Washington Times 

San Diego Union Tribune: Feds intercept dozens of undocumented immigrants during 

Fourth of July weekend, Lyndsay Winkley and Alex Riggins, July 7, 2022, 7:44 PM 

Federal border agents stopped eight groups of undocumented immigrants who tried to cross the 

U.S.-Mexico border, some by land but more by sea, over the Fourth of July weekend, officials 

said Thursday. Customs and Border Protection officials said the attempted water crossings 

included people swimming, vessels making stealth runs under the cover of darkness and at least 

two watercraft that tried to blend in with recreational boaters. [Continue Reading] 

Tucson Sentinel: 3 charged with transporting & harboring 86 migrants , Paul Ingram, July 7, 

2022, 1:30 PM 

Federal agents arrested three men during a pair of raids in Phoenix last week, charging them with 

conspiracy to transport and harbor at least 86 people in the country illegally, officials announced 

Wednesday. Jesus Gabriel Villela-Duran, 28, and Eleazar Soto-Diaz, 34, were allegedly 

caretakers for two residences where special agents found 79 people in the country without 

authorization, said Yvette Cantu, a Justice Department spokeswoman. [Continue Reading ]

KFOX-Fox (El Paso, TX): Number of migrants facing consequences for entering U.S. 

illegally is rising, report shows , Nasya Mancini, July 7, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The number of migrants facing criminal consequences for entering the country illegally is going 

up, according to a new report from Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, also known as 

TRAC immigration, at Syracuse University. The report specifically shows an increase in criminal 

referrals for unlawful entry into the country and unlawful re-entry. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

Reuters: U.S. FTC settles with Weber grills over 'right to repair' , Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 

2:32  PM 

Weber-Stephen Products LLC (WEBR.N), the maker of Weber grills, has agreed to scrap some 

warranty rules as part of a settlement with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) over 

consumers' right to repair products that they purchase, the agency said on Thursday. Under the 

settlement, Weber will no longer require consumers to use Weber parts as a condition of 

remaining under warranty and will add language to its warranty to that effect, the FTC said in a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000353

statement. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: Justice Department Urges Judge Not to Dismiss College Financial Aid Antitrust 

Case, Melissa Korn, July 7, 2022, 7:36 PM 

The Justice Department weighed in Thursday on an antitrust lawsuit against 17 colleges and 

universities, challenging the schools’ legal arguments in a request to dismiss the case. The 

lawsuit, filed in Illinois federal court in January and seeking class-action status, names as 

defendants prestigious institutions including Columbia University, Vanderbilt University and the 

University of Chicago. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Urges Against Exemption In Financial Aid Antitrust Case, Matthew Perlman, 

July 7 2022, 8:00 PM 

The U. S. Department of Justice is looking to wade into a suit accusing more than a dozen top 

private universities, including Brown, Duke and Yale, of conspiring to limit financial aid, to argue 

that an antitrust exemption applies only if all the involved schools meet its requirements. The DOJ 

filed a motion Thursday in Illinois federal court seeking to lodge a statement of interest in a case 

from former students accusing 17 universities of unlawfully conspiring to reduce the amount of 

financial aid they provide. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law : FTC’s Khan Eyes Old Weapon to Crack Down on New Market Players, 

Dan Papscun, July 7, 2022, 4:00 AM 

The FTC is mulling the use of a rarely used anti-price discrimination law to potentially crack down 

on dominant companies’ unfair use of market power. The Federal Trade Commission is ramping 

up enforcement against illegal bribes and rebate schemes involving pharmacy benefits 

managers, it announced in a June enforcement policy statement. The statement pointed to one of 

its legal authorities the Robinson-Patman Act, a Great Depression-era price discrimination law 

referred to as the “Magna Carta of Small Business" that could be exercised by the agency. 

[Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

NYT: E.P.A. Describes How It Will Regulate Power Plants After Supreme Court Setback ,

Lisa Friedman, July 7, 2022, 12:00 PM 

Following the Supreme Court’s landmark ruling last week limiting the government’s ability to 

restrict the pollution that is causing global warming, the Biden administration is planning to use 

other regulatory tools in hopes of achieving similar goals. A key part of the plan: Further restrict 

other pollutants that coal-burning power plants emit such as soot, mercury and nitrous oxides a

move that also will reduce greenhouse gas emissions. [Continue Reading ]

Courthouse News: Ninth Circuit denies oil giants’ appeal in climate change lawsuit ,

Candance Cheung, July 7, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled Thursday to deny an appeal by fossil fuel companies to 

transfer climate change lawsuits to federal court, forcing the fight to remain in state court. The 

lawsuits, filed by the city and county of Honolulu and Maui County in 2020, accused the 

companies of exacerbating the effect of climate change on the islands to increase their own 

profits. [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000354

Law360: 9th Circ. Questions Enviros' Strategy In EPA Fungicide Case , Gina Kim, July 7, 

2022, 7:37 PM 

Environmental groups dropped their bid to void the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's 

approval of a new crop fungicide, but asked the Ninth Circuit to set a deadline for the agency to 

study the chemical's effects, prompting one judge to ask why the environmentalists would allow 

"another nine months to a year of fish being killed" as part of a legal strategy. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Texas Says Climate Ruling Precludes Nuclear Waste Site , Keith Goldberg, July 7, 

2022, 5:18 PM 

Texas has told the Fifth Circuit that the U.S. Supreme Court's recent decision curbing the U.S. 

Environmental Protection Agency's ability to regulate greenhouse gas emissions bolsters its case 

that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission wrongly approved a West Texas nuclear waste storage 

project. [Continue Reading ]

TAX 

WaPo : IRS chief faces questions over audits of Trump foes , Jeff Stein, July 7, 2022, 4:55 

PM 

The commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service faces a new onslaught of questions after a

report Wednesday showed that two foes of President Donald Trump had been selected for a

rare audit. Charles Rettig, whose elevation by Trump to lead the service in 2018 surprised many 

tax professionals when it was announced, faced new scrutiny after the New York Times revealed 

that both former FBI director James B. Comey and his deputy, Andrew McCabe, were the 

subjects of highly unusual audits for which the IRS says were selected at random. [Continue 

Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Grassley and Johnson say DOJ must investigate Joe Biden’s 

funding of Hunter’s participation in escort ring tied to Russia, Jerry Dunleavy, July 7, 2022, 

6:37  PM 

Two top Republican senators have demanded the Justice Department and FBI launch a full 

investigation into Hunter Biden's laptop, including the revelation unearthed on Hunter Biden’s 

laptop by the Washington Examiner that President Joe Biden apparently unwittingly financed his 

son’s participation in an escort ring tied to Russia. [Continue Reading ]

WJZY-Fox (Belmont, NC): North Carolina tax preparer sentenced to prison after 

arranging over $5M in false refund claims , Ciara Lankford, July 8, 2022, 1:12 AM 

A North Carolina man was sentenced Thursday to 15 months in prison for preparing false trust tax 

returns on behalf of his Washington, D.C.-based and other clients. According to court documents, 

Thy Muhammad owned and operated Seventh Millennium International, a Rocky Mount, NC, tax 

preparation business. [Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

NBC: The FBI didn’t finish over 1 million gun background checks in time to stop a sale in 

2020 and 2021 , Josua Eaton, July 8, 2022, 4:25 AM 

There were over 1 million opportunities for someone to buy a gun from a licensed dealer without 

a completed background check in 2020 and 2021, according to an FBI report released last 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000355

month. In all, 1,002,274 background checks or 4.2 percent took longer than three business 

days in 2020 and 2021, a higher share than any other period since at least 2014, according to 

data compiled by NBC News. After the third business day, federal law allows dealers to sell 

weapons while the background check is still pending, which potentially puts weapons in the hands 

of people who can’t legally own a gun because of mental illness or their criminal history. [Continue 

Reading ]

CNN: Woman accused of killing elite cyclist used passport that belonged to someone 

'closely associated' with her to flee to Costa Rica, authorities say, Raja Razek, July 8, 

2022, 12:18 AM 

The woman who fled to Costa Rica after allegedly killing an elite cyclist in Texas used several 

aliases and a passport that belongs to someone "closely associated with her," a spokesperson 

for the US Marshals Service said Thursday. Kaitlin Marie Armstrong, 34, is suspected of fatally 

shooting Anna Moriah "Mo" Wilson at an Austin home on May 11, according to authorities. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  Fox , KTBC-Fox (Austin, TX) 

ABC: US Marshals director says protecting Supreme Court justices 'a top priority', Luke 

Barr, July 7, 2022, 4:20 PM 

U.S.  Marshals Service Director Ronald Davis said protecting Supreme Court justices from threats 

has been a key part of his agency's mission even before the leaked draft of the opinion 

overturning Roe v. Wade in May, noting there were more than 4,500 threats to federal judges last 

year, including against those on the nation's high court. "It is something that is a top priority of the 

agency," Davis told ABC News Chief Justice Correspondent Pierre Thomas in an interview set to 

air on ABC News Live "Prime" on Thursday. [Continue Reading ]

Fox: 'Operation North Star': US Marshals capture 1,500 fugitives over 30 days across 10 

cities, Audrey Conklin, July 7, 2022, 2:34 PM 

The U.S. Marshal Services (USMS) has arrested 1,500 fugitives stemming from its "Operation 

North Star" initiative to reduce violent crime in 10 U.S. cities over 30 days. Across Chicago; 

Washington, D.C.; New York City; Memphis; New Orleans; Los Angeles; Houston; Indianapolis; 

Philadelphia; and Baltimore, the USMS arrested 1,501 fugitives, violent criminals, sex offenders 

and self-identified gang members over the month of June, USMS said in a press release. 

[Continue Reading] See also:  Patch (Houston, TX) , Patch (Los Angeles, CA) , Patch (Memphis, 

TN) 

CBS: [VIDEO] FBI searches for 'Spell Out Bandit' wanted in multiple bank robberies, 

Jennifer McRae, July 7, 2022, 3:06 PM 

The FBI Rocky Mountain Safe Streets Task Force and Denver Police Department have teamed 

up to search for the so-called "Spell Out Bandit" wanted in multiple bank robberies. The suspect 

remains unidentified. [Watch ]

KOAT-ABC (Albuquerque, NM): FBI creates new initiative to help New Mexico businesses 

prevent cyber-attacks, John Cardinale, July 7, 2022, 11:37 PM 

Cyber attacks can happen to anyone. “The threat has been out there. It's been attacking 

individuals. It's been attacking businesses. It's attacking private industry,” said Raul Bujanda, the 

special agent in charge of the Albuquerque FBI Field Office. The state of New Mexico is no 

exception to these attacks. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000356

WGNO-ABC (New Orleans, LA): Top ATF Dog passes away after years of service with 

State Fire Marshal, Michael Scheidt, July 7, 2022, 10:54 PM 

“Monty was my friend, buddy, and partner,” said Lt. Mashon, “I am going to miss him until we 

meet again.” Those are the words of Lt. Brian Mashon who was the handler for K-9 Monty. 

[Continue Reading ]

WXYZ-ABC (Detroit, MI): FBI data: Intentional killings of law enforcement hit 20-year high 

in 2021, Brett Kast, July 7, 2022, 10:37 PM 

According to FBI data, last year, the intentional killing of law enforcement officers reached a 20 -

year high, the most since the 9/11 attacks in 2001. In 2021, 73 police officers were intentionally 

killed in the line of duty. In 2020, that number was 46. [Continue Reading] 

KDRV-ABC (Medford, OR): U.S. Marshals arrest man accused of murdering 14-year-old 

runaway in Tampa, Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 9:07 PM 

A man accused of murdering a teenage girl in Tampa has been arrested. Ronny Walker, 44, has 

been charged with first-degree murder in the death of Nilexia B. Alexander, a 14-year-old runaway 

from Temple Terrace. [Continue Reading] 

WDAF-Fox (Kansas City, MO): FBI investigates possible dog fighting ring in Raytown, 

Heidi Schmidt, July 7, 2022, 4:27 PM 

The FBI is investigating a possible illegal dog fighting ring that held fights at a vacant store in 

Raytown, and potentially other areas in the metro. An informant tipped off FBI agents about the 

illegal fights after he said the organizer invited him to a fight in April. [Continue Reading] 

WTOV-NBC/Fox (Steubenville, OH): Man arrested in connection with Steubenville 

shooting, Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 4:00 PM 

A man is in custody in connection to a June shooting in Steubenville. City officials report U.S. 

Marshals arrested Tyler Pesta. This was in response to an increased police presence on Ohio 9

in Belmont County. [Continue Reading ]

KSL-NBC (Salt Lake City, UT): Utahn working with DEA sought to tip off suspect about 

wiretap, but not for obvious reasons, Annie Knox, July 7, 2022, 12:56 PM 

A longtime interpreter who used to work on federal narcotics cases in Utah admitted he tried to 

warn a suspect last year about a wiretap, but not to protect any criminal network or for a kickback. 

No one disputes it was a bad idea. But all parties agree that Jose Araujo simply wanted to lighten 

his crushing workload that involved weeding through an onslaught of text messages and calls. 

[Continue Reading ]

WKRC-CBS (Cincinnati, OH): DEA: Tri-State area seeing record number of fentanyl 

overdoses, deaths, Unattributed, July 7, 2022, 8:00 AM 

Just a speck of fentanyl can kill someone, but area law enforcement is seizing the deadly drug in 

record numbers. More than 21,000 items containing the deadly drug were seized through May of 

this year. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

CNN : [OPINION] The dangerous election theory the Supreme Court may be poised to 

endorse, Joshua A. Douglas, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000357

On the heels of groundbreaking decisions on Roe v. Wade and gun rights, the US Supreme 

Court appears poised to take up another case with the potential to profoundly reshape American 

life -- this time at the ballot box. The case in the upcoming Court session could make it easier for 

political incumbents to entrench themselves in office and could even put the 2024 election in 

peril. After already making it harder for voting rights advocates to secure protection for the right to 

vote through restrictive rulings that defer to state legislatures, the Court now seems poised to cut 

off protection from state courts as well. [Continue Reading ]

NPR : [AUDIO] How the Supreme Court's move to the right could further transform life in 

the U.S ., Terry Gross, July 7, 2022, 1:57 PM 

The court's super majority of conservative judges has already passed down rulings about 

abortion and the 2nd Amendment. New York Times journalist Adam Liptak says more legal 

upheavals are likely. [Listen] 

WPXI-NBC (Pittsburgh, PA): Biden administration, states brace for potential legal battles 

over abortion pills, Samantha Manning, July 7, 2022, 8:00 PM 

The Biden administration is warning that some states may try to restrict access to government-approved abortion pills and contraception in the wake of the U.S. Supreme Court overturning Roe 

v.  Wade last month. [...] In a statement on June 24, 2022, following the Supreme Court’s ruling to 

overturn Roe v. Wade, Attorney General Merrick Garland said: “We stand ready to work with other 

arms of the federal government that seek to use their lawful authorities to protect and preserve 

access to reproductive care. In particular, the FDA has approved the use of the medication 

Mifepristone. [Continue Reading] 

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

Reuters : Biden's planned anti-abortion judicial nominee 'strong' conservative, ex-boss 

wrote, Nate Raymond, July 7, 2022, 5:40 PM 

A Republican lawyer considered by President Joe Biden for a Kentucky federal judgeship 

despite his opposition to abortion would be a "strong and dependable conservative" voice on the 

bench for decades, his ex-boss said in a letter released Thursday. That assessment came in a

2018 letter from former Republican Kentucky Governor Matt Bevin's general counsel 

recommending that now-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell support Chad Meredith 

becoming a federal district court judge.. [Continue Reading] 

Louisiana Illuminator : Federal judge vacancies present ticking clock for Democrats, 

Weslley Muller, July 7, 2022, 9:26 PM 

Louisiana has three judicial vacancies on its federal courts two of which are considered 

“judicial emergencies” yet the Biden administration has not submitted any nominees to fill the 

seats. The situation is similar nationwide with more than 80 federal court vacancies that have no 

nominees, and Senate Democrats so far have no plans to expedite appointments. At the current 

pace, dozens of judgeships could still be open by year’s end with the possibility that Republicans 

gain control of the chamber. [Continue Reading ]

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360: Feds Look To Ax Suit Over Fort Sill Apache Tribe's Casino, Joyce Hanson, July 7, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000358

2022, 8:09 PM 

The federal government has urged an Oklahoma federal court to toss the Kiowa Tribe and 

Comanche Nation's suit claiming that the Fort Sill Apache Tribe unlawfully acquired land to build a

casino, arguing that they knew about the gambling facility long before it opened. The Kiowa and 

Comanche tribes wrongly claim that the U. S. Department of the Interior violated the 

Administrative Procedure Act when it transferred to the Fort Sill Apache Tribe an original 160 -

acre Kiowa allotment taken into trust on behalf of George Tsalote in May 1901, the government 

said Thursday in its motion to dismiss the suit. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: ND Judge Won't Throw Out Tribes' Redistricting Suit , Faith Williams, July 7, 2022, 

7:07  PM 

A North Dakota federal judge on Thursday denied the state's motion to dismiss a suit claiming its 

new legislative districts dilute Native Americans' voting rights, ruling the tribes' right to seek a

remedy is embedded in case law. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 :Tribe Has Standing In Toxic Landfill Case Against Wash. City , Greg Lamm, July 7, 

2022, 5:47 PM 

The Yakama Nation has standing to pursue its case against a Washington city seeking costs 

connected to the cleanup of a former municipal landfill, according to an order by a federal judge 

who also ruled that the city's expert environmental witness is qualified to testify. [Continue 

Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Washington Times: Democratic senators urge Biden to move faster on marijuana policy, 

Tom Howell Jr., July 7, 2022, 5:59 PM 

Six liberal senators are prodding President Biden to pardon prior cannabis offenders and compel 

the Department of Justice to reclassify the drug, a sign that members of the president’s own party 

are disappointed by a lack of progress on the issue. “The administration’s failure to coordinate a

timely review of its cannabis policy is harming thousands of Americans, slowing research, and 

depriving Americans of their ability to use marijuana for medical or other purposes,” wrote Sens. 

Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Cory Booker of New Jersey, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York, 

Ed Markey of Massachusetts Ron Wyden of Oregon and Bernard Sanders, Vermont 

independent. [Continue Reading ]

Marijuana Moment: New York Marijuana Regulators Put 52 Unlicensed Retailers On Blast 

As State Prepares To Launch Adult-Use Market, Kyle Jaeger, July 7, 2022, 12:00 PM 

New York marijuana regulators have put 52 unlicensed cannabis retailers on notice, publicizing 

dozens of cease and desist letters that they have sent to businesses accused of illegally selling 

marijuana as the state prepares to launch its adult-use market. The Office of Cannabis 

Management (OCM) said that the storefronts are falsely claiming to be legal cannabis shops, 

without a license and without adhering to product testing requirements, which could jeopardize 

public health. [Continue Reading ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

WaPo: American Cartel: Inside the battle to bring down the opioid industry, Scott Higham 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000359

## •••••••

and Sadi Horwitz, July 7, 2022, 7:00 AM 

Late on his last day as a DEA agent, Joe Rannazzisi grabbed a mailroom cart to wheel a few 

boxes of personal belongings to his Ford Excursion. He had turned in his badge earlier that day 

one without a formal goodbye lunch that was now an evening without farewell drinks. Almost 

everyone had already cleared out of the Drug Enforcement Administration’s sleek office complex 

in Arlington, and the silent corridor was a numbing coda to a career that for all its accolades 

seemed to have ended in defeat. It was an unusual feeling for the muscled, tough-talking New 

Yorker who’d spent 30 years bringing down bad guys. [Continue Reading] 

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JULY 7, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with Whit Johnson 

CBS: Evening News with Jericka Duncan 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

WNBA star Brittney Griner has pleaded guilty to drug charges saying she accidentally 

packed cannabis oil in her bag. She’s been detained in Russia since February and the 

White House says they are working on her release. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was sentenced on federal civil rights 

charges today in the murder of George Floyd. He was sentenced to 21 years to run 

concurrently with his state sentence. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

President Biden awarded the Medal of Freedom, the nation’s highest civilian honor, to 17 

Americans. And while some of this year’s recipients are already household names, all of 

them have made significant contributions to this country. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The father of the alleged Highland Park parade shooter has told that he is not culpable in 

the Independence Day attack, in spite of having signed a consent form for his son to apply 

for gun ownership. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

British Prime Minister Boris Johnson is stepping down following months of scandals. But 

the embattled leader says he will stay on until his successor is chosen in early September. 

[ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Tributes are pouring in for actor James Caan, who died today at the age of 82. Caan’s 

legendary career spanned seven decades, starring in several films like “The Godfather” 

and “Elf.” [CBS , NBC ]

Elite US veterans in Ukraine: American volunteer medics now operating near the front lines, 

preparing for a top secret mission. [ABC ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000360

## ••

## •••••••

Many shoppers are getting some much-needed relief to their wallets as retailers start to 

give big discounts on goods that were stuck in a traffic jam at sea during the pandemic and 

are now coming in. [CBS ]

Jamestown, Virginia, the first permanent English settlement in the country, is now listed 

among the nation’s most endangered historic sites, as rising sea levels threaten to wash 

away America’s early history. [CBS ]

Mississippi’s only abortion clinic, which was at the center of the Supreme Court’s decision 

to overturn Roe v. Wade, is closed tonight. Physicians at the clinic saw their last patients for 

follow-up visits today. [NBC ]

Officials are facing mounting concern that the U.S. is heading toward a summer Covid-19 

surge. Omicron’s subvariant, BA-5, is the most contagious version of the virus yet and is 

now the dominant strain, making up more than 50 percent of new cases. [NBC ]

In an exclusive interview, New York City Mayor Adams said New York is not a dangerous 

city, despite overall crime rising nearly 40 percent this year. Adams, a Democrat, also 

agreed with Republican criticism of progressive prosecutors, and said that the far-right and 

far-left are “co-conspirators to the public safety crisis.” [NBC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Shinzo Abe, Former Japanese Premier, Is Assassinated” [WSJ , NYT , WaPo , LAT ]

“Hiring Slowed in June From Robust Pace, Economists Estimate” [WSJ , NYT ]

“Boris Johnson Resignation Caps Stunning Fall From Grace” [WSJ , NYT , WaPo ]

“Russia Sanctions Meet Their Toughest Test at Europe’s Largest Port” [NYT , WaPo , LAT ]

END 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979 01570-000361

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.31979

From : Kapper, Matthew B. (OAG) 

Subject: Fv.d: Abbreviated AM C ips 

To : Jll'liil?Jjl'lfb (OAG) 

Sent: une , :45 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iP hone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  "Iverson, Dena (PAO)" <Dena.I.DeBonis@usdoj.gov> 

Date: Jlllle 23, 2022 at 1:28:13 PM GMT 2 To: "Klapper, Matthew B. (OAG)" llilm~ 

(b)  (6) , "B r"Goodlander, Margaret V. (OAG)" on, Tamarra D. (OAG)" G)" 

Dickerson, Julie 

usdoj.gov >, 'Miller, Marshall (ODAG)" 

Cc: "Coley, Anthony D.  (PAO)" <Anthony.D.Coley@usdoj.gov> 

Subject: Abbreviated AM Oips 

MORNING HEADLINES 

• "Fed's Powell to I-lead to the I-louse With Rates in Focus" [WSJ] 

• "Germany Looks at Potential Rationing of Natural Gas After Russia Cuts Supply" [WSJ] 

• "Jan. 6 I-tearing to Focus on I-low Trump Pressured Justice Officials" [WSJ , NYT ,WaPo] 

• "California primary's lesson for pundits: Don't speak too soon in the age of mail-in voting" [ LA I] 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

WaPo: [OPINION] A question for Garland: Do you know how it feels for POTUS to target you?, Jennifer Rubin, June 22, 2022, 12:00 PM Attorney General Merrick Garland is surely familiar with Republicans' indifference to (if not encouragement of) threats of violence directed at government officials. When he vowed to investigate threats against local officials such as school board members, Senate Republicans harangued him, falsely accusing him of labeling parents as "domest ic terrorists." Republicans also objected when he vowed to look into passengers assailing airline personnel over mask rules. [Continue Reading] 

Fox: Republicans push OOJ to protect pro-life centers from 'assault' by violent activists, Kelly Laco, June 23, 2022, 6:24 AM I-louse Republicans are putting pressure on the Department of Justice to take action against 

> 01570-000362

Docmnent ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000363 violent activists who have targeted crisis pregnancy centers and places of worship in an 

attempt to intimidate pro-life Americans and justices. Rep. Ken Buck, R-Colo., who sits on 

the House Judiciary Committee, is leading Republicans in this charge, telling Fox News Digital 

that it is a "shame" that DOJ "will not act" and protect Supreme Court justices and pro-life 

centers. [Continue Reading ]

TIME: These Are the Factors Garland Is Likely Weighing as He Mulls Charging Trump, 

Brian Bennett, June 22, 2022, 10:10 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol has laid out its case that 

Donald Trump knew he lost the 2020 election, and that he nevertheless spread lies about 

election fraud as part of a broad effort to overturn Joe Biden’s win, pressured state election 

officials to change the results, orchestrated an effort to send fake electors to Washington, and used multiple tactics to persuade Vice President Mike Pence to name Trump the winner, 

including inciting a mob to go after him. [Continue Reading ]

KCYU-Fox (Yakima, WA): State attorneys general ask Department of Justice to investigate violence against pro-life groups, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 12:35 PM 

The attorneys general of 19 states want the U.S. Department of Justice to investigate what 

they say is growing violence targeting pro-life groups nationwide. Last month, Politico 

published a leaked draft U.S. Supreme Court opinion, apparently revealing the nation’s 

highest court is poised to overturn Roe v. Wade, which established abortion as a

constitutional right, and Casey v. Planned Parenthood. [Continue Reading] See also:  WTRF -

CBS/ABC (Wheeling, WV),  WVNS-CBS/Fox (Lewisburg, WV) 

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: Man pleads not guilty to trying to kill Justice Kavanaugh, Michael Kunzelman, June 

22, 2022, 8:30 PM 

A man who was arrested near Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s home in Maryland 

earlier this month pleaded not guilty Wednesday to trying to kill Kavanaugh. Nicholas John 

Roske, 26, of Simi Valley, California, remained in custody after his arraignment on one count 

of attempting to assassinate a Supreme Court justice. [Continue Reading] See also: Axios, 

CNN, Fox, Guardian, NY Post,  Washington Examiner , WJRT-ABC (Flint, MI),  WSJ , WUSA -

CBS (Washington, DC) 

AP: Former West Virginia lawmaker gets 3 months in Jan. 6 riot, Alanna Durkin Richer ,

June 22, 2022, 3:35 PM 

A former West Virginia lawmaker who livestreamed himself on Facebook storming the U.S. 

Capitol and cheering on what he described as a “revolution” was sentenced Wednesday to 

three months in prison. Derrick Evans, 37, who pleaded guilty to a felony civil disorder 

charge, told the judge that he regrets his actions every day and is a “good person who 

unfortunately was caught up in a moment.” [Continue Reading ] See also:  NBC , Washington 

Examiner , WaPo 

AP: Decades later, ‘Torso Killer’ charged in killing at NY mall, Michael Balsamo, June 

22, 2022, 2:59 PM 

More than five decades after Diane Cusick’s lifeless body was discovered in the parking lot 

of a mall on New York’s Long Island, authorities have linked her death to the so-called “Torso 

Killer,” a serial killer already convicted in 11 other killings. The suspect, Richard Cottingham 

— believed to be one of America’s most prolific serial killers — was arraigned Wednesday 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000364

on a second-degree murder charge in connection with Cusick’s 1968 killing. From a hospital 

bed in New Jersey, where he’s already serving a life sentence for other killings, Cottingham 

pleaded not guilty. [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: U.S. judge agrees to postpone Proud Boys trial amid Jan. 6 Capitol riot 

hearings, Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 2:33 PM A federal judge on Wednesday postponed the trial for leaders of the Proud Boys facing 

seditious conspiracy charges for their role in storming the U.S. Capitol, amid fears that 

revelations during recent congressional hearings could taint the jury pool. 

U.S.  District Judge Timothy Kelly set a new trial date of Dec. 12, after prosecutors and 

attorneys for three of the Proud Boys defendants requested a delay. [Continue Reading] See 

also:  Guardian , NBC , USA Today , WaPo , WSJ 

Reuters: U.S. seeks probe of Trump-allied lawyer's funding of Oath Keepers defense, 

Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 1:24 PM 

U.S.  prosecutors asked a judge on Wednesday to launch an ethics inquiry into whether 

defense lawyers for prominent members of the right-week Oath Keepers are improperly allowing an attorney closely allied with former President Donald Trump to help pay their legal 

fees. The Justice Department's court filing cited media reports alleging that the legal fees for 

Oath Keepers leader Stewart Rhodes are being paid by Defending the Republic, an entity 

controlled by Sidney Powell, an attorney who played a key role in Trump's attempt to 

overturn his election defeat. The group is also paying fees for Oath Keeper defendants Kelly Meggs, Connie Meggs and Kenneth Harrelson, it said. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Courthouse News , The Hill , National Law Journal , WaPo 

Reuters: Russian cyber spies attack Ukraine's allies, Microsoft says, Zeba Siddiqui, 

June 22, 2022, 12:25 PM 

Russian government hackers have conducted multiple cyber spy operations on countries 

allied with Ukraine since Moscow's February invasion of that country, Microsoft said in a

report on Wednesday. "The cyber aspects of the current war extend far beyond Ukraine and 

reflect the unique nature of cyberspace," Microsoft President Brad Smith said in the report. 

[Continue Reading] See also:  CNN 

Bloomberg: Trump Seeks to Turn Durham Case Bust Into Clinton Lawsuit Boon , Erik 

Larson, June 22, 2022, 12:10 PM 

The acquittal last month of a former Hillary Clinton campaign lawyer accused of lying to the 

FBI was a blow to Republicans who wanted to take the Russia probe down a notch. But it 

wasn’t a total loss for Donald Trump. The former president on Tuesday night amended his 

March lawsuit accusing Clinton of leading a vast conspiracy against him to add details 

gleaned from testimony and evidence from Special Counsel John Durham’s failed prosecution 

of longtime Democratic lawyer Michael Sussmann last month in Washington [Continue 

Reading ]

Washington Times: Mexican scientist gets 4-year prison term after spying in Miami for 

Russia , Tom Howell Jr, June 22, 2022, 2:25 PM 

A Mexican scientist has been sentenced to four years in prison for spying on “a U.S. 

government source” on behalf of Russia. Hector Cabrera Fuentes, 37, pleaded guilty in 

February to acting on behalf of a foreign government without notifying American authorities. 

[Continue Reading] See also: Daily Beast,  UPI 

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000365

AP: 1/6 panel to hear of Trump’s pressure on Justice Department, Eric Tucker, June 23, 

2022, 5:46 AM 

The Jan. 6 committee will hear from former Justice Department officials who faced down a

relentless pressure campaign from Donald Trump over the 2020 presidential election results 

while suppressing a bizarre challenge from within their own ranks. The hearing Thursday will 

bring attention to a memorably turbulent stretch at the department as Trump in his final days 

in office sought to bend to his will a law enforcement agency that has long cherished its 

independence from the White House. [Continue Reading] See also : ABC,  CBS , CNN ,

Guardian , The Hill , MSNBC , NBC , NPR , NYT , Reuters , USA Today , VOA 

AP: Ginni Thomas responds to 1/6 panel, hearings stretch to July, Farnoush Amiri, 

Mary Clare Jalonick, June 22, 2022, 11:00 PM The House’s Jan. 6 committee plans to continue its public hearings into July as its 

investigation of the Capitol riot deepens. The chairman, Rep. Bennie Thompson, told 

reporters Wednesday that the committee is receiving “a lot of information” — including new 

documentary film footage of Donald Trump’s final months in office — as its yearlong inquiry 

intensifies with hearings into the attack on Jan. 6, 2021, and Trump’s efforts to overturn the 

2020 election that Democrat Joe Biden won. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: What to expect at Thursday’s Jan. 6 committee hearing, Devlin Barrett, June 23, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on Congress is set to hear 

testimony Thursday from former senior officials who resisted President Donald Trump’s 

efforts to bend the Justice Department to his will to try to overturn the election won by Joe 

Biden. The 3 p.m. televised hearing will be a public airing of a high-stakes drama that played 

out inside the White House and Justice Department shortly before the Jan. 6 attack on 

Congress. [Continue Reading ] See also:  CNN , NPR 

NYT: A Year Later, Some Republicans Second-Guess Boycotting the Jan. 6 Panel ,

Luke Broadwater, June 22, 2022, 8:00 PM 

The four hearings held in the past few weeks by the House committee investigating the Jan. 

6 attack, with their clear, uninterrupted narratives about President Donald J. Trump’s effort to 

undercut the peaceful transfer of power, have left some pro-Trump Republicans wringing 

their hands with regret about a decision made nearly a year ago. Representative Kevin 

McCarthy of California, the minority leader, chose last summer to withdraw all of his 

nominees to the committee — amid a dispute with Speaker Nancy Pelosi over her rejection 

of his first two choices — a turning point that left the nine-member investigative committee 

without a single ally of Mr. Trump. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Sen. Ron Johnson under fire over fake-electors disclosure at hearing, Colby 

Itkowitz, June 22, 2022, 7:00 PM 

Weeks before the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection, Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) held a hearing on 

election fraud in an attempt to legitimize former president Donald Trump’s false allegations of 

voting irregularities. Four days before the attack on the Capitol, Johnson signed a statement 

with nine other Republican senators that they intended to object to certifying Joe Biden’s 

electors and demand “an emergency 10-day audit of the election.” [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Justice Dept. expands Jan. 6 probe with fresh subpoenas, Spencer S. Hsu, Josh 

Dawsey and Devlin Barrett, June 22, 2022, 2:59 PM 

The Justice Department’s investigation of the Jan. 6 attack ratcheted up Wednesday as 

federal agents dropped subpoenas on people in at least two states, in what appeared to be 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000366

a widening probe of how political activists supporting President Donald Trump tried to use 

invalid electors to thwart Joe Biden’s 2020 electoral victory. FBI officials confirmed to The 

Washington Post that agents conducted court authorized law enforcement activity 

Wednesday morning at two locations — one the address of Brad Carver, a Georgia lawyer 

who allegedly signed a document claiming to be a Trump elector, and another the Virginia 

home of Thomas Lane, who worked on the Trump campaign’s efforts in Arizona and New 

Mexico. The FBI officials did not identify the people associated with those addresses, but 

public records list each of the locations as the home addresses of the men. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  Daily Beast , NYT , Reuters , Washington Examiner 

WaPo: Lawmakers on Jan. 6 committee ramp up their security as threats increase ,

Amy Gardner, Josh Dawsey and Jacqueline Alemany, June 22, 2022, 12:24 PM In the past 24 hours, there has been an uptick in the number of violent threats against 

lawmakers on the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the 

U.S.  Capitol, and all lawmakers on the committee are likely to receive a security detail, 

according to three people involved with the investigation. The committee on Tuesday held its 

fourth hearing, which focused on efforts by former president Donald Trump and his allies to 

overturn the results of the 2020 election and the resulting political violence and harassment 

experienced by many of those who resisted. [Continue Reading] 

NBC: Who is Jeffrey Clark? Jan. 6 panel seeks to make Trump's man at DOJ famous, 

Ryan J. Reilly, June 23, 2022, 5:01 AM Most Americans don't know Jeffrey Clark — the environmental lawyer whom former 

President Donald Trump wanted to take over the Justice Department to aid his effort to 

overturn the 2020 election. But the House Jan. 6 committee hopes its Thursday hearing might 

change that. [Continue Reading ] See also:  The Hill 

NBC: Q&A: Justice reporter Ryan Reilly breaks down what we've learned from the January 6th hearings, Benjy Sarlin, June 22, 2022, 3:19 PM 

Before the smoke even settled on the January 6th attack, NBC News Justice Reporter Ryan 

Reilly set out covering the legal aftermath, which has since grown to encompass hundreds of 

arrests, investigations, and prosecutions. He's also followed the extensive effort by online 

amateur sleuths to identify suspects and gather evidence alongside the official effort. With 

the country now taking a fresh look at the attack via the House Select Committee's hearings, 

we asked Reilly to help put their findings in perspective. Here's our conversation, edited for 

length and clarity. [Continue Reading] 

Guardian: January 6 panel to focus on Trump’s relentless pressure on justice department, Hugo Lowell, June 22, 2022, 7:01 PM 

Donald Trump pressured top justice department officials to falsely declare that the 2020 

election was corrupt and launch investigations into discredited claims of fraud as part of an 

effort to return him to office, the House January 6 select committee will say on Thursday. 

The panel investigating the Capitol attack is expected at its fifth hearing to focus on how 

Trump abused the power of the presidency to twist the justice department into endorsing 

false election claims – and potentially how the Republican congressman Scott Perry sought a

pardon for his involvement. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Jan. 6 committee delays hearing schedule until July, Rebecca Beitsch, June 

22, 2022, 2:10 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol is pressing pause 

on its hearings for next week and picking them up again in July. Rep. Bennie Thompson (D -

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000367

Miss.), the chairman of the committee, told reporters Wednesday that the committee would hold off on the two final hearings it had planned for this month. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL LAW 

Reuters: Maxwell deserves 30- to 55-year prison term - U.S. prosecutors, Luc Cohen, 

June 23, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Ghislaine Maxwell should be sentenced to between 30 and 55 years in prison after being 

convicted of helping the sex offender and globetrotting financier Jeffrey Epstein sexually abuse teenage girls, U.S. prosecutors said on Wednesday. Maxwell, 60, was convicted in 

December by a federal jury on five charges, including sex trafficking, for recruiting and 

grooming four girls between 1994 and 2004 for sexual encounters with Epstein, then her 

boyfriend. [Continue Reading ] See also : NBC 

AP : Motocross instructor with Indiana business indicted on federal child porn charges , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Federal officials say a motocross instructor who visited states from New York to Georgia 

has been charged with producing child pornography. The Justice Department says Ryan 

Meyung, 30, is accused of engaging six minors in sexually explicit conduct to produce sexual 

abuse images and with transporting and possessing images of child sexual abuse. [Continue 

Reading ]

Reuters: Former Tallahassee mayor, Florida governor candidate Gillum indicted for 

fraud, Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 11:47 AM 

The U.S. Justice Department on Wednesday said a federal grand jury voted to indict 

Tallahassee's former Democratic mayor and Florida gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum 

on charges of conspiracy, wire fraud and making false statements. Gillum, 42, is facing 

numerous criminal charges along with his associate, Sharon Janet Lettman-Hicks, 53, the 

U.S.  Attorney for the Northern District of Florida said. [Continue Reading] See also: AP, 

CNN, KRIV-Fox (Houston, TX),  USA Today , WaPo , WESH-NBC (Orlando, FL) , WJXT-CW 

(Jacksonville, FL),  WSJ 

Bloomberg : US Says Giuliani Associate Parnas Deserves Up to 8 Years’ Prison , Robert 

Burnson, June 22, 2022, 10:04 PM 

US prosecutors say Lev Parnas, a Florida businessman and associate of Rudy Giuliani, 

should spend as long as eight years in prison for crimes that included violating campaign 

finance laws and defrauding investors. The native of Ukraine vaulted to prominence during the 

first impeachment of former President Donald Trump when it was revealed that Giuliani had 

recruited him to help in his effort to dig up dirt on then-candidate Joe Biden and his son, 

Hunter. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: DOJ Official Confirms CCO Certs. Are New Settlement Staple, Al Barbarino, 

June 22, 2022, 3:19 PM 

A senior official in the U. S. Department of Justice's fraud section said Wednesday that 

companies can expect a new policy requiring that chief compliance officers certify 

agreements with the department to "most likely" be part of every new deal moving forward. 

Speaking at a legal industry conference, Lauren Kootman, assistant chief in the corporate 

enforcement, compliance and policy unit of the DOJ's fraud section, echoed prior statements 

from DOJ officials that the certifications are meant to "empower" CCOs, not punish them. 

[Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000368

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: Harris meets Democratic attorneys general as White House gears up for abortion ruling , Nandita Bose, June 23, 2022, 4:57 AM 

U.S.  Vice President Kamala Harris will meet a group of seven Democratic attorneys general 

on Thursday, a White House official said, to discuss the defense to a major ruling that could 

dramatically curtail abortion rights in the country. The conservative-majority U.S. Supreme 

Court is expected to issue a decision in the coming days to overturn Roe v. Wade, which 

guaranteed the right to an abortion - potentially paving the way to about half of the 50 U.S. 

states banning or heavily restricting the procedure. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters: Rights groups call on Biden to negotiate for WNBA star Griner's release , Rory 

Carroll, June 22, 2022, 8:53 PM 

A coalition of human rights groups on Wednesday called on U.S. President Joe Biden to 

"make a deal" to secure the release of WNBA star Brittney Griner who has been detained in 

Russia for months. Griner was taken into custody at a Moscow airport on Feb. 17 when a

search of her luggage allegedly revealed multiple cannabis oil vape cartridges. She could 

face up to 10 years in prison. [Continue Reading] 

AP: Feds want 25 years for Chauvin for violating Floyd’s rights , Amy Forliti, June 22, 

2022, 8:00 PM 

Federal prosecutors asked a judge on Wednesday to sentence a former Minneapolis officer 

to 25 years for violating the rights of George Floyd, saying Derek Chauvin’s actions were 

cold-blooded and needless as he knelt on the Black man’s neck while Floyd repeatedly said 

he couldn’t breathe. Chauvin pleaded guilty in December to violating Floyd’s rights, admitting 

for the first time that he kept his knee on Floyd’s neck — even after he became unresponsive 

— resulting in Floyd’s death. [Continue Reading] 

AP: Lawsuit challenges Missouri voting aid restrictions , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 

6:00  PM 

Civil rights activists sued Missouri on Wednesday over a decades-old law that prohibits 

volunteers from offering ballot-booth help to multiple voters who have physical disabilities or 

are unable to read or write. The federal lawsuit contends Missouri’s limits on voter 

assistance violate federal voting law and should be struck down. It’s the latest of dozens of 

voting-related lawsuits across the U.S., as election procedures have come under increased 

scrutiny both from those seeking to guarantee access and ensure integrity. [Continue 

Reading ]

AP : DOJ: Maine violates ADA in care of kids with disabilities , Patrick Whittle, June 22, 

2022, 5:00 PM 

Maine unnecessarily institutionalizes youths with mental health and developmental disabilities 

because of a lack of sufficient community-based services that would allow them to stay in 

their homes, the U.S. Department of Justice said Wednesday in declaring a violation of the 

Americans with Disabilities Act. The Justice Department conducted its investigation after 

advocacy group Disability Rights Maine filed a complaint on behalf of a group of children. The 

rights organization said the children were not able to access community-based services, 

resulting in institutionalization or risk of institutionalization that violated the ADA. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  The Hill 

Reuters: Law profs prevail over backlash to publishing prosecutor misconduct cases ,

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000369

Hassan Kanu, June 22, 2022, 1:09 PM 

A federal court ruling last week vindicated crucial First Amendment rights and upheld the use 

of one of the only effective means of holding prosecutors accountable for misconduct —

public exposure. A U.S. district court in Manhattan held on June 13 that a group of six law 

professors can freely call attention to misconduct and unaccountability in district attorneys’ 

offices by publishing online their disciplinary complaints against prosecutors. [Continue 

Reading ]

Courthouse News: Alaska agrees to comply with ‘motor voter’ law , Hillel Aron, June 22, 

2022, 7:00 PM 

The Justice Department announced Wednesday that it has reached an agreement with 

Alaska to resolve complaints that the state was not complying with certain parts of the 

National Voter Registration Act. Passed in 1993, the law includes a provision known as the 

“motor voter” law, which requires states to offer everyone who applies for or renews a

driver’s license the opportunity to register to vote on the same application. [Continue 

Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Reuters: California urges court to maintain ban on private immigrant detention , Daniel 

Wiessner, June 22, 2022, 4:12 PM 

California and a coalition of advocacy groups urged a U.S. appeals court on Tuesday to 

uphold the state's ban on privately run immigrant detention centers, but some of the judges 

seemed skeptical of their claim that the law only regulates businesses and not the federal 

government. Aimee Feinberg of the California Solicitor General's Office told an 11-member 

panel of the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals that the 2019 law's incidental impact on 

government contracting does not render it invalid. [Continue Reading] 

Forbes : Revelations Show Trump Immigration Policy Was Supposed To Be Harsher ,

Stuart Anderson, June 23, 2022, 12:22 AM 

While Donald Trump was president, reporters published shocking revelations about his 

administration’s conduct of U.S. immigration policy. It turns out reporters missed a few items. 

Former Cabinet officials and others have revealed immigration policy during the Trump 

administration was intended to be much harsher, including placing a quarter-million soldiers 

on the U.S.-Mexico border, enacting crueler measures to separate families and targeting 

children for deportation at American schools. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: White House To Release Final DACA Rule In August , Rae Varona, June 22, 

2022, 10:43 PM 

The Biden administration announced plans to issue a final Deferred Action for Childhood 

Arrivals rule by August and continue its efforts to undo multiple Trump-era regulations. Here 

are the main immigration highlights from the administration's regulatory agenda for spring 

2022. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: DOJ Says Trade Group Can't Join Suit Over EB-5 Visa Freeze , Nate Beck, 

June 22, 2022, 6:54 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice says it would be disruptive to allow a trade group for the EB -

5 program to join a lawsuit that seeks to force U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services to 

reverse changes to a rule allowing foreign investors to trade cash for a green card. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000370

Law360 : Nonprofit Group Backs Axing Haitians' Border Whipping Suit , Nicole 

Rosenthal, June 22, 2022, 2:10 PM 

A nonprofit organization backed the Biden administration's bid to toss a proposed class 

action accusing border patrol officers of whipping Haitian migrants and wrongfully denying 

them asylum, telling a D.C. federal court that the constitutional protections the migrants claim 

are overridden by COVID-19 concerns and a public health order. [Continue Reading] 

Arizona Republic: Autopsy report determines migrant was stabbed to death by CBP 

agent in Douglas , Gloria Rebecca Gomez, Angela Cordoba Perez, Clara Migoya, June 22, 

2022, 6:47 PM 

A migrant was stabbed to death by a Customs and Border Protection agent in Douglas in 

late May, a Pima County medical examiner's autopsy report found. Abigail Román Aguilar, 

32, a Mexican immigrant from the state of Chiapas, died on May 24 after a "use of force 

incident" involving an agent, the CBP said in a statement issued that day. Román Aguilar had 

two stab wounds in the chest and blunt force injuries including lacerations in the head and 

contusions in the head and extremities, according to the Pima County Medical Examiner's 

Office report, obtained by The Arizona Republic. [Continue Reading] 

ANTITRUST 

Reuters: U.S. consumer watchdog to review 'excessive' credit card late payment fees ,

Katanga Johnson, June 22, 2022, 4:30 PM The top U.S. consumer watchdog on Wednesday said it had begun a review of "excessive" 

credit card fees and asked card issuers for data on revenue and expenses in a bid to stamp 

out abuses and boost competition. The advanced notice of proposed rulemaking issued by 

the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) confirms a Reuters April report that the 

agency would scrutinize credit card fees as part of a broader crackdown on what it calls 

"junk fees," a catch-all for overdraft, credit card late-payment fees, bounced check fees, and 

other charges. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters: DOJ defends rare wage-fixing criminal case in Maine federal court , Mike 

Scarcella, June 22, 2022, 12:14 PM 

U.S.  Justice Department lawyers on Tuesday defended their rare criminal antitrust case 

charging four business managers with conspiring to fix hourly rates for home healthcare 

support specialists in Maine and agreeing not to hire each other's workers. The government's 

filing in Portland federal court urged a trial judge not to dismiss the case, which was filed in 

January amid an ongoing federal antitrust investigation into the home health care industry. 

[Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Meta Antitrust Judge Backs TikTok, WeChat, Telegram Data Request ,

Malathi Nayak, June 22, 2022, 5:10 PM Meta Platforms Inc. won a judge’s backing to obtain information from ByteDance Ltd’s 

TikTok, Tencent Holdings Ltd’s WeChat and Telegram Group Inc. to bolster its defense 

against an antitrust lawsuit by the US Federal Trade Commission. US District Judge James 

Boasberg on Wednesday wrote letters to China’s Ministry of Justice seeking help with 

getting documentary evidence from Tencent and ByteDance, and sent a separate letter to 

officials in the British Virgin Islands concerning Telegram. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Fights Bid To Duck Pandemic Wage-Fixing Charges, Matthew Perlman, 

June 22, 2022, 8:39 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000371

The U.S. Department of Justice is contesting a dismissal bid by operators of four Maine 

home health care agencies who were indicted on allegations that they conspired to fix pay rates in order to avoid competing with each other for workers during the pandemic. [Continue 

Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Law360: EPA Delays Greenhouse Gas Regs As Court Ruling Looms , Keith Goldberg, 

June 22, 2022, 10:30 PM 

The Biden administration has pushed back the release of plans to regulate greenhouse gas 

emissions from the power sector until next year, just as the U.S. Supreme Court could limit 

the scope of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's climate change authority. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: DOI Asks 9th Circ. To Revisit Coal Mine Emissions Ruling , Clark Mindock, June 

22, 2022, 3:46 PM 

The U.S. Department of the Interior has told the Ninth Circuit it went too far when rejecting 

the agency's process for green-lighting a Montana mine expansion project and wants a

rehearing on a "narrow but important" element of the case. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Boeing Says Feds Want To Break Rocket Site Cleanup Deal , Greg Lamm, June 

22, 2022, 2:59 PM 

Boeing asked a Washington federal judge on Tuesday to toss the federal government's $32 

million contaminated groundwater lawsuit, saying the suit is barred under a broad hold-harmless clause in a decades-old contract to build and test rockets for NASA's moonshots. 

[Continue Reading] 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

LAT: Anaheim remains without a mayor following FBI political corruption probe, 

Gabriel San Román, June 22, 2022, 8:35 PM 

Anaheim City Council, for a second time, failed to fill the vacancy left by former mayor Harry 

Sidhu, who resigned last month amid an FBI investigation into members of a self-described 

political ‘cabal.’ During a June 7 meeting, council members first grappled with an array of 

issues related to the fallout from the probe but couldn’t decide on who to appoint, if anyone, 

to serve as interim mayor ahead of the November elections. [Continue Reading ]

Newsweek: Who is Michael McDonald? Nevada GOP Chairman Reportedly Investigated 

by FBI, Khaleda Rahman, June 23, 2022, 4:50 AM 

FBI agents reportedly served a search warrant on Nevada's top GOP official, who was 

among those subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the January 6 attack 

on the U.S. Capitol. Nevada GOP Chair Michael McDonald was among more than a dozen 

officials who were subpoenaed by the committee earlier this year in connection with a "fake 

electors" scheme that sought to have representatives in battleground states say that former President Donald Trump, not Joe Biden, had won them. [Continue Reading ]

Arizona Republic (Phoenix, AZ): 'We have to do something': Phoenix police launch 'Gun 

Crime Crackdown' to combat gun violence, Miguel Torres, June 22, 2022, 7:24 PM 

A gun “crime crackdown” program will come to Phoenix this summer on the heels of the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000372

mass shooting that killed a 14-year-old girl, Phoenix police Chief Jeri Williams announced at a

Wednesday news conference. [...] “Together with the ATF, the Maricopa County Attorney’s 

Office, the U.S. Attorney’s Office, and the community, Phoenix PD is going to be laser-focused on curbing the recent rise in gun crimes in our city," Williams said. [Continue 

Reading ] See also: KPNX-NBC (Phoenix, AZ) 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

USA Today: 4 inmates who escaped federal prison camp in Virginia back in custody, officials said , Bill Atkinson, June 22, 2022, 9:14 PM 

All four inmates who escaped from a federal prison's satellite camp in Virginia are back in 

custody, the U.S. Marshals Service and Federal Bureau of Prisons announced Wednesday. Lamonte Rashawn Willis, of Suffolk, Virginia, was the final inmate to turn himself back in at 

the low-security satellite camp around noon Wednesday, officials said. No other details of his 

surrender were released. [Continue Reading] See also:  AP , Fox 

US SUPREME COURT 

Reuters: Most judges in survey support U.S. Supreme Court having ethics code , Nate 

Raymond, June 22, 2022, 3:37 PM Hundreds of judges nationwide believe that U.S. Supreme Court justices should be subject to 

an ethics code, according to a poll released Wednesday, with one saying they should set a

"very high bar for the rest of us to emulate." The National Judicial College, which provides 

training to judges nationally, said that in a survey of more than 12,000 of its alumni, 97% of 

the 859 judges who responded agreed Supreme Court justices should be bound by an ethics 

code. [Continue Reading ]

AP : Protesters turn Supreme Court front into forum on abortion , Jacquelyn Martin, June 

22, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A steady stream of protesters has turned the street in front of the Supreme Court building 

into an open-air forum encapsulating the fierce national debate over abortion after the leak of 

a draft opinion suggesting the justices would overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 landmark ruling 

that legalized abortion nationwide. Both supporters and foes of abortion rights have gathered 

during large, organized weekend marches and on weekdays when the court is scheduled to release its opinion. They march and chant; sometimes they attempt to shout the other side 

down. [Continue Reading] 

NYT, The Daily: [AUDIO] The Supreme Court Case That Could Doom U.S. Climate 

Goals , June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

While coming rulings on abortion and guns have garnered lots of attention, the Supreme 

Court is also set to make another major decision in a less-publicized suit involving climate 

change. The case, about how far the Environmental Protection Agency can regulate greenhouse gas emissions from power plants, could affect the way the entire government 

makes rules and regulations. [Listen ]

WSJ: Farmers Stick With Bayer’s Roundup, Undeterred by Supreme Court Decision ,

Patrick Thomas, June 22, 2022, 1:08 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court this week denied an effort by Bayer AG BAYRY -1.11% to stem 

thousands of lawsuits alleging its Roundup weedkiller caused cancer among landscapers and 

residential gardeners. On Alan Meadows’s Tennessee farm, it was business as usual. As the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000373

top U.S. court declined Tuesday to hear Bayer’s appeal of a 2018 jury verdict linking the 

company’s herbicide to non-Hodgkin lymphoma in a California plaintiff, Mr. Meadows said he 

was spraying the chemical on his own 4,000-acre farm, which he said he has done since the 

1990s. [Continue Reading] 

NPR : [AUDIO] The Supreme Court may issue a ruling that could hurt Biden's climate change plans , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:58 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court is hearing a case that could limit the Environmental Protection 

Agency's ability to regulate climate-warming greenhouse gasses. [Listen ]

Washington Examiner: Senate bill would imprison Supreme Court leakers and impose 

$10K fine, Kaelan Deese, June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) unveiled new legislation Thursday that would hold future Supreme 

Court leakers accountable with a $10,000 fine and 10 years in prison for releasing 

information about pending decisions in response to last month's unprecedented leaked draft 

opinion that signaled the overturning of Roe v. Wade. [Continue Reading] 

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360: HUD To Establish First-Ever Tribal Advisory Committee , Caleb Symons, June 

22, 2022, 8:42 PM 

Federal officials plan to create a tribal advisory committee meant to strengthen relations between Native groups and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and to 

advise HUD on its existing regulations and housing development for those communities. 

[Continue Reading] 

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters: Biden asks Congress for gas tax holiday to lower record pump prices , Jarrett 

Renshaw and Nandita Bose, June 23, 2022, 3:47 AM 

U.S.  President Joe Biden on Wednesday called for a three-month suspension of the federal 

gasoline tax to combat record prices, but opposition from lawmakers within his own party 

suggests the request may never be met. American families paying much more for gasoline 

deserve some financial relief, Biden said as he pushed Congress to act, while commenting 

that a suspension of the 18.4 cents per gallon tax was not enough. [Continue Reading] See 

also : Bloomberg , NBC 

USA Today: Biden to meet with G7 leaders in Europe amid global economic crisis, conflict with Russia , Francesca Chambers, June 23, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Skyrocketing gas prices. Surging food costs. Markets in freefall. The international financial 

crisis will be front and center as President Joe Biden meets with leaders of some of the 

world’s most advanced economies this weekend in the Bavarian Alps. Rich nations that make 

up the Group of Seven, or G7, will band together in an attempt to stabilize the global 

economy while maintaining and potentially increasing punitive actions on Russia over its war 

in Ukraine. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

Reuters: U.S. Senate poised to step forward on rare bipartisan gun legislation , David 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000374

# ••

Morgan, June 23, 2022, 5:03 AM The U.S. Senate is poised on Thursday for a vote to advance a bipartisan gun control bill that 

supporters hope will help curb the mass shootings that have rocked the country, in what 

could be Congress's first new limits on guns in decades. The 80-page Bipartisan Safer 

Communities Act would encourage states to keep guns out of the hands of those deemed to 

be dangerous and tighten background checks for would-be gun purchasers convicted of domestic violence or significant crimes as juveniles. [Continue Reading ] See also:  NBC , CNN 

NYT: Gun Bill’s Progress Reflects Political Shift, but G.O.P. Support Is Fragile , Emily 

Cochrane, June 22, 2022, 7:00 PM 

As Senator Joni Ernst, Republican of Iowa, weighed whether she should vote to take up a

bipartisan gun reform measure, the phone lines in her offices were being flooded by 

constituents hoping to sway her. The calls were coming in roughly six to one, she estimated, 

with an urgent message: “Please do something.” On Tuesday, Ms. Ernst became one of 14 

Republicans to break with her party to support moving ahead with the legislation, propelling it 

past a Republican blockade that has thwarted years of efforts to overhaul the nation’s gun 

laws. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ : Congress Unlikely to Heed Biden’s Call for Three-Month Suspension of Gas 

Tax , Tarini Parti, Amara Omeokwe and Lindsay Wise, June 22, 2022, 3:39 PM President Biden called for a three-month suspension of federal gasoline and diesel taxes—a 

move that is unlikely to have the support needed to pass in Congress and one economists and business leaders say would do little to address record-high gas prices. “I fully understand that the gas tax holiday alone is not going to fix the problem, but it will provide 

families some immediate relief,” Mr. Biden said at the White House on Wednesday. “Just a

little bit of breathing room.” [Continue Reading] See also:  CNN , NYT , USA Today 

Roll Call: Gun bill expands school safety spending beyond security, Michael 

Macagnone, June 23, 2022, 5:00 AM Mill Creek Township School District in Pennsylvania plans to upgrade its surveillance 

cameras, radios and a door monitoring system with a $500,000 federal grant, one of 

hundreds awarded across the country over the past four years as part of a $1 billion 

program Congress passed to address school violence. But Superintendent Ian Roberts said 

the grant won’t cover upgrades like security vestibules on its more than 40 entrances at 10 

schools, and the district can’t afford that immediately. “From an infrastructure standpoint, 

there's still some things that are lacking in this and other districts,” Roberts said. [Continue 

Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 22, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

President  Joe Biden on Wednesday called on Congress to suspend federal gasoline 

and diesel taxes for three months — an election-year move meant to ease financial 

pressures that was greeted with doubts by many lawmakers. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  Wall Street Journal is reporting that the Food and Drug Administration is about to 

order Juul to stop selling its e-cigarettes. Officials began investigating Juul for targeting 

teens as underage vaping skyrocketed. [ABC , CBS ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000375

# •••••

Texas  state Sen. Roland Gutierrez is suing the Department of Public Safety over 

access to records about the Uvalde school shooting. Meanwhile, Uvalde's mayor is 

slamming the department, saying it's keeping residents in the dark about the 

investigation. [CBS, NBC] 

The  U.S. Senate took an initial step toward passing the country's first major gun-control 

legislation in decades on Tuesday, galvanized by two mass shootings in a nation that 

has long struggled to curb chronic gun violence. [ABC, NBC] 

The  House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol 

is ramping up its investigation this week as new evidence emerges, including dozens of 

hours of footage from filmmaker Alex Holder's upcoming three-part documentary 

series. [CBS] 

Cerebral,  an online mental health provider, faces growing scrutiny overs its prescribing 

practices, including a Justice Department investigation. CBS News has an exclusive 

interview with the company's CEO to address the concerns. [CBS] 

A nuclear scientist from Texas, who's credited with designing sensitive technology 

found in dozens of laser-guided weapons systems used by the U.S. military, was 

rescued from war-torn Ukraine. [ABC ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11017 01570-000376

From: Watson, Theresa (OAG) 

Subject: Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

To: Berger, Christine (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: June 23, 2022 7:37 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: June 23, 2022 at 6:54:50 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# June 23, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

US Attorneys 

3. 

National Security 

4. 

Jan. 6 Committee 

5. 

Criminal Law 

6. 

Civil Rights 

7. 

Civil Law 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000377

## •

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

Immigration & Border Security 

Antitrust 

Environment 

Tax 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

US Supreme Court 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

Native American Affairs 

Marijuana Legalization 

Administration 

Congress 

Network Evening News Lineup 

Morning Headlines 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JUNE 23, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000378

## •

## •

## •

## •

SCOTUS 

Opinions 

Conference 

CONGRESS 

9:00  AM: Senate Judiciary Committee: Executive Business Meeting. 

10:00  AM: House Judiciary Committee: The Patent Trial and Appeal Board After 10 Years: 

Impact on Innovation and Small Businesses. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

WaPo: [OPINION] A question for Garland: Do you know how it feels for POTUS to target 

you?, Jennifer Rubin, June 22, 2022, 12:00 PM 

Attorney General Merrick Garland is surely familiar with Republicans’ indifference to (if not 

encouragement of) threats of violence directed at government officials. When he vowed to 

investigate threats against local officials such as school board members, Senate Republicans 

harangued him, falsely accusing him of labeling parents as “domestic terrorists.” Republicans 

also objected when he vowed to look into passengers assailing airline personnel over mask rules. 

[Continue Reading ]

Fox: Republicans push DOJ to protect pro-life centers from 'assault' by violent activists ,

Kelly Laco, June 23, 2022, 6:24 AM 

House Republicans are putting pressure on the Department of Justice to take action against 

violent activists who have targeted crisis pregnancy centers and places of worship in an attempt 

to intimidate pro-life Americans and justices. Rep. Ken Buck, R-Colo., who sits on the House 

Judiciary Committee, is leading Republicans in this charge, telling Fox News Digital that it is a

"shame" that DOJ "will not act" and protect Supreme Court justices and pro-life centers. 

[Continue Reading ]

Daily Beast: Ted Cruz ‘Halfway’ Expects Merrick Garland to Riot After Roe Ruling , William 

Vaillancourt, June 23, 2022, 5:55 AM 

If and when the Supreme Court strikes down Roe v. Wade, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) says it won’t be 

all that surprising to see Attorney General Merrick Garland among the rioters taking to the streets 

over the decision. Speaking to Sean Hannity, Cruz pointed to the civil rights protests and riots in 

2020 after the killing of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer and said there could be 

more such riots after the Roe decision. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Fox 

TIME: These Are the Factors Garland Is Likely Weighing as He Mulls Charging Trump, 

Brian Bennett, June 22, 2022, 10:10 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000379

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol has laid out its case that 

Donald Trump knew he lost the 2020 election, and that he nevertheless spread lies about 

election fraud as part of a broad effort to overturn Joe Biden’s win, pressured state election 

officials to change the results, orchestrated an effort to send fake electors to Washington, and 

used multiple tactics to persuade Vice President Mike Pence to name Trump the winner, 

including inciting a mob to go after him. [Continue Reading ]

KCYU-Fox (Yakima, WA): State attorneys general ask Department of Justice to 

investigate violence against pro-life groups, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 12:35 PM 

The attorneys general of 19 states want the U.S. Department of Justice to investigate what they 

say is growing violence targeting pro-life groups nationwide. Last month, Politico published a

leaked draft U.S. Supreme Court opinion, apparently revealing the nation’s highest court is poised 

to overturn Roe v. Wade, which established abortion as a constitutional right, and Casey v. 

Planned Parenthood. [Continue Reading] See also:  WTRF-CBS/ABC (Wheeling, WV) , WVNS-

CBS/Fox (Lewisburg, WV) 

US ATTORNEYS 

KTVB-NBC (Boise, ID): New US attorney for Idaho: Civil rights, hate crime enforcement is 

'front and center', Betsy Russell, June 22, 2022, 9:02 PM 

Idaho’s new top federal prosecutor says civil rights and hate crime enforcement are top-of-mind 

for federal prosecutors both in Idaho and nationwide. “It’s always been important,” Josh Hurwit 

told the Idaho Press in an interview this week. “But with the rise in hate incidents that we’ve seen 

really starting in the pandemic, and now continuing with various groups in Idaho and around the 

country, obviously the tragic shooting in Buffalo put this front and center.” [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: Man pleads not guilty to trying to kill Justice Kavanaugh, Michael Kunzelman, June 22, 

2022, 8:30 PM 

A man who was arrested near Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s home in Maryland earlier 

this month pleaded not guilty Wednesday to trying to kill Kavanaugh. Nicholas John Roske, 26, of 

Simi Valley, California, remained in custody after his arraignment on one count of attempting to 

assassinate a Supreme Court justice. [Continue Reading] See also: Axios, CNN, Fox, Guardian, 

NY Post , Washington Examiner, WJRT-ABC (Flint, MI),  WSJ , WUSA-CBS (Washington, DC) 

AP: Former West Virginia lawmaker gets 3 months in Jan. 6 riot, Alanna Durkin Richer , June 

22, 2022, 3:35 PM 

A former West Virginia lawmaker who livestreamed himself on Facebook storming the U.S. 

Capitol and cheering on what he described as a “revolution” was sentenced Wednesday to three 

months in prison. Derrick Evans, 37, who pleaded guilty to a felony civil disorder charge, told the 

judge that he regrets his actions every day and is a “good person who unfortunately was caught 

up in a moment.” [Continue Reading ] See also:  NBC , Washington Examiner , WaPo 

AP: Decades later, ‘Torso Killer’ charged in killing at NY mall, Michael Balsamo, June 22, 

2022, 2:59 PM 

More than five decades after Diane Cusick’s lifeless body was discovered in the parking lot of a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000380

mall on New York’s Long Island, authorities have linked her death to the so-called “Torso Killer,” a

serial killer already convicted in 11 other killings. The suspect, Richard Cottingham believed to 

be one of America’s most prolific serial killers was arraigned Wednesday on a second-degree 

murder charge in connection with Cusick’s 1968 killing. From a hospital bed in New Jersey, where 

he’s already serving a life sentence for other killings, Cottingham pleaded not guilty. [Continue 

Reading ]

Reuters: U.S. judge agrees to postpone Proud Boys trial amid Jan. 6 Capitol riot 

hearings, Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 2:33 PM 

A federal judge on Wednesday postponed the trial for leaders of the Proud Boys facing seditious 

conspiracy charges for their role in storming the U.S. Capitol, amid fears that revelations during 

recent congressional hearings could taint the jury pool. 

U.S.  District Judge Timothy Kelly set a new trial date of Dec. 12, after prosecutors and attorneys 

for three of the Proud Boys defendants requested a delay. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Guardian , NBC , USA Today , WaPo , WSJ 

Reuters: U.S. seeks probe of Trump-allied lawyer's funding of Oath Keepers defense, 

Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 1:24 PM 

U.S.  prosecutors asked a judge on Wednesday to launch an ethics inquiry into whether defense 

lawyers for prominent members of the right-week Oath Keepers are improperly allowing an 

attorney closely allied with former President Donald Trump to help pay their legal fees. The 

Justice Department's court filing cited media reports alleging that the legal fees for Oath Keepers 

leader Stewart Rhodes are being paid by Defending the Republic, an entity controlled by Sidney 

Powell, an attorney who played a key role in Trump's attempt to overturn his election defeat. The 

group is also paying fees for Oath Keeper defendants Kelly Meggs, Connie Meggs and Kenneth 

Harrelson, it said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Courthouse News , The Hill , National Law 

Journal , WaPo 

Reuters: Russian cyber spies attack Ukraine's allies, Microsoft says, Zeba Siddiqui, June 

22, 2022, 12:25 PM 

Russian government hackers have conducted multiple cyber spy operations on countries allied 

with Ukraine since Moscow's February invasion of that country, Microsoft said in a report on 

Wednesday. "The cyber aspects of the current war extend far beyond Ukraine and reflect the 

unique nature of cyberspace," Microsoft President Brad Smith said in the report. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  CNN 

Bloomberg: Trump Seeks to Turn Durham Case Bust Into Clinton Lawsuit Boon , Erik 

Larson, June 22, 2022, 12:10 PM 

The acquittal last month of a former Hillary Clinton campaign lawyer accused of lying to the FBI 

was a blow to Republicans who wanted to take the Russia probe down a notch. But it wasn’t a

total loss for Donald Trump. The former president on Tuesday night amended his March lawsuit 

accusing Clinton of leading a vast conspiracy against him to add details gleaned from testimony 

and evidence from Special Counsel John Durham’s failed prosecution of longtime Democratic 

lawyer Michael Sussmann last month in Washington [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times: Mexican scientist gets 4-year prison term after spying in Miami for 

Russia , Tom Howell Jr, June 22, 2022, 2:25 PM 

A Mexican scientist has been sentenced to four years in prison for spying on “a U.S. government 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000381

source” on behalf of Russia. Hector Cabrera Fuentes, 37, pleaded guilty in February to acting on 

behalf of a foreign government without notifying American authorities. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  Daily Beast , UPI 

JAN. 6 COMMITTEE 

AP: 1/6 panel to hear of Trump’s pressure on Justice Department, Eric Tucker, June 23, 

2022, 5:46 AM 

The Jan. 6 committee will hear from former Justice Department officials who faced down a

relentless pressure campaign from Donald Trump over the 2020 presidential election results 

while suppressing a bizarre challenge from within their own ranks. The hearing Thursday will bring 

attention to a memorably turbulent stretch at the department as Trump in his final days in office 

sought to bend to his will a law enforcement agency that has long cherished its independence 

from the White House. [Continue Reading] See also : ABC,  CBS , CNN , Guardian , The Hill, 

MSNBC , NBC , NPR , NYT , Reuters , USA Today , VOA 

AP: Ginni Thomas responds to 1/6 panel, hearings stretch to July, Farnoush Amiri, Mary 

Clare Jalonick, June 22, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The House’s Jan. 6 committee plans to continue its public hearings into July as its investigation of 

the Capitol riot deepens. The chairman, Rep. Bennie Thompson, told reporters Wednesday that 

the committee is receiving “a lot of information” including new documentary film footage of 

Donald Trump’s final months in office as its yearlong inquiry intensifies with hearings into the 

attack on Jan. 6, 2021, and Trump’s efforts to overturn the 2020 election that Democrat Joe 

Biden won. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: What to expect at Thursday’s Jan. 6 committee hearing, Devlin Barrett, June 23, 

2022, 6:00 AM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on Congress is set to hear testimony 

Thursday from former senior officials who resisted President Donald Trump’s efforts to bend the 

Justice Department to his will to try to overturn the election won by Joe Biden. The 3 p.m. 

televised hearing will be a public airing of a high-stakes drama that played out inside the White 

House and Justice Department shortly before the Jan. 6 attack on Congress. [Continue Reading] 

See also:  CNN , NPR 

NYT: A Year Later, Some Republicans Second-Guess Boycotting the Jan. 6 Panel , Luke 

Broadwater, June 22, 2022, 8:00 PM 

The four hearings held in the past few weeks by the House committee investigating the Jan. 6

attack, with their clear, uninterrupted narratives about President Donald J. Trump’s effort to 

undercut the peaceful transfer of power, have left some pro-Trump Republicans wringing their 

hands with regret about a decision made nearly a year ago. Representative Kevin McCarthy of 

California, the minority leader, chose last summer to withdraw all of his nominees to the 

committee amid a dispute with Speaker Nancy Pelosi over her rejection of his first two choices 

a turning point that left the nine-member investigative committee without a single ally of Mr. 

Trump. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Sen. Ron Johnson under fire over fake-electors disclosure at hearing, Colby 

Itkowitz, June 22, 2022, 7:00 PM 

Weeks before the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection, Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) held a hearing on 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000382

election fraud in an attempt to legitimize former president Donald Trump’s false allegations of 

voting irregularities. Four days before the attack on the Capitol, Johnson signed a statement with 

nine other Republican senators that they intended to object to certifying Joe Biden’s electors and 

demand “an emergency 10-day audit of the election.” [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Justice Dept. expands Jan. 6 probe with fresh subpoenas, Spencer S. Hsu, Josh 

Dawsey and Devlin Barrett, June 22, 2022, 2:59 PM 

The Justice Department’s investigation of the Jan. 6 attack ratcheted up Wednesday as federal 

agents dropped subpoenas on people in at least two states, in what appeared to be a widening 

probe of how political activists supporting President Donald Trump tried to use invalid electors to 

thwart Joe Biden’s 2020 electoral victory. FBI officials confirmed to The Washington Post that 

agents conducted court authorized law enforcement activity Wednesday morning at two locations 

one the address of Brad Carver, a Georgia lawyer who allegedly signed a document claiming 

to be a Trump elector, and another the Virginia home of Thomas Lane, who worked on the Trump 

campaign’s efforts in Arizona and New Mexico. The FBI officials did not identify the people 

associated with those addresses, but public records list each of the locations as the home 

addresses of the men. [Continue Reading] See also:  Daily Beast , NYT , Reuters , Washington 

Examiner 

WaPo: Lawmakers on Jan. 6 committee ramp up their security as threats increase , Amy 

Gardner, Josh Dawsey and Jacqueline Alemany, June 22, 2022, 12:24 PM 

In the past 24 hours, there has been an uptick in the number of violent threats against lawmakers 

on the House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the U.S. Capitol, 

and all lawmakers on the committee are likely to receive a security detail, according to three 

people involved with the investigation. The committee on Tuesday held its fourth hearing, which 

focused on efforts by former president Donald Trump and his allies to overturn the results of the 

2020 election and the resulting political violence and harassment experienced by many of those 

who resisted. [Continue Reading ]

NBC: Who is Jeffrey Clark? Jan. 6 panel seeks to make Trump's man at DOJ famous, 

Ryan J. Reilly, June 23, 2022, 5:01 AM 

Most Americans don't know Jeffrey Clark the environmental lawyer whom former President 

Donald Trump wanted to take over the Justice Department to aid his effort to overturn the 2020 

election. But the House Jan. 6 committee hopes its Thursday hearing might change that. 

[Continue Reading ] See also: The Hill 

NBC: Q&A: Justice reporter Ryan Reilly breaks down what we've learned from the 

January 6th hearings, Benjy Sarlin, June 22, 2022, 3:19 PM 

Before the smoke even settled on the January 6th attack, NBC News Justice Reporter Ryan 

Reilly set out covering the legal aftermath, which has since grown to encompass hundreds of 

arrests, investigations, and prosecutions. He's also followed the extensive effort by online 

amateur sleuths to identify suspects and gather evidence alongside the official effort. With the 

country now taking a fresh look at the attack via the House Select Committee's hearings, we 

asked Reilly to help put their findings in perspective. Here's our conversation, edited for length 

and clarity. [Continue Reading] 

Guardian: January 6 panel to focus on Trump’s relentless pressure on justice 

department, Hugo Lowell, June 22, 2022, 7:01 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000383

Donald Trump pressured top justice department officials to falsely declare that the 2020 election 

was corrupt and launch investigations into discredited claims of fraud as part of an effort to return 

him to office, the House January 6 select committee will say on Thursday. The panel investigating 

the Capitol attack is expected at its fifth hearing to focus on how Trump abused the power of the 

presidency to twist the justice department into endorsing false election claims and potentially 

how the Republican congressman Scott Perry sought a pardon for his involvement. [Continue 

Reading ]

The Hill: Jan. 6 committee delays hearing schedule until July, Rebecca Beitsch, June 22, 

2022, 2:10 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol is pressing pause on 

its hearings for next week and picking them up again in July. Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.), 

the chairman of the committee, told reporters Wednesday that the committee would hold off on 

the two final hearings it had planned for this month. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

Reuters: Maxwell deserves 30- to 55-year prison term - U.S. prosecutors, Luc Cohen, June 

23, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Ghislaine Maxwell should be sentenced to between 30 and 55 years in prison after being 

convicted of helping the sex offender and globetrotting financier Jeffrey Epstein sexually abuse 

teenage girls, U.S. prosecutors said on Wednesday. Maxwell, 60, was convicted in December by 

a federal jury on five charges, including sex trafficking, for recruiting and grooming four girls 

between 1994 and 2004 for sexual encounters with Epstein, then her boyfriend. [Continue 

Reading ] See also : NBC 

AP : Motocross instructor with Indiana business indicted on federal child porn charges ,

Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Federal officials say a motocross instructor who visited states from New York to Georgia has 

been charged with producing child pornography. The Justice Department says Ryan Meyung, 30, 

is accused of engaging six minors in sexually explicit conduct to produce sexual abuse images 

and with transporting and possessing images of child sexual abuse. [Continue Reading] 

Reuters: Former Tallahassee mayor, Florida governor candidate Gillum indicted for 

fraud, Sarah N. Lynch, June 22, 2022, 11:47 AM 

The U.S. Justice Department on Wednesday said a federal grand jury voted to indict 

Tallahassee's former Democratic mayor and Florida gubernatorial candidate Andrew Gillum on 

charges of conspiracy, wire fraud and making false statements. Gillum, 42, is facing numerous 

criminal charges along with his associate, Sharon Janet Lettman-Hicks, 53, the U.S. Attorney for 

the Northern District of Florida said. [Continue Reading] See also: AP, CNN, KRIV-Fox (Houston, 

TX) , USA Today , WaPo , WESH-NBC (Orlando, FL) , WJXT-CW (Jacksonville, FL),  WSJ 

Bloomberg : US Says Giuliani Associate Parnas Deserves Up to 8 Years’ Prison , Robert 

Burnson, June 22, 2022, 10:04 PM 

US prosecutors say Lev Parnas, a Florida businessman and associate of Rudy Giuliani, should 

spend as long as eight years in prison for crimes that included violating campaign finance laws 

and defrauding investors. The native of Ukraine vaulted to prominence during the first 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000384

impeachment of former President Donald Trump when it was revealed that Giuliani had recruited 

him to help in his effort to dig up dirt on then-candidate Joe Biden and his son, Hunter. [Continue 

Reading ]

Baltimore Sun: Baltimore man pleads guilty to federal conspiracy charges for 

involvement in Cherry Hill gang, murder, Lilly Price, June 22, 2022, 8:22 PM 

A Baltimore man who was a member of a violent gang based in South Baltimore pleaded guilty 

Tuesday to federal charges of conspiracy to participate in a racketeering enterprise. Deaven 

Cherry, 35, aka “Gotti,” played a significant role in a gang called Hillside that operated in Cherry 

Hill for 14 years, the U.S. Attorney for the District of Maryland said in a news release Wednesday. 

Cherry, charged with murder, went on the run in 2016 and was a fugitive for four years until his 

arrest by U.S. marshals in Baltimore County in 2020. [Continue Reading ]

NY Daily News: Six indicted in fatal shooting after massive Brooklyn marijuana robbery, 

John Annese, June 22, 2022, 7:52 PM 

A band of robbers face federal charges for ambushing an upstate pot seller in a Brooklyn Airbnb, 

fatally shooting the dealer as the thieves tried to grab hockey bags full of weed, prosecutors said. 

Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn announced Wednesday they’ve indicted a half-dozen suspects 

in connection with the Dec. 3, 2021, robbery turned bloodbath in Brighton Beach. [Continue 

Reading ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): Owners of Grand Rapids-based company to pay $1 

million settlement related to pandemic fraud, John Tunison, June 22, 2022, 7:42 PM 

A Grand Rapids trucking company and it’s owners have agreed to pay a $1 million settlement in a

civil case related to federal pandemic relief fraud, U.S. prosecutors said. DMR Transportation and 

its owners, Semsi Salja and Anes Suhonjic, agreed to pay the amount under the Financial 

Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act. [Continue Reading] See also:  WXMI-Fox 

(Grand Rapids, MI) 

St. Thomas Source: Sixth Venezuelan Pleads Guilty To Cocaine Smuggling, Mat Probasco, 

June 22, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Another of the 11 Venezuelan men caught with bails of cocaine on a boat south of the USVI 

pleaded guilty in a St. Croix court, federal prosecutors said Wednesday. Alexis Fuentes, 33, is 

the sixth of the men to plead guilty to conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute cocaine while 

on board a vessel subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. [Continue Reading ]

Lake and McHenry County Scanner (Lake County, IL): Former executive director of 

Grayslake Chamber of Commerce faces federal charges for allegedly stealing $300k ,

Woo-Sung Shim, June 22, 2022, 4:08 PM 

A Round Lake Beach woman, who is the former executive director of the Grayslake Chamber of 

Commerce, was indicted by the feds for allegedly stealing at least $300,000 in funds belonging 

to the chamber. Karen Christian-Smith, 56, of Round Lake Beach, was indicted Wednesday on 

six counts of wire fraud. Christian-Smith served as the executive director for the Grayslake Area 

Chamber of Commerce and Industry, a non-profit organization, from 2006 to October 2019. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : Daily Herald,  WGN-ABC (Chicago, IL) 

NJ Metro Breaking News: Newark Man Sentenced to Five Years for Role in Fentanyl 

Conspiracy, Weapon Possession, Chris Coleman, June 22, 2022, 5:04 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000385

An Essex County man was sentenced today to 60 months in prison for his role in a fentanyl 

conspiracy and unlawful possession of a firearm and ammunition, U.S. Attorney Philip R. Sellinger 

announced. According to U.S. Attorney Sellinger, Jaqua Clayton, aka “Quay,” 23, of Newark, 

previously pleaded guilty to an information charging him with conspiracy to distribute fentanyl, 

possession with intent to distribute fentanyl and possession of a firearm and ammunition by a

convicted felon. [Continue Reading ]

Goshen News (Goshen, IN): Elkhart man sentenced to 57 months , Unattributed, June 22, 

2022, 3:00 PM 

Shea Pletcher, 42, Elkhart, was sentenced by United States District Court Judge Robert L. Miller, 

Jr. on his plea of guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm, announced United States 

Attorney Clifford D. Johnson. Pletcher was sentenced to 57 months in prison followed by two 

years of supervised release, a news release stated. [Continue Reading] See also : WBND-ANC 

(South Bend, IN) , WNDU-NBC (South Bend, IN) 

WFMJ-NBC/CW (Youngstown, OH): New Castle woman sentenced for storing guns, drugs 

in her home, Corey Vallas, June 22, 2022, 10:00 PM 

A New Castle woman was sentenced Tuesday for violating federal narcotics laws. Deia 

Eggleston, 46, pleaded guilty to the count back in February. According to the release, Eggleston 

was connected to a cocaine distribution drug trafficking organization in New Castle that also 

included Dondi Searcy, Jr., also of New Castle. [Continue Reading ]

WVLT-CBS (Knoxville, TN): Sevierville man sentenced to life in prison for selling drugs 

that caused overdose; DOJ says, Kelly Ann Krueger, June 22, 2022, 9:09 PM 

A Sevierville man was sentenced to life in prison after he was caught selling drugs to an 

undercover agent and was linked to the overdose death of a Kodak man on Thanksgiving of 

2018, according to officials with the Department of Justice. After a four-day trial, a jury convicted 

42-year-old Stacey Edward Williams on eight separate counts; conspiracy to distribute heroin, 

fentanyl, and acetyl fentanyl, multiple counts of possession and distribution of heroin, fentanyl, 

and acetyl fentanyl, the distribution of fentanyl and acetyl fentanyl resulting in death, and the 

possession of a firearm by a convicted felon. [Continue Reading] 

KXMB-CBS (Bismarck, ND): Minot man, Velva woman sentenced to federal prison for 

sexual exploitation of minors, Steph Malloy, June 22, 2022, 9:01 PM 

Two North Dakotans have now been sentenced to federal prison for the sexual exploitation of 

children. Wednesday, a judge sentenced 33-year-old Katie Heidinger, of Velva, and 46-year-old 

Derrick Walker, of Minot, for 6 counts of sexual exploitation of a minor. In addition, Walker was 

also charged with one count of receipt of images depicting the sexual exploitation of a minor. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  KFYR-NBC/Fox (Bismarck, ND) 

WBFF-Fox (Baltimore, MD): 61-year-old man sentenced to over four years for money 

laundering through law firm, Sinéad Hawkins, June 22, 2022, 8:22 PM 

A 61-year-old man was sentenced to over four years in prison for advising drug dealers to 

launder over million dollars. A 16-day- trial lead Kenneth Wendell Ravenell to be convicted of his 

charge on December 28, 2021. His over four-year sentence will be followed by three years of 

supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

WTMJ-AM (Milwaukee, WI): Oshkosh man who described himself as 'next mass shooter' 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000386

indicted on federal firearm charges, Madison Goldbeck, June 22, 2022, 7:31 PM 

An Oshkosh man who described himself as the "next mass shooter" was indicted on federal 

firearm charges. A federal grand jury indicted Whittier P. Ives, 53, on Wednesday for unlawfully 

possessing a firearm. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Ives is prohibited from 

possessing a firearm due to a court-ordered mental health commitment issued by a Winnebago 

County judge in April and due to prior felony convictions in California. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA) , WBAY-ABC (Green Bay, WI) 

WNDU-NBC (South Bend, IN): South Bend man sentenced to 12 years for robbery, firearm 

brandishing , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 7:31 PM 

On Wednesday, a South Bend man was sentenced to 12 years in prison with 2 years of 

supervised release. Arsenio Harrison, 30, of South Bend was arrested last year after a robbery in 

South Bend and an attempted robbery in Mishawaka. [Continue Reading ]

WWLP-NBC (Springfield, MA): Stoughton man guilty of $400k COVID relief scheme, 

Waleed Azad, June 22, 2022, 6:57 PM 

A Stoughton man pleaded guilty in federal court in Boston in connection with filing a fraudulent 

loan application in order to obtain over $400,000 in Paycheck Protection Program loan funds. 

According to the news release sent to 22News by the Department of Justice in Boston, Adley 

Bernadin, 44, pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud. [Continue Reading ]

WWLP-NBC (Springfield, MA): Lowell man pleads guilty in child pornography case, Amy 

Phillips, June 22, 2022, 6:44 PM 

A Lowell man, who is a level 3 registered sex offender, has pleaded guilty to one count of receipt 

of child pornography after coercing a juvenile to share sexually explicit photos using Snapchat. 

Chayanne Nieves, aged 24, appeared in federal court in Boston Wednesday. He was arrested 

and charged in August 2021 and has remained in custody since his arrest. [Continue Reading ]

WSOC-ABC (Charlotte, NC): NC man gets life for killing SC woman; FBI says he’s 

connected to 3 other deaths, Jazzmine Jackson, June 22, 2022, 6:27 PM 

A North Carolina man was sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole after 

pleading guilty in the kidnapping and death of a woman who disappeared in Greenville County, 

South Carolina, last year, according to a release from the South Carolina U.S. District Attorney. 

Daniel Glen Printz pleaded guilty to kidnapping Edna Suttles and taking her across state lines, 

which eventually led to her death. [Continue Reading] See also:  WCCB-CW (Charlotte, NC) 

KY3 (Springfield, MO): Nixa woman involved in high speed police chase sentenced for 

trafficking meth, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 6:25 PM 

A woman from Nixa, Mo., who led police on a high-speed chase at night with no headlights, was 

sentenced in federal court Wednesday to 12 years in federal prison for trafficking 

methamphetamine. On January 13th, 2022, Gina Nunez, 44, pleaded guilty to one count of 

possessing methamphetamine with the intent to distribute. Nunez admitted that she was in 

possession of methamphetamine found in her vehicle after she led officers on a high-speed 

chase over two stop strips before crashing her vehicle and being arrested. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Man pleads guilty to threatening Hennepin County 

employees, Zoe Brown, June 22, 2022, 6:00 PM 

A Minneapolis man pleaded guilty Wednesday to threatening Hennepin County government 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000387

employees and illegally having guns. The U.S. Attorney’s Office says an arrest warrant for 60 -

year-old Peter Robert Berry was issued in June 2021 after he failed to show up for a court 

appearance. Berry then called a Hennepin County Corrections employee and threatened to 

“shoot up the place,” then called a probation officer and demanded a call back before he starts 

“killing everybody.” [Continue Reading ]

KGBT-CBS (Harlingen, TX): 60-year-old sentenced to over five years for smuggling 

cocaine, Alejandra Yanez, June 22, 2022, 5:51 PM 

A Brownsville resident was sentenced after being arrested for possession of cocaine two years 

ago. Today, U.S. District Judge Rolando Olvera ordered Martin Munoz, 60, to serve a 70-month 

sentence to be immediately followed by five years of supervised release, according to a United 

States Department of Justice news release. [Continue Reading] 

KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO): Belton man sentenced for illegally possessing guns, 

drugs, Zoe Brown, June 22, 2022, 5:16 PM 

A young man from Belton has been sentenced to nearly seven years in prison for illegally 

possessing firearms and crack cocaine. Keylan L. Williams, 19, was sentenced Tuesday to six 

years and eight months in prison without parole. [Continue Reading ]

KPRC-NBC (Houston, TX): Katy sex offender to serve at least 15 years in federal prison 

for distributing child phonography: DOJ, Brittany Taylor, June 22, 2022, 5:15 PM 

A 45-year-old Katy man has been sent to federal prison following his conviction for a child 

pornography charge while on deferred adjudication for another similar offense, U.S. Attorney 

Jennifer B. Lowery announced. Manuel Candia-Reuter pleaded guilty on June 9, 2021. On 

Wednesday, Candia-Reuter was ordered to serve 180 months in prison, followed by 10 years of 

supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

WSET-ABC (Lynchburg, VA): Owner of Lighthouse Properties sentenced to 42 months for 

$550k embezzlement scheme, Ezra Hercyk, June 22, 2022, 5:00 PM 

The former owner of Lighthouse Properties was sentenced today to 42 months in federal prison 

for his role in an embezzlement scheme in which he stole more than $550,000. Timothy Penick, 

39, of Forest, pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud in May 2021. [Continue Reading ]

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): Raleigh County man sentenced for mine equipment theft, 

Will Carroll, June 22, 2022, 4:48 PM 

A Raleigh County man was sentenced on Wednesday to two years and six months in prison and 

three years of supervised release for helping steal specialized equipment at a mine located in 

Boone and Lincoln counties. According to the US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of 

West Virginia, 51-year-old Charles Stanley admitted to helping others steal multiple pieces of 

mining equipment from a mine in 2019. [Continue Reading] 

WDBJ-CBS (Roanoke, VA): Former Amherst Co. veterinarian sentenced on drug charges, 

Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:36 PM 

A former Amherst County veterinarian who admitted to stealing opioids was sentenced 

Wednesday. 54-year-old Patrick Gries has been sentenced to eight months in federal prison. He 

pleaded guilty in January to two drug charges: “NARCOTICS - False/forged label on container of 

controlled drugs.” [Continue Reading ] See also:  WSET-ABC (Lynchburg, VA) , WSLS-NBC 

(Roanoke, VA) 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000388

KY3 (Springfield, MO): Branson, Mo. man pleads guilty to threatening Los Angeles 

County Sheriff’s Office, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:24 PM 

A Branson man pleaded guilty in federal court to threatening over the internet to injure employees 

of the Los Angeles County California Sheriff’s Office Joshua L. Bippert, 27, pleaded guilty before 

U.S.  District Judge M. Douglas Harpool to one count of transmitting a threat across state lines to 

injure another person. [Continue Reading ]

WLNE-ABC (Providence, RI): Drug-trafficking organization leader sentenced to federal 

prison, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:20 PM 

A man who led a drug-trafficking organization was sentenced on Wednesday, announced by the 

United States Attorney Zachary A. Cunha. 47-year-old Juni Rafael Jimenez-Martinez was 

sentenced to 15 years in federal prison. The twice-deported Dominican national was a

Providence resident. [Continue Reading ]

KPAX-CBS/CW (Missoula, MT): Montana man sentenced for using construction excavator 

to break into firearms business, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:20 PM 

A Billings man who admitted to stealing firearms from a dealer after breaking into the business by 

using a construction excavator to tear a hole in the wall was sentenced Wednesday. Erik Stephen 

Deaner, 46, pleaded guilty in December 2021 to theft from a federal firearms dealer and was 

sentenced to five years and two months in prison, followed by three years of supervised release, 

the U.S. Attorney's Office said in a press release. [Continue Reading] See also:  KTVQ-CBS 

(Billings, MT) 

WALB-NBC (Albany, GA): Tifton man sentenced for trafficking heroin , Unattributed, June 

22, 2022, 4:09 PM 

A Tifton man was sentenced to over a decade in prison for trafficking heroin from Atlanta to south 

Georgia, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of Georgia. Joshua 

Gannon Deanda, 24, was sentenced to over 12 years in prison. In November 2020, Deanda was 

pulled over for a traffic violation where he ran away from deputies. [Continue Reading ] See also: 

WFXL-Fox (Albany, GA) , WRBL-CBS (Columbus, GA) 

WPGG-AM (Atlantic City, NJ): RI Man Convicted of Bank Fraud Conspiracy that Operated 

in South Jersey, Chris Coleman, June 22, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Federal authorities say a man from Rhode Island has been convicted for his role in a bank fraud 

conspiracy that targeted financial institutions in South Jersey and beyond. U.S. Attorney Philip 

Sellinger says 42-year-old Olayinka Peter Olaseinde of Providence, RI, was convicted on 

Tuesday of one count of bank fraud conspiracy and three counts of bank fraud following a five-day bench trial in Camden federal court. [Continue Reading ]

WYOU-CBS (Scranton, PA): Man indicted on firearms offense, Justin Glowacki, June 22, 

2022, 3:31 PM 

The US Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of Pennsylvania announced that a 36-year-old 

man was indicted on a firearms charge in Luzerne County. U.S. Attorney Gerard M. Karam said 

the indictment alleges Antonio Menzel Clark, of Ashley, possessed a handgun when he was 

prohibited from possessing a firearm due to a prior felony conviction. [Continue Reading ]

WESH-NBC (Orlando, FL): 29-year-old man facing charges for selling firearm and heroin 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000389

in Ocala , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 3:28 PM 

According to the U.S. Department of Justice, a Florida man is facing charges for selling a firearm 

and heroin. Troy Nix, 29, of Mount Dora has an indictment charging him with the possession of a

firearm as a convicted felon and the possession of heroin with the intent to distribute. Nix could 

face several years in federal prison if convicted. [Continue Reading ]

WFTX-Fox (Fort Myers, FL): Man sentenced to 7 years for possessing extreme amounts 

of child pornography , Hannah Groves, June 22, 2022, 3:19 PM 

A U.S. District Judge sentenced 66-year-old Timothy Crawley to seven years in federal prison for 

possessing images and videos showing sexual abuse of children. In addition, Crawley was 

sentenced to a 20-year term of supervised release and was ordered to register as a sex 

offender. [Continue Reading ]

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): Huntington man sentenced to 6 years for fentanyl crime, 

Will Carroll, June 22, 2022, 3:11 PM 

A Huntington man was sentenced to six years in prison, followed by four years of supervised 

release, for possession with intent to distribute 40 or more grams of fentanyl. According to the 

US Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of West Virginia, 20-year-old Ian Wyatt Justice, of 

Huntington, was arrested on March 16 when law enforcement officers executed a search warrant 

at his home on Charleston Avenue. [Continue Reading ]

WKYC-NBC (Cleveland, OH): Stark County man pleads guilty in attempting murder-for -

hire plot, Anna Meyer, June 22, 2022, 3:07 PM 

A 53-year-old Stark County man has admitted to attempting to coordinate a murder-for-hire plot. 

Scott Allen Renninger, of Uniontown, pleaded guilty in federal court on Tuesday to one count of 

using interstate commerce facilities in the commission of murder-for-hire. [Continue Reading ]

See also:  WEWS-ABC (Cleveland, OH) , WJW-Fox (Cleveland, OH) 

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): 39-year-old man sentenced to prison for drug distribution , Phil 

Villarreal, June 22, 2022, 2:53 PM 

A 39-year-old convicted drug dealer was sentenced to 72 months in prison. Jamaar Charles 

Samuels, 39, was sentenced to the term, which will be followed by a 36-month supervised 

release. Last year, Samuels' co-defendant, 60-year-old Patrick Michael La Fever, was sentenced 

to 97 months in prison followed by 60 months of supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

KNWA-NBC (Rogers, AR): Fayetteville man sentenced to 25 years in federal prison for 

drug trafficking , C.C. McCandless, June 22, 2022, 2:49 PM 

On June 21, a Fayetteville man was sentenced to 300 months in prison followed by five years of 

supervised release on one count of aiding and abetting the possession with intent to distribute 

more than 500 grams of methamphetamine. The Honorable Judge Timothy L. Brooks presided 

over the sentencing hearing in the United States District Court in Fayetteville. According to court 

documents, in March 2021, the Fourth Judicial District Drug Task Force (DTF) began 

investigating a drug trafficking organization operating within the Western District of Arkansas, 

Fayetteville Division. [Continue Reading ]

WDRB-Fox (Louisville, KY): Floyds Knobs man headed to federal prison for robbing 5

Indy banks in 10 weeks, Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A Floyds Knobs man is headed to federal prison after pleading guilty to five bank robberies in 10 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000390

weeks in the Indianapolis area. Daniel Wilkinson robbed five different Chase Bank branches in 

the Indianapolis area between Sept. 5 and Nov. 17, 2020, according to court documents. 

[Continue Reading ] See also: WHAS-ABC (Louisville, KY) 

KELO-AM (Sioux Falls, SD): Pine Ridge man indicted for sex abuse of a minor, Jazzmine 

Jackson, June 22, 2022, 12:13 PM 

A Pine Ridge, South Dakota man is facing up to 15 years in prison after being indicted by a

federal grand jury on sexual abuse charges. Court documents say 24-year-old McKinley Two 

Bulls-Hunter appeared before a U.S. Magistrate Judge on June 15 where he plead ‘not guilty’ to 

engaging in a sexual act with a minor female between April and July of 2021. [Continue Reading ]

WTTV-CBS (Indianapolis, IN): Indianapolis ‘career criminal’ sentenced to 15 years for 

illegal gun possession , Joe Hopkins, June 22, 2022, 12:07 PM 

An Indianapolis “career criminal” was sentenced to 15 years in federal prison after pleading guilty 

to possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, the U.S. Department of Justice announced 

Wednesday. According to court documents, Corey Thomas, now age 33, was arrested on 

November 21 of 2020 after police were called to a domestic disturbance situation involving a gun. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : WXIN-Fox (Indianapolis, IN) 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: Harris meets Democratic attorneys general as White House gears up for 

abortion ruling , Nandita Bose, June 23, 2022, 4:57 AM 

U.S.  Vice President Kamala Harris will meet a group of seven Democratic attorneys general on 

Thursday, a White House official said, to discuss the defense to a major ruling that could 

dramatically curtail abortion rights in the country. The conservative-majority U.S. Supreme Court is 

expected to issue a decision in the coming days to overturn Roe v. Wade, which guaranteed the 

right to an abortion - potentially paving the way to about half of the 50 U.S. states banning or 

heavily restricting the procedure. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters: Rights groups call on Biden to negotiate for WNBA star Griner's release , Rory 

Carroll, June 22, 2022, 8:53 PM 

A coalition of human rights groups on Wednesday called on U.S. President Joe Biden to "make a

deal" to secure the release of WNBA star Brittney Griner who has been detained in Russia for 

months. Griner was taken into custody at a Moscow airport on Feb. 17 when a search of her 

luggage allegedly revealed multiple cannabis oil vape cartridges. She could face up to 10 years 

in prison. [Continue Reading ]

AP: Feds want 25 years for Chauvin for violating Floyd’s rights , Amy Forliti, June 22, 2022, 

8:00  PM 

Federal prosecutors asked a judge on Wednesday to sentence a former Minneapolis officer to 

25 years for violating the rights of George Floyd, saying Derek Chauvin’s actions were cold -

blooded and needless as he knelt on the Black man’s neck while Floyd repeatedly said he 

couldn’t breathe. Chauvin pleaded guilty in December to violating Floyd’s rights, admitting for the 

first time that he kept his knee on Floyd’s neck even after he became unresponsive 

resulting in Floyd’s death. [Continue Reading ]

AP: Lawsuit challenges Missouri voting aid restrictions , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 6:00 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000391

PM 

Civil rights activists sued Missouri on Wednesday over a decades-old law that prohibits 

volunteers from offering ballot-booth help to multiple voters who have physical disabilities or are 

unable to read or write. The federal lawsuit contends Missouri’s limits on voter assistance violate 

federal voting law and should be struck down. It’s the latest of dozens of voting-related lawsuits 

across the U.S., as election procedures have come under increased scrutiny both from those 

seeking to guarantee access and ensure integrity. [Continue Reading ]

AP : DOJ: Maine violates ADA in care of kids with disabilities , Patrick Whittle, June 22, 2022, 

5:00  PM 

Maine unnecessarily institutionalizes youths with mental health and developmental disabilities 

because of a lack of sufficient community-based services that would allow them to stay in their 

homes, the U.S. Department of Justice said Wednesday in declaring a violation of the Americans 

with Disabilities Act. The Justice Department conducted its investigation after advocacy group 

Disability Rights Maine filed a complaint on behalf of a group of children. The rights organization 

said the children were not able to access community-based services, resulting in 

institutionalization or risk of institutionalization that violated the ADA. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  The Hill 

Reuters: Law profs prevail over backlash to publishing prosecutor misconduct cases ,

Hassan Kanu, June 22, 2022, 1:09 PM 

A federal court ruling last week vindicated crucial First Amendment rights and upheld the use of 

one of the only effective means of holding prosecutors accountable for misconduct public 

exposure. A U.S. district court in Manhattan held on June 13 that a group of six law professors 

can freely call attention to misconduct and unaccountability in district attorneys’ offices by 

publishing online their disciplinary complaints against prosecutors. [Continue Reading ]

Courthouse News: Alaska agrees to comply with ‘motor voter’ law , Hillel Aron, June 22, 

2022, 7:00 PM 

The Justice Department announced Wednesday that it has reached an agreement with Alaska to 

resolve complaints that the state was not complying with certain parts of the National Voter 

Registration Act. Passed in 1993, the law includes a provision known as the “motor voter” law, 

which requires states to offer everyone who applies for or renews a driver’s license the 

opportunity to register to vote on the same application. [Continue Reading ]

KPVI-NBC (Pocatello, ID): Patriot Front members could face overlapping federal, state 

prosecution , Betsy Russell, June 22, 2022, 11:00 PM 

Both of Idaho’s last two U.S. attorneys say the June 11 arrests of 31 members of a white 

nationalist group for conspiracy to riot at a gay pride event in Coeur d’Alene is the type of thing 

that federal prosecutors should look into and likely are examining. Bart Davis, a Trump 

appointee who served as U.S. attorney for Idaho from 2017 to 2021, said, “All I know are what 

the news accounts are. … I don’t know what actually occurred. But I do believe that these are the 

kinds of matters that the federal government has some role in.” [Continue Reading ]

KFSM-CBS (Fort Smith, AR): Lawsuit filed against Arkansas officers for using alleged 

excessive force against woman , Kathryn Gilker, June 22, 2022, 7:34 PM 

We first told you the story of a woman who says she was mistreated by River Valley officers back 

in February. Now, a federal civil rights lawsuit has been filed against Sebastian County deputies 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000392

and Greenwood police officers who the suit says mistreated her after a car accident back in May 

of 2020. “Now that the wait is over, I feel relieved,” said Tyler "Unique" McClain. It was in the early 

morning hours of May 14, 2020, when 19-year-old McClain, who goes by Unique, veered off the 

road at Highway 10 and Highway 71 south near Greenwood. [Continue Reading ]

WRBL-CBS (Columbus, GA): Former Georgia prison employee pleads guilty after trying 

to conceal assault of inmate , Nicole Sanders, June 22, 2022, 4:08 PM 

A former Valdosta State Prison (VSP) supervisory correctional officer pled guilty to attempting to 

conceal an assault on an inmate, according to the United States Attorney’s Office for Middle 

District Georgia. Geary Staten, 31, faces a maximum of three years in prison and a $250,000 

fine. Staten’s sentencing is scheduled for Sept. 21. [Continue Reading] See also:  WFXL-Fox 

(Albany, GA) 

CIVIL LAW 

WSJ: Facebook Parent Meta Pulls Out of Sponsorship Deal for U.S. 250th Anniversary 

Project , Jess Bravin, June 22, 2022, 10:20 PM 

Facebook parent Meta Platforms Inc. said Wednesday it has canceled its sponsorship 

agreement with the organization planning the federal government’s commemoration of the 250th 

anniversary of the U.S., a project beset by internal strife and facing a discrimination lawsuit filed 

by female former executives. Meta said in March it would review its ties to the U.S. 

Semiquincentennial Commission and its affiliated America250 Foundation following Wall Street 

Journal reports detailing feuds among the congressionally appointed commissioners and 

accusations of mismanagement and misuse of federal funds by former employees. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Official Confirms CCO Certs. Are New Settlement Staple, Al Barbarino, June 

22, 2022, 3:19 PM 

A senior official in the U. S. Department of Justice's fraud section said Wednesday that 

companies can expect a new policy requiring that chief compliance officers certify agreements 

with the department to "most likely" be part of every new deal moving forward. Speaking at a legal 

industry conference, Lauren Kootman, assistant chief in the corporate enforcement, compliance 

and policy unit of the DOJ's fraud section, echoed prior statements from DOJ officials that the 

certifications are meant to "empower" CCOs, not punish them. [Continue Reading ]

WLUC-NBC (Marquette, MI): Michigan awarded $14.5 million in pharmaceutical lawsuit ,

Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 3:55 PM 

The state of Michigan will receive $14.5 million from Mallinckrodt after they allegedly underpaid 

Medicaid rebates for nearly seven years. Michigan Attorney General Dana Nessel joined 49 other 

states, Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico, and the federal government to settle allegations of fraud 

against Mallinckrodt ARD, LLC (formerly known as Questcor Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), a U.S. 

subsidiary of the Irish pharmaceutical company Mallinckrodt plc (collectively Mallinckrodt), which 

sells and markets pharmaceutical products throughout the nation. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Reuters: California urges court to maintain ban on private immigrant detention , Daniel 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000393

Wiessner, June 22, 2022, 4:12 PM 

California and a coalition of advocacy groups urged a U.S. appeals court on Tuesday to uphold 

the state's ban on privately run immigrant detention centers, but some of the judges seemed 

skeptical of their claim that the law only regulates businesses and not the federal government. 

Aimee Feinberg of the California Solicitor General's Office told an 11-member panel of the 9th 

U.S.  Circuit Court of Appeals that the 2019 law's incidental impact on government contracting 

does not render it invalid. [Continue Reading] 

AP : Jury: Construction company retaliated against immigrant , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 

4:00  PM 

A federal jury has awarded $650,000 in damages to a Massachusetts construction worker who 

said his employer retaliated against him after he was injured on the job by sparking an immigration 

investigation that led to his arrest. The jury on Tuesday ordered Tara Construction to pay $50,000 

in compensatory damages for emotional distress and the company and its owner to pay a total of 

$600,000 in punitive damages to José Martin Paz Flores, who is referred to as Paz in court 

documents. [Continue Reading] 

Forbes : Revelations Show Trump Immigration Policy Was Supposed To Be Harsher ,

Stuart Anderson, June 23, 2022, 12:22 AM 

While Donald Trump was president, reporters published shocking revelations about his 

administration’s conduct of U.S. immigration policy. It turns out reporters missed a few items. 

Former Cabinet officials and others have revealed immigration policy during the Trump 

administration was intended to be much harsher, including placing a quarter-million soldiers on the 

U.S.-Mexico border, enacting crueler measures to separate families and targeting children for 

deportation at American schools. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: White House To Release Final DACA Rule In August , Rae Varona, June 22, 2022, 

10:43  PM 

The Biden administration announced plans to issue a final Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals 

rule by August and continue its efforts to undo multiple Trump-era regulations. Here are the main 

immigration highlights from the administration's regulatory agenda for spring 2022. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Says Trade Group Can't Join Suit Over EB-5 Visa Freeze , Nate Beck, June 

22, 2022, 6:54 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice says it would be disruptive to allow a trade group for the EB-5 

program to join a lawsuit that seeks to force U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services to reverse 

changes to a rule allowing foreign investors to trade cash for a green card. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : Up to 33% of ICE catch-and-release migrants abscond: GAO audit ,

Stephen Dinan, June 22, 2022, 6:00 PM 

ICE’s catch-and-release program has a high failure rate, according to a new government audit 

released Wednesday that found up to one-third of migrants abscond before their time is up. The 

Alternatives to Detention program, or ATD as it’s known within U.S. Immigration and Customs 

Enforcement, also doesn’t have solid yardsticks to measure its success, even as the number of 

people ICE enrolls soars, the Government Accountability Office said in the exhaustive new 

analysis. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000394

Law360 : Nonprofit Group Backs Axing Haitians' Border Whipping Suit , Nicole Rosenthal, 

June 22, 2022, 2:10 PM 

A nonprofit organization backed the Biden administration's bid to toss a proposed class action 

accusing border patrol officers of whipping Haitian migrants and wrongfully denying them asylum, 

telling a D.C. federal court that the constitutional protections the migrants claim are overridden by 

COVID-19 concerns and a public health order. [Continue Reading ]

Arizona Republic: Autopsy report determines migrant was stabbed to death by CBP 

agent in Douglas , Gloria Rebecca Gomez, Angela Cordoba Perez, Clara Migoya, June 22, 

2022, 6:47 PM 

A migrant was stabbed to death by a Customs and Border Protection agent in Douglas in late 

May, a Pima County medical examiner's autopsy report found. Abigail Román Aguilar, 32, a

Mexican immigrant from the state of Chiapas, died on May 24 after a "use of force incident" 

involving an agent, the CBP said in a statement issued that day. Román Aguilar had two stab 

wounds in the chest and blunt force injuries including lacerations in the head and contusions in the 

head and extremities, according to the Pima County Medical Examiner's Office report, obtained 

by The Arizona Republic. [Continue Reading ]

Desert Review (Imperial Valley, CA): Calexico CBP officers seize more than half a million 

dollars’ worth of fentanyl , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:00 PM 

US Customs and Border Protection Officers assigned to the Calexico Port of Entry seized over 

half million dollars’ worth of Fentanyl, according to a press release. 

On June 6 at approximately 9:52 a.m., a 28-year-old male driver in a 2014 Ford entered the 

United States at the Calexico West Port of Entry from Mexico. [Continue Reading ]

Bharat Express News : ICE arrests 119 illegal immigrants, most with prior convictions, 

who had returned after being deported , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 3:00 PM 

Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced on Wednesday that it has conducted a

nationwide operation focused on deporting illegal immigrants who had been deported but later 

returned to the United States. ICE said its enforcement and removal operations (ERO) caught 

119 illegal immigrants between June 1 and June 7 who had returned after an earlier deportation. 

[Continue Reading ]

KNSD-NBC (San Diego, CA): Customs Agents Explain Dangers of Human Smuggling off 

San Diego Coast , Tania Luviano, June 22, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The mission of U.S Customs and Border Protection’s Air and Marine Operations Unit is to save 

lives, which is a hard thing to do amid dangerous offshore conditions. Despite the deadly waters, 

CBP says they’ve seen an increase in human smuggling off San Diego’s coast, and agents 

blame smugglers who disregard the threat of the open ocean and prey on people who dream of a

better life in the United States. [Continue Reading ]

WKBW-ABC (Buffalo, NY): Weapons, currency and narcotics seized by CBP Officers at 

the Peace Bridge , Anthony Reyes, June 22, 2022, 10:56 AM 

Weapons, currency and narcotics were seized by U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 

officers at the Peace Bridge Sunday. CBP said officers encountered a vehicle occupied by two 

25-year-old males, a 35-year-old male and a 38-year-old male that made a U-turn on the Peace 

Bridge and were required to enter primary inspection. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000395

ANTITRUST 

Reuters: U.S. consumer watchdog to review 'excessive' credit card late payment fees ,

Katanga Johnson, June 22, 2022, 4:30 PM 

The top U.S. consumer watchdog on Wednesday said it had begun a review of "excessive" credit 

card fees and asked card issuers for data on revenue and expenses in a bid to stamp out abuses 

and boost competition. The advanced notice of proposed rulemaking issued by the Consumer 

Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) confirms a Reuters April report that the agency would 

scrutinize credit card fees as part of a broader crackdown on what it calls "junk fees," a catch-all 

for overdraft, credit card late-payment fees, bounced check fees, and other charges. [Continue 

Reading ]

Reuters: DOJ defends rare wage-fixing criminal case in Maine federal court , Mike 

Scarcella, June 22, 2022, 12:14 PM 

U.S.  Justice Department lawyers on Tuesday defended their rare criminal antitrust case charging 

four business managers with conspiring to fix hourly rates for home healthcare support specialists 

in Maine and agreeing not to hire each other's workers. The government's filing in Portland federal 

court urged a trial judge not to dismiss the case, which was filed in January amid an ongoing 

federal antitrust investigation into the home health care industry. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Meta Antitrust Judge Backs TikTok, WeChat, Telegram Data Request , Malathi 

Nayak, June 22, 2022, 5:10 PM 

Meta Platforms Inc. won a judge’s backing to obtain information from ByteDance Ltd’s TikTok, 

Tencent Holdings Ltd’s WeChat and Telegram Group Inc. to bolster its defense against an 

antitrust lawsuit by the US Federal Trade Commission. US District Judge James Boasberg on 

Wednesday wrote letters to China’s Ministry of Justice seeking help with getting documentary 

evidence from Tencent and ByteDance, and sent a separate letter to officials in the British Virgin 

Islands concerning Telegram. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Fights Bid To Duck Pandemic Wage-Fixing Charges, Matthew Perlman, June 

22, 2022, 8:39 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice is contesting a dismissal bid by operators of four Maine home 

health care agencies who were indicted on allegations that they conspired to fix pay rates in order 

to avoid competing with each other for workers during the pandemic. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Law360: EPA Delays Greenhouse Gas Regs As Court Ruling Looms , Keith Goldberg, June 

22, 2022, 10:30 PM 

The Biden administration has pushed back the release of plans to regulate greenhouse gas 

emissions from the power sector until next year, just as the U.S. Supreme Court could limit the 

scope of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's climate change authority. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: Shoshone Tribe Asks 9th Circ. To Revive Hunting Rights Suit , Andrew Westney, 

June 22, 2022, 6:35 PM 

The Northwestern Band of the Shoshone Nation has urged the Ninth Circuit to overturn a ruling 

that the tribe doesn't have treaty rights to hunt and fish in its aboriginal lands, saying an Idaho 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000396

district judge wrongly found that the tribe had to have settled on a reservation there to retain those 

rights. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Construction Co. Sanctioned Over Lost Docs In Mine Spill Suit , Caleb Symons, 

June 22, 2022, 5:42 PM 

A federal judge in New Mexico slapped Harrison Western Construction Corp. with sanctions for 

failing to produce documents related to its work on the Gold King Mine before the Colorado 

structure ruptured in August 2015, releasing 3 million gallons of toxic waste. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOI Asks 9th Circ. To Revisit Coal Mine Emissions Ruling , Clark Mindock, June 

22, 2022, 3:46 PM 

The U.S. Department of the Interior has told the Ninth Circuit it went too far when rejecting the 

agency's process for green-lighting a Montana mine expansion project and wants a rehearing on 

a "narrow but important" element of the case. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Boeing Says Feds Want To Break Rocket Site Cleanup Deal , Greg Lamm, June 

22, 2022, 2:59 PM 

Boeing asked a Washington federal judge on Tuesday to toss the federal government's $32 

million contaminated groundwater lawsuit, saying the suit is barred under a broad hold-harmless 

clause in a decades-old contract to build and test rockets for NASA's moonshots. [Continue 

Reading ]

Bloomberg Law: EPA Seeks to Delay Deadline for Washington Water Quality Review , Maya 

Earls, June 22, 2022, 1:25 PM 

A lower court’s timeline to consider whether Washington needs updated water quality standards 

to protect aquatic life should be paused, the EPA and an environmental group told the Ninth 

Circuit. The US District Court for the Western District of Washington said the Environmental 

Protection Agency must “make a necessity determination” by June 27. But completing this review 

“with the appropriate degree of scientific rigor” can’t be done in the time given, according to a

joint motion to stay filed by the agency and Northwest Environmental Advocates in the US Court 

of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. [Continue Reading] 

KOIN-CBS (Portland, OR): Court docs: Eugene man illegally mailed hundreds of live 

scorpions, Sam Campbell, June 22, 2022, 5:28 PM 

A Eugene man was sentenced to two years of federal probation for sending and receiving 

hundreds of live scorpions across several states and outside the country. The U.S. Attorney’s 

Office in Oregon said 39-year-old Darren Dennis Drake violated the Lacey Act by both importing 

and exporting the venomous arachnids without the proper Fish and Wildlife Service license. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  KEZI-ABC (Eugene, OR) 

TAX 

KAAL-ABC (Austin, MN): Kenyon woman sentenced to more than 9 years for embezzling 

$881,000, tax fraud, Zoe Brown, June 22, 2022, 4:50 PM 

A Kenyon woman was sentenced to 111 months in prison, three years of supervised release, and 

$1,058,777.18 in restitution for embezzling more than $881,000 from the owners of several 

Denny’s restaurant franchises around the Twin Cities and from a family-owned construction 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000397

company in Rochester. According to court documents, in 2014, Kimberly Sue Peterson-Janovec, 

59, became the Director of Operations for MI5, Inc., a Denny’s franchisee that owned and 

operated eight Denny’s franchises in Minnesota and Wisconsin. [Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

LAT: Anaheim remains without a mayor following FBI political corruption probe, Gabriel 

San Román, June 22, 2022, 8:35 PM 

Anaheim City Council, for a second time, failed to fill the vacancy left by former mayor Harry 

Sidhu, who resigned last month amid an FBI investigation into members of a self-described 

political ‘cabal.’ During a June 7 meeting, council members first grappled with an array of issues 

related to the fallout from the probe but couldn’t decide on who to appoint, if anyone, to serve as 

interim mayor ahead of the November elections. [Continue Reading] 

Newsweek: Who is Michael McDonald? Nevada GOP Chairman Reportedly Investigated 

by FBI, Khaleda Rahman, June 23, 2022, 4:50 AM 

FBI agents reportedly served a search warrant on Nevada's top GOP official, who was among 

those subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the January 6 attack on the U.S. 

Capitol. Nevada GOP Chair Michael McDonald was among more than a dozen officials who were 

subpoenaed by the committee earlier this year in connection with a "fake electors" scheme that 

sought to have representatives in battleground states say that former President Donald Trump, 

not Joe Biden, had won them. [Continue Reading ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): 5 firefighters hospitalized after battling fire in 

downtown Holly, investigation underway, Miguel Torres, June 22, 2022, 7:31 PM 

Officials are working to determine the cause of a fire that destroyed businesses and historic 

buildings in the downtown area of a small village in northern Oakland County and also led to five 

firefighters being hospitalized. The Oakland County Sheriff’s Office and Alcohol, Tobacco and 

Firearm’s (ATF) are investigating the Tuesday, June 21, fire in downtown Holly that claimed 

multiple businesses, according to a post on the Holly Police Department Facebook page. 

[Continue Reading ]

Arizona Republic (Phoenix, AZ): We have to do something': Phoenix police launch 'Gun 

Crime Crackdown' to combat gun violence, Miguel Torres, June 22, 2022, 7:24 PM 

A gun “crime crackdown” program will come to Phoenix this summer on the heels of the mass 

shooting that killed a 14-year-old girl, Phoenix police Chief Jeri Williams announced at a

Wednesday news conference. [...] “Together with the ATF, the Maricopa County Attorney’s 

Office, the U.S. Attorney’s Office, and the community, Phoenix PD is going to be laser-focused 

on curbing the recent rise in gun crimes in our city," Williams said. [Continue Reading ] See also: 

KPNX-NBC (Phoenix, AZ) 

KARK-NBC (Little Rock, AR): Sources: Home of Arkansas judge raided by FBI, Mitch 

McCoy, June 22, 2022, 9:25 PM 

The home of an Arkansas judge was raided by authorities, according to sources. Sources tell 

KARK anchor Mitch McCoy that the home of Monroe County District Court Judge David Carruth 

was raided by the FBI on Wednesday. At this point, it’s unclear why federal agents were 

searching the judge’s home. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000398

KHON-Fox/CW- (Honolulu, HI): FBI Honolulu search for victims in child porn case, 

Elizabeth Ufi, June 22, 2022, 9:05 PM 

The FBI Honolulu Division said they are seeking the public’s assistance in identifying potential 

victims in the investigation of an Oahu teacher accused of distributing child pornography. The 

suspect, 33-year-old Alden Bunag, has been charged with distribution of child pornography. 

[Continue Reading ]

WPEC-CBS (West Palm Beach, FL): Man wanted for woman's murder in Martin County 

under arrest in Palm Beach County, Gary Detman, Luli Ortiz, June 22, 2022, 9:00 PM 

The search for a man considered armed and dangerous is over. James Stephenson was 

arrested Wednesday evening at a restaurant in Palm Beach County. The Martin County Sheriff’s 

Office said Stephenson, 61, was captured by its Warrants Unit with help from the Palm Beach 

County Sheriff's Office Tactical Unit and the U.S. Marshals Fugitive Task Force. [Continue 

Reading ]

KABC-ABC (Los Angeles, CA): Feds still looking for Alcatraz fugitives - 3 men in their 90s 

'if they're still alive', Stephanie Sierra, June 22, 2022, 8:37 PM 

There's a possible clue into one of the greatest mysteries of the 20th century. The U.S. Marshals 

Service released updated renderings of what three missing Alcatraz fugitives would look like in 

their 80s in hopes of putting them back behind bars - if they're still alive. [Continue Reading ]

KSL-NBC (Salt Lake City, UT): FBI now involved in Dylan Rounds case as his parents 

plead for help in 1st joint interview, Elizabeth Ufi, June 22, 2022, 8:04 PM 

The FBI is now involved in the case of an eastern Idaho man who disappeared from a remote 

farm near the Utah/Nevada border nearly a month ago. Dylan Rounds, 19, had been farming in the 

desert town of Lucin, Utah, during summer months over the past few years. His grandmother last 

spoke with him on May 28 and nobody has heard from him since then. There has been no sign of 

Rounds anywhere and no activity on his cell phone or bank account, according to his parents. 

[Continue Reading ]

WMTV-NBC (Madison, WI): FBI: Milwaukee man arrested for 1991 Indiana murder, 

Brandon Landsberg, June 22, 2022, 7:53 PM 

Over 30 years after the alleged murder of a man, the FBI revealed Tuesday that a 50-year-old 

man was charged in the crime. The victim was found in his apartment on Nov. 26, 1991, stabbed 

multiple times in Gary, Indiana, according to the FBI. Family members found John Thomas Curie, 

who was 35 years old at the time of his death. [Continue Reading ]

KRQE-CBS/Fox (Albuquerque, NM): FBI releases video of “Fast Fila Duo” accused bank 

robbers, Jordan Honeycutt, June 22, 2022, 7:41 PM 

The FBI has released video of two men accused of robbing an Albuquerque bank. Nicknamed 

the Fast Fila Duo, one of the two men is seen walking into Western Commerce Bank on 

Wyoming on June 14. He brandishes a gun and demands money. The teller quickly hands him 

cash and he walks out. On video, his sunglasses fly off and as he messes with his hate, his face 

is clearly seen. [Continue Reading ]

KLAS-CBS (Las Vegas, NV): I-Team sources: FBI seizes Nevada GOP chairman’s phone 

as part of fake elector investigation, David Charns, June 22, 2022, 7:12 PM 

FBI agents served a search warrant Wednesday on Nevada’s top GOP official, sources told the 8

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000399

News Now I-Team’s George Knapp. Agents seized the cell phone of state Republican chairman 

Michael McDonald, reportedly as part of an investigation into the fake elector scheme initiated at 

the end of the 2020 presidential election. [Continue Reading ]

KSHB-NBC (Kansas City, MO): FBI confirms search of Oak Grove, Missouri, health care 

clinic, David Medina, June 22, 2022, 6:49 PM 

Agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation searched the offices of an Oak Grove clinic on 

Tuesday morning. Oak Grove Police Department escorted the FBI to the Health+Plus offices 

located in the 100 block of 12th Street in downtown Oak Grove. [Continue Reading] 

KSN-NBC (Wichita, KS): Eastern Kansas volunteer firefighter dies after getting injured 

while battling fire, Makenzie Koch, June 22, 2022, 5:29 PM 

A volunteer Linn County, Kansas, firefighter has died after he was injured in a structure fire earlier 

this week. Joshua Haynes, a firefighter with the Linn County, Kansas, Rural District 1 Fire 

Department, suffered life-threatening injuries Monday night while battling a fire at the Carpenter 

Chiropractor Clinic in Pleasanton, Kansas.[...] Haynes died Wednesday, according to the Bureau 

of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF). He leaves behind three children. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO) 

WCPO-ABC (Cincinnati, OH): FBI paid informant Chinedum Ndukwe $27K to wear wire at 

City Hall for 18 months, Paula Christian, June 22, 2022, 5:22 PM 

After listening to nearly three hours of opening statements in the public corruption trial of P.G. 

Sittenfeld, at least one juror appeared to be nodding off in the jury box as attorneys described the 

inner workings of Cincinnati City Hall, campaign fundraising and development deals. Both sides 

outlined their cases and described what jurors will hear during the two-week trial at U.S. District 

Court in Cincinnati. [Continue Reading ]

KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO): FBI agents raid Oak Grove doctor’s office, Sharon Chen, 

June 22, 2022, 5:10 PM 

A doctor in Oak Grove is under a federal investigation. FBI agents raided the offices of Dr. David 

Clark Tuesday. Just after 10 a.m., Sue Moon arrived to the scene of agents swarming the area 

outside of her bookstore. [Continue Reading ]

KRQE-CBS/Fox (Albuquerque, NM): Students get a chance to spend the day with the FBI, 

Isaac Cruz, June 22, 2022, 3:50 PM 

The FBI Teen Academy is giving high school sophomores, juniors and seniors in New Mexico a

chance to spend a day with the FBI. The academy will be held Tuesday, July 26, at the FBI 

Albuquerque headquarters at 4200 Luecking Park. The academy will from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. 

Students who attend are expected to attend all events. The FBI says students should dress 

appropriately and punctuality and professional behavior are expected. [Continue Reading ]

KKTV-CBS (Colorado Springs, CO): Law enforcement raiding pawn shops in Colorado 

Springs, Pueblo as part of a large-scale theft investigation, Lindsey Grewe and Nicole 

Heins, June 22, 2022, 12:55 PM 

U.S.  Marshals, FBI and local law enforcement have raided four pawn shops as part of an ongoing 

investigation into a multi-million dollar criminal organization. Two of the Top Dollar Pawn shops are 

located in Pueblo and two are in Colorado Springs. Authorities were originally going to share 

more details on the case with the public Wednesday afternoon, but decided to cancel that news 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000400

conference. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

USA Today: 4 inmates who escaped federal prison camp in Virginia back in custody, 

officials said , Bill Atkinson, June 22, 2022, 9:14 PM 

All four inmates who escaped from a federal prison's satellite camp in Virginia are back in 

custody, the U.S. Marshals Service and Federal Bureau of Prisons announced Wednesday. 

Lamonte Rashawn Willis, of Suffolk, Virginia, was the final inmate to turn himself back in at the 

low-security satellite camp around noon Wednesday, officials said. No other details of his 

surrender were released. [Continue Reading ] See also:  AP , Fox 

US SUPREME COURT 

Reuters: Most judges in survey support U.S. Supreme Court having ethics code , Nate 

Raymond, June 22, 2022, 3:37 PM 

Hundreds of judges nationwide believe that U.S. Supreme Court justices should be subject to an 

ethics code, according to a poll released Wednesday, with one saying they should set a "very 

high bar for the rest of us to emulate." The National Judicial College, which provides training to 

judges nationally, said that in a survey of more than 12,000 of its alumni, 97% of the 859 judges 

who responded agreed Supreme Court justices should be bound by an ethics code. [Continue 

Reading ]

AP : Protesters turn Supreme Court front into forum on abortion , Jacquelyn Martin, June 

22, 2022, 2:00 PM 

A steady stream of protesters has turned the street in front of the Supreme Court building into an 

open-air forum encapsulating the fierce national debate over abortion after the leak of a draft 

opinion suggesting the justices would overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 landmark ruling that 

legalized abortion nationwide. Both supporters and foes of abortion rights have gathered during 

large, organized weekend marches and on weekdays when the court is scheduled to release its 

opinion. They march and chant; sometimes they attempt to shout the other side down. [Continue 

Reading ]

NYT, The Daily: [AUDIO] The Supreme Court Case That Could Doom U.S. Climate Goals ,

June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

While coming rulings on abortion and guns have garnered lots of attention, the Supreme Court is 

also set to make another major decision in a less-publicized suit involving climate change. The 

case, about how far the Environmental Protection Agency can regulate greenhouse gas 

emissions from power plants, could affect the way the entire government makes rules and 

regulations. [Listen] 

WSJ: Farmers Stick With Bayer’s Roundup, Undeterred by Supreme Court Decision ,

Patrick Thomas, June 22, 2022, 1:08 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court this week denied an effort by Bayer AG BAYRY -1.11% to stem 

thousands of lawsuits alleging its Roundup weedkiller caused cancer among landscapers and 

residential gardeners. On Alan Meadows’s Tennessee farm, it was business as usual. As the top 

U.S.  court declined Tuesday to hear Bayer’s appeal of a 2018 jury verdict linking the company’s 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000401

herbicide to non-Hodgkin lymphoma in a California plaintiff, Mr. Meadows said he was spraying 

the chemical on his own 4,000-acre farm, which he said he has done since the 1990s. [Continue 

Reading ]

NPR : [AUDIO] The Supreme Court may issue a ruling that could hurt Biden's climate 

change plans , Unattributed, June 22, 2022, 4:58 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court is hearing a case that could limit the Environmental Protection Agency's 

ability to regulate climate-warming greenhouse gasses. [Listen ]

Washington Examiner: Senate bill would imprison Supreme Court leakers and impose 

$10K fine, Kaelan Deese, June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) unveiled new legislation Thursday that would hold future Supreme Court 

leakers accountable with a $10,000 fine and 10 years in prison for releasing information about 

pending decisions in response to last month's unprecedented leaked draft opinion that signaled 

the overturning of Roe v. Wade. [Continue Reading ]

SCOTUSblog : [OPINION] Justices overturn Washington workers’ compensation law on a

strict reading of intergovernmental immunity , Michael C. Duff, June 22, 2022, 5:34 PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday unanimously struck down a Washington state law that was aimed 

at helping federal contract employees get workers’ compensation for diseases arising from 

cleaning up nuclear waste. The case, United States v. Washington, concerned the federally 

controlled Hanford nuclear reservation, a decommissioned facility that spans 586 square miles 

near the Columbia River. The reservation, formerly used by the federal government in the 

production of nuclear weapons, presents unique hazards to cleanup workers. [Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

Law360 : DC, 6th Circ. Picks Tout Broad Experience In Senate Hearing , James Arkin, June 

22, 2022, 4:19 PM 

President Joe Biden's nominees for the D.C. and Sixth Circuits appeared before the Senate 

Judiciary Committee Wednesday, touting their diverse experience and qualifications in a relatively 

low-key hearing that featured limited questioning from senators on the panel. [Continue Reading ]

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360: HUD To Establish First-Ever Tribal Advisory Committee , Caleb Symons, June 22, 

2022, 8:42 PM 

Federal officials plan to create a tribal advisory committee meant to strengthen relations between 

Native groups and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and to advise HUD 

on its existing regulations and housing development for those communities. [Continue Reading] 

KTEN-NBC (Ada, OK): Stitt hoping for clarity from Supreme Court on tribal jurisdiction ,

Molly O'Brien, June 22, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Gov. Kevin Stitt and the State of Oklahoma are still waiting for a U.S. Supreme Court ruling in the 

Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta case that's related to the landmark McGirt decision. The Supreme 

Court heard arguments in the Castro-Huerta case in April. The state argued it has the authority to 

prosecute non-native Oklahomans for crimes against Native Americans on tribal land. Then in 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000402

May, the FBI director asked lawmakers for $22.5 million to support the increased case load the 

agency has faced since the McGirt decision. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Law360: Wash. Pot Regulator Had Power To Pull License Application, Sam Reisman, June 

22, 2022, 9:16 PM 

Washington state's cannabis regulator was within its authority to cancel a would-be marijuana 

retailer's license application, a state appeals court ruled on Wednesday. The Washington State 

Court of Appeals said in a unanimous, unpublished decision that the state's Liquor and Cannabis 

Board had statutory authority to withdraw pending applications for cannabis retailers, including one 

from plaintiff Vision Research Group LLC. "The [Liquor and Cannabis Board] cancelled all 

pending applications, apparently without consideration or discrimination," the court found. 

[Continue Reading ]

Marijuana Moment: 23 State Attorneys General Call On Congress To Address Marijuana 

Copycat Products That Resemble Common Food Brands, Kyle Jaeger, June 22, 2022, 

2:00  PM 

A bipartisan coalition of 23 state attorneys general sent a letter to congressional leaders on 

Wednesday, demanding action to prevent the sale of copycat marijuana products that resemble 

popular food brands. The letter, led by Virginia Attorney General Jason Miyares (R) and Nevada 

Attorney General Aaron Ford (D), says that the top state prosecutors are “gravely concerned 

about the dangers of copycat tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) edibles in our communities, particularly 

the risk they pose to our children.” [Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

Reuters: Biden asks Congress for gas tax holiday to lower record pump prices , Jarrett 

Renshaw and Nandita Bose, June 23, 2022, 3:47 AM 

U.S.  President Joe Biden on Wednesday called for a three-month suspension of the federal 

gasoline tax to combat record prices, but opposition from lawmakers within his own party 

suggests the request may never be met. American families paying much more for gasoline 

deserve some financial relief, Biden said as he pushed Congress to act, while commenting that a

suspension of the 18.4 cents per gallon tax was not enough. [Continue Reading ] See also :

Bloomberg , NBC 

USA Today: Biden to meet with G7 leaders in Europe amid global economic crisis, 

conflict with Russia , Francesca Chambers, June 23, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Skyrocketing gas prices. Surging food costs. Markets in freefall. The international financial crisis 

will be front and center as President Joe Biden meets with leaders of some of the world’s most 

advanced economies this weekend in the Bavarian Alps. Rich nations that make up the Group of 

Seven, or G7, will band together in an attempt to stabilize the global economy while maintaining 

and potentially increasing punitive actions on Russia over its war in Ukraine. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000403

Reuters: U.S. Senate poised to step forward on rare bipartisan gun legislation , David 

Morgan, June 23, 2022, 5:03 AM 

The U.S. Senate is poised on Thursday for a vote to advance a bipartisan gun control bill that 

supporters hope will help curb the mass shootings that have rocked the country, in what could be 

Congress's first new limits on guns in decades. The 80-page Bipartisan Safer Communities Act 

would encourage states to keep guns out of the hands of those deemed to be dangerous and 

tighten background checks for would-be gun purchasers convicted of domestic violence or 

significant crimes as juveniles. [Continue Reading ] See also:  NBC 

NYT: Gun Bill’s Progress Reflects Political Shift, but G.O.P. Support Is Fragile , Emily 

Cochrane, June 22, 2022, 7:00 PM 

As Senator Joni Ernst, Republican of Iowa, weighed whether she should vote to take up a

bipartisan gun reform measure, the phone lines in her offices were being flooded by constituents 

hoping to sway her. The calls were coming in roughly six to one, she estimated, with an urgent 

message: “Please do something.” On Tuesday, Ms. Ernst became one of 14 Republicans to 

break with her party to support moving ahead with the legislation, propelling it past a Republican 

blockade that has thwarted years of efforts to overhaul the nation’s gun laws. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ : Congress Unlikely to Heed Biden’s Call for Three-Month Suspension of Gas Tax ,

Tarini Parti, Amara Omeokwe and Lindsay Wise, June 22, 2022, 3:39 PM 

President Biden called for a three-month suspension of federal gasoline and diesel taxes a

move that is unlikely to have the support needed to pass in Congress and one economists and 

business leaders say would do little to address record-high gas prices. “I fully understand that the 

gas tax holiday alone is not going to fix the problem, but it will provide families some immediate 

relief,” Mr. Biden said at the White House on Wednesday. “Just a little bit of breathing room.” 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  CNN , NYT , USA Today 

CNN : Senate will take critical vote to advance bipartisan gun bill toward final passage ,

Clare Foran, Lauren Fox, Ali Zaslav and Ted Barrett, June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The Senate is poised to take a critical vote on Thursday to advance a major bipartisan gun safety 

bill toward final passage. The vote is expected to succeed with Republican support, putting the 

legislation on a path to pass the Senate as soon as this week. The bipartisan gun deal represents 

the first major federal gun safety legislation in decades. It includes millions of dollars for mental 

health, school safety, crisis intervention programs and incentives for states to include juvenile 

records in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Senate bill would imprison Supreme Court leakers and impose 

$10K fine , Kaelan Deese, June 23, 2022, 6:00 AM 

Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-LA) unveiled new legislation Thursday that would hold future Supreme Court 

leakers accountable with a $10,000 fine and 10 years in prison for releasing information about 

pending decisions in response to last month's unprecedented leaked draft opinion that signaled 

the overturning of Roe v. Wade. In an exclusive interview, Cassidy told the Washington Examiner 

that if the legislation, titled the Stop Supreme Court Leakers Act of 2022, becomes law, it would 

not be able to imprison or fine anyone responsible for leaking the draft opinion of Dobbs v. 

Jackson Women's Health Organization, though it could be used to confiscate any possible profits 

received by the person or people who leaked the draft. [Continue Reading] 

Roll Call: Gun bill expands school safety spending beyond security, Michael Macagnone, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000404

## ••

## •••

## ••

June 23, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Mill Creek Township School District in Pennsylvania plans to upgrade its surveillance cameras, 

radios and a door monitoring system with a $500,000 federal grant, one of hundreds awarded 

across the country over the past four years as part of a $1 billion program Congress passed to 

address school violence. But Superintendent Ian Roberts said the grant won’t cover upgrades 

like security vestibules on its more than 40 entrances at 10 schools, and the district can’t afford 

that immediately. “From an infrastructure standpoint, there's still some things that are lacking in 

this and other districts,” Roberts said. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 22, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

President Joe Biden on Wednesday called on Congress to suspend federal gasoline and 

diesel taxes for three months an election-year move meant to ease financial pressures 

that was greeted with doubts by many lawmakers. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The Wall Street Journal is reporting that the Food and Drug Administration is about to order 

Juul to stop selling its e-cigarettes. Officials began investigating Juul for targeting teens as 

underage vaping skyrocketed. [ABC , CBS ]

Texas state Sen. Roland Gutierrez is suing the Department of Public Safety over access to 

records about the Uvalde school shooting. Meanwhile, Uvalde's mayor is slamming the 

department, saying it's keeping residents in the dark about the investigation. [CBS , NBC ]

The U.S. Senate took an initial step toward passing the country's first major gun-control 

legislation in decades on Tuesday, galvanized by two mass shootings in a nation that has 

long struggled to curb chronic gun violence. [ABC , NBC ]

The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol is 

ramping up its investigation this week as new evidence emerges, including dozens of hours 

of footage from filmmaker Alex Holder's upcoming three-part documentary series. [CBS ]

Cerebral, an online mental health provider, faces growing scrutiny overs its prescribing 

practices, including a Justice Department investigation. CBS News has an exclusive 

interview with the company's CEO to address the concerns. [CBS ]

A nuclear scientist from Texas, who's credited with designing sensitive technology found in 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000405

## ••••

dozens of laser-guided weapons systems used by the U.S. military, was rescued from war-torn Ukraine. [ABC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Fed’s Powell to Head to the House With Rates in Focus” [WSJ ]

“Germany Looks at Potential Rationing of Natural Gas After Russia Cuts Supply” [WSJ ]

“Jan. 6 Hearing to Focus on How Trump Pressured Justice Officials” [WSJ , NYT , WaPo ]

“California primary’s lesson for pundits: Don’t speak too soon in the age of mail-in voting” [LAT ]

END 

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5056 01570-000406

From: Watson, Theresa (OAG) 

Subject: Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

To: Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Berger, Christine (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); 

Figures, Shomari (OAG) 

Sent: June 22, 2022 6:57 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: June 22, 2022 at 6:52:09 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# June 22, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

US Attorneys 

3. 

National Security 

4. 

Jan. 6 Hearings 

5. 

Criminal Law 

6. 

Civil Rights 

7. 

Civil Law 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000407

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

Immigration & Border Security 

Antitrust 

Environment 

Tax 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

US Supreme Court 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

Native American Affairs 

Marijuana Legalization 

Opioid Crisis 

Administration 

Congress 

Network Evening News L

Morning Headlines 

ineup 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JUNE 22, 2022 

DOJ 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000408

## •••••

No scheduled events. 

SCOTUS 

Opinions 

Orders 

CONGRESS 

10:00  AM: Senate Judiciary Committee: Nominations. 

2:30  PM: Senate Judiciary Committee: The Patent Trial and Appeal Board: Examining 

Proposals to Address Predictability, Certainty, and Fairness. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

AP: Facebook and US sign deal to end discriminatory housing ads , Larry Neumeister ,

June 21, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Facebook will change its algorithms to prevent discriminatory housing advertising and its parent 

company will subject itself to court oversight to settle a lawsuit brought by the U.S. Department of 

Justice on Tuesday. In a release, U.S. government officials said it had reached agreement with 

Meta Platforms Inc., formerly known as Facebook Inc., to settle the lawsuit filed simultaneously in 

Manhattan federal court. According to the release, it was the Justice Department’s first case 

challenging algorithmic discrimination under the Fair Housing Act. Facebook will now be subject 

to Justice Department approval and court oversight for its ad targeting and delivery system. 

[Continue Reading] See also:  CNBC , Daily Beast , Guardian,  The Hill , Insider , NY Daily News, 

NYT , VOA , WaPo 

Reuters: U.S. attorney general vows to help track down, prosecute Russian war 

criminals, Sarah N. Lynch and Katharine Jackson, June 21, 2022, 11:49 AM 

U.S.  Attorney General Merrick Garland affirmed the United States' commitment to identify, arrest 

and prosecute those involved in war crimes and atrocities committed during Russia's invasion of 

Ukraine in a visit to that country on Tuesday. Garland met with Prosecutor General Iryna 

Venediktova near Lviv, Ukraine, and announced the creation of a team focused on war crimes 

accountability, the Justice Department said. "The United States is sending an unmistakable 

message. There is no place to hide. [Continue Reading] See also: CBS, Daily Caller, CNN, 

Courthouse News , Forbes , Insider , Law360 , NBC , NY Post , Politico , Reuters, Spectrum News, 

UPI , USA Today , Washington Examiner , The Week , WPTV-NBC (West Palm Beach, FL) , WSJ 

Fox: DOJ allowing illegal protests outside SCOTUS justices' homes despite federal law, 

former officials say, Timothy H.J. Nerozzi, June 21, 2022, 4:27 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000409

The Department of Justice has failed to enforce a federal statute which prohibits protests, 

pickets, and other forms of intimidation outside the home of judges. It is illegal under federal law 

to attempt to influence a judge's ruling or interfere with the discharge of their duty. However, the 

Department of Justice has thus far refused to interfere with demonstrators outside the homes of 

several Supreme Court justices, including Justices Clarence Thomas, Amy Coney Barrett, and 

Brett Kavanaugh. While the DOJ has provided security at the justices' homes, they have allowed 

protests and picketing to continue unimpeded. [Continue Reading] 

US ATTORNEYS 

The Legal Intelligencer: Romero Selects Veteran Prosecutors and Former Big Law Alums 

to Flesh Out Leadership Team, Max Mitchell, June 21, 2022, 7:04 PM 

Jacqueline Romero, fresh off being sworn in as the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of 

Pennsylvania, has installed a team of veteran prosecutors to comprise her leadership team and is 

sticking with several Big Law alumni to continue leading her civil division. “This seasoned 

leadership team of career public servants will bring to bear an extraordinary breadth and depth of 

experience and judgment to meet the threats our communities face. [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: Maine Man Charged With Entering US Capitol on Jan 6, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 

5:19  PM 

Another Maine man who entered the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6 is facing federal charges, officials 

said Tuesday. Todd Tilley, 61, of South Paris, was arrested without incident Tuesday, the FBI 

said. It was not known if he had an attorney. He's charged with entering a restricted building, 

disorderly conduct in a restricted building, disorderly conduct in the U.S. Capitol, and parading, 

demonstrating or picketing in the Capitol. [Continue Reading ] See also:  The Republican 

(Springfield, MA) 

AP: Phone call between WNBA’s Griner and wife being rescheduled, Eric Tucker, June 21, 

2022, 2:30 PM 

A phone call between jailed WNBA star Brittney Griner and her wife is being rescheduled after an 

earlier attempt to connect on the couple’s anniversary failed because of an “unfortunate mistake,” 

Biden administration officials said Tuesday. White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre told 

reporters that the State Department was working to arrange a new call but did not say when that 

would be. State Department spokesman Ned Price said the call could not be completed because 

of a “logistical error” that officials have worked quickly to fix so that a new call can take place. 

Griner was to have spoken with her wife Cherelle on Saturday, the couple’s fourth anniversary, for 

the first time since her arrest in Russia in mid-February. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: [OPINION] How Russia’s vaunted cyber capabilities were frustrated in Ukraine, 

David Ignatius, June 21, 2022, 6:48 PM 

A quiet partnership of the world’s biggest technology companies, U.S. and NATO intelligence 

agencies, and Ukraine’s own nimble army of hackers has pulled off one of the surprises of the 

war with Russia, largely foiling the Kremlin’s brazen internet hacking operations. Russia’s cyber -

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000410

reversals haven’t resulted from lack of trying. Microsoft counts nearly 40 Russian destructive 

attacks between Feb. 23 and April 8, and Rob Joyce, the National Security Agency’s 

cybersecurity director, said the Russians had attempted an “enormous” cyber offensive. 

[Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Ukraine Warns of New Malware Campaign Tied to Russian Hackers, Jack 

Gillum, June 21, 2022, 2:22 PM 

Ukrainian cybersecurity officials said Tuesday that a prominent Russian-backed hacking group is 

behind a new wave of malware attacks being spread via innocuous-looking emails. The Ukrainian 

Computer Emergency Response Team said emails warning of unpaid taxes or nuclear terrorism 

are, in fact, ruses for delivering malicious software. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: [ANALYSIS] Defense bill is a major cyber legislation opportunity for Rep. 

Langevin, Aaron Schaffer, June 21, 2022, 7:36 AM 

Good morning and happy Tuesday! I'm filling in for Joe today. If you have a few minutes, check 

out these delightful photos from this year's Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show. Below: 

Georgia's secretary of state is set to testify before the Jan. 6 committee, and U.S. officials warn 

that Russia will “probably” try to interfere in this year's elections. First up. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Former NSA chief warns of Russian cyberattacks against US financial sector, 

Ines Kagubare, June 21, 2022, 6:44 PM 

Retired Gen. Keith Alexander, the former National Security Agency chief and head of U.S. Cyber 

Command, warned Tuesday that Russian President Vladimir Putin is likely to unleash 

cyberattacks against the U.S. financial sector as retaliation for the West’s involvement in its war 

with Ukraine. Alexander said Putin has stated that the U.S. was intending to launch cyberattacks 

against Russian banks following sanctions that crippled the country’s economy. [Continue 

Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): 9th Minnesotan charged in Jan. 6 Capitol riot, Josh Skluzacek, 

June 21, 2022, 11:51 AM 

Another Minnesotan has been charged with federal crimes in connection to the Jan. 6, 2021, U.S. 

Capitol riot. Frank Joseph Bratjan Jr. was arrested last Wednesday and is charged with entering a

restricted building, disorderly conduct in a restricted building, disorderly conduct in a Capitol 

building and demonstrating in a Capitol building. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Patch (Eagan, 

MN) 

JAN. 6 HEARINGS 

Reuters: Former Justice Dept officials to testify Thursday at a hearing of House Jan 6

panel, Eric Beech, June 22, 2022, 4:12 AM 

Three officials from ex-President Donald Trump's Justice Department will testify on Thursday at a

hearing of the U.S. House of Representatives committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on 

the U.S. Capitol, the panel said in a statement. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters: Takeaways from fourth day of Jan. 6 U.S. Capitol riot hearings, Richard Cowan 

and Patricia Zengerle, June 21, 2022, 8:16 PM 

The fourth day of the hearings in the U.S. Congress on the Jan. 6, 2021 assault on the Capitol by 

former President Donald Trump's supporters featured testimony by election officials from the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000411

states of Arizona and Georgia. Here are five takeaways from the fourth of the U.S. House of 

Representatives Select Committee on Jan. 6's hearings this month. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  Bloomberg , Newsweek 

LAT: [EDITORIAL] These California congressmen betrayed voters on Jan. 6, Editorial 

Board, June 22, 2022, 6:00 AM 

As the nation absorbs the revelations from the congressional hearings on the deadly Jan. 6, 

2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol among them, that then-President Trump was surrounded by 

aides telling him there was no evidence of voter fraud and that his scheme to have Vice President 

Mike Pence overturn the election results was illegal voters must remember that 147 members 

of Congress were complicit in the attempted coup. These eight senators and 139 House 

members were in the Capitol that day because voters elected them to run our representative 

democracy [Continue Reading] 

LAT: Thursday’s Jan. 6 hearing to explore ‘the effort to corrupt the Justice Department’, 

Anumita Kaur, June 21, 2022, 8:38 PM 

The House hearings investigating the catalysts behind the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol will 

continue Thursday and is expected to explore then-President Trump’s efforts to pressure the 

Justice Department in the days after the election. The hearing will examine Trump’s “attempt to 

corrupt the country’s top law enforcement body, the Justice Department, to support his attempt to 

overturn election,” House select committee Chairman Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.) said 

during his closing remarks at Tuesday’s hearing. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: How the Jan. 6 hearings could complicate the upcoming Proud Boys trial, Devlin 

Barrett and Spencer S. Hsu, June 21, 2022, 7:04 PM 

A federal judge will hear arguments Wednesday on whether to delay one of the Justice 

Department’s signature Jan. 6 criminal trials out of concern that a high-profile congressional 

investigation into the Capitol breach may have generated key evidence that prosecutors and 

defense lawyers have not seen. Five alleged members of the extremist group the Proud Boys, 

including their former leader Henry “Enrique” Tarrio, are due to go on trial Aug. 8 on charges of 

seditious conspiracy. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Politico 

WaPo: [OPINION] Those ignoring the Jan. 6 revelations are guaranteeing more violence ,

Dana Milbank, June 21, 2022, 6:49 PM 

Rep. Adam Kinzinger (Ill.), one of two Republicans on the House Jan. 6 committee, recently 

made public a letter mailed to his home threatening to kill him, his wife and his 5-month-old child. 

“There’s violence in the future, I’m going to tell you,” he said on ABC’s “This Week.” “And until we 

get a grip on telling people the truth, we can’t expect any differently.” The ongoing threat of 

violence was at the core of Tuesday’s hearing of the select committee, which explored the 

campaign by President Donald Trump and his lawyers to pressure state legislators and election 

officials to overturn the election results and the harassment, intimidation and threats they set 

off. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: Trump-Inspired Menacing of Officials Dominates Jan. 6 Hearing, Mike Dorning, 

Billy House, and Chris Strohm, June 21, 2022, 5:56 PM 

State officials who resisted pressure from Donald Trump to overturn election results testified 

Tuesday to withstanding an atmosphere of escalating menace including armed protesters 

massing outside their homes, public accusations of pedophilia and, in one case, a break-in at his 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000412

daughter-in-law’s home. Arizona House Speaker Rusty Bowers, a Republican who backed 

Trump’s re-election but refused to help him de-certify the outcome, told the House panel 

investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol insurrection of continuing protests unnerving his “gravely ill” 

daughter and “valiant” wife. [Continue Reading] See also:  CBS , CNN , Courthouse News , NBC ,

NPR , Roll Call , WaPo , WSJ 

WaPo: [OPINION] Rusty Bowers proves to be the Jan. 6 committee’s most compelling 

witness yet, Jennifer Rubin, June 21, 2022, 4:23 PM 

Whether or not the accumulating pile of evidence against Donald Trump induces Attorney 

General Merrick Garland to indict the defeated former president or his associates for their 

attempted coup, all but the MAGA cultists should understand that Trump and his chief of staff 

Mark Meadows personally executed the illegal scheme to create alternate slates of electors. 

[Continue Reading ]

LAT: ‘I will not break my oath’: Arizona Assembly speaker details Trump’s pressure to 

help overturn results," Sarah D. Wire, June 21, 2022, 1:14 PM 

Tuesday’s hearing by the House panel investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol is 

zeroing in on Trump’s personal involvement in efforts to pressure state election officials to 

subvert the will of voters and to persuade lawmakers to submit false slates of electors backing 

him to Congress. Arizona House Speaker Rusty Bowers, Georgia Secretary of State Brad 

Raffensperger and Georgia Secretary of State Chief Operating Officer Gabriel Sterling, all 

Republicans, are testifying about the actions of Trump and those in his inner circle before the 

committee in its fourth hearing this month. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg 

LAT: Jan. 6 panel to receive Trump family footage from 2020 election and Capitol 

insurrection, Sarah D. Wire, June 21, 2022, 12:34 PM 

British filmmaker Alex Holder on Tuesday complied with a subpoena to turn over to the House 

Select Committee investigating Jan. 6, 2021, documentary footage he filmed during the final six 

weeks of President Trump’s reelection campaign along with footage of the attack on the Capitol. 

The footage includes exclusive interviews with President Trump, his children Ivanka, Eric and Don 

Jr. and son-in-law Jared Kushner, as well as Vice President Mike Pence. The videos could give 

the committee a never-before-seen view of the president and vice president’s thoughts and 

actions before and after the election. [Continue Reading ]

Fox: How powerful testimony from state Republicans highlighted Trump pressure 

campaign, Howard Kurtz, June 22, 2022, 3:00 AM 

The one-sided nature of yesterday’s House hearing began with the Democratic chairman, Bennie 

Thompson, pronouncing Donald Trump guilty as charged. The panel had important witnesses 

from Georgia and Arizona lined up to tell their stories, and yet this sounded like a prosecutor’s 

opening statement, underscoring the fact that the Jan. 6 committee has no Republicans offering a

semblance of the defense. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: [ANALYSIS] The 14 most important lines from today's January 6 committee 

hearing, Chris Cillizza, June 21, 2022, 4:33 PM 

The January 6 committee held its fourth public hearing on Tuesday, focusing on Donald Trump's 

pressure campaign on officials in states like Georgia and Arizona, where the 2020 election was 

close. I watched the hearing and took notes on the lines from it that you need to see. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000413

Insider: Liz Cheney says the House January 6 committee is 'certain' Donald Trump 

doesn't want his former top White House lawyer to testify, Ryan Barber, June 21, 2022, 

6:00  PM 

Rep. Liz Cheney publicly called Tuesday for former White House counsel Pat Cipollone to testify 

before the House committee investigating the January 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol, saying the 

panel had evidence that he "tried to do what was right" as former President Donald Trump tried to 

overturn the 2020 election. "Our committee is certain that Donald Trump does not want Mr. 

Cipollone to testify here. Indeed, our evidence shows that Mr. Cipollone and his office tried to do 

what was right. They tried to stop a number of President Trump's plans for January 6," said 

Cheney, a Wyoming Republican who serves as vice chair of the House January 6 committee. 

[Continue Reading ]

MSNBC: [VIDEO] Ruby Freeman: ‘FBI informed me I needed to leave my home for safety’ 

ahead of Jan. 6, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 5:00 PM 

In a video testimony Ruby Freeman detailed the FBI asking her to leave her home ahead of Jan. 

6 for safety reasons. Freeman worked during the 2020 election to process ballots in Fulton 

County. She said she received threats ahead of Jan. 6 related to claims of a stolen election and 

that is what prompted the FBI to ask her to leave her house. [Watch ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): Trump’s push for Michigan ‘fake electors’ a focus 

of fourth Jan. 6 hearing, Ben Orner, June 21, 2022, 4:58 PM 

Former President Donald Trump tried to pressure legislators in Michigan and other swing states 

to subvert the 2020 election result by replacing Joe Biden’s legitimate electoral college votes with 

“fake electors,” the U.S. House select committee on the Jan. 6 insurrection argued Tuesday. The 

committee investigating Trump’s influence on last year’s U.S. Capitol riot played testimony of 

Michigan Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey recalling a White House meeting he and former 

House Speaker Lee Chatfield had a couple weeks after the election. [Continue Reading ]

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): House Select Committee investigating Jan. 6 announces next 

hearing witnesses, Douglas Jones, June 21, 2022, 9:24 PM 

The House Select Committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021 attack on the U.S. Capitol has 

released a list of witnesses who will appear at Thursday's hearing on Capitol Hill. That hearing is 

expected to focus on the pressure then-President Trump put on the Department of Justice while 

making unfounded claims of voter fraud. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

WSJ: Lawyers Make Final Arguments in Fraud Case Against Former Theranos 

President , Heather Somerville, June 21, 2022, 7:52 PM 

Government prosecutors in the criminal-fraud trial of Theranos Inc.’s former second-in-command, 

Ramesh “Sunny” Balwani, made their final pitch to the jury in closing arguments Tuesday, as the 

Silicon Valley case moves closer to a resolution. Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeff Schenk said that Mr. 

Balwani, longtime president and chief operating officer of the now-defunct blood-testing startup, 

had full knowledge of the fraud he was committing because he was in charge of Theranos’s 

laboratory and was well-informed of its many problems with test accuracy and reliability and fired 

employees who raised concerns. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000414

WaPo: Woman indicted for Instagram post targeting witnesses at gang trial, Salvador 

Rizzo, June 21, 2022, 5:47 PM 

A woman accused of posting an Instagram message listing five people who were scheduled to 

testify in a gang murder and racketeering trial and terming each of them a “snitch” has been 

indicted on a charge of witness tampering. Prosecutors said Keira Ta published the Instagram 

post in April that gave the address for the federal courthouse in Alexandria, where the trial was 

about to begin, and listed the five witnesses, adding “snitch” next to each name. The post also 

indicated the five would be testifying between Tuesday and Thursday. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: Justice Department to drop 31 remaining fraud charges against Michael Avenatti 

following guilty plea, Kara Scannell, June 21, 2022, 3:06 PM 

The Justice Department will drop the remaining fraud counts facing disgraced attorney Michael 

Avenatti after he agreed to plead guilty to multiple charges last week. Prosecutors with the US 

attorney's office for the Central District of California said in a court filing Tuesday they wouldn't 

move ahead with the remaining 31 counts of wire fraud, bank fraud and tax-related charges 

because the judge can consider those allegations when he sentences Avenatti in September. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  Fox , UPI 

Law360: [ANALYSIS] Potential Next Steps For DOJ's COVID-19 Fraud Enforcement, Scott 

Memmott, Jake Harper and Jonathan York, June 21, 2022, 6:04 PM 

Fraud stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic continues to be a criminal enforcement priority for 

the U. S. Department of Justice. As evidence of its commitment, U. S. Attorney General Merrick 

Garland established the DOJ COVID-19 fraud enforcement task force on May 17, 2021, to 

facilitate coordination with more than a dozen federal agencies to investigate and prosecute "the 

most culpable domestic and international criminals," according to a DOJ press release. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360 : Fla. Lawyer Found Guilty Of Extorting Client For Cash, Madison Arnold, June 21, 

2022, 4:41 PM 

Former criminal defense attorney Marion Michael O'Steen was found guilty on two charges 

interfering with commerce by extortion and failing to timely file a form required for receipt of more 

than $10,000 and faces up to 25 years in federal prison, the U.S. Attorney's Office of the 

Middle District of Florida announced Tuesday. [Continue Reading ]

City News Service : Colorado Man Sentenced To Prison For Assaulting Girl In OC ,

Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 7:58 PM 

A convicted sex offender from Colorado was sentenced Tuesday to 20 years in federal prison for 

taking a 15-year-old girl he had a sexual relationship with on a 3 1/2-month road trip that ended in 

Fountain Valley. Kenneth Wayne Fisher, 46, of Colorado Springs, Colorado, pleaded guilty in May 

2020 to a count of transportation of a minor to engage in criminal sexual activity and a count of 

commission of a felony offense involving a minor while required to register as a sex offender. 

[Continue Reading ]

Louisville Courier Journal: Former LMPD officers heading to federal prison for throwing 

drinks at people in West End , Krista Johnson, June 21, 2022, 6:28 PM 

Two former Louisville Metro Police officers have been convicted of federal civil rights violations 

after throwing drinks from their unmarked squad cars at people in Louisville's West End, 

according to the U.S. Department of Justice, with one of the officers pleading guilty to additional 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000415

cyberstalking charges. Bryan Andrew Wilson, 36, and Curt Flynn, 40, both pleaded guilty Tuesday 

to one count of conspiracy to violate the civil rights of Louisville pedestrians through arbitrary use 

of force. [Continue Reading ]

My Mother Lode (Angels Camp, CA): 2 Year Sentence For Wallace Post Office Burglary ,

Nic Peterson, June 21, 2022, 4:58 PM 

In 2021 a Modesto man named Thomas Day, 41 was charged for breaking into a Wallace post 

office. A story covering that can be found here. As announced by U.S. Attorney Phillip A. Talbert, 

he was sentenced to two years in prison this week. According to court documents, on July 2, 

2020, Day broke into the post office at 8271 Camanche Parkway South in Wallace and used a

glass-breaking punch tool to shatter the glass on the door to the lobby area of the building. 

[Continue Reading ]

Riverfront Times (St. Louis, MO): Man Arrested in St. Louis Dog House Headed to Big 

House , Ryan Krull, June 21, 2022, 4:52 PM 

A 58-year-old California man received a 30-year sentence today in Federal Court in St. Louis for 

drug trafficking and money laundering. In February, Lester "Unc" Bull pleaded guilty to a slew of 

charges and admitted to being part of a conspiracy that brought at least 100 kilograms of 

marijuana into the St. Louis area. [Continue Reading ]

Booth Newspapers (Grand Rapids, MI): Michigan prisoner sentenced for mailing anthrax 

threat to federal court in Kalamazoo, Marie Weidmayer, June 21, 2022, 4:46 PM 

A Michigan prisoner who mailed letters threatening an anthrax attack and to kill people was 

sentenced to prison. Nathon James Zink, 34, was sentenced June 21 to just over nine years in 

prison for mailing threatening communication to a federal employee and five years for mailing 

threatening communication after he pleaded guilty March 8. [Continue Reading] See also : WJBK-

Fox (Detroit, MI), WOOD-NBC (Grand Rapids, MI), WXMI-Fox (Grand Rapids, MI) 

KOIN-CBS (Portland, OR): Molotov cocktails, baseball bats: Portland protester gets 

prison, Michaela Bourgeois, June 21, 2022, 11:13 PM 

An Indiana man was sentenced to federal prison on Tuesday for possessing destructive devices 

during 2020 Portland protests, the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the District of Oregon announced. 

25-year-old Malik Fard Muhammad was sentenced to 10 years in federal prison with three years’ 

supervised release. [Continue Reading ] See also:  KPTV-Fox (Portland, OR) 

WROC-CBS (Rochester, NY): Rochester man first to be convicted in 18-person drug bust ,

Hailie Higgins, June 21, 2022, 10:34 PM 

Following a four-week trial, a Rochester man has been convicted for his involvement in 

possessing and selling cocaine and fentanyl, authorities say. In April 2020, 36-year-old Earnest 

Baker was arrested along with 17 other defendants, according to authorities. That day, officials 

say they executed 24 search warrants were executed at homes in Rochester, West Henrietta, 

Penfield, Greece, Irondequoit, and Syracuse, and 12 search warrants were executed on cars 

associated with defendants. [Continue Reading ]

WROC-CBS (Rochester, NY): Two sentenced for kidnapping of Rochester mail carrier ,

Hailie Higgins, June 21, 2022, 8:32 PM 

Two of the three defendants involved in the kidnapping of a federal employee were sentenced to 

time in prison, authorities from the Department of Justice announced today. Back in December 

2021, 39-year-old Mark Rogers and 36-year-old Joseph “Gus” Way plead guilty to the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000416

kidnapping, along with 37-year-old Tashara Levans. [Continue Reading ]

WIVB-CBS (Buffalo, NY): Retired teacher pleads guilty to child porn charge , Patrick Ryan, 

June 21, 2022, 8:18 PM 

A retired 71-year-old teacher admitted he was in possession of child pornography in court 

Tuesday. Richard W. Scherer lives in Depew but spent about 25 years as a teacher in Maryland 

for the Montgomery County Public Schools. [Continue Reading ] See also : WKBW-ABC (Buffalo, 

NY) 

WGNO-ABC (New Orleans, LA): NOLA man indicted on 10 counts of bank fraud and mail 

theft , Raeven Poole, June 21, 2022, 8:18 PM 

A New Orleans man is facing jail time for a series of charges including mail theft and bank fraud, 

according to the Department of Justice. On June 10, U.S. Attorney Duane A. Evans announced 

the indictment of 67-year-old Gregory Joseph Hernandez. According to the lawsuit, Hernandez 

stole checks out of the mail, forged information on the stolen check and then he and others 

deposited and cashed them at different banks and credit unions across the New Orleans region. 

[Continue Reading ]

KPVI-NBC (Pocatello, ID): 2 convicted felons from Shreveport sentenced to federal 

prison , Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 8:00 PM 

Two men from Shreveport were sentenced Tuesday by Chief U.S. District Judge S. Maurice 

Hicks, Jr. for illegally possessing firearms, U.S. Attorney Brandon B. Brown said in a news 

release. Damontra Vonravious Mandigo, 22, was sentenced to seven years and three months in 

prison, followed by 3 years of supervised release, for being a convicted felon in possession of a

firearm. [Continue Reading ]

WFAA-ABC (Dallas, TX): Dallas woman sentenced to life in prison after pleading guilty to 

coordinating husband's murder-for-hire with ex-boyfriend, Ariel Plasencia, June 21, 2022, 

7:50  PM 

The Dallas woman who pleaded guilty to coordinating her husband's 2020 murder-for-hire with 

her ex-boyfriend was sentenced to life in prison Tuesday. Jennifer Lynne Faith, of Oak Cliff, 

pleaded guilty to the murder-for-hire charge in February. She had faced charges of obstruction of 

justice and use of interstate commerce in the commission of murder-for-hire. In return for her 

plea, prosecutors agreed to drop the obstruction charge and to recommend a sentence of life 

imprisonment. [Continue Reading] 

KOSA-CBS (Odessa, TX): Marfa man found guilty of meth possession, Micah Allen, June 

21, 2022, 7:41 PM 

A federal jury sitting in Pecos convicted a Marfa man last week for possession with intent to 

distribute meth. According to court documents and evidence presented at trial, Stephen Dudley 

Brunson, 63, was stopped for a traffic violation. Brunson was subsequently arrested for Class C

offenses involving the license plate and temporary permit displayed on the vehicle he was driving. 

When Brunson was searched incident to arrest, several knives and brass knuckles were found on 

his person as well as over 27 grams of meth. [Continue Reading ]

WWLP-NBC (Springfield, MA): Brockton man guilty for role in violent drug trafficking 

conspiracy , Waleed Azad, June 21, 2022, 7:25 PM 

A Brockton man was sentenced in Boston for his role in a violent drug trafficking conspiracy 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000417

reaching from Boston to Brockton to Cape Cod. According to a news release sent to 22News by 

the Department of Justice in Boston, Cody Goncalves, 28, was sentenced to 13 years in prison 

and four years of supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

KSHB-NBC (Kansas City, MO): Kansas City man sentenced after selling 4 AR-15 rifles, 

marijuana to undercover police officer , David Medina, June 21, 2022, 7:00 PM 

A Kansas City, Missouri, man who sold four AR-15 style rifles and marijuana to an undercover 

police officer will spend 10 years in prison for illegally possessing a firearm. Paul N. Ortiz, 24, 

was sentenced in federal court on Tuesday after the transactions that happened in 2018. 

[Continue Reading ]

WPRI-CBS (Providence, RI): 2 charged with trafficking meth, fentanyl, Steven Matregrano, 

June 21, 2022, 6:17 PM 

Two men have been charged with trafficking methamphetamine, according to U.S. Attorney 

Zachary Cunha. Charles Bersch, 38, of Providence, and Peter Walkovich, 37, of Pepperell, Mass. 

have been charged with possession with intent to distribute 50 grams or more of 

methamphetamine and conspiracy. Charging documents show that on May 23, a vehicle in which 

Bersch and Walkovich were riding in was stopped in Cranston. [Continue Reading ]

WPSD-NBC (Paducah, KY): Paducah doctor admits to participating in telehealth Medicare 

fraud scheme, agrees to pay more than $500,000 , Leanne Fuller, June 21, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A Paducah doctor has agreed to pay $561,800 after federal prosecutors say he knowingly 

submitted or conspired to submit more than $3 million in false claims to Medicare. Prosecutors 

say he received kickbacks from a firm in exchange for filing Medicare claims that were not 

medically necessary for patients he did not actually treat. [Continue Reading ]

KPRC-NBC (Houston, TX): Army veteran admits to sending death threats to staff at Lake 

Jackson VA clinic: DOJ, Brittany Taylor, June 21, 2022, 4:25 PM 

A 33-year-old Brazoria County man has pleaded guilty to threatening employees at the Lake 

Jackson Veterans Affairs outpatient clinic, U.S. Attorney Jennifer B. Lowery announced Tuesday. 

Mark Williams Jr. was a U.S. Army veteran receiving treatment at VA facilities. He admitted to 

making a series of threatening statements via interstate communications. [Continue Reading ]

WTAJ-CBS (Altoona, PA): Johnstown man who failed to register as sex offender 

sentenced, Alexis Loya, June 21, 2022, 4:23 PM 

A former resident of Johnstown was sentenced in federal court for failing to register as a sex 

offender. Andrew Gere, 52, of 111 Poplar Street in Johnstown, was sentenced to a total of 15 

months in prison followed by five years of supervised release, according to U.S. Attorney Cindy 

K.  Chung. His sentence was imposed by U.S. District Judge Stephanie L. Haines. [Continue 

Reading ]

KXLY-ABC (Spokane, WA): Spokane man sentenced to 7 years in federal prison for 

possessing child pornography, Vincent Saglimbeni, June 21, 2022, 3:55 PM 

A man was sentenced to seven years in federal prison for the possession of child pornography. 

Forty-seven-year-old Brian D. Knight faces the highest sentence available under the terms of his 

plea agreement. He will also serve 10 years of federal supervision once he is released from 

federal prison. [Continue Reading ] See also:  KHQ-NBC (Spokane, WA) 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000418

KRTV-CBS (Great Falls, MT): Wolf Point man sentenced for murder , Unattributed, June 21, 

2022, 3:42 PM 

Doratello “DJ” Juan Fischer of Wolf Point, 37 years old, who admitted to fatally shooting a man 

on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, was sentenced in federal court in Great Falls on Tuesday, 

June 21, 2022, U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich said in a news release. Court documents state that 

on November 27, 2020, Fischer shot the victim (identified only as "John Doe" in court 

documents) in the back with a .22-caliber rifle, killing him. [Continue Reading] 

KCPQ-Fox (Seattle, WA): Former Bellevue teacher sentenced to 20 years in prison for 

child pornography, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 2:43 PM 

A former Bellevue teacher was sentenced to 20 years in prison and lifetime supervised release 

for the production and possession of child pornography. On May 14, 2020, Stuart MacGregor 

Hoffman was arrested at his home after an ongoing investigation in the United Kingdom. The 31 -

year-old had sent explicit child sex images to a contact in the U.K., which prompted Homeland 

Security to start their own investigation. [Continue Reading ] See also:  KIRO-CBS (Seattle, WA) 

KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO): Jury finds KC man guilty after gun falls apart during 

restaurant robbery , Zoe Brown, June 21, 2022, 1:53 PM 

A jury has found a 30-year-old Kansas City, Missouri, man guilty after his gun fell apart during a

robbery at the Church’s Chicken on Blue Ridge Boulevard and DNA from the revolver’s parts was 

matched to him. Justin Domonique Davis was found guilty of using a firearm during a crime of 

violence, and aiding and abetting robbery. [Continue Reading ]

See also : KTTN (Trenton, MO) 

Daily Voice (Hampden County, MA): 'Operation Snowfall': MA Man Admits To Cocaine 

Trafficking Conspiracy, David Cifarelli, June 21, 2022, 12:40 PM 

A Braintree man is facing up to 30 years in prison for his role in a multi-year drug trafficking 

investigation, the US Attorney's Office for Massachusetts reports. Martin Angomas, age 32, 

pleaded guilty to trafficking cocaine and illegally possessing ammunition as part of a Boston-based gang that was the focus of "Operation Snowfall," the office reports. [Continue Reading] 

WAGA- Fox (Atlanta, GA): Georgia couple sentenced to prison for two-week metro Atlanta 

crime spree , Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 11:35 AM 

A Georgia couple has been sentenced to multiple years in federal prison for a two-week crime 

spree involving a bank robbery and carjacking in metro Atlanta. Authorities say 30-year-old 

Quantavious Cedron Arnold and 31-year-old Ericka Brewster put innocent civilians at risk through 

multiple crimes in Atlanta and DeKalb County. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WGXA-Fox/ABC 

(Macon, GA) 

WXIN-Fox (Indianapolis, IN): Kokomo man sentenced to 25 years in meth case, Matt 

Adams, June 21, 2022, 9:59 AM 

A Kokomo man who pleaded guilty in a methamphetamine distribution case learned his sentence. 

A U.S. district judge sentenced 33-year-old Demario Barker to 25 years in federal prison. Barker 

had previously pleaded guilty to two counts of distribution of methamphetamine. [Continue 

Reading ]

WHBQ-Fox (Memphis, TN): Man sentenced to several years federal prison for firearms 

charges, DOJ says, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 9:55 AM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000419

A man has been sentenced to several years in federal prison after an incident in 2019. Austin 

Martin, 23, was sentenced to 10 years in federal prison for possession of a firearm, according to 

Joseph C. Murphy Jr., United States Attorney. He was sentenced Tuesday. [Continue Reading ]

See also:  WREG-CBS (Memphis, TN) 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

WPSD-NBC (Paducah, KY): Two former Louisville officers plead guilty to federal civil 

rights charges , Charity Blanton, June 21, 2022, 8:00 PM 

Two former Louisville Metropolitan Police Department officers have plead guilty to conspiracy to 

violate the civil rights of pedestrians through the arbitrary use of force, oppression, and 

intimidation. One of the two also pled guilty to a separate cyberstalking conspiracy charge. 

According to court documents, Bryan Wilson and Curt Flynn assaulted and attempted to assault 

multiple pedestrians while working as detectives with the LMPD Ninth Mobile Division. [Continue 

Reading ]

CIVIL LAW 

Law360: 20 States Ask 5th Circ. To Block Biden's Contractor Vax Order, Rae Varona ,

June 21, 2022, 4:07 PM 

Twenty states have asked the Fifth Circuit to uphold a lower court decision to block the Biden 

administration's widely challenged COVID-19 vaccine mandate for federal contractors, saying the 

mandate exceeded the White House's authority under a federal procurement act. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: DaVita Gets All Clear To Return No-Poach Docs , Bryan Koenig, June 21, 2022, 

2:57  PM 

An Illinois federal judge gave DaVita the permission it needed Monday to dispose of confidential 

documents produced by the U.S. Department of Justice in its failed criminal no-poach case, 

deeming it sufficient for follow-on civil plaintiffs that the company will return what DOJ gave it. 

[Continue Reading ]

WWLP-NBC (Springfield, MA): Outpatient mental health company pays $4.6 million for 

false claims allegations , Aubree Carr, June 21, 2022, 4:15 PM 

Pathways of Massachusetts (Pathways) and its former corporate parent company, Molina 

Healthcare, Inc. (Molina), will pay $4.6 million for false claim allegations and other allegations 

made by whistleblowers. According to the Office of Attorney General Maura Healey, Pathway 

fraudulently claimed to be submitted to the state’s Medicaid Program, MassHealth, for behavioral 

health care services. They also provided services to patients by unlicensed and improperly 

supervised staff members. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

LAT : A 9th Circuit panel tossed California’s ban on private immigration facilities. That 

could change on appeal , Rebecca Schneid, June 22, 2022, 12:02 AM 

Lawyers for a private prison company traded arguments with the State of California before the 9th 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000420

Circuit Court of Appeals in Pasadena on Tuesday over a lawsuit challenging state legislation 

banning private, for-profit prisons and immigration detention centers. Although no ruling has been 

made, the outcome of the case could affect the future of the private prison industry in several 

states beyond California. [Continue Reading ]

NYT : Companies Brace for Impact of New Forced Labor Law , Ana Swanson, June 22, 2022, 

12:00  AM 

A sweeping new law aimed at cracking down on Chinese forced labor could have significant 

and unanticipated ramifications for American companies and consumers. The law, which went 

into effect on Tuesday, bars products from entering the United States if they have any links to 

Xinjiang, the far-western region where the Chinese authorities have carried out an extensive 

crackdown on Uyghur Muslims and other ethnic minorities. That could affect a wide range of 

products, including those using any raw materials from Xinjiang or with a connection to the type of 

Chinese labor and poverty alleviation programs the U.S. government has deemed coercive 

even if the finished product used just a tiny amount of material from Xinjiang somewhere along its 

journey. [Continue Reading ] See also:  NBC 

Fox : [OPINION] Biden's open borders encourage child trafficking and smuggling, Robert 

Law, June 21, 2022, 2:00 PM 

Then-candidate Joe Biden, and every other 2020 contender for the Democratic ticket, vowed to 

suspend all deportations for the first 100 days and try to push through a massive amnesty. That 

pledge, combined with disastrous immigration policies out of the Department of Homeland 

Security (DHS) since Biden’s inauguration, has fueled a historic and sustained border crisis. In 

May, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) apprehended 239,416 illegal aliens, breaking 

April’s then-record of 234,088, which broke March’s then-record of 222,339. By comparison, May 

2019 witnessed 144,116 apprehensions and May 2021 had 180,597. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Calif. Asks En Banc 9th Circ. To Uphold Private Prison Ban , Lauren Berg, June 

21, 2022, 11:48 PM 

California urged the en banc Ninth Circuit on Tuesday to uphold the state's law banning private 

immigration detention facilities and other private prisons after a three-judge panel struck the law 

down, arguing that the law regulates private businesses, not the contracts those businesses hold 

with the federal government. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: Border Patrol chiefs under three presidents warn Biden on 

'whipping' discipline , Anna Giaritelli, June 21, 2022, 8:29 PM 

The top U.S. Border Patrol officials from the Bush, Obama, and Trump administrations are 

warning the Biden administration against disciplining agents whom it investigated for "whipping" 

Haitian migrants in Del Rio, Texas, last September, the Washington Examiner has learned. Four 

national Border Patrol chiefs and five other top-ranking officials who served under the previous 

three presidents on Tuesday sent a letter, obtained exclusively by the Washington Examiner, to 

Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas in which they shared serious concerns about a

report that DHS agency Customs and Border Protection is planning to punish agents involved in 

the incident despite outcry that the agents are not guilty of any wrongdoing. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Biden Moves To Ax Alabama's Immigration Enforcement Suit, Mike LaSusa, June 

21, 2022, 6:00 PM 

The Biden administration on Tuesday asked an Alabama federal judge to toss a suit brought by 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000421

Alabama, Florida and Georgia against the White House's immigration enforcement policy, saying 

the challengers are rehashing losing arguments made in other similar cases. The administration 

defended the guidance issued in September by the U. S. Department of Homeland Security, 

which laid out three categories of unauthorized migrants prioritized for removal and introduced a

case-by-case analysis to determine whether someone should be deported. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : ICE officers demand freedom from AFL-CIO over mismanagement, 

‘defund the police’ stance, Stephen Dinan, June 21, 2022, 4:00 PM 

The National ICE Council says its members are sick of being labeled “Nazis” and racists by 

fellow unionists and is filing charges with the Labor Department to seek financial autonomy from 

its parent unions, the AFL-CIO and the American Federation of Government Employees. The 

council says it cannot get adequate representation from the two organizations, which “foster hate 

and prejudice” against U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement and have backed political 

candidates who call for defunding ICE essentially advocating for the erasure of the 7,600 jobs 

the council represents. [Continue Reading ]

Tucson Sentinel : Former Az prison guard sentenced to 30 mos. in gun smuggling plot ,

Paul Ingram, June 21, 2022, 4:20 PM 

A former Arizona Department of Corrections officer will serve 30 months in federal prison after he 

plead guilty to four counts, including conspiracy, gun smuggling, making false statements when 

purchasing a firearm, and aiding and abetting false statements in connection with the purchase of 

a firearm. Juan Carlos Rubio, 26, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge John C. Hinderaker last 

week after he pleaded guilty in April to all four counts. [Continue Reading ]

KGTV-ABC (San Diego, CA): CBP officers seize more than half a million dollars’ worth of 

fentanyl , Krista Summerville, June 21, 2022, 9:57 PM 

U.S.  Customs and Border Protection seized more than half a million dollars worth of fentanyl at 

the Calexico Port of Entry earlier this month, the agency said. Authorities discovered the drugs 

inside a 2014 Ford sedan driven by a 28-year-old man on June 6 just before 10 a.m. According 

to CBP, the man tried to enter the U.S. when he was referred to a further inspection point. 

[Continue Reading ]

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): Border Patrol seizes 120 pounds of methamphetamine in car 

with young children , Anne Simmons, June 21, 2022, 4:45 PM 

Roving patrols near Gila Bend, Ariz. led U.S. Customs and Border Protection Border Patrol 

Agents from the Tucson Sector to the seizure of over 120 pounds of methamphetamine 

concealed in a minivan. Ajo Station sgents stopped a Honda Odyssey on Thursday at the junction 

of Interstate 8 and State Route 85. A Border Patrol Canine alerted agents to the presence of 

concealed narcotics, which were revealed after a search of the car's trunk. [Continue Reading ]

WGNO-ABC (New Orleans, LA): Wrong turn could cost Russian man chance at asylum in 

U.S., Julian Resendiz, June 21, 2022, 2:37 PM 

When Aleksandr Pogorelov told his mom and stepfather that he received conscription papers to 

go fight in Ukraine, the couple panicked. “He’s not the soldier type. He doesn’t have a mean bone 

in his body. And he doesn’t agree with that war. We all knew he’s going to get killed if he goes,” 

said Justin Jacobs, the stepfather. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000422

Reuters: Big Tech bill advocates and critics keep pressure on U.S. lawmakers ,

Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 4:01 PM 

Supporters of a U.S. bill aimed at reining in Big Tech platforms like  Amazon.com  (AMZN.O) and 

Alphabet's Google (GOOGL.O) have flooded lawmakers with nearly 4,000 phone calls, while 

critics of the legislation sent a letter telling senators it would "harm consumers." Versions of the 

bill have progressed further than any previous Big Tech antitrust legislation, with strong bipartisan 

support in the House of Representatives and Senate. [Continue Reading ]

MarketWatch: [OPINION] Stagflation will be the Fed’s biggest worry , Peter Morici, June 22, 

2022, 6:30 AM 

The Federal Reserve’s biggest long-term concern should be stagflation a combination of 

persistent and unacceptably-high inflation coupled with nonplus growth. As this column has 

argued, short of a punishing recession Americans will be lucky to see inflation at 4%, never mind 

the Federal Reserve’s official target of 2%. [...] As demand for fossil fuels recedes, profits should 

be returned to shareholders so that capital may be redeployed to new, more-productive activities 

including green energy rather than forcing Big Oil to do things it knows nothing about. Looking 

at how a few money managers can bully large corporations to foolish decisions, maybe Justice 

Department antitrust chief Jonathan Kanter should stop harassing Frank Perdue’s legacy and set 

his sights on BlackRock’s Larry Fink. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Fed. Circ. Reverses Initial Panel To Find Gilenya IP Invalid , Andrew Karpan, June 

21, 2022, 11:07 PM 

The Federal Circuit held Tuesday that Novartis' patent covering its multibillion-dollar multiple 

sclerosis drug Gilenya isn't valid after all, reversing an earlier panel that found in favor of the 

Swiss drugmaking giant. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: FTC Probing NYSE Owner's $16B Deal For Black Knight , Matthew Perlman, June 

21, 2022, 6:33 PM 

The Federal Trade Commission has extended its review of Intercontinental Exchange Inc.'s 

planned $16 billion purchase of Black Knight Inc., a provider of data and analytics for the housing 

finance industry. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : [OPINION] The progressive antitrust Trojan Horse , Brian Garst, June 

21, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Progressives have a plan to expand antitrust law that would effectively nationalize America’s most 

successful companies. They even hope to get conservatives on board. The bill most likely to get 

consideration this Congress would, according to Ryan Bourne and Brad Subramaniam of the 

Cato Institute, “generally make it unlawful for major online platforms to engage in conduct that has 

produced tech products that consumers enjoy.” [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

AP: Kansas oil refinery to pay $1.6 million for clean air errors , Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 

5:00  PM 

An oil refinery in El Dorado will pay a $1.6 million penalty for violations of the federal Clean Air 

Act, which resulted in a fire that killed an employee in 2017, the Environmental Protection Agency 

announced Tuesday. HollyFrontier El Dorado Refining oil refinery did not follow requirements 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000423

designed to protect the public from accidental releases of hazardous substances, which 

contributed to the fire and caused the employee’s death, the EPA said. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Fond Du Lac Tribe Says PolyMet Can't End Mine Suit , Andrew Westney, June 21, 

2022, 7:41 PM 

The Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa has urged a Minnesota federal judge not to 

toss the tribe's suit seeking to undo a federal land swap for PolyMet Mining Inc.'s NorthMet 

project, saying the band has the standing to sue the U.S. Forest Service for violating the tribe's 

treaty rights. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Judge Approves $45M Roundup False Ad Deal , Emily Field, June 21, 2022, 6:05 

PM 

A California federal judge on Tuesday signed off on a $45 million settlement to end allegations 

that Monsanto made false claims related to the dangers of its Roundup pesticides, stressing that 

the deal doesn't prevent class members from suing over illnesses. [Continue Reading ]

KULR-NBC (Billings, MT): Judge shuts down trail construction after lawsuit by ranch 

catering to wealthy , Ducan Adams, June 21, 2022, 11:00 PM 

The 35,000-acre Rock Creek Cattle Co. ranch, which is both an exclusive enclave for the wealthy 

and a cattle ranch west of Deer Lodge, sought and received a judge’s order last week that has 

temporarily halted Powell County’s work on a recreational trail. The county had hoped to complete 

this summer the final portion of the trail meant to stretch about 10.5 miles from Deer Lodge to 

Garrison. [Continue Reading ]

WHIO-AM (Dayton, OH): Ohio man pleads guilty to killing bald eagle, will pay $20K fine, 

Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 8:28 PM 

An Ohio man pleaded guilty Tuesday to shooting and killing a bald eagle last October. According 

to a release from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Ohio, 79-year-old David B. 

Huff, of Dover, shot and killed a bald eagle with a rifle on Oct. 7, 2021. [Continue Reading] See 

also:  WJW-Fox (Cleveland, OH) , WKYC-NBC (Cleveland, OH) 

TAX 

The Hill : IRS says it’s making headway in clearing tax return backlog , Tobias Burns, June 

21, 2022, 3:07 PM 

The IRS says it is climbing out from under the unprecedented stack of tax returns that piled up 

after the agency had to scale back its operations and close facilities in 2020 following the onset 

of the pandemic. The agency announced Tuesday that by the end of this week it will have cleared 

all original individual tax returns that were filed in 2021 and that didn’t contain any major mistakes. 

[Continue Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

Fox: US Marshals still searching for Alcatraz inmates who may have survived escape 60 

years ago, Brie Stimson, June 22, 2022, 4:10 AM 

The U.S. Marshals Service released three age-progressed photos last week of inmates who 

broke out of Alcatraz in June 1962. The inmates, Frank Morris and brothers Clarence and John 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000424

Anglin, made their escape 60 years ago by climbing through the prison’s vents and pipes to the 

roof, sliding down on a smokestack and navigating the cold waters of San Francisco Bay in a raft 

made of prison raincoats following months of planning. [Continue Reading ] See also: Daily 

Beast , KGO-ABC (San Francisco, CA) 

The Hill : Vote on Biden ATF pick nears as gun reform talks yield fruit , Alex Gangitano and 

Brett Samuels, June 22, 2022, 5:07 AM 

The Senate is poised to confirm President Biden’s pick to head the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 

Firearms and Explosives (ATF), a big moment for the White House after it had to pull its last 

nominee before the latest string of deadly mass shootings. Confirming Steve Dettelbach would 

be a victory for Biden, who has promised to be tough on guns but has waited on the sidelines as 

a bipartisan group of senators nails down a package on gun violence prevention that falls far short 

of Democratic goals. [Continue Reading] 

Texarkana Gazette (Texarkana, TX): FBI offering reward of up to $50,000 for information 

related to death of Shamia Little, Pat Parris, June 21, 2022, 10:00 PM 

The FBI is offering a reward of up to $50,000 for information leading to the identification, arrest 

and conviction of the individual(s) responsible for the homicide of Shamia Little. The FBI 

Shreveport Resident Agency is working with the Shreveport Police Department to solve the 

homicide of 17-year-old Shamia. On July 12, 2021, Shamia was discovered deceased 

approximately a fourth of a mile northwest of Douglas Williams Park in Shreveport. She died from 

a gunshot wound. [Continue Reading ]

Chicago Tribune: FBI makes arrest in 1991 Gary murder, Meredith Colias-Pete, June 21, 

2022, 5:07 PM 

The FBI announced it arrested a Milwaukee man Tuesday in connection with a 1991 Gary murder. 

Quentin Maurice Smith, 50, was charged Friday in Lake Superior Court with the Nov. 26, 1991 

murder of John Thomas Currie, who was then 35, FBI spokeswoman Chris Bavender said. 

[Continue Reading ]

KNXV-ABC (Phoenix, AZ): Valley law enforcement to launch new approach to gun 

violence investigations, Jack Gillum, June 22, 2022, 1:23 AM 

Endless stories of how rampant gun violence in the Valley has upended lives has led area law 

enforcement to launch a new enforcement effort. [...] Phoenix police, county prosecutors and 

ATF are planning to launch a multi-faceted approach to enforcing gun violence. [Continue 

Reading ]

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): A rare look inside the Tucson DEA drug vault, Pat Parris, June 

21, 2022, 8:16 PM 

The Drug Enforcement Agency says Tucson has become a hub for Mexican drug cartels bringing 

in deadly drugs before sending them across the country. Local DEA officials are charged with 

trying to intercept those illegal drugs. KGUN 9 was recently given an exclusive tour of the DEA's 

Tucson drug vault near the airport. We found a nearly empty storage warehouse. [Continue 

Reading ]

KTBS-ABC (Shreveport, LA): 171 arrests made in Natchitoches, Grant, Rapides parishes, 

Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 7:00 PM 

Law enforcement officers from multiple agencies in Natchitoches, Grant and Rapides parishes 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000425

joined forces over the past two weeks to make 171 arrests and seize guns and drugs off the 

streets. The special operation was headed up by the Central Louisiana Violent Crime Abatement 

Team (VCAT) comprised of Louisiana State Police, Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF), 

Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), Louisiana Probation and Parole, Rapides Parish Sheriff’s 

Office, Natchitoches Parish Sheriff’s Office, Grant Parish Sheriff’s Office, Sabine Parish Sheriff’s 

Office, Pineville Police Department, Alexandria Police Department, Natchitoches City Police 

Department, Lecompte Police Department, Ball Police Department, Boyce Police Department, 

Glenmora Police Department, Woodworth Police Department, Alexandria City Marshal’s Office, 

Pineville City Marshal’s Office and Louisiana National Guard. [Continue Reading ]

KLKN-ABC (Lincoln, NE): Nebraska AG urges feds to investigate attacks against anti -

abortion groups, Nolan Dorn, June 21, 2022, 6:03 PM 

Nebraska Attorney General Doug Peterson is urging the federal government to investigate 

“terroristic acts” against anti-abortion organizations. In a letter to U.S. Attorney General Merrick 

Garland, 19 attorneys general said his lack of action was “intolerable.” [Continue Reading ]

KCTV-CBS (Kansas City, MO): Fire in Pleasanton, Kansas, critically injures firefighter, Zoe 

Brown, June 21, 2022, 5:22 PM 

A fire last night at a chiropractor’s office in Pleasanton, Kansas, critically injured a firefighter. [...] 

he Kansas City Field Division of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said 

that they have been asked to join the Kansas Fire Marshal’s Office in investigating the cause of 

the fire. They will be returning to the scene tomorrow to continue the investigation. [Continue 

Reading ] See also: KMBC-ABC (Kansas City, MO) 

KSNV-NBC (Las Vegas, NV): Two dozen arrested following recent sex offender 

verification operation, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 4:00 PM 

A recent sex offender apprehension effort led to the arrest of two dozen people in Las Vegas. 

The LVMPD Sex Offender Apprehension Team and the U.S. Marshals Service District of Nevada 

Sexual Offender Predator Apprehension Team held the joint operation from June 13-17. 

[Continue Reading ]

Daily Voice (Hudson, NJ): Gunman Wanted In Triple Jersey City Shooting Captured By US 

Marshals At Bergen County Hotel, Cecilia Levine, June 21, 2022, 3:19 PM 

US Marshals captured a 31-year-old Newark man accused of killing a woman and wounding two 

other people in a shooting in Jersey City last February, authorities said Tuesday, June 21. Jimmy 

B.  Colclough shot Raven Harris dead and wounded the other victims -- one 28, the other 29 -- at 

the intersection of Old Bergen Road and Neptune Avenue on Feb. 10, Hudson County 

Prosecutor Esther Suarez said. [Continue Reading ]

KTVZ-NBC (Bend, OR): Oregon FBI’s Tech Tuesday: Building a digital defense against 

elder fraud, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 12:59 PM 

This week's FBI Portland Tech Tuesday feature focuses on safeguarding you and your loved 

ones from elder fraud schemes. You’re entering the final season in your life, and you’ve worked 

hard over the years to earn enough to live comfortably. But your nest egg could be just tempting 

enough to be the target of scammers looking to take it from you. The FBI, alongside other federal 

law enforcement and protection agencies is warning elder Americans beware of scammers. 

This message also applies to those looking out for elders many times we take care of our 

elders, including managing finances. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000426

WRIC-ABC (Richmond, VA): U.S. Marshals Service say escaped inmates ‘took advantage 

of the prison system’, Sabrina Shutters, June 21, 2022, 6:52 AM 

8News is continuing to work to get answers about the four inmates who walked out of a federal 

prison early Saturday morning in Hopewell. One of the prisoners turned himself in Sunday 

morning, but three others are still on the run. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

AP : Judge keeps execution for inmate who sought pastor’s touch , Juan Lozano, June 21, 

2022, 4:00 PM 

A Texas judge on Tuesday denied a request by a district attorney who called capital punishment 

“unethical” to withdraw the execution date of a death row inmate whose case had raised legal 

questions about the role of spiritual advisers in the death chamber. On April 12, an order was 

signed setting John Henry Ramirez’s execution for Oct. 5. Ramirez’s execution had been put on 

hold several times, most recently after the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review his challenge of 

state rules that would have prevented his pastor from touching him and praying aloud during his 

execution. [Continue Reading ]

Staten Island Advance: Judge releases reputed mobster with ties to S.I. to home 

confinement. Blasts Bureau of Prisons for delays in treating eye condition , Frank 

Donnelly, June 22, 2022, 5:50 AM 

A judge issued a scathing rebuke of the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) when he recently 

ordered the prison release of a reputed mobster with ties to Staten Island due to the agency’s 

“cavalier attitude” in addressing the inmate’s medical needs. Vincent (Chickie) DeMartino, 66, was 

sprung from prison last month and ordered to serve the remaining two-plus years of his 25-year 

prison sentence under home confinement. [Continue Reading ]

WRIC-ABC (Richmond, VA): Inmate turns himself in after escaping federal prison in 

Hopewell, 3 inmates still on the run, Tannock Blair, June 21, 2022, 9:32 PM 

One of the four inmates who escaped a Hopewell minimum security prison turned himself in to 

authorities in the early hours of Sunday morning. Tavares Lajuane Graham reportedly turned 

himself in after being wanted for over 24 hours. According to authorities, Graham surrendered at 

around 5 a.m. on Sunday, June 19. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WAAY-ABC (Huntsville, AL) 

US SUPREME COURT 

AP: Supreme Court limits reach of federal gun crime law , Jessica Gresko, June 21, 2022, 

4:00  PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday limited the reach of a federal statute that requires stiff penalties 

for crimes involving a gun. The 7-2 decision united both conservative and liberal justices, though 

one dissenting justice compared the result to “Alice in Wonderland.” The justices said the law 

can’t be used to lengthen the sentences of criminals convicted of a specific attempted robbery 

offense. The case before the justices involved Justin Taylor, who in the early 2000s was a

marijuana dealer in the area of Richmond, Virginia. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg 

Law , CNN , WaPo 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000427

Reuters: U.S. Supreme Court strikes down Washington workers' comp law for nuclear 

site , Daniel Wiessner, June 21, 2022, 3:42 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday said the state of Washington could not in a 2018 law lower 

the bar for federal contractors who work at a decomissioned nuclear weapons plant to receive 

workers' compensation benefits. Justice Stephen Breyer wrote for the unanimous court that the 

state could not single out the Hanford, Washington facility in the law because the federal 

government had not explicitly waived its typical immunity from discriminatory state laws with 

respect to workers' compensation. [Continue Reading ]

AP: Justices rule religious schools must get Maine tuition aid , Mark Sherman, June 21, 

2022, 2:00 PM 

The Supreme Court ruled Tuesday that Maine can’t exclude religious schools from a program that 

offers tuition aid for private education, a decision that could ease religious organizations’ access 

to taxpayer money. The 6-3 outcome could fuel a renewed push for school choice programs in 

some of the 18 states that have so far not directed taxpayer money to private, religious education. 

The most immediate effect of the court’s ruling beyond Maine probably will be felt next door in 

Vermont, which has a similar program. [Continue Reading ] See also : CNN , NBC , NPR , NYT ,

Politico , SCOTUSblog , WaPo , WSJ 

Reuters: Supreme Court to consider whether U.S. can drop whistleblower cases , Brendan 

Pierson, June 21, 2022, 1:59 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday agreed to hear a case over whether the federal government 

can dismiss a whistleblower lawsuit brought on its behalf without the whistleblower's consent, an 

issue that has divided appeals courts. The case was brought against UnitedHealth Group Inc 

subsidiary Executive Health Resources Inc by a former employee, Jesse Polansky, who accused 

the company of falsely certifying inpatient hospital admissions as medically necessary, resulting 

in Medicare being overbilled by potentially billions of dollars. [Continue Reading ]

USA Today: Supreme Court justices don't have a code of ethics. Hundreds of judges say 

that's a problem , Tami Abdollah, June 22, 2022, 5:57 AM 

Hundreds of judges across the United States said U.S. Supreme Court justices should be bound 

by a code of ethics and many said they were shocked to find out that wasn't already the case. 

The National Judicial College surveyed judges across the nation on whether the Supreme Court 

should be held to a higher standard. The survey came amid a contentious and high-profile U.S. 

Supreme Court calendar that has involved questions of bias, as well as investigations into 

Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas' family ties to the Jan. 6, 2021 insurrection at the U.S. 

Capitol. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: [OPINION] How Supreme Court ruling lays groundwork for religious charter 

schools , Valerie Strauss, June 21, 2022, 10:23 PM 

Less than a month ago, attorney and education policy scholar Kevin Welner wrote on this blog 

that the Supreme Court would probably further erode the separation of church and state in a case 

known as Carson v. Makin, which was brought to expand voucher policies that provide public 

money for private and religious education. It did just that on Tuesday, ruling that the state of Maine 

cannot deny tuition aid to religious schools. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: [EDITORIAL] Justice Sotomayor’s Class-Action Consolation Prize , Editorial Board, 

June 21, 2022, 6:30 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000428

The Supreme Court last week ruled 8-1 (Viking River Cruises v. Moriana) that California’s Private 

Attorneys General Act (PAGA) aka the trial lawyer enrichment act doesn’t supersede class-action waivers. Now watch unions and trial lawyers turn lemons into lemonade with a recipe from 

Justice Sonia Sotomayor. [Continue Reading] 

WSJ: New York vs. New Jersey Port Fight Heads to U.S. Supreme Court , Paul Berger and 

Jess Bravin, June 21, 2022, 6:09 PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday agreed to decide whether New Jersey can unilaterally pull out of 

a bistate crime-fighting agency it has operated with New York for decades. New York state 

officials in March asked the court to stop New Jersey from withdrawing from the Waterfront 

Commission of New York Harbor, a regulator set up almost 70 years ago to fight organized crime 

on the docks at the Port of New York and New Jersey. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: The Supreme Court Has Just Eroded First Amendment Law , Noah Feldman, June 

21, 2022, 4:45 PM 

In an extremely important church-and-state decision, the Supreme Court has held that if the state 

of Maine decides to pay for a child’s private education in lieu of a public one, it must allow its 

tuition money to be used at religious schools. The 6-3 decision, Carson v. Makin, profoundly 

undermines existing First Amendment law. It represents the end of the centuries-old 

constitutional ban on direct state aid to the teaching of religion. And remarkably, it does all this in 

the name of religious liberty, giving the free-exercise clause of the First Amendment primacy over 

the establishment clause found in the exact same amendment. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: With Supreme Court abortion ruling pending, protesters rally and wait , Steve 

Thompson and Michelle Boorstein, June 21, 2022, 1:41 PM 

Several dozen protesters from both sides of the abortion debate shouted, rallied and waved 

competing scripture interpretations outside the Supreme Court on Tuesday, one of the last days 

the court could release its decision in a case that directly challenges the constitutional right to 

abortion established in Roe v. Wade nearly 50 years ago. A decision didn’t come, but advocates 

said they will return Thursday, the next time the decision could be announced. [Continue Reading] 

WaPo: Supreme Court rejects appeal from Roundup maker over cancer claims, Ann E. 

Marimow, June 21, 2022, 12:23 PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday let stand a multimillion-dollar verdict against the manufacturer of 

the popular weedkiller Roundup for failing to warn of cancer risks. The decision by the justices not 

to intervene clears the way for thousands of similar lawsuits against the company Bayer. The 

Biden administration had urged the court to deny the company’s request, a departure from the 

Trump administration’s position. [Continue Reading] See also:  LAT 

NYT: The Major Supreme Court Decisions in 2022, Adam Liptak and Jason Kao, June 21, 

2022, 12:00 PM 

The leak in May of a draft opinion that would overrule Roe v. Wade seemed to expose new fault 

lines at the Supreme Court in the first full term in which it has been dominated by a 6-to-3 

conservative supermajority, including three justices appointed by President Donald J. Trump. The 

court’s public approval ratings have been dropping, and its new configuration has raised 

questions about whether it is out of step with public opinion. [Continue Reading ]

CNN: [ANALYSIS] John Roberts played the long game on state funding of religious 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000429

schools , Joan Biskupic, June 22, 2022, 5:30 AM 

Chief Justice John Roberts has been laying the groundwork for years for Tuesday's sweeping 

decision requiring states to fund religious education. But he always tried to signal some caution. 

Five years ago, in a financing dispute involving a church school in Missouri, he even added a

footnote that said the Supreme Court decision applied only to money for playground resurfacing. 

Fellow conservatives called him out and suggested the caveat was preposterous because the 

decision would, of course, reach other religious funding cases. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Justices Deny Bid To Void Immunity In Tribal Conspiracy Suit , Caleb Symons, 

June 21, 2022, 9:54 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court declined on Tuesday to take up an appellate decision that shielded a

tribal judge and other tribal court staff from corruption claims brought by the owner of a Nevada 

software company, who claims they were wrongly prejudiced in his lawsuit against the Blue Lake 

Rancheria. [Continue Reading ]

SCOTUSblog : Justices grant review in cases on Bank Secrecy Act and False Claims Act, 

Amy Howe, June 21, 2022, 5:18 PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday morning added two cases one involving the Bank Secrecy 

Act, the other involving the government’s power to dismiss fraud claims to its 2022-23 docket. 

In a list of orders from the justices’ private conference last week, the justices also turned down 

over a dissent from Justice Clarence Thomas that was joined by Justice Samuel Alito a request 

from Ohio to reinstate the conviction and death sentence of an inmate who was convicted of 

killing his cellmate. [Continue Reading ]

NPR: [AUDIO] Meet The Man Who Helped Build The Court That May Overturn Roe, 

Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 5:00 PM 

As soon as Thursday, the Supreme Court could rule on Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health 

Organization. A leaked draft opinion in that case showed a majority of justices agreeing to 

overturn Roe v. Wade, which would end the constitutional right to an abortion. However the court 

rules, this moment is the culmination of a decades-long effort by conservative activists around the 

country. [Listen ]

CNN: Justice Sonia Sotomayor continues her warnings of a dramatic conservative turn 

at the Supreme Court , Ariane de Vogue, June 21, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Justice Sonia Sotomayor made crystal clear on Tuesday that she believes the conservatives on 

the Supreme Court -- including three of President Donald Trump's nominees -- are set to move 

the country sharply to the right by eviscerating or ignoring decades of precedent on issues that 

most divide the public. Remaining cases this term include abortion, gun rights, the environment, 

immigration and a case involving a former public high school football coach who lost his job after 

leading prayers at the 50-yard line. [Continue Reading ] See also : The Hill 

SCOTUSblog: Divided court rejects death-row prisoner’s attempt to gather neurological 

evidence , Mridula Raman, June 21, 2022, 3:00 PM 

The Supreme Court on Tuesday dealt another blow to prisoners challenging their state-court 

convictions and sentences in federal court. In a 5-4 decision in Shoop v. Twyford, the justices 

limited the ability of federal courts to use the All Writs Act to order states to transport prisoners, 

even when such transport could help prisoners investigate whether their convictions are 

unconstitutional. [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000430

Bloomberg Law: High Court Rules for Hospital Health Plan in Kidney Care Fight , Lydia 

Wheeler, June 21, 2022, 10:37 AM 

The Supreme Court Tuesday sided with an Ohio hospital’s employee health plan in a dispute over 

how much it pays for kidney dialysis. In a 7-2 decision, the justices said Marietta Memorial 

Hospital and its employee health plan aren’t discriminating against patients with end-stage renal 

disease (ESRD) by paying less for dialysis than other treatments because they’re providing the 

same coverage for all kidney-care patients [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Justices To Weigh Foreign Account Tax Penalty Limits , Theresa Schliep, June 21, 

2022, 10:10 AM 

The U.S. Supreme Court decided Tuesday to hear a dispute over the maximum penalty for failing 

to disclose foreign bank accounts to the IRS in a case that could resolve the limits of a $10,000 

penalty for undeclared accounts. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : High Court To Review DOJ Authority To Torpedo FCA Suits, Daniel Wilson, June 

21, 2022, 10:08 AM 

The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday agreed to hear a case examining if the federal government 

lost its authority to dismiss a whistleblower's False Claims Act suit by waiting too long to jump into 

it. [Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

Law360 : Senate Confirms Fresno County Judge To Calif. Federal Court , James Arkin, 

June 21, 2022, 8:11 PM 

The Senate voted 53-45 in bipartisan fashion Tuesday to confirm Judge Ana Isabel de Alba of 

Fresno County Superior Court to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360 : NJ Senate Judiciary Panel Approves 2 County Prosecutors , Nick Muscavage, 

June 21, 2022, 4:01 PM 

The New Jersey Senate Judiciary Committee has approved two nominees tapped by Gov. Phil 

Murphy for county prosecutor positions. [Continue Reading ]

WYOU-CBS (Scranton, PA): Biden’s candidate for PA Middle District U.S. Attorney sworn 

in, Justin Glowacki, June 21, 2022, 4:27 PM 

Gerard M. Karam was officially sworn in as the U.S. Attorney for the Middle District of 

Pennsylvania on Tuesday, June 21. President Biden nominated Gerard M. Karam to serve as the 

head of the office on April 22 and was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on June 13. Karam will 

replace John C. Gurganus who was selected as the interim United States Attorney in November 

2021. [Continue Reading ]

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

Law360 : Mohegan Chief Tapped As First Native U.S. Treasurer , Caleb Symons, June 21, 

2022, 1:08 PM 

President Joe Biden on Tuesday appointed the nation's first-ever Native American treasurer, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000431

tapping Mohegan Tribe Chief Lynn Malerba for a role that carries outsized visibility because of its 

signature on U.S. paper currency. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Marijuana Moment: State Marijuana Protections Not Included In Justice Department 

Funding Bill, Despite Lawmakers’ Pleas, Kyle Jaeger, June 21, 2022, 7:00 PM 

A much-anticipated congressional spending bill does not currently include provisions to protect all 

state, territory and tribal marijuana programs from Justice Department interference, despite pleas 

from dozens of bipartisan lawmakers. There were high hopes that such language could be 

attached to the base bill for the Fiscal Year 2023 appropriations for Commerce, Justice, Science, 

and Related Agencies (CJS) as introduced by congressional leaders. [Continue Reading ]

Marijuana Moment: Florida Official Awaits Justice Department’s Response To Medical 

Marijuana Patients’ Gun Rights Lawsuit This Week, Kyle Jaeger, June 21, 2022, 12:30 PM 

The Justice Department is due this week to respond to a marijuana lawsuit filed by Florida’s top 

agriculture official, who is also running as a Democratic gubernatorial candidate. The case 

concerns the constitutional rights of medical cannabis patients to purchase and possess firearms. 

Florida Agriculture Commissioner Nikki Fried spoke to Marijuana Moment about the case, how 

cannabis has played into her race for governor and the federal government’s drug testing policy 

for marijuana in a phone interview on Friday. [Continue Reading ]

OPIOID CRISIS 

WTKR-CBS (Norfolk, VA): Local pharmacy agrees to pay $125K civil penalty for alleged 

controlled substances record-keeping violations, Vincent Saglimbeni, June 21, 2022, 4:03 

PM 

A Newport News pharmacy has agreed to pay to settle claims of alleged record-keeping 

violations associated with controlled substances. Hidenwood Pharmacy, Inc., and its owner, Anne 

Hutchens, of Seaport, have agreed to pay $125,000 to settle civil penalty claims. The claims 

stem from alleged record-keeping violations associated with controlled substances. [Continue 

Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

Bloomberg: Biden to Call On Congress Wednesday to Pass Gas Tax Holiday , Jennifer 

Jacobs and Josh Wingrove, June 21, 2022, 6:13 PM 

President Joe Biden will call on Congress to enact a gasoline tax holiday, a person familiar with 

the plans says, as he looks to cool soaring pump prices heading into summer. Biden will make a

statement Wednesday calling on Congress to enact the pause, the person said, speaking on 

condition of anonymity ahead of an announcement. The White House did not immediately 

respond to a request for comment. [Continue Reading ] See also:  CNN , The Hill,  NBC , Reuters ,

USA Today 

Bloomberg Law: Biden’s New Regulatory Playbook Targets Climate, Opioids, Courtney 

Rozen, Andrea Vittorio, Ellen M. Gilmerat Pat Rizzuto, Ben Penn, Andrew Kreighbaum, June 21, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000432

## •••

2022, 4:13 PM 

President Joe Biden released his third regulatory to-do list Tuesday, detailing his ambitions to 

regulate consumer data use, treat opioid addiction, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The 

list, which includes more than 2,650 items, is the third of Biden’s presidency. It offers a window 

into how the administration plans to use federal agencies in the coming months to advance its 

priorities. Its impact potentially ripples from multinational corporations to local agencies and 

average citizens. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

WSJ: Senate Begins Debate of Bipartisan Gun Control Bill , Eliza Collins and Natalie 

Andrews, June 22, 2022, 12:42 AM 

The Senate began debate Tuesday on bipartisan legislation intended to curb gun violence, in 

what would represent the first major federal change to gun laws in decades. Senators easily 

cleared the simple majority threshold required to advance the package, 64-34; final passage will 

need at least 60 votes. Debate on the proposed legislation is expected to continue through the 

week. Lawmakers who worked on the bill said they hope to have it pass the Senate before the 

chamber breaks next week for a two-week recess. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg ,

CBS , The Hill , NBC , Reuters , USA Today , WaPo 

WAGA-Fox (Atlanta, GA): Marjorie Taylor Greene accuses Democrat's chief of staff of 

vandalizing her sign, says DOJ won't prosecute, Unattributed, June 21, 2022, 8:33 PM 

Georgia Congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene said she finally knows who is responsible for 

"attacks on my office and my Christian faith." She is calling on the Department of Justice to take 

action. The Republican who represents Georgia’s 14th Congressional District took to the floor of 

the House on Tuesday to present her evidence. [Continue Reading ]

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 21, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

The head of the Texas Department of Public Safety blasted the Uvalde school police 

chief’s response to the shooting, saying his response was a “failure” and that the attack 

could have been stopped within three minutes after the gunman entered the school. [ABC ,

CBS , NBC ]

Senate lawmakers say a tentative deal has been made on a bipartisan gun reform bill that 

would toughen federal gun laws and provide billions of dollars for school safety and mental 

health programs. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Election officials from Arizona and Georgia testified about the pressure campaign they felt 

from former President Trump and the threats they received after being falsely accused of 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000433

## ••

## •

## •

## •

## ••••

## •

fraud at the fourth Jan. 6 public hearing today. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The US State Department confirmed that 52-year-old Stephen Zabielski is the second 

American to be killed while fighting in Ukraine. An 8 year old boy was among at least 15 

people killed in Ukraine during a Russian attack on Kharkiv, which remains under constant 

shelling. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Hot temperatures turned tragic in Houston on Monday when Texas authorities say a 5-year -

old boy died after being left in a car as temperatures topped 100 degrees. [ABC , CBS ]

A plane's landing gear collapsed and caught fire when it touched down in Miami. There 

were 126 people on board. [ABC , CBS ]

The Supreme Court is breaking down the barrier between church and state in their latest 

ruling. Maine gives taxpayer money to families who live in areas that don’t have public high 

schools, but that public money is banned from being used in schools that offer religious 

instruction. [NBC ]

Certified Nursing Assistants have become the backbone to sustaining nursing homes since 

the start of the pandemic, but a recent survey shows 87% of providers are now facing 

shortages. [CBS ]

64-year-old Judy Huth accused Bill Cosby of sexually assaulting her in 1975 at the Playboy 

Mansion when she was 16 and Cosby was 37. In court, Cosby’s attorneys called her 

accusations “a complete and utter fabrication.” [NBC ]

Football player Deshaun Watson reportedly settled sexual misconduct lawsuits with 20 

women, according to the accusers’ lawyer. The attorney says four more women’s lawsuits 

are still moving forward. [NBC ]

With COVID vaccines now available for 20 million children under the age of 5, President 

Biden and the first lady visited a clinic in DC. where parents have been waiting for nearly a

year and a half to get their kids vaccinated. [CBS ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Hundreds Killed in Afghanistan Earthquake” [WSJ , NYT ’,  WaPo , LAT ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000434

## ••

“Trump’s pressure drew violence, threats to resistant officials, committee reveals” [WaPo , LAT ]

“Bipartisan Gun Bill Clears Initial Vote in Senate” [NYT , WaPo , LAT ]

“Investigators probing ‘deputy gang’ violence were told not to ask about Banditos, chief 

says” [LAT ]

END 

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject 

line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5048 01570-000435

From: K apper, Matthew B. (OAG) 

Subject:  Fwd: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Attorney General Garland 

To: (OAG) 

Sent: June 17, 2022 8:26 AM (UTC-04:00) 

Abbreviated clips coming soon. Full clips package in the meantime. 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From:  DOJ Digests <doj-digests@rendon.com> 

Date: June 17, 2022 at 6:53:32 AM EDT 

To:  DoJ-Digests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest Reply-To:  Rendon DOJ Alert Desk <dojdesk@rendon.com> 

# Department of Justice 

# Morning News Digest 

# June 17, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1. 

US Department of Justice News 

2. 

National Security 

3. 

Jan. 6 Hearings 

4. 

Criminal Law 

5. 

Civil Rights 

6. 

Civil Law 

7. 

Immigration & Border Security 

8. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000436

## •

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Antitrust 

Environment 

Tax 

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

Criminal Justice/Corrections 

US Supreme Court 

Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

Native American Affairs 

Marijuana Legalization 

Administration 

Congress 

Network Evening News Lineup 

Morning Headlines 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JUNE 17, 2022 

DOJ 

No scheduled events. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000437

Reuters : US and partners dismantle Russian hacking botnet: Justice Dept , Unattributed, 

June 16, 2022, 6:09 PM 

Law enforcement in the United States, Germany, the Netherlands and Britain dismantled a global 

network of internet-connected devices that had been hacked by Russian cyber criminals and 

used for malicious purposes, the US Justice Department said on Thursday (June 16). The 

network, known as the RSOCKS botnet, comprised millions of hacked computers and devices 

worldwide, including "Internet of Things" gadgets such as routers and smart garage openers, the 

department said in a statement. [Continue Reading ]

Reuters: VP Harris launches task force on online harassment after shootings, Alexandra 

Alper, June 16, 2022, 3:38 PM 

U.S.  Vice President Kamala Harris inaugurated a task force on Thursday to curb online 

harassment, fulfilling one of the Biden campaign's promises in the wake of a mass shooting that 

highlights a link between online abuse and violence. [...] Harris was joined on Thursday by 

Attorney General Merrick Garland, Surgeon General Vivek Murthy and tennis star Sloane 

Stephens, who publicized a torrent of angry messages she received on social media, including 

racist and sexist abuse, following her loss at the U.S. Open. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Fox ,

UPI , Washington Times 

WSJ: Charges Against Accused Buffalo Shooter Point to Alleged Act of Domestic 

Terrorism, Government Says , Sadie Gurman and Aruna Viswanatha, June 16, 2022, 6:29 PM 

Senior Justice Department officials said they viewed the killing of 10 people in a racist massacre 

at a Buffalo supermarket as an act of domestic terrorism after federal hate-crimes charges were 

brought against the suspect, saying they were relying on existing statutes amid a broader debate 

about whether new tools are needed to combat violent extremism. Payton Gendron, 18 years old, 

made his first appearance in federal court Thursday to face 26 counts of hate crimes and 

firearms offenses, including one that carries the potential penalty of death. The federal judge in 

the case urged prosecutors to decide promptly whether they intend to pursue a capital sentence. 

[Continue Reading ]

WSJ : A New Policy Is Making Corporate Compliance Chiefs Uneasy , Dylan Tokar, June 16, 

2022, 2:34 PM 

Compliance officers are worried that a new Justice Department policy, aimed at raising their 

stature within companies, will actually make their jobs harder and even leave them open to 

criminal prosecution. The policy, previewed by a senior Justice Department official in March, is 

meant to give compliance officers a voice and provide them with access to information and 

resources needed to guarantee that their company’s compliance program is effective. It was 

applied for the first time last month in a settlement agreement with commodities giant Glencore 

PLC. [Continue Reading] 

Guardian: Outrage at pay hike for Phoenix police under investigation over use of force, 

Ian Lopez, Allie Reed, June 17, 2022, 4:35 AM 

A bumper pay hike for Phoenix police has been condemned by community advocates who argue 

the money should be spent tackling the city’s extreme heat, homelessness and mental health 

crises. At a heated city council meeting on Wednesday, several public speakers questioned the 

$19.8m salary windfall given the continuing Department of Justice investigation into the city police 

department over allegations of excessive use of force, retaliation against Black Lives Matter 

protesters, discriminatory policing and inappropriate treatment of homeless and disabled people. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000438

[Continue Reading ]

Fox: Cotton: Garland must resign over DOJ inaction on Jane's Revenge, more than 50 

attacks on pro-life groups, Danielle Wallace, Kelly Laco, June 16, 2022, 4:25 PM 

Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Arkansas, said Thursday that U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland should 

resign over the Biden administration Justice Department’s inaction on more than 50 attacks on 

pro-life pregnancy centers and churches in recent weeks purportedly carried out by Jane’s 

Revenge. In a letter sent to Garland, Cotton, who is the ranking member for the subcommittee on 

Criminal Justice and Counterterrorism, the Intelligence Committee, and the Armed Services 

Committee, also called on the DOJ to investigate Jane’s Revenge as a "domestic terrorist 

organization." [Continue Reading ]

Fox: DOJ defended actions to protect justices in letter sent same day man arrested for 

trying to kill Kavanaugh, Tyler Olson, June 16, 2022, 3:58 PM 

The Justice Department defended its actions to protect Supreme Court justices' safety in a letter 

to the governors of Maryland and Virginia the same day an armed man was arrested near Justice 

Brett Kavanaugh’s home. The letter, dated June 8, is from Acting Assistant Attorney General 

Peter Hyun. It responds to a May 11 letter GOP Govs. Larry Hogan and Glenn Youngkin sent to 

Attorney General Merrick Garland demanding the Justice Department (DOJ) do more to protect 

the justices. [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: UK gov’t approves extradition of Assange; appeal possible, Unattributed, June 17, 

2022, 6:30 AM 

The British government has approved the extradition of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange to the 

United States to face spying charges. The government said Friday that Home Secretary Priti 

Patel had signed the extradition order. It follows a British court ruling that he could be sent to the 

U.S.  Home Secretary Priti Patel signed the order authorizing Assange’s extradition to the U.S., 

where he faces charges over WikiLeaks’ publication of a huge trove of classified documents. 

[Continue Reading ] See also: Bloomberg,  NYT , USA Today , WaPo 

Reuters: Nebraska man pleads guilty to making threats against election official, Sarah N. 

Lynch, June 16, 2022, 3:42 PM 

A Nebraska man pleaded guilty on Thursday to making threats against an election official, marking 

the third federal case brought by a U.S. Justice Department task force formed last year to 

address the rising tide of such threats. The Justice Department said that Travis Ford, 42, of 

Lincoln, wrote threatening posts on Instagram in August 2021 to an unnamed election official, 

asking: "Do you feel safe? You shouldn't... Your security detail is far too thin and incompetent to 

protect you." Threats against election workers and volunteers drastically increased before and 

after the November 2020 presidential election, spurred by former Republican President Donald 

Trump's repeated false claims that the election was stolen from him, which he continues to do 

without any evidence. Reuters published a series of investigative reports that documented more 

than 850 threats and menacing messages to U.S. election workers. [Continue Reading] See 

also : Axios, Bloomberg Law, Colorado Sun, Daily Beast, Durango Herald, KCNC-CBS (Denver, 

CO), KETV-ABC (Omaha, NB), KMGH-ABC (Denver, CO),  KUSA-NBC (Denver, CO) , Lincoln 

Journal Star (Lincoln, NB) , NBC , WaPo 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000439

Reuters: U.S. must decide if it seeks death penalty for Buffalo shooting, judge says, Sarah 

N.  Lynch and Jonathan Allen, June 16, 2022, 12:29 PM 

A federal judge on Thursday urged the Justice Department to decide promptly whether to seek 

the death penalty for a white man accused in the racially motivated shooting death of 10 Black 

people in Buffalo, New York last month. Payton Gendron, 18, is facing 26 counts of hate crimes 

and firearms offenses in a criminal complaint by the U.S. Justice Department stemming from the 

May 14 attack. A grand jury has not yet returned an indictment, and he has not yet entered a plea 

on the charges. [Continue Reading] See also:  ABC , Fox , KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA),  NBC ,

NY Daily News,  USA Today , WSJ 

LAT: Inside the MAGA world scramble to produce findings suggesting the 2020 election 

was stolen, Sarah D. Wire, June 17, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Days after the 2020 presidential election, before all votes were counted and Joseph R. Biden 

was declared the winner, cyber experts and analysts piled into suites at the Trump Hotel in 

Washington and other hotel rooms in the area. The plan was urgent: Crowdsource evidence of 

electoral fraud to secure a Trump victory with the assistance of his legal team and White House 

staff. [Continue Reading ]

NYT: YouTube deleted a Jan. 6 committee video that included Trump’s election lies, Nico 

Grant, June 16, 2022, 7:00 PM 

The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 riot has been trying to draw more eyes to its 

televised hearings by uploading clips of the proceedings online. But YouTube has removed one 

of those videos from its platform, saying the committee was advancing election misinformation. 

The excerpt, which was uploaded June 14, included recorded testimony from former Attorney 

General William P. Barr. But the problem for YouTube was that the video also included a clip of 

former President Donald J. Trump sharing lies about the election on the Fox Business channel. 

[Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Justice Dept. secures first guilty plea for threats to election workers, David 

Nakamura, June 16, 2022, 6:08 PM 

A Nebraska man pleaded guilty Thursday on charges that he threatened an election official over 

social media last year, marking the first conviction for a Justice Department task force charged 

with protecting poll workers. Federal authorities said Travis Ford, 42, of Lincoln, Neb., posted 

multiple hostile messages on an Instagram page associated with the official, who was not named 

in a Justice Department news release. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , KMGH-ABC 

(Denver, CO) , NBC , Washington Examiner 

CBS: Russian superyacht seized by U.S. docks in Hawaii, flying American flag, Graham 

Kates, June 16, 2022, 12:11 PM 

A Russian-owned superyacht seized in Fiji by American law enforcement which has been 

cracking down on sanctioned oligarchs docked in Honolulu Thursday. The Amadea was seized 

on June 7, following weeks of legal and administrative hurdles that had stalled American efforts to 

seize the $300 million vessel. The U.S. government says the luxe ship, which is nearly the length 

of a football field, is owned by sanctioned gold mining billionaire Suleiman Kerimov. An attorney 

for the ship's holding company says it belongs to a Russian oil executive who the U.S. has not 

sanctioned. [Continue Reading ] See also:  The Hill , KHON-Fox/CW- (Honolulu, HI) 

Washington Times: House Republicans plan probe of jail conditions, Justice Department 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000440

treatment of Jan. 6 defendants, Mica Soellner, June 16, 2022, 7:00 PM 

House Republicans plan to launch an investigation, if they win a majority in November, into the jail 

conditions of those being held on charges related to the Jan. 6 riot. Lawmakers have said there is 

a double standard in how inmates charged in connection to the riot are being treated and alleging 

a political motivation for the treatment. [Continue Reading] 

Politico: Key Trump lawyer sought presidential pardon after effort to overturn election 

failed, Robert Barnes and Ann E. Marimow, June 16, 2022, 3:18 PM 

Days after he mounted a failed attempt to pressure Vice President Mike Pence to overturn the 

2020 election, attorney John Eastman asked Rudy Giuliani to help him get on Donald Trump’s list 

for a presidential pardon, according to an email revealed by the Jan. 6 select committee on 

Thursday. “I’ve decided that I should be on the pardon list, if that is still in the works,” Eastman 

wrote to Giuliani in the email. [Continue Reading ]

Politico: The Guilfoyle email that illustrates Cheney's pre-Jan. 6 assistance to Trump 

World, Betsy Woodruff Swan, June 16, 2022, 4:30 AM 

It reads like a time capsule from an alternate universe: Kimberly Guilfoyle, a card-carrying Trump 

World insider, heaping praise upon Rep. Liz Cheney for helping the former president’s reelection. 

In a previously unreported email obtained by POLITICO, Guilfoyle the former Fox News host 

now engaged to Donald Trump’s elder son thanked the Wyoming Republican for supporting 

Trump’s 2020 bid as a “congressional co-captain” and asked her to do more. “I wanted to start 

off by saying a big thank you for your $10,000 contribution to DJTFP and for your continued 

support for the President,” Guilfoyle, who was national chair of the Trump Victory Finance 

Committee at the time, wrote to Cheney on April 30, 2020. [Continue Reading ]

KAIT-ABC/NBC/CW (Jonesboro, AR): Former professor sentenced for 1 year in federal 

prison for lying to FBI agent, Alexandra Alper, June 16, 2022, 9:28 PM 

A former University of Arkansas professor was met with a one-year sentence in federal prison 

after being accused of lying to an FBI special agent. On Thursday, June 16, Dr. Simon Saw-Teong Ang, 65, was given the sentence in the Western District of Arkansas Federal Court in 

Fayetteville. [Continue Reading ] See also:  KFSM-CBS (Fort Smith, AR) 

JAN. 6 HEARINGS 

AP: Jan. 6 takeaways: ‘Heated’ Trump, Pence’s near miss with mob, Mary Clare Jalonick, 

Eric Tucker and Kevin Freking, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

The House committee investigating the Capitol insurrection used its latest public hearing on 

Thursday to focus on the pressure that then-President Donald Trump put on his vice president, 

Mike Pence, to delay or reject the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory on Jan. 6, 2021. 

The committee is trying to show how that pressure incited an angry mob to lay siege to the 

Capitol that day. Pence, presiding over the certification in the vice president’s traditional 

ceremonial role, did not give in. [Continue Reading] See also : Bloomberg,  NYT , USA Today ,

WaPo 

AP: 1/6 panel: Pence rejecting Biden win would be ‘un-American’, Lisa Mascaro and Mary 

Clare Jalonick, June 16, 2022, 2:00 PM 

The 1/6 committee on Thursday plunged into Donald Trump’s last-ditch efforts to salvage the 

2020 election by pressuring Vice President Mike Pence to defy historical precedent and reject 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000441

the electoral count in the run-up to the U.S. Capitol riot. With two witnesses Thursday, including 

Pence’s counsel, the House panel is making a case that Trump’s false claims of a fraudulent 

election left him grasping for alternatives as courts turned back dozens of lawsuits challenging the 

vote [Continue Reading ]

AP: Jan. 6 panel sends letter asking Ginni Thomas to testify, Mary Clare Jalonick and 

Farnoush Amiri, June 16, 2022, 1:00 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the Capitol has asked 

Virginia Thomas, the wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, for an interview, the 

panel’s chairman said Thursday afternoon. Thomas, a conservative activist, communicated with 

people in President Donald Trump’s orbit ahead of the attack and also on the day of the 

insurrection, when hundreds of Trump’s supporters violently stormed the Capitol and interrupted 

the certification of Joe Biden’s victory. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WaPo 

NYT, The Daily: [AUDIO] What the Jan. 6 Hearings Have Revealed So Far , June 17, 2022, 

6:00  AM 

The House committee that was tasked with scrutinizing the events surrounding the attack at the 

U.S.  Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021 is holding a series of public hearings. Testimony from key figures 

has explored a campaign by former President Donald J. Trump and his allies to subvert American 

democracy and cling to power by reversing an election. The panel has recounted how Mr. 

Trump’s actions brought the United States to the brink of a constitutional crisis. [Listen] 

LAT: [LETTERS TO THE EDITOR] The Jan. 6 committee can’t let itself be turned into 

another Mueller report , June 17, 2022, 6:00 AM 

To the editor: I think it would be a huge mistake for the House Jan. 6 committee not to 

recommend that the U.S. Department of Justice file criminal charges against those responsible 

for the insurrection. (“How I learned to stop worrying and love the Jan. 6 committee,” Opinion, 

June 14) Refusing to recommend charges raises the question of why so much time and money 

were spent investigating this. Some say the purpose of the committee is to inform people about 

the facts of what happened. That’s fine, but does anyone really think former President Trump’s 

far-right followers will change their minds? [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg: Proud Boys Case Stalled Without Jan. 6 Panel Records, DOJ Says , Chris 

Strohm, June 16, 2022, 9:29 PM 

The Congressional Jan. 6 select committee’s failure to share transcripts of its interviews has led 

the Justice Department to delay prosecuting two members of the Proud Boys who stormed the 

Capitol. In a court filing Thursday, federal prosecutors in Washington agreed to put on hold the 

cases against Proud Boys Joseph Biggs and Dominic Pezzola, who have both pleaded not guilty. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : WaPo 

NYT: For Mike Pence, Jan. 6 Began Like Many Days. It Ended Like No Other , Annie Karni 

and Maggie Haberman, June 16, 2022, 9:00 PM 

He started the day with a prayer. Vice President Mike Pence, preparing to withstand the final 

stage of a relentless campaign by President Donald J. Trump to force him to illegally try to 

overturn the results of the 2020 election, began Jan. 6, 2021, surrounded by aides at his official 

residence at the Naval Observatory, asking God for guidance. The group was expecting a difficult 

day. But what followed over the next 12 hours was more harrowing than they imagined. [Continue 

Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000442

WaPo: John Eastman says Ginni Thomas invited him to speak on ‘election litigation’ ,

Emma Brown, Jacqueline Alemany and Josh Dawsey, June 16, 2022, 7:39 PM 

John Eastman, the lawyer who played a key role in efforts to pressure Vice President Mike Pence 

to overturn the 2020 election, confirmed Thursday that the wife of Supreme Court Justice 

Clarence Thomas invited him a month after the election to speak at a meeting she was helping to 

organize. Eastman’s disclosure came a day after The Washington Post reported that the House 

select committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol had obtained email 

correspondence between him and Virginia “Ginni” Thomas, a conservative activist and staunch 

supporter of former president Donald Trump [Continue Reading ] See also : Bloomberg , NYT 

WSJ: Witnesses Lay Out How Pence Resisted Pressure to Block 2020 Election Results ,

Siobhan Hughes and Scott Patterson, June 16, 2022, 6:47 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol heard testimony 

Thursday about how then-President Donald Trump’s efforts to persuade Vice President Mike 

Pence to block Joe Biden’s win led to a heated exchange between the two men the morning of 

the riot and prompted a pardon request from the architect of Mr. Trump’s plan. [Continue 

Reading ]

LAT: Jan. 6 committee will cooperate with Justice Department ‘in due time,’ chairman 

says, Anumita Kaur, June 16, 2022, 6:36 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol received a formal 

request by the Department of Justice to share copies of its witness interviews, which the 

committee will do “in due time,” chairman Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.) said Thursday. “We 

can’t stop our work because someone writes us a letter,” Thompson said following the panel’s 

third hearing on the Capitol insurrection. “Now, we will cooperate with them, but the committee has 

its own timetable.” [Continue Reading ]

NYT: A Justice Department inquiry into alternate electors is focusing on Trump lawyers., 

Alan Feuer, Katie Benner and Luke Broadwater, June 16, 2022, 3:30 PM 

The Justice Department has been pursuing a criminal investigation into the creation of alternate 

slates of pro-Trump electors seeking to overturn Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s victory in the 2020 

election, with a particular focus on a team of lawyers that worked on behalf of President Donald J. 

Trump, according to people familiar with the matter. A federal grand jury in Washington issued 

subpoenas this year to people linked to the alternate elector plan, requesting information about 

several lawyers including Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani and one of his chief 

legal advisers, John Eastman, one of the people said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg ,

CNN , LAT , NBC , Politico 

NYT: Justice Department accuses Jan. 6 committee of refusing to share transcripts., 

Katie Benner, June 16, 2022, 3:30 PM 

The Justice Department accused the House committee investigating Jan. 6 of hampering the 

federal criminal investigation into the attack by refusing to share interview transcripts with 

prosecutors, according to a person familiar with the matter. The person, who was not authorized 

to speak on the record, said the Justice Department sent a two-page letter to the committee on 

Wednesday that renewed its request for transcripts of the committee’s more than 1,000 witness 

interviews related to actions undertaken by former President Donald J. Trump and his allies to 

unlawfully overturn the 2020 election results as well as the attack on Congress by a pro-Trump 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000443

mob. The letter was earlier reported by Insider. The committee conducted the interviews for this 

month’s public hearings on the matter, but it has no authority to charge anyone involved in the 

attack on Congress. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , Bloomberg , Forbes , Fox , Guardian ,

The Hill , Insider , NBC , NPR , Politico 

CNN: Jan. 6 panel sends request to Ginni Thomas after she says she looks 'forward to 

talking', Shawna Mizelle and Tierney Sneed, June 16, 2022, 10:10 PM 

House January 6 committee Chair Bennie Thompson on Thursday said the panel investigating the 

US Capitol attack has sent a letter to Virginia "Ginni" Thomas asking her to speak with them about 

her role in the effort to overturn the 2020 electoral results. Thomas, a conservative activist and the 

wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, appears open to speaking with the committee, 

telling conservative outlet The Daily Caller that she "can't wait to clear up misconceptions." 

[Continue Reading ]

CNN: Charging Trump for fundraising off election lies would face high bar, experts say, 

Katelyn Polantz and Kara Scannell, June 16, 2022, 11:30 AM 

While the House January 6 committee is making its case to the American public that then-President Donald Trump ripped off donors with false fundraising pitches after the 2020 election, 

prosecutors would face higher hurdles if they were to pursue a criminal fraud case in court. "Is it a

grift? Yeah, it's a grift. But is a grift always illegal? Not necessarily," said Paul Pelletier, a former 

federal prosecutor who previously led the Justice Department's fraud section. One state attorney 

general, New York's Letitia James, has already said she will investigate the committee's 

allegations of fraud and potential misconduct. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Post-Watergate reforms may frame DOJ decision over prosecuting Trump, John 

Kruzel, June 17, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The break-in at the Watergate complex 50 years ago this week led to a sweeping government 

ethics overhaul that included a push to insulate the Department of Justice (DOJ) from politics. In 

a historical twist, this nearly half-century-old corrective may help frame the DOJ’s fraught decision 

over whether to criminally charge former President Trump for his effort to overturn the 2020 

election results. [Continue Reading ]

NPR, Up First: [AUDIO] January 6 Takeaways, Long Covid, Student Loan Poll , June 17, 

2022, 5:48 AM 

A recap of the 3rd hearing by the House Jan. 6 panel (1:29). There's a bit of good news coming 

out of research into long COVID (5:07). And Americans support student loan forgiveness, but 

would rather rein in costs (8:57). [Listen ]

Washington Examiner: [EDITORIAL] The existential threat to the Jan. 6 committee’s 

credibility, Luis Barrio, June 17, 2022, 12:01 AM 

“January 6th and the lies that led to insurrection have put 2 1/2 centuries of constitutional 

democracy at risk,” House Jan. 6 committee Chairman Bennie Thompson (D-MS) said in his 

opening statement last Thursday. “In this moment, when the dangers to our Constitution and our 

democracy loom large, nothing could be more important.” Well, nothing except trying to improve 

the chance of Democrats maintaining control of Congress, apparently. [Continue Reading] 

NPR: Committee deadlocks on Biden's pick to lead firearms agency, Carrie Johnson, June 

16, 2022, 11:31 AM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000444

The Senate Judiciary Committee has deadlocked 11-11 along party lines on the nomination of 

Steve Dettelbach to lead the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Democrats 

can still advance the nomination to the full Senate using procedural moves, and three key 

lawmakers Joe Manchin of West Virginia, Angus King of Maine and John Tester of Montana 

say they support his nomination. Dettelbach would be the first Senate confirmed ATF director in 

seven years. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

AP : Avenatti pleads guilty to fraud, tax charges in California , Amy Taxin, June 16, 2022, 

5:00  PM 

Incarcerated lawyer Michael Avenatti pleaded guilty Thursday to four counts of wire fraud and a

tax-related charge in a federal court case in Southern California accusing him of cheating his 

clients out of millions of dollars. Avenatti, who is in federal custody and representing himself in the 

case, made the plea during a court hearing in Santa Ana where he acknowledged cheating his 

clients but disagreed with federal prosecutors on how much. [Continue Reading ] See also : ABC ,

CBS , CNN , NBC , Reuters , UPI 

AP : Missouri man pleads guilty in catalytic converter thefts , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 

4:25  PM 

A Missouri man pleaded guilty Thursday to participating in a scheme that transported tens of 

thousands of stolen catalytic converters across state lines as part of a multi-million business. 

Federal prosecutors said Evan Marshall, 24, of Rogersville, pleaded guilty to transporting stolen 

property across state lines. Marshall becomes the sixth of seven people indicted in the 

conspiracy to plead guilty. The five others who have pleaded from Springfield or Rogersville. 

[Continue Reading ]

NYT : A Businessman Is Acquitted in a Georgetown Admissions Trial , Anemona Hartocollis, 

June 16, 2022, 7:03 PM 

A wealthy businessman accused of bribing his daughter’s way into Georgetown University as a

tennis player was acquitted on all counts Thursday by a federal jury in Boston, the first not-guilty 

verdict related to the government’s Varsity Blues investigation into corrupt college admissions. 

The businessman, Amin Khoury, was accused of giving $180,000 in cash to Gordon Ernst, 

Georgetown’s tennis coach, to facilitate his daughter’s recruitment to the team and admission to 

the university, even though she was not a Georgetown-caliber player. The cash went through a

middleman, delivered in a paper bag, according to prosecutors. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Ark. Prof Gets 1 Year For Lying To FBI About China Patents , Jack Queen, June 

16, 2022, 5:33 PM 

A former University of Arkansas chemical engineering professor targeted in a controversial 

Trump-era counterespionage initiative was sentenced to a year and a day in prison Thursday for 

lying to the FBI about patents he held in China. [Continue Reading ] See also : KAIT-ABC 

(Jonesboro, AR) , KFSM-CBS (Fort Smith, AR) 

NY Post: California hacker gets 9 years in prison for stealing thousands of nudes, David 

Propper, June 16, 2022, 10:39 PM 

A California man who hacked into thousands of iCloud accounts to swipe nudes of young women 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000445

was sentenced Thursday to nine years behind bars, federal prosecutors announced. Hao Kuo 

Chi, who dubbed himself “icloudripper4you,” stole private photos and videos by illegally 

breaching into the Apple accounts, according to the US Attorney’s Office for the Central District 

of Florida. [Continue Reading ]

Register Citizen (Torrington, CT): Feds: Hartford man pleads guilty to illegally having gun 

at Manchester hookah lounge , Liz Hardaway, June 16, 2022, 9:00 PM 

A Hartford man pleaded guilty to illegal gun possession Wednesday after he pointed a gun at 

someone outside of a Manchester hookah lounge, according to federal prosecutors. The incident 

took place on July 24, 2021. U.S. Attorney Vanessa Roberts Avery said when police arrived on 

the scene, Michael Jones, 25, of Hartford, attempted to flee and got rid of the firearm in the 

lounge’s back parking lot. [Continue Reading ]

Miami Herald: Miami man charged with manslaughter in 2020 Bimini boat crash that 

killed couple , Jay Weaver and David Ovalle, June 16, 2022, 8:16 PM 

Over the Fourth of July holiday weekend two years ago, a young Miami couple were passengers 

on a motorboat when it crashed at high speed into a rock formation off the coast of Bimini, 

Bahamas. Javier Perez, 29, was found on the jagged rock, but Carolyn Alvarez, 26, disappeared 

into the dark water. On Thursday, federal prosecutors charged the Miami man at the helm of the 

boat, Josbel Fernandez Echevarria, 36, with two counts of involuntary manslaughter in the deaths 

of Perez and Alvarez. [Continue Reading] 

Sacramento Bee : West Sacramento man pleads guilty to stealing hundreds of identities 

in mail fraud scheme , Amelia Davidson, June 16, 2022, 6:27 PM 

A West Sacramento man pleaded guilty Thursday to mail fraud and aggravated identity theft, after 

authorities discovered a scheme involving hundreds of stolen identification materials, as well as 

forged licenses, credit cards and checkbooks. Philip Rich, 49, may face up to 20 years of prison 

time after authorities discovered an elaborate identity theft scheme he carried out, allegedly with a

co-defendant Kimberly Acevedo. [Continue Reading ]

Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale, FL): Delray Beach man gets 14 years in prison for $20 

million Medicare fraud scheme, tax evasion , Ron Hurtibise, June 16, 2022, 6:44 PM 

A Delray Beach businessman was sentenced to 14 years in prison for marketing unnecessary 

tests and products to Medicare beneficiaries and defrauding the government-run health insurance 

system out of more than $20 million. Marc Sporn, 59, ran the scam through numerous Palm 

Beach County companies that he founded and used his company accounts to purchase luxury 

items such as high-end watches and diamond jewelry, classic and exotic cars, and two yachts, 

according to a news release by the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of Florida. 

[Continue Reading ]

Hartford Courant: Feds: A Connecticut drug dealer has to forfeit about $165,000 in jewelry 

and a Mercedes , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 6:31 PM 

A Hamden man was sentenced to seven years in prison Thursday for fentanyl distribution 

offenses, according to federal authorities. Darryl Small, 34, also must serve five years of 

supervised release, according to federal authorities. [Continue Reading ]

Pioneer Press (Saint Paul, MN): Former Stillwater prison guard, inmate indicted on meth 

distribution scheme , Nick Ferraro, June 16, 2022, 6:28 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000446

A guard at Minnesota Correctional Facility-Stillwater was in a romantic relationship with an inmate 

serving a murder sentence and together they ran a methamphetamine operation inside the prison 

for at least the first three months of this year, according to federal charges. A grand jury this week 

indicted former corrections officer Faith Rose Gratz, 24, of St. Paul, and inmate Axel Rene 

Kramer, 35, on federal charges for their alleged roles in a drug distribution scheme that was 

carried out at the state’s largest high-security prison from at least January until early April. 

[Continue Reading ] See also: KMSP-Fox (Minneapolis, MN),  Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN) 

Atlanta Journal-Constitution: Alleged gang members indicted by feds after bodies found at 

Gwinnett storage unit , Caroline Silva, June 16, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Five alleged gang members were indicted on murder and federal racketeering charges in 

connection with three North Georgia deaths in 2018 and 2019, officials said Wednesday. Philmon 

Deshawn Chambers, 33, of Atlanta; Lesley Chappell Green, 34, of Stone Mountain; Robert 

Maurice Carlisle, 33, of Lithonia; Shabazz Larry Guidry, 27, of Decatur; and Andrea Paige 

Browner, 27, of Athens were each indicted on charges of murder and the Racketeer Influenced 

and Corruption Organizations (RICO) Act, said Melissa Hodges, the spokeswoman for the U.S. 

Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of Georgia.. [Continue Reading ]

Erie News Now (Erie, PA): Harborcreek Man Pleads Guilty to Sending Ammunition to 

Netherlands, Possession of Destruction Devices, Savannah Young, June 16, 2022, 5:57 PM 

A Harborcreek man has pleaded guilty to sending ammunition out of the country and possession 

of destructive devices, the U.S. Department of Justice announced Thursday. Donald Witherow, 

48, entered the plea to charges of violating federal laws for smuggling goods from the United 

States and possessing unregistered firearms. [Continue Reading ]

Wyoming Tribune Eagle (Laramie County, WY): Wyoming man accused of trafficking 

fentanyl within 1,000 feet of a school, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A federal grand jury has indicted a Cheyenne man suspected of trafficking fentanyl within 1,000 

feet of a school, the U.S. Attorney's Office for Wyoming said Thursday. Robert Butler has been 

charged with possession with intent to distribute fentanyl within 1,000 feet of an elementary 

school and possession with intent to distribute cocaine. [Continue Reading ]

Las Vegas Review-Journal: Man gets prison for credit card scheme, Vegas ticket 

purchases , Glenn Puit, June 16, 2022, 4:44 PM 

A California man who stole credit card numbers and used them to purchase some $500,000 

worth of tickets for events in Las Vegas was sentenced this week to five years in prison. Carl 

Dewain Jefferson, 36, admitted to fraudulently obtaining over 700 credit card numbers from 

people by using “unauthorized access devices” from 2014 to 2015, according to a Nevada U.S. 

attorney’s office press release. [Continue Reading ] See also : KLAS-CBS (Las Vegas, NV) 

Hartford Courant : West Hartford man found guilty of drug trafficking in heroin case ,

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:38 PM 

A 37-year old West Hartford man was convicted of trafficking in heroin at the conclusion of a trial 

Thursday before a federal judge. Dwayne Thompson was charged with an associate, Jose 

Carrasquillo, for arranging to buy a distribution quantity of heroin. Federal prosecutors said the 

two agreed to buy more than six pounds of heroin for nearly $130,000 from an undercover law 

enforcement officer posing as a heroin wholesaler. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000447

KAYS (Hays, KS): 20 Mexican nationals accused in Kansas City heroin, meth conspiracy ,

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Twenty Mexican nationals are among 39 defendants indicted by a federal grand jury for their roles 

in a $4.7 million conspiracy to distribute more than 335 kilograms of methamphetamine and 22 

kilograms of heroin over the past two years, according to the United State's Attorney. “This 

operation took a significant amount of illegal drugs off the street, and disrupted a large Mexican 

drug-trafficking organization in the Kansas City metropolitan area,” said U.S. Attorney Teresa 

Moore. [Continue Reading ] See also : KSHB-NBC (Kansas City, MO) , WDAF-Fox (Kansas City, 

MO) 

Houston Chronicle (Houston, TX): Houston drug smuggler's destination was the Galleria, 

feds say, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 12:00 PM 

A Houston man who said he was supposed to smuggle 10 pounds of fentanyl hidden in the 

battery of his SUV to someone waiting at the Galleria was sentenced Thursday to federal prison, 

authorities said. Juan Alvarado-Vargas, 22, pleaded guilty in April to conspiracy to possess with 

the intent to distribute fentanyl, about six months after he was stopped at a South Texas 

checkpoint, federal authorities said. [Continue Reading] 

WSMV-NBC (Nashville, TN): Columbia man faces federal charges after running over 

Franklin officer, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 9:03 PM 

A Columbia man accused of running over a Franklin Police officer during a traffic stop now faces 

federal charges, according to the U.S. Attorney’s office. A federal indictment unsealed on 

Wednesday charges Roy Gene Nicholson III, 26, with drug distribution and firearm charges, U.S. 

Attorney Mark H. Wildasin said. Nicholson was charged with possession of marijuana with intent to 

distribute and possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime. He was arrested 

Wednesday by the United States Marshals Service and is in federal custody. [Continue Reading ]

WATE-ABC (Knoxville, TN): Jefferson County woman sentenced on child porn charges, 

Savannah Young, June 16, 2022, 8:45 PM 

Jefferson County woman sentenced to over 21 years in prison for production and potential 

distribution of child pornography. On Thursday, Shana Coffey, 42, of Jefferson City was 

sentenced to serve 262 months in federal prison for producing and attempting to distribute child 

pornography, followed by a lifetime on supervised release. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WBIR -

NBC (Knoxville, TN), WVLT-CBS (Knoxville, TN) 

KTVQ-CBS (Billings, MT): Billings man sentenced to minimum of 27 years for drugs and 

human trafficking , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:35 PM 

A Billings man faces at least 27 years in federal prison after he was convicted Thursday of 

multiple drug and human-trafficking crimes, according to U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich. Angelo 

Corey Stackhouse, 52, was found guilty of all crimes in a bench trial by U.S. District Judge Susan 

P.  Watters. [Continue Reading] 

KOLO-ABC (Reno, NV): Four arrested in investigation into South Lake Tahoe drugs ,

Steve Timko, June 16, 2022, 8:25 PM 

Federal authorities arrested four people Thursday on suspicion of trafficking in heroin and 

methamphetamine around South Lake Tahoe, the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Sacramento 

announced. They arrested Sarah Anderson, 32, Fabian Gomez, 33, Epifanio Ramirez, 47, and 

Joaleen Rogers, 53, all of South Lake Tahoe as part of Operation Bear Trap. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000448

WMAR-ABC (Baltimore, MD): Baltimore man pleads guilty to attempted armed robbery 

while on supervised release , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:16 PM 

A Baltimore man faces a maximum sentence of 20 years after pleading guilty to an attempted 

armed robbery while on supervised release from prison. Larry Haynes, 25, pleaded guilty to 

attempting to rob a Baltimore convenience store on January 21, 2021. According to documents, 

the clerk refused to comply with Haynes' demand before he showed the clerk a gun in his 

waistband. [Continue Reading] 

KECI-NBC (Missoula, MT): Former East Helena police chief sentenced for distributing 

child pornography , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:00 PM 

East Helena's former chief of police was sentenced for distributing child pornography through 

social media, according to U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich. William Daly Harrington, 43, pleaded 

guilty in December to distribution of child pornography and is sentenced to five years and six 

months in prison, followed by five years of supervised release and a $7,500 fine. [Continue 

Reading ]

KARE-NBC (Minneapolis, MN): Twin Cities house flipper pleads guilty to defrauding 

Minnesotans out of nearly $3.2 million , Connor O'Neal, June 16, 2022, 7:17 PM 

A Twin Cities house-flipper pleaded guilty Thursday to defrauding more than $3 million out of 

Minnesota homeowners. Suzanne Griffiths, 46, is accused of executing a fraud scheme from 

2018 through December 2020 where she promised individuals who invested in her house-flipping 

businesses that there would be repayment in return for up-front investments, according to court 

documents. [Continue Reading] 

WTEN-ABC (Albany, NY): Man sentenced for traveling to meet minor for sex, Richard 

Roman, June 16, 2022, 6:52 PM 

A man from Maine has been sentenced for child pornography and attempting to meet a local 

minor for sex. United States Attorney Carla B. Freedman said that Jay Scott Cloutier, 58, of 

Lyman, Maine was sentenced to 15 years and 6 months in prison for child exploitation offenses. 

As part of his guilty plea, Cloutier admits that between April 2019 and September 2019, he 

exchanged sexual explicit text messages in an attempt to entice a minor into engaging in sexual 

acts with him. [Continue Reading ]

WNCN-CBS (Goldsboro, NC): NC drug trafficker who stashed cocaine, heroin in car ‘trap’ 

during trips from Atlanta gets 17 years in prison, Joedy McCreary, June 16, 2022, 6:34 PM 

A North Carolina man who hid several kilograms of cocaine and heroin in his car while driving from 

Atlanta to Pitt County will spend more than 17 years in prison, federal prosecutors say. The U.S. 

Department of Justice said Alterick Wallisima Boyd of Winterville on Thursday was sentenced to 

210 months in prison. [Continue Reading ]

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): Pima County judge sentences woman to nine years for 

importing meth , Caleb J. Fernández, June 16, 2022, 6:33 PM 

U.S.  District Judge John C. Hinderaker has sentenced Connie Sue Lorenzo-Molina, 30, of Slater, 

Mo. to nine years in prison. Lorenzo-Molina received her sentence Tuesday after pleading guilty 

to importation of methamphetamine. Public Affairs Officer Esther Winne says the 30-year-old's 

sentence includes five years of supervision upon release. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000449

WJZ-CBS (Baltimore, MD): Baltimore Man, 21, Faces Federal Charges In Brutal Death Of 

Alleged Drug Trafficker Held For Ransom, Court Docs Say , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 

6:13  PM 

A Baltimore man faces federal charges in the death of an alleged drug trafficker from California 

who was kidnapped and held for ransom before he was shot and set on fire, according to court 

documents. Ziyon Thompson, 21, is charged with use of a firearm resulting in death in relation to 

a drug trafficking crime, interference with commerce by extortion, drug conspiracy and related 

charges. [Continue Reading] 

KCBD-NBC (Lubbock, TX): Boukamp convicted on all charges after traveling to engage in 

sex with 14-year-old Lubbock girl, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 6:03 PM 

A 22-year-old Michigan man has been found guilty on multiple charges after traveling to engage in 

sexual conduct with a 14-year-old girl from Lubbock. Thomas John Boukamp fired six attorneys 

and chose to represent himself in the trial, which concluded on Thursday. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  KFYO-AM (Lubbock, TX) 

WFOR-CBS (Miami, FL): Coral Springs police officer accused of using COVID relief funds 

to repair vintage car , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:57 PM 

A Coral Springs police officer has found himself on the wrong side of the law. Jason Scott Carter 

is accused of falsely applying for and using COVID relief funds. Federal prosecutors said the 44 -

year-old from Boca Raton "submitted a fraudulent Economic Injury Disaster Loan ("EIDL") 

application and loan agreement on behalf of Jason S. Carter, Inc., a South Florida business he 

allegedly owned and operated." [Continue Reading ] See also : Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale, 

FL) , WTVJ-NBC (Miami, FL) 

WNCN-CBS (Goldsboro, NC): Wake County man sentenced to 11+ years for child porn, 

Department of Justice says , Kathryn Hubbard, June 16, 2022, 4:59 PM 

A Holly Springs man was sentenced Wednesday to more than 11 years in prison and 20 years of 

supervised release for receipt of child pornography, federal officials said. Ryan Evers, 28, pled 

guilty to the charge in March 2021. In Sept. 2018, Evers was communicating with a child through 

social media, according to court documents. Evers discussed wanting to have sexual intercourse 

with the child and court documents said he encouraged the minor to send explicit images to him. 

[Continue Reading ]

KVIA-ABC (El Paso, TX): Federal officials: El Paso man pleads guilty to receiving child 

pornography, David Gonzalez, June 16, 2022, 4:46 PM 

A 29-year-old El Paso man pleaded guilty this week to receiving and distributing a visual depiction 

involving the sexual exploitation of a minor, according to federal officials. Investigators say Kevin 

Holguin-Cano faces 20 years in prison. No scheduled date has been set. [Continue Reading ] See 

also:  KDBC-CBS (El Paso, TX) , KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX) 

Patch (Merrimack, NH): Merrimack Man Accused Of Lying On Form, Buying Guns For 

Another Person , Tony Schinella, June 16, 2022, 4:38 PM 

A man from Merrimack faces a felony charge in U.S. District Court after being indicted by a grand 

jury. Leith Sukkar, 22, of Merrimack was arrested in Manchester on Thursday on a single count of 

false statement during the acquisition of a firearm. He was due to be arraigned in U.S. District 

Court in Concord today. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000450

WBAL-NBC (Baltimore, MD): Pain clinic's medical director pleads guilty in federal 

oxycodone case , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:34 PM 

A doctor pleaded guilty Thursday to distributing and dispensing oxycodone at a pain management 

office in Towson where he was Medical Director and part owner. Norman Rosen, 84, of Towson, 

served as the medical director and part-owner of Rosen-Hoffberg Rehabilitation and Pain 

Management, federal prosecutors said. [Continue Reading ]

KMOV-CBS (St. Louis, MO): Man gets 10 years in prison for selling drugs to undercover 

DEA agent , Matt Woods, June 16, 2022, 4:32 PM 

St. Louis County man Bryant Taylor was sentenced to a decade in prison Thursday for selling 

oxycodone, heroin and fentanyl to an undercover DEA agent in 2019. Taylor was also found in 

March of 2020 with fentanyl and cocaine in his car. He was arrested in October of that year and 

found with fentanyl, $12,000 in cash and multiple guns. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): St. Paul man sentenced for COVID fraud scheme ,

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:41 PM 

A St. Paul man has been sentenced to more than six years in prison for a COVID-19 fraud 

scheme. The U.S. Attorney’s Office says 33-year-old Kyle William Brenizer owned and managed 

True-Cut Construction in Brooklyn Park. On May 1, 2020, he submitted a false and misleading 

Paycheck Protection Program application for True-Cut, seeking $841,000. [Continue Reading ]

WCYB-NBC/CW (Bristol, VA): Richlands salon owner received nearly $30K in fraudulent 

COVID-19 unemployment funds: DOJ, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A Richlands hair and nail salon owner pleaded guilty after receiving nearly $30,000 in fraudulent 

COVID-19 unemployment funds, according to the U.S. Department of Justice. Mandi Dawn 

Hammond, 36, pleaded guilty to one count of fraud in connection with a major disaster or 

emergency benefits program and one count of mail fraud. [Continue Reading ]

WMUR-ABC (Manchester, NH): New Hampshire man faces possession of machine gun 

charge , KC Downey, June 16, 2022, 2:22 PM 

A New Hampshire man was indicted by a federal grand jury this week on a charge of possession 

of a machine gun, officials with the office of the U.S. attorney for the District of New Hampshire 

announced on Thursday. Kyle Morris, 22, of Salem, possessed two machine guns "in violation of 

federal law" on Feb. 16, officials said. In February, FBI agents executed a search warrant in 

connection with this case. See raw video from the scene of the investigation in the video player 

above. [Continue Reading ]

WCMH-NBC (Columbus, OH): Dublin man pleads guilty to using hidden camera to 

produce child pornography, Joe Clark, June 16, 2022, 2:02 PM 

A Dublin man is facing up to 30 years in prison after pleading guilty to federal charges of 

producing and possessing child pornography. Timothy W. Wright, 50, admitted to using a hidden 

camera in his bathroom to produce child pornography, as well as paying three minors at least 

$300 for nude photos, according to Kenneth Parker, U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of 

Ohio. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Minneapolis man sentenced to 22 years for illegal gun 

possession , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:25 PM 

A Minneapolis man has been sentenced to more than two decades in prison for illegal gun 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000451

possession. The U.S. Attorney’s Office says 60-year-old Gregory Lynn McCoy was sentenced 

Thursday to more than 22 years (272 months) in prison, followed by five years of supervised 

release. Prosecutors say law enforcement was told by a confidential informant that McCoy who 

has multiple prior felony convictions had a gun and drugs in 2019. [Continue Reading ]

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): West Virginia man sentenced to nearly 20 years on meth 

charges, Jessica Patterson, June 16, 2022, 12:54 PM 

A West Virginia man will spend nearly 20 years behind bars after being convicted on 

methamphetamine charges. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Shane Kelly Fulkerson, 

46, of St. Albans was sentenced on Thursday, June 16, 2022, to 19 years and seven months in 

prison, which will be followed by five years of supervised release, for two counts of possession 

with intent to distribute methamphetamine. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (Tampa, FL): 21-Year-Old Tampa Man Indicted On Gun Possession Charges , D'Ann 

Lawrence White, June 16, 2022, 11:17 AM 

A 21-year-old Tampa man has been indicted in U.S. District Court on charges of being a

convicted felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition. In United States Attorney Roger B. 

Handberg's continuing efforts to get guns off Tampa streets, Cedric Durham was arrested 

Monday and made his first appearance before United States Magistrate Judge Thomas Wilson 

the following day. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Federal jury convicts St. Paul man of meth, gun charges ,

Josh Skluzacek, June 16, 2022, 11:12 AM 

A St. Paul man has been found guilty of methamphetamine and gun charges by a federal jury. 

The U.S. Attorney’s Office says the jury found 44-year-old William Howard Proto, Jr., guilty of two 

counts of possession with intent to distribute meth, one count of gun possession in furtherance of 

drug trafficking and one count of felon in possession of a gun. Authorities say Proto pleaded 

guilty to the gun possession as a felon charge during the trial. [Continue Reading ]

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: N.Y. leaves disabled to 'languish' in institutions, new lawsuit claims , Brendan 

Pierson, June 16, 2022, 1:00 PM 

New York state is facing a proposed class action accusing it of allowing people with 

developmental disabilities who qualify for community-based services through Medicaid to remain 

in restricted institutional settings.The lawsuit, filed Wednesday in Manhattan federal court by the 

legal non-profit Disability Rights New York (DRNY) and Kasowitz Benson Torres, accuses the 

state Department of Health (DOH) and its Office for People with Developmental Disability 

(OPWDD) of shirking their legal obligation to arrange for community-based services when 

possible. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo : [EDITORIAL] Impunity for unwarranted police killings is still a default , Editorial 

Board, June 16, 2022, 1:03 PM 

After a legal odyssey of nearly five years, the Justice Department decided last week not to 

reopen the federal criminal civil rights investigation of two hotheaded U.S. Park Police officers 

who shot to death Bijan Ghaisar, an unarmed 25-year-old accountant. By declining to prosecute 

them for a killing that stemmed from a fender bender in suburban Virginia, Attorney General 

Merrick Garland’s department has effectively shrugged at an apparently unjustified killing. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000452

[Continue Reading ]

CIVIL LAW 

Reuters : Mississippi prosecutor ducks lawsuit claiming racial bias in jury selection , Nate 

Raymond, June 16, 2022, 2:01 PM 

A divided federal appeals court on Thursday dismissed a lawsuit accusing a long-serving district 

attorney in Mississippi of regularly discriminating against Black people by striking them from juries 

due to their race. The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 that four Black Mississippi 

residents eligible for jury service and a local chapter of the National Association for the 

Advancement of Colored People lacked standing to sue Montgomery County District Attorney 

Doug Evans. [Continue Reading ]

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

NYT: Homeland Security Department Will Make Changes to Its Disciplinary Process ,

Chris Cameron, June 16, 2022, 10:00 PM 

The Department of Homeland Security announced on Thursday that it would overhaul the 

disciplinary process for its employees after The New York Times reported that the agency’s 

inspector general removed damaging findings from investigative reports about domestic violence 

and sexual misconduct committed by employees. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: Illegal Border Crossings Hit Record in May , Alicia A. Caldwell, June 16, 2022, 3:32 PM 

Arrests of migrants illegally crossing the U.S. border with Mexico hit a record high in May, 

according to new data released by the Department of Homeland Security. U.S. Border Patrol 

agents made 222,656 arrests of people crossing the border illegally, a nearly 10% increase 

compared with April. The agency said about 25% of arrests in May involved repeated border 

crossers, with agents arresting 177,793 unique people. Border Patrol agents have been dealing 

with record numbers of illegal border crossings for almost two years, with drastic increases 

recorded in the past several months as pandemic-era travel restrictions have eased. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  WaPo 

LAT : Coins depicting Border Patrol agent grabbing Haitian migrant trigger investigation ,

Hamed Aleaziz, June 16, 2022, 4:56 PM 

The photograph encapsulates the intensity of the clashes between Border Patrol agents and 

Haitian immigrants desperate to get into the United States. An agent on horseback leans over, 

grabbing a man by the shirt as a rein dangles. Now an image mirroring the Sept. 19 photo by Paul 

Ratje of AFP has appeared on a “challenge coin” typically collected by agents, law enforcement 

officials and aficionados. [Continue Reading ]

NBC: Number of migrants crossing border hits another record, with surges in migration 

by nationalities once rarely seen, Julia Ainsley, June 16, 2022, 6:16 PM 

The number of undocumented immigrant crossings at the southwest border once again broke 

record highs in May, prompted in large part by surges in migration by nationalities that were 

previously rarely found at the U.S.-Mexico border, according to Customs and Border Protection 

data obtained by NBC News. CBP stopped migrants at the Southwest border of the U.S. more 

than 239,000 times in May, though some migrants attempted to cross more than once. The 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000453

number of individual migrants who attempted to cross the border was 157,555, still up by 2

percent over April’s previous record high. The number of border crossers from India, Turkey, 

Russia, Haiti, Brazil, Colombia and Nicaragua increased in part because it is harder for border 

agents to subject some of those nationalities to the Covid-19 border restrictions known as Title 

42 that let the U.S. quickly send migrants back to their home countries or into Mexico. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: 5th Circ. Shoots Down Nonprofit Bid To Crack Open Title 42 , Alyssa Aquino, June 

16, 2022, 8:43 PM 

The Fifth Circuit on Thursday rejected a legal service provider's attempts to open up parts of the 

U.S.-Mexico border to asylum-seekers by narrowing an injunction order requiring the Biden 

administration to enforce COVID-19 border restrictions nationwide. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Ohio Says High Court Limits Don't Apply To ICE Ops Case , Alyssa Aquino, June 

16, 2022, 8:00 PM 

Ohio has rebuked the Biden administration's attempts to use a recent high court ruling to notch a

Sixth Circuit victory in litigation challenging its immigration enforcement priorities, saying the 

justices' new limits on courts' injunctive immigration power warrants, at most, a remand. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360 : 5th Circ. Urged To Keep Alive Texas Migrant Transport Suit , Mike LaSusa, June 

16, 2022, 5:49 PM 

A group of border shelters has urged the Fifth Circuit to back a Texas federal judge's decision 

allowing a lawsuit to proceed against the governor of Texas over his order directing law 

enforcement to stop cars suspected of carrying certain migrants. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Split 6th Circ. Gives Honduran Asylum-Seekers Another Shot , Eric Heisig, June 

16, 2022, 5:23 PM 

A split Sixth Circuit panel told the Board of Immigration Appeals to take another look at whether a

Honduran woman and her two children can stay in the U.S. as refugees after they claimed they 

suffered violence and intimidation by the brutal MS-13 gang. [Continue Reading ]

Kansas City Star : Appeals court rejects civil claim against ICE officer who allegedly 

shoved KC lawyer, Bill Lukitsch, June 16, 2022, 7:27 PM 

A federal appeals court ruled Thursday that an officer with U.S. Immigration and Customs 

Enforcement did not violate the constitutional rights of an immigration lawyer who was injured after 

allegedly being shoved to a concrete sidewalk outside of a Kansas City detention facility in 2018. 

[Continue Reading ]

Laredo Morning Times : Fentanyl smuggler sentenced to prison , Cesar Rodriguez, June 16, 

2022, 5:00 PM 

A Houston resident has been sentenced to prison for attempting to deliver fentanyl at the Galleria 

Mall, according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office. Juan Alvarado-Vargas, 22, pleaded guilty on April 5

to conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute fentanyl. On Thursday, U.S. District Judge 

Marina Garcia Marmolejo sentenced Alvarado-Vargas to 72 months in prison followed by three 

years of supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000454

ANTITRUST 

Bloomberg: White House Weighs Fuel-Export Limits as Pump Prices Surge , Jennifer A

Dlouhy and Ari Natter, June 16, 2022, 4:48 PM 

Top Biden administration officials are weighing limits on exports of fuel as the White House 

struggles to contain gasoline prices that have topped $5 per gallon. Discussions around capping 

gasoline and diesel exports have picked up in recent days, as President Joe Biden intensified his 

criticism of soaring oil company profits, said people familiar with the matter who asked for 

anonymity to describe private conversations. [Continue Reading] See also : USA Today 

Law360: Meta Says TikTok Parent Co. Has Key Docs To Fight FTC, Bryan Koenig, June 16, 

2022, 8:29 PM 

Meta asked a D.C. federal judge Thursday to help it subpoena the Chinese parent companies of 

TikTok and WeChat, arguing their U.S. affiliates do not have all the information the Facebook 

parent needs to rebut Federal Trade Commission allegations of a largely uncontested monopoly. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360: FTC Warns Drugmakers, Middlemen Over Rebates , Matthew Perlman, June 16, 

2022, 7:16 PM 

The Federal Trade Commission issued a policy statement warning drug companies and 

pharmacy benefits managers that enforcers are looking to go after rebates and other pricing 

schemes the agency said block patients' access to cheaper medications. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: DOJ Calls Baseball's Antitrust Exemption 'An Aberration', Matthew Perlman, June 

16, 2022, 6:33 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice has waded into a suit from minor league teams that lost their 

affiliations with Major League Baseball clubs, urging a New York federal court to view baseball's 

antitrust exemption narrowly and noting that the exemption is based on a rationale that has already 

been discredited by the U.S. Supreme Court. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: [ANALYSIS] Mitigating Labor Antitrust Risks As Enforcement Ramps Up, 

Michael Murray, Michael Spafford and Carson Sullivan, June 16, 2022, 5:44 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice's Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade Commission recently 

ratcheted up their prioritization of antitrust enforcement in the labor markets. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law : FTC Targets Pharmacy Agent Fees in Push for Lower Celine 

Castronuovo , June 16, 2022, 4:18 PM 

High drug rebates that pharmacy benefit managers require from drugmakers may violate federal 

competition laws if they stifle patient access, according to a policy statement adopted 

unanimously by the FTC on Thursday. The Federal Trade Commission voted 5-0 to issue a

document outlining how it will use existing competition and consumer protection laws to examine 

rebates and fees paid by drug manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers the entities that run 

prescription drug benefits. [Continue Reading] 

ENVIRONMENT 

Reuters: Greens say vacate 3,500 drilling permits in new climate change lawsuit , Barbara 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000455

Grzincic, June 16, 2022, 3:38 PM 

The Biden administration must vacate thousands of permits it has issued to drill for oil and gas on 

federal lands and stop issuing any more until it considers the cumulative, nationwide effect of 

increased greenhouse gas emissions from new wells, two environmental groups said in a new 

lawsuit. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: Green Groups Challenge Removal Of Large Tree Protections , Joyce Hanson, 

June 16, 2022, 9:18 PM 

Six environmental nonprofits have hit the U.S. Forest Service with a suit in Oregon federal court 

challenging the agency's decision to remove longstanding protections for large and old trees in 

the Pacific Northwest as part of an amended forest management plan. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Mich., Wis. Biz Group Backs Bad River Tribe In Line 5 Suit , Andrew Westney, 

June 16, 2022, 8:17 PM 

A group representing Michigan and Wisconsin businesses urged a federal judge Thursday to 

shut down Enbridge Energy Co.'s Line 5 pipeline on the Bad River Band's tribal land, saying 

there's little risk to the local economy from a shutdown, while a potential oil spill could prove 

catastrophic for the businesses. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : 8th Circ. Weighs If Red States Can Fight Carbon Cost Metric , Morgan Conley, 

June 16, 2022, 5:30 PM 

The Eighth Circuit on Thursday probed whether over a dozen red states, led by Missouri, jumped 

the gun by suing over the Biden administration's method for estimating costs related to 

greenhouse gas pollution instead of waiting to challenge specific regulations integrating the 

metric. [Continue Reading ]

TAX 

KPIX-CBS (San Francisco, CA): Vallejo woman sentenced for ID theft of disabled victims 

to obtain tax refunds , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:37 PM 

A judge sentenced Vallejo resident Tamara Manuel Thursday to more than three years in prison 

for stealing the identities of severely disabled persons in order to get federal tax refunds. U.S 

Attorney for the Eastern District of California Phillip Talbert said in a press statement that Manuel 

carried out the scheme while working at Sonoma Development Center (SDC), a large, state-run 

facility serving people with developmental disabilities. [Continue Reading ] See also:  San 

Francisco Chronicle 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

AP: Police: 2 Dead, 1 Hurt in Church Shooting; Suspect Detained, Unattributed, June 17, 

2022, 12:30 AM 

A lone suspect fired on a small group meeting at a suburban church near one of Alabama’s major 

cities Thursday evening, fatally wounding two people and injuring a third before being taken into 

custody, authorities said. The attack occurred at Saint Stephen’s Episcopal Church in the 

Birmingham suburb of Vestavia Hills, Police Capt. Shane Ware said. He said officers rushed to 

the church after dispatchers got a call reporting an active shooter at the church at 6:22 p.m. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  CBS , CNN , NYT , USA Today 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000456

CBS: 140 pounds of meth seized, 4 arrests made in Sonoma County drug investigation, 

Maggie Fusek, June 16, 2022, 5:37 PM 

Four people were arrested and more than 140 pounds of methamphetamine were seized in 

connection with a drug trafficking operation in Sonoma County, authorities said. According to the 

San Francisco office of the Drug Enforcement Administration, law enforcement served search 

warrants in Cloverdale and Santa Rosa starting Wednesday night. The warrants were served 

following a 16-month joint investigation by the DEA, Sonoma County Sheriff's Office and the 

Marin County Sheriff's Office. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: FBI investigating 'series of attacks and threats' against pregnancy 

centers and faith-based groups, Jerry Dunleavy, June 16, 2022, 9:47 PM 

The FBI is investigating the rash of attacks and vandalism targeting anti-abortion activist groups 

and pregnancy centers across the country. The bureau told the Washington Examiner on 

Thursday that it did not have a comment on any specific groups carrying out the violence but 

acknowledged an inquiry is underway. [Continue Reading ]

The Oregonian (Portland, OR): U.S. Marshals lead Operation Safer Multnomah, 

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A group of deputy U.S Marshals knock on a door to speak with a resident as they try to learn the 

location of a man sought on an arrest warrant as part of Operation Safer Multnomah on Friday, 

June 10, 2022 in Portland. [Continue Reading ]

KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX): EPCSO has one of their own graduate from FBI Academy, Luis 

Barrio, June 17, 2022, 1:24 AM 

El Paso Special Agent in Charge Jeffrey Downey announced that Lieutenant Correy Harrison of 

the El Paso County Sheriff’s Office, and Lieutenant Caleb Lacey with the Odessa Police 

Department, have graduated from the FBI National Academy Class #282. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (Healdsburg, CA): DEA Announces 4 Sonoma County Arrests For Suspected Meth 

Trafficking, Maggie Fusek, June 16, 2022, 11:10 PM 

Four people were arrested Thursday in Sonoma County in connection with a large-scale drug 

distribution ring, federal authorities announced. The arrests were the result of a 16-month-long 

investigation by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration's Santa Rosa Resident Office, the 

Sonoma County Sheriff's Office and the Marin County Sheriff's Office into a drug trafficking 

organization suspected of distributing meth throughout the region, the DEA's San Francisco Field 

Division said in a news release. [Continue Reading ]

KVRR-Fox (Fargo, ND): CAIR wants FBI to investigate EGF mosque fire as a hate crime, 

Hami Arain, June 16, 2022, 8:00 PM 

The Council on American-Islamic Relations wants FBI involvement nearly two weeks after a

possible hate crime where a woman attacked an East Grand Forks Mosque during morning 

prayer. Fifty-seven-year-old Suzette Gay Thompson of Thief River Falls is arrested on an arson 

charge and could face up to 20 years in prison and a $20,000 fine. [Continue Reading ]

WJW-Fox (Cleveland, OH): FBI investigated Deshaun Watson, one accuser, detective 

says, Peggy Gallek, Ed Gallek, June 16, 2022, 7:31 PM 

A Houston police detective has testified FBI officials told her they were investigating Deshaun 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000457

Watson and one of the 24 women who have filed lawsuits against the quarterback. Houston 

Police Detective Kamesha Baker made the statement during a deposition taken earlier this month 

in Houston. Baker, who investigated 10 criminal complaints made against Watson, revealed 

during the deposition that she had communicated with the FBI. [Continue Reading ]

WCBI-CBS (Columbus, MS): FBI raids local Columbus business J5, Stephanie Poole, June 

16, 2022, 7:30 PM 

Around 9 a.m. federal agencies made their way inside the J5 building in Columbus. State and 

local law enforcement agencies also assisted going through the building and collecting files. 

[Continue Reading ]

WDHN-ABC (Dothan, AL): Samson man turns himself into U.S. Marshals on 2019 child 

porn charges, Seth Feiner, June 16, 2022, 7:12 PM 

A Samson man has turned himself into authorities on a charge of possession of child 

pornography dating back to 2019. Harley Dakota Wambles was indicted in November of 2019 on 

a child porn possession, per the indictment record. Wambles then turned himself into the U.S. 

Marshals Office on Wednesday, June 15th, according to his attorney, David Harrison. [Continue 

Reading ]

WFTX-Fox (Naples, FL): FBI and Fort Myers Police investigating social media threats 

against local NAACP chapter, Briana Brownlee, June 16, 2022, 6:15 PM 

The Lee County NAACP has the Fort Myers Police Department along with the FBI in Tampa 

looking into recent posts that escalated into serious threats of violence. President of the Lee 

County NAACP Jame Muwakkil says the threats started on June 10, 2022. [Continue Reading ]

KITV-ABC (Honolulu, HI): KPD, FBI find homemade explosives, meth during raid on Lihue 

home, Briana Brownlee, June 16, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Authorities arrested a Kauai man after police and the federal agents found illegal drugs and 

homemade explosives in his Lihue home. [Continue Reading ]

KDKA-CBS (Pittsburgh, PA): FBI Searching For Suspected Bank Robber, Kasey Chronis, 

June 16, 2022, 5:36 PM 

The FBI and Reserve Township Police are asking for help finding details about a suspected bank 

robber. The FBI has released photos of a man they believe robbed the Standard Bank along Mt. 

Troy Road last month. [Continue Reading] 

WIBW-AM (Topeka, KS): FBI Chicago warns of increase in sextortion schemes targeting 

young boys, Kasey Chronis, June 16, 2022, 4:56 PM 

The FBI is warning parents of an increase in sextortion schemes targeting teenage boys. In 

Chicago and nationwide, officials have seen an alarming rise in cases where adults are posing as 

girls and young women online, and coercing young boys to engage in sexually explicit activity via 

video chat. In some cases, predators are using trafficking victims to lure teenage boys into 

producing sexual content. [Continue Reading] 

WOIO-CBS (Cleveland, OH): U.S. Marshals, SWAT arrest accused robber who pepper-sprayed employees, Julia Bingel, June 16, 2022, 4:03 PM 

A robbery suspect wanted by multiple police agencies for robberies, thefts, shoplifting and fraud 

was arrested after a more than a three hour stand-off on Cleveland’s East Side Thursday. U.S. 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000458

Marshals and Cleveland SWAT located Sheldon Payne, 29, in the 9600 block of Nelson Ave. 

According to the U.S. Marshals, Payne barricaded himself inside with a woman and small child. 

[Continue Reading ]

KSLA-CBS (Shreveport, LA): FBI offering reward in Shamia Little investigation, Jade Myers 

and Brittney Hazelton, June 16, 2022, 1:16 PM 

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is now offering a reward for any information regarding the 

death of 17-year-old Shamia Little. The FBI Shreveport Resident Agency is working with the 

Shreveport Police Department to solve the homicide of 17-year-old Shamia Little. They are now 

offering $50,000 for information leading to an arrest. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

Axios : Judge says DOJ must decide if it wants to seek death penalty for Buffalo shooting 

suspect , Jacob Knutson, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A federal judge said Thursday that the Department of Justice must decide whether it seeks the 

death penalty for the man accused of killing 10 people during a mass shooting in Buffalo, New 

York, in May, according to Reuters. Driving the news: The Justice Department charged Payton 

Gendron, 18, with 26 counts of federal hate crimes and firearm violations on Wednesday, though 

Attorney General Merrick Garland declined to say if the department will seek the death penalty as 

punishment. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

Reuters : Liberal Justice Sotomayor says U.S. Supreme Court 'mistakes' can be fixed ,

Lawrence Hurley, June 16, 2022, 8:17 PM 

Liberal Justice Sonia Sotomayor said on Thursday the U.S. Supreme Court's "mistakes" in high-profile cases can be corrected over time as she adopted a positive tone ahead of a decision in 

which its conservative majority is expected to curtail abortion rights. Sotomayor, speaking in 

Washington at the annual meeting of a liberal legal group, did not directly address last month's 

publication of a leaked draft opinion in the abortion case or any of the court's other current cases. 

But Sotomayor said she believes the court can help people "regain the public's confidence" in 

government institutions. [Continue Reading ] See also : Bloomberg , CNN , Guardian , NYT 

NYT: Bracing for the End of Roe v. Wade, the White House Weighs Executive Actions, 

Charlie Savage, June 16, 2022, 5:00 AM 

President Biden’s top aides are weighing whether he can or should take a series of executive 

actions to help women in Republican-controlled states obtain abortions if the Supreme Court 

eliminates a woman’s right to end her pregnancy, according to senior administration officials. 

Some of the ideas under consideration include declaring a national public health emergency, 

readying the Justice Department to fight any attempt by states to criminalize travel for the purpose 

of obtaining an abortion, and asserting that Food and Drug Administration regulations granting 

approval to abortion medications pre-empt any state bans, the officials said. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law: Low-Income Drug Discount Fight Looms in HHS’s Supreme Court Loss, 

Ian Lopez, Allie Reed, June 17, 2022, 4:35 AM 

A US Supreme Court loss for the HHS in a Medicare case gives the agency ammunition in a

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000459

broader battle over drugmaker discounts for low-income Americans. All nine Supreme Court 

justices agreed that the Department of Health and Human Services wrongly slashed $1 billion a

year in drug reimbursements to hospitals through a 30-year-old government program designed to 

help at-need populations. The HHS and hospitals are now on the same side in another courtroom 

conflict over that program whether the HHS can require that drugmakers offer discounts to 

certain pharmacies. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : [ANALYSIS] Chevron Deference Still Feels Heat After High Court Reprieve , Jeff 

Overley, June 16, 2022, 10:56 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court's landmark doctrine requiring judicial deference to federal regulators 

survived a major health care case at the high court Wednesday, but the controversial bedrock of 

administrative law barely escaped the conservative justices' frying pan and is heading right back 

into their fire, experts say. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: [ANALYSIS] Supreme Court Should Review Flight Break Mandate, Patricia 

Vercelli, June 16, 2022, 3:02 PM 

In a one-sentence, unsigned opinion yesterday, the Supreme Despite government pushback, the 

U.S.  Supreme Court should review Virgin America v. Bernstein, a Ninth Circuit decision that would 

require meal and rest breaks for flight attendants, as federal law and California regulations are in 

clear conflict and threaten to disrupt national air transportation, says Patricia Vercelli at Airlines for 

America.. [Continue Reading ]

E&E News : Supreme Court under pressure to punt climate case , Pamela King, June 16, 

2022, 1:13 PM 

In a one-sentence, unsigned opinion yesterday, the Supreme Court disposed of a legal fight 

related to the Biden administration’s change of course on a Trump-era rule that made it harder for 

immigrants to obtain green cards. Some lawmakers and legal observers have urged the justices 

to bestow the same fate on the West Virginia v. EPA battle over a climate regulation that after 

two administration changes, years of legal wrangling and a transformation of the power sector 

does not currently exist. [Continue Reading ]

SCOTUSblog : [OPINION] Supreme Court, once again, rejects California treatment of 

arbitration , Ronald Land, June 16, 2022, 12:10 PM 

The holding of Wednesday’s decision in Viking River Cruises v. Moriana will surprise nobody. As 

it has so many times before, the Supreme Court rejected California’s treatment of arbitration 

under California law, in this case California’s Private Attorneys General Act. The most surprising 

thing about the decision is how close it came to unanimity. Eight of the nine justices agreed in the 

result, with the lone dissent coming from Justice Clarence Thomas, who long has held that the 

relevant federal statute (the Federal Arbitration Act) does not apply to cases in state courts. 

[Continue Reading ]

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

The Hill : Biden nominates Derek Chauvin prosecutor as federal judge , Zach Schonfeld, 

June 16, 2022, 4:33 PM 

President Biden nominated one of the attorneys who prosecuted former Minneapolis police 

officer Derek Chauvin for the murder of George Floyd as a federal judge on Wednesday. Biden 

nominated Jerry Blackwell to the U.S. District Court for the District of Minnesota. The White 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000460

House did not mention Blackwell’s role in the Chauvin case in the announcement of the 

nomination. [Continue Reading ]

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

WaPo : Man illegally excavated Native American site, took artifacts, officials say , Jaclyn 

Peiser, June 16, 2022, 7:12 AM 

A peninsula on the Harry S. Truman Lake in Henry County, Mo., houses a trove of Native 

American artifacts dating back thousands of years. The site is protected by federal law, and 

unauthorized excavation is forbidden. Johnny Lee Brown dug for treasure anyway, federal 

prosecutors say. In an 11-count indictment made public on Tuesday, prosecutors allege the 71 -

year-old Clinton, Mo., resident caused more than $300,000 in damage during excavation trips 

spanning over five years. Brown’s charges include felony counts for conspiracy, causing damage 

and defacing archaeological resources and government property. [Continue Reading ]

New Jersey Advance Media : N.J. sues Ford over toxic history at former iron mines and on 

Native American land , S.P. Sullivan, June 16, 2022, 4:04 PM 

State authorities on Thursday filed a lawsuit against the Ford Motor Company for dumping 

automobile paint sludge in former iron mines and on Native American land in Ringwood, marking 

another chapter in what has become more than half a century of corporate and government 

failures to clean up harmful toxic waste. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

Marijuana Moment: Congressional Lawmakers Seek Broad Marijuana Protections For 

Legal States In Key Spending Bill Coming Next Week, Kyle Jaeger, June 16, 2022, 12:00 

PM 

Congressional lawmakers are urging House leaders to include broad protections for states, 

territories and tribes that choose to legalize marijuana as part of a key spending bill that’s 

expected to be introduced next week. Reps. Earl Blumenauer (D-OR), Tom McClintock (R-CA), 

Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-DC) and Barbara Lee (D-CA), along with 44 of their colleagues, 

recently sent a letter calling on the chairman and ranking member of an appropriations 

subcommittee to address the issue through the must-pass legislation. [Continue Reading ]

ADMINISTRATION 

AP : Biden signs bill to protect Supreme Court justices into law , Unattributed, June 16, 

2022, 10:00 PM 

President Joe Biden signed a bill Thursday that will give around-the-clock security protection to 

the families of Supreme Court justices. The new law, which passed the House this week and the 

Senate last month, comes eight days after a man carrying a gun, knife and zip ties was arrested 

near Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s house after threatening to kill the justice. The bill calling for the 

expansion of security protections was approved unanimously by the Senate and passed shortly 

after the leak of a draft court opinion that would overrule Roe v. Wade and sharply curtail abortion 

rights in roughly half the states. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000461

## •

## •••

CNN : Kamala Harris launches new national task force on preventing online harassment 

and abuse , Sam Fassum, June 16, 2022, 2:00 PM 

Vice President Kamala Harris on Thursday launched a new national task force aimed at helping to 

prevent and address online harassment and abuse. Ahead of the meeting, President Joe Biden 

signed a memorandum establishing the initiative, the White House Task Force to Address Online 

Harassment and Abuse. The interagency effort will particularly focus on online harassment and 

abuse of women and LGBTQ Americans, as one senior administration official ahead of the 

meeting noted how such harassment "disproportionately targets" those communities. [Continue 

Reading ]

CONGRESS 

WSJ : Gun Talks Stall on Red-Flag Laws, Domestic Abuser Rules , Natalie Andrews, Lindsay 

Wise and Teresa Mettela, June 16, 2022, 6:03 PM 

Senators drafting gun-control legislation failed to overcome sticking points before breaking for the 

weekend, putting in jeopardy a historic bipartisan deal to reduce gun violence. Negotiators said 

they were stuck on language for two provisions. One would provide federal grants to states to 

enforce red-flag laws that allow authorities to remove guns temporarily from people threatening 

violence. The other would close the “boyfriend loophole” that allows convicted domestic abusers 

to buy guns if they aren’t married to their partner. [Continue Reading] See also : NYT , WaPo 

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 16, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

On the third day of hearings investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, new video was 

released detailing former Pres. Trump’s pressure campaign on then Vice President Pence 

to block the electoral vote count and overturn the 2020 election. The committee is now 

looking to speak with the wife of Justice Clarence Thomas and her role in efforts to overturn 

the election. [ABC , ABC -2,  CBS , NBC ]

President Biden says a recession is “not inevitable” as the Federal Reserve works to bring 

inflation under control. Meanwhile, mortgage rates are hitting their highest level since 2008. 

[ABC , CBS , NBC ]

The State Department is investigating reports that a third American has gone missing in 

Ukraine. This comes as the families of two other Americans are desperate for any 

information, with fears the Russians may be holding them. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Federal assistance is on the way to Montana after the unprecedented flooding at 

Yellowstone National Park. For local businesses, the natural disaster could trigger an 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000462

## •••••••

economic catastrophe. In Wisconsin, residents spent the day picking up the pieces 

following a night of severe storms, including several tornadoes. [ABC , CBS , NBC ]

Louisville is one of the most racially segregated cities in America, but ahead of Juneteenth, 

the community is trying to change its future by understanding its past. [CBS ]

US lled coalition forces seized a man described by officials as a senior leader of Islamic 

State in an operation in northeast Syria late Wednesday. Military forces detained Hani 

Ahmed al-Kurdi, assessed to be a bomb maker and facilitator who had become one of 

Islamic State’s senior leaders in Syria, U.S. military officials said. [ABC ]

Real estate investment groups are buying up an increasing share of houses and renting 

them out in some cases to families who had dreamed of owning their own homes. 

According to one report, in January, 33 percent of all homes purchased in the U.S. were 

bought by investors. [NBC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“European Commission Recommends E.U. Candidacy for Ukraine” [WSJ , NYT , WaPo ]

“Capitol Rioters Came Within 40 Feet of Vice President Pence” [NYT ]

“CDC Panel to Review Covid-19 Shots for Young Children” [WSJ , NYT , WaPo ]

“Trump aides told him that using Pence to overturn election was illegal” [WaPo ]

END                                                 

> RENDON Media News Alert Notice:
> This RENDON product is distributed as part of adeliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation
> 15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov.
> The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov
> To unsubscribe, please email DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the subject
> line. Your request will be processed within 7business days.
> Document ID: 0.7.1088.11003 01570-000463

## •                             

> From: Watson, Theresa (OAG)
> Subject: FW: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest
> To: Dickerson, Ju ie (OAG); Davidson, Marcia A. (OAG); Sanchez, Giovanni (OAG); Figures, Shomari (OAG);
> Berger, Christine (OAG)
> Sent: June 17, 2022 7:17 AM (UTC-04:00)

From: DOJ Di gests <doj-digests@rendon.com >

Sent: Friday, June 17, 2022 6:53 AM 

To: DoJ-Di gests3 Rendon <DOJdesk@rendon.com> 

Subject: [EXTERNAL] Morning Digest 

# Department of Justice Morning News Digest June 17, 2022 

# 7:00  AM EST 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

1.  US Department of Justice News 

2.  National Security 

3.  Jan. 6 Hearings 

4.  Criminal Law 

5.  Civil Rights 

6.  Civil Law 

7.  Immigration & Border Security 

8.  Antitrust 

9.  Environment 

10.  Tax 

11.  Federal Law Enforcement Agencies 

12.  Criminal Justice/Corrections 

13.  US Supreme Court 

14.  Judicial Nominees & Appointments 

15.  Native American Affairs 

16.  Marijuana Legalization 

17.  Administration 

18.  Congress 

19.  Network Evening News Lineup 

20.  Morning Headlines 

WASHINGTON & DOJ SCHEDULE: JUNE 17, 2022 

DOJ 

No  scheduled events. 

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000464

Reuters : US and partners dismantle Russian hacking botnet: Justice Dept , Unattributed, June 16, 

2022, 6:09 PM 

Law enforcement in the United States, Germany, the Netherlands and Britain dismantled a global 

network of internet-connected devices that had been hacked by Russian cyber criminals and used for 

malicious purposes, the US Justice Department said on Thursday (June 16). The network, known as the 

RSOCKS botnet, comprised millions of hacked computers and devices worldwide, including "Internet of 

Things" gadgets such as routers and smart garage openers, the department said in a statement. 

[Continue Reading ]

Reuters: VP Harris launches task force on online harassment after shootings, Alexandra Alper, 

June 16, 2022, 3:38 PM 

U.S.  Vice President Kamala Harris inaugurated a task force on Thursday to curb online harassment, 

fulfilling one of the Biden campaign's promises in the wake of a mass shooting that highlights a link 

between online abuse and violence. [...] Harris was joined on Thursday by Attorney General Merrick 

Garland, Surgeon General Vivek Murthy and tennis star Sloane Stephens, who publicized a torrent of 

angry messages she received on social media, including racist and sexist abuse, following her loss at the 

U.S.  Open. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Fox , UPI , Washington Times 

WSJ: Charges Against Accused Buffalo Shooter Point to Alleged Act of Domestic Terrorism, Government Says , Sadie Gurman and Aruna Viswanatha, June 16, 2022, 6:29 PM 

Senior Justice Department officials said they viewed the killing of 10 people in a racist massacre at a

Buffalo supermarket as an act of domestic terrorism after federal hate-crimes charges were brought 

against the suspect, saying they were relying on existing statutes amid a broader debate about whether 

new tools are needed to combat violent extremism. Payton Gendron, 18 years old, made his first 

appearance in federal court Thursday to face 26 counts of hate crimes and firearms offenses, including one that carries the potential penalty of death. The federal judge in the case urged prosecutors to decide 

promptly whether they intend to pursue a capital sentence. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ : A New Policy Is Making Corporate Compliance Chiefs Uneasy , Dylan Tokar, June 16, 2022, 

2:34  PM 

Compliance officers are worried that a new Justice Department policy, aimed at raising their stature 

within companies, will actually make their jobs harder—and even leave them open to criminal 

prosecution. The policy, previewed by a senior Justice Department official in March, is meant to give 

compliance officers a voice and provide them with access to information and resources needed to guarantee that their company’s compliance program is effective. It was applied for the first time last 

month in a settlement agreement with commodities giant Glencore PLC. [Continue Reading] 

Guardian: Outrage at pay hike for Phoenix police under investigation over use of force, Ian 

Lopez, Allie Reed, June 17, 2022, 4:35 AM 

A bumper pay hike for Phoenix police has been condemned by community advocates who argue the 

money should be spent tackling the city’s extreme heat, homelessness and mental health crises. At a

heated city council meeting on Wednesday, several public speakers questioned the $19.8m salary 

windfall given the continuing Department of Justice investigation into the city police department over 

allegations of excessive use of force, retaliation against Black Lives Matter protesters, discriminatory 

policing and inappropriate treatment of homeless and disabled people. [Continue Reading ]

Fox: Cotton: Garland must resign over DOJ inaction on Jane's Revenge, more than 50 attacks on pro-life groups, Danielle Wallace, Kelly Laco, June 16, 2022, 4:25 PM 

Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Arkansas, said Thursday that U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland should resign 

over the Biden administration Justice Department’s inaction on more than 50 attacks on pro-life 

pregnancy centers and churches in recent weeks purportedly carried out by Jane’s Revenge. In a letter 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000465

sent to Garland, Cotton, who is the ranking member for the subcommittee on Criminal Justice and 

Counterterrorism, the Intelligence Committee, and the Armed Services Committee, also called on the 

DOJ to investigate Jane’s Revenge as a "domestic terrorist organization." [Continue Reading ]

Fox: DOJ defended actions to protect justices in letter sent same day man arrested for trying to kill Kavanaugh, Tyler Olson, June 16, 2022, 3:58 PM 

The Justice Department defended its actions to protect Supreme Court justices' safety in a letter to the 

governors of Maryland and Virginia the same day an armed man was arrested near Justice Brett 

Kavanaugh’s home. The letter, dated June 8, is from Acting Assistant Attorney General Peter Hyun. It 

responds to a May 11 letter GOP Govs. Larry Hogan and Glenn Youngkin sent to Attorney General Merrick Garland demanding the Justice Department (DOJ) do more to protect the justices. [Continue 

Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: UK gov’t approves extradition of Assange; appeal possible, Unattributed, June 17, 2022, 6:30 

AM 

The British government has approved the extradition of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange to the United 

States to face spying charges. The government said Friday that Home Secretary Priti Patel had signed 

the extradition order. It follows a British court ruling that he could be sent to the U.S. Home Secretary 

Priti Patel signed the order authorizing Assange’s extradition to the U.S., where he faces charges over 

WikiLeaks’ publication of a huge trove of classified documents. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Bloomberg,  NYT , USA Today , WaPo 

Reuters: Nebraska man pleads guilty to making threats against election official, Sarah N. Lynch, 

June 16, 2022, 3:42 PM 

A Nebraska man pleaded guilty on Thursday to making threats against an election official, marking the 

third federal case brought by a U.S. Justice Department task force formed last year to address the 

rising tide of such threats. The Justice Department said that Travis Ford, 42, of Lincoln, wrote 

threatening posts on Instagram in August 2021 to an unnamed election official, asking: "Do you feel 

safe? You shouldn't... Your security detail is far too thin and incompetent to protect you." Threats 

against election workers and volunteers drastically increased before and after the November 2020 

presidential election, spurred by former Republican President Donald Trump's repeated false claims that 

the election was stolen from him, which he continues to do without any evidence. Reuters published a

series of investigative reports that documented more than 850 threats and menacing messages to U.S. 

election workers. [Continue Reading] See also : Axios, Bloomberg Law, Colorado Sun, Daily Beast, 

Durango Herald, KCNC-CBS (Denver, CO), KETV-ABC (Omaha, NB), KMGH-ABC (Denver, CO), 

KUSA-NBC (Denver, CO) , Lincoln Journal Star (Lincoln, NB),  NBC , WaPo 

Reuters: U.S. must decide if it seeks death penalty for Buffalo shooting, judge says, Sarah N. 

Lynch and Jonathan Allen, June 16, 2022, 12:29 PM A federal judge on Thursday urged the Justice Department to decide promptly whether to seek the death 

penalty for a white man accused in the racially motivated shooting death of 10 Black people in Buffalo, 

New York last month. Payton Gendron, 18, is facing 26 counts of hate crimes and firearms offenses in a

criminal complaint by the U.S. Justice Department stemming from the May 14 attack. A grand jury has 

not yet returned an indictment, and he has not yet entered a plea on the charges. [Continue Reading] 

See also:  ABC , Fox , KTTV-Fox (Los Angeles, CA) , NBC , NY Daily News , USA Today , WSJ 

LAT: Inside the MAGA world scramble to produce findings suggesting the 2020 election was stolen, Sarah D. Wire, June 17, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Days after the 2020 presidential election, before all votes were counted and Joseph R. Biden was 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000466

declared the winner, cyber experts and analysts piled into suites at the Trump Hotel in Washington and 

other hotel rooms in the area. The plan was urgent: Crowdsource evidence of electoral fraud to secure a

Trump victory with the assistance of his legal team and White House staff. [Continue Reading] 

NYT: YouTube deleted a Jan. 6 committee video that included Trump’s election lies, Nico Grant, 

June 16, 2022, 7:00 PM 

The House select committee investigating the Jan. 6 riot has been trying to draw more eyes to its 

televised hearings by uploading clips of the proceedings online. But YouTube has removed one of those 

videos from its platform, saying the committee was advancing election misinformation. The excerpt, which was uploaded June 14, included recorded testimony from former Attorney General William P. 

Barr. But the problem for YouTube was that the video also included a clip of former President Donald J. 

Trump sharing lies about the election on the Fox Business channel. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: Justice Dept. secures first guilty plea for threats to election workers, David Nakamura, 

June 16, 2022, 6:08 PM 

A Nebraska man pleaded guilty Thursday on charges that he threatened an election official over social 

media last year, marking the first conviction for a Justice Department task force charged with protecting 

poll workers. Federal authorities said Travis Ford, 42, of Lincoln, Neb., posted multiple hostile messages 

on an Instagram page associated with the official, who was not named in a Justice Department news 

release. [Continue Reading] See also:  Axios , KMGH-ABC (Denver, CO) , NBC , Washington Examiner 

CBS: Russian superyacht seized by U.S. docks in Hawaii, flying American flag, Graham Kates, 

June 16, 2022, 12:11 PM 

A Russian-owned superyacht seized in Fiji by American law enforcement — which has been cracking 

down on sanctioned oligarchs — docked in Honolulu Thursday. The Amadea was seized on June 7, 

following weeks of legal and administrative hurdles that had stalled American efforts to seize the $300 

million vessel. The U.S. government says the luxe ship, which is nearly the length of a football field, is 

owned by sanctioned gold mining billionaire Suleiman Kerimov. An attorney for the ship's holding 

company says it belongs to a Russian oil executive who the U.S. has not sanctioned. [Continue Reading ]

See also:  The Hill , KHON-Fox/CW- (Honolulu, HI) 

Washington Times: House Republicans plan probe of jail conditions, Justice Department 

treatment of Jan. 6 defendants, Mica Soellner, June 16, 2022, 7:00 PM 

House Republicans plan to launch an investigation, if they win a majority in November, into the jail 

conditions of those being held on charges related to the Jan. 6 riot. Lawmakers have said there is a

double standard in how inmates charged in connection to the riot are being treated and alleging a

political motivation for the treatment. [Continue Reading ]

Politico: Key Trump lawyer sought presidential pardon after effort to overturn election failed, 

Robert Barnes and Ann E. Marimow, June 16, 2022, 3:18 PM 

Days after he mounted a failed attempt to pressure Vice President Mike Pence to overturn the 2020 

election, attorney John Eastman asked Rudy Giuliani to help him get on Donald Trump’s list for a

presidential pardon, according to an email revealed by the Jan. 6 select committee on Thursday. “I’ve 

decided that I should be on the pardon list, if that is still in the works,” Eastman wrote to Giuliani in the 

email. [Continue Reading ]

Politico: The Guilfoyle email that illustrates Cheney's pre-Jan. 6 assistance to Trump World, 

Betsy Woodruff Swan, June 16, 2022, 4:30 AM It reads like a time capsule from an alternate universe: Kimberly Guilfoyle, a card-carrying Trump World 

insider, heaping praise upon Rep. Liz Cheney for helping the former president’s reelection. In a

previously unreported email obtained by POLITICO, Guilfoyle — the former Fox News host now 

engaged to Donald Trump’s elder son — thanked the Wyoming Republican for supporting Trump’s 2020 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000467

bid as a “congressional co-captain” and asked her to do more. “I wanted to start off by saying a big 

thank you for your $10,000 contribution to DJTFP and for your continued support for the President,” 

Guilfoyle, who was national chair of the Trump Victory Finance Committee at the time, wrote to Cheney 

on April 30, 2020. [Continue Reading ]

KAIT-ABC/NBC/CW (Jonesboro, AR): Former professor sentenced for 1 year in federal prison for 

lying to FBI agent, Alexandra Alper, June 16, 2022, 9:28 PM 

A former University of Arkansas professor was met with a one-year sentence in federal prison after 

being accused of lying to an FBI special agent. On Thursday, June 16, Dr. Simon Saw-Teong Ang, 65, 

was given the sentence in the Western District of Arkansas Federal Court in Fayetteville. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  KFSM-CBS (Fort Smith, AR) 

JAN. 6 HEARINGS 

AP: Jan. 6 takeaways: ‘Heated’ Trump, Pence’s near miss with mob, Mary Clare Jalonick, Eric 

Tucker and Kevin Freking, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM The House committee investigating the Capitol insurrection used its latest public hearing on Thursday to 

focus on the pressure that then-President Donald Trump put on his vice president, Mike Pence, to delay 

or reject the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory on Jan. 6, 2021. The committee is trying to show 

how that pressure incited an angry mob to lay siege to the Capitol that day. Pence, presiding over the 

certification in the vice president’s traditional ceremonial role, did not give in. [Continue Reading] See 

also : Bloomberg , NYT , USA Today , WaPo 

AP: 1/6 panel: Pence rejecting Biden win would be ‘un-American’, Lisa Mascaro and Mary Clare 

Jalonick, June 16, 2022, 2:00 PM 

The 1/6 committee on Thursday plunged into Donald Trump’s last-ditch efforts to salvage the 2020 

election by pressuring Vice President Mike Pence to defy historical precedent and reject the electoral 

count in the run-up to the U.S. Capitol riot. With two witnesses Thursday, including Pence’s counsel, the 

House panel is making a case that Trump’s false claims of a fraudulent election left him grasping for 

alternatives as courts turned back dozens of lawsuits challenging the vote [Continue Reading] 

AP: Jan. 6 panel sends letter asking Ginni Thomas to testify, Mary Clare Jalonick and Farnoush 

Amiri, June 16, 2022, 1:00 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, insurrection at the Capitol has asked Virginia Thomas, the wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, for an interview, the panel’s chairman 

said Thursday afternoon. Thomas, a conservative activist, communicated with people in President 

Donald Trump’s orbit ahead of the attack and also on the day of the insurrection, when hundreds of 

Trump’s supporters violently stormed the Capitol and interrupted the certification of Joe Biden’s victory. 

[Continue Reading ] See also:  WaPo 

NYT, The Daily: [AUDIO] What the Jan. 6 Hearings Have Revealed So Far , June 17, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The House committee that was tasked with scrutinizing the events surrounding the attack at the U.S. 

Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021 is holding a series of public hearings. Testimony from key figures has explored a

campaign by former President Donald J. Trump and his allies to subvert American democracy and cling 

to power by reversing an election. The panel has recounted how Mr. Trump’s actions brought the United 

States to the brink of a constitutional crisis. [Listen ]

LAT: [LETTERS TO THE EDITOR] The Jan. 6 committee can’t let itself be turned into another 

Mueller report , June 17, 2022, 6:00 AM 

To the editor: I think it would be a huge mistake for the House Jan. 6 committee not to recommend that 

the U.S. Department of Justice file criminal charges against those responsible for the insurrection. (“How 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000468

I learned to stop worrying and love the Jan. 6 committee,” Opinion, June 14) Refusing to recommend 

charges raises the question of why so much time and money were spent investigating this. Some say the 

purpose of the committee is to inform people about the facts of what happened. That’s fine, but does 

anyone really think former President Trump’s far-right followers will change their minds? [Continue 

Reading ]

Bloomberg: Proud Boys Case Stalled Without Jan. 6 Panel Records, DOJ Says , Chris Strohm, June 

16, 2022, 9:29 PM 

The Congressional Jan. 6 select committee’s failure to share transcripts of its interviews has led the 

Justice Department to delay prosecuting two members of the Proud Boys who stormed the Capitol. In a

court filing Thursday, federal prosecutors in Washington agreed to put on hold the cases against Proud 

Boys Joseph Biggs and Dominic Pezzola, who have both pleaded not guilty. [Continue Reading ] See 

also : WaPo 

NYT: For Mike Pence, Jan. 6 Began Like Many Days. It Ended Like No Other , Annie Karni and 

Maggie Haberman, June 16, 2022, 9:00 PM He started the day with a prayer. Vice President Mike Pence, preparing to withstand the final stage of a

relentless campaign by President Donald J. Trump to force him to illegally try to overturn the results of 

the 2020 election, began Jan. 6, 2021, surrounded by aides at his official residence at the Naval 

Observatory, asking God for guidance. The group was expecting a difficult day. But what followed over 

the next 12 hours was more harrowing than they imagined. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: John Eastman says Ginni Thomas invited him to speak on ‘election litigation’ , Emma 

Brown, Jacqueline Alemany and Josh Dawsey, June 16, 2022, 7:39 PM 

John Eastman, the lawyer who played a key role in efforts to pressure Vice President Mike Pence to 

overturn the 2020 election, confirmed Thursday that the wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas 

invited him a month after the election to speak at a meeting she was helping to organize. Eastman’s 

disclosure came a day after The Washington Post reported that the House select committee 

investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol had obtained email correspondence between him 

and Virginia “Ginni” Thomas, a conservative activist and staunch supporter of former president Donald 

Trump [Continue Reading] See also : Bloomberg , NYT 

WSJ: Witnesses Lay Out How Pence Resisted Pressure to Block 2020 Election Results , Siobhan 

Hughes and Scott Patterson, June 16, 2022, 6:47 PM The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol heard testimony 

Thursday about how then-President Donald Trump’s efforts to persuade Vice President Mike Pence to 

block Joe Biden’s win led to a heated exchange between the two men the morning of the riot and 

prompted a pardon request from the architect of Mr. Trump’s plan. [Continue Reading ]

LAT: Jan. 6 committee will cooperate with Justice Department ‘in due time,’ chairman says, 

Anumita Kaur, June 16, 2022, 6:36 PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol received a formal 

request by the Department of Justice to share copies of its witness interviews, which the committee will 

do “in due time,” chairman Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.) said Thursday. “We can’t stop our work 

because someone writes us a letter,” Thompson said following the panel’s third hearing on the Capitol 

insurrection. “Now, we will cooperate with them, but the committee has its own timetable.” [Continue 

Reading ]

NYT: A Justice Department inquiry into alternate electors is focusing on Trump lawyers., Alan 

Feuer, Katie Benner and Luke Broadwater, June 16, 2022, 3:30 PM 

The Justice Department has been pursuing a criminal investigation into the creation of alternate slates of 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000469

pro-Trump electors seeking to overturn Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s victory in the 2020 election, with a

particular focus on a team of lawyers that worked on behalf of President Donald J. Trump, according to 

people familiar with the matter. A federal grand jury in Washington issued subpoenas this year to people 

linked to the alternate elector plan, requesting information about several lawyers including Mr. Trump’s 

personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani and one of his chief legal advisers, John Eastman, one of the 

people said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Bloomberg , CNN , LAT , NBC , Politico 

NYT: Justice Department accuses Jan. 6 committee of refusing to share transcripts., Katie 

Benner, June 16, 2022, 3:30 PM 

The Justice Department accused the House committee investigating Jan. 6 of hampering the federal 

criminal investigation into the attack by refusing to share interview transcripts with prosecutors, 

according to a person familiar with the matter. The person, who was not authorized to speak on the 

record, said the Justice Department sent a two-page letter to the committee on Wednesday that 

renewed its request for transcripts of the committee’s more than 1,000 witness interviews related to 

actions undertaken by former President Donald J. Trump and his allies to unlawfully overturn the 2020 

election results as well as the attack on Congress by a pro-Trump mob. The letter was earlier reported 

by Insider. The committee conducted the interviews for this month’s public hearings on the matter, but it 

has no authority to charge anyone involved in the attack on Congress. [Continue Reading] See also: 

Axios , Bloomberg , Forbes , Fox , Guardian , The Hill,  Insider , NBC , NPR , Politico 

CNN: Jan. 6 panel sends request to Ginni Thomas after she says she looks 'forward to talking', 

Shawna Mizelle and Tierney Sneed, June 16, 2022, 10:10 PM House January 6 committee Chair Bennie Thompson on Thursday said the panel investigating the US 

Capitol attack has sent a letter to Virginia "Ginni" Thomas asking her to speak with them about her role 

in the effort to overturn the 2020 electoral results. Thomas, a conservative activist and the wife of 

Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, appears open to speaking with the committee, telling 

conservative outlet The Daily Caller that she "can't wait to clear up misconceptions." [Continue Reading] 

CNN: Charging Trump for fundraising off election lies would face high bar, experts say, Katelyn 

Polantz and Kara Scannell, June 16, 2022, 11:30 AM 

While the House January 6 committee is making its case to the American public that then-President 

Donald Trump ripped off donors with false fundraising pitches after the 2020 election, prosecutors would 

face higher hurdles if they were to pursue a criminal fraud case in court. "Is it a grift? Yeah, it's a grift. 

But is a grift always illegal? Not necessarily," said Paul Pelletier, a former federal prosecutor who 

previously led the Justice Department's fraud section. One state attorney general, New York's Letitia 

James, has already said she will investigate the committee's allegations of fraud and potential 

misconduct. [Continue Reading] 

The Hill: Post-Watergate reforms may frame DOJ decision over prosecuting Trump, John Kruzel, 

June 17, 2022, 6:00 AM 

The break-in at the Watergate complex 50 years ago this week led to a sweeping government ethics 

overhaul that included a push to insulate the Department of Justice (DOJ) from politics. In a historical 

twist, this nearly half-century-old corrective may help frame the DOJ’s fraught decision over whether to 

criminally charge former President Trump for his effort to overturn the 2020 election results. [Continue 

Reading ]

NPR, Up First: [AUDIO] January 6 Takeaways, Long Covid, Student Loan Poll , June 17, 2022, 5:48 

AM 

A recap of the 3rd hearing by the House Jan. 6 panel (1:29). There's a bit of good news coming out of 

research into long COVID (5:07). And Americans support student loan forgiveness, but would rather rein 

in costs (8:57). [Listen ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000470

Washington Examiner: [EDITORIAL] The existential threat to the Jan. 6 committee’s credibility, 

Luis Barrio, June 17, 2022, 12:01 AM 

“January 6th and the lies that led to insurrection have put 2 1/2 centuries of constitutional democracy at 

risk,” House Jan. 6 committee Chairman Bennie Thompson (D-MS) said in his opening statement last 

Thursday. “In this moment, when the dangers to our Constitution and our democracy loom large, nothing 

could be more important.” Well, nothing except trying to improve the chance of Democrats maintaining 

control of Congress, apparently. [Continue Reading ]

NPR: Committee deadlocks on Biden's pick to lead firearms agency, Carrie Johnson, June 16, 

2022, 11:31 AM 

The Senate Judiciary Committee has deadlocked 11-11 along party lines on the nomination of Steve 

Dettelbach to lead the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Democrats can still 

advance the nomination to the full Senate using procedural moves, and three key lawmakers — Joe 

Manchin of West Virginia, Angus King of Maine and John Tester of Montana — say they support his 

nomination. Dettelbach would be the first Senate confirmed ATF director in seven years. [Continue 

Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

AP : Avenatti pleads guilty to fraud, tax charges in California , Amy Taxin, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Incarcerated lawyer Michael Avenatti pleaded guilty Thursday to four counts of wire fraud and a tax-related charge in a federal court case in Southern California accusing him of cheating his clients out of 

millions of dollars. Avenatti, who is in federal custody and representing himself in the case, made the 

plea during a court hearing in Santa Ana where he acknowledged cheating his clients but disagreed with federal prosecutors on how much. [Continue Reading] See also : ABC , CBS , CNN , NBC , Reuters , UPI 

AP : Missouri man pleads guilty in catalytic converter thefts , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:25 PM 

A Missouri man pleaded guilty Thursday to participating in a scheme that transported tens of thousands 

of stolen catalytic converters across state lines as part of a multi-million business. Federal prosecutors 

said Evan Marshall, 24, of Rogersville, pleaded guilty to transporting stolen property across state lines. 

Marshall becomes the sixth of seven people indicted in the conspiracy to plead guilty. The five others 

who have pleaded from Springfield or Rogersville. [Continue Reading] 

NYT : A Businessman Is Acquitted in a Georgetown Admissions Trial , Anemona Hartocollis, June 

16, 2022, 7:03 PM 

A wealthy businessman accused of bribing his daughter’s way into Georgetown University as a tennis 

player was acquitted on all counts Thursday by a federal jury in Boston, the first not-guilty verdict related 

to the government’s Varsity Blues investigation into corrupt college admissions. The businessman, Amin 

Khoury, was accused of giving $180,000 in cash to Gordon Ernst, Georgetown’s tennis coach, to 

facilitate his daughter’s recruitment to the team and admission to the university, even though she was not 

a Georgetown-caliber player. The cash went through a middleman, delivered in a paper bag, according 

to prosecutors. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Ark. Prof Gets 1 Year For Lying To FBI About China Patents , Jack Queen, June 16, 2022, 

5:33  PM 

A former University of Arkansas chemical engineering professor targeted in a controversial Trump-era 

counterespionage initiative was sentenced to a year and a day in prison Thursday for lying to the FBI 

about patents he held in China. [Continue Reading ] See also : KAIT-ABC (Jonesboro, AR) , KFSM-CBS 

(Fort Smith, AR) 

NY Post: California hacker gets 9 years in prison for stealing thousands of nudes, David Propper, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000471

June 16, 2022, 10:39 PM 

A California man who hacked into thousands of iCloud accounts to swipe nudes of young women was sentenced Thursday to nine years behind bars, federal prosecutors announced. Hao Kuo Chi, who 

dubbed himself “icloudripper4you,” stole private photos and videos by illegally breaching into the Apple 

accounts, according to the US Attorney’s Office for the Central District of Florida. [Continue Reading ]

Register Citizen (Torrington, CT): Feds: Hartford man pleads guilty to illegally having gun at 

Manchester hookah lounge , Liz Hardaway, June 16, 2022, 9:00 PM A Hartford man pleaded guilty to illegal gun possession Wednesday after he pointed a gun at someone 

outside of a Manchester hookah lounge, according to federal prosecutors. The incident took place on 

July 24, 2021. U.S. Attorney Vanessa Roberts Avery said when police arrived on the scene, Michael 

Jones, 25, of Hartford, attempted to flee and got rid of the firearm in the lounge’s back parking lot. 

[Continue Reading ]

Miami Herald: Miami man charged with manslaughter in 2020 Bimini boat crash that killed couple ,

Jay Weaver and David Ovalle, June 16, 2022, 8:16 PM 

Over the Fourth of July holiday weekend two years ago, a young Miami couple were passengers on a

motorboat when it crashed at high speed into a rock formation off the coast of Bimini, Bahamas. Javier 

Perez, 29, was found on the jagged rock, but Carolyn Alvarez, 26, disappeared into the dark water. On 

Thursday, federal prosecutors charged the Miami man at the helm of the boat, Josbel Fernandez 

Echevarria, 36, with two counts of involuntary manslaughter in the deaths of Perez and Alvarez. 

[Continue Reading ]

Sacramento Bee : West Sacramento man pleads guilty to stealing hundreds of identities in mail 

fraud scheme , Amelia Davidson, June 16, 2022, 6:27 PM 

A West Sacramento man pleaded guilty Thursday to mail fraud and aggravated identity theft, after 

authorities discovered a scheme involving hundreds of stolen identification materials, as well as forged 

licenses, credit cards and checkbooks. Philip Rich, 49, may face up to 20 years of prison time after 

authorities discovered an elaborate identity theft scheme he carried out, allegedly with a co-defendant 

Kimberly Acevedo. [Continue Reading ]

Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale, FL): Delray Beach man gets 14 years in prison for $20 million Medicare fraud scheme, tax evasion , Ron Hurtibise, June 16, 2022, 6:44 PM 

A Delray Beach businessman was sentenced to 14 years in prison for marketing unnecessary tests and 

products to Medicare beneficiaries and defrauding the government-run health insurance system out of 

more than $20 million. Marc Sporn, 59, ran the scam through numerous Palm Beach County companies that he founded and used his company accounts to purchase luxury items such as high-end watches and diamond jewelry, classic and exotic cars, and two yachts, according to a news release by the U.S. 

Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of Florida. [Continue Reading] 

Hartford Courant: Feds: A Connecticut drug dealer has to forfeit about $165,000 in jewelry and a

Mercedes , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 6:31 PM 

A Hamden man was sentenced to seven years in prison Thursday for fentanyl distribution offenses, 

according to federal authorities. Darryl Small, 34, also must serve five years of supervised release, 

according to federal authorities. [Continue Reading] 

Pioneer Press (Saint Paul, MN): Former Stillwater prison guard, inmate indicted on meth 

distribution scheme , Nick Ferraro, June 16, 2022, 6:28 PM 

A guard at Minnesota Correctional Facility-Stillwater was in a romantic relationship with an inmate 

serving a murder sentence and together they ran a methamphetamine operation inside the prison for at 

least the first three months of this year, according to federal charges. A grand jury this week indicted 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000472

former corrections officer Faith Rose Gratz, 24, of St. Paul, and inmate Axel Rene Kramer, 35, on 

federal charges for their alleged roles in a drug distribution scheme that was carried out at the state’s 

largest high-security prison from at least January until early April. [Continue Reading] See also:  KMSP-

Fox (Minneapolis, MN), Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN) 

Atlanta Journal-Constitution: Alleged gang members indicted by feds after bodies found at 

Gwinnett storage unit , Caroline Silva, June 16, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Five alleged gang members were indicted on murder and federal racketeering charges in connection with 

three North Georgia deaths in 2018 and 2019, officials said Wednesday. Philmon Deshawn Chambers, 

33, of Atlanta; Lesley Chappell Green, 34, of Stone Mountain; Robert Maurice Carlisle, 33, of Lithonia; 

Shabazz Larry Guidry, 27, of Decatur; and Andrea Paige Browner, 27, of Athens were each indicted on 

charges of murder and the Racketeer Influenced and Corruption Organizations (RICO) Act, said Melissa 

Hodges, the spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Middle District of Georgia.. [Continue 

Reading ]

Erie News Now (Erie, PA): Harborcreek Man Pleads Guilty to Sending Ammunition to Netherlands, Possession of Destruction Devices, Savannah Young, June 16, 2022, 5:57 PM 

A Harborcreek man has pleaded guilty to sending ammunition out of the country and possession of 

destructive devices, the U.S. Department of Justice announced Thursday. Donald Witherow, 48, entered 

the plea to charges of violating federal laws for smuggling goods from the United States and possessing 

unregistered firearms. [Continue Reading ]

Wyoming Tribune Eagle (Laramie County, WY): Wyoming man accused of trafficking fentanyl 

within 1,000 feet of a school, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

A federal grand jury has indicted a Cheyenne man suspected of trafficking fentanyl within 1,000 feet of a

school, the U.S. Attorney's Office for Wyoming said Thursday. Robert Butler has been charged with 

possession with intent to distribute fentanyl within 1,000 feet of an elementary school and possession 

with intent to distribute cocaine. [Continue Reading] 

Las Vegas Review-Journal: Man gets prison for credit card scheme, Vegas ticket purchases ,

Glenn Puit, June 16, 2022, 4:44 PM 

A California man who stole credit card numbers and used them to purchase some $500,000 worth of 

tickets for events in Las Vegas was sentenced this week to five years in prison. Carl Dewain Jefferson, 

36, admitted to fraudulently obtaining over 700 credit card numbers from people by using “unauthorized 

access devices” from 2014 to 2015, according to a Nevada U.S. attorney’s office press release. 

[Continue Reading ] See also : KLAS-CBS (Las Vegas, NV) 

Hartford Courant : West Hartford man found guilty of drug trafficking in heroin case , Unattributed, 

June 16, 2022, 4:38 PM 

A 37-year old West Hartford man was convicted of trafficking in heroin at the conclusion of a trial 

Thursday before a federal judge. Dwayne Thompson was charged with an associate, Jose Carrasquillo, 

for arranging to buy a distribution quantity of heroin. Federal prosecutors said the two agreed to buy 

more than six pounds of heroin for nearly $130,000 from an undercover law enforcement officer posing 

as a heroin wholesaler. [Continue Reading ]

KAYS (Hays, KS): 20 Mexican nationals accused in Kansas City heroin, meth conspiracy ,

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:00 PM 

Twenty Mexican nationals are among 39 defendants indicted by a federal grand jury for their roles in a

$4.7 million conspiracy to distribute more than 335 kilograms of methamphetamine and 22 kilograms of 

heroin over the past two years, according to the United State's Attorney. “This operation took a

significant amount of illegal drugs off the street, and disrupted a large Mexican drug-trafficking 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000473

organization in the Kansas City metropolitan area,” said U.S. Attorney Teresa Moore. [Continue Reading ]

See also : KSHB-NBC (Kansas City, MO) , WDAF-Fox (Kansas City, MO) 

Houston Chronicle (Houston, TX): Houston drug smuggler's destination was the Galleria, feds say, 

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 12:00 PM 

A Houston man who said he was supposed to smuggle 10 pounds of fentanyl hidden in the battery of his SUV to someone waiting at the Galleria was sentenced Thursday to federal prison, authorities said. Juan 

Alvarado-Vargas, 22, pleaded guilty in April to conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute 

fentanyl, about six months after he was stopped at a South Texas checkpoint, federal authorities said. 

[Continue Reading ]

WSMV-NBC (Nashville, TN): Columbia man faces federal charges after running over Franklin 

officer, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 9:03 PM 

A Columbia man accused of running over a Franklin Police officer during a traffic stop now faces federal 

charges, according to the U.S. Attorney’s office. A federal indictment unsealed on Wednesday charges 

Roy Gene Nicholson III, 26, with drug distribution and firearm charges, U.S. Attorney Mark H. Wildasin 

said. Nicholson was charged with possession of marijuana with intent to distribute and possession of a

firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime. He was arrested Wednesday by the United States 

Marshals Service and is in federal custody. [Continue Reading ]

WATE-ABC (Knoxville, TN): Jefferson County woman sentenced on child porn charges, Savannah 

Young, June 16, 2022, 8:45 PM Jefferson County woman sentenced to over 21 years in prison for production and potential distribution of 

child pornography. On Thursday, Shana Coffey, 42, of Jefferson City was sentenced to serve 262 

months in federal prison for producing and attempting to distribute child pornography, followed by a

lifetime on supervised release. [Continue Reading] See also: WBIR-NBC (Knoxville, TN),  WVLT-CBS 

(Knoxville, TN) 

KTVQ-CBS (Billings, MT): Billings man sentenced to minimum of 27 years for drugs and human 

trafficking , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:35 PM 

A Billings man faces at least 27 years in federal prison after he was convicted Thursday of multiple drug 

and human-trafficking crimes, according to U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich. Angelo Corey Stackhouse, 

52, was found guilty of all crimes in a bench trial by U.S. District Judge Susan P. Watters. [Continue 

Reading ]

KOLO-ABC (Reno, NV): Four arrested in investigation into South Lake Tahoe drugs , Steve Timko, 

June 16, 2022, 8:25 PM 

Federal authorities arrested four people Thursday on suspicion of trafficking in heroin and 

methamphetamine around South Lake Tahoe, the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Sacramento announced. They 

arrested Sarah Anderson, 32, Fabian Gomez, 33, Epifanio Ramirez, 47, and Joaleen Rogers, 53, all of 

South Lake Tahoe as part of Operation Bear Trap. [Continue Reading] 

WMAR-ABC (Baltimore, MD): Baltimore man pleads guilty to attempted armed robbery while on 

supervised release , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:16 PM 

A Baltimore man faces a maximum sentence of 20 years after pleading guilty to an attempted armed 

robbery while on supervised release from prison. Larry Haynes, 25, pleaded guilty to attempting to rob a

Baltimore convenience store on January 21, 2021. According to documents, the clerk refused to comply 

with Haynes' demand before he showed the clerk a gun in his waistband. [Continue Reading] 

KECI-NBC (Missoula, MT): Former East Helena police chief sentenced for distributing child 

pornography , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 8:00 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000474

East Helena's former chief of police was sentenced for distributing child pornography through social 

media, according to U.S. Attorney Jesse Laslovich. William Daly Harrington, 43, pleaded guilty in 

December to distribution of child pornography and is sentenced to five years and six months in prison, 

followed by five years of supervised release and a $7,500 fine. [Continue Reading] 

KARE-NBC (Minneapolis, MN): Twin Cities house flipper pleads guilty to defrauding Minnesotans 

out of nearly $3.2 million , Connor O'Neal, June 16, 2022, 7:17 PM 

A Twin Cities house-flipper pleaded guilty Thursday to defrauding more than $3 million out of Minnesota 

homeowners. Suzanne Griffiths, 46, is accused of executing a fraud scheme from 2018 through 

December 2020 where she promised individuals who invested in her house-flipping businesses that there 

would be repayment in return for up-front investments, according to court documents. [Continue Reading ]

WTEN-ABC (Albany, NY): Man sentenced for traveling to meet minor for sex, Richard Roman, June 

16, 2022, 6:52 PM 

A man from Maine has been sentenced for child pornography and attempting to meet a local minor for 

sex. United States Attorney Carla B. Freedman said that Jay Scott Cloutier, 58, of Lyman, Maine was 

sentenced to 15 years and 6 months in prison for child exploitation offenses. As part of his guilty plea, 

Cloutier admits that between April 2019 and September 2019, he exchanged sexual explicit text 

messages in an attempt to entice a minor into engaging in sexual acts with him. [Continue Reading ]

WNCN-CBS (Goldsboro, NC): NC drug trafficker who stashed cocaine, heroin in car ‘trap’ during 

trips from Atlanta gets 17 years in prison, Joedy McCreary, June 16, 2022, 6:34 PM 

A North Carolina man who hid several kilograms of cocaine and heroin in his car while driving from 

Atlanta to Pitt County will spend more than 17 years in prison, federal prosecutors say. The U.S. 

Department of Justice said Alterick Wallisima Boyd of Winterville on Thursday was sentenced to 210 

months in prison. [Continue Reading ]

KGUN-ABC (Tucson, AZ): Pima County judge sentences woman to nine years for importing meth ,

Caleb J. Fernández, June 16, 2022, 6:33 PM 

U.S.  District Judge John C. Hinderaker has sentenced Connie Sue Lorenzo-Molina, 30, of Slater, Mo. to 

nine years in prison. Lorenzo-Molina received her sentence Tuesday after pleading guilty to importation 

of methamphetamine. Public Affairs Officer Esther Winne says the 30-year-old's sentence includes five 

years of supervision upon release. [Continue Reading ]

WJZ-CBS (Baltimore, MD): Baltimore Man, 21, Faces Federal Charges In Brutal Death Of Alleged Drug Trafficker Held For Ransom, Court Docs Say , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 6:13 PM 

A Baltimore man faces federal charges in the death of an alleged drug trafficker from California who was 

kidnapped and held for ransom before he was shot and set on fire, according to court documents. Ziyon 

Thompson, 21, is charged with use of a firearm resulting in death in relation to a drug trafficking crime, 

interference with commerce by extortion, drug conspiracy and related charges. [Continue Reading] 

KCBD-NBC (Lubbock, TX): Boukamp convicted on all charges after traveling to engage in sex with 

14-year-old Lubbock girl, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 6:03 PM 

A 22-year-old Michigan man has been found guilty on multiple charges after traveling to engage in sexual 

conduct with a 14-year-old girl from Lubbock. Thomas John Boukamp fired six attorneys and chose to 

represent himself in the trial, which concluded on Thursday. [Continue Reading] See also:  KFYO-AM 

(Lubbock, TX) 

WFOR-CBS (Miami, FL): Coral Springs police officer accused of using COVID relief funds to 

repair vintage car , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:57 PM 

A Coral Springs police officer has found himself on the wrong side of the law. Jason Scott Carter is 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000475

accused of falsely applying for and using COVID relief funds. Federal prosecutors said the 44-year-old 

from Boca Raton "submitted a fraudulent Economic Injury Disaster Loan ("EIDL") application and loan 

agreement on behalf of Jason S. Carter, Inc., a South Florida business he allegedly owned and 

operated." [Continue Reading ] See also : Sun Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale, FL) , WTVJ-NBC (Miami, FL) 

WNCN-CBS (Goldsboro, NC): Wake County man sentenced to 11+ years for child porn, 

Department of Justice says , Kathryn Hubbard, June 16, 2022, 4:59 PM 

A Holly Springs man was sentenced Wednesday to more than 11 years in prison and 20 years of 

supervised release for receipt of child pornography, federal officials said. Ryan Evers, 28, pled guilty to 

the charge in March 2021. In Sept. 2018, Evers was communicating with a child through social media, 

according to court documents. Evers discussed wanting to have sexual intercourse with the child and court documents said he encouraged the minor to send explicit images to him. [Continue Reading ]

KVIA-ABC (El Paso, TX): Federal officials: El Paso man pleads guilty to receiving child 

pornography, David Gonzalez, June 16, 2022, 4:46 PM 

A 29-year-old El Paso man pleaded guilty this week to receiving and distributing a visual depiction 

involving the sexual exploitation of a minor, according to federal officials. Investigators say Kevin Holguin-Cano faces 20 years in prison. No scheduled date has been set. [Continue Reading] See also:  KDBC -

CBS (El Paso, TX) , KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX) 

Patch (Merrimack, NH): Merrimack Man Accused Of Lying On Form, Buying Guns For Another 

Person , Tony Schinella, June 16, 2022, 4:38 PM 

A man from Merrimack faces a felony charge in U.S. District Court after being indicted by a grand jury. 

Leith Sukkar, 22, of Merrimack was arrested in Manchester on Thursday on a single count of false 

statement during the acquisition of a firearm. He was due to be arraigned in U.S. District Court in 

Concord today. [Continue Reading] 

WBAL-NBC (Baltimore, MD): Pain clinic's medical director pleads guilty in federal oxycodone 

case , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:34 PM 

A doctor pleaded guilty Thursday to distributing and dispensing oxycodone at a pain management office 

in Towson where he was Medical Director and part owner. Norman Rosen, 84, of Towson, served as 

the medical director and part-owner of Rosen-Hoffberg Rehabilitation and Pain Management, federal 

prosecutors said. [Continue Reading] 

KMOV-CBS (St. Louis, MO): Man gets 10 years in prison for selling drugs to undercover DEA 

agent , Matt Woods, June 16, 2022, 4:32 PM 

St. Louis County man Bryant Taylor was sentenced to a decade in prison Thursday for selling 

oxycodone, heroin and fentanyl to an undercover DEA agent in 2019. Taylor was also found in March of 

2020 with fentanyl and cocaine in his car. He was arrested in October of that year and found with 

fentanyl, $12,000 in cash and multiple guns. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): St. Paul man sentenced for COVID fraud scheme , Unattributed, June 

16, 2022, 2:41 PM 

A St. Paul man has been sentenced to more than six years in prison for a COVID-19 fraud scheme. The 

U.S.  Attorney’s Office says 33-year-old Kyle William Brenizer owned and managed True-Cut 

Construction in Brooklyn Park. On May 1, 2020, he submitted a false and misleading Paycheck 

Protection Program application for True-Cut, seeking $841,000. [Continue Reading] 

WCYB-NBC/CW (Bristol, VA): Richlands salon owner received nearly $30K in fraudulent COVID-19 

unemployment funds: DOJ, Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A Richlands hair and nail salon owner pleaded guilty after receiving nearly $30,000 in fraudulent COVID -

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000476

19 unemployment funds, according to the U.S. Department of Justice. Mandi Dawn Hammond, 36, 

pleaded guilty to one count of fraud in connection with a major disaster or emergency benefits program 

and one count of mail fraud. [Continue Reading ]

WMUR-ABC (Manchester, NH): New Hampshire man faces possession of machine gun charge , KC 

Downey, June 16, 2022, 2:22 PM A New Hampshire man was indicted by a federal grand jury this week on a charge of possession of a

machine gun, officials with the office of the U.S. attorney for the District of New Hampshire announced on 

Thursday. Kyle Morris, 22, of Salem, possessed two machine guns "in violation of federal law" on Feb. 

16, officials said. In February, FBI agents executed a search warrant in connection with this case. See 

raw video from the scene of the investigation in the video player above. [Continue Reading] 

WCMH-NBC (Columbus, OH): Dublin man pleads guilty to using hidden camera to produce child 

pornography, Joe Clark, June 16, 2022, 2:02 PM 

A Dublin man is facing up to 30 years in prison after pleading guilty to federal charges of producing and 

possessing child pornography. Timothy W. Wright, 50, admitted to using a hidden camera in his 

bathroom to produce child pornography, as well as paying three minors at least $300 for nude photos, 

according to Kenneth Parker, U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Ohio. [Continue Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Minneapolis man sentenced to 22 years for illegal gun possession ,

Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 2:25 PM 

A Minneapolis man has been sentenced to more than two decades in prison for illegal gun possession. 

The U.S. Attorney’s Office says 60-year-old Gregory Lynn McCoy was sentenced Thursday to more than 22 years (272 months) in prison, followed by five years of supervised release. Prosecutors say law 

enforcement was told by a confidential informant that McCoy — who has multiple prior felony convictions 

— had a gun and drugs in 2019. [Continue Reading] 

WOWK-CBS (Huntington, WV): West Virginia man sentenced to nearly 20 years on meth charges, 

Jessica Patterson, June 16, 2022, 12:54 PM 

A West Virginia man will spend nearly 20 years behind bars after being convicted on methamphetamine 

charges. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Shane Kelly Fulkerson, 46, of St. Albans was 

sentenced on Thursday, June 16, 2022, to 19 years and seven months in prison, which will be followed 

by five years of supervised release, for two counts of possession with intent to distribute 

methamphetamine. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (Tampa, FL): 21-Year-Old Tampa Man Indicted On Gun Possession Charges , D'Ann 

Lawrence White, June 16, 2022, 11:17 AM 

A 21-year-old Tampa man has been indicted in U.S. District Court on charges of being a convicted felon 

in possession of a firearm and ammunition. In United States Attorney Roger B. Handberg's continuing 

efforts to get guns off Tampa streets, Cedric Durham was arrested Monday and made his first appearance before United States Magistrate Judge Thomas Wilson the following day. [Continue 

Reading ]

KSTP-ABC (Saint Paul, MN): Federal jury convicts St. Paul man of meth, gun charges , Josh 

Skluzacek, June 16, 2022, 11:12 AM 

A St. Paul man has been found guilty of methamphetamine and gun charges by a federal jury. The U.S. 

Attorney’s Office says the jury found 44-year-old William Howard Proto, Jr., guilty of two counts of 

possession with intent to distribute meth, one count of gun possession in furtherance of drug trafficking 

and one count of felon in possession of a gun. Authorities say Proto pleaded guilty to the gun possession 

as a felon charge during the trial. [Continue Reading] 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000477

CIVIL RIGHTS 

Reuters: N.Y. leaves disabled to 'languish' in institutions, new lawsuit claims , Brendan Pierson, 

June 16, 2022, 1:00 PM 

New York state is facing a proposed class action accusing it of allowing people with developmental 

disabilities who qualify for community-based services through Medicaid to remain in restricted institutional 

settings.The lawsuit, filed Wednesday in Manhattan federal court by the legal non-profit Disability Rights 

New York (DRNY) and Kasowitz Benson Torres, accuses the state Department of Health (DOH) and its 

Office for People with Developmental Disability (OPWDD) of shirking their legal obligation to arrange for 

community-based services when possible. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo : [EDITORIAL] Impunity for unwarranted police killings is still a default , Editorial Board, June 

16, 2022, 1:03 PM 

After a legal odyssey of nearly five years, the Justice Department decided last week not to reopen the 

federal criminal civil rights investigation of two hotheaded U.S. Park Police officers who shot to death 

Bijan Ghaisar, an unarmed 25-year-old accountant. By declining to prosecute them for a killing that 

stemmed from a fender bender in suburban Virginia, Attorney General Merrick Garland’s department has 

effectively shrugged at an apparently unjustified killing. [Continue Reading] 

CIVIL LAW 

Reuters : Mississippi prosecutor ducks lawsuit claiming racial bias in jury selection , Nate 

Raymond, June 16, 2022, 2:01 PM A divided federal appeals court on Thursday dismissed a lawsuit accusing a long-serving district attorney 

in Mississippi of regularly discriminating against Black people by striking them from juries due to their 

race. The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 that four Black Mississippi residents eligible for jury 

service and a local chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People lacked 

standing to sue Montgomery County District Attorney Doug Evans. [Continue Reading] 

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

NYT: Homeland Security Department Will Make Changes to Its Disciplinary Process , Chris 

Cameron, June 16, 2022, 10:00 PM 

The Department of Homeland Security announced on Thursday that it would overhaul the disciplinary 

process for its employees after The New York Times reported that the agency’s inspector general 

removed damaging findings from investigative reports about domestic violence and sexual misconduct 

committed by employees. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: Illegal Border Crossings Hit Record in May , Alicia A. Caldwell, June 16, 2022, 3:32 PM 

Arrests of migrants illegally crossing the U.S. border with Mexico hit a record high in May, according to 

new data released by the Department of Homeland Security. U.S. Border Patrol agents made 222,656 

arrests of people crossing the border illegally, a nearly 10% increase compared with April. The agency 

said about 25% of arrests in May involved repeated border crossers, with agents arresting 177,793 

unique people. Border Patrol agents have been dealing with record numbers of illegal border crossings 

for almost two years, with drastic increases recorded in the past several months as pandemic-era travel 

restrictions have eased. [Continue Reading ] See also:  WaPo 

LAT : Coins depicting Border Patrol agent grabbing Haitian migrant trigger investigation , Hamed 

Aleaziz, June 16, 2022, 4:56 PM 

The photograph encapsulates the intensity of the clashes between Border Patrol agents and Haitian 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000478

immigrants desperate to get into the United States. An agent on horseback leans over, grabbing a man 

by the shirt as a rein dangles. Now an image mirroring the Sept. 19 photo by Paul Ratje of AFP has 

appeared on a “challenge coin” typically collected by agents, law enforcement officials and aficionados. 

[Continue Reading ]

NBC: Number of migrants crossing border hits another record, with surges in migration by nationalities once rarely seen, Julia Ainsley, June 16, 2022, 6:16 PM 

The number of undocumented immigrant crossings at the southwest border once again broke record highs in May, prompted in large part by surges in migration by nationalities that were previously rarely found at the U.S.-Mexico border, according to Customs and Border Protection data obtained by NBC 

News. CBP stopped migrants at the Southwest border of the U.S. more than 239,000 times in May, 

though some migrants attempted to cross more than once. The number of individual migrants who 

attempted to cross the border was 157,555, still up by 2 percent over April’s previous record high. The 

number of border crossers from India, Turkey, Russia, Haiti, Brazil, Colombia and Nicaragua increased 

in part because it is harder for border agents to subject some of those nationalities to the Covid-19 

border restrictions known as Title 42 that let the U.S. quickly send migrants back to their home countries 

or into Mexico. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: 5th Circ. Shoots Down Nonprofit Bid To Crack Open Title 42 , Alyssa Aquino, June 16, 

2022, 8:43 PM 

The Fifth Circuit on Thursday rejected a legal service provider's attempts to open up parts of the U.S. -

Mexico border to asylum-seekers by narrowing an injunction order requiring the Biden administration to 

enforce COVID-19 border restrictions nationwide. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Ohio Says High Court Limits Don't Apply To ICE Ops Case , Alyssa Aquino, June 16, 2022, 

8:00  PM 

Ohio has rebuked the Biden administration's attempts to use a recent high court ruling to notch a Sixth 

Circuit victory in litigation challenging its immigration enforcement priorities, saying the justices' new limits 

on courts' injunctive immigration power warrants, at most, a remand. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : 5th Circ. Urged To Keep Alive Texas Migrant Transport Suit , Mike LaSusa, June 16, 2022, 

5:49  PM 

A group of border shelters has urged the Fifth Circuit to back a Texas federal judge's decision allowing a

lawsuit to proceed against the governor of Texas over his order directing law enforcement to stop cars 

suspected of carrying certain migrants. [Continue Reading ]

Law360 : Split 6th Circ. Gives Honduran Asylum-Seekers Another Shot , Eric Heisig, June 16, 2022, 

5:23  PM 

A split Sixth Circuit panel told the Board of Immigration Appeals to take another look at whether a

Honduran woman and her two children can stay in the U.S. as refugees after they claimed they suffered 

violence and intimidation by the brutal MS-13 gang. [Continue Reading] 

Kansas City Star : Appeals court rejects civil claim against ICE officer who allegedly shoved KC 

lawyer, Bill Lukitsch, June 16, 2022, 7:27 PM 

A federal appeals court ruled Thursday that an officer with U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 

did not violate the constitutional rights of an immigration lawyer who was injured after allegedly being 

shoved to a concrete sidewalk outside of a Kansas City detention facility in 2018. [Continue Reading] 

Laredo Morning Times : Fentanyl smuggler sentenced to prison , Cesar Rodriguez, June 16, 2022, 

5:00  PM 

A Houston resident has been sentenced to prison for attempting to deliver fentanyl at the Galleria Mall, 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000479

according to the U.S. Attorney’s Office. Juan Alvarado-Vargas, 22, pleaded guilty on April 5 to 

conspiracy to possess with the intent to distribute fentanyl. On Thursday, U.S. District Judge Marina 

Garcia Marmolejo sentenced Alvarado-Vargas to 72 months in prison followed by three years of 

supervised release. [Continue Reading ]

ANTITRUST 

Bloomberg: White House Weighs Fuel-Export Limits as Pump Prices Surge , Jennifer A Dlouhy and 

Ari Natter, June 16, 2022, 4:48 PM 

Top Biden administration officials are weighing limits on exports of fuel as the White House struggles to 

contain gasoline prices that have topped $5 per gallon. Discussions around capping gasoline and diesel 

exports have picked up in recent days, as President Joe Biden intensified his criticism of soaring oil 

company profits, said people familiar with the matter who asked for anonymity to describe private 

conversations. [Continue Reading] See also : USA Today 

Law360: Meta Says TikTok Parent Co. Has Key Docs To Fight FTC, Bryan Koenig, June 16, 2022, 

8:29  PM 

Meta asked a D.C. federal judge Thursday to help it subpoena the Chinese parent companies of TikTok 

and WeChat, arguing their U.S. affiliates do not have all the information the Facebook parent needs to 

rebut Federal Trade Commission allegations of a largely uncontested monopoly. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: FTC Warns Drugmakers, Middlemen Over Rebates , Matthew Perlman, June 16, 2022, 7:16 

PM 

The Federal Trade Commission issued a policy statement warning drug companies and pharmacy 

benefits managers that enforcers are looking to go after rebates and other pricing schemes the agency 

said block patients' access to cheaper medications. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: DOJ Calls Baseball's Antitrust Exemption 'An Aberration', Matthew Perlman, June 16, 

2022, 6:33 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice has waded into a suit from minor league teams that lost their affiliations 

with Major League Baseball clubs, urging a New York federal court to view baseball's antitrust 

exemption narrowly and noting that the exemption is based on a rationale that has already been 

discredited by the U.S. Supreme Court. [Continue Reading ]

Law360: [ANALYSIS] Mitigating Labor Antitrust Risks As Enforcement Ramps Up, Michael 

Murray, Michael Spafford and Carson Sullivan, June 16, 2022, 5:44 PM 

The U.S. Department of Justice's Antitrust Division and the Federal Trade Commission recently 

ratcheted up their prioritization of antitrust enforcement in the labor markets. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law : FTC Targets Pharmacy Agent Fees in Push for Lower Celine Castronuovo , June 

16, 2022, 4:18 PM 

High drug rebates that pharmacy benefit managers require from drugmakers may violate federal 

competition laws if they stifle patient access, according to a policy statement adopted unanimously by 

the FTC on Thursday. The Federal Trade Commission voted 5-0 to issue a document outlining how it will 

use existing competition and consumer protection laws to examine rebates and fees paid by drug 

manufacturers to pharmacy benefit managers—the entities that run prescription drug benefits. [Continue 

Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000480

Reuters: Greens say vacate 3,500 drilling permits in new climate change lawsuit , Barbara Grzincic, 

June 16, 2022, 3:38 PM 

The Biden administration must vacate thousands of permits it has issued to drill for oil and gas on federal 

lands and stop issuing any more until it considers the cumulative, nationwide effect of increased 

greenhouse gas emissions from new wells, two environmental groups said in a new lawsuit. [Continue 

Reading ]

Law360: Green Groups Challenge Removal Of Large Tree Protections , Joyce Hanson, June 16, 

2022, 9:18 PM 

Six environmental nonprofits have hit the U.S. Forest Service with a suit in Oregon federal court 

challenging the agency's decision to remove longstanding protections for large and old trees in the 

Pacific Northwest as part of an amended forest management plan. [Continue Reading] 

Law360: Mich., Wis. Biz Group Backs Bad River Tribe In Line 5 Suit , Andrew Westney, June 16, 

2022, 8:17 PM 

A group representing Michigan and Wisconsin businesses urged a federal judge Thursday to shut down Enbridge Energy Co.'s Line 5 pipeline on the Bad River Band's tribal land, saying there's little risk to the 

local economy from a shutdown, while a potential oil spill could prove catastrophic for the businesses. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360 : 8th Circ. Weighs If Red States Can Fight Carbon Cost Metric , Morgan Conley, June 16, 

2022, 5:30 PM 

The Eighth Circuit on Thursday probed whether over a dozen red states, led by Missouri, jumped the gun 

by suing over the Biden administration's method for estimating costs related to greenhouse gas pollution 

instead of waiting to challenge specific regulations integrating the metric. [Continue Reading] 

TAX 

KPIX-CBS (San Francisco, CA): Vallejo woman sentenced for ID theft of disabled victims to obtain 

tax refunds , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 4:37 PM 

A judge sentenced Vallejo resident Tamara Manuel Thursday to more than three years in prison for 

stealing the identities of severely disabled persons in order to get federal tax refunds. U.S Attorney for 

the Eastern District of California Phillip Talbert said in a press statement that Manuel carried out the 

scheme while working at Sonoma Development Center (SDC), a large, state-run facility serving people 

with developmental disabilities. [Continue Reading ] See also:  San Francisco Chronicle 

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

AP: Police: 2 Dead, 1 Hurt in Church Shooting; Suspect Detained, Unattributed, June 17, 2022, 

12:30  AM 

A lone suspect fired on a small group meeting at a suburban church near one of Alabama’s major cities 

Thursday evening, fatally wounding two people and injuring a third before being taken into custody, 

authorities said. The attack occurred at Saint Stephen’s Episcopal Church in the Birmingham suburb of 

Vestavia Hills, Police Capt. Shane Ware said. He said officers rushed to the church after dispatchers got 

a call reporting an active shooter at the church at 6:22 p.m. [Continue Reading ] See also:  CBS , CNN ,

NYT , USA Today 

CBS: 140 pounds of meth seized, 4 arrests made in Sonoma County drug investigation, Maggie 

Fusek, June 16, 2022, 5:37 PM 

Four people were arrested and more than 140 pounds of methamphetamine were seized in connection 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000481

with a drug trafficking operation in Sonoma County, authorities said. According to the San Francisco 

office of the Drug Enforcement Administration, law enforcement served search warrants in Cloverdale 

and Santa Rosa starting Wednesday night. The warrants were served following a 16-month joint 

investigation by the DEA, Sonoma County Sheriff's Office and the Marin County Sheriff's Office. 

[Continue Reading ]

Washington Examiner: FBI investigating 'series of attacks and threats' against pregnancy centers 

and faith-based groups, Jerry Dunleavy, June 16, 2022, 9:47 PM The FBI is investigating the rash of attacks and vandalism targeting anti-abortion activist groups and 

pregnancy centers across the country. The bureau told the Washington Examiner on Thursday that it did 

not have a comment on any specific groups carrying out the violence but acknowledged an inquiry is 

underway. [Continue Reading] 

The Oregonian (Portland, OR): U.S. Marshals lead Operation Safer Multnomah, Unattributed, June 

16, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A group of deputy U.S Marshals knock on a door to speak with a resident as they try to learn the 

location of a man sought on an arrest warrant as part of Operation Safer Multnomah on Friday, June 10, 

2022 in Portland. [Continue Reading ]

KTSM-NBC (El Paso, TX): EPCSO has one of their own graduate from FBI Academy, Luis Barrio, 

June 17, 2022, 1:24 AM 

El Paso Special Agent in Charge Jeffrey Downey announced that Lieutenant Correy Harrison of the El 

Paso County Sheriff’s Office, and Lieutenant Caleb Lacey with the Odessa Police Department, have graduated from the FBI National Academy Class #282. [Continue Reading ]

Patch (Healdsburg, CA): DEA Announces 4 Sonoma County Arrests For Suspected Meth 

Trafficking, Maggie Fusek, June 16, 2022, 11:10 PM 

Four people were arrested Thursday in Sonoma County in connection with a large-scale drug distribution 

ring, federal authorities announced. The arrests were the result of a 16-month-long investigation by the 

U.S.  Drug Enforcement Administration's Santa Rosa Resident Office, the Sonoma County Sheriff's Office 

and the Marin County Sheriff's Office into a drug trafficking organization suspected of distributing meth 

throughout the region, the DEA's San Francisco Field Division said in a news release. [Continue Reading ]

KVRR-Fox (Fargo, ND): CAIR wants FBI to investigate EGF mosque fire as a hate crime, Hami 

Arain, June 16, 2022, 8:00 PM 

The Council on American-Islamic Relations wants FBI involvement nearly two weeks after a possible 

hate crime where a woman attacked an East Grand Forks Mosque during morning prayer. Fifty-seven -

year-old Suzette Gay Thompson of Thief River Falls is arrested on an arson charge and could face up to 

20 years in prison and a $20,000 fine. [Continue Reading] 

WJW-Fox (Cleveland, OH): FBI investigated Deshaun Watson, one accuser, detective says, Peggy 

Gallek, Ed Gallek, June 16, 2022, 7:31 PM 

A Houston police detective has testified FBI officials told her they were investigating Deshaun Watson 

and one of the 24 women who have filed lawsuits against the quarterback. Houston Police Detective 

Kamesha Baker made the statement during a deposition taken earlier this month in Houston. Baker, who 

investigated 10 criminal complaints made against Watson, revealed during the deposition that she had 

communicated with the FBI. [Continue Reading] 

WCBI-CBS (Columbus, MS): FBI raids local Columbus business J5, Stephanie Poole, June 16, 2022, 

7:30  PM 

Around 9 a.m. federal agencies made their way inside the J5 building in Columbus. State and local law 

enforcement agencies also assisted going through the building and collecting files. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000482

WDHN-ABC (Dothan, AL): Samson man turns himself into U.S. Marshals on 2019 child porn 

charges, Seth Feiner, June 16, 2022, 7:12 PM 

A Samson man has turned himself into authorities on a charge of possession of child pornography dating 

back to 2019. Harley Dakota Wambles was indicted in November of 2019 on a child porn possession, 

per the indictment record. Wambles then turned himself into the U.S. Marshals Office on Wednesday, 

June 15th, according to his attorney, David Harrison. [Continue Reading] 

WFTX-Fox (Naples, FL): FBI and Fort Myers Police investigating social media threats against local 

NAACP chapter, Briana Brownlee, June 16, 2022, 6:15 PM 

The Lee County NAACP has the Fort Myers Police Department along with the FBI in Tampa looking into 

recent posts that escalated into serious threats of violence. President of the Lee County NAACP Jame 

Muwakkil says the threats started on June 10, 2022. [Continue Reading ]

KITV-ABC (Honolulu, HI): KPD, FBI find homemade explosives, meth during raid on Lihue home, 

Briana Brownlee, June 16, 2022, 6:00 PM 

Authorities arrested a Kauai man after police and the federal agents found illegal drugs and homemade 

explosives in his Lihue home. [Continue Reading ]

KDKA-CBS (Pittsburgh, PA): FBI Searching For Suspected Bank Robber, Kasey Chronis, June 16, 

2022, 5:36 PM 

The FBI and Reserve Township Police are asking for help finding details about a suspected bank robber. 

The FBI has released photos of a man they believe robbed the Standard Bank along Mt. Troy Road last 

month. [Continue Reading] 

WIBW-AM (Topeka, KS): FBI Chicago warns of increase in sextortion schemes targeting young 

boys, Kasey Chronis, June 16, 2022, 4:56 PM The FBI is warning parents of an increase in sextortion schemes targeting teenage boys. In Chicago and 

nationwide, officials have seen an alarming rise in cases where adults are posing as girls and young 

women online, and coercing young boys to engage in sexually explicit activity via video chat. In some 

cases, predators are using trafficking victims to lure teenage boys into producing sexual content. 

[Continue Reading ]

WOIO-CBS (Cleveland, OH): U.S. Marshals, SWAT arrest accused robber who pepper-sprayed 

employees, Julia Bingel, June 16, 2022, 4:03 PM A robbery suspect wanted by multiple police agencies for robberies, thefts, shoplifting and fraud was 

arrested after a more than a three hour stand-off on Cleveland’s East Side Thursday. U.S. Marshals and 

Cleveland SWAT located Sheldon Payne, 29, in the 9600 block of Nelson Ave. According to the U.S. 

Marshals, Payne barricaded himself inside with a woman and small child. [Continue Reading ]

KSLA-CBS (Shreveport, LA): FBI offering reward in Shamia Little investigation, Jade Myers and 

Brittney Hazelton, June 16, 2022, 1:16 PM The Federal Bureau of Investigation is now offering a reward for any information regarding the death of 

17-year-old Shamia Little. The FBI Shreveport Resident Agency is working with the Shreveport Police 

Department to solve the homicide of 17-year-old Shamia Little. They are now offering $50,000 for 

information leading to an arrest. [Continue Reading] 

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

Axios : Judge says DOJ must decide if it wants to seek death penalty for Buffalo shooting 

suspect , Jacob Knutson, June 16, 2022, 5:00 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000483

A federal judge said Thursday that the Department of Justice must decide whether it seeks the death 

penalty for the man accused of killing 10 people during a mass shooting in Buffalo, New York, in May, 

according to Reuters. Driving the news: The Justice Department charged Payton Gendron, 18, with 26 

counts of federal hate crimes and firearm violations on Wednesday, though Attorney General Merrick 

Garland declined to say if the department will seek the death penalty as punishment. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

Reuters : Liberal Justice Sotomayor says U.S. Supreme Court 'mistakes' can be fixed , Lawrence 

Hurley, June 16, 2022, 8:17 PM Liberal Justice Sonia Sotomayor said on Thursday the U.S. Supreme Court's "mistakes" in high-profile 

cases can be corrected over time as she adopted a positive tone ahead of a decision in which its 

conservative majority is expected to curtail abortion rights. Sotomayor, speaking in Washington at the 

annual meeting of a liberal legal group, did not directly address last month's publication of a leaked draft 

opinion in the abortion case or any of the court's other current cases. But Sotomayor said she believes 

the court can help people "regain the public's confidence" in government institutions. [Continue Reading] 

See also : Bloomberg , CNN , Guardian,  NYT 

NYT: Bracing for the End of Roe v. Wade, the White House Weighs Executive Actions, Charlie 

Savage, June 16, 2022, 5:00 AM President Biden’s top aides are weighing whether he can or should take a series of executive actions to 

help women in Republican-controlled states obtain abortions if the Supreme Court eliminates a woman’s 

right to end her pregnancy, according to senior administration officials. Some of the ideas under 

consideration include declaring a national public health emergency, readying the Justice Department to 

fight any attempt by states to criminalize travel for the purpose of obtaining an abortion, and asserting 

that Food and Drug Administration regulations granting approval to abortion medications pre-empt any 

state bans, the officials said. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg Law: Low-Income Drug Discount Fight Looms in HHS’s Supreme Court Loss, Ian 

Lopez, Allie Reed, June 17, 2022, 4:35 AM 

A US Supreme Court loss for the HHS in a Medicare case gives the agency ammunition in a broader 

battle over drugmaker discounts for low-income Americans. All nine Supreme Court justices agreed that 

the Department of Health and Human Services wrongly slashed $1 billion a year in drug reimbursements to hospitals through a 30-year-old government program designed to help at-need populations. The HHS 

and hospitals are now on the same side in another courtroom conflict over that program—whether the 

HHS can require that drugmakers offer discounts to certain pharmacies. [Continue Reading] 

Law360 : [ANALYSIS] Chevron Deference Still Feels Heat After High Court Reprieve , Jeff Overley, 

June 16, 2022, 10:56 PM 

The U.S. Supreme Court's landmark doctrine requiring judicial deference to federal regulators survived a

major health care case at the high court Wednesday, but the controversial bedrock of administrative law 

barely escaped the conservative justices' frying pan and is heading right back into their fire, experts say. 

[Continue Reading ]

Law360: [ANALYSIS] Supreme Court Should Review Flight Break Mandate, Patricia Vercelli, June 

16, 2022, 3:02 PM 

In a one-sentence, unsigned opinion yesterday, the Supreme Despite government pushback, the U.S. 

Supreme Court should review Virgin America v. Bernstein, a Ninth Circuit decision that would require 

meal and rest breaks for flight attendants, as federal law and California regulations are in clear conflict 

and threaten to disrupt national air transportation, says Patricia Vercelli at Airlines for America.. 

[Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000484

E&E News : Supreme Court under pressure to punt climate case , Pamela King, June 16, 2022, 1:13 

PM 

In a one-sentence, unsigned opinion yesterday, the Supreme Court disposed of a legal fight related to 

the Biden administration’s change of course on a Trump-era rule that made it harder for immigrants to 

obtain green cards. Some lawmakers and legal observers have urged the justices to bestow the same 

fate on the West Virginia v. EPA battle over a climate regulation that — after two administration 

changes, years of legal wrangling and a transformation of the power sector — does not currently exist. 

[Continue Reading ]

SCOTUSblog : [OPINION] Supreme Court, once again, rejects California treatment of arbitration ,

Ronald Land, June 16, 2022, 12:10 PM 

The holding of Wednesday’s decision in Viking River Cruises v. Moriana will surprise nobody. As it has so 

many times before, the Supreme Court rejected California’s treatment of arbitration under California law, 

in this case California’s Private Attorneys General Act. The most surprising thing about the decision is 

how close it came to unanimity. Eight of the nine justices agreed in the result, with the lone dissent 

coming from Justice Clarence Thomas, who long has held that the relevant federal statute (the Federal 

Arbitration Act) does not apply to cases in state courts. [Continue Reading] 

JUDICIAL NOMINEES & APPOINTMENTS 

The Hill : Biden nominates Derek Chauvin prosecutor as federal judge , Zach Schonfeld, June 16, 

2022, 4:33 PM 

President Biden nominated one of the attorneys who prosecuted former Minneapolis police officer Derek 

Chauvin for the murder of George Floyd as a federal judge on Wednesday. Biden nominated Jerry 

Blackwell to the U.S. District Court for the District of Minnesota. The White House did not mention 

Blackwell’s role in the Chauvin case in the announcement of the nomination. [Continue Reading] 

NATIVE AMERICAN AFFAIRS 

WaPo : Man illegally excavated Native American site, took artifacts, officials say , Jaclyn Peiser, 

June 16, 2022, 7:12 AM 

A peninsula on the Harry S. Truman Lake in Henry County, Mo., houses a trove of Native American artifacts dating back thousands of years. The site is protected by federal law, and unauthorized 

excavation is forbidden. Johnny Lee Brown dug for treasure anyway, federal prosecutors say. In an 11 -

count indictment made public on Tuesday, prosecutors allege the 71-year-old Clinton, Mo., resident 

caused more than $300,000 in damage during excavation trips spanning over five years. Brown’s 

charges include felony counts for conspiracy, causing damage and defacing archaeological resources 

and government property. [Continue Reading] 

New Jersey Advance Media : N.J. sues Ford over toxic history at former iron mines and on Native 

American land , S.P. Sullivan, June 16, 2022, 4:04 PM 

State authorities on Thursday filed a lawsuit against the Ford Motor Company for dumping automobile 

paint sludge in former iron mines and on Native American land in Ringwood, marking another chapter in 

what has become more than half a century of corporate and government failures to clean up harmful 

toxic waste. [Continue Reading ]

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000485

## •

Marijuana Moment: Congressional Lawmakers Seek Broad Marijuana Protections For Legal States In Key Spending Bill Coming Next Week, Kyle Jaeger, June 16, 2022, 12:00 PM Congressional lawmakers are urging House leaders to include broad protections for states, territories 

and tribes that choose to legalize marijuana as part of a key spending bill that’s expected to be 

introduced next week. Reps. Earl Blumenauer (D-OR), Tom McClintock (R-CA), Eleanor Holmes Norton 

(D-DC) and Barbara Lee (D-CA), along with 44 of their colleagues, recently sent a letter calling on the 

chairman and ranking member of an appropriations subcommittee to address the issue through the must-pass legislation. [Continue Reading] 

ADMINISTRATION 

AP : Biden signs bill to protect Supreme Court justices into law , Unattributed, June 16, 2022, 10:00 

PM 

President Joe Biden signed a bill Thursday that will give around-the-clock security protection to the 

families of Supreme Court justices. The new law, which passed the House this week and the Senate last 

month, comes eight days after a man carrying a gun, knife and zip ties was arrested near Justice Brett 

Kavanaugh’s house after threatening to kill the justice. The bill calling for the expansion of security 

protections was approved unanimously by the Senate and passed shortly after the leak of a draft court 

opinion that would overrule Roe v. Wade and sharply curtail abortion rights in roughly half the states. 

[Continue Reading ]

CNN : Kamala Harris launches new national task force on preventing online harassment and abuse , Sam Fassum, June 16, 2022, 2:00 PM 

Vice President Kamala Harris on Thursday launched a new national task force aimed at helping to 

prevent and address online harassment and abuse. Ahead of the meeting, President Joe Biden signed a

memorandum establishing the initiative, the White House Task Force to Address Online Harassment and 

Abuse. The interagency effort will particularly focus on online harassment and abuse of women and 

LGBTQ Americans, as one senior administration official ahead of the meeting noted how such 

harassment "disproportionately targets" those communities. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

WSJ : Gun Talks Stall on Red-Flag Laws, Domestic Abuser Rules , Natalie Andrews, Lindsay Wise 

and Teresa Mettela, June 16, 2022, 6:03 PM 

Senators drafting gun-control legislation failed to overcome sticking points before breaking for the 

weekend, putting in jeopardy a historic bipartisan deal to reduce gun violence. Negotiators said they 

were stuck on language for two provisions. One would provide federal grants to states to enforce red-flag laws that allow authorities to remove guns temporarily from people threatening violence. The other 

would close the “boyfriend loophole” that allows convicted domestic abusers to buy guns if they aren’t 

married to their partner. [Continue Reading ] See also : NYT , WaPo 

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 16, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

On  the third day of hearings investigating the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol, new video was released 

detailing former Pres. Trump’s pressure campaign on then Vice President Pence to block the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 01570-000486

## ••••••••••

electoral vote count and overturn the 2020 election. The committee is now looking to speak with 

the wife of Justice Clarence Thomas and her role in efforts to overturn the election. [ABC , ABC -2, 

CBS, NBC] President Biden says a recession is “not inevitable” as the Federal Reserve works to bring inflation 

under control. Meanwhile, mortgage rates are hitting their highest level since 2008. [ABC , CBS ,

NBC] The State Department is investigating reports that a third American has gone missing in Ukraine. 

This comes as the families of two other Americans are desperate for any information, with fears 

the Russians may be holding them. [ABC, CBS, NBC] Federal assistance is on the way to Montana after the unprecedented flooding at Yellowstone 

National Park. For local businesses, the natural disaster could trigger an economic catastrophe. In 

Wisconsin, residents spent the day picking up the pieces following a night of severe storms, 

including several tornadoes. [ABC, CBS, NBC] Louisville is one of the most racially segregated cities in America, but ahead of Juneteenth, the 

community is trying to change its future by understanding its past. [CBS] US lled coalition forces seized a man described by officials as a senior leader of Islamic State in 

an operation in northeast Syria late Wednesday. Military forces detained Hani Ahmed al-Kurdi, 

assessed to be a bomb maker and facilitator who had become one of Islamic State’s senior 

leaders in Syria, U.S. military officials said. [ABC] Real estate investment groups are buying up an increasing share of houses and renting them out –

in some cases to families who had dreamed of owning their own homes. According to one report, 

in January, 33 percent of all homes purchased in the U.S. were bought by investors. [NBC ]

MORNING HEADLINES 

“European Commission Recommends E.U. Candidacy for Ukraine” [WSJ,  NYT , WaPo ]“Capitol Rioters Came Within 40 Feet of Vice President Pence” [NYT] “CDC Panel to Review Covid-19 Shots for Young Children” [WSJ, NYT, WaPo] “Trump aides told him that using Pence to overturn election was illegal” [WaPo ]

END 

RENDON Media News Alert Notice: 

This RENDON product is distributed as part of a deliverable for the DOJ News Clipping Service Solicitation 

15JPSS18RQZM00005 for for DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov. 

The original recipient is currently subscribed to doj-digests as: DOJ.News.Clips@usdoj.gov 

To unsubscribe, please email  DOJ.News.Clips.Shared.Mailbox@usdoj.gov  with "UNSUBSCRIBE ME" in the 

subject line. Your request will be processed within 7 business days.              

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5036 From: The Marsha Project
> Subject: [EXTERNAL] Feds are (sti ) fai ing chi d migrants
> To :Good ander, Margaret V. (OAG)
> Sent: June 16 , 2022 7:34 AM (UTC-04:00)

## 2022 

PICK OF THE NEWS 

" No place for a child. One of every three migrants held in overcrowded, freezing Border Patrol detention cells between February 2017 to June 2021 was a minor - far more than previously known, according to a new data analysis by The Marshall Project. About one-third of these children were detained for longer than 72 hours, a violation of legal limits. But border 

> 01570-000487

Docwnent ID: 0.7.1088.30779 01570-000488 authorities have repeatedly failed to improve conditions for the children or change punitive 

practices that traumatize them. In collaboration with Politico Magazine, TMP’s Anna Flagg and 

Julia Preston have our story, with photographs by Kristen Luce. THE MARSHALL PROJECT 

Federal hate crimes charges for the Buffalo gunman. Federal prosecutors charged 18 -

year-old Payton Gendron with 26 counts of hate crimes and weapons violations on Wednesday, 

making the avowed white supremacist eligible for the federal death penalty. The complaint 

offered chilling new details of the massacre. BUFFALO NEWS At one point during the shooting 

spree, authorities say, Gendron apologized to a White victim but did not kill him.   

> POUGHKEEPSIE JOURNAL

U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland visited Buffalo on Wednesday 

to meet some of the victims’ families and survivors of the attack. THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Federal judge convicts rioter who flew Confederate battle flag inside U.S. Capitol 

last Jan. 6. Kevin Seefried and his son, Hunter, were both convicted of obstructing the 

certification of the 2020 presidential vote. THE NEW YORK TIMES Related: Ginni Thomas, the 

wife of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, corresponded with one of his former law 

clerks, John Eastman, to try to overturn the results of the election. THE WASHINGTON POST 

More details about the alleged Proud Boys plot to storm the Capitol. USA TODAY Today’s Capitol 

riot hearing will focus on the threat to former Vice President Mike Pence. LOS ANGELES TIMES 

Not-so-happy anniversary for the “Dreamers.” The Deferred Action for Childhood 

Arrivals (DACA) program began 10 years ago under the Obama administration. It was supposed 

to be a temporary fix, to give young undocumented immigrants some security about their daily 

lives. THE WASHINGTON POST But no permanent legislative solution has appeared and none 

looks likely soon. That means a majority of undocumented teenagers are graduating from high 

school this year without any protection from deportation. THE NEW YORK TIMES There are 

more than 100,000 young immigrants without DACA protection. LOS ANGELES TIMES 

“You got the wrong guy.” North Carolina prosecutors gained a double-murder conviction 

against former basketball player James Richardson 11 years ago using a grainy surveillance 

video that they said established Richardson’s presence at the scene of the crime. What 

prosecutors didn’t tell Richardson or his lawyers, or the judge and jury for that matter, was that 

the video they played at trial was a low-quality copy of the original surveillance tape. That 

revelation, in 2019, has further undermined a weak case and given Richardson, who has always 

maintained his innocence, some measure of hope. THE ASSEMBLY 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30779 01570-000489

N/S/E/W 

Louisiana is sending children held in juvenile detention to neighboring states. That’s an 

apparent violation of state law that requires youths to be detained in facilities that are licensed 

by the Louisiana Department of Children and Family Services. THE LENS 

Two police officers were fatally shot in El Monte, California , late Tuesday while responding to 

a stabbing at a motel. Police say the suspected gunman, Justin Flores, was on probation for a

gun charge. Flores was fatally shot by officers during the confrontation. LOS ANGELES TIMES 

David Leavitt, the district attorney in Utah County, Utah , realized that prosecuting death 

penalty cases was wasteful and expensive. So he announced he would no longer seek capital 

punishment. Now he faces a fierce challenge ahead of the state’s primary. BOLTS TMP 

Context from 2017: A new Florida prosecutor says “no” to the death penalty. THE MARSHALL 

> PROJECT

Police in Knoxville, Tennessee , arrested two married couples from Guatemala in April and 

accused them of trafficking heroin. But they were carrying beans, not heroin. All four now face 

federal immigration charges. HARDKNOXWIRE 

A new lawsuit in Ohio alleges that police in East Cleveland illegally retaliated against a resident 

for speaking out forcefully about the candidates in a mayoral race. REASON 

COMMENTARY 

Public opinion and the Capitol Riot hearings. “I’ve seen congressional hearings change 

minds, including my own.” PROPUBLICA We should appreciate the brave police officers who 

tried to defend the Capitol. LOS ANGELES TIMES Related: A U.S. Capitol tour last Jan. 5 was 

odd. People were taking photographs and video of the stairwells, security checkpoints and 

hallways. CBS NEWS At least one of those “tourists” came back the next day as part of the 

Capitol riot, congressional investigators say. THE NEW YORK TIMES 

The Second Amendment is unrecognizable today. Even legendary conservative jurist 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30779 01570-000490

Robert Bork, three short decades ago, acknowledged there was no “personal” right to bear arms 

under the Constitution. THE NEW YORK REVIEW OF BOOKS 

A gun owner offers a compromise. Don’t start by outlawing guns. Start by eliminating the 

legal immunities given to gun manufacturers and sellers. THE NEW YORK TIMES 

The rights-without-remedies era. A new U.S. Supreme Court ruling shields Border Patrol 

agents from liability, even when they’ve violated the constitutional rights of plaintiffs seeking 

to hold them accountable for misconduct. USA TODAY Another new U.S. Supreme Court ruling 

makes it harder for immigrants to have their challenges heard in court. SLATE 

About the “Thin Blue Line” flags flown by Capitol rioters. “It is a striking, though not 

surprising, flag to see in the context of an insurrection in which Trump supporters attacked the 

cops who tried to stand between them and Congress.” MOTHER JONES TMP Context: The 

short, fraught history of the thin blue line. THE MARSHALL PROJECT 

ETC. 

“Reining it in since May 28, 1924.” Border patrol officers are circulating a “challenge coin” 

that jokingly commemorates their treatment of Haitian refugees last year in Del Rio, Texas. 

Agents were seen on horseback using their reins as whips as they chased people. MIAMI 

> HERALD

Prior restraint watch. Citing the state’s “Marsy’s Law,” a Florida judge last week barred the 

Sarasota Herald-Tribune from publishing the names of two Sarasota County sheriff’s deputies 

who fatally shot a man in April. HERALD TRIBUNE TMP Context: What is “Marsy’s Law,” and 

why did a billionaire crusade for it years ago? THE MARSHALL PROJECT 

Exploring a “cultural attitude” at the FBI. A new Justice Department inspector general’s 

report says Michael Steinbach, a former high-ranking FBI agent, had extensive and forbidden 

contacts with journalists six years ago. Steinbach retired in 2017. POLITICO 

A model to emulate? Officials in Houston have been extraordinarily successful in reducing 

the city’s homeless population. They’ve done it by providing permanent housing for tens of 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30779 01570-000491

thousands of people without homes. THE NEW YORK TIMES 

Do prison work programs actually help reduce recidivism? The feds have crunched 

more data on people released after completing vocational programs within the Bureau of 

Prisons. SENTENCING LAW AND POLICY Related: Read the report. U.S. SENTENCING 

> COMMISSION

Opening Statement curates timely articles on criminal justice and immigration; these links 

are not endorsements of specific articles or points of view. 

Want less email? Update your preferences. 

This email was sent to (b)(6) (Margaret Goodlander) 

why did I get this? 

unsubscribe from this list 

update subscription preferences 

The Marshall Project · 156 West 56th Street · Suite 701 · New York, NY 10019 · USA 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.30779 01570-000492

## ••••                                                           

> From: Iverson, Dena (PAO)
> Subject: Abbreviated AM Cips
> To: Kapper, Matthew B. (OAG); Figures, Shomari (OAG); Berger, Christine (OAG); Good ander, Margaret V.
> (OAG); Matthews-Johnson, Tamarra D. (OAG); Visser, Tim (OAG); Reich, Mitche (OAG); Dickerson, Ju ie
> (OAG); Schedu e, DAG (SMO); Car in, John P. (ODAG); Mi er, Marsha (ODAG)
> Cc: Co ey, Anthony D. (PAO)
> Sent: June 15, 2022 7:31 AM (UTC-04:00)

MORNING HEADLINES 

“Fed  Weighs 0.75-Point Hike as Stock Futures Rise” [WSJ, NYT, WaPo] 

“Ukraine’s  NATO Allies Strain to Keep Up Pressure on Russia” [WSJ, NYT, LAT] 

“U.S.  abortion rate rises, reversing three decades of declines” [WSJ, NYT, LAT] 

“Analysis:  Far-Right Republicans Press Closer to Power Over Future Elections” [NYT , WaPo , LAT ]

US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NEWS 

CBS: Attorney General Garland to visit Buffalo mass shooting site and meet with victims' families 

and survivors, Robert Legare, June 15, 2022, 5:22 AM 

Just over a month after an 18-year-old White man opened fire inside a Buffalo Tops supermarket, killing 

10 and wounding three others, Attorney General Merrick Garland is traveling to the site of the massacre 

to pay his respects to the victims' families. In the wake of the massacre, Garland announced the Justice 

Department would investigate the matter as a hate crime and an act of racially-motivated violent 

extremism. Investigators allege the suspect detailed his plans and his racist motivation for the violence in 

hundreds of pages of writings he posted online shortly before the shooting. According to authorities, 11 

of the 13 individuals who were shot were Black. [Continue Reading] See also: Buffalo News (Buffalo, 

NY) , Fox , Spectrum News (New York, NY) , WGRZ-NBC (Buffalo, NY),  WIVB-CBS (Buffalo, NY) 

Fox: Missouri Sen. Hawley rips AG Garland for failing to act on protests at Supreme Court 

justices homes , Bradford Betz, June 14, 2022, 5:20 PM 

Sen. Josh Hawley, R-Mo., is accusing Attorney General Merrick Garland of inaction on the protesters 

who flocked to the home of Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh last week following an alleged 

assassination attempt on his life. In a Tuesday letter sent to Garland, Hawley raised concerns that 

despite demonstrations outside Kavanaugh’s home and an increase in pro-abortion attacks on pregnancy 

resource centers, no significant action has been taken. Federal law stipulates that picketing at the homes 

of judges with the intent to intimidate them or influencing their rulings is illegal. [Continue Reading ]

NATIONAL SECURITY 

AP: Spy agencies’ focus on China could snare Chinese Americans, Nomaan Merchant And Eric 

Tucker, June 14, 2022, 12:25 PM 

As U.S. intelligence agencies ramp up their efforts against China, top officials acknowledge they may 

also end up collecting more phone calls and emails from Chinese Americans, raising new concerns about 

spying affecting civil liberties. A new report from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence makes 

several recommendations, including expanding unconscious bias training and reiterating internally that 

federal law bans targeting someone solely due to their ethnicity. [Continue Reading ]

AP: Judge to decide trial for Confederate flag-toting dad, son, Michael Kunzelman, June 14, 2022, 

7:05  PM 

A man carrying a Confederate battle flag stormed the U.S. Capitol with his son because they intended to 

stop Congress from certifying President Joe Biden’s 2020 electoral victory, prosecutors argued Tuesday 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000493

at the close of the men’s trial. A federal judge, not a jury, will decide if Delaware residents Kevin 

Seefried and his adult son, Hunter, are guilty of a felony obstruction charge and several misdemeanor 

offenses stemming from the Capitol riot on Jan. 6, 2021. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg: A Ragtag Band of Hackers Is Waging Cyberwar on Putin’s Supply Lines, Ryan 

Gallagher, June 15, 2022, 12:01 AM Russia’s military began sending large numbers of weapons and troops into Belarus in late January. The 

official purpose of the movement was a joint military exercise, but Belarus, which has a 650-mile border 

with Ukraine and a government closely aligned with Moscow, was also a logical staging point for Russian 

President Vladimir Putin to carry out an invasion. Several days after the troops arrived weird things 

started happening to the computer systems that ran the Belarus national railway system, which the 

Russian military was using as part of its mobilization. [Continue Reading ]

WaPo: White House has security concerns about any deal for NSO hacking tools, Ellen 

Nakashima and Craig Timberg, June 14, 2022, 4:00 PM A major American defense firm, L3Harris, is in talks with the blacklisted Israeli spyware company, NSO 

Group, to buy its phone-hacking capability in a deal that would give the U.S. company control of one of 

the world’s most sophisticated and controversial hacking tools, according to people familiar with the 

talks. The unusual deal appears to be an attempt to salvage some utility from a firm facing serious 

financial straits, by selling its most valuable product — its hacking code and access to the software’s 

developers — to a company that would restrict its use to the United States and trusted Western allies. 

[Continue Reading ]

NBC: Federal judge to consider Steve Bannon’s motion to dismiss contempt indictment, Pete 

Williams, June 15, 2022, 4:32 AM 

Lawyers for former Trump White House adviser Steve Bannon will urge a federal judge Wednesday to 

dismiss an indictment charging him with contempt of Congress for failing to respond to a subpoena from 

the House Jan. 6 committee. They argue that prosecuting Bannon violates longstanding Justice 

Department policies concerning executive branch officials. They also maintain that the committee had no 

authority to issue the subpoena and that the law making contempt of Congress a crime is 

unconstitutional. [Continue Reading] 

CNN: Biden administration eases terrorism-related restrictions for Afghan evacuees , Priscilla 

Alvarez, June 15, 2022, 3:00 AM 

The Biden administration is loosening certain terrorism-related exemptions for Afghan evacuees who 

worked with or on behalf of the US government so they can qualify for immigration benefits, the 

Department of Homeland Security announced Tuesday. "These actions will also ensure that individuals 

who have lived under Taliban rule, such as former civil servants, those required to pay service fees to the 

Taliban to do things like pass through a checkpoint or obtain a passport, and those who fought against 

the Taliban are not mistakenly barred because of overly broad applications of terrorism-related 

inadmissibility grounds (TRIG) in our immigration law," the department said in a statement. [Continue 

Reading ]

CBS: What is the Patriot Front? Prominent white supremacist group tied to mass arrest near Idaho Pride event , Alex Sundby, June 14, 2022, 3:29 PM 

The nearly three dozen people arrested for allegedly conspiring to riot near an Idaho Pride event over 

the weekend appear to be affiliated with the hate group Patriot Front, police said. The group was called 

"one of the most prominent white supremacist groups in the country" by the Southern Poverty Law 

Center earlier this year. [...] In 2021, Attorney General Merrick Garland warned of an "elevated threat to 

the homeland" posed by domestic violent extremists. "In the FBI's view, the top domestic violent 

extremist threat comes from racially or ethnically motivated violent extremists, specifically those who 

advocated for the superiority of the white race," Garland said. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000494

ABC: Prolific ads featuring right-wing icons push questionable claims about US 'crime wave', 

Mike Levine, June 14, 2022, 7:23 AM 

You may have seen ads for the anti-fraud service Home Title Lock on national TV, heard them on talk 

radio, or watched them on social media -- often featuring right-wing personalities such as Rudy Giuliani 

or Newt Gingrich. The prolific ads urgently warn of a scam called "home title theft," when a con artist 

fraudulently claims ownership of someone else's home to swindle lenders or even sell the property. In 

several commercials, Giuliani, Gingrich and other pitchmen claim the FBI classifies home title theft as 

"one of the fastest-growing" crimes in America. Some marketing materials also showcase people who've 

been identified as "real victims" -- a "devastated" Texas cowboy and a Florida-raised grandmother 

whose "heart-wrenching story of losing her rightfully-owned home is occurring all too often nationwide." 

[Continue Reading ]

Courthouse News: Proud Boys member who called for civil war days after Capitol riot pleads 

guilty, Emily Zantow, June 14, 2022, 6:00 PM Getting the more serious charges against him dropped in the process, a 21-year-old member of the 

Proud Boys who called for a civil war days after rioting at the U.S. Capitol pleaded guilty on Tuesday to 

entering and remaining in a restricted area. Ryan Ashlock struck a plea deal with the Justice Department 

in which he admitted guilt to a misdemeanor charge that carries a statutory sentence of up to one year in 

prison. [Continue Reading] 

Washington Examiner: FBI official had unauthorized contacts with reporters for years: DOJ 

watchdog, Jerry Dunleavy, June 14, 2022, 9:36 PM 

A top FBI national security official involved in Crossfire Hurricane had dozens of unauthorized contacts 

with the media over several years, the Department of Justice's watchdog concluded. Justice Department 

inspector general Michael Horowitz’s office concluded in a newly released investigative report that retired 

FBI official Michael Steinbach violated numerous bureau rules through his meetings and communications with reporters, though prosecution against him was declined by DOJ. [Continue Reading ]

The Patriot-News (Harrisburg, PA): Pa. Capitol riot suspect pens letter from jail saying politicians 

‘need to go,’ a woodchipper ‘sounds good’, Jonathan Bergmueller, June 14, 2022, 6:54 PM 

A Jan. 6 defendant accused of toppling a police barricade is now accused of writing a letter talking about 

getting rid of politicians with a woodchipper, according to court documents filed Monday. ‘All these 

poltions(sic) in office need to go, a woodchiper(sic) sounds good’ Ryan Samsel, 38, of Bristol, Bucks 

County, said in the June 2 letter riddled with misspellings from the Federal Detention Center in 

Philadelphia. “I’ll tell people get your wepons (sic) kiss your kidds (sic) goodbye and let’s (expletive) go!” 

[Continue Reading ]

Newsweek: Jan. 6 Defendant Blames Stephen Colbert for Negative Media Coverage, Jack Dutton, 

June 14, 2022, 12:42 PM 

An attorney representing Joseph Biggs, a Proud Boys organizer linked to the deadly January 6 Capitol 

riot, has argued that Biggs' trial should be moved out of Washington D.C. due to negative coverage of 

the far-right group by CBS' The Late Show With Stephen Colbert and MSNBC's Morning Joe. Biggs is 

charged with conspiracy, as well as obstructing an official Congress proceeding, illegal entry and 

disorderly conduct on restricted Capitol grounds. [Continue Reading] 

JAN. 6 HEARINGS 

AP : Jan. 6 hearings: What we’ve learned, and what’s next , Mary Clare Jalonick, June 14, 2022, 8:00 

PM 

House investigators are trying to make a methodical case that President Donald Trump’s lies about the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000495

2020 election led directly to his supporters’ insurrection at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6, 2021. The House 

panel investigating the attack has held the first two in a series of hearings providing its initial findings 

after a yearlong probe and more than 1,000 interviews. The committee has shown clips not only from the 

violent attack on the Capitol, but also from its own closed-door interviews with Trump aides and 

associates who were trying to dissuade him from spreading falsehoods about an election he lost. 

[Continue Reading ]

AP: Police: House Republican’s tour of Capitol wasn’t suspicious, Michael Balsamo, June 14, 

2022, 12:16 PM 

Police have determined that there is nothing suspicious about a tour of U.S. Capitol office buildings that a

House Republican gave about 15 people the day before the Jan. 6 attack by rioting supporters of then-President Donald Trump. The House committee investigating the 2021 insurrection examined whether 

rioters had been involved in reconnaissance and surveillance before the attack, and Democrats 

suggested some Republican members may have helped them. But there has been no public evidence of 

that. Rep. Barry Loudermilk, a Republican from Georgia, was simply showing his constituents around, 

Capitol Police Chief Tom Manger in a letter sent Monday. [Continue Reading ]

AP: 1/6 Panel postpones hearing with ex-Justice Dept. officials, Eric Tucker, June 14, 2022, 12:00 

PM 

The House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021 riot at the U.S. Capitol has postponed a hearing that 

was to feature Trump-era Justice Department officials. The hearing had been set for Wednesday, but 

the committee on Tuesday morning said that it had been postponed. It did not give a reason or a new 

date for the hearing. The next hearing is set to take place on Thursday. The witnesses at Wednesday’s 

hearing were to include Jeffrey Rosen, who was the acting attorney general at the time of the Capitol 

insurrection, as well as two other former top officials, Richard Donoghue and Steven Engel. [Continue 

Reading ] See also:  NBC , NPR 

USA Today: Bill Barr's complicated relationship with Donald Trump: From vital advocate to damning witness , Kevin Johnson, June 15, 2022, 5:00 AM 

Just more than a month after the 2020 election, Bill Barr recalled a meeting with Donald Trump in which 

the then-attorney general began to question the state of mind of his boss – the president of the United 

States. Over and over, Barr recentlytold a House committee investigating the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the 

U.S.  Capitol, he tried to convince Trump that his efforts to cling to power based on false claims of 

election fraud were “nonsense.” [Continue Reading ]

NYT: Jan. 6 Panel Puts Trump Fund-Raising Tactics Under Scrutiny , Kenneth P. Vogel and Rachel 

Shorey, June 15, 2022, 12:22 AM Since Election Day in 2020, Donald J. Trump and his close allies have raised more than $390 million 

through aggressive fund-raising solicitations promising bold political actions, including fighting to overturn 

his re-election campaign defeat, helping allied candidates win their own campaigns and fighting “to save 

America from Joe Biden and the radical left.” [Continue Reading ]

LAT: [EDITORIAL] Even if the DOJ prosecutes Trump, it’s the American people who need to repudiate the ‘Big Lie’, Harry Litman, June 14, 2022, 3:32 PM 

As the Jan. 6 committee continues to roll out an overwhelming case of corrupt conduct by Donald Trump, 

the calls grow louder for the Department of Justice to bring criminal charges against the former 

president. Even if that happens, it would be a fundamental mistake to view the department as the 

avenging angel that alone can restore accountability and truth to our deeply damaged politics. [Continue 

Reading ]

WSJ: Jan. 6 Committee Splits Over Possible Criminal Referral for Trump, Scott Patterson and 

Sadie Gurman, June 14, 2022, 1:44 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000496

As the Jan. 6 select committee investigating the attack on the Capitol continues its public hearings, a

public disagreement has emerged between committee members about whether it would consider 

referring criminal charges against former President Donald Trump to the Justice Department. In 

comments to reporters late Monday, Rep. Bennie Thompson (D., Miss.), chairman of the committee, 

cast doubt on whether it would make a criminal referral to the Justice Department. “We’re going to tell 

the facts,” Mr. Thompson said.  Continue Reading ] See also:  WaPo 

CNN: January 6 committee teases next hearing with video of Trump lawyer warning John Eastman , Ryan Nobles, Kristin Wilson, Zachary Cohen and Annie Grayer, June 15, 2022, 1:00 AM 

The House select committee investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol teased their upcoming 

hearing on Thursday, by releasing a video clip from their deposition of former Trump White House 

attorney Eric Herschmann. In the clip, Herschmann outlines how he warned conservative attorney John 

Eastman to back off plans to file appeals in Georgia based on the election results after the events of 

January 6, 2021. Thursday's hearing is expected to focus on the pressure campaign applied to former 

Vice President Mike Pence to stand in the way of the certification of the election. [Continue Reading ]

See also:  NBC 

NBC: Trump’s pick for Pennsylvania governor says he sees ‘parallels’ to Hitler’s power grab in 

Capitol riot, Ryan J. Reilly, June 14, 2022, 3:24 PM The Donald Trump-endorsed nominee for Pennsylvania governor compared the Jan. 6 attack to historical 

events staged by Nazis, responding to a question by saying that he saw ‘parallels’ between the response 

to the Jan. 6 attack and the 1933 Reichstag fire, which Adolf Hitler used to seize additional power. Doug 

Mastriano was at the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 6. Mastriano, a Pennsylvania state senator, has been 

subpoenaed by the House Jan. 6 committee. He organized buses to D.C. that day, according to receipts 

his campaign's lawyer previously acknowledged turning over to the Jan. 6 committee. [Continue Reading] 

MSNBC: The battle that preceded the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol, Steve Vladeck, June 15, 

2022, 5:36 AM 

If there was a single moment when President Donald Trump’s effort to remain in power and unlawfully 

overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election hung in the balance, it appears to have been not 

sometime on Jan. 6, 2021, as a violent mob disrupted the joint congressional session while it formally 

certified Joe Biden’s victory, but three days earlier, on Jan. 3. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: Democrats pressure Jan. 6 panel to pursue criminal referrals of Trump , Mike Lillis, June 

15, 2022, 5:30 AM 

The committee investigating last year’s attack on the U.S. Capitol says it is undecided on the question of 

whether to issue a criminal referral of former President Trump for his role in the rampage. For a growing 

number of Democrats watching from the sidelines, however, the answer is already clear. “I think they 

should do criminal referrals,” said Rep. Juan Vargas (D-Calif.). “Obviously, with what they’ve uncovered, 

there’s criminal conspiracy there. And having the information, I think they should refer it to the 

Department of Justice for prosecution. It all starts at the top.” [Continue Reading ]

Forbes: Can Trump Be Charged As Result Of The Jan. 6 Committee Investigation? Here’s What 

To Know, Alison Durkee, June 14, 2022, 3:59 PM 

The House January 6 Committee has started making a public case against former President Donald 

Trump and his allies in a series of hearings, arguing the former president “oversaw and coordinated” an 

unlawful plan to overturn the 2020 election—but the Justice Department, not Congress, is the only entity 

that could bring criminal charges against Trump or his allies. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL LAW 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000497

AP : Guilty plea entered in theft of COVID-19 relief funds , Unattributed, June 14, 2022, 7:00 PM 

A former West Haven City Hall employee has pleaded guilty to a federal wire fraud charge for his part in 

the theft of more than $600,000 in federal money that was supposed to be spent for pandemic relief. 

John Bernardo, 66, who served as a housing specialist for the city, pleaded guilty Tuesday in U.S. 

District Court. According to state business records, Bernardo and former state Rep. Michael DiMassa, a

West Haven Democrat, formed Compass Investment Group LLC, which received federal COVID-19 

relief funds from the city of West Haven for consulting, lobbying and legal services to its health 

department that were never provided. [Continue Reading ] See also: CT Mirror 

WaPo : Agent allegedly used law enforcement database to track acquaintances , Devlin Barrett, 

June 14, 2022, 4:04 PM 

A federal agent has been charged with misusing cellphone tracking technology to look up the locations of people with whom he had personal relationships — and lying to investigators when confronted about it, 

according to an indictment unsealed Tuesday. Deputy U.S. Marshal Adrian Pena was charged in a 14 -

count indictment with misconduct dating back to 2016. Officials say he misused law enforcement data for 

personal reasons while assigned to a task force in the Uvalde County Sheriff’s Office — one of the law 

enforcement agencies now under intense scrutiny for waiting more than an hour to confront a gunman 

who killed 19 children and two teachers inside an elementary school last month. [Continue Reading ] See 

also : Daily Beast , WRIC-ABC (Richmond, VA) 

AP : Officials: Fraud suspect caught heading to Cuba on Jet Ski , Unattributed, June 14, 2022, 4:36 

PM 

A Cuban man charged in a $4.2 million Medicare fraud scheme is being held as a flight risk after officials 

said he tried to flee the U.S. on a Jet Ski. A federal judge in Miami ordered Ernesto Cruz Graveran, 54, 

of Hialeah, to be detained pending trial Monday, according to court records. He has been charged with 

health care fraud. [Continue Reading ] See also : Daily Beast,  Bradenton Herald (Bradenton, FL) , Times 

Union (Albany, NY) 

Middletown Press (Middletown, CT): Feds: Hartford man faces up to 20 years in prison for firearm 

theft , Liz Hardaway, June 14, 2022, 10:00 PM A Hartford man pleaded guilty Tuesday to charges stemming from the theft of dozens of guns from a

warehouse in South Windsor last year, according to federal prosecutors. At the time of his arrest, police 

found Shameik Camara, 32, with one of the stolen firearms, U.S. Attorney Vanessa Roberts Avery said 

in a news release Tuesday. [Continue Reading] 

KTVE-NBC (El Dorado, AR): Louisiana man gets 10 year plus sentence for Illegal Possession of Firearms, Furtherance of Drug Trafficking , Sherie Johnson, June 14, 2022, 7:47 PM 

On Tuesday, June 14, 2022, Western District United States Attorney Brandon B. Brown announced that 

United States District Judge Terry A. Doughty sentenced 50-year-old Brandon Khesahn Cooper of 

Dubach, La., to 11 years and six months in prison, followed by five years of supervised release. Cooper’s sentence followed authorities charging him with Possession of Firearms by a Convicted Felon and Possession of Firearms in Furtherance of Drug Trafficking. [Continue Reading] 

WYFF-NBC (Greenville, SC): Upstate man indicted on gun trafficking, Jenni Williams, June 14, 

2022, 6:04 PM 

Two people, including an Upstate man, were charged with trafficking guns across state lines. U.S. 

Attorney Jennifer Williams announced that Ontavious Plumer, 32, of Due West, and Terrance Darby, 41, 

of Philadelphia, schemed and trafficked nearly 60 firearms from southern states to Philadelphia. This is 

known as the "iron pipeline," and authorities have already indicted multiple people for involvement with 

this pipeline. [Continue Reading ]

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000498

KYW-CBS (Philadelphia, PA): Man Sentenced To 15 Years In Prison For North Philadelphia ATM Blast During 2020 Civil Unrest, Unattributed, June 14, 2022, 2:30 PM 

A Philadelphia man has been sentenced to 15 years in prison for blowing up an ATM and possessing an illegal firearm during unrest in the city during the aftermath of George Floyd’s murder in 2020. Federal 

prosecutors said Tuesday that 26-year-old David Elmakayes has been sentenced to a 15-year prison 

term, along with three years of supervised release. [Continue Reading ] See also:  Milford Mirror 

CIVIL RIGHTS 

WaPo: Video contradicts police in Texas boy’s shooting death, family says , Arelis R. Hernández 

and Joshua Lott, June 14, 2022, 7:39 PM 

The family of a 13-year-old San Antonio boy who was shot and killed by police earlier this month says 

body-camera footage of the incident contradicts the official account and they plan to bring a civil rights 

lawsuit against the city’s police department. Andre “AJ” Hernandez Jr. was driving a car — which police 

later said was determined to have been stolen — with two other teens on June 3 when he encountered 

city police officers responding to reports of a shooting near the Southwest Side neighborhood where he 

lived. [Continue Reading] 

CIVIL LAW 

Bloomberg Law: KBR Settles 15-Year Iraq Kickback Lawsuit for $14 Million , Daniel Seiden, June 14, 

2022, 11:31 AM 

Houston-headquartered Kellogg Brown & Root Services Inc. and three other companies have agreed to 

a settlement of nearly $14 million million to resolve False Claims Act and Anti-Kickback Act allegations 

and for breach of contract, the Department of Justice said Tuesday. The lawsuit dealt with subcontracts 

that KBR awarded while it was under the Logistics Civil Augmentation Program III contract, awarded in 

2001, which required KBR to provide logistics support to Army forces in Iraq, according to the Justice 

Department. [Continue Reading] See also : Law360 

IMMIGRATION & BORDER SECURITY 

Washington Examiner: Border Patrol agents to be disciplined for horseback 'whipping' incident ,

Anna Giaritelli, June 14, 2022, 9:14 PM 

The Border Patrol is preparing to discipline agents whom Biden administration officials accused of 

“whipping” Haitian migrants while on horseback in Del Rio, Texas, last September, the Washington 

Examiner has learned. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, the federal agency that investigated the 

incident, will accuse the horse patrol agents of “administrative violations,” according to two agency 

officials, confirming an earlier report from Fox News. It is unlikely they will be fired, one of the sources 

said. [Continue Reading ]

Washington Times : ICE chief adopts new ‘free speech’ rules to limit investigations of journalists ,

Stephen Dinan, June 14, 2022, 10:00 AM 

U.S.  Immigration and Customs Enforcement announced a new policy to limit the agency’s entanglements 

with reporters, including requiring pre-approval before arresting journalists or subpoenaing their records. 

Acting ICE Director Tae Johnson said “compulsory” tools should only be used as a last resort and in 

cases where a crime is believed to have been committed. [Continue Reading ]

Miami Herald: More migrant boats are crossing the Mona Passage. U.S. Border Patrol is looking 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000499

for them , Syra Ortiz, June 14, 2022, 5:23 PM The small U.S. Customs and Border Protection plane took off on a recent morning from the northwestern 

Puerto Rican town of Aguadilla, the rows of homes against coastal forests and sandy beaches becoming 

smaller and smaller. The aircraft flew 11,500 feet over the 80 miles of deep, unpredictable waters of the 

strait that separates Puerto Rico and Hispaniola, the island shared between Haiti and the Dominican 

Republic. [Continue Reading] 

ANTITRUST 

Reuters: Antitrust cops’ quixotic PE warning , Unattributed, June 14, 2022, 6:04 PM 

U.S.  Federal Trade Commission boss Lina Khan says private equity is in the crosshairs. While 

Blackstone (BX.N) and Apollo Global Management (APO.N) may well be on notice, it’s unclear whether 

she’s really going to do more than just make threats. [Continue Reading] 

Bloomberg : Senate Passes State Venue Antitrust Bill That Google Opposed , Leah Nylen, June 14, 

2022, 8:07 PM 

The Senate passed legislation Tuesday evening to allow state attorneys general to pick the location 

where their federal antitrust suits are heard, a blow to Alphabet Inc.’s Google, which had opposed the 

bill. The chamber passed the measure by unanimous consent. An amendment removed a provision that 

would have applied the measure retroactively to a 2020 antitrust suit filed by Texas and 14 other states 

and territories against the operator of the world’s largest search engine. [Continue Reading ]

WSJ: Antitrust Authorities Take Aim at Private-Equity Healthcare Deals , Chris Cumming, June 14, 

2022, 5:56 PM 

U.S.  antitrust enforcers on Monday took action against a private-equity firm they say sought to stifle 

competition, in what regulators suggest could be the first strike against allegedly anticompetitive behavior 

by buyout firms in the healthcare sector. [Continue Reading ]

The Hill: [OPINION] Abandoning decades of antitrust precedent won’t reduce inflation , Richard J. 

Pierce, Jr., June 14, 2022, 4:30 PM 

The inflation rate is now 8.6 percent — the highest rate in 40 years. President Biden says that reducing 

the level of inflation is his top domestic priority. Yet, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission and the 

head of the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice are obsessed with the need to throw 

consumers under the bus and force sellers to increase the prices they charge for goods and services. 

Both FTC Chair Lina Khan and the head of the Antitrust Division, Jonathan Kanter, have made it a high 

priority to eliminate the consumer welfare standard that the Supreme Court and most antitrust scholars 

have embraced for 50 years. [Continue Reading ]

ENVIRONMENT 

Law360: Oklahoma Seeks Early Win In Coal Mining Fight With Feds , Andrew Westney, June 14, 

2022, 8:36 PM 

Oklahoma has asked a federal judge for an early win in its suit seeking to regulate coal mining on Native 

American tribal lands, saying the Supreme Court's McGirt decision doesn't give the U.S. Department of 

the Interior the leverage to take away the state's authority over coal mining. [Continue Reading ]

Bloomberg Law: EPA, DOJ Agree to Close Knoxville Utilities Board Consent Decree, Unattributed, 

June 14, 2022, 2:27 PM 

The EPA and the Department of Justice filed a motion to terminate the consent decree with the Knoxville 

Utilities Board concerning a 2005 Clean Water Act settlement about the sewer system, according to the 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000500

agency Tuesday. KUB reported on Jan. 28 that all work under the amended consent decree, which 

focused on deficiencies at the Fourth Creek and Kuwahee wastewater treatment plants, had been 

completed. [Continue Reading ]

TAX 

Law360: Roger Stone Ordered To Turn Over Tax Records, Financial Info, Theresa Schliep, June 

14, 2022, 6:15 PM 

Roger Stone must furnish tax records and answer questions about financial accounts after a federal 

judge Tuesday ordered him and his wife to comply with document and information requests from the U. 

S.  in its $2 million tax case against them. A Florida federal magistrate judge said Roger Stone and his 

wife must comply with document and information requests from the U. S. government, which has 

contended that the couple used Stone's business Drake Ventures to hide their income. [Continue 

Reading ]

FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES 

Rolling Stone: Del Records Execs Arrested for Working With Promoter Tied to Mexican Cartel, 

Tomás Mier , June 15, 2022, 12:25 AM 

On Tuesday, the FBI arrested two música Mexicana record label executives for doing business with a

concert promoter with alleged ties to Mexican drug cartels in 2018. Angel Del Villar, CEO of Del 

Records, and Luis Scalisi, CFO of subsidiary Del Entertainment, were arrested and later released on 

bail for allegedly conspiring to violate the Kingpin Act, which prohibits Americans from conducting 

business with foreign narcotics traffickers. [Continue Reading] 

The Patriot-News (Harrisburg, PA): Philly police underreported crime data to FBI in 2021 | Today in 

Pa., Claudia Dimuro, June 15, 2022, 5:31 AM 

You can listen to the latest episode of “Today in Pa” at this link, or on any of your favorite apps including 

Alexa, Apple, Spotify, and Stitcher. Episodes are available every weekday on PennLive. Feel free to 

subscribe, follow or rate “Today in Pa.” as you see fit! “Today in Pa.” Daily Podcast | June 15, 2022. 

The Philadelphia Police Department is part of the roughly 60 percent of law enforcement agencies 

nationwide who underreported crime data to the FBI last year. [Continue Reading] 

The Oregonian (Portland, OR): Federal investigators looking into ‘suspicious’ fire at Gresham 

pregnancy center, Zaeem Shaikh, June 14, 2022, 6:34 PM 

Federal investigators are looking into the cause of a fire at a Gresham pregnancy center last week 

apparently caused when someone threw an incendiary device through a window. No one was hurt. First 

Image, the organization that owns the center, said in a post on its website that the device and fire set off 

alarms about 3 a.m. last Friday. [Continue Reading ]

KNBC-NBC (Los Angeles, CA): ‘These Two Men Were Loved': Two Officers Die in El Monte 

Shooting, Eric Leonard, June 14, 2022, 9:00 PM 

Two El Monte Police officers were shot to death Tuesday afternoon while handling a domestic violence 

call at a motel, and the man investigators said opened fire on the officers was shot dead at the scene, 

authorities said. [...] The investigation into the officers' murder and the death of the alleged attacker was 

turned-over to the LA County Sheriff's Department Homicide Bureau, and the ATF said agents were 

already on scene and assisting. [Continue Reading] 

WRGB-CBS (Schenectady, NY): Undercover DEA agent details amazing NYS bust that uncovered 

millions in buried gold, Anne McCloy, June 14, 2022, 6:00 PM 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000501

An undercover federal agent is sitting down with CBS 6 to detail one of the most unique drug busts the 

New York Capital Region has ever seen. A case that involved millions of dollars in buried gold. We first 

told you about it last week when CBS 6’s Anne McCloy interviewed Eric Canori, the former marijuana 

dealer who hid the buried treasure. [Continue Reading ]

CRIMINAL JUSTICE/CORRECTIONS 

AP: US judge keeps Nevada execution challenge alive, for now , Ken Ritter, June 14, 2022, 2:27 PM 

A federal judge declined Monday to either decide or dismiss a condemned Nevada killer’s lawsuit 

challenging the constitutionality of the state plan for what would its first lethal injection in more than 16 

years. U.S. District Judge Richard Boulware II left open Zane Michael Floyd’s case — at least for now 

— and set an Oct. 11 date for attorneys representing Floyd and the state to return to court in Las 

Vegas. [Continue Reading ]

ABC: 1st federal prison to experience COVID-19 outbreak now short-staffed: Officials, Luke Barr, 

June 14, 2022, 2:52 PM 

The first federal prison to experience a COVID-19 outbreak in March of 2020 is now severely short-staffed, the Louisiana congressional delegation and members of the Bureau of Prison union say. FCI 

Oakdale in Louisiana experienced a severe COVID-19 outbreak in March of 2020, so bad the Justice 

Department inspector general was critical of the BOP for how it failed to separate inmates at the facility 

during the first weeks of the pandemic. [Continue Reading ]

US SUPREME COURT 

Reuters: U.S. Congress votes to expand Supreme Court security, Moira Warburton and Nate 

Raymond, June 14, 2022, 6:38 PM The U.S. House of Representatives gave final congressional approval on Tuesday to a bill to bolster 

Supreme Court security in light of threats made against justices ahead of their anticipated ruling curtailing 

abortion rights. The legislation, which had already cleared the Senate, passed the House on a 396-27 

vote. The measure expands police protection to the families of the justices and senior officers of the 

court. President Biden will sign it into law, the White House said. [Continue Reading ] See also:  ABC ,

Bloomberg, The Hill,  NBC , WSJ 

MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION 

The Hill: Dems eye marijuana bill as vehicle for justice measures, Aris Folley and Karl Evers-Hillstrom, June 15, 2022, 5:39 AM 

Senate Democrats are eyeing a cannabis banking bill that has bipartisan support as a potential vehicle 

for long-sought restorative justice measures. Prominent Democrats have been pushing to pass the SAFE 

Banking Act, which would enable legally operating cannabis firms to use banking services, as part of a

larger China competition package being conferenced in both the House and Senate. [Continue Reading ]

CONGRESS 

Reuters: Trump-backed challenger ousts Republican incumbent in South Carolina midterm race, 

Eric Beech and Jason Lange, June 14, 2022, 11:58 PM Republican U.S. Representative Tom Rice, who voted to impeach Donald Trump after the Jan. 6 U.S. 

Capitol riot, lost his re-election bid in South Carolina on Tuesday, while a second Republican incumbent 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000502

## •

## •

## •••

## •

## ••

targeted by the former president prevailed. A prime target in Trump's midterm revenge campaign against 

perceived political enemies, Rice lost the Republican nomination to Russell Fry 24.6% to 51%, with 99% 

of the vote counted, according to Edison Research. [Continue Reading ]

AP : In a boost, McConnell backs Senate bipartisan gun deal , Alan Fram, June 14, 2022, 5:00 PM 

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell announced his support Tuesday for his chamber’s emerging 

bipartisan gun agreement, boosting momentum for modest but notable election-year action by Congress 

on an issue that’s deadlocked lawmakers for three decades. The Kentucky Republican said he hoped an 

outline of the accord, released Sunday by 10 Democrats and 10 Republicans, would be translated into 

legislation and enacted. McConnell’s backing was the latest indication that last month’s gun massacres in 

Buffalo, New York, and Uvalde, Texas, had reconfigured the political calculations for some in the GOP 

after years of steadfastly opposing even incremental tightening of firearms curbs. [Continue Reading] 

See also:  Bloomberg , The Hill,  NBC , Reuters , WaPo , WSJ 

USA Today: What is the 'boyfriend loophole' in the bipartisan gun deal announced by senators?, 

Merdie Nzanga, June 15, 2022, 5:00 AM In response to mass shootings, a bipartisan group of senators tentatively reached a deal on a gun bill 

that would expand "red flag" laws, spend more on mental health and close the "boyfriend loophole" that 

allows some domestic abusers to buy firearms. Gun control activists have tried to close the loophole for 

years, but like most gun legislation, the efforts fizzled out. After massacres in Buffalo, New York, and 

Uvalde, Texas, as well as other mass shootings, there is fresh momentum for gun control, including 

ensuring that all domestic abusers are barred from acquiring guns. [Continue Reading] 

NETWORK EVENING NEWS LINEUP: JUNE 14, 2022 

ABC: World News Tonight with David Muir 

CBS: Evening News with Norah O'Donnell 

NBC: Nightly News with Lester Holt 

More  than 170 million Americans are bracing for temperatures above 90 degrees. But virtually 

every corner of the country is being impacted by weather from wildfires, floods, tornadoes and 

heat. [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

The  upcoming Federal Reserve meeting could bring the biggest interest rate hike in 28 years as 

everything from gas to food and travel has seen the largest annual increase in nearly four decades. 

[ABC, CBS, NBC] 

With  Russian forces closing in, the people of the Donbas region are fleeing for their lives as 

bridges out of the city are being blown up and those remaining are being ordered to “surrender or 

die.” [ABC, CBS, NBC] 

A somber ceremony was held in Buffalo today marking one month since 10 people were killed in amass shooting at a supermarket. Meanwhile, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell signaled his 

support for the bipartisan gun reform proposal that’s expected to be finished this week. [CBS] 

A high-stakes meeting is underway in Southern California where delegates from the Southern 

Baptist Convention are choosing new leaders and confronting shocking allegations of sexual abuse. 

[CBS] 

The  House has overwhelmingly voted to extend police protection to the families of Supreme Court 

justices, now sending the bill to President Biden. This comes as concern is rising over threats to 

justices as the Court prepares to issue a ruling on abortion rights. [CBS] 

The  House committee investigating the Jan. 6 riots announced Tuesday morning that its hearing set 

for Wednesday has been postponed and offered conflicting explanations as to why. [ABC] 

Sweltering  temperatures across Texas have led to skyrocketing energy demand and now, some 

> Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030 01570-000503

---providers are struggling. [NBC ]

Document ID: 0.7.1088.5030
