Title: Fact Check: Have more mass shootings occurred under Obama than his predecessors?

URL Source: https://www.jacksonville.com/story/news/2016/07/08/fact-check-have-more-mass-shootings-occurred-under-obama-than-his-predecessors/12926006007

Published Time: 2016-07-08T20:35:45Z

Markdown Content:
Times-Union readers want to know:

**I received an email that says that since the end of 2015 under President Barack Obama, there have been 162 mass shootings, compared to 11 under President Ronald Reagan, 20 under President George W. Bush and 23 under President Bill Clinton. Is this true?**

This claim was first posted by the website TruthStreamMedia.com on Dec. 2, 2015, according to Snopes.com. That website included a copy of its data and links to the sources used to compile the information, including Mother Jones and Wikipedia.

Those sources, however, did not back up TruthStreamMedia.com's claim that 162 mass shootings had occurred during Obama's presidential tenure through 2015.

Mother Jones recorded 25 mass shootings during that time, while Wikipedia's list of "Mass Shootings in the United States by Year" recorded 47 such shootings between 2009 and 2015.

Much of the discrepancies in the data can be attributed to each source's different definitions of "mass shootings" and the criteria used for inclusion.

Snopes.com notes that TruthStreamMedia.com loosened its definition of "mass shootings" to include domestic murders in its total for Obama, but excluding similar instances in the data for his predecessors.

For example, Snopes.com found, one entry under Obama lists "Ervin Lupoe," who killed his wife and five children in 2009, but this crime was not listed by either Wikipedia or Mother Jones because it is not classified as a "mass shooting" by their definitions:

Mother Jones stated of its criteria, "Our focus is on public mass shootings in which the motive appeared to be indiscriminate killing."

Mother Jones' criteria were that the shootings had to occur in a public place - except in the case of a party on private property in Crandon, Wis., and another in Seattle, where crowds of strangers had gathered - and that crimes primarily related to gang activity, armed robbery, or domestic violence in homes were not included.

While Lupoe was included in Obama's numbers, Snopes.com found that similar cases, such as Christian Longo's murder of his wife and three children in 2002, were excluded from the records of Obama's predecessors.

Because of these different criteria and the differing inclusions/exclusions, it is difficult to quantify the number of mass shootings.

Other tracking websites also have different criteria, so finding common ground is near impossible. ShootingTracker.com, includes any instance where four or more people are shot. The GunViolenceArchive.org records incidents where four or more people (excluding the shooter) are shot. Mother Jones records mass shootings as those resulting in the death of four or more people.

As Snopes.com points out, using different criteria isn't wrong, but the differences in definitions must be explained. And, in the widely shared email, they weren't.

So TruthStreamMedia.com misled its readers by using one set of criteria for Obama and another for his predecessors.

You can look at the Mother Jones data at To view the Mother Jones sources used by TruthStreamMedia.com, go to tinyurl.com/dxx6s9b. To see those from Wikipedia, go to tinyurl.com/h543w8x and tinyurl.com/grgadwy.

Carole Fader: (904) 359-4635
