Title: SF Macy’s Union Square location may be a reason for store's closure

URL Source: http://www.sfchronicle.com/sf/article/s-f-macys-closure-union-square-18690336.php

Published Time: 2024-02-27T21:39:50Z

Markdown Content:
Shoppers at Macy’s on Union Square in 2022. Experts and analysts suggest the store’s struggles could be due to where it’s located in San Francisco.

Michaela Vatcheva/Special to The Chronicle

After Macy’s announced it would close 150 stores nationwide, including its iconic San Francisco location in Union Square as early as next year, it might be easy to point the finger at online retail undercutting in-person shopping and eroding the need for big department stores.

The Essential Sale: 6 months for 99¢. Elevate your everyday with exceptional reporting.

The Essential Sale: 6 months for 99¢. Elevate your everyday with exceptional reporting.

ACT NOW

After all, the pandemic drove consumers online for just about every purchase.

Article continues below this ad

But experts say, and studies show, that in-person retail— sometimes called brick and mortar—has largely rebounded from pandemic lows. The problem, at least for Macy’s flagship San Francisco store, may just be its location.

A JP Morgan Chase study from last year called Downtown Downturn found that in cities, many retail firms have shifted from downtown locations to more suburban areas, following the migrations of their consumers.

That study, which looked at 70 million office-entry card swipes from the first quarter of 2017 to the second quarter of 2022, also found that locations with more exposure to work-from-home trends, like downtown San Francisco, lost more in-person businesses.

Case in point: San Francisco’s return-to-office numbers have flatlined at below 50% of pre-pandemic averages, according to data from Kastle Systems, which tracks office card swipes. Recent office vacancy data for San Francisco also shows a record high of 36%, with many of those office buildings near the Macy’s in Union Square. More vacant offices mean fewer office workers and less in-person spending.

Article continues below this ad

San Francisco Macy's closing

“Union Square doesn’t need to exist in the modern framework of local consumer demand,” said Christopher Thornberg, an economist and founder of Beacon Economics. He said with fewer people going downtown for work in San Francisco’s urban core, big shopping centers like Union Square don’t make economic sense.

“This is a Union Square problem. Not a San Francisco problem,”Thornberg said. He said San Francisco’s low unemployment rate, and hyperactive venture capital sector, mean “it’s a great economy. It’s just that this economy doesn’t need a Union Square.”

More broadly, he said, the same market forces that brought down Sears and JCPenney were now converging on Macy’s bottom line, delayed only by the “crazy surge in post-pandemic spending” once social distancing and other restrictions were lifted.

The pandemic’s effects can’t be ignored, although they are only part of the picture.

Article continues below this ad

Many retailers such as Home Depot have largely rebounded from pandemic lows. But Macy’s has not, deciding to close 150 of its stores.

Brandon Bell/Getty Images

Online retail spending rose sharply during the pandemic, but in-person retail spending has not returned to pre-pandemic levels since restrictions were lifted, according to a 2023 study from Bank of America Institute.

That has caused physical retailers to reinvent themselves, offering more services and allowing customers to buy online and pick up in person, for example.

“Macy’s is probably going through what Best Buy did, just 10 or 12 years later,” said Kirthi Kalyanam, executive director of the Retail Management Institute at Santa Clara University. He said by offering a showroom environment with lowered prices and services, like tech support on site, Best Buy was able to get ahead of the online trends eroding the need for retail stores.

Other than the mass of store closures, one number was particularly worrying in Macy’s earnings report Tuesday, said Sucharita Kodali, a retail analyst at Forrester Research: Macy’s said its online sales decreased 4% compared with the fourth quarter of 2022.

Article continues below this ad

“That’s highly unusual,” she said, noting that it is not uncommon for e-commerce numbers from large retailers to grow faster than the business overall, and even see double digit year-over-year growth.

That suggests that the company was not only failing to grow its online business, but losing market share overall to other retail and large e-commerce players, Kodali said.

Reach Chase DiFeliciantonio: chase.difeliciantonio@sfchronicle.com; Twitter: @ChaseDiFelice

Feb 27, 2024

Reporter

Chase DiFeliciantonio is a reporter at the San Francisco Chronicle where he covers tech and how AI is changing the city and the region. He previously covered business, labor issues, and San Francisco's recovery from the pandemic's economic and other effects. A fifth-generation San Franciscan, prior to joining the Chronicle in early 2020 he covered legal and business news at the North Bay Business Journal and the Daily Journal.
