Title: wim22-publication-v1.pdf

URL Source: https://www.uvu.edu/global/docs/wim22/wim22-publication-v1.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 25 Jun 2025 04:07:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 746

Markdown Content:
FIRST ACADEMIC CONFERENCE 

# ON THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

# “WHY IT MATTERS” 

# AS PART OF THE DECADE OF ACTION 

# PUBLICATIONS 

# volume I 

# SDG1 – SDG7 

# UTAH VALLEY UNIVERSITY 

# OCTOBER 5 – 7, 2022 EXECUTIVE BOARD PUBLICATION 

## Baldomero Lago, Chair Baldomero Lago, Chief Editor 

## Felipe Queipo Rego, Co -chair Iñigo Arbiol Oñate, Co -editor 

## Elsie Effange -Mbella Felipe Queipo Rego, Co -editor & Design 

## Ramu Damodaran Hailey Scott, Contributing Editor 

## Susan a Mosquera Monelos 

## Mark Charlton 

## Yuan -Kwan Chan 

## Iñigo Arbiol Oñate 

## Jayashri Wyatt 

## EDITORIAL REVIEW BOARD 

## Dr. Mark Charlton Dr. Iñigo Arbiol Oñate Dr. Padmini Murthy 

## Hon. Elsie Effange -Mbella Dr. Gratin Atingdobe Dr. Noel Alembong 

## Dr. Eneke Bechem Dr. Shahira Osama Dr. Amira Y. Badri 

## Dr. Annemieke Farenhorst Dr. Kale Kostick Dr. Popi Konidari 

## Dr. Shiv Tripathi Dr. Mwangi Peter Wanderi Dr. Kazunori Sato 

## Dr. Susana Mosquera Monelos Dr. Muneo Kitajima Dr. Emmanuel Yenshu 

## Dr. Rosemary Shafack Dr. Michael Sone Ekonde Dr. Ronald Ndip 

## Dr. Patrick Shey Dr. Nalova Endeley Dr. Evelyn Tangomoh 

## Dr. Patience Sone Munge Dr. Ngomo Horace Manga Dr. Samuel Ayonghe 

## SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE 

## Dr. Baldomero Lago, Utah Valley University, Utah, USA 

## Mr. Felipe Queipo Rego, Communications Officer, Civil Society Unit, DGC, United Nations 

## Hon. Elsie Effange -Mbella, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cameroon 

## Hon. Ramu Damodaran, Former Chief of UNAI, USA 

## Dr . Susana Mosquera Monelos, University of Piura, Peru 

## Dr. Mark Charlton, De Montfort University, United Kingdom 

## Ms. Yuan -Kwan Chan, United Nations University, Japan 

## Dr. Iñigo Arbiol Oñate, University of Deusto, Spain 

## Dr. Ngomo Horace Manga, University of Be au, Cameroon 

## Dr. Samuel Ayonghe, University of Beau, Cameroon 

## Dr. Padmini Murthy, New York University, NYC, USA 

## Dr. Annemieke Farenhorst, University of Manitoba, Canada 

## Dr. Mami Katsumi, Nagaoka University of Technology, Japan 

## Dr. Shiv K. Tripathi, Atmiya University, Rajkot, India 

## Publication © 2022 – Utah Valley University 

## Copyrights are maintained by the authors 

## ISBN 978 -84 -1325 -164 -6Why It Matters Vol. 1 | i

# Preface 

The Sustainable Development Goals are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the 

planet and improve the lives and prospects of everyone, everywhere. The 17 Goals were adopted 

by all UN Member States in 2015, as part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development which 

set out a 15 -year plan to achieve the Goals. They are unique in the world due to their historical 

nature, since never before had such a large international consensus been achieved linked to a 

collec tive roadmap; universal since they include all kinds of countries and people; detailed thanks 

to the different levels and execution indicators; and transformative because they invite us to 

ambitiously transform our societies. 

With just under ten years lef t to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), world 

leaders at the SDG Summit in September 2019 called for a Decade of Action and delivery for 

sustainable development, and pledged to mobilize financing, enhance national implementation, 

and strengt hen institutions to achieve the Goals by the target date of 2030, leaving no one behind. 

The Second SDG Summit, that will take place on 18 September 2023 will review the status of the 

global implementation of Agenda 2030, paying particular attention at the work carried out at the 

supranational level. 

The UN Secretary -General called on all sectors of society to mobilize for a decade of action on 

three levels: global action to secure greater leadership, more resources and smarter solutions for 

the Sustainabl e Development Goals; local action embedding the needed transitions in the 

policies, budgets, institutions and regulatory frameworks of governments, cities and local 

authorities; and people action, including youth, civil society, media, the private sector, unions, 

academia and other stakeholders, to generate an unstoppable movement pushing for the required 

transformations. 

We are at one of the greatest crossroads in recent history. We live immersed in a systemic change 

in which the classic geopolitical conf licts linked to territorial sovereignty and resources have 

returned to the international reality, overshadowing the possibility of reaching and maintaining 

consensus around our shared challenges as a humanity. The world has also in recent times 

witnessed t he devastating consequences of a pandemic that has highlighted and exacerbated 

inequalities across the globe, particularly for communities and social groups already vulnerable, 

notably women and girls. The gap that exists between the so -called developed wo rld and those 

developing nations and economies in transition has widened and, once again, demonstrated that 

it is imperative to address global challenges through a common agenda. Never has multilateralism 

been so important in finding solutions to our socia l challenges. 

It is precisely this complex context of confrontation and socioeconomic differences that should 

encourage us to strengthen our commitment to the 2030 Agenda as a universal language from 

which to build a social contract that leaves power comp etition aside and reactivates the path 

towards universal, inclusive, and sustainable development. The most prosperous societies are 

the most integrated and cohesive, those that share a social contract of basic principles, values, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | ii 

and priorities. At the cur rent global crossroads, this is an even greater need, and the 2030 Agenda 

is a universal reference. 

The 1st International Academic Conference on the Sustainable Development Goals - "Why it 

Matters", co -sponsored by the United Nations Department of Global Communications through the 

Civil Society Unit and the Academic Impact Initiative , takes place as the Decade of Action 

continues the countdown towards 2030, and the global community, including academic 

institutions, civil society organizations, private sec tor entities, local and national governments, as 

well as media outlets, explore ways through which the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and 

the 17 Sustainable Development Goals become an intrinsic part of their efforts. 

Academic institutions play a cruci al role in these efforts, as they are uniquely qualified to bring to 

the table discussions and approaches that can be incorporated into the action plans in other social 

sectors. This publication gathers some of the contributions around the relevance and pe rtinence 

of why the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda matter more than ever before. 

These intensely negotiated agreements offer the academic community a clear and unique 

development framework that invites everyone at all levels of society to work to transform our world 

and create a more equal and sustainable society for everyone. Inspired by the "Why It Matters" 

motto these two volumes collect the effort of reflection and scientific research, in the spirit of social 

commitment and i nclusivity, and represent a proposal to transfer experiences and good practices 

to the global society. 

There is still much work to be done, and we hope that this publication will contribute to the 

conversations in preparation for, but also part of, the 20 24 Summit of the Future convened by the 

United Nations, and described by Secretary -General Antonio Guterres as “once -in -a-generation 

opportunity to reinvigorate global action, recommit to fundamental principles, and further develop 

the frameworks of multil ateralism so they are fit for the future.” 

In putting this collection together, our goal has been to inspire others and provide a unique and 

first -of -its -kind compendium of academic works aiming at healing through sustainable approaches 

our ailing planet and its peoples, building a world for all to enjoy. 

Only working together can we make a difference. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | iii 

# Table of Contents 

# No Poverty 

The Mukono Micro -Livestock Farming Project Designed to Tackle Sustainable Development Goal 

No. 1, No Poverty 

Awath Java Abdat, Babirye Esther, Emmanuel Kato, Kuteesa Jesse Kirule, and Owen 

Ssembuya ……………………………………………………………………………… .. ……… 1

The Socio -Economic Effects of Child Marriage on the Wellbeing of the Girl -Child: An Analysis of 

the Implementation of Agenda 2030 in C ameroon 

Helen Linonge -Fontebo ……………………………………………………………………… ... . 9

The Relationship Between MSMEs and Poverty Eradication in Makindye Division Kampala, 

Uganda 

Nabulya Justine, Susan Nankunda, and Masibo Sharon ………………………………….. 23 

Ending Poverty and Inequality: What Matters and Why 

Warner Woodworth ………………………………………………………………………… .… 37 

# Zero Hunger 

Dynamique Spatio -Temporelle de L’occupation de Sol et de son Implication á la Sécurité 

Alimentaire en Zone Cotonniére de Mali 

Bebe Alfred Dembele, Si di Dembele, and Souleymane Si di Traore ……………………… 55 

Assessment of Sustainable Food Systems in Mountain Regions of India Through Climate Smart 

Agriculture During Covid -19 Pandemic: The Case Study of AI for Rural 

Priyanka Prem Kumar, Ankur Rangi, and Anirban Roy ……………………………………. 73 

The Contribution of Input -Output Multi -Objective Optimization Model of Sustainable Consumption 

and Production in Food -Energy -Water Nexus 

Isaac Okola ……………………………………………………………………………… ... …. 10 5

# Good Health and Well -Being 

The Universal Health Coverage in Nigeria: The Perception of Public Health Professionals 

Towards the United Nations Sustainable Development 

Andre Ben Moses Akuche, Kennedy Nsan, and Precious Tariela Ebikabowei Victo r.… 115 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | iv 

Tsunami Preparedness in Indonesia: The WAVES Initiative 

Emmett Chad, Sarah Hall, Ron Harris, and Carolus Prasetyadi ……………………… .… 147 

Reducing Child Mortality in Sierra Leone with a Sustainable Diagnostics Device for Sickle Cell 

Disease 

Alice Chen, Laura Duffany, Kathleen Gifford, Katie Goettle, Dream Intarachumnum, 

Lauryn Jones, Wei Ngai, Tiffany Pang, Heidi Shen, and Jannah Wing …………………. 173 

Can Just Any Country Achieve UHC?: Lessons from Different Health Systems 

Karuna Jain and Sandhy a Mishra …………………………………………………………... 187 

The State of Food Security and Nutrition: Building Climate Resilience for Food Security and 

Nutrition in the South West Region, Cameroon 

Mireille Sylviane Dongmo Nguepi, Bernard Tientcheu, and Achidi Aduni Ufuan………. 209 

Trends of Malaria in the South Wes t Region of Cameroon: Overview, Challenges, and 

Perspectives 

Esum M.E., Roland N. Ndip, and Sumbele I. U.N ……………………………………….. 235 

Understanding the True Healthcare Impact of Nonprofits Serving the Navajo Tribe During the 

Covid -19 Pandemic 

Mohan Sudabattul a, Samuel Philips, Gabrielle Hoyer, and Audrey Pozernick ……….. .. 253 

For Objective 3: Good Health and Well -Being Eye Health Management 

Chunhong Yan ……………………………………………………………………………….. 273 

# Quality Education 

Inclusive Co -Curricular Educational Model for Implementation of Sustainable Development for 

Rural and Mountain Communities 

Baktybek Abdrisaev, Rusty Butler, Wendy Jyang, and Teki Uday …………… ... ……….. 297 

Strengthening Civil Society Capacity for Education for All In Republic of Ben in: The Important 

Role of Universities and Other Research Institutions 

Faïssou Amadou ……………………………………………………………………………... 315 

A Study of Enhancing the E -Learning and the 21st Century Competence Skills Training in 

Institutions of Higher Learning 

Joy Ayebare, Racheal Babirye, and Kenneth Wabuteya ……………………… .. ……….. 335 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | v

Instituting Dynamics and Practical Experiences in K -12 Education in Underdeveloped Regions: 

Redefinition, Augmentation, and Diversification of Teaching Qualification to Promote Equitable 

Educational Access 

Jihong Cai …………………………………………………………………………………….. 349 

Racial Diversity - A Secret of High -Performing School Districts Across the United States 

Joyce Coffey, Melanie Mosqueda, and Reema Rafifar ………………………………… .. . 363 

Perspectives on Integrating the Local Context for Environmental Literacy: An Exploratory Study 

with Middle -School Teachers in India 

Girish Dalvi and Tanaya Vyas ………………………………………………………………. 377 

Culture and the Sustainable Development Goals: An Outlook of Future Opportunitie s

Kenna Lee Edler and Jonghwi Park ……………………………………………………… .. . 395 

Building Capacity and Awareness for the UN Sustainable Development Goals Through Project -

Based and Community -Engaged Pedagogies 

Martina King and Tai Munro …… ………………... …………………………………………. 417 

Th e Effect of Different Instructional Methods and Beliefs towards Mental Computations 

Eunmi Joung ………………………………………………………………………………….. 447 

The First Phase of Development of Health Learning Package by Applying Technology Based with 

Autonomous Learning Approach to Enhance Covid -19 Literacy and Health Behaviors as Lifelong 

Learning Skills 

Rungrawee Samawathdana ……………………………………………………………… ... . 461 

The Power of Educating Women and Ending Generational Poverty: A Comparative Study of 

Women in Ghana and Liberia 

Lauren T aylor ……………………………………………………………………… .. ……….. 475 

# Gender Equality 

Who Gets to Choose? A Global Perspective on Gender, Work -Life Balance, and Choice in the 

Post -Pandemic Workplace 

Cristen Dalessandro and Daniel Patterson ……………………………………………… .. . 489 

Can Performance and Representation Improve Public Perceptions of Police Legitimacy in 

Pursuing Domestic Violence Case? 

Kimberly Madsen …………………………………………………………………………….. 503 

Gender Disparities in Educational Attainments: Does Gender Gaps Matter? 

Balram Rao and Kunal Rao …………………………………………………………………. 531 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | vi 

Differential Impact of School Closure on Adolescent Girls during Covid 19 Pandemic: A Study of 

Slum Dwellers in Delhi 

Antra Singh ……………………………………………………………………… .. ……… ….. 55 5

# Clean Water and Sanitation 

Diarrheal Diseases and Evaluation of Inhabitants’ Knowledge, Attitude and Practices Regarding 

Water Safety, Sanitation and Hygiene in Cholera Endemic Localities of Douala, Cameroon 

Jane -Francis TatahKihla Akoachere, Roy Lyonga Mbua, and Engome Regina Wotany 57 5

STARS -c, A Google Earth Engine Tool to Evaluate Long -Term Water Quality Trends Globally 

Anna Cardall, Kaylee Tanner, and Gustavious Williams ……………………… ... ……….. 60 3

The Study of Clean Wate r and Sanitation in Bunyenye and Bunyaka Villages in Luwero District 

SDG 6 

Aaron Kasule, Rebecca Nakato, and Philip Nsubuga …………………………………….. 62 3

Achieving Sustainable Development Goal 6 in India: Transforming Lives through Localisation 

Siddharth Singh …………………………………………………………………… .. ……….. 63 9

# Affordable and Clean Energy 

Renewable Energy for Rural Electrification of Sub -Saharan Africa: Why It Matters 

Louis Musong Katche, Emmanuel Tanyi, and Pierre Tsafack ………………… .. ……….. 65 5

Improvement of the Livelihoods of Rural Populations of Sub -Saharan Africa Through Post -

Harvest and Cook Technologies Powered by Renewable Resources 

Nde Nguti, Divine Ngwashi, and Emmanuel Tanyi ………………………………………... 681 

Financing Sustainable Energy in the Ghanaian Energy Market - A Comprehensive Policy Review 

and Recommendations 

Parth Ponkshe ………………………………………………………………………………... 701 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 1

# The Mukono Micro -Livestock Farming Project Designed 

# to Tackle Sustainable Development Goal No. 1, No Poverty 

Awath Java Abdat, Babirye Esther, Emmanuel Kato, 

Kuteesa Jesse Kirule, and Owen Ssembuya (Uganda) 

Abstract 

41% of Uganda’s population live in poverty according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). 

Almost half of Uganda’s population is under the age of 15 , representing one of the youngest 

populations in the world. A young population indicates high potential but as the sit uation stands, 

poverty is high amongst the households that 45% of children drop out of school at primary level 

but the rate is speculated to be higher for girls. Not to digress, this problem amongst many others 

is the reason why poverty has been persistent in the Ugandan society. Our Team chooses to 

tackle the SDG Number 1, No poverty to see to it that such problems are done away with. The 

aim is to create a society that is financially independent and financially secure hence sustainable 

in the long run. Th e Team chose to work with a project that is easily executable and understood 

by everyone and that was micro -livestock farming, with cuniculture being the pioneer of this 

project we called the Mukono Micro -Livestock Project. The cost of setting up the proje ct is not 

very costly, and the maintenance of the whole project depends on how its ran. Given our major 

aims, to conclude this project we decided that SACCOs are the way to go, with everything else 

being just a means to an end. This submission shows how ef fective the project can be and with 

funding, it will surely change the lives of people in the target area. 

Key words: Kigezi Health Care Foundation (KIHEFO), Mukono Micro -Livestock Project (MUMILI), 

Saving Credit and Cooperative Organization (SACCO), Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 

Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 

Introduction 

In Uganda’s context, poverty is locally defined as the lack of necessities such as food, shelter, 

clothes, education, and Cash, which are greatly seen as the major challenges in communities. 

The poverty line in the country is US$0.88 which is much less W orld Bank international figure of 

US$1.9. The focus area is – which is in Mukono District, Namubiru Village. The SDG 1 No Poverty 

aims at halting poverty and if its successfully halted, most if not all SDGs are to be done away 

with. This is because in all the different SDGs developed by the UN, poverty sits at the heart of it 

all. Poverty breeds ignorance and from that comes all the other sins and atrocities since in 

scenarios where survival is the major obligation, the animal in man comes out and trembles the 

“human rights” without a flinch in thought. Only people who have secured a financially stable 

environment have a chance to develop other aspects of life. On the contrary a survivor’s purpose 

is to live another day, a mind with only a singularity like t hat cannot think of education, cannot 

think about gender equality, cannot care about sustainable energy sources, a mind like that even Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 2

worries less about climate; not to mention all the psychological trauma that may come with it. 

What we are trying to poi nt out is that it is illogical to ask a mind that lives to survive to look beyond 

the basic needs of life and pursue other ideologies and we dare say that Poverty is the root of all 

evil. The sustainable development Goals (SDGs) are the key to a better wor ld as addressed by 

the United Nations. The team is focusing on SDG NO.1 which is “No poverty, to end poverty in all 

its forms everywhere.” 

As all other countries, the economy suffered a great blow as a result of the Covid -19 pandemic, 

and this worsened th e already bad financial status of many Ugandans. Basing on our project site 

Namubiru village, Mukono district central Uganda, the state of poverty has steadily increased 

following the negative Impacts of the pandemic covid -19 where most individuals lost th eir jobs 

due to the decline in the country’s economic activities, but it was on record that the agricultural 

sector of the country was less impacted. In the first half of 2021, Uganda’s Finance Ministry 

reported that 28 % of Ugandans were poor. That rate h ad increased from 18 % before the 

pandemic. In line with World Bank practice, the official poverty line is the equivalent of $ 1.90 

purchasing power per day and head. The Finance Ministry also noted that two thirds of Ugandans 

had lost at least some income due to the Covid -19 crisis. It was obvious that things would be 

challenging. In June 2020, the Uganda office of the United Nations Development Programme 

(UNDP) prepared a report on what impacts the novel virus was likely to have. It expected some 

4.4 mill ion workers in Uganda’s informal sector to fall into extreme poverty. Women, people with 

disabilities and chronic conditions, youth and the elderly were said to be most at risk. The UNDP 

report also predicted that tourism, manufacturing, and services secto rs would be 

disproportionately affected. Even before the pandemic, Oxfam, the international charity, had 

warned that inequality was worsening in Uganda example, that 80 % of rural households were 

vulnerable to poverty even before Covid -19, compared to less than 30 % in urban areas. The 

team after researching and discussing the best way to tackle the task at hand concluded that 

being part of the agricultural sector would be a nice start. The decide project plan was micro -

livestock farming with the overall ai m to establish a financially secure and independent society 

through savings groups (SACCOs). Sustainability means the state of being independent of help 

from others, this is exactly what the Team wants to achieve, and that’s why we choose a project 

that ca n make people financially free and secure, hence, sustainable. This means the challenge 

at hand is difficult with objectives like mindset change and development of money management 

skills. The choice of livestock was poultry and cuniculture (rabbits). It m ay not seem like much but 

with research we found that the products of these two commodities are both high and the later 

had a relatively young market with lots of room to grow. 

Under the project we decided to name the Mukono Micro -Livestock (Micro -livest ock are animals 

that require limited space to rear hence there is no threat to the environment and climate at large) 

Farming Project, the aim is to create a society with financial independence and financial security. 

Financial independence is the state whe re one has income that he or she is free to spend on 

things that interests them. Financial security is simply a fall back plan for finances during a crisis. 

These two , working hand in hand , can without doubt end poverty and can be sustainable. With 

products coming from the animals being the main source of income, and SACCOs being the form 

in which finances are secured. The major resource we are to optimize is the human resource, the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 3

partici pants themselves. The stakeholders need to be willing to learn and accept the terms at 

which we are a going to be operating with. 

Purpose 

The MUMILI Project is designed for strictly purposes of freeing the society of Namubiru from 

staunch poverty and acq uire middle class income statue. This is to be done by the involvement 

of 50 participants from the target community, training them the disciplines of rearing the respective 

animals and also educating and involving all the participants in SACCOs with a comm on product. 

But what is a SACCO? In full, SACCO is an acronym for Savings and Credit Cooperative 

Organization. SACCOs are voluntary associations where members regularly pool their savings 

and occasionally obtain loans which they use for different purposes. The general idea is to 

promote savings and make credit available to all members, talk about being sustainable. Normally, 

SACCOs operate on a basis of equality for promotion of economic interests, group ownership of 

property and resources acquired through these cooperatives is also acceptable since people have 

equal stakes and usually, SACCOs comprise of members in the same income statue to avoid 

some members from acting privileged. SACCOs are democratic and have in many areas of the 

country helped to be an effectively participatory strategy to bootstrap low -income individuals into 

the socio -economic activities of the nation. Also, they reduce exploitation of powerless individuals 

by other individuals or institutions. With all the above being explained, othe r questions arouse, 

how are members going to join the SACCOs? Where does one get the income to keep up with a 

SACCO? 

Well, the project is designed in such a way to be self -sustainable, by this we mean that steps 

were taken to see to it that work is resour ceful and yields results i.e., in these SACCOs, only 

members of the MUMILI project will have permission to join and only if they are registered and 

have yielded results from the respective fields of the micro -livestock project. This will help promote 

unit amongst members and also avoid interruptions from outsiders with little understanding. 

What we are trying to describe is the methodology that will get us to the aims of financial 

independence and security. Members carrying out the project, after 6 months of operation will be 

introduced to the market. After earning from their own product, they will be inclined to startup 

different SACCOs in -order to further broaden their knowledge and influence over the area. Using 

them as an example, the team will see to i t that we attract more people from the same area. 

Why Micro -Livestock? 

The state in which most people in the area of Namubiru live is that of extreme poverty, and as for 

that matter, the team chose a more financially friendly solution, cuniculture and po ultry. These two 

farm animals are not as hard to rear as say cattle. The main challenge with them is sanitation, 

and we believe with proper sensitization, anyone can learn how to handle them. The second 

reason is due to the fact that they don't require a l ot of space and resources especially for starters 

as compared to other animals. One of the major driving factor for choosing this program is that, 

for rabbits, there is a higher level of output of products i.e. the gestation period of the rabbit female Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 4

is 30 days, and a litter at least has 7 kits; Proper breeds mature within 5 months making the rabbit 

a highly profitable animal when it comes to turnover (Mukasa, 2021)."One can start with only six 

rabbits (Mutua, 2016). In the beginning, I was the farmer, I was the vet, I was everything. I was 

small, but I had a big vision, a serious vision," Mutua reminisces. Unfortunately, his vision was 

one that was often met with ridicule. "If you tell people, 'Raise rabbits, there is a future,' they will 

tell you, 'No, rabbits are for kids.' It's challenging to change somebody's tastes. The Masai (a tribe 

in northwest Kenya) give rabbits to dogs. I spent two years going to trade shows and giving away 

rabbit meat for free, saying, 'Taste this!'" (Mutua, 2016) 

With MUMILI , one can easily understand the full scope, from what they will be doing, how they 

will be doing it, how to earn, and how to keep earning. It secures the stakeholder. In conclusion 

to this question, all we are describing is that; one joins the project, rea rs the animals, takes the 

products from his own farm to market and gets the profits, then with those profits the registered 

members join a SACCO. It is under the SACCO that our major interest lies because as a 

cooperative society, the scope of one’s econom ic activity is enlarged, both individual and on a 

group basis. We ought also to point out that MUMILI project can act as both a source of income 

and food to whoever becomes involved since the products are edibles . To add on, the waste 

material from both po ultry and rabbits if collected in huge sums has high market value since it’s a 

capable fertilizer. Also, the wool of the rabbits is also marketable. Given the fact that the market 

is still developing for the rabbit products and on high demand, the possibi lity of a highly productive 

supplier to set his/her own price is high (Mutua, 2016). And as a matter of fact, the price of rabbit’s 

meat has a range, 25000 -35000 Ugandan shillings. 

"If you want to feed your family, you can buy one female and one male. Ke ep the first two rabbits 

until the pair matures, around five months, and after that the breeding speed of the rabbits keeps 

up with the eating speed of the family. You will always have enough meat," boasts Mutua. "If you 

want to do it commercially, you'll need at least five female rabbits and one male rabbit. That can 

earn you USH 640,000 [$200] or even up to USH 1,280,000 [$400] per month." To put that in 

perspective, USH 640,000 is already more than many manual laborers in Uganda. 

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, rabbits convert 

20 percent of the fodder they consume into protein , making them roughly twice as efficient as 

cows. They're also about as low -maintenance as livestock can be; t hey thrive with minimal space 

and virtually no attention. While more demanding farm animals require valuable cereal grains, 

rabbits will happily munch away on just about any greenery you throw their way. And unlike cows, 

which give birth only once a year, these little guys breed like, well, rabbits, producing litters of 

roughly eight kits at a time. A project such as ours can actually be used to tackle two SDGs that 

is; No poverty and Zero Hunger as the research provided above has clearly shown such potenti al. 

For poultry, chicken in particular, if one majors in the local breed (breeds indigenous to Uganda) 

the risk of disease is decreased. Although this comes at a cost of time, the products(eggs) from 

these breeds have a price that triples that of the usual layers that are imported. Being local breeds, 

these birds are more. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 5

Methodology 

The execution of this program must have proper management of all aspects from people to funds. 

The way the team worked around this was to acquire a project site. A base of the first operation 

so as to act as the body that links the collective goods from th e participants to the market. The 

level of hierarchy at the site will be democratic and imitate that followed in a SACCO with few 

adjustments from the experts we are to involve along the way. The project site will of course be 

within the target area so as its easily accessible to those who would be interested. The project 

site will also act as a place where the civilians would get all the training and information required 

to get involved into the project. 

We are to make it clear through paper work and oral ly that whoever chooses to join our expedition 

is bound to join a SACCO. This is to ensure results from the farming practices and also help clarify 

that the major aim is financial independence and security. Well as involvement into the program 

will certain ly bring income, for the equation to be complete one needs to join a SACCO for the 

equation to be complete. This is because a SACCO improves ones social network and makeup 

money needed for emergencies. Better decision making is therefore paramount and a me mber 

can rest assured that he has a backup plan. According to a study conducted by the Uganda 

Technology and Management University in 2017, in Uganda, savings and credit cooperatives 

(SACCOs) as financial intermediaries, channeling savings into loans, prov ide saving opportunities 

for the people, especially in the rural areas , but further improvements are necessary to make their 

services more efficient and sustainable. 

A study done in Kampala by Makerere University found out that SACCOs have significantly 

reduced poverty, contributed to education, helped in saving mobilization, and provided emergency 

housing loans and funeral insurance. SACCOs were found to have contributed to strengthening 

social protection and social inclusion, reduction of risks and vulne rabilities facing women 

entrepreneurs and ability to make decisions. Inclusion of women workers and women 

entrepreneurs with disabilities, increase in responsibilities in the home and the ability to participate 

in the community activities, helping women to network and build relationships. 

According to the research made from the different surveys we made across the target society, it 

was brought to our understanding that starting with places of worship like churches would simply 

make our work easier to get recruits. Not surprisingly, we got a good turn up of people who were 

interested in the project. Further surveys revealed to us what we proved us to be on the right track 

as we found many of those interested were actually carrying out cuniculture already. W hat more 

signs did we need to be confident, for one thing was made clear to us and it was that people were 

actually interested, they only lacked proper training and serious motivation. Those who were 

involved in the cuniculture lacked the proper facilities to enlarge their animal numbers as they 

would die off easily due to poor sanitation. This would kill motivation for many, not to mention that 

it was a hobby to some and yes, once in a while they used them for food. The other problem was 

the market. Market s for product such as these prefer large numbers of products, and require a 

steady flow of product within intervals. For example, some suppliers mentioned that on a monthly 

basis a farm ought to produce over 200 animals (Mukasa, 2020) This requires that on e fully Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 6

commit to providing to the market with a sustainable source ensuring a steady flow of income and 

products for both supplier and buyer. To put it simply, people who do small scale are bitterly not 

able to access the full potential of this market sh are, but if all the people of the area have one 

single place (the project site) to work as the middle man between the market and the farmer, 

everyone is able to have a share of the full potential of the market. 

Assuming all goes well, and we actually achi eve our first goal of hitting the market in the first 6 

months of our operation, the profits that will come off the success will be used for SACCO 

registration from all the first participants without exceptions. SACCOs are given an annual 

probation for ope ration. 

Relevant Literature 

In October 2013, The Kigezi Healthcare Foundation (KIHEFO) opened the Rabbit Breeding and 

Training Centre, in Kabale, Uganda. With 120 rabbits for breeding and distribution the project 

began giving to poor households and curre ntly has 700 rabbits housed at the main center -with 

capacity for 3,000 -and additional rabbits distributed to more than 60 farmers within the region. 

The main center located in Kabale -town is now fully functioning and has 16 breeding cages, 60 

weaning cages and 1 mobile rabbit cage for demonstration with community members. Rabbit 

training manuals have been designed in both English and Rukiga, the local language. since the 

start of 2016, more than 800 people within the community have been trained in rabbit re aring and 

management and equipped with skills and knowledge about the benefits of keeping rabbits. The 

success of this project has spread since then and mini -breeding centers have been built in 6 

additional communities, including Bukoora, Muyumbu, Rubira, Nyabikoni, Kasinde and Ikumba -

all in Kabale district. 

In October 2015, Trina Moyles, a KIHEFO volunteer, visited 6 farmers who'd benefited individually 

in August 2014 with 1 cage (4 units) and 3 breeding rabbits. She reported that "one farmer had 

tripled her meat intake over the course of 14 months. Farmers were eating the rabbits, and also 

selling them to generate income. It was a balance of eating/selling. An unintended outcome was 

the amount of rabbit manure produced, which was used to make compost for their field crops. 

Another unintended outcome was that some of the rabbit farmers were organizing amongst 

themselves -donating rabbits to other farmers who weren't necessarily direct beneficiaries of the 

original project." 

Limitations 

All projects face limitations and problems that threaten their success. The MUMILI faces a few 

like these but they can be dealt with the most serious limitation in our project is the project site. 

Well as the participants can do the work from their homes, th e whole operation of connecting 

them and training them needs a center of command, a base of operation. This site is where the 

local participants will have to bring their products so as we can put out to the market. What we 

are trying to point out is that t he project site will be the place where animals are slaughtered in 

huge quantities and delivered to the meat market. This is because the market has a lot of demand Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 7

and obviously a single farmer cannot meet the weekly demand but as one unit, receiving from all 

over the village, the MUMILI project site can act as the middle man. To add on, the setting up of 

the different infrastructure is also sophisticated. The greatest expenses are used up by the wood 

for the modified hutches that are needed to run cunicul ture (Mukasa, 2021). 

The other would be limitation is disease but with proper training, a farmer can raise the animals 

in a clean environment and not worry about disease. Also, the best way to fight against 

coccidiocis, the most notorious disease towards the rabbit’s life is i mmunization. This can be done 

by mixing coccidiostant in the feeds of the kits during the weaning period. This is information got 

from experts we tried to interview. 

Conclusions 

In conclusion, the MUMILI project has a high success rate if it gets suffici ent funds to setup all the 

required infrastructure and carry out requires sensitization of the people in the area of focus. It 

ought to spread through different communities across the country and more projects like this can 

be developed to help fight pover ty amongst Ugandans. It should be noted that the major goal/aim 

is to create a financially stable society, with the attributes money security and independence. The 

project described above also shows the potential of handling two SDGs namely; No poverty and 

Zero Hunger. This is because the products can be used for both commercial and nutrition 

services. 

References 

Hubbell, D(2016) Available at: https://www.vice.com/en/article/78mmdg/meet -the -man -

kenyans -call -mr -rabbit (Accessed on: 26/02/2022) 

Kaaya, R( 2018) Available at:  http://dissertations.mak.ac.ug/handle/20.500.12281/8099 

(Accessed on: 26/02/2022) 

NTVUganda(2020)SEEDS OF GOLD. 6 th September. A vailable 

at: https://youtu.be/IzW2n2NQ85Q (Accessed on: 21/03/2022) 

Ssegujja, R.S(2021) Available at: https://www.dandc.eu/en/article/many -african - countries -

covid -19 -has -exacerbated -inequality -uganda (Accessed: 19/03/2022) 

Uganda Bureau Of Statistics(2019). Available at: https://www.ub os.org/wp -

content/uploads/publications/02_2020Poverty_Map_report__Oct_2019.pdf 

(Accessed on: 3/03/2022) 

USAID(2021)UGANDA: Nutrition Profile. Available at: 

https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/tagged_Uganda -Nutrition -

Profile.pdf (Acces sed on: 3/03/2022) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 8Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 9

# The Socio -Economic Effects of Child Marriage on the Wellbeing 

# of the Girl -Child: An Analysis of the Implementation 

# of Agenda 2030 in Cameroon 

Helen Linonge -Fontebo (University of Buea, Cameroon) 

Abstract 

Socio -cultural and customary laws in Cameroon perpetuate child marriage, given that the civil 

and common law operate alongside a strong under -current of customary laws 1 which sometimes 

act as a parallel regime to statutory law, thereby compromising the de velopment (SDG 1, 3, 4, 5, 

8, 10, 16) of girls, resulting in early pregnancy, social isolation, little or no education, poor 

vocational training/skills, loss of self -esteem and reinforces the gendered nature of poverty. 

Indicating that boys are also affect ed by child marriage, but the impact is severe on girls, 

compounded by the fact that Cameroon has not adhered to Article 6 (b) of the Protocol to the 

African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on Women, which states a minimum age of 

marriage at 18 for bo th boys and girls. Religion is often used to justify child marriage in Cameroon 

and elsewhere. This explains why it is predominant among the Muslims in the Northern part of 

Cameroon, where young girls are still sent into marriages with traditional rulers, lamibes, who may 

have ten or fifteen wives. This practise is also common among the Bacheve, Oliti and Assumbo 

clans in Akwaya where girls at five, unknowingly are faced with the reality of child marriage at 

about the age of ten when their supposed suitors come for them. 

This paper examines the socio -economic implications of child marriage on the well -being of the 

girl Childs’ education, health and development through documentary and desktop review of 

literature and concludes by proposing recommendations fo r ways in which the practice of child 

marriage can be addressed through the Ministries of Women’s Empowerment and the Family, 

Social Affairs, NGOs/CSOs and other stakeholders in Cameroon. 

Keywords: socio -economic, child marriage, wellbeing, girl -child, agenda 2030, development in 

Cameroon 

Purpose 

Child marriage is gendered, it affects girls in much greater numbers than boys considering that in 

primitive communities, an unmarried person as old as seventeen and eighteen was regarded as 

inadeq uate, irrespective of whether the person was a boy or girl (Plan International 2013 & Lewis   

> 1Customary law is part of Cameroon’s law pursuant to the provisions of section 27 of the Southern Cameroons High
> Court Law 1955, indicating that the High Courts shall “observe” and “enforce the observance” of customary law
> insofar as it is not repugnant to natural justice, equity, and good conscience or contrary to the written law. Despite the
> illegality of child marriage (forced ma rriage) under section 356 of the Cameroon Penal Code and its negative impact
> on development it is still tolerated in the name of culture (Cameroons New Gender Policy Document: 35).

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 10 

1982). Although indicators 5.3.1 of SDG 5 measures child marriage among girls, the practice 

occurs among boys as well perpetuated by gender inequality and unbalanc ed power relationships 

at all levels of the society. Child marriage refers to both formal marriages and informal unions in 

which a girl lives with a male partner as if married before the age of 18 (Arinze -Umobi 2008; 

UNICEF 2005). In child marriage the con sent of the child is ignored and her parents enter into 

agreement for her. This often also constitute forced marriage and coercion, given that, children 

under 18 cannot make informed decision on whom to marry. 

Although the United Nation (UN) defines a c hild as anyone under the age 18, there is no single 

definition of the term “child” worldwide and there are variations within countries. That is why in 

some countries a girl is only a child until she begins menstruation and is interpreted as a marriage 

of a girl who has not yet reached puberty. This explains why some organisations refer to child 

marriage as “early or forced marriage”. Therefore, forced marriage in this context refers to a 

marriage “conducted without the valid consent of one or both parties a nd is a marriage in which 

duress – whether physical or emotional – is a factor” (United Kingdom Foreign and 

Commonwealth Office in Linonge -Fontebo 2018). 

According to Judiasih, Sudini, Rubiati, Yanitasari, Kusmayanti & Salim (2019), Al -Qu’ran does not 

de termine a concrete age limit for someone or party who is going to get married. Age is not one 

of the legal requirements for a marriage. An -Nissa verse 6 “… test the orphan until they are old 

enough to marry, and if in your opinion they have been intelligen t, then give up their possessions”. 

Based on these provisions, experts stipulate that a person is held accountable for his actions and 

has the freedom to determine his life after being of sufficient age. A child is considered an adult 

when he is aqil balig h in Indonesia. Therefore, children who have reached a certain age can 

distinguish between good and bad. There is no explanation about the exact age when someone 

is considered an adult to Islamic Law - it is based on maturity on men and women themselves. 

Fe ar of falling into adultery which is a taboo pushes people to marry. In other context, child 

marriage is rooted in gender roles and social expectations, prevailing conceptions about Islamic 

law, and the fear of falling pregnant before marriage. This is com mon in the Northern regions of 

Cameroon where religion and culture prepare the girl child for marriage rather than schooling for 

chastity. 

The goal of Agenda 2030 for sustainable development is gender equality and women’s 

empowerment and was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on the 25 -27 

September 2015 and centered on 17 SDGs which became effective on 1 January 2016 to 

complete what the 2000 Millennium Development Goals was not able to achieve in fifteen years. 

This paper therefore provides an analysis of the relevance of each of the seven targeted SDGs 

used and its potential for women’s contribution towards it achievement and establishes the extent 

to which child marriage affects the socio -economic wellbeing of the girl child. Purporting tha t a 

violation of women’s human rights through gender inequalities to economic growth, health, 

education in Africa and elsewhere where child marriage prevails will hamper SDG. 

Literature provides that each year, 14 to 15 million girls are married before t he age 18 (UNICEF 

2012 & UNICEF 2018). The consequence of girls marrying early is that they drop out of school, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 11 

have more children and are at greater risk of HIV infection and intimate partner violence and face 

serious health complications and even deaths as a result of early pregnancy and childbearing. 

Child brides are often widowed, isolated/abandoned and divorced with limited opportunity to 

participate in the development of their communities. Those who are widowed and isolated are 

more vulnerable becaus e they typically do not own property (Witheridge & Antonowicz (2014 & 

Population Council 2011) Child marriage therefore hampers efforts to eradicate poverty and 

achieve sustainable global development. The purpose and objective of this study is to examine 

the effects/implication of early marriage on girls ’ socioeconomic wellbeing in Cameroon which is 

fundamental if Cameroon wants to eradicate child marriage in all its ramifications in concordance 

to the recommendation of the SDGs. 

Methods 

This contribution is based on a documentary analysis of international and national policies to 

which Cameroon is a signatory and desktop review of key factors involved in the socio -economic 

well -being of the girl -child through the seven SDGs used. The presentation of this research is 

descriptive and qualitative in approach using limited ethnographic work. The research employed 

primary and secondary data from articles, books, international conventions, decisions, 

documents, reports etc. 

Findings: A Desktop Review of Literature 

Why Child Marriage is a Concern for Agenda 2030 

Currently 650 million women and girls were married as children, indicating that unless efforts are 

accelerated 150 million more girls will be married by 2030 (Girls not brides 2020; Plan 

International 2019). It is imperative to address the root causes of child marriage, gender 

inequality, poverty, insecurity, and the lack of economic and social opportunities for girls. 

Evidence shows that ending child marriage will catalyse effo rts toward achieving SDGs by 

improving educational attainment, income, and maternal and child health. 

Child marriage perpetuates poverty, inequality and insecurity and is a violation of girls’ human 

rights to dignity, welfare and equal access to vital opp ortunities and services, given that, girls are 

deprived of their childhood and the option of education and find themselves in adult roles, 

including forced sex and pressure to bear children early. Hence, they are more likely to experience 

domestic violence , unhappy conjugal relationships throughout their life cycle. For example, in 

parts of North India, parents’ expectation that the birth of a girl will carry lower social status and 

high expenditures due to dowry payments at marriage facilitates preference for boy as opposed 

to girl children often leading to unfavourable birth ratios. Less investment in daughters propagates 

under -investments in their nutrition and education which perpetuates their dependence on men 

and their low status (Population Council 20 11). Failure to prevent and deal with child marriage 

will undermine the achievement of a majority of the sustainable development goals (SDG) unless 

concerted action is taken. Seven of the 17 SDGs used in this paper are analysed below vis -à-vis 

child marria ge. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 12 

Efforts to Implement the Sustainable Development Goals in Cameroon vis -à-vis 

Relationship between the Seven Selected SDGs and Child Marriage 

Table 1: SDGs Versus Child Marriage 

No. 

SDG 

Objective  Relation to Child Marriage 

SDG 1  Eradicate Poverty  According to Onyisi (2018), child marriage is linked to 

higher household poverty and perpetuates poverty across 

generations. Often linked to poverty and low levels of 

economic development. When girls have the skills and 

opportunities to secure a job and de velop their skills they 

can support themselves and their families and break 

intergenerational cycles of poverty. The Fourth 

Cameroonian Survey Households (ECAM4) carried out in 

2014, set the monetary poverty line at 738 FCFA per day 

as mentioned by the UN daily revenue of 1.5 dollars. 

37.7% women and 37.2 men live with less than 738 FCFA 

per day. The poor people cluster around the rural area 

(56.8%) than the urban areas (8.9%) (Yute 2019:14). 

Choosing when and who to marry is an important decision 

the Cam eroon government must encourage in eradicating 

child marriage for girls to dictate their own destinies. 

SDG 3  Good health and 

wellbeing 

Action to prevent child marriage and improving married 

and unmarried adolescent girls’ access to sexual and 

reproductive health services dramatically improve health 

and development outcomes for millions of girls and 

children worldwide. This will foster pos itive outcomes for 

girls by delaying marriage and motherhood to reduce 

related high rates of infant mortality. 

Despite some efforts made by the government and its 

partners, the ratios of infant mortality and neonatal 

mortality still persist. 

SDG 4  Inclusive and 

equitable quality 

Education 

Quality education, difficulties in taking proper care of 

children’s nutrition and health. Education is the one of the 

powerful tools available to prevent child marriage and 

promote gender equality. It provides prot ection for girls 

and also provides them with the knowledge and skills to 

determine their future. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 13 

The primary completion rate lies at 72.8% for girls and 

79.7 for boys in Cameroon (Yute 2019). Girls’ completion 

rate may be improved if child marriage is er adicated. 

SDG 5  Gender Equality and 

Empowerment for all 

Women and girls 

Addressing child marriage can be an entry point to 

addressing broader gender inequality. By tackling harmful 

practices and entrenched unequal social norms, we can 

work towards makin g sure the voices and decisions of girls 

and women are as valued as those of boys and men. 

Early and child marriage though a hindrance to education 

is still prevalent in Cameroon given that, 10.2% of women 

aged 20 -24 were married before the age of 15 year s and 

31% before the age of 18. Nearly 3 out of 5 women 

(59.4%) aged 20 -24, with no education were married 

before the age of 18 (Yute 2019:14). 

SDG 8  Economic growth  By ending child marriage and ensuring that adolescent 

have access to education, informat ion and services they 

need, they would be able to decide if, when and how many 

children to have, and increase their educational 

attainment. This would result in increases in productivity, 

and enable countries to make significant advances to 

alleviate pover ty and benefit from economic growth. To 

meet the UN’s SDGs, it is important to note that sustained, 

shared and sustainable economic growth is a prerequisite 

for prosperity. 

Cameroon has made strides towards the implementation 

of this SDG through the Growth and Employment Strategy 

Paper (GESP) since 2010 by implementing the MDG’s 

objectives in the 2010 -2020 GESP aimed at driving 

economic growth to an annual average of 5.5%, by cutting 

underemployment from 75.8% to 50% with the creation of 

thousand form al jobs per year, reducing income poverty 

rate from 39.9 to 28.7% (Yute 2019:14). 

SDG 

10 

Reducing inequalities  Reducing inequalities means not leaving anyone behind, 

no matter where they are and how hard they are to reach. 

The objective of this SDG is to gradually and sustainably 

grow the income of the poorest 40% of the population, 

empower all people and promote their social, economic 

and political integration, regardless of their profile (Yute 

2019:14). Of course, this cannot be achieved if child 

marria ge is increasing. Child marriage widens wealth, 

income, and gender inequalities as well as inequalities 

between the Global North and the Global South Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 14 

considering that child marriage strives more in the Global 

South (Onyisi 2018). 

SDG 

16 

Peace, Justice, a nd 

strong institutions 

Child marriage is a form of violence against women and 

girls. Girls who marry as children are at risk of sexual, 

physical, and psychological violence from their partners or 

their partners’ families throughout their lifetime. In cases 

where there is wider age difference between girls and their 

husbands, the girls are more likely to experience intimate 

partner violence than otherwise due to the intersection of 

power imbalances by gender and age (Onyisi 2018).  

> Source: Linonge -Fontebo, 2022.

Socio -cultural, religion and customary laws in Cameroon perpetuate child marriage, thereby 

compromising the development of girls and reinforce the gendered nature of poverty. Indicating 

that boys are also affected by child marriage but the impact i s severe on girls, compounded by 

the gender differentiation of age to marry in Cameroon Civil Status Registration Ordinance 

(CSRO) (15 for girls and 18 for boys) in abrogation of Article 6 (b) of the Protocol to the African 

Charter on Human and People’s Ri ghts of Women, which states a minimum age of marriage at 

18 for both boys and girls. Child marriage is predominant among the Muslims in the Northern part 

of Cameroon, where young girls are still sent into marriages with traditional rulers, lamibes, who 

may have ten or fifteen wives and common among the Bacheve, Oliti and Assumbo clans in 

Akwaya where girls at five, unknowingly are faced with the reality at about the age of ten when 

their supposed suitors come for them (Linonge -Fontebo, 2018). 

The appropria te age at marriage facilitates maturity in overcoming problems that will arise in the 

future and guarantee the rights of the child to welfare, protection, maintenance, and care until 

adulthood. As mentioned above child marriage for women is endorsed by the Cameroon CSRO 

when it allows girls to marry at the age of 15 rather than the international minimum age of 18 in 

defiance of laws it has ratified including the CRC, CEDAW etc. Child marriage negatively affects 

girls more likely to marry as children than bo ys. Given that, early and forced marriages hamper 

education, psychological wellbeing, health because the child has the right to education needed 

for personal development, preparation for adults and effective contributions to the welfare of the 

family and s ociety in the future (Judiasih et al. 2019). Child marriage endangers the health of 

young women and reproductive health, and it is a violation of children’s rights and has a negative 

impact on physical growth, health, mental and emotional development and educational 

opportunities, a problem faced almost all over the world. The United Nations (UN) addresses and 

overcome child marriage by working tirelessly with member countries to implement the SDGs 

related to it. 

Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development (S D) was adopted at the UN General Assembly 

Summit on 25 -27 September 2015 and became effective on the 1 January 2016. This agenda 

centres on 17 sustainable development goals with 169 targets, and a universal call for action to 

end poverty, protect the plane t and ensure prosperity for all. The SDGs are one of the processes Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 15 

for achieving SD that will be applied to each country that agrees to implement it. SDGs builds on 

the MDGs, which began global efforts in 2000 and hope to complete what was not achieved u nder 

the MDGs set targets in the set time frame of 15 years (Onyisi 2018). 

The UNs 5 th objective talks of “achieving gender equality and empowering women and girls”. This 

objective states that gender equality is not only a fundamental human right but also an effort to 

achieve world peace and prosperity. This coincides with the third target addressing the elimination 

of all dangerous practices, such as child marriage, forced marriage and fe male circumcision”. 

However, the Cameroon CSRO allows the marriage of girls under the age of 15 if for “serious 

reasons a waiver has been granted by the president of the republic.” This is in disregard of 

international and regional commitments Cameroon say s it is part and parcel of the constitution. 

If Cameroon must address and reduce gender inequalities and injustice there is a need to enact 

the draft Child Protection Code and Family Planning Code, which stipulate the age of marriage 

for girls at 18 years old and establishes other protections for wom en and girls. 

The Ministry of Women’s Empowerment and the Family which is the main national women’s 

machinery in the country focuses mostly on women in urban and semi -urban towns, where they 

have offices, and disregard rural women, who form the bulk of w omen with limited financial means. 

It is necessary to improve awareness and accountability so that laws are understood at the local 

level and accompanied by meaningful rural programs to ensure that rural women are not left 

behind. 

Cameroon has made strid es toward gender equality and the empowerment of women through 

major international commitments – Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination 

Against Women (CEDAW), that states that, the betrothal and marriage of a child shall have no 

legal effect and all necessary action, including legislation shall be taken to specify a minimum age 

for marriage (CEDAW 1981). The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995), the 

Declaration of Heads of States and Government of the African Union on equ ality between women 

and men, and the sustainable development goals. However, though these international regional 

commitments take precedence over Cameroon’s national laws, customs, and traditions, the 

preference for customary laws remains, and means that d iscrimination against women continues 

in Cameroon, especially in rural areas. Moreover, the preamble of the constitution of Cameroon 

includes several provisions that enshrine gender equality. But many questions about inequalities 

faced by women continue to linger, such as the continuation of child marriage. 

Research Implications 

Causes of Early Marriage in Cameroon and in Africa 

If the seven SDGs in this study have to be eliminated before 2030, there is a need to understand 

the causes and the effects of child marriage on girls’ socioeconomic wellbeing and propose 

solutions on how to overcome it. The following are some of the reasons for child marriage: Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 16 

1. Conflicts, Disasters, and emergencies 

Food insecurity sometimes results to hasty marriages arranged b y parents for girls to marry 

against their will. Emergencies and disasters increase economic pressure on families which 

escalate to early and forced marriages. Floods in the Northern parts of Cameroon, droughts and 

disagreements in Afghanistan have forced farmers to arrange and receive money for early 

matrimony of their daughters (Adamec in Ganira et al. 2015). 

2. Poverty 

According to Ganira et al. (2015) girls from needy households are more likely to be victims of 

early marriages. Poverty alongside the trad itional practice of son preference influences parents 

to take sons to school rather than daughters in circumstances of economic constraints. High level 

of poverty in a community may compromise young girl’s education. Economic factors are 

responsible for un derage marriage in Indonesia (Judiasih et al. 2019). Families sometimes feel 

that releasing a woman to marry, reduces the burden of responsibility of the male family or the 

husband who marries him. Young marriage sometimes may be a bridge of social change for 

women. 

3. Gender Inequality 

Women and girls assume lower societal status emanating from cultural and traditional beliefs. 

Such beliefs suppress girls’ capability to participate in equal roles in society. Once women and 

girls are denied access to educati on, they develop into uneducated adults with inadequate tools 

and resources for future generation of educated women (Ganira et al. 2015). 

4. Weak legislatures 

While nations have legalised right to marriage, including minimum age and consent, these laws 

may be applied and few prosecutions brought against law breakers. Consequently, marriage is 

not considered directly in the rights of the child. Practitioners rega rd other rights (e.g. health, 

education, life, development and survival) or CRC general principles such as interests of the child. 

5. Traditional and Religious practices 

Cultural practices among the Luos have led to boys and girls being married of at a te nder age in 

areas where people still follow traditional rules and regulations. The Luos also believe that a girl 

who has reached puberty and dies before she is married and is not deflowered will remain a 

malevolent ghost, causing barrenness to all of her f emale kinsfolk. It is said that the dead will 

return to reproach the living unmarried girls in visions and in dreams and ask them “why did our 

father and our brothers allow me to go into the grave without tasting the joy of man?” (Ogutu in 

Ganira; Inda; Od undo; Akondo; & Ngaruiya 2015:75). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 17 

Cultural factors of people’s minds that are not open or who believe in old myths that if a girl is not 

married in a certain period or age she will not sell well or will not have a mate and not marry in 

the future. The m yth of not getting married when you reject the first application from a male is also 

a factor parents are afraid to reject applications without considering the child’s age. Such believe 

systems are an obstacle to the elimination of early marriage especiall y in rural areas. 

Furthermore, it avoids adultery, besides being a recommendation from religion, parents 

encourage their children to get married instead of dating. 

6. Parenting factor 

Lack of advice given to children regarding the dangers of getting marri ed at a young age and life 

in undergoing a household with a relatively young age and the dominant role of parents in 

determining the marriage of girls, considering the assumption that children belong so that children 

especially girls must be obedient to th eir parents (Astuty in Judiasih et al. 2019). 

7. Education 

The education of the person who carried out the early marriage. The higher the level of education 

of a person, of course the higher the desire to work, career, and reach the aspirations of that 

pers on. Moreover, someone who is educating must also want to complete his education first. 

8. Pregnancy outside of marriage 

Due to promiscuity of relationships and the ways of dating teenagers and having a relationship 

between husband and wife outside of marria ge forces marriage to occur without looking at 

someone’s marriage age. The family encourages marriage to take place in such circumstances 

without thinking. 

9. Emotional and environmental factors 

Couples being carried away without thinking about mental, econ omic, and future readiness make 

a person want to get married which also influence the consequences of divorce carried out by 

early age couples. Also, a teenager tends to follow the surrounding social environment – following 

peers or associates who carry ou t early marriage. 

From the above it is evident that the causes of child marriage are complex and systematic, ranging 

from inequality and poverty to customary practices and the practice is a form of violence and a 

development challenge that robs 14 million girls under the age 18 each year and by 2020, it was 

estimated that 142 million girls will be married by their 18 th birthday if current trends continue 

(UNICEF 2012). This frustrates the future of girls and holds them and their countries back from 

achieving their potential. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 18 

Sustainable development cannot be achieved without gender equality (Pathania in Judiasih 

2019). Gender differences give birth to the manifestations of injustice. Gender inequality does not 

only exists because of traditions and beliefs held by the community but due to the systems and 

rules that are applied to result in the planting of an understanding of the community that the 

position of women is lower than that of men and existence of policies that harm women (Judiasih 

et al. 2 019). The Civil Status Registration Ordinance (CSRO), Article 52 of Order No. 81 -02 of 29 

June 1981 in Cameroon states that, “No marriage may take pace if the girl is younger than 15 or 

the boy younger than 18, unless the president of the Republic grants a n exemption for a serious 

reason....” This legislation regarding the minimum age for marriage harbours elements of gender 

differences, inequalities and injustice between men and women, when the marriage law stipulates 

18 years for boys and 15 years for gir ls. There is no reason strong enough to warrant the 

president’s endorsement of child marriage for girls and not for boys. The minimum age for 

marriage in Cameroon contradicts section 356 of the Cameroon Penal Code that criminalises 

forced marriage. In fact , there is need for the harmonisation of these laws unless Cameroon does 

not view child marriage as forced marriage. 

The Socioeconomic Effects/Implications of Child Marriage 

Child brides end up with a high rate of illiteracy because the time they would have been using to 

go to school is spent at home as housewife. Child marriage is associated with lower education 

and economic status of girls. Child brides are less able than older or unmarried girls to access 

schooling and income generating opportunities or benefit from education or economic 

development programmes. Girls already in school are often forced to terminate their education 

when they marry early. Therefore child marriage excludes or prevents further education of girls 

and reinforces poverty. Lim ited mobility, household responsibilities, pregnancy, raising children 

and other social restrictions for married girls prevent them from taking advantage of education or 

work opportunities. Education is widely credited as the most significant factor for de laying girls’ 

age of marriage. 

Child/early marriage has serious health, economic and social implications for young brides, for 

the well -being of the family, and for society as a whole . It poses many dangers to young girls’ 

health, which includes complications during early pregnancy and multiple births, which can lead 

to reproductive health risks, especially obstetric fistula and infant and maternal death. Child brides 

are susceptible t o suffer from anaemia than adults, which greatly increases the risk and 

complications linked to pregnancy and eclampsia than women who wait until the age of 20 to bear 

children (Mathur, Greene & Malhotra 2003). Most babies of mothers younger than 18 tend t o be 

premature and have low body weight, and such babies are likely to die in the first year of life. 

Obstetric fistula is among the worst of the neonatal health outcomes. Most often girls suffering 

from fistulas are abandoned by their husbands and become social outcasts from their 

communities. Complications from pregnancy can affect social wellbeing, for example, leading 

limited autonomy and decision -making ability and reduced opportunities to develop psychological 

and social skills necessary to make strat egic decisions and life choices in young brides. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 19 

Child marriage also exacerbate the spread of HIV/AIDS and STDs from older husbands and lead 

to unwanted pregnancies, premature births, and other pregnancy – related complications which 

may result to death. Spousal age difference reinforce the powerlessness of the girl, because older 

husbands of child brides are sexually experienced, and having had more sexual partners in their 

lifetime increases the chances that they maybe HIV positive. The age difference b etween the child 

bride and her spouse is further compounded by power imbalance between women and men and 

makes open communication about sexual relations; including condom use difficult (Linonge -

Fontebo 2018). 

Another implication of child marriage is that it robs girls of their childhood -time necessary to 

develop physically, emotionally, and psychologically. Early/child marriage inflicts great emotional 

stress, as the young woman is removed from her parents’ home to that of her husband and in -

laws (LUKMEF 2 015). The girl has to put up with a man many years older than her, and has to 

develop an intimate emotional and physical relationship with a man she has nothing in common 

with. Child brides have to perform heavy domestic chores, being under pressure to dem onstrate 

fertility and responsible for raising children while being children themselves. 

Limitations 

The insecurity in the South West (Ambazonian crisis) and Northern (Boko Haram) Regions of 

Cameroon were child marriage prevails was major difficulty i n collecting primary data. The data 

was essentially documentary and exploratory that warrants that the need to describe and explain 

the real life experiences of women and girls. The information is principally based on qualitative 

analogy. A more detailed i nvestigation with qualitative and quantitative information will definitely 

give more insights into what is largely a reflection that is meant to inform action. 

Originality and Value of the Paper 

African Union member states committed to the 2030 Agenda f or sustainable development 

relevant to promoting gender equality, women and girls human rights and specifically ending child 

marriage. SDGs are relevant to the achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of 

women and girls, and recognition and valui ng of women’s contributions are critical to achieving 

this goal and other related target and indicators. A conducive environment that removes barriers 

faced by girls must be created. 

Agenda 2030 emphasises that SDGs are interrelated and ensures the integr ation across all 17 

objectives is essential to achieving sustainable development. Secondly, each SDG can be 

characterised as objectives that are primarily linked to either the economic, environmental, or 

social system. 

The well -being of the girl -child s tands out as one of the twelve critical areas examined by The 

Beijing Declaration, to which public policies have benefitted women in Cameroon. The SDGs are 

welcomed in Cameroon through the National Development Plan and the scope to be an emerging 

nation in 2035. To transform Cameroon into an emerging nation by 2035 warrants poverty Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 20 

reduction, consolidation of the democratic process and national unity in keeping with the diversity 

of the country linked to the SDGs. Despite efforts made by the government th rough the National 

Action Plan, Ministries of Women’s Empowerment and the Family, Social Affairs and NGOs/CSOs 

in Cameroon towards addressing child marriage, a lot needs to be done to translate international 

commitments and financing to contract realisatio n of Agenda 2030. 

All the causes of child/early marriage, for instance socialisation has to be addressed in order to 

reduce child marriage. From a feminist perspective, the sexual victimisation of girls is a function 

of male socialisation because so many young males learn how to be aggressive and exploitative 

of women. This exploitation of young girls by older men triggers delinquent behaviour such as 

running away from home and prostitution, among girls who are victims of men’s aggression 

(Judiasih et al. 2019:61). There is therefore need for concerted efforts from traditional rulers, 

religious leaders, NGOs, CSOs, researchers and communities to fight child marriage. 

References 

Arinze -Umobi, D.C. (2008), Domestic violence against women in Nigeria: a legal anatomy 

Onitcha: Folmech Printing and Publications and Pub. Co. Ltd. 

Cameroon Penal Code. Law No. 65 -LF of 12 November 1965 and Law No. 67 -LF -1 of 12 June 

1967, revised in 2016, sec. 356. 

Ganira, K.L.; Inda, A.N; Odundo, P.A; Akondo, J .O; & Ngaruiya, B. (2015), Early and forced 

marriage on girls education, in Migori County, Kenya: Constraints, Prospects and policy. 

World Journal of Education, Sciendu Press: Nairobi. Vol.5:4, Pp 72 -80. 

Girls not brides (2020). Girls not brides: The gl obal partnership 

Judiasih, S. D., Sudini, L.P., Rubiati, B., Yanitasari, D., Kusmayanti, H., & Salim, E.F. (2019), 

Sustainable development goals and elimination of children’s marriage practice in 

Indonesia. Journal of Notariil, Vol.4 No.1, pp. 52 -64. 

Lewis, J. (1982). Anthropology made simple. London: William Heinemann. 

Linonge -Fontebo, H.N. (2018), Socio -cultural, Economical and Organisational Determinants of 

Child Marriage in Cameroon, in Christian Green M., Jeremy Gunn T. and Mark Hill 

(Eds.), . Religion, Law and Security in Africa, ACLARS: African SUN MeDIA, pp. 351 -

366. 

LUKMEF -Cameroon (2015). Break the silence: Community Manual on ending gender based 

violence. Limbe: LUKMEF. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 21 

Mathur, S., Greene, M., & Malhotra, A. (2003). Too youn g to wed: The lives, rights and health of 

young married girls. Washington, DC: ICRW. Online at: 

https://www.icrw.org/publications/too -young -to -wed -2. 

Onyisi, J.A. (2018). Analysis of child marriage and sustainable development goals. 5. 

https://ssrn.com /abstract/3329179 .

Plan International (2013). A girl’s right to say no to marriage: Working to end child marriage and 

keep girls in school. 

Plan International (2019). 150 million girls are at risk of child marriage by 2030: The time to Act 

is now. htt ps://plan -international.org 

Population Council (2011). When girls’ lives matter: Ending forced and early marriage in 

Cameroon. http://www.popcouncil.org 

Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in 

Africa, adopted by the Ordinary session of the Assembly of the Union, Maputo, 

CAB/LEG/66.6 (Sept. 13, 2000); reprinted in 1 Afr. Hum. Rts. L.J. 40, entered into force 

Nov. 25, 2005. Online at://www.www.acgpr.org/instruments/women -protocol [hereinafter 

AU Women’s Protocol]. 

Republic of Cameroon, Civil Status Registration Ordinance, Article 52 of Order No. 81 -02 of 29 

June 1981. 

UNICEF (2005). Early marriage: A har mful traditional practice. New York: Unicef. 

UNICEF (2012). Partnering with religious communities for children. Online at: 

https//www.unicef.org/eapro/partnering_with_Religious_Communities_for_Children.pdf 

UNICEF (2012). Child marriage: Latest trends a nd future prospects. data.unicef.org. 

United Nations Foundations (2017). Ending inequality against women in Cameroon. By Jude 

Thaddues Njikem 

Wetheridge L. and Antonowicz L. (2014). Child marriage in West Africa and Cameroon: A desk 

review. Plan Waro. Online at: https///www.frauenrechte.de/online/images/downloads/ 

fruehehen/Plan -Waro -Child -Marriage.pdf 

Yute, I. T. (2019). Sustainable development goals (SDG’s) in Cameroon sustainable 

development goals in Cameroon. University Dissertation: Istabul Sehir University. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 22 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 23 

# The Relationship Between MSMEs and Poverty Eradication 

# in Makindye Division Kampala, Uganda 

Nabulya Justine, Susan Nankunda, and Masibo Sharon 

(Institute of Advanced Leadership, Uganda) 

Abstract 

The UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) list "poverty" and "entrepreneurship" as two of 

its seventeen many components. This paper delves into the relationship between MSMEs and 

poverty eradication, looking at a case study of Makidye Division. The objec tive of this 

research was to enlighten the patterns of poverty in Makindye Division, the characteristics 

of MSMEs in the region, research limitations, and possible steps to eradicate poverty in Uganda 

by 2030. In addition, the paper uses data and literatu re from Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) 

and the Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives. The finding of the study revealed 

that majority of the MSMEs are operated by youths between 18 -30years and were mostly women. 

It was also revealed that majority of the business owners have a low level of education as well as 

half the MSME were registered as sole proprietorships. The findings also revealed that the onset 

of Covid -19 affected the performance of most of the MSME and many had to either close or cut 

down the number of employees. Finally, the paper recommended that there should be support of 

market certainty for MSMEs products, particularly for MSEs to sustain the production cycle 

through digitalization; business owners be equipped to have the right min dset towards business; 

there should be formation of business incubator programs to help upcoming businesses to start 

right and avoid mistakes made by the already existing MSMEs; and have promotion mechanism 

for inter -institutional collaboration among MSMEs .

Keywords: MSMEs and Poverty Eradication, Alleviation in Makindye Division Kampala Uganda, 

Capacity Building, Youth, Men and Women Mindset, Entrepreneurship, Skilling and Technology, 

Seed Capital, Value Addition, Mentorship for Economic Growth, Sustainab le Employment 

Acronyms 

SDGs……………… The Sustainable Development Goals 

MSMEs……………… Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises 

MSEs……………… Medium Sized Enterprises 

SMEs……………… Small Sized Enterprises 

GDP……………… Gross Domestic Product Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 24 

IMF……………… International Monetary Fund 

SED………………Small Business Development 

UBOS………………Uganda Bureau of Statistics 

PDM……………… Parish Development Model 

ACF………………Agricultural Credit Facility 

UGGDS……………… Uganda Green Growth Development Strategy 

NFIS……………… National Financial Inclusion Strategy 

Introduction 

Availability of work is a critical part of the solution to poverty. People are able to provide for 

themselves (e.g., food) and earn the money they need to purchase products and services through 

work. Wealth is also created via labour, which enables governm ents to provide services like as 

health care, clean water, and education to the poor through taxation (International Monetary Fund, 

2000). However, it is not easy to get sustainable employment. Economic, social, and political 

activities all work together t o create it. "Working out of poverty" is a good starting point, but it does 

not give specific advice on how to get out of poverty. 

Many impoverished people's idea of employment is running their own micro or small business or 

working for someone else who d oes. As solo proprietors, managers, and employees, the poor are 

frequently joined in their work by members of their families as well as temporary and permanent 

employees. In many situations, impoverished individuals choose this type of job because they 

hav e few other options. Either suitable paid employment is unavailable or the work they undertake 

on the family farm is insufficient to meet their family's requirements. By working for themselves, 

they want to get out of poverty. The goal of small business de velopment (SED) is to create an 

atmosphere where owners and employees may operate more effectively, safely, and efficiently. 

They can lessen their plight as a result of this. This is the difficulty of reducing poverty through 

the creation of small business es. 

MSMEs help bring people out of poverty by creating jobs. 783 million people, or 11 percent of the 

world's population, were in severe poverty in 2013, according to a new worldwide estimate. 5 The 

vast majority of the poor in emerging nations are either unemployed or underpaid (Sobir, 2020). 

It has been shown that private sector job development has been a key factor in reducing poverty. 

During the past 30 years, the private enterprise has helped to reduce the percentage of people 

living in poverty from 5 2% to 22% in the developing world. 6 Small and medium -sized businesses 

(MSMEs) play an important role in the private sector's effort to create jobs. MSMEs accounted for 

90 percent of all new jobs in developing economies, creating four out of every five new posts in 

the formal sector (Sobir, 2020). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 25 

According to TNS, et al., (2015), a s many as 10 different industrial sectors make up at least five 

percent of Uganda's MSMEs, making the country one of the most diversified in the world. More 

than a third of micr o and small enterprises (MSMEs) are employed in agriculture, followed by 

education and health care 13%), and recreation & personal (10%). 

The bulk of MSMEs in Uganda (69 percent) are under 10 years old, making them relatively new 

businesses. Nearly nine o ut of 10 Ugandan MSME owners began their businesses with their own 

money, and three -quarters of them are sole proprietorships. There are less than a third (31 

percent) of micro -enterprises that employ a manager to oversee day -to -day operations. Over half 

of the owners have a secondary or higher degree (TNS, et al., 2015) .

Additionally, it's a close -knit community, with 81.1 percent of MSMEs' major clientele being 

individuals rather than corporations, and 66% of MSMEs being located in the same general 

vicin ity as their clients. One member of the regular five -person crew is a family member. More 

than half of MSMEs (63 percent) report that word -of -mouth is their primary method of obtaining 

suppliers and that friends and family are more likely than official len ders to have contributed start -

up capital for their businesses. 73.9 percent of MSMEs learn about new business prospects 

through talking to consumers, yet only 15 percent of MSMEs are members of business groups, 

maybe because they are too small (TNS, et al ., 2015) .

Purpose 

The UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) list "poverty" and "entrepreneurship" as two of 

its seventeen many components. There are several ways to alleviate poverty, and one of them is 

business. Entrepreneurs make investments and hire employees who contr ibute to the company's 

growth, as highlighted in the aforementioned study on entrepreneurship. The creation of new jobs 

and the development of new skills and experience for a significant number of young people 

entering the labor force are all made possible by thriving businesses. The drive of this study was 

to analyze the level of poverty in Makindye Division, the characteristics of MSMEs, and find ways 

to reduce unemployment as one of the measures to reduce poverty amongst the youth, women, 

and men in the region. In Uganda, the Agricultural Sector is the most important and dominant 

sector; it employs approximately 72% of the population and contributes about 32% to the GDP. 

The agribusiness era is characterized by a shift from family farms to strategically p laced 

commercial and processing units linked to modern retailers and exporters ( Uganda Investment 

Authority, 2021 ). 

The purpose of this paper is to determine and offer detailed findings and suggestions on how 

possible the SDG1 is. No Poverty can be reali zed through the implementation of various projects, 

not only in Makindye Division but also in Uganda at large. This research, therefore, focused on 

examining the status of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises dealing in value addition, their 

potential to g row, develop when provided with knowledge, better skills, and technology, their 

ability to employ more youths, men, and women in Makindye division, not only as a way of 

reducing poverty but cubbing on other vices that arise as a result of unemployment. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 26 

Background Literature 

Poverty is defined as the lack of basic necessities such as food and shelter, as well as those who 

have limited or no access to these necessities (i.e. health, education). Non -material 

circumstances, such as a lack of rights, instability, helplessness, and indignity, are increasingly 

being included in the definition of poverty. As a whole, poverty is better understood when it is 

seen in this context (Nur sini, 2020). Additionally, it makes it more difficult to assess the 

performance of programs aimed at reducing poverty. Defining poverty is a challenging task, and 

policymakers often err on the side of describing rather than defining it. 

Micro, Small and m edium -sized enterprises (MSMEs) have long been acknowledged as engines 

of growth for a country's economy. Macroeconomic goals can be met through their creation of 

jobs at low investment costs, the development of entrepreneurial skills and indigenous 

techno logies, the prevention of rural –urban migration, the efficient use of local resources, and a 

reduction in poverty. Since the 1940s, successive Ugandan administrations have created policies 

to support the growth of the MSME sector, having recognized the imp ortance and catalytic role it 

plays in economic development. 

It is estimated that micro -enterprises employ more people and produce more goods and services 

than small and medium -sized businesses do in the vast majority of developing nations, including 

Ugan da. Micro -enterprises accounted for nearly all of Uganda's MSME units in 2020, according 

to the country's Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS). Micro -enterprises employ 89.04 percent of 

the total MSME workforce and produce 37.7% of the total MSME production. Because this 

business does not require a lot of money or experience, it is available to everybody. Micro -

business entrepreneurs in Uganda tend to be poorer than their counterparts in other countries. 

As a result, the poor are more likely to work in small and medium -sized businesses, rather than 

own them. As a result, the poor's participation in business, whether as owners or employees, is 

critical to the growth of the economy on a national and worldwide scale. 

The achievement of future SDGs may be helped in this way as well. MSMEs empowerment 

initiatives in Uganda have become one of the most important ways to alleviate poverty in Uganda. 

These initiatives are designed to increase production capacity and human capital capabilities by 

providing training, cap ital help, and technological assistance. Over time, these initiatives are 

aimed at changing the status of small, medium, and big businesses from micro to medium and 

even larger enterprises. With these developments, new jobs with high productivity are creat ed, 

as well as jobs in MSME industries, which directly touch the poor. These have the potential to 

enhance societal well -being on a broad scale. 

The SDGs have made eradicating poverty one of its most significant objectives. It has been signed 

and agreed t o by more than 160 nations, including Uganda, to alleviate poverty by 2030. They 

appear to require proper measures to assist them in achieving their aim in light of the global 

economic uncertainty. Nursini (2020) argues that many nations are able to endure in this 

unpredictable environment due of their successful micro, small and medium -sized businesses. 

As a result, MSMEs have emerged as a key strategy for economic growth and poverty reduction. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 27 

Descriptive research by Nursini (2020) found that MSMEs have enhanced the social and 

economic well -being of impoverished people in East Asia by increasing their access to capital. 

The market and the capacity of MSMEs are two major variables assisting MSME employees in 

growing their earnings and reducing poverty in N igeria, according to other qualitative research 

like that conducted by Asikhia (2010). The income of MSEs workers in the Ibadan Metropolis in 

southern Nigeria, according to Adeyemi and Lanrewaju (2014), rose to 39 percent. On the same 

note, a value chain a pproach to local economic development in Uganda is needed to ensure that 

all value chain players, including women and youth, smallholder farmers and other agri -MSMEs, 

have access to suitable services to meet their requirements. With the Parish Development Model 

(PDM), each level of the value chain is systematically and deliberately intervened in to guarantee 

that once production is ramped up, it continues to be supported by stable pricing and the 

availability of inexpensive capital and predictable markets ( Ministry of Local Government, 2021). 

A case study conducted by Andre Foods International and SME Finance Working Group (2021), 

indicate the efforts of various banking institutions, organizations, and government towards 

financing of agribusiness MSMEs in U ganda. They emphasized the need to invest more money 

in the agricultural sector to improve its trends thereby enticing more youths to get involved in the 

sector, hence quitting the rural -urban migration. It futhured narrated how financial institutions like 

DFCU bank Uganda, Letshego Microfinance Uganda, The START Facility, UN World Food 

Program, and Stanbic Bank Uganda among others have come out with different programs and 

approaches of addressing the inadequate capital challenge. Government introduced prog rams 

like Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) which facilitates the provision of medium and long -term 

financing to projects that engage in agriculture processing with a focus on commercialization and 

value addition among others, such efforts have moved the Ugandan MSMEs sector a milestone. 

Gap in Knowledge 

Obviously, many efforts have been channeled towards poverty eradication in Uganda by the 

government and various organizations. However, some crucial areas have been overlooked, as 

shared below. 

There is a gap of incubation programs, which would be useful in mentoring entrepreneurs prior to 

investing all their capital only to end in losses. Incubator programs aim at analyzing the individual 

entrepreneur, their ambitions, goals, and mindset, coupled with equipping the entrepreneur with 

the required skills/ acumen to not only start a business but also sustain and develop it. Such 

programs encourage the entrepreneurs to start business outside of their passion not just because 

they want to earn, this in the long run builds in them resilience to stick with the business, no matter 

the circumstances as they look for better ways to develop it. In addition, lack of effective 

management during their early stages is also a major cause of business failure for small 

businesses. Owners tend to manage these businesses themselves as a measure of reducing 

operational costs. Many Ugandans starting up MSMEs have no knowledge on how to run these 

ideas/businesses and therefore end up failing because of lack management skills, mentorship 

coupled with lack of substantial capital. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 28 

Suggestions about value addition and the need for technology were made but not detailed; further 

explanations of what or how is it to be done was not shade light upon. One of the major challenges 

faced by the agribusiness in Makindye Division is the rotting of the purchased/stored goods. This 

could be mitigated by carrying food value addition, which requires availability of accessible 

technology to the micro agribusiness owners. This wou ld enable them to reduce losses, increase 

profits and produce better quality products capable of beating competition both nationally and 

internationally. 

Methodology Used 

Time series from 2000 to 2020 are used in this study, which includes both primary and secondary 

data. They came from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and the Ministry of trade. Poverty 

statistics, MSME production, MSME labor and GDP are examples of secondary data. The 

Headcount Index, the Poverty Gap Index, and the Poverty Severit y Index all serve as indices for 

gauging the severity of poverty. The carried out a brief survey to identify the existing MSMEs 

dealing in agribusiness in Makindye Division, Kampala district. These approaches enabled the 

research to know the past, current, and predict the future of poverty alleviation. 

The sampling size was 100, medium and small enterprises, the final number of successful 

interviews was 52, in micro and small enterprises have between 1-15 employees. 

Business Size  Successfully interviewed 

Micro  40 

Small  12 

Total  52 

They carried out a brief survey to identify the existing MSMEs dealing in agribusiness in Makindye 

Division, Kampala district. They used primary and secondary data both qualitative and 

quantitative. These approaches enabled us to know the past, current, an d predict the future of 

poverty alleviation. 

Originality/ Value of the Paper 

This paper is original research that has been conducted by the researchers by fulfilling all the 

ethical requirements. The paper contributes to the corpus of information already available on the 

subject is the study's main goal. Small business management and performance challenges are 

also addressed in the report. Entrepreneurs will benefit from this study's insights into the unique 

problems faced by small and medium -sized businesses, and it is anticipated that it will also 

provide ideas for how to address those issues. Other researchers and libraries will benefit from 

the findings as well. It is hoped that the findings of this study would aid in the development of 

management and entrepreneurial skills among Uganda's MSMEs, which will in turn serve to lower 

the country's poverty rate. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 29 

Findings/Discussion 

An analysis was done of the data collected and results presented and evaluated. The findings of 

the study showed that. 

Figure 1: Showing Age of Respondents 

The study found out that the majority of the MSMEs are operated by youths between 18 -30years 

with a percentage of 48.07%, followed by those in the age bracket 31 -35 with 32.69% and others 

as illustrated in the graph above. This shows the potential that the se MSMEs have to grow given 

the energetic and visionary human resources they have. If the right knowledge and resources are 

channeled into these businesses they have the capacity to not only develop but also create more 

jobs for other youths in Makindye Di vision thereby reducing unemployment and poverty in the 

region. 

Figure 2: Showing the Gender of the Respondents 

It was discovered that the majority of the MSMEs in Makindye division are operated by women 

as demonstrated in the graph below, hence reducing the gap of gender inequality. "Uganda's 

economic recovery will be faster, stronger, and more sustainable if it brings more women into the 

center of profitable economic activity", according to the 18 th edition of the Uganda Economic 

Update (The Wor ld Bank, 2021). The research strongly suggests that if these women get more 

empowered with the business skills required to grow their businesses, gender inequality will be 

reduced by 2030.    

> 0.00%
> 10.00%
> 20.00%
> 30.00%
> 40.00%
> 50.00%
> 60.00%
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 18-30 31-35 41-50 51 and above

# Age of Respondents  

> Frequency Percent

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 30 

Figure 3 : Indicates the Respondents’ Level of Education 

It was disclosed that the majority of the business owners have a low level of education as 

showcased in the graph above, which limits the growth and development of the businesses as 

many can hardly do book & record keeping to track business p rogress. There are limited 

opportunities for higher education and business skills. 

The majority of the businesses operate on a day -to -day basis without further goals or business 

direction. The study, therefore, deduces that if business management, value addition practical 

skilling workshops, and capacity building workshops are conducted on the local le vel in the 

communities, business owners will get the required business acumen to sustain, grow and  

> 35
> 67.92%
> 17
> 32.08%
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Frequency Percent

# Gender of Respondents      

> Female Male
> 0.00%
> 5.00%
> 10.00%
> 15.00%
> 20.00%
> 25.00%
> 30.00%
> 35.00%
> 40.00%
> 45.00%
> 50.00%
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Non-formal Primary Secondary Diploma Degree

# LEVEL OF EDUCATION  

> Frequency Percent

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 31 

develop their business thereby increasing income, employment opportunities and reducing 

poverty. 

All the respondents affirmed the need for knowledge in bu siness management, bookkeeping, 

record keeping, consumer behavior, technology and value addition, cost -effective production, 

hygiene, time management, competition, teamwork, financial literacy among other skills. 

Figure 4 : Showing the Major Sources of Capital for the MSMEs 

It was revealed that own savings are the major source of capital for these MSMEs, they are 

marginal, which limits its growth and expansion, as the savings are not enough for business 

growth. 

The Loans being the second source of capital, come with challenges such as a limited amount to 

borrow due to a lack of the required collateral such as land, a house, a car among others, the 

high -interest rates imposed by banks, and credit institutions. The government has intervened by 

setting up strategies and bodies, for example, Uganda Green Growth Development Strategy 

(UGGDS) and National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) to r educe financial exclusion and 

access barriers to financial services , but it has not been so successful due to lack of awareness 

and the difficult process of accessing such services. These financial challenges have kept many 

businesses at a small -scale level without hope of expansion or improving methods of production 

not to mention value addition. 

Primary Business Activities 

It was discovered that the majority of the MSMEs use agricultural produce as their raw material 

as 30.75% sell raw agricultural produce, 52.83% deal in value -added agribusiness like 

restaurants, hotels, making snacks, and selling processed foo d, while 16.42% of businesses 

> 36%
> 51%
> 13%

# Major Source of Capital for the 

# Business 

> Loans
> Own Savings
> Support from volunteers and
> family members

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 32 

provide services. The agricultural sector is the main employer in Makindye division. Despite its 

prominence, it is faced with several challenges ranging from; the use of poor and local methods 

of production, poor transportati on of produce, poor storage facilities, and limited access to 

financing for agriculture based MSMEs, in addition to increased taxes and market price 

fluctuations, which often results into losses. 

The Legal Status of the Business 

Nearly two out of four MSME owners had registered their businesses as sole proprietorships. The 

rest were not yet registered for reasons such as lack of knowledge about the need for legal 

existence for a business, the fear of the long registration process, and lack of willingnes s to pay 

to pay direct taxes. 

Management of Business Operations 

Business owners often play a hands -on role in the management of the MSMEs daily in terms of 

operations management, while a few business owners hire labor to spearhead the operations of 

the business. 

Rate of Membership in Associations 

Relatively few MSMEs are part of formal networking scheming amongst themselves in the region, 

they operate on a basis of every man for himself, and they do not consult with each other. There 

is a general lack of successful businesses to benchmark or even to approach for advice. There 

is a need to promote a mechanism for inter -institutional collaboration in MSME development by 

inspiring partnerships and mentorship programs. 

Market Tren ds 

Price fluctuations were another concern that business owners need to learn to cope with since in 

most cases they end up making major losses leading to a reduction in income, capital, and failure 

of paying back loans on time. This often keeps these busi nesses in debt, unable to grow, and 

operating in a survival mode. 

The Durability of Raw Materials/ Commodities 

Since the majority of the MSMEs use agricultural products for production, they are faced with the 

challenge of raw materials & commodities getting spoilt/rotten, due to a lack of technology to 

sustain them for longer periods in the market or do value addit ion by processing them into better 

quality products. There is, therefore, a need to empower these business operators with value 

addition skills and provide them with seed capital to purchase the required machines to not only 

reduce the loss margin but also position them for competition as they bring better quality products 

on the market. Examples include processing the milk into yogurt, processing banana, sweet 

potatoes, and Irish potatoes into crisps among other value addition strategies. As these MSMEs Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 33 

are supported to grow, they will have the demand and capacity to employ more women and youths 

in Makindye division thereby reducing poverty and crime in the region. 

Effects of the Covid -19 Control Measures on Businesses 

Several MSMEs were forced to eithe r cut off workers or close due to the prevalence of Covid -19, 

which required the government to implement lockdowns and other measures to curb the spread 

of Covid -19. Uganda experienced some of the strictest lockdown measures in the world as 

observed by (Ha rtwig and Lakemann, 2020), with many businesses being forced to close or 

operate under strict social distancing rules, regular curfews, and challenges in accessing markets 

due to higher transportation and input costs. Small businesses experienced a larger decline in 

business activity compared to medium and large firms ( Corti and Nathan, 2020) .

Research Limitations/ Implications 

i. Some people were not willing to freely share information about their business; they had the 

“what is in there for us” attitude. 

ii. Some people felt insecure to share general information about their business. 

iii. Some of them have negative attitudes towards interviewers. Some were verbally violent to 

the interviewers. 

iv. Some business owners were too busy to allocate the time required to answer the 

questionnaires. 

v. Some business owners deemed it irrelevant to share information about their business 

because they thought we had no tangible solution to offer. 

vi. The fear of catching covid -19 caused many especially the elderly to den y information, on 

grounds that interviewers may be carriers of the virus. 

vii. Lack of enough resources such as transport fees and stationery limited interviewers from 

reaching out to more MSMEs. 

viii. The lack of clear communication skills by the business owners m ade it difficult for 

interviewers from getting the exact information, required for the purposes of this research. 

Some respondents were giving misleading information. 

ix. Researchers did not finish conducting the research in time because they had multiple 

res ponsibilities on their hands. This led to the delayed analysis and compilation of the 

report. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 34 

Recommendations 

As a result of the findings, the policy recommendations to alleviate poverty through the use of 

MSMEs are as follows: 

i. There should be support of market certainty for MSMEs products, particularly for MSEs to 

sustain the production cycle through digitalizat ion. 

ii. Business owners be equipped to have the right mindset towards business, business 

management skills, among other skills to enable them to drive their business to growth and 

development to enable them to forsake the hand to mouth mentality, by providin g capacity 

building pieces of training on business management skills i.e. efficient means of production, 

value addition and the use of modern tools and equipment, such skills will not only improve 

the quality of products but also increase its competitivene ss on both local and international 

market. 

iii. There should be formation of business incubator programs to help upcoming businesses to 

start right and avoid mistakes made by the already existing MSMEs. 

iv. Promote mechanism for inter -institutional collaboration in MSMEs development by inspiring 

partnerships and mentorship programs. This will also encourage them to form a formal 

networking scheme in which they can sensitize and uplift one another to success. 

v. Roll out a revolving fund to offer seed capital to MSMEs and organized groups. This will 

address the issue of lack of capital. It will also encourage cooperativeness among 

businesses owners in the region. 

vi. Businesses be enlightened and guided on the righ t steps to legally register their businesses. 

This in turn will enable such businesses to win grants and loans provided by the government 

under its programs and strategies, which will foster business growth and development, 

thereby increasing the business’ ability to employ more workers hence a reduction of the 

jobless population. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, poverty reduction has been demonstrated to be a crucial factor in the success of 

small and medium -sized enterprises (Small and Medium Enterprises & Medium Sized 

Enterprises). MSMEs can help lower the percentage of the poor, the gap between t he average 

expenditure of the poor and the poverty line and the discrepancy in the average expenditures by 

the poor. It was also shown that MSEs and SMEs had differing impacts on poverty reduction when 

indirect effects were estimated. Labor absorption in S MEs reduced the number of poor persons 

and the disparity between their average expenditures and the poverty line significantly, but it did 

not bring average expenditures closer to the poverty line. SMEs production increased 

significantly. Rising Medium Siz ed Enterprises production has a significant effect on measures of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 35 

poverty reduction derived from workers absorbed into the system. Because of this, it may be 

argued that the expansion of MSME output was controlled by owners, and employees in general 

have yet to obtain remuneration that could alleviate their economic hardships. 

References 

Adeyemi, Nathaniel , and Moshood Lanrewaju . 2014 . “ Impact of Micro and Small Business 

Entrepreneurship on Poverty Reduction in Ibadan Metropolis, South Western Nigeria .” 

International Review of Management and Business Research 3 (3): 1603 –1626 .

Andre Foods International and SME Finance Working Group. AFI and SMEF (2021), 

“Agricultural MSME Financing in Uganda: A Response to Covid -19.” 

Asikhia, Olalekan U. 2010 . “ SME s and Poverty Alleviation in Nigeria: Marketing Resources and 

Capabilities Implications .” New England Journal of Entrepreneurship 13 (2): 57 –70 .

Corti Paul Lakuma and Nathan Sunday “Impact Of Covid -19 On Micro, Small And Medium 

Businesses In Uganda” (ht tps://www.brookings.edu/blog/africa -in -

focus/2020/05/19/impact -of -covid -19 -on -micro -small -and -medium -businesses -in -

uganda/Date accessed 25 th /02/2022 

Effects of the COVID -19 Pandemic on informal Entrepreneurs in Uganda https://www.giga -

hamburg.de/en/pre ss/when -the -going -gets -tough Date accessed 24th/11/2021 

International Monetary Fund “ Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Uganda's Poverty Eradication 

Action Plan Summary and Main Objectives ”

https://www.imf.org/external/NP/prsp/2000/Uga/01/#:~:text=Uganda' s%20Poverty%20Er 

adication%20Action%20Plan%20(PEAP)%20is%20established%20on%20four,poor%20 

to%20raise%20their%20incomes Date Accessed 06 th /06/2022 

Nursini, N. (2020). Micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and poverty reduction: 

empirical evidence from Indonesia. Development Studies Research, 7(1), 153 -166. 

Uganda Investment Authority “Agriculture Value Addition” 

https://www.ugandainvest.go.ug/why -uganda/opportunities/agriculture -value -addition/ 

Date accessed 25 th /11/2021 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 36 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 37 

# End ing Poverty and Inequality: What Matters and Why 

Warner Woodworth (University of Utah, Utah, United States) 

Abstract 

In attempting to articulate the ugly nature of both inequality and poverty, we explore the realities 

of what life is like for the world’s Have -Nots. The suffering of the “poorest of the poor” has been 

exacerbated by the past several years of COVID -19 and i ts toll in terms of illness, death, and 

economic challenges. Virtually all areas of the globe have faced new hardships, whether Latin 

America, Asia, Africa, the Mediterranean and/or Middle East, North America, Australia, and 

Europe. This study utilizes the process of action research to design new social enterprises, 

implement them, apply field work methods for collecting data, and hereby documenting the 

results. The focus will center on grassroots innovations to design nonprofit organizations that go 

beyond humanitarian relief to generate real change, deep, substantive and sustainable strategies. 

Two facets of this work are explored. The first area of this research is social entrepreneurship, an 

approach by which students and professors are activists focused on reducing human suffering in 

its many forms The second is that of microfinance in which tiny loans are given to poor women to 

enable them to rise from abject poverty. Small, Utah -based techniques have arisen in college 

classrooms as laboratories for soc ial innovation. After their development as practical models, they 

have then been implemented in communities of the poor in dozens of countries. Their methods 

are explained, and results are reported and assessed which demonstrate the UNSDGs can be 

significa ntly addressed, and lives of the global poor can be ameliorated in pursuing long -term 

economic self -sufficiency. 

Keywords: Poverty, Inequality, United Nations, Sustainable Development Goals 

Introduction 

The ugly specter of extreme poverty has afflicte d humanity for millennia. Consequences and 

impacts are manifold. Specific factors include suffering from hunger, joblessness, disease, a lack 

of education, homelessness, civil war, and a lack of women’s empowerment (CGAP, 2021). 

According to the World Bank (2018), almost half of the world’s people try surviving on less than 

$5.50 each day. Research studies have documented the implications of being poor and the 

subsequent issue of inequality that arises. Gaps between the Haves and Have -Nots continue to 

assau lt people’s well -being (Human Security Trust Fund, 2019). The 2007 -9 worldwide “Great 

Recession” took a heavy toll on the world economy, especially for poor countries. 

More recently, of course, the 2020 -2022 global “Coronavirus Pandemic” made things wors e for 

millions more. The relevance of this paper in our present circumstances of the COVID -19 

pandemic cannot be overstated as people seek to answer questions about jobs, justice and their 

health. Thus, we explore ways academics, students and entrepreneurs can design their business 

and professional impacts to survive and maybe even thrive in challenging times. What is Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 38 

increasingly relevant and required these days is the ability of experts, governments, universities 

and nonprofits to generate capacity -build ing outcomes for those who struggle economically, even 

in large well -developed nations like America. As the U.S. and the rest of the world copes with the 

unprecedented disaster of the Coronavirus pandemic, worries have been expanding. In 2020, 

according to the Coronavirus Resource Center (2020) at Johns Hopkins University, some 17 

million people globally had the virus and sadly some 667,000 had died. That number continued 

to mushroom leading to the 460 million cases and over 6 million deaths as of spring 20 22 when 

numbers began to decline (Worldometers, 2022). 

Among those who battle the deleterious effects of mass pandemics globally, poor families face 

the largest challenges. This paper spells out critical factors giving rise to what the United Nations 

arti culates as poverty leading to disparities between rich and poor, men and women, adults and 

children, urban and rural (United Nation SDGs, 2015). Multiple strategies are analyzed as 

counters to reverse the plight of the poor, drawing on initial forays into designing interventions 

that address these crises (Woodworth, 2000). Tools and methodologies will be examined. They 

involve Utah college students, MDs, NGO donors, schoolteachers, entrepreneurs, nurses, 

professors, and others. Analyses of what things matte r, and why they are workable, will be 

highlighted. 

Key interventions are explored, including Utah -based NGOs I have developed with collaborators 

doing social entrepreneurship and village banking through microfinance, building village schools 

and educatin g poor children, installing clean water systems, launching square -foot -gardening 

techniques, implementing literacy programs for indigenous women, creating rural healthcare 

systems, establishing methods for social entrepreneurship, organizing worker -owned 

cooperatives, and more. Combined, they have generated a useful framework for expanding the 

quality of life in developing nations (USAID, 2020; Yunus, 2009). Over the decades we have 

ensured that such approaches are sustainable for the long -term. Our Utah -in itiated cases of NGO 

work in Africa, Asia and Latin America are briefly summarized, with particular attention paid to the 

logic of why and how they succeeded in raising hundreds of millions of dollars while empowering 

tens of millions of extremely impoveri shed families to move up the “food chain” toward greater 

equality and social justice. 

Assessing existing NGOs and exploring potential new innovations that will further strengthen the 

social and economic impacts will be analyzed. These will summarize thin gs that absolutely matter 

and show why they are so critical in securing capacity -building among the poorest, most ignored, 

powerless people on earth. Each intervention is one that was carried out in partnership with the 

Have Nots as critical stakeholders i n the process of social change. They offer additional steps 

toward ensuring a better future for those who suffer from both poverty and its resulting inequality. 

A Personal Context 

It is often suggested that real insights about social innovation come from one’s own experience. 

This certainly seems to be the case when one talks of trying to change the world. Thus, I will 

speak from my own life, my personal practice, not just abstract theories and/or the observations Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 39 

of others. But I do so while realizing my many limitations and the awareness that we must all 

continue to learn, to question, and to critique our life’s work. Hopefully, these personal illustrations 

will show the tremendou s possibilities of generating action -based learning and research, not only 

for academic purposes, but for engaging professors, students, and alumni in reducing human 

suffering and building civil society around the globe. 

The context for this paper is rel ated to a variety of social enterprises emerging from action 

research courses over some 40 years (Smith and Woodworth, 2012). These began back in 1980s 

when a small group of students and I gathered data on poverty and unemployment in the 

Philippines, and t hen collaborated with Filipino managers, academics, and church representatives 

to plan and roll out a microcredit nonprofit in that country. In spite of criticisms from academic 

colleagues, deans and other campus administrators, our little start -up survive d, growing to have 

some 600 employees operating a dozen offices throughout the Philippines, as well as in Ghana, 

Peru, Mexico, Guatemala, Nepal and El Salvador. Thus far, we have raised some $168 million, 

trained over a million microentrepreneurs, and crea ted over 300,000 new jobs through self -

employed microenterprises. Developing our NGO successfully over 30 years helped me learn 

that we as academics can change the world, not just teach theoretical courses, do research and 

publish statistical data. 

At th e outset, we should briefly highlight a few key terms so readers will understand the 

concepts being addressed.  Below is a short listing: 

• Civil society (sectors of a country’s social problems and challenges, sometimes referred 

to as its “social sector” or “third sector,” or other terms. In contrast to the traditional arenas 

of the private sector, such as business and for -profit enterprises, and/or public sector 

systems like federal, state, regional, and city governments; schools; and so forth) 

• Humanitarian ism (the belief and practice of regarding lives as individuals perform 

benevolent treatment of and offer assistance to others in need, to improve their living 

conditions) 

• International development ( usually implies large -scale government programs focused o n

alleviating poverty, fostering economic expansion, and improving living conditions in poor 

nations around the globe) 

• Microcredit (tiny loans or microloans to the very poor) 

• Micro -bank (a village or communal bank group, usually of self -organized poor wo men) 

• Microenterprise (a very small income -generating activity or family business) 

• Microentrepreneur (recipient of a microloan with which one can start or expand a small 

business) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 40 

• MFI (microfinance institution —term and acronym used herein for all financ ial services for 

the poor) 

• Microfinance institution (a more -inclusive term for the above five “micro -” terms, 

sometimes also including programs such as client savings, health insurance for the poor, 

education loans, and others) 

• NGO (a nongovernmental organization or nonprofit that may provide a range of 

humanitarian and development services, such as literacy, healthcare, education and 

schools, crisis response and aid, computer skills, village progress aid, agricultural help, 

and women’s empowerment, as well as microcredit itself) 

• Social entrepreneurship (a relatively new field for studying and implementing societal 

innovations above and beyond the private sector of business and/or the public sector of 

government. Sometimes referred to a s the practice of nonprofit or charitable efforts) 

• Social entrepreneur (a person who seeks to design programs to improve society, using 

business methods, not simply charity) 

• Social impact (the seeking of funding that leads to major economic results, not merely 

charity but also long -term innovation) 

To summarize, the structure of this research is based on five core themes headlined below in 

sequence :

Purpose: The objective of this paper is to explicate ways Utah professors and students have 

successfully designed and implemented non -governmental organizations (NGOs) drawing on 

various UNSDGs, with an emphasis on No. 1 combating poverty, No. 10 reducing inequalities, 

but also addressing additional needs such as No. 4 strengthening education, N o. 3 improving 

health and well -being, all to help find “transformative pathways in turbulent times” (United Nations, 

2020, p.3). 

Design/Methodology/Approach: This study consists of doing action research, the social science 

methodology pioneered in the 195 0s by Kurt Lewin (1951) and followed up later by many others 

(Argyris, 1985). It’s an approach to doing studies in the field by practitioners rather than from a 

university center. Instead of congregating statistical data in a lab or from a computer, action 

research is hands on. It is widely used today to initiate field experiments, assess their impacts, 

carry out organizational evaluations, and thereby, inform the public how we may ultimately change 

the world for the better. The cases examined below are pra ctical reports and assessments of 

grassroots initiatives designed as models for social change that reduce human suffering. We 

follow them through their original conceptions, structures, funding, and implementation. Finally, 

this paper describes and analyze s their roll out, and subsequent impacts. While the details of our 

ethnographic methodologies are examined in considerable detail later in this paper, suffice it to 

say I recruited hundreds of students in my business school classes over several years who s ought Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 41 

to “change the world,” as they put it. We designed new NGOs which were consistent with the 

SDGs of the United Nations. Training grad students, forming action teams, preparing the 

sequence of steps when we “hit the ground” in several developing natio ns, implementing 

microcredit and social entrepreneurial methods, all combined to generate a powerful process with 

significant results. 

In carrying out this research, two main concepts are the main focus of inquiry: social 

entrepreneurship and microcredit. We introduce the main idea of each below. 

Social Entrepreneurship 

First, we turn to the basics of social entrepreneurship. A relatively new idea in recent years, it has 

arisen as a more dynamic construct than simply using terms like nonprofit, charity, and other 

terms. Why? Because it suggests business implications, taking action, and innovation. No less a 

figure than Peter Drucker (1999) argued in the Harvard Business Review that social 

entrepreneurship would become the second careers of masses of profe ssional or knowledge 

workers. This literature has exploded since (Aldrich and Zimmer, 1986; Bornstein, 2004; Dees, 

2007; Mair and Marti, 2006). 

Perhaps innovative changes in business schools and the Academy of Management (AOM) 

described below will illust rate. Business schools and management education today are in flux, 

and their various conditions are in a state of dynamism as never before. These changes have led 

to academic institutions creating new courses and degrees in social entrepreneurship. Not jus t

regular entrepreneurial business start -ups or traditional management emphases, but “social” 

entrepreneurship. Courses in social entrepreneurship abound: Harvard’s Social Enterprise 

Program, Duke’s Center for the Advancement of Social Entrepreneurship (CA SE), and dozens 

more. They offer certificates in “Innovation and Entrepreneurship,” and others have multiple 

courses and program emphases using terms such as the  University of Pennsylvania ’s “Social 

Impact and Responsibility,” or at schools which offer certificates in “Innovation and 

Entrepreneurship.” Stanford, a long with Yale, sponsor Programs on Social Enterprise (PSE). 

Boston College designed and rolled out its famous Center for Social Innovation (CSI) offering a 

variety of relevant courses. The University of Michigan runs its business school’s Center for 

Socia l Impact offering a dozen relevant courses. Berkeley has courses in Entrepreneurship to 

Address Global Poverty, Social Sector Leadership, and more. Cornell’s Social Entrepreneurship 

Programs include the Center for Transformative Action nonprofit incubator and a Societal 

Solutions Scholars Program . All told, there are hundreds of such courses. 

In some instances, universities have established formal degrees, programs where graduate 

students may earn a Master’s in Social Innovation. S chools like  American University ’s Master of 

Arts in Social Enterprise, USC’s “Master of Science in Social Entrepreneurship,” NYU’s “ MBA 

in Social Innovation and Impact,” Georgetown’s “Master of International Development Policy,” 

and Pepperdine’s “MA in Social Entrepreneurship and Change.” Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 42 

Another exciting development in the rise and study of innovative changes in business has been 

the fact that the Academy of Management, the world’s most prestigious academic group, as well 

as the largest management association for business scholarship has begun emphasizing social 

entrepreneurship issues. Some of its annual meetings have had themes such as “Capitalism in 

Question, “The Inf ormal Economy,” “Practice and Research,” and “Doing Well By Doing Good.” 

The academy’s leaders articulated their visions of these annual research conferences as an 

opportunity to “consider whether our research and the knowledge we produce contribute to the 

wellbeing of the larger society in which we live and work” (AOM, 2020). 

The theme of one recent year’s conference attended by as many as 7,000 management scholars 

was “Dare to Care: Passion and Compassion in Management Practice and Research,” Its goals 

were “to dare managers and management scholars to care more deeply about our roles – to have 

passion about what we do and compassion for the people for whom we do our work. “Dare to 

care” orients managers to a focus on enabling others to create, produce, a nd deliver goods and 

services that enhance the wellbeing of, and generate value for, all the stakeholders involved 

(notably customers, employees, investors, and the public). Daring to care encourages 

management scholars to expand their focus toward an unde rstanding of how solving 

organizational problems might ensure a sustainable future” (AOM, 2010). 

A number of sessions and papers at these recent AOM conferences have emphasized using 

business schools and research to understand and practice the values of social innovation and 

relevance and in our disciplines. Titles included phrases like “Navigating the Tensions in Poverty 

Alleviation Research: Scholarly Rigor vs. Practical Relevance;” “Base -of -the -Pyramid 

Interventions,” “Social Capital and Social Exchange;” “Ten Years of Daring to Care: The UN 

Global Compact (2000 -2010) —What Has Been Achieved;” “Daring to Meas ure Social Impact: 

Performance Management in the Social Sector;” “Sustainable Global Enterprise: Building 

Research on Caring and Daring MNEs;” and “ Social Repair Through Micro -Business.” 

I believe these socially relevant events to be an exciting and pat h-breaking new agenda for 

management scholars and practitioners. The latest such example? AOM’s 82 nd conference for 

August 2022 has as its relevant theme: “Creating a Better World Together.” 

The other key concept to be explored in this study is that of mi crocredit. Immediately below, the 

paper describes and defines its meaning. 

Tools of Microcredit 

It seems appropriate at the outset to introduce readers to the role of microcredit and related terms 

such as microfinance, microlending and microenterprise an d microentrepreneur. Combined, 

these are core strategies for empowering the poor which help create jobs and also show the poor 

that they matter. In part, this is because they are trained and given a microloan with which to start 

a tiny business, a microent erprise. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 43 

I’ll never forget my early experience implementing microcredit which is illustrated by a single 

individual. It involves a Honduran woman with whom one of our NGOs was preparing to offer a 

$100 microloan to purchase chickens and launch her busin ess. After a few days training, we met 

with a group of her and her neighbors to issue these tiny loans. But she broke out in tears, telling 

us she didn’t merit financial support. She declared she was just a “poor Indian woman,” unworthy 

of a hundred dollar s. In fact, she said she had never even seen $100. Such is the despair of those 

in extreme poverty. In her case, we coached and encouraged, and she finally took the loan. She 

bought baby chicks and feed, and within four months had paid us back, plus intere st. We then 

issued her a $200 loan and the same thing occurred as her microenterprise grew. When I last 

visited her humble shack where she was raising her children as a single mother, her efforts had 

paid off amazingly. She had a sense of self -worth and di gnity, and her expanded coops contained 

over 5,000 chickens! 

This paper elucidates the growing phenomenon of microcredit —what it is, how it strengthens poor 

families, where it works, how it is structured, and the extent of its impacts. While many families 

experience the stress and strain of poverty, new solutions are being implemented to help 

overcome the debilitating effects of joblessness. One of the most innovative is microcredit and its 

related tactics to empower the poor and enable those who s truggle to enjoy greater incomes, 

experience a sense of dignity, solidify family relationships, and improve their quality of life. 

Such an approach differs from large -scale, expensive programs that broadly assert that their 

objective is to eliminate pover ty, in general. Instead, microcredit is a sort of boutique strategy 

which has narrower goals. It uses a business model, not charity, to lift the poor, and it 

accomplishes this, one family at a time. In doing so, the poor experience a better life, feel mor e

dignity, and are not dependent on huge government programs. The phrase I often use in my 

consulting and working with microenterprise organizations is that it gives the poor “a hand -up, not 

a handout.” 

To begin with, let us clarify these terms a bit more . First, a microenterprise is usually created 

through nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), an increasingly used expression often akin to 

nonprofit foundations. A microenterprise signifies one’s very small business, usually operated by 

just one or two fami ly members. Next is the word, microcredit, by which I mean “microlending” 

only, providing tiny amounts of capital loaned for income -generating projects. Microentrepreneur 

is the term for the recipient of microcredit, i.e., an individual who seeks a small l oan with which to 

start or expand one’s tiny business. Microfinance is a more encompassing word that may include 

microcredit for the microenterprise operated by the microentrepreneur. It may also include other 

economic services for the poor like a microent repreneur’s savings account, microloans for 

housing or education, microinsurance, small -scale agriculture loans for seed or tools. NGOs that 

provide this broader array of financial services are often described as microfinance institutions 

(MFIs). One may w onder where these new financial strategies came from. 

Three financial experiments gave rise to this microcredit movement. One MFI that claims it was 

the first is ACCION International, an NGO that was doing traditional development work in Latin 

America during the 1970s. It began to provide simple, tiny loans for start -up economic activity in Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 44 

1972 in Brazil. Seeing that a small amount of credit could help a poor family improve, the practice 

began to spread. While ACCION’s early efforts were limi ted to Latin America, it eventually began 

to expand by launching new offices in the U.S., Africa, Europe and Asia. In recent years, ACCION 

has impacted millions of the global poor in 55 countries. It currently offers savings programs to 

microcredit clients as well as insurance, tech assistance and other services (ACCION, 2022). 

Another pioneering organization was the Grameen Bank of Bangladesh, based in the capital city, 

Dhaka. It was the first microenterprise support organization to achieve major growth and 

substantial scale. Founded in 1976 by Professor Muhammad Yunus, a U.S. -trained economist, 

Grameen created a peer -lending structure where five to six women each received individual loans 

and jointly guaranteed all the loans in their group. Weekly payments were small and easy to 

understand, and all loans were one year in length. The groups met weekly in a designated center, 

meeting with five to seven other groups, to make loan and interest payments and to support each 

other’s business success. This group structure fostered self -esteem and a culture of mutual 

accountability that supported high loan repayment rates, high savings rates, and low levels of 

business failure. 

Today it has more than seven million clients, 96 percent of them women. Currently it has given 

out over $20 billion to 9 million mostly female borrowers in thousa nds of villages, with a payback 

rate in excess of 99 percent (Grameen, 2022). One of the most important features of Grameen is 

its openness and commitment to helping other NGOs start microcredit programs. Today there are 

hundreds of replication efforts in many nations that were built off the Grameen model. 

The third pioneering MFI, FINCA International (Foundation for International Community 

Assistance), did not become a major organization in the emerging microcredit field until the 1990s. 

But the founder, John Hatch, was a key player in the efforts to generate interest and public 

attention for the MFI field, beginning in 1983. Indeed, without any knowledge of the Grameen 

Bank in far -off Bangladesh, or of the microcredit experiments by ACCION in Latin Ameri ca, Hatch 

invented another type of solidarity group which he called Village Banking. In his model, the loan 

officer would go to a village, explain the concept, and ask the village elders to choose 30 -40 

impoverished women who each needed a $50 loan to star t or expand a business. Later Finca 

staffers returned for the repayment. 

FINCA’s model was implemented in those early years in several Latin American locales, but more 

recently has expanded to Africa and the former USSR. Today it has over nearly 3 million clients 

who comprise some 34,000 village bank groups of mostly poor women living in 41 nations (FINCA, 

2022). FINCA’s strategy emphasizes financial inclusion as a core value undergirding all it does. 

Further details about the rise of microenterprise throu gh ACCION, Grameen and other cases may 

be obtained in an early volume (Woodworth, 2000). 

This microcredit strategy for empowering poor families has become perhaps the most innovative 

development tool to globally empower millions of poor families in the la st several decades. It is 

impressive for several reasons: It defies the traditional assumption that solutions are best invented 

in industrialized nations and that top -down development is required because national political Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 45 

leaders’ support is essential fo r success. Instead, microfinance essentially turns traditional 

borrowing and finance for families upside down. 

As microcredit has been increasingly recognized for its contribution to poverty alleviation, many 

government and multilateral organizations ( such as USAID, the World Bank, the United Nations) 

have become involved. Likewise, there are important microenterprise industry research and policy 

organizations helping to further the impact of microcredit for the poor: They include the UN’s 

“Internationa l Year of Microcredit,” the Consultative Group to Help the Poorest (CGAP), the Small 

Enterprise Education and Promotion Network (SEEP), and the Microcredit Summit. With the 

above context, we turn to my research with local, Utah -based NGO efforts. 

Action Research Findings 

The results of NGO cases for this paper center on both social entrepreneurial work and 

microcredit strategies. The paragraphs below report on a mix of programs we developed in Utah 

at Brigham Young University, Utah Valley University, and other area schools of higher education 

to carry out several UN SDGs. They are organizational strategies carried out using either 

microfinance or social entrepreneurship mechanisms to improve societies globally. Below we 

briefly describe several cases addr essing the challenges of recent years and ways we sought to 

ameliorate matters. 

International Aid, Inc. in Developing Nations 

One of the first projects to counter poverty in my courses is a current NGO which we launched 

some two decades ago after hurric anes wreaked havoc in Latin America. Let’s refer to this 

nonprofit enterprise as International Aid, Inc. (IAI). It emerged from my microfinance course at a 

school of business in Utah. 

In 1989, I had designed and began teaching an innovative college course to be applied in the 

Philippines using various designations: Microcredit, Microenterprise, Microfinance, and so forth. 

Although it started small with just a handful of students, it gre w to having hundreds of interested 

young people register, both undergraduates and graduate students. Eventually, colleagues at 

other schools wanted to establish their own courses, and the idea of earning college credit through 

such experiences is now avail able through microfinance courses at over 600 colleges. 

As one of our early initiatives, IAI focused on empowering those we call “Necessity Entrepreneurs” 

in developing nations through microfinance. IAI became an innovative example of social 

entrepreneur ship utilizing student volunteers, local entrepreneurs, alumni, and faculty in 

mobilizing our collective efforts to serve the poor that we started in Latin America. Facing the 

question of whether or not a business school has anything of relevance to a natu ral disaster which 

devastated a huge region, we extended my course of a decade earlier for the Philippines to 

become a new, not -for -credit course in January 1999 called “How to Change the 

World.” Eventually some 70 -plus students signed up for the experien ce and formed self -

organizing teams to plan how we might assist the victims of the hurricane. In spite of cynics at the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 46 

university, who claimed students could not address such major catastrophes, we prepared 46 

volunteers, who each spent two months or mor e in Honduras that summer. About $116,000 was 

raised for establishing 47 communal banks, as well as recapitalizing an additional 52 bank groups 

of FINCA International, our MFI partner, whose client resources had been destroyed by the 

flooding. 

MBA student s served as on -the -ground team leaders over specific projects in -country. In addition 

to microfinance and economic development, approximately 20,000 hours of community service 

was rendered by IAI volunteers: Shoveling mud out of schools, rebuilding houses, mentoring 

street children, teaching computer skills, and delivering babies in rural health clinics. Over 800 

jobs were created by these new microenterprise start -ups, which benefited some 4,000 family 

members. 

That first experience of helping Honduras l ed to increased motivation for doing similar work 

elsewhere in subsequent years. As students, donors, and faculty began to feel empowered in 

their ability to make a difference, new crises inspired new strategies. Thus, in winter semester 

2000, some 88 volu nteers were organized and trained to serve during the following summer of 

that year. We raised over $250,000 and sent teams of young social entrepreneurs to continue our 

efforts in Honduras, as well as to expand to Venezuela, Peru, and El Salvador. We bega n to 

partner with more NGOs in these countries, starting more village banks in Honduras and El 

Salvador, as well as providing microenterprise training programs in Peru and Venezuela. 

Gradually IAI enlarged the scope of its efforts by going to Brazil, Bolivia, and Uganda, as well as 

continued its strategies in Central America. Expanded impacts have continued to nations like Fiji, 

Nicaragua, Tanzania, Thailand, and India. Today it operates alone and/or with partners which are 

additional NGOs that offer various services to the poor, most of which fit well within the UN’s 

SDGs: Microcredit (SDG Nos. 1 and 10), square foot gardening (No. 3), adult literacy (SDG No. 

4), women’s empowerment (SDG 5), home construction, agricultural and other appropriat e

technologies, as well as training in computer skills and English as a Second Language (ESL) 

(SDG No. 4), serving in rural health clinics (SDG No. 3), teaching in schools (SDG No. 4), HIV -

AIDS education and prevention (SDG No. 3), fostering peace by provi ding refugee support for 

Middle Eastern families driven from their communities to camps elsewhere (No. 16), installing 

latrines in multiple rural villages (SDG No. 6), rebuilding schools after the 2015 earthquake in 

Nepal (SDG No. 4), establishing savings and loans associations in isolated areas of multiple 

nations where none existed (SDG No. 1), and volunteering in orphanages (SDG No. 4), and 

more. 

International Aid, Inc. has worked to expand its donor relationships by building partnerships with 

a number of businesses, which range from small firms like Marketing Alley in Utah and Smog ‘n 

Go in California, to large companies like Starbucks, Novell, the Marriott Foundation, Walmart, 

Unitus, and Intel. They have collectively led to huge impacts for “Necessit y Entrepreneurs” among 

the poorest of the poor. Not only have we drawn on students from my own university over these 

years, but also from dozens of other schools like Stanford, Colorado State, Virginia Tech, Yale, 

and Washington University. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 47 

When the UN es tablished its list of SDGs in 2015, there were some 736 million people still lived 

on less than $1.90 a day. One in every ten people was extremely poor. IAI has primarily sought 

to help eradicate poverty, but being poor is one of the most challenging goals to overcome. This 

student -led MFI has made a small dent in global poverty, but it’s nonetheless a dent. IAI has 

grown to operate in 17 nations from Fiji to Tanzania implementing programs such as social 

entrepreneurship, sustainable development, literacy a nd computer skills, microentrepreneurship 

training, and so forth. 

For over 20 years, some 3,000 IAI student social entrepreneurs have volunteered to spend 3 -4

months each laboring to empower the disenfranchised. But the world still has a long way to go. 

Latino Microcredit in Utah 

Another case is a small, local community -based nonprofit example implemented by college 

students and me establishing an NGO in 2003 using the university as an incubator to recruit, train, 

mentor and give $500 microloans to Lat ino immigrants in our local valley of the western United 

States where the school is located. I’ll refer to the organization as “Latino Microcredit” (LM). It 

began because growing numbers of Latino immigrants were moving into Utah Valley where we 

live. They struggled with the challenges of housing, getting sufficient food on the table, 

transportation, schools for their children, and employment. 

We designed a four -pillar system for operating its program: Entrepreneurial training, group 

support, having a me ntor, and receiving loans. Briefly put, training seemed to be of interest to 78 

percent of Latino adults in a survey we conducted early on. So, we designed eight modules, one 

to be taught each week for 8 weeks. It covered topics like what microentrepreneur ship is, how it 

works, what a loan’s principal and interest are, as well as covering other relevant topics –simple 

accounting and bookkeeping, sales and marketing, customer service, productivity, human 

resources, teambuilding, business English, and so forth . In addition, it was decided that as 

learning grows and application occurs through the use of cases, trainers would begin to help the 

participants design their own microenterprise business plans. 

During these weeks, would -be microentrepreneurs learned ab out each other, worked on training 

cases as a team, shared ideas and experiences. This system is one of mutual support built 

solidarity and trust. If group members went on to complete the eight sessions of training and 

qualify for $500 loans, a graduation ceremony was held, certificates of completion were given, as 

well as the loans. Each member of the group signed a commitment to repay each other’s loans, 

in addition to one’s own, the group thereby acting as social collateral. This technique is sometimes 

referred to as “peer -lending” or “solidarity group loans.” Group commitment and peer pressure 

served to minimize borrower default rates. Also, they taught responsibility and the importance of 

repayment on time and in full for the amount due. 

After graduati ng and obtaining their first LM loans, the microentrepreneurs next turned to 

launching their tiny businesses, and each was assigned a volunteer mentor who agreed to coach 

them at least monthly throughout the next year. These mentors were older, experienced Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 48 

individuals who had enjoyed considerable business success, knew how to operate within the 

realities of the U.S. business environment, and were fluent in Spanish language skills. 

As of now, Latino Microfinance seems to be succeeding. Hundreds of would -be 

microentrepreneurs have received orientation and/or training. Those who completed the training 

have obtained loans, started microenterprises, and, so far, at least until now, nearly a hundred 

percent of them have paid back their microcredit debts, 97.2 pe rcent to be precise. LM eventually 

shifted from being a university class project, or a short -term community effort to become a legal 

501(c) 3 nonprofit so it could expand its services and loan capital to greater numbers of poor 

families. The hope is to eve ntually have the capability and resources to assist thousands of 

impoverished Hispanic families in the Utah Valley region so they can progress from the 

“underground” or “black market” economy to the point that they may qualify for larger -scale loans 

from r egular banks in the formal U.S. economy. 

This application of the SDGs in our own community has faced challenges. They included the fact 

that although the Provo mayor originally endorsed this project and committed a few thousand start 

up dollars, he later reneged upon learning LM was serving “undocumented” families from Central 

America. LM has also had to move its operations around for various reasons, including from the 

initial campus to Centro Hispano, and at other facilities. We enjoyed operating on the campus of 

Utah Valley University for years, working and training clients at UVU’s Small Business 

Development Center. Being centrally located in the valley made it easier and more accessible for 

Latino clients to get to for training and mentoring. 

As a social enterprise, Latino Microfinance fits well within the United Nations agenda of working 

to eliminate extreme poverty (SDG No. 1) and help reduce inequality, even in Utah (SDG No. 10). 

To do so means we must labor to reduce and eventually eliminat e terrible poverty within one of 

the world’s wealthiest nations. LM’s growing stronger today with financing from banks and credit 

unions, has convinced me that through this small experiment we can generate changemakers 

locally, as well as reduce poverty am ong minority populations which are especially vulnerable, 

doing so in our home communities as well as globally. 

Microfinance Accelerator 

A final case of this research, and the largest MFI of all this author has established, is the launching 

of an NGO we will refer to as the “ Microfinance Accelerator” or (MA), an effort we established 

beginning in 1999 -2000. It became a major microfinance institution (MFI) which I co -founded and 

served as the first board chair —along with some entrepreneurial friends of mi ne, showing how 

like -minded business executives can come together, collaborate with amazing young people by 

hiring a few students, and sharing how their best practices can be integrated in assisting small 

MFIs around the world to rapidly scale up with our financial backing. Although well -established 

before the UN’s SDGs were conceived and articulated, the first UN goal of eliminating poverty 

was the central mission of MA. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 49 

We learned how to be laser -focused, bring together a mix of management competencies with 

young students’ energies, and become a major player around the world in scaling up the global 

field of microfinance. MA board members brought not only business savvy t o the organization, 

but they were all socially conscious executives. One had been the marketing head at Apple, Inc 

overseeing the launch of the MacIntosh Computer in Silicon Valley. Another was the head of Bain 

Capital in Boston with $150 billion in invest or assets being managed today. Others had extensive 

experience as advisors to Bill Gates at Microsoft, founders of tech companies, and more. All were 

social entrepreneurs seeking to better the world. For over 15 years, we garnered loan capital for 

some 20 MFIs which totaled over $1.2 billion in loans and investments in Africa, Latin America, 

and Asia. With the financing we did, these once small MFIs rapidly ramped up from their early 

years when they had a total of less than 300,000 clients, today they have an astounding 40 million 

borrowers. 

Soon after beginning, in 2002, MA established its own little MFI in Mexico in an indigenous region 

in the state of Hidalgo, to experiment with assisting tiny business start -ups. That practical 

fieldwork gave the team t he ability to learn quickly what was successful and how to design and 

launch a new organization in Latin America. The board reached out to partner with a Peruvian 

NGO which was beginning to expand throughout the region of Latin America. Efforts began to 

le ase facilities, hire and train a small Mexican staff, and then begin offering training in practices 

of microlending, savings, and budgeting one’s income. Starting from scratch in January 2002 , the 

first loans were issued in April and by December the Tula M FI had g rown to serve some 2,500 

clients. Astoundingly, the new social business enjoyed 100 percent of expected repayments, 

along with interest rates and a 99 percent client retention rate. The average loan size for clients 

was a mere $95. The organization grew to a total of 10,401 clients within several more years. 

Altogether, MA has invested some $1.9 million in our first Mexico project. The beginnings of MA’s 

outreach in Tula alone have grown to serve more than 26,000 women clients. 

From that humble beg inning Microfinance Accelerator expanded with ever -larger donations from 

individuals as well as large family foundations, often drawing on relationships between board 

members and their professional colleagues. Thanks to some members’ personal wealth, sever al 

million dollars was obtained. Then, with that success, even larger contributions came from our 

friends, including $3 million from the Bill Gates Foundation early on; several million dollars more 

from Pierre Omidyar, founder of eBay; and from Apple found er Steve Job’s family foundation. The 

Omidyar Network, for example, gave MA several one -to -two -million -dollar grants early on. In 

2008, it contributed $9 million to be used over the next three years. It was clear that if Microfinance 

Accelerator developed a businesslike model for expanding microcredit, considerable potential lay 

in securing the necessary capital for reaching huge success as a “partner to the poor.” It would 

also be consistent and support the soon -to -be -established United Nation’s SDG No. I in attacking 

poverty, as well as other priorities such as SDG No. 8 by building systems for more and decent 

work and economic growth, No. 9 to strengthen industry that would thereby foster innovation and 

better infrastructure, and No. 10 which sought to re duce inequalities. 

Over time, a new potential MA partner was identified in India, called SKS Microfinance (Swayam 

Krishi Sangam), a small MFI located in the state of Andhra Pradesh. It appeared to be a good Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 50 

model with a creative approach that was percei ved to have high growth potential. Yet it only had 

some 5,000 clients, despite seeming to have much promise, because it was well run, was efficient, 

had good technical systems, and other qualities. Without more funding, however, it could only 

serve several thousand microentrepreneurs in a nation of more than a billion individuals, because 

it lacked sufficient capital. Instead of a promising future, its limitations were clear. 

Small grants of $100,000 from Microfinance Acceleration began to spur major new g rowth at SKS. 

This became a genuine win -win arrangement for the poor of India, their local MFIs, and MA itself. 

The initial MA support to scale up SKS also led to significant internal growth. By 2010, it had 

engaged with 6.8 million impoverished Indian bor rowers and held $624 million worth of microloans 

(Strom and Bajaj, 2010). Eventually, after tripling its capital and client base further, and for multiple 

growth reasons, SKS rebranded itself with a new name —Bharat Financial Inclusion Ltd. —and 

added new se rvices. 

Beyond SKS, MA began to establish partnerships with other small MFIs that were well run, yet 

lacked capital for significant client growth. They included Finsol in Brazil, Credex in Mexico, 

LifeBank Foundation in The Philippines , Fondo de Inversion Social (FIS) in Argentina, and 

Bandhan in Kolkatta, India . In addition to these and other MFIs, Microfinance Accelerator pursued 

a number of other prospects and began funded for their growth. Over 15 years , we garnered loan 

capital for some 20 MFIs which totaled over $1.2 billion in loans and investments in Africa, Latin 

America, and Asia. With the financing we did, these once small MFIs rapidly ramped up from their 

early years when they had a total of less than 300,000 clients, today they have impacted an 

astounding 28 million borrowers. 

The organization enjoyed considerable recognition and generated important results, so much so 

that it eventually split off into several divisions or branches which continu e to this day, fully 

consistent with the UN’s SDGs. 

Limitations of this Research and its Implications 

Clearly there are aspects of this paper which are limited, both for scholars and managers working 

on the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals throughout the earth. My research is 

practitioner -based and grows from the action research I’ve done over several decades. So, it’s 

not a study using statistical information, number -crunching methods, and/or other approaches 

reported in academic journals u sing statistics and data sets. Instead, this research is qualitative, 

on -the -ground learning. It consists of social applications, applied economics, and sociological 

cases analysis. Hopefully, some academic readers will be interested in further research of the 

concepts and cases above, thus, enlightening the world about microcredit and social 

entrepreneurship. 

However, this study also suggests ways that the average person, having little money or lacking a 

PhD has the capacity to improve society. In some r espects, one might see that they, themselves, 

can remake the world. Drawing on the words of the great anthropologist, Margaret Mead (2022), Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 51 

the following is suggested: “ Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can 

change the world; indeed, it's the only thing that ever has.” 

The Originality and Value of this Research 

This paper offers further value -added dimensions to the notion that while the world’s impoverished 

masses struggle continuously, each human being can labor to reduce suffering, empower the 

poor, and work for a more peaceful and just society. Through the co ncepts and cases above, it 

can be surmised that the power is within us to conceive new ideas, design frameworks for thinking 

and action, such that life becomes more bearable for others. Instead of simply depending on large 

institutions like the U.S. federa l government, big banks, the United Nations, major churches, 

World Bank and other top -down structures, we can invert society and work from the bottom -up. 

In so doing, we are able to strengthen civil society and raise the level of well -being for the masses. 

The essence of my argument specifically is that college students, along with faculty, can become 

radical social innovators by inventing new courses and projects using entrepreneurship and 

microcredit to empower the world’s poor with sustainable strategi es that last. In several instances, 

the spin -offs from my courses have led to collaboration and involvement with students from other 

universities that joined our on -the -ground summers of volunteering in the field. They include 

students from Portland State University, the University of Utah, Stanford, VA Tech, Utah Valley 

University, Colorado State, University of Washington, UNC, Harvard, and Berkeley, as well as 

Brigham Young University. In my view, both individually and collectively, people can truly make a

difference in society. All it takes is blood, sweat and tears. 

Conclusions 

Finally, as we have explored the relevant United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals and 

their applications today, we see applicable results. This paper suggests two things: First, at the 

macrolevel, we see that the UN’s SDGs have generated important values and future objectives 

for the masses of people on our earth and we can all facilitate this movement. Second, these 

goals are relevant in inspiring the next generation of yo ung people across the world to mobilize 

and make a difference. Not just from the “Big Boys,” the massive institutions like the World Bank, 

USAID, or the UN itself. But other movements from below, carrying out small, grassroots micro -

strategies that can als o play a role in development. 

In so doing, let us remember the philosophy of the great South African leader, Nelson Mandela 

(2022): “As long as poverty, injustice and gross inequality persist in our world, none of us can 

truly rest.” Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 52 

References 

Accion. (2022). https://www.accion.org/about/what -is -accion.  Accessed February 24, 2022. 

AOM, 2010. Academy of Management. 

http://pd.aom.org/2010/subMenu.asp?mode=setmenu&menuid=14. Accessed January 

5, 2022. 

AOM. (2020). Academy of Management. https://aom .org/events/annual -meeting/past -annual -

meetings. Accessed February 14, 2022. 

Aldrich, H. E. and Zimmer, C. (1986). Entrepreneurship Through Social Networks, SSRN: 

http://ssrn.com/abstract=1497761. Accessed January 12, 2022. 

Argyris, C. (1985). Actio n Science , Concepts, Methods, and Skills for Research and 

Intervention . San Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass. 

Bornstein, D. (2004). How to Change the World: Social Entrepreneurs and the Power of New 

Ideas. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

CGAP. (2021). The State of Economic Inclusion Report 2021: The Potential to Scale. World 

Bank. Washington, D.C. 

Dees, J. G. (2007). Taking Social Entrepreneurship Seriously: Uncertainty, Innovation, and 

Social Problem Solving. Society , 44, 3, pp. 24 -31 .

Drucker, P. F. (1999). Managing Oneself. Harvard Business Review , January -February, pp. 

100 -109. 

FINCA. (2022). https://finca.org/. Accessed February 27, 2022. 

Grameen. (2022). https://grameenbank.org/data -and -report/monthly -report -01 -2022 -issue -505 -

in -usd/. Accessed January 8, 2022. 

Human Security Trust Fund. (2019).  Human Development Index covering 232 countries. 

https://www.un.org/humansecurity/. Accessed December 22, 2019. 

Lewin, K. (1951). Field Theory in Social Science . New York, NY: Harper and Row. 

Mair, J. and Marti, I. (2006). Social Entrepreneurship Research: A Source of 

Explanation, Prediction, and Delight, Journal of World Business, 41, 36 –44. 

Mandela, N. (2022). https://www.brainyquote.com/authors/nelson -mandela -quotes.  Accessed 

March 11, 2022. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 53 

Mead, M. (2022). https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/margaret_mead_100502. Accessed 

March 9, 2022. 

Smith, I. and Woodworth, W. (2012). Developing Social Entrepreneurs and Social Innovators: A 

Social Identity and Self -Efficacy Approach. Academy of Management Learning and 

Education (AMLE), 11, 3, 390 -407. 

Strom, S., & Bajaj, V. (2010). Rich I.P.O. Bri ngs Controversy to SKS Microfinance. The New 

York Times, July 29. 

United Nations. (2015). Sustainable Development Goals. New York, NY: 

https://sdgs.un.org/goals. Accessed February 6, 2022. 

United Nations. (2020). The Sustainable Development Goals Repor t 2020. New York 

Headquarters, NY: UN Headquarters Report. 

USAID. (2020). U.S. Agency for International Development. Washington, DC: 

https://www.usaid.gov/ . Accessed March 11, 2022. 

Woodworth, W. (2000). Small Really Is Beautiful: Micro Approaches to Third World 

Development —Microentrepreneurship, Microenterprise, and Microfinance. Ann Arbor, 

MI: Third World Think Tank. 

World Bank. Nearly Half the World Lives on Less than $5.50 a D ay. (2018). Washington, DC: 

World Bank Group. Oct. 17, 2018 . https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -

release/2018/10/17/nearly -half -the -world -lives -on -less -than -550 -a-day . Accessed March 

3, 2022. 

Worldometers. (2022). https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/. Accessed March 4, 2022. 

Yunus, M. (2009). Creating a World Without Poverty: Social Business and the Future of 

Capitalism. New York, NY: Public Affairs. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 54 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 55 

# Dynamiq ue Spatio -Temporelle de L’occupation du sol et 

# de son Implication à la Sécurité Alimentaire 

# en Zone Cotonnière du Mali 

Bebe Alfred Dembele (Institute of Rural Economy, Mali), 

Si di Dembele (University of Social Science and Management of Bamak o, Mali), a nd 

Souleymane Si di Traore (University of Social Science and Management of Bamak o, Mali) 

Résumé 

La zone cotonnière du Mali est soumise à une pression anthropique très forte. Depuis plusieurs 

décennies, la forte croissance démographique cumulée avec l’introduction des cultures de rente 

et la vulgarisation de nouvelles techniques agricoles ont entrainé une modification de l’espace. 

Donc pour satisfaire les besoins alimentaires, les exploitations agricoles restent dans une logique 

extensive pour assurer l’autosuffisance alimentaire. C’est dans cette optique que le présent article 

se fixe comme objectif d ’évaluer la dynamique d’occupation du sol et son implication sur la 

sécurité alimentaire dans les terroirs de Benguéné et Ziguéna dans la zone cotonnière. Pour ce 

faire un jeu d’image Landsat acquise durant quatre période (1987, 1998, 2009 et 2018) ont été 

utilisés pour quantifier la dynamique spatio -temporelle des unités d’occupation du sol. Les 

données issues des Recensements Généraux de la Population et de l’Habitat (GPH) ont été 

utilisées pour faire une projection de la population en 2018 afin d’estimer les besoins céréaliers 

selon la norme FAO pour les différentes dates de recensement et de leurs mettre en lien avec la 

dynamique d’occupation du sol. Les résultats issus de ces classifications ont été intégrés dans 

une approche de modélisation en utilisan t la chaine CA -Markov pour comprendre la dynamique 

future de l’occupation du sol. Les résultats révèlent que de façon générale la dynamique 

d’occupation du sol est fortement dépendante des besoins alimentaires et qu’à l’horizon 2028 les 

terroirs seront con frontés à un problème de saturation d’espace agricole. Dans un système de 

production peu intensif ou les terroirs sont quasis saturer, les producteurs seront contraints de 

développé d’autres stratégies pour assurer la sécurité alimentaire à savoir une fort e intensification 

des systèmes de production s’inscrivant dans une démarche d’agroécologie, le développement 

d’autres activités génératrices de revenue (AGR) et aussi de promouvoir la planification familiale. 

Les résultats tentent aussi de mettre la lumièr e sur les pratiques actuelles en termes de gestion 

durable des ressource naturelles et des stratégies de sécurité alimentaire face aux défis d’atteinte 

des objectifs de développement durable (ODD), plus spécifiquement les indicateurs des objectifs 

2, 9 et 15 des 

ODD. 

Mot clés:  Pression anthropique, Dynamique spatiale, sécurité alimentaire, Modélisation Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 56 

Introduction 

La zone cotonnière du Mali est soumise à une pression anthropique et animale très forte. Depuis 

plusieurs décennies, la forte croissance démographique cumulée avec l’introduction des cultures 

de rente comme le coton et l’arachide et la vulgarisation de nouvelles techniques agricoles ont 

entrainé une modification de l’espace. Donc pour satisfaire les besoins alimentaires, les 

expl oitations agricoles restent dans une logique extensive pour assurer l’autosuffisance 

alimentaire. 

La sécurité alimentaire se définit comme l’accès permanent de tous aux denrées alimentaires 

nécessaires pour mener une vie saine et active. Par cette définit ion, la réalisation de la sécurité 

alimentaire reste un défi majeur à relever pour la zone cotonnière qui constitue la principale région 

agricole du Mali (Dembélé et Staatz, 2010) . Dep uis quelques décennies, et ce malgré 

d'importants progrès accomplis en matière de gestion et de prévention des crises alimentaires, 

le pays traverse des crises alimentaires dont les origines sont diverses. Certaines crises sont 

conjoncturelles, d'autres on t des causes structurelles (Hitimana et al., 2008) . Le Mali dispose d’un 

important potentiel agro -sylvo -pastoral et halieutique mais n’arrive pas à couvrir entièrement ses 

besoins alimentaires et atteindre un niveau de sécurité alimentaire satisfaisant et durable 

(Sanogo, 2017) . Bien qu’aucune crise alimentaire majeure ne soit survenue depuis les années 

1983 -1984, le Mali vit dans une situation d’insécurité alimentaire chroniqu e liée à la pauvreté 

endémique, au caractère rudimentaire des systèmes de production (CSA, 2005) . Depuis 

l’indépendance en 1960, les cultures de rente telles que le riz et le coton, plus encadrées par les 

services d’appui technique, ont connu des augmentations considérables de rendement (riz 3,33 

t/ha et coton 1,03 t/ha en 2017), tandis que les rendements des cultures vivrières pluviales (mil 

0,88 t/ha et sorgho 0,89 t/ha en 2017 etc.) ont évolué timidement au cours des 50 dernières 

années, bien qu’elles soient la base de l’alimentation de plus de 80% de la population (Institut 

d’Économie Rurale, 2020) . La superficie totale cultivée en céréales (riz, mil, sorgho, maïs, fonio, 

blé et orge) est passée de 1,6 millions d’hectares e n 1984 -1985 à 3,9 millions hectares en 2008 -

2009, elle a donc plus que doublée en l’espace de 25 ans. On estime le taux de croissance 

moyenne des emblavures à 2,2% par an dans l’ensemble de 1990 à 2009 (CSA, 2011). En 25 

ans, la production de céréale a pre sque triplé au Mali, passant de 1,1 million de tonnes au début 

des années 80 à 2,7 millions de tonnes en 2002 -2004 (Egg et Wade, 2006) . Donc la production 

agricole globale a augmenté pour répondre à l’accroissement de la demande, mais en accroissant 

les surfaces emblavées, plutôt qu’en intensif iant. La très grande majorité des systèmes de 

production agricole sont restés dans une logique extensive par la dynamique d’occupation du sol, 

qui nécessite toujours plus de terres, notamment au détriment des pâturages et des espaces de 

cueillettes (Gautier, Gazull and Belières, 2007) . C’est dans cette optique que nous nous sommes 

interrogés qu’avec la forte croissance démographique dans la zone cotonnière du Mal i, la 

dynamique d’occupation du sol contribue -t-elle a assuré la sécurité alimentaire de sa population? 

Des études ont été mener pour évaluer la dynamique d’occupation du sol à travers les images 

satellitaires et la forte pression anthropique sur les ress ources naturelles (activités agricole). Ainsi 

Cuny et Sorg, (2003) dans une étude réalisée dans la commune de Sorobasso située dans le 

vi eux bassin cotonnier, a permis de montrer à l’aide des images satellitaires, qu’au cours des Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 57 

cinquante dernières années l’évolution des paysages forestiers est fortement lié à la dynamique 

agricole induit par le coton. Les résultats révèlent aussi que l’e xpansion territoriale agricole a été 

plus importante que la croissance démographique. Ces constats ont été faites par Ballo et al., 

(2016) dans une étude en utilisant les images Landsat, les résultats de cet article conclu que la 

dynamique de l’augmentation de la superficie agricole et de diminution de la végétation est 

fortement liée à l’évolutio n démographique. Mais par contre Fane, (2015) avec la même méthode 

dans une étude dans la commune rurale de Wateni, trouve que malgré la forte pression 

anthropique sur les ressource natur elle, la disponibilité des ressources est relativement important 

et rend atypique la dynamique de l’espace dans la commune. A l’instar de ces résultats ci -dessus 

et parallèlement a des travaux similaires (Issiaka, Arouna et Imorou, 2016; Mamane et al., 20 18; 

Thierry et al., 2018; Zakari et al., 2018; Sall et al., 2019) qui ont été mener dans la sous -région 

pour évaluer la dynamique d’occupation du sol à partir des images satellitaires et la forte pression 

anthropique sur ces ressources, ces études ne ti ennent pas compte de la simulation de l’état futur 

de l’occupation a un horizon (échelle d’année) et le lien direct des besoins alimentaires 

grandissant en fonction de celle -ci (occupation du sol). C’est partant de ces travaux antérieurs 

que cet article se fixe comme objectif d’évaluer encore la dynamique d’occupation du sol à partir 

des images satellitaires de type Landsat et son implication sur la sécurité alimentaire dans les 

terroirs de Benguéné et Ziguéna dans la zone cotonnière 

Matériels et Méthodes 

Présentation des Sites D’études 

Cette étude a été conduite deux (2) villages de la zone cotonnière, il s’agit de Benguéné vieux 

bassin cotonnier et Ziguéna dans la zone Bougouni -Sikasso. 

Benguéné en zone semi -aride au Nord : La zone dans laquelle est située le village se trouve entre 

les isohyètes 800 -1000 mm. Cette zone relève du vieux bassin cotonnier. Les effets conjugués 

de la péjoration climatique et la forte emprise agricole constituent une menace pour les 

ressources naturelles de la zone. Les terres cultivées occupent plus de la moitié du terroir. 

Ziguéna en zone de transition au centre : cette zone est située entre les isohyètes 1100 -1200 

mm. La proximité de la zone des centres urbains (Si kasso, Kignan) augmente le facteur de 

pression démographique. Les meilleures terres du village de Ziguéna sont exploitées pour la 

culture de contre -saison, une menace pour les ressources naturelles en général et pastorales en 

particulier (Kone, 2017) .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 58   

> Figure 1: Présentation des zones d'études
> Source : MDRI et SotubaGIS

Données 

Les données utilisées sont essentiellement des images satellitaires de type Landsat. Ces images 

téléchargées couvrent une période de 30 ans avec un intervalle de 10 ans, la date d’acquisition 

de ces images varie d’octobre à décembre en fonction de la disponibilité. La résolution spatiale 

est de 30 mètres et les capteurs sont de t ype TM et OLI/TIRS. 

Les données démographiques issues des différents recensements généraux de la population et 

de l’habitat (RGPH) que le Mali a connue (1976, 1986, 1998 et 2009) ont été utilisées pour projeter 

la population de 2009 et d’estimé les besoins céréaliers de la population selon la norme FAO qui 

est de 2014 kg/personne/an. 

Méthodes 

Analyse Diachronique 

Deux méthodes de traitement d’image couplées ont été adoptées. Il s’agit de la classification 

supervisée en utilisant l’algorithme de maximum par vraisemblance (Ballo et al., 2016; Souley 

Yero, 2008) , les résultats obtenus de la classification supervisée ont été soumis à la méthode 

d’interprétation visuelle afin d’apporter d’éventuelle correction d’apparence des classes. La 

méthode d’interprétation visuelle des images perme t de caractériser les principaux objets 

présents : sols, végétations, eaux, etc., d’une manière fidèle, systématique et exhaustive par leur Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 59 

comportement spectral. L’interprétation visuelle a été efficace grâce à la composition colorée par 

vraie couleur (r ouge -vert -bleu) et par fausse couleur (exemple : infrarouge -rouge -vert, proche 

infrarouge - infrarouge -rouge). Les unités d’occupation obtenues à l’issu du traitement sont entre 

autres : la zone agricole (champs et jachère récente), la végétation dense (co mposé de galeries 

forestières, savanes boisées, savanes arborées et le bois sacré), la végétation moins dense 

(essentiellement des savanes arbustives en général dernier stade de dégradation des savanes 

boisées ou arborées). 

Statistiques de la Dynamique Spatiale 

Après la méthode de traitement des images Landsat, les statistiques d’évolution de l’occupation 

des sols ont été calculées à travers l’équation (N°2) proposée par la FAO (1996) et celle de 

Bernier (1992) (N°3) couramment employées pour mesurer la croissance des agrégats 

macroéconomiques entre deux périodes données (Hamidou et al., 2012; Issiaka et al., 2016; 

Kpedenou et al., 2017; Soro et al., 2014) .

𝐓𝐠 = 𝐒 𝟐 −𝐒 𝟏 

> 𝐒 𝟏

× 𝟏𝟎𝟎 (2) 

Tg : Taux global de croissance ; S1 : la surface d’une classe d’unité de surface à la date t1 ; S2 :

la superficie de la même classe d’unité de surface à la date t2 

𝐓𝐜 = 𝐥𝐧 𝐒 𝟐 −𝐥𝐧 𝐒 𝟏   

> (𝐭 𝟐 −𝐭 𝟏 )×𝐥𝐧 𝐞

× 𝟏𝟎𝟎 (3) 

Tc : le taux de croissance annuelle ; S1 : la surface d’une classe d’unité de surface à la date t1 ; 

S2 : la superficie de la même classe d’unité de surface à la date t2 ; Ln : le logarithme népérien 

et e la base des logarithmes népériens (e=2,71828) 

Modélisation 

Cette étape de la démarche nous conduit à prévoir les changements futurs en 2028, pour autant 

que le contexte considéré pour ces modèles soit encore pertinent dans le futur. Le type de modèle 

appliqué dans cette recher che est celui faisant appel aux chaines de Markov. La démarche 

consiste d’abord à faire l’analyse de la chaine de Markov qui est un processus qui permet de 

simuler l’état futur de l’occupation du sol en se basant sur son passé puis l’application des 

automa tes cellulaire qui tienne compte de la contiguïté spatiale d’un pixel par rapport à un groupe 

de pixels. 

Evaluation des Besoins Alimentaires 

Les besoins alimentaires en céréale ont été estimés selon la norme FAO qui est de 214 kg de 

céréales/personne/an et à partir des données de recensement général de la population et de 

l’habitat (1987, 1998 et 2009). Pour les besoins de 2018 ainsi que les besoins futur (2028) en Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 60 

absence de données nous avons procédé à la projection de la population. Pour cela nous avons 

d’abord procédé au calcul du taux d’accroissement intercensitaire (formule 1): 

𝐫 = √(𝐏𝐧 +𝐚  

> 𝐏𝐧

) −

> 𝐭

𝟏 (1) 

r : taux d’accroissement naturel (TAN) ; t : intervalle de temps entre deux recensements ; Pn+a : 

population de l’année 2009 ; Pn : population de l’année 1998 

Puis nous avons procédé au calcul de la projection avec la formule ci -dessus 

𝐏𝐧 = 𝐏𝐨 (𝟏 + 𝐫 )𝐧 (2) 

Pn : la population ; Po : la population initiale ; 1 : le chiffre constant ; r : le taux d’accroissement 

naturel ; n : le nombre d’année entre la population de départ (2009) et la population d’arrivé 

(2018). 

Résultats 

Dynamique D’occupation du Sol 

Dynamiq ue D’occupation du Sol à Benguéné 

La figure ci -dessous présente la situation de l’occupation du sol du terroir de Benguéné en 1987, 

1998, 2009 et 2018. Elle permet de percevoir, à travers ces différentes cartes, 

les différents états d’occupation du sol des années retenues dans le cadre de cette étude.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 2: Statistiq ues de la dynamique d'occupation du sol
> de 1987, 1998, 2009 et 2018 dans le terroir de Benguéné

En 1987, la végétation naturelle était la classe la plus dominante du terroir. La végétation dense 

occupait une superficie de 1467,87 hectares soit 40,26 % du terroir. La végétation moins dense 

quant à elle occupait une superficie de 1039 hectares soit 28, 52 % du terroir. Celle -ci était suivie         

> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
> 1987
> 1998
> 2009
> 2018

Hectares   

> Années
> Agricole Vegetation dense Vegetation moins dense

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 61 

de la zone agricole qui occupait une proportion de 30,55 % du terroir soit 1113,61 hectares, c’était 

la plus petite unité d’occupation du sol dans le terroir de Benguéné à l’époque ( Figure 2). 

La situation de l’occupation du sol de 1998 montre toujours une domination de la végétation 

naturelle malgré une légère augmentation de la zo ne agricole ( Figure 2). Cette superficie agricole 

est passée à 1364,81 hectares soit 37,44 %. La timide progression de la zone agricole s’est faite 

esse ntiellement sur la végétation dense. Elle a régressé avec une superficie de 1124,4 hectares 

soit 30,84 % du terroir. La végétation moins dense a subi une légère augmentation avec une 

superficie de 1128,34 hectares soit 30,95 % de la superficie du terroir. Cette légère augmentation 

de la végétation moins dense découle de la dégradation de la végétation dense. 

En 2009, la situation de l’occupation du sol révèle que la zone agricole a connu une progression 

importante avec une superficie de 1671,97 hectares s oit 45,86 % du terroir. De façon générale la 

végétation naturelle demeure toujours la plus grande unité d’occupation du sol. La surface de la 

végétation dense était estimée à 1008,78 hectares soit 27,67 % du terroir. La végétation moins 

dense avait une sup erficie de 934,4 hectares soit 25,63 % du terroir ( Figure 2). 

En 2018, la zone agricole est devenue la plus grande unité d’occupation du sol avec une 

progression importante. Elle atteint une superficie de 1911,32 hectares et occupait 52,43 % soit 

plus de la moitié du terroir. L’extension de la surface agricole a été faite essentiellement au 

détriment de la formation naturelle. La végétation dense occupe une superficie de 953,75 

hectares avec taux d’occupation de 26,16 % du terroir. La végétation moins dense occupe ainsi 

une superficie de 743,13 hectares soit 20,38 % de la surface du terroir ( Figure 2). 

Dynamique d’occupation du sol à Ziguéna 

La ( Figure 3) illustre la situation de l’occupation du sol du terroir de Ziguéna des années 1987, 

1998, 2009 et 2018 .   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 3: Statistiques de la dynamique d'occupation du
> sol de 1987, 1998, 2009 et 2018 dans le terroir de Ziguéna

La  Figure 3 fait ressortir l’état de la dynamique de l’occupation du sol de 1987 -2018 à Ziguéna. 

La situation de l’occupation du sol en 1987 à Ziguéna révèle de façon générale que la végétation           

> 01000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
> 1987
> 1998
> 2009
> 2018
> Hectares
> Années
> Agricole Eau Vegetation dense Vegetation moins dense

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 62 

naturelle était assez appréciable. La surface de la végétation dense était estimée à 2832,57 

hectares soit 44,95 % du terroir. La végétation moins dense occupait 1651,21 hectares soit 26,2 

% de la superficie total. A l’époque la zone agricole suivait la végétation naturelle avec une 

superficie de 1778,43 hectares soit 28,22 % du terroir. La surface eau venait en dernière position 

avec une surface estimée à 28 hectares soit moins 1 % du terroir ( Figure 3). 

En 1998, la végétation naturelle était toujours la classe la plus dominante malgré la progression 

de la zone agricole. La végétation moins dense a subi une légère augmentation de superficie 

résultant de la dégradation de la végétation dense. La formation naturelle mesurait 2301,5 

hectares soit 36,52 % du terroir pour la végétation moins dense. La végétation dense occupait 

une superficie de 1779,2 hectares soit 28,2 % de la surface totale du terroir. La zone agricole est 

passée à une superficie de 2146,1 hectares soit 34 % du terroir. Malgré la progression de la 

surface e au elle est restée la plus petite unité d’occupation du sol avec une superficie de 60,08 

hectares soit près de 1 % de la surface totale ( Figure 3). 

L’a nalyse de la situation de l’occupation du sol de 2009 révèle que la zone agricole continue de 

progresser contrairement à la végétation naturelle. La végétation moins dense passe à 31,65 % 

soit 1993,9 hectares. La végétation dense est passée à 25,46 % soit 1604,34 hectares. La zone 

agricole quant à elle passe à 2524,4 hectares soit 40 % du terroir. La surface eau a connu une 

extension malgré qu’elle soit la plus petite unité d’occupation du sol, elle est passée à 157,38 

hectares soit 2,5 % du terroir ( Figure 3). 

En 2018 la situation de l’occupation du sol révèle une forte domination de la zone agricole qui a 

connu une augmentation exponentielle de surface a u fil des années, elle atteint une superficie de 

3640,4 hectares soit 57,78 % du terroir. La végétation naturelle suit une logique régressive. La 

végétation moins dense est passée à 1454 hectares soit 23,1 % du terroir. Quant à la végétation 

dense elle a r égressé à 1123,82 hectares soit 17,84 % du terroir. De façon générale la végétation 

naturelle a régressé pour faire place à la zone agricole. La surface eau a aussi régressé et est 

passé à 42,39 hectares soit 0,67 % du terroir compte tenue des effets de la saisonnalité ( Figure 

3). 

Statistique de la Dynamique de L’occupation du Sol 

Statistique de la Dynamique de L’occupation du Sol à Benguéné 

Taux de changement annuel global 1987 -2019 

La zone agricole de Benguéné a connu une progression annuelle de 0,6 % soit une croissance 

annuelle de 7,14 hectares durant la période 1987 -2018 (

Source : Landsat  

> Figure 4

). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 63 

Ceci est contraire à la végétation naturelle qui régresse d’année en année au profit de la surface 

agricole. La végétation dense régresse annuellement de 0,8 % de sa superficie soit une ré duction 

annuelle de 11,9 hectares. La végétation moins dense a perdu annuellement 0,1 % de sa 

superficie, ce qui équivaut à une régression de 1,1 hectare par an entre 1987 -2018.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 4:Taux de changement annuel global 1987 -2019 à Benguéné

Taux de Changement Global 1987 -2019 

Le taux de changement global montre que la zone agricole de Benguéné a connu une progression 

remarquable (

Figure 5). Elle a augmenté de 71,6 % de sa superficie initiale correspondant à une croissance 

globale de 797,7 hectares durant la période 1987 -2018. Ces évolutions remarquables ont été 

faites sur la végétation naturelle qui se voit diminuer de superficie. La végétation dense a perdue 

globalement 49,4 % de sa superficie initiale soit une régression globale de 724,7 hectares durant 

la période 187 -2018. De même la végétation moins dense a aussi perdu 8,3 % de sa superficie 

soit 86 hectares durant la même période.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 5:Taux de changement global 1987 -2019 à Benguéné
> Statistique de la dynamique de l’occupation du sol à Ziguéna

Taux de Changement Annuel Global 1987 -2019 

La  Figure 6 illustre le changement annuel global. La surface agricole a subi une forte progression 

annuelle de 0,9 % soit une augmenta tion de 15,1 hectares par an durant la période 1987 -2018. 

De même la surface en eau a progressé annuellement de 0,5 % soit une extension de 0,1 

-1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

Agricole 

Végétation dense 

Végétation moins dense 

Pourcentage        

> -60 -40 -20 020 40 60 80
> Agricole
> Végétation dense
> Végétation moins dense

Pourcentage Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 64 

hectares par an. La végétation naturelle quant à elle perd de superficie au détriment des autres 

unités d’occupa tion du sol. La végétation dense régresse de 1,1 % par an soit 31,1 hectares. La 

végétation moins dense a aussi perdu annuellement 0,2 % de sa surface soit une réduction de 

2,5 hectares par an pendant la période 1987 -2018.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 6:Taux de changement annuel global 1987 -2019 à Ziguéna

Taux de changement global 1987 -2019 

Les taux de changements globaux durant la période 1987 -2018 nous montre que la surface 

agricole a augmenté de 104,7 % soit une progression de 1862 hectares (

Figure 7). Suivie de la surface en eau qui a subi une extension de 51,4 % avec une augmentation 

de 14,4 hectares. Ces différentes évolutions ont été faites de façon générale sur la formation 

naturelle. La végétation dense a perdu 60,3 % de sa surface soit 1708,7 hectares. La végétation 

moins dense a globalement perdu 11,9 % de sa superficie soit une réduction de 197,2 hec tares 

durant période d’étude.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 7:Taux de changement global 1987 -2019 à Ziguéna

Modélisation de la Dynamique Spatio -Temporelle de L’occupation du Sol 

Matrice de Transition des Unités de L'occupation du Sol de Benguéné 1998 à 2009 

-2 -1 -1 0 1 1

> Agricole
> Eau
> Végétation dense
> Végétation moins dense

Pourcentage           

> -80 -60 -40 -20 020 40 60 80 100 120

Agricole 

Eau 

Végétation dense 

Végétation moins dense 

Pourcentage Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 65 

Les résultats de la matrice de transition révèlent que 1411,71 hectares de la surface agricole sont 

restés constante avec une stabilité de 74 % et 499,4 hectares ont changés d ’état soit un taux de 

changement de 26 %. Le bâti rural a connu une stabilité de 85 % de sa surface initiale soit 31,02 

hectares contre un changement d’état de 5,48 hectares avec une proportion de 15 %. La 

végétation naturelle a été l’unité la moins instab le durant cette période. La végétation dense a été 

stable à 32 % soit 237,46 hectares contre une variation de 68 % de sa superficie initiale soit 

505,78 hectares. Quant à la végétation elle a été stable à 65 % (616,07 hectares) contre un 

changement d’état de 35 % (337,77 hectares). Cette forte instabilité de la végétation naturelle a 

été faite en faveur de la surface agricole. 

Tableau 1: Probabilité de Transition à Benguéné Entre 2009 -2018 

Unités  Agricole  Bâtis  Bois 

sacré 

Végétation 

dense 

Végétation 

moins 

dense 

Total 

1998 

Agricole  1411,71  16,67  0 373,55  109,27  1911,2 

Bâtis  1,37  31,02  1,37  1,37  1,37  36,5 

Bois sacré  0,04  0,04  0,99  0,04  0,04  1,15 

Végétation 

dense  342,78  0,18  0 237,46  162,82  743,24 

Végétation 

moins dense  105,23  0,37  0 232,1  616,07  953,77 

Total 2009  1861,13  48,28  2,36  844,52  889,57  3645,86  

> Source : Landsat

Matrice de transition des unités de l'occupation du sol de Ziguéna 1998 à 2009 

Les statistiques de la matrice de transition révèlent que la surface agricole a été constant à 74 % 

de sa superficie initiale soit 2689,3 hectares contre un changement d’état de 26 % (950,77 

hectares). Le bâti rural a connu une stabilité de 85 % (33,79 hectares) contre une variation de 15 

% soit 6,16 hectares. La su rface en eau a été moins stable soit 13 % (5,35 hectares) de sa surface 

initiale et une variation importante de 87 % soit 37,06 hectares. La végétation naturelle a été de 

façon générale la moins constante. La végétation dense est restée stable à 32 % (364, 08 

hectares) contre une variation de 68 % (759,93 hectares) de sa surface initiale. La végétation 

moins dense est restée constante à 38 % (547,44 hectares) contre un changement d’état de 62 

% (906,7 hectares). 

Tableau 2:Probabili té de transition à Ziguéna entre 2009 -2018 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 66 

Unités  Agricole  Bâtis  Eau  Végétation 

dense 

Végétation 

moins 

dense 

Total 

1998 

Agricole  2689,3  41,1  2,1  267,09  640,46  3640,07 

Bâtis  6,16  33,79  0 0 0 39,95 

Eau  36,85  0 5,35  0,01  0,2  42,41 

Végétation dense  563,4  0,15  0,01  364,08  196,37  1124,01 

Végétation moins 

dense  624,81  5,53  0 276,37  547,44  1454,15 

Total 2009  3920,5  80,57  7,46  907,55  1384,47  6300,59  

> Source : Landsat
> Bilan de la stabilité de la dynamique d’occupation du sol

Dans les terroirs d’étude spatialement 69 % (2502,2 hectares) de la superficie est resté stable à 

Benguéné contre 40 % (2546,8 hectares) à Ziguéna. Les surfaces en régression sont de 24 % à 

Benguéné soit 887,6 hectares et de 43 % (2714,7 hectares) à Ziguén a. Les zones de 

progressions sont respectivement de 7 % (255,9 hectares) et 16 % (1040 hectares) à Benguéné 

et Ziguéna. De façon générale les zones de régression sont beaucoup plus importantes Ziguéna 

contrairement à Benguéné. Ceci explique une forte réser ve des surfaces agricole à Ziguéna et 

possible saturation des espaces agricoles dans le terroir de Benguéné.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 8: Statistique de la stabilité des unités d'occupation du sol

Simulation de L’occupation du Sol à L’horizon 2028 

Simulation de L’occupation du Sol de Benguéné à L’horizon 2028 

La simulation de l’occupation du sol annonce une forte anthropisation pour un terroir quasiment 

déjà sous l’emprise agricole avec environ 75 % du terroir (Figure 9). La zone agricole connaîtra 

une forte extension de sa superficie initiale de 2018. La surface agricole passera de 1911,32    

> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> Progression Regression Stable
> Hectares
> Benguéné Ziguéna

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 67 

hectares (52,4 %) e n 2018 à 2050,1 hectares (56,2 %) en 2028. La végétation naturelle perdra 

de superficie au profit de la zone agricole. La végétation dense passera de 743,1 hectares (20,4 

%) à 624,8 hectares (17,1 %). La végétation moins dense passera 953,8 hectares (26,2 %) à 

929,1 hectares (25,5 %) durant la même période.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 9: Comparaison de la carte d'occupation du sol de 2018 et la
> carte de prédiction à l'horizon 2028 dans le terroir de Benguéné

Simulation de l’occupation du sol de Ziguéna à l’horizon 2028 

Le bilan global de la simulation de l’occupation du sol prévoie une forte anthropisation de l’espace 

de Ziguéna ( Figure 10 ). En effet la surface agricole connaîtra une hausse considérable de 

superficie dans le futur (2028). La surface agricole passera de 3640,4 hectares en 2018 (57,8 %) 

à 3937,45 hectares (62,5 %) en 2028. Cette évolution de la classe ci -dessus sera faites sur la 

végétation naturelle, qui a son tour diminuera de superficie. La végétation dense passera de 

1123,8 hectares (17,8 %) en 2018 à 906 hectares (14,4 %) en 2028. La végétation moins dense 

passera de 1454 hectares (23,1 %) en 2018 à 1385 hectares (22 %). La surface eau perdra aussi 

de superficie due probablement aux effets futurs de la saisonnalité.   

> Source : Landsat
> Figure 10 : Comparaison de la carte d'occupation du sol de 2018 et la
> carte de prédiction à l'horizon 2028 dans le terroir de Ziguéna

Pression Démographique et Besoins Spécifiques des Populations 

Au Mali comme dans toutes les autres régions d’Afrique subsaharienne, les céréales sèches (mil, 

maïs, sorgho) constituent la bas e des consommations des exploitations agricoles familiales. Les 

besoins en céréale sèche (mil, maïs, sorgho) sont estimés à 139 kg par personne et par an, 

0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 

2028 

2018 

Hectares 

> Années

Agricole Végétation dense Végétation moins dense 

0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 

2028 

2018 

Hectares 

> Années

Agricole Eau Végétation dense Végétation moins dense Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 68 

celles -ci sont complétée par le riz avec un besoins de 79 kg par personne et par an selon les 

statist iques de la FAO ( Figure 11 ). Au total les besoins céréalières estimés par la norme FAO est 

de 214 kg par tête et par an. Comme nous pouvons le constater plus la population croit plus les 

besoins spécifiques de ces céréales augmentent. Les besoins céréaliers constituent un facteur 

important de la dynamique d’occupation du sol dans les systèmes de production peu intensif 

comme celui des sites d’études retenu (Benguéné et Ziguéna).   

> Source : RGPH et FAO
> Figure 11 : Estimation de la variabilité des besoins en céréale selon la norme FAO

Dynamique D’occupation des Terres Agricole et Sécurité Alimentaire 

La dynamique d’occupation des terres agricole (superficies cultivées) du terroir de Benguéné 

varie en fonction des besoins alimentaires (céréales). Elle est la principale stratégie de réalisation 

de l’autosuffisance alimentaire. Cependant cette autosuffisa nce ne pourra pas se faire 

continuellement par le biais des superficies cultivables puisqu’elles s’épuiseront dans un futur 

proche c'est -à-dire à partir de 2028 ( Figure 12 ). Les exploitations agricoles seront contraintes de 

développées d’autres stratégies pour pouvoir assurer autosuffisance céréalière.             

> Source : Landsat, RGPH et FAO
> Figure 12 : Evolution des besoins en céréales et capacité des
> terres agricoles à l'horizon 2038 dans le terroir de Benguéné
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500
> 3000
> 3500
> 0
> 100000
> 200000
> 300000
> 400000
> 500000
> 1976
> 1987
> 1998
> 2018
> 2018
> 2028
> 2038
> 1976
> 1987
> 1998
> 2018
> 2018
> 2028
> 2038
> Benguéné Ziguéna
> Populations
> Tonnes
> Mil-maïs-sorgho Riz Population
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> 500
> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> 4000
> 1987 1998 2009 2018 2028 2038
> Tonne/an
> Hectares
> Années
> Cultivables cultivées Cultivables non cultivées Besoins céréalière

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 69 

Dans le terroir de Ziguéna, la dynamique d’occupation des superficies cultivées est fortement 

dépendante des besoins alimentaires (céréalièr e) (Figure 13 ). Les superficies cultivées 

augmentent en fonction des besoins alimentaires de la population. La disponibilité foncière 

(superficie cultiv ables) de Ziguéna laisse entrevoir une continuité de réalisation de 

l’autosuffisance par l’extension des superficies cultivées jusqu’en 2038. Mais au -delà de cette 

date les superficies cultivables ne seront plus en mesure de couvrir les besoins céréaliers , donc 

les exploitations agricoles seront contraintes de développer d’autres stratégies pour la réalisation 

de la sécurité alimentaire en termes de disponibilité alimentaire.   

> Source : Landsat, RGPH et FAO
> Figure 13 :Evolution des besoins en céréales et capacité des
> terres agricoles à l'horizon 2038 dans le terroir de Ziguéna

Discussion 

Les tendances générales observées au niveau de la dynamique d'occupation du sol dans les 

deux (2) sites (Benguéné et Ziguéna) sur les trois (3) dernières décennies est une forte 

augmentation des superficies agricoles au détriment de la formation végétation, ces résultats sont 

identiques aux travaux effectués par Ballo et al., 2016; F ane, 2015; Ngo et al., 2018 . Les 

résultats de la prédiction de l’état futur de l’occupation du sol (modélisation) révèlent qu'à l'horizon 

futur (2028), pendant que les surfaces agricoles et bâtis s'étendront, les superficies de la 

végétation naturelle connaîtront une forte régressi on. Ces tendances sont observées dans les 

études menées par Dembele, 2019; Oloukoi et Mama, 2006; Sall et al., 2019 . Les résultats de 

cette étude prouvent également que l’amélioration de l’autosuffisance alimentaires (céréalières) 

est le fruit de la dynamique d’ occupation des terres agricole qu’a connue les sites durant les trente 

(30) dernières années, c'est -à-dire une forte augmentation de la superficie cultivée plus que le 

rendement résultant essentiellement de l’augmentation des besoins céréalières et qui res te la 

principale stratégie d’autosuffisance. Cette tendance est conforme avec celui de Ballo et al., 

2016) , qui affirme que l’augmentation de la population est fortement corrélée avec la production 

et aussi avec la superficie cultivée, tandis qu’elle est en faible corrélation avec le rendement par 

hectare.        

> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 0
> 2000
> 4000
> 6000
> 8000
> 1987 1998 2009 2018 2028 2038
> Tonne/an
> Hectares
> Années
> Cultivables cultivées Cultivables non cultivées Besoins céréalière

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 70 

Conclusion 

L’étude a permis de mettre en exergue des éléments de réponses à des facteurs liés à la 

dynamique d’occupation du sol et de la stratégie de réalisation de la sécurité alimentaire dans un 

contexte de forte croissance démographique. Deux principaux types de données ont été utilisés, 

il s’agit des images Landsat et des données du RGPH. Les dynamiques d’occupation du sol 

passées se sont faites principalement au profit des surfaces agricoles, résultant essentiellement 

de l’augmentation des besoins alimentaires. La principale stratégie constatée pour assurer 

l’autosuffisance alimentaire soulève des questions quant à la vulnérabilité future des exploitations 

agricole face au risque de l’insécurité alimentaire puisque l’accroissement de la production ne 

pourra pas se faire éternellement par l’augmentation des surfaces. Les résultats de ces analyses 

montrent à quel point les pratiques actuelles compromettent les défis d’atteinte des ODD. Les 

résultats de cette étude nous a permis de dégager des pistes de solution fac e à la vulnérabilité 

future des exploitations agricoles au risque de déficit céréalières, il s’agit donc : d’intensifier 

l’agriculture pour booster les rendements des cultures ; d’orienté le maximum de producteur vers 

d’autres activités génératrices de rev enu différent de l’agriculture et de diminuer le taux de 

croissance démographique par la planification familiale afin de réduire la pression sur les 

ressources naturelles. 

Références Bibliographiques 

Ballo, A. et al. (2016) ‘Pressions Anthropiques Et Dynamique D’occupation Des Terres Dans 

Le Terroir De Ziguéna, Zone Cotonnière Du Mali’, European Scientific Journal, ESJ, 

12(5), p. 90. doi:10.19044/esj.2016.v12n5p90. 

Blanchard, M ., 2010. Gestion de la fertilité des sols et rôle du troupeau dans les systèmes 

coton -céréales -élevage au Mali -Sud : savoirs techniques locaux et pratiques 

d’intégration agriculture élevage p303. 

Coulibaly, M., 2017. Accaparement des terres et sécurité alimentaire au Mali p28. 

CSA (2005) Analyse de la sécurité alimentaire et de la vulnérabilité (CFSVA). Bamako: 

Commissariat à la Sécurité Alimentaire (CSA), p. 95. 

Cuny, P. and Sorg, J. -P. (2003) ‘Forêt et coton au sud du Mali : cas de la commune rural e de 

Sorobasso | BOIS & FORETS DES TROPIQUES’, p. 15. 

Dembele, A.B., 2019. detection des zones a potentiel agricole dans la commune rurale de 

bougaribaya p99. 

Dembélé, N.N. and Staatz, J.M. (2010) Sécurité alimentaire en Afrique de l’Ouest : Enjeux et 

Eléments Stratégique pour sa Réalisation. Bamako: MSU, p. 26. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 71 

Dewbre, J., Battisti, A.B. de, 2008. Progrès agricole au Cameroun, au Ghana et au Mali: 

Comprendre les causes et maintenir la dynamique. OCDE. 

Droy, I., Bélières, J. -F., Bidou, J.E., 2012. Entre Crise et Rebond: Questions Autour de la 

Durabilité des Systèmes de Production Cotonniers au Mali. Eur J Dev Res 24, 491 –

508. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejdr.2012.12 

Egg, J. and Wade, I. (2006) ‘Bilan et perspectives des cultures vivrières dans les p ays du 

Sahel’, Oléagineux, Corps gras, Lipides, 13(4), pp. 285 –291. 

doi:10.1051/ocl.2006.0040. 

Fagaye, S., Doubangolo, C., Ousmane, C., Patrick, D., 2013. Évaluation de l’arrière effet de 

la culture du coton sur la production céréalière en zone cotonni ère du Mali p17. 

Fane, S. (2015) ‘Dynamique spatiale des ressources naturelles exploitées dans la commune 

rurale de wateni (cercle de Sikasso au mali)’, p. 21. 

Gautier, D., Gazull, L. and Belières, J. -F. (2007) ‘Note de cadrage Mali’, p. 47. 

Hamidou, A., Boubé, M., Ali, M., Mahamane, S., 2012. Caractérisation de la dynamique spatio -

temporelle de l’occupation des terres dans le complexe des forêts de classées de Dan 

kada Dodo - Dan Gado (région de Maradi, Niger) p11. 

Hitimana, L. et al. (2008) ‘Profil sécurité alimentaire du Mali’, CSAO -CILSS, p. 26. 

Institut d’Économie Rurale (2020) Adaptation de l’Agriculture et de l’Élevage au 

Changement Climatique au Mali -Résultats et leçons apprises au Sahel. Bamako: 

Institut d’Économie Rurale (I ER), p. 26. 

Issiaka, N.T., Arouna, O. and Imorou, I.T. (2016) ‘Cartographie De La Dynamique Spatio -

Temporelle Des Parcours Naturels Des Troupeaux Transhumants Dans Les 

Communes De Banikoara Et De Karimama Au Benin (Afrique De L’ouest)’, European 

Scient ific Journal, ESJ, 12(32), p. 251. doi:10.19044/esj.2016.v12n32p251. 

Kpedenou, K.D., Drabo, O., Ouoba, A.P., Da, D.C.E., Tchamie, T.T.K., 2017. analyse de 

l’occupation du sol pour le suivi de l’evolution du paysage du territoire ouatchi au sud -

est togo entre 1958 et 2015. Cahiers du cerleshs XXXI, 203 –228. 

Mamane, B. et al. (2018) ‘Dynamique spatio -temporelle d’occupation du sol dans la Réserve 

Totale de Faune de Tamou dans un contexte de la variabilité climatique (Ouest du 

Niger)’, International Jour nal of Biological and Chemical Sciences, 12(4), p. 1667. 

doi:10.4314/ijbcs.v12i4.13. 

Mamy, S., Sidiki, T., 2019. Atlas des zones cotonnières du Mali. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 72 

MDRE, 2004. strategie nationale de securite alimentaire au mali. ministere du 

developpement rural et d e l’environnement. 

Ngo Makak, R., Sanou, P., Toure, I., Tchindjang, M., Makak J., S., 2018.  Analyse 

Diachronique De L’Occupation Des Terres Pour La Conception D’Une Base De 

Données Géo -Référencées De Suivi Des Dynamiques Territoriales Dans La 

Commune Rurale De Koumbia Au Burkina Faso. 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1215893 

Oloukoi, J., Mama, V.J., 2006. modélisation de la dynamique de l’occupation des terres dans 

le département des collines au bénin 6, 20. 

Sall, A. et al. (2019) ‘Contribution à l’é tude de la vulnérabilité des terres de cultures de la 

région de Thiès (Sénégal) à l’aide de la télédétection et des systèmes d’information 

géographique (SIG)’, Journal of Animal & Plant Sciences, pp. 6731 –6746. 

doi:10.35759/JAnmPlSci.v41 -1.1. 

Sanogo, Z .J. -L. (2017) ‘etat des lieux et facteurs -cles pour un meilleur acces des producteurs 

maliens a la mecanisation’, p. 15. 

Soro, G., Ahoussi, E.K., Kouadio, E.K., Soro, T.D., Oulare, S., Saley, M.B., Soro, N., 2014. 

Apport de la télédétection à la cartographie de l’évolution spatio -temporelle de la 

dynamique de l’occupation du sol dans la région des Lacs (Centre de la Côte d ’Ivoire) 

15. 

Souley Yero, K., 2008. L’évolution de l’occupation des sols à l’échelle des bassins versants 

de Wankama et Tondi Kiboro : Quelles conséquences sur les débits et 

l’évapotranspiration réelle (ETR) (DEA). Universite Abdou Moumouni De Niamey 

Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines, Niger. 

Thierry, A. et al. (2018) ‘Modelisation Des Changements D’occupation Des Terres En Region 

Soudanienne Au Nord -Ouest Du Benin’, European Scientific Journal, ESJ, 14(12), p. 

248. doi:10.19044/esj.2018.v14n1 2p248. 

Valenghi, D., Guenat, D., 2001. Coton biologique au Mali Document de programme. 

Zakari, S. et al. (2018) ‘Application De La Télédétection Et Du Sig Au Suivi Des Formati ons 

Végétales De La Forêt Classée Des Trois Rivières Au Nord -Est Du Bénin’, European 

Scientific Journal, ESJ, 14(15), p. 450. doi:10.19044/esj.2018.v14n15p450. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 73 

# Assessment of Sustainable Food Systems in Mountain Regions 

# of India Through Climate Smart Agriculture 

# During Covid -19 Pandemic: The Case Study of AI for Rural 

Priyanka Prem Kumar, Ankur Rangi, and Anirban Roy (AI for Rural, India) 

Abstract 

The Sustain able Development Goal (SDG) 2.4 states that “By 2030, ensure sustainable food 

production and resilient agricultural practices.” As per the Food and Agriculture Organization of 

the United Nations FAO -UN (2018): one in every three mountain people in developi ng countries 

are vulnerable to food insecurity. The largest source of livelihood in India is Agriculture and about 

70 percent of its rural households still depend on it. Indian mountain agriculture has always been 

tagged with some basic limitations includi ng remoteness, inaccessibility, marginality, and 

vulnerability (FAO, 2019). Farming in hilly areas is mostly rain -dependent and faces several 

constraints such as irrigation facilities, climatic limitations, infrastructure restrictions. management 

limitatio ns and socio -economic restraints have impacted Indian agrarian society and resurfaced 

bottlenecks in current farming practices, particularly in vulnerable regions. 

To meet the needs of current and future generations, it is critical to accelerate implementation 

and track the development of sustainable food systems so that we can improve the livelihoods of 

marginal households in the rural and mountain regions. In this research paper, we will be doing 

extensive research on how Climate -Smar t Agriculture (CSA) will help farming systems achieve 

increased productivity and build resilient frameworks to tackle climate change. We also intend to 

investigate the erratic effects of climate change, i.e., droughts, irregular rainfall, and create 

pathwa ys for better infrastructure. Finally, we will also examine how the digital solutions, through 

gamification, assist farmers in making informed crop selection decisions and reducing 

Greenhouse emissions. 

Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Sustainable Food Systems, Climate Smart Agriculture, 

Sustainable Mountain Development, Public and Private Partnerships. 

Acronyms 

SOFI………………The State of Food Security and Nutrition 

SDG………………Sustainable Development Goal 

IFAD………… ……International Fund of Agriculture Development 

UNICEF………………United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 74 

WFP………………World Food Program 

WHO………………World Health Organization 

PoU………………Prevalence of Undernourishment 

FAO………………Food and Agriculture Organization 

UN………………United Nations 

UNEP -WCMC………………UN Environment Program World Conservation Monitoring Centre 

LER………………Land Equivalent Ratio 

GHG………………Greenhouse Gas 

CGIAR………………Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 

AI… ……………Artificial Intelligence 

IoT………………Internet of Things 

NITI………………National Institution for Transforming India 

IBM………………International Business Machines 

ICAR………………The Indian Council of Agricultural Research 

IARI………………Indian Agricultural Research Instit ute 

ML………………Machine Learning 

UAV………………Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 

DL………………Deep Learning 

CSA………………Climate -Smart Agriculture 

SOC………………Soil Organic Carbon 

SAARC………………South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 

FS………………Food Systems Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 75 

FGD………………Focus Group Discussion 

ICIMOD………………The International Center for Integrated Mountain Development 

RMS………………Resilient Mountain Solutions 

SAPS………………Sustainable Agriculture Practices and System 

FOCUS………………Fostering Climate Resilient Upland Farming Systems 

MoA&FW………………Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer’ Welfare 

GoI………………Government of India 

MAFAP………………Monitoring and Analyzing Food and Agricultural Policies 

AIR………………AI for Rural 

GPS………………Global Positioning System 

OECD………………Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development 

CSE………………Consumer Support Estimate 

PSE………………Producer Support Estimate 

C-D Ratio………………Credit -Deposit Ratio 

RIDF………………Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 

RBI………………Reserve Bank of India 

KCC………………Kisan Credit Card 

PM -KISAN………………Pradhan Mantri -Kisan Samman Nidhi 

NPJSY………………Neelambar Pitambar Jal Sammridhi Yojana 

PMGSY………………Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 

e-Nam………………Electronic Unified Agricultural Markets 

AIF………………Agriculture Infrastructure Fund Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 76 

PPPs………………Public -Private Partnerships 

CO2………………Carbon Dioxide 

FPO………………Farmers Producer Organization 

VC………………Value Chain 

Introduction 

Purpose 

Six years ago, we were positive that with transformative methods, the Sustainable Development 

Goal 2 (SDG 2) i.e., ending hunger, food insecurity, and all forms of malnutrition would be ended 

by 2030. In the past four publications of The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the world 

(SOFI), FAO exposed that the worl d has not been progressing either towards ensuring access to 

safe, nutritious, and sufficient food for all people (SDG target 2.1) or in the direction of eradicating 

all forms of malnutrition (SDG target 2.2) ( FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO, 2021) . Confli ct, 

climate variability, extremes, economic slowdowns, downturns, and the Covid -19 pandemic are 

the major reasons which are making the pathway towards SDG 2 even steeper.  

> Figure 1: The number of undernourished people in the world continued to rise in 2020

Under the Covid -19 pandemic, the number of people affected by hunger in the world increased 

abruptly in 2020. After remaining quite unchanged from 2014 to 2019, the Prevalence of 

Undernourishment (PoU) climbed to 9.9 percent in 2020 as shown in Figur e 1. It is estimated 

around 660 million may still face hunger in 2030 i.e., 30 million more people, had the pandemic Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 77 

not occurred. There is an increase of 320 million in just one year i.e., one in three people in the 

world did not have access to adequate food in 2020 as shown in figure 2. 

> Figure 2: Moderate or severe food insecurity has been climbing slowly for six years

According to the study done by FAO, mountain ecosystems are becoming increasingly fragile and 

degraded, under the pressure from c hanges to land use and climate, overexploitation, and other 

factors that threaten living and food security. Around 275 million rural people vulnerable to food 

insecurity are estimated to live in mountain areas globally. The Mountain partnership founded in 

2002, addresses the challenges facing mountain regions by tapping the wealth and diversity of 

resources, knowledge, information, and expertise, in order to stimulate concrete initiatives at all 

levels that will ensure improved quality of life and environme nts in the world’s mountain regions 

(FAO, Mountain Partnership). India is also one among the alliance of partners dedicated to 

improving the lives of mountain peoples. The standard mountain definition within the UN is the 

UNEP - WCMC definition to represent the world’s mountain environments (Valerie et al., 2000) 

which is based on altitude and slope which indicates six elevation classes according to the 

following scheme:  

> ●

Class 1: elevation ≥ 4 500 m  

> ●

Class 2: elevation 3 500 –4 500 m  

> ●

Class 3: elevation 2 500 –3 500 m  

> ●

Class 4: elevation 1 500 –2 500 m and slope ≥ 2°  

> ●

Class 5: elevation 1 000 –1 500 m and slope ≥ 5° or LER > 300 m  

> ●

Class 6: elevation 300 –1 000 m and LER > 300 m Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 78 

India has seven major mountain ranges: 1. The Himalayas, 2. Purvanchal range (extension of the 

Himalayas in the northeast of India), 3. Satpura and Vindhya ranges (Central India, Madhya 

Pradesh to Maharashtra), 4. Aravalli range (Rajasthan to Haryana), 5. Western Ghats (Gujrat to 

Southern tip of India), 6. Eastern Ghats (from West Bengal to Tamil Nadu). The Indian Himalayan 

region is 53.8 million hectares and is a shelter to 34 million people who are majorly hill farming 

communities that survive on liveliho od farming on the insignificant rainfall. Agriculture is the 

primary sector of the Indian Himalayas contributing 45 percent to the total regional income of the 

inhabitants. However, more than 90 percent of the farmers in the hill and mountain areas are 

mar ginal, cultivating less than one hectare of land (Tej, 1995; Tej, 1999). 

In terms of moisture stress, poor soil conditions, and short growing seasons, Indian agriculture 

faces several constraints as irrigation facilities are barely sufficient, despite h aving access to 

sufficient water resources (FAO, 2019). Moving on, there are socio -economic limitations such as 

smallholdings, ignorance of farmers regarding techniques, poor productivity, pre - and post -

production management, marketing networks, labor shor tages, and lack of entrepreneurship. 

Furthermore, climatic limitations include high rainfall and humidity, low temperatures during 

winter, low light intensity and radiation, floods, and seasonal drought. Moreover, infrastructure 

restrictions include the la ck of road, transport, and communication facilities, lack of post -harvest 

facilities, and marketing. Adding to that there are management limitations such as extension gaps, 

poor motivation, awareness, lack of farmer incentives, non -assurance of the minimum price, lack 

of availability of inputs, lack of credit facilities, and ineffective coordination between various 

departments connected with agricultural development. 

> Figure 3: Mountain Agricultural System

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 79 

Covid -19 has amplified the vulnerabilities o f mountain communities that depend on agriculture for 

survival as shown in figure 3 above. One in each two rural mountain individuals in underdeveloped 

nations need more food to carry on with a sound life and they are presently managing the effect 

of the C ovid -19 pandemic (FAO and UNCCD, 2020). This study indicates the vulnerability of 

people especially the smallholders to climate change, food insecurity, and malnutrition in 

mountain areas. Thus, there is a need for policies to improve the resilience of mou ntain 

ecosystems. 

Literature Review 

Climate Crisis – the increased frequency of extreme weather events such as droughts, floods, 

and storms are the most challenging issue of our age. Akshit and Raju (2022) mention in their 

article that less snow, high temperatures have upturned lives in the Himalayan cold desert and 

also how the changing precipitation has impacted farming. Shagun (2021) mentions in her article 

that the climate crisis has cost India 5 million hectares of crops in 2021 to the cyclonic storm, flash 

floods, floods, landslides, an d cloudbursts. In another article, Richard (2022) said that 

unfavorable, unreliable weather hurt agriculture is pushing food prices out of reach across the 

world. Ram (2021) speaks about the pressures of cultivating tomato off -season and changing 

climate t hat is making life difficult for Chittoor’s (Andhra Pradesh state) farmers as they were 

reluctant to take up tomato cultivation. A report on "Natural change impacts on Agriculture in India 

'' (n.d.) states the impact of environmental change on agribusiness could achieve issues with food 

security and how it could affect a huge piece of the general population. This is also backed up by 

Anubhab and Kavi (2019) in their papers as well. Another report by Current Science (2016), said 

that assessing vulnerability to climate change and variability is an important first step in evolving 

appropriate adaptation strategies to changing climate. Hulya et al., (2021) wrote in their article 

that the structural aspects of climate vulnerabilities in the context of monsoon fai lure and how it 

impacts the already disadvantaged marginal landholders, subsistence farmers, and agricultural 

workers in rural parts of Tamil Nadu state. 

Policies - Climate change alters the agriculture production conditions and food security, increasing 

the frequency and depth of risk to agricultural production and incomes. A report by FAO (2016) 

mentions policy -makers who need assistance in identifying risk management options in the 

agricultural sector that allow them to effectively respond to the climat e risks they face while 

maintaining and enhancing agricultural policy objectives and adopting climate -smart agriculture. 

One more article by  CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change  (2016), seeks to bridge the 

gap between what policymakers already know, and what can work on the grassroots level to 

improve adaptation, increase productivity, improve li velihoods, and makeup to sustainable 

development affected by climate change. According to Pritha and Bhagirath (2022), sustainable 

adaptive capacity -driven policy initiatives to enable efficient adaptation and agrarian welfare are 

of paramount importance i n the Eastern Himalayan foothills of West Bengal, India. 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Agriculture - AI is a creative tool that simulates human intelligence and 

ability processes by machines, principally computer systems, robotics, and digital equipment. AI Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 80 

helps scientists in building robust systems to learn from weather conditions, sense all the data, 

and analyze them to propose effective solutions for the farmers. Srinivasarao et al., (2020) 

recommend integrating IoT and AI technologies and using the data that is collected from sensors 

in the field about so il moisture, weather conditions, fertilization levels, irrigation system, soil 

composition, and temperature will help in increasing crop production. In an article by Rayda and 

Mohsen (2021) suggest the importance of AI and ML (Machine Learning) as a predi ctive 

multidisciplinary approach to improve the food and agriculture sector. Karim et al., (2021) found 

that the usage of AI and remote sensing as efficient devices to increase agricultural system yields 

has improved crop production as well as enhanced ins tantaneous monitoring, processing, and 

collection. A Tokyo report on ‘AI in agriculture for tackling Social and Environmental changes’, 

(2019) talks about how digitization can be used to transform the current agri -food system in order 

to face today’s clima te and challenges with digital and precision agriculture. Parul (2020) in his 

article, speaks about the initiatives adopted by the Ministry of Agriculture in India highlighting how 

AI is bridging the gap between conventional agricultural practices and sust ainable farming 

methodology. The government's policy think -tank National Institution for Transforming India (NITI) 

Aayog decided to partner with leading technology company IBM to develop a crop yield prediction 

model using AI to provide real -time advisory to farmers, according to a newspaper article in the 

Economic Times titled 'NITI Aayog ropes in IBM to use AI in Agriculture' (2018). In another 

newspaper article in India Today, Neetu (2016) mentions that the ICAR through the Indian 

Agricultural Research I nstitute (IARI) is developing an indigenous prototype for drone -based crop 

and soil health monitoring systems that could benefit the farmers abundantly. Thomas et al., 

(2020) conducted a study testing the effectiveness of various ML algorithms and how it i s an 

important decision support tool for crop yield prediction, including supporting decisions on what 

crops to grow and what is to be done during the growing season of the crops by using the input 

features of temperature, rainfall, and soil type. In their book, Parvinder and Amandeep (2022) 

claim that AI techniques are helping in increasing yield and overcoming limitations, like global 

warming, excessive use of fertilizers, limited availability of natural resources, plant disease, and 

water scarcity. Subee sh and Mehta (2022), found that IoT and AI -based systems are capable of 

enhancing input use efficiency on the farm and smart farming leverages digital technologies to 

automate agricultural operations in real -time. Elsayed et al., (2021) in an Egyptian jour nal of 

remote sensing and space science, illustrate the use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and 

robots in real -time harvesting, seedling, weed detection, irrigation, spraying of agricultural pests, 

livestock applications, and other applications using Io T, AI, Deep Learning (DL), ML, and wireless 

communications. A blog in Equinox’s drones ‘Importance of drone technology in Indian 

agriculture, farming’ (2019 -20) speaks about the usage of  agricultu re  drones and how it 

empowers the farmer to adapt to specific environments and make mindful choices accordingly. 

Rahul et al., (2020) discusses how AI can improve Indian Agriculture by providing accurate and 

timely infor mation regarding crops, land, weather, insect, pest, etc. to the farmers; therefore, 

improving crop productivity. 

Climate -smart agriculture (CSA) - CSA as defined and presented by FAO (2013) at the Hague 

Conference on Agriculture, Food Security, and Clima te Change in 2010, contributes to the 

achievement of sustainable development goals. It integrates the three dimensions of sustainable 

development (economic, social, and environmental) by addressing food security and climate Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 81 

challenges. According to FAO, C SA is composed of three main pillars: 1. sustainably increasing 

agricultural productivity and incomes; 2. adapting and building resilience to climate change; 3. 

reducing and removing greenhouse gas emissions. The article ‘Climate -smart agriculture: an 

answ er to climate change’ (2016) clearly suggests that sustainably increasing agricultural 

production, adap ting to climate change, and reducing emissions are the vital steps for adopting 

CSA. A study conducted by Juliet et al., (2021) gives insights into the C limate Change scenario 

in the mountain ranges of the Aravalli district (in Gujrat state) and its impacts on smallholder 

farmers, the adoption of CSA practices and their challenges, and current policy options and 

programs. The paper published by Srinivasa e t al., (2019) also aims at identifying indicators for 

measuring climate -resilient agriculture in the  Indian  subcontin ent including the Himalayan 

mountains and developing a conceptual framework for location -specific policy interventions. 

Alireza and Ricardo (2020), mention how ML and gamification can be combined and how they 

can be used in behavioral change efforts by ada pting the gamification context and optimizing the 

gamification tasks in a non -game context. 

Contributions of FAO & ICIMOD to Indian Food Systems 

Food systems (FS) as defined by FAO, encloses the entire range of associated people and their 

value -added activities involved in the production, aggregation, distribution, consumption, and 

disposal of food products that emerge from agriculture, forestry or fisheries, and parts of the 

broader economic, societal and natural environments in which they are rooted (FAO, 2018). A 

sustainable food system (SFS) is an FS that delivers food security and nutrition for all so that the 

economic, social, and environmenta l bases to generate food security and nutrition for future 

generations are not compromised. 

The SDGs of the United Nations revolve around a sustainable food system. To achieve a 

sustainable food system, the global food system needs to be updated to be mo re productive, 

including all poor and marginalized populations, environmentally sustainable and resilient, and be 

able to deliver healthy and nutritious diets to all. Encouraging policymakers to see the bigger 

picture will also help assist multi -stakeholde r collaboration and policy alignment at different levels 

of the FS to address the challenges. 

Food systems have the potential to deliver inexpensive, sustainable, and inclusive healthy diets, 

as well as become a powerful force in the fight against hunger, food insecurity, and malnutrition. 

Climate change is already affecting food security through increasing temperatures and changing 

precipitation patterns and is predicted to be increasingly affected by projected future climate 

change. About 20 -35% of total Greenhouse Gas (GHG) is due to the food systems. In 2018, India 

produced 2,299 million tons of carbon dioxide (CO2). The majority of agricultural GHG emissions 

occur during the primary production stage, when agricultural inputs, farm machinery, residue 

ma nagement, and irrigation are produced. Supply -side practices also contribute to climate change 

through crop and livestock emissions, carbon in soil and biomass, and increasing emission 

intensity in production systems as shown in Figure 4. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 82  

> Figure 4: Interlinkages between the climate system, food system, and socio -economic system

ICIMOD (The International Center for Integrated Mountain Development) focuses on adaptation 

to change to overcome the impacts on farming systems, high -value agriculture produ cts, and 

related value chains for increasing the income of the poor farmers through agriculture and rural 

enterprises. ICIMOD is contributing to the farming systems’ knowledge development, action 

research for interventions, capacity building, piloting, and providing inputs to policy processes for 

improving livelihood for mountain farmers. 

Under the regional program of adaptation and resilience building, ICIMOD works with HKH region 

mountain communities to adapt and transform major changes and face persiste nt problems that 

exist (Summary of the Hindukush Himalaya, 2019). ICIMOD has adopted is Resilient Mountain 

Solutions (RMS), an integrated approach to sustainable mountain development (SMD), focusing 

on climate change, adaptation, resilience, and preparedne ss for mountain risks (ICIMOD 

Adaptation and Resilience Building - RMS, n.d.). According to the annual report 2020 (ICIMOD 

Annual Report, 2020), ICIMOD has demonstrated its resilience and adaptability, focusing our 

work on the uniqueness of the pandemic im pacts on the people and environments in the HKH 

mountains especially in the Koshi basin (‘The Future of the Koshi Basin’, n.d.). 

ICIMOD has conducted a workshop with the objective of this training to develop participants’ 

understanding of the issues of c limate change, adaptation, inclusive value chains, and resilience -

building in the agriculture sector (‘Regional Training on Building Resilient Agriculture: Solution 

Packages for Farming Communities’, 2019). Regional conference (‘Regional Conference on 

Moun tain Agriculture, with Focus on Ecosystem Services, Agri -Extension, and Market Linkages’, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 83 

2017) focuses on improving mountain livelihoods was an outreach event that resulted in the 

uptake of knowledge in policy and practice initiatives related to mountain agriculture and also in 

higher education, training, and research. 

FAO aims to help policymakers, administrators, and philanthropists to represent an important 

alternative to conventional input -intensive agriculture in the context of constraints from cli mate 

(Shanal et al., 2021). FAO also addresses the fact that the Indigenous Peoples’ FS involves the 

totality of human agencies (knowledge, strategies, techniques, values, sharing) for the production, 

generation, utilization, access, availability, stabilit y, and management of food that are nutritious, 

culturally and spiritually fulfilling, and sustainable for future generations (The White/Wiphala Paper 

on Indigenous Peoples’ food systems, FAO 2021). 

FAO’s operations in India began in the year 1948 (FAO in India, FAO n.d.). The Strategic 

Objectives through their alignment into Regional Initiatives and Regional Priorities in India which 

will be governed by FAO’s support are:  

> ●

Farm earnings have increased as a result of sustainable and improved agricultural 

productivity.  

> ●

Stronger food and nutrition security systems.  

> ●

Enhanced social inclusion, improved skills, and employment opportunity in the agriculture 

sector 

The NITI Aayog, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (MoA&FW ) with FAO have 

launched the book titled ‘Indian Agriculture Towards 2030: Pathways for Enhancing Farmers’ 

Income, Nutritional Security and Sustainable Food and Farm Systems’. A National Conference in 

January 2021 aimed to address how the Green Revolution transformed India from a food -deficit 

nation to a food -surplus, export -oriented country and how the country now is facing second -

generation problems, especially related to sustainability, nutrition, the adoption of new agricultural 

technologies, and income levels of the population dependent on farming (“INDIAN 

AGRICULTURE TOWARDS 2030: Pathways for Enhancing Farmers’ Income, Nutritional Security 

and Sustainable Food Systems”, FAO 2021). 

FAO has also contributed to the project in 2018, which was about ‘Str engthening Institutional 

Capacities for SMD in the Indian Himalayan Region (Indian Himalayan Region)’ (FAO in India, 

FAO project list). Another Project ‘Implementing the Monitoring and Analyzing Food and 

Agricultural Policies (MAFAP) Program in India’ was undertaken under the FAO support in 2019. 

The Indian government and the private sector are joining hands to create climate -resilient villages 

and are now taking into account that the long -standing policies for agriculture inputs (power and 

fertilizers) an d price support are imposing significant damage on the environment. If this continues 

to grow without mitigation through the right policies and corrective measures, this issue will be a Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 84 

big challenge in the years to come especially in the over -exploited a reas which are mostly rural 

and mountainous parts. 

Jharkhand and their Adaptation Strategies 

The FGDs (focus group discussions) to examine the perception regarding climate change data 

revealed that the Sauria Paharia community (Suparna et al., 2021), a vulnerable indigenous 

mountainous community (they are smallholder farmers facing food and nutrition insecurity and 

have limited resources to cope with climate change) attributed local climatic variability in the form 

of low and erratic rainfall with long d ry spells, very less crop productivity, diversity and food 

obtainable from the forests and water bodies. The major reason reported for the reduced 

household income was declining agroforestry -produce which led to a shift from livelihood 

agricultural economy to migratory unskilled wage laboring which in turn led to household food 

insecurity. 

Dr. R. K. Singh, Additional Director General (Food & Fodder Crops) of ICAR said that the next 

green revolution will come from the country's eastern region and Jharkhand with its rich 

biodiversity will play an important role on this front (‘Jharkhand to play a key role in next green 

revolution: Experts’, 2018) . The state is part of agro -climatic zone VII, which includes the Eastern 

Plateau and Hilly region, and is divided into three subzones: IV. Central and North -Eastern 

Plateau, V. Eastern Plateau, and VI. South -Eastern Plateau. The Sauria Paharia people are a 

Dravidian ethnic people of the Indian state of Jharkhand. They are found mostly in the Santhal 

Parganas (one of the divisions of Jharkhand) region in the Rajmahal Hills. 

> Figure 5: Agroclimatic zones of Jharkhand

The adaptation strategies during adverse situations adopted by the Sauria Paharia community to 

cope with climate variability included the use of climate -resilient indigenous crop varieties for Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 85 

farming, seed conservation, and availability of indigenous forest foods and weeds for consumption 

(Suparna et al., 2021). Promoting sustainable adaptation strategies, with adequate knowledge 

and technology, have the potential to improve farm resilience, income, household food security, 

and dietary diversity in this population and can be scaled to other mountainous regions in India 

as well. 

> Figure 6: Sustainability in Food systems

In order to achieve SFS and educate the farmers, the development has to take place 

simultaneously in social, economic and environmental dimensions. The FS is considered 

sustainable economically if the activities co nducted by the support system provider are economic 

value -added for all categories of stakeholders say food supply improvements for consumers etc. 

Under the social dimension, FS is considered sustainable when there is equity in the distribution 

of economic value -added i.e., amongst the vulnerable groups, especially in the category of 

gender, age, and race living in mountainous regions. FS is considered environmentally 

sustainable by ensuring that the FS activities do have a positive impact on the surroundin g

environment, say biodiversity, water, soil, etc., (FAO, 2014) as explained in Figure 6. 

This paper’s proposed method will be using AI in the food system development paradigm and 

thus will ultimately increase proficiency, helps farmers of all communities to be benefitted and 

help the mountainous communities thrive to ‘produce more from less’, and meet the challenges 

in food systems, India needs the right mix of policies, motivate the private sectors to build more 

effective value chains, agricultural diver sification towards more nutritious food, and the catalytic 

factor of increasing digitization, IoT and AI will help to build sustainability in FS. 

AIR is researching and looking into digital farming using AI. These technologies provide precise 

location vi a Global Positioning System (GPS) and record the data which is then useful for 

forecasting, forewarning, and taking control measures when there are occurrences of natural Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 86 

disasters. Moreover, we are looking into intelligence in predictive modeling for eff ective disease 

or pest management and also investing in capacity building to encourage the wider adoption of 

new and existing technologies among smallholder farmers to empower and educate them. In the 

near future, we are also thinking of research and devel opment of much more protected practices 

like soilless farming systems, polyhouse farming, and vertical farming systems. 

We are proposing in this paper that for agriculture to be a long -term sustainable activity it has to 

go hand in hand with farm incomes and farmer prosperity. Thus, adapting the Carbon capture 

models to reduce carbon emissions could be a great opportunity for these rural farmers as these 

models are already in place in the USA and South America (World Bank, 2012). As far as climate 

change is concerned, our research on adaptation through the use of climate -resilient seeds is 

making significant changes. Value chain development and marketing platforms that link farms to 

agricultural output markets play a critical and essential role in determin ing prices and incentives 

for the farmers. 

We also believe that working towards marketing reforms also needs to be promoted and funded 

i.e., for the creation of assaying, sorting, and grading infrastructure at the mandis. This will be 

helpful to reduce t he difference in the quality of produce from mandi to the mandi, and also 

encourage retailers and processors to purchase through e -NAM. Digitalization of value chains 

and making use of digital platforms will open up more opportunities for well -organized ma rketing 

with low market risks, which will be beneficial for both the farmers as well as consumers. 

Investments in food processing and value addition and also linking the processing with retailing 

in an organized manner can be used to build efficient and me thodical value chains. Investment in 

solar -powered cold storage will reduce the costs as well as losses of agricultural produce, 

particularly perishable food products, and this also improves the storage quality. Public -Private 

Partnerships (PPP) in the sup ply chain will also help reduce the market risk for farmers and 

improve price awareness among them. 

This paper discusses some of the indigenous farming knowledge as collected through a survey 

undertaken by one of the AIR team members. The outcome of the survey that we carried out is 

related to the land preparation/manuring/soil treatment, cropping system, input management, 

water resource management, and soil, water conservation practices, and is beneficial in making 

farming practices sustainable aroun d the globe:  

> ●

Land preparation for direct -seeded rice after broadcasting is done by using powdered 

manures mixed with soil and planking. This helps in the mineralization and water holding 

capacity of the soil.  

> ●

Applying a crop rotating system gives good y ield without much dependency on irrigation. 

Rotation cropping systems provide high tolerance to environmental stress and high 

biomass productivity. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 87  

> ●

Input management practices such as composting are done by applying karanji cakes. 

Waterlogging, Planking, leveling, deep -summer plowing, and the application of karanji 

cakes help in keeping the land weed -free, controlling pests and termite attacks.  

> ●

Water resource management is better done by the construction of Doba structure which 

is a small rainwater harvesting structure and it is helpful in reducing evaporation and 

providing irrigation.  

> ●

Earthen and stone bunding is useful for the conservation of soil, water, and nutrients and 

also in the safe storage and sequestration of ex cess water.  

> ●

Crop mulching helps in the conservation of soil moisture during high air temperatures and 

keeps the soil cool. 

This research clearly shows that indigenous people and their knowledge are central to the 

adaptive changes using available natural resources essential and to face the world’s climate 

change. However, to ensure scientifically credible results merged with traditional knowledge and 

building capacity, monitoring of the natural resource from time to time is also vital and that is 

where AI can step in. 

AI Solutions for Agriculture 

Downpour sustained rice is the principal crop covering 68 percent of Jharkhand. Environmental 

changes in temperatures, precipitation, barometric carbon dioxide, etc will make rice less 

nutritious and the yield will also be low. GHG can impact the rice yiel d efficiency as climatic CO2 -

prompted changes of the atmosphere and also affect the development pace of harvest plants. 

Rainless days for even seven days in hilly rice -developing territories can fundamentally decrease 

rice yields. When salinity increases i t results in rice plant stunting, reduced tillering, visibly patchy 

field growth, reduction in germination, plant height, tillering capacity, and poor root growth. Rice 

stems have hubs, which break when there is enormous weight because solid breeze/precipi tation 

happens during flooding. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 88 

> Figure 7: AI in Agriculture

Figure 7 shows how AI can be used in agriculture. It has the potential to benefit the entire agrarian 

value chain.  

> ●

With the help of AI, farmers can analyze weather conditions by using weather forecasting 

which helps them plan the type of crop that can be grown and when seeds should be 

sown.  

> ●

AI can help farmers to monitor soil and crop health conditions and produce healthy crops 

with a higher level of productivity.  

> ●

Image recognition -based technology applications can identify the nutrient deficiencies in 

soil including plant pests and diseases by which farmers can also get an idea to use 

fertilizer which helps to improve harvest quality.  

> ●

An AI -equipped drone can capture da ta from fields and helps the farmer identify pests and 

bacteria and educating the farmer with timely use of pest control.  

> ●

AI applications can help in accurate and controlled farming by providing farmers proper 

guidance about water management, crop rotatio n, timely harvesting, type of crop to be 

grown, optimum planting, pest attacks, nutrition management using an SMS -enabled 

phone and the Sowing App.  

> ●

AI systems use satellite images and compare them with historical data using DL and image 

processing models to detect which type of insect has landed and then send alerts to 

farmers to their smartphones so that they can take required precautions. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 89  

> ●

AI can effectively be used for differentiating between weeds and crop seedlings using 

digital imaging. It is one of the most effective non -chemical methods of weed control.  

> ●

AI can alert personnel in irrigating agricultural fields and in times of drought. It can monitor 

and analyze the soil moisture and humidity in the surrounding atmosphere, and mitigate 

wastage of wa ter by releasing it only when it is required.  

> ●

AI can assist in the implementation of proper grain storage techniques by maintaining the 

proper temperature, pressure, and humidity conditions for various types of crops. 

AIR’s research is thus aiming to ide ntify policy barriers and provide digital solutions to governing 

bodies responsible for developing food systems for farmers in the mountain regions of India; thus, 

aiming to reduce emissions by 15% and improve direct engagement at grass root levels by 25%. 

Methodology 

AIR’s (AI For Rural) activities for building efficient food systems include:  

> ●

Having systematic data collection and analysis of data that covers a particular area of 

interest for the entire Food system (Cognitive Computing).  

> ●

Focusing on the design of policymaking by addressing the people/ stakeholders involved 

in the food system particularly by focusing on the technical and organizational support.  

> ●

Supporting the capacities of government bodies to work with business and non -st ate 

organizations.  

> ●

Collaboration with partners and organizations to learn, adapt and synergize different 

techniques to achieve common food system goals. 

AIR is using Artificial Intelligence through which different intelligence data is collected for the r ural 

and mountainous regions which would then be provided as an information tool for the small -holder 

farmers for farming, irrigation, and to connect with potential buyers/sellers. We are building an 

approach of Cognitive computing technology that can help farmers understand and interact with 

different environments like agriculture, land, and fertilizers to maximize productivity. We have 

adopted this initiative as it has already resulted in 30 percent higher yield per hectare than average 

in Andhra Pradesh State. 

First of all, we have to capture data points on the ground every day which is a very essential 

preliminary step for all of the above -mentioned technologies to be used. This will help farmers 

achieve better yield through better crop selection, reso urce utilization and improve the quality and 

accuracy of crops. Moreover, by adopting Precision -farming, we can help educate the farmers 

about detecting pests, disease in crops, and malnutrition in the field. This will help farmers to 

optimize the number o f pesticides to be used in the field. Furthermore, we are also helping to Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 90 

educate the farmers in understanding the seasonal forecast models to predict future weather 

trends. Lastly, it is also important for the farmers to understand and use drone -based AI -enabled 

cameras to monitor the produce more efficiently by taking real -time images which can then be 

sent for analysis to identify potential problems and improvements via gamification technique. 

Results 

AIR is currently working on data collection, analy zing/ tracking, measurement, and reporting. In 

this paper, we are concentrating on research and development before and after production and 

on optimizing the harvest of rice production in the state of Jharkhand. The main purpose of this 

paper is to underst and the food system in Jharkhand as our case study and compare them with 

Andhra Pradesh state as a subject of comparison who is currently leading technology adaptation 

in the market. During our research, we explored some basic ques like climate change, pro duct, 

and technology adaptation challenges that exist to adopting new technologies in Jharkhand. 

We are exploring and trying to be aware of how farming systems operate, to gain more 

understanding about the current gaps or how efficient is the food product ion, and to conscious of 

how we can invest technology so that we can develop a technique for improvement of challenges 

that exist to adapting AI in Jharkhand most importantly in the Dumka district. Going forward we 

are going to continue our research to pro vide a way for technology adoption and AI readiness in 

this district and improve collaboration at the grassroots level. Our research should trigger 

development and improve processes. 

Agricultural Production Statistics 

Table 1: Agricultural Production (Rice) in 2020 

States  Agricultural 

Production: Rice 

(Thousand Tons) 

Year  States  Agricultural 

Production: Rice 

(Thousand Tons) 

Andhra 

Pradesh 

8,658.900  2020  Manipur  385.500 

Arunachal 

Pradesh 

244.700  2020  Meghalaya  303.400 

Assam  4,984.600  2020  Mizoram  60 

Bihar  6,298.000  2020  Nagaland  363.300 

Chhattisgarh  6,774.800  2020  Orissa  8,360.400 

Goa  90.400  2020  Punjab  11,779.300 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 91 

Gujarat  1,983.100  2020  Rajasthan  480.500 

Haryana  4,824.300  2020  Sikkim  16.100 

Himachal 

Pradesh 

143.800  2020  Tamil Nadu  7,171.100 

Jammu & 

Kashmir 

587.000  2020  Tripura  810.200 

Jharkhand  3,012.800  2020  Union 

Territories 

161.6052014 

Karnataka  3,634.500  2020  Uttar Pradesh  15,517.900 

Kerala  605.600  2020  Uttaranchal  658.400 

Madhya 

Pradesh 

4,778.200  2020  West Bengal  15,881.400 

Maharashtra  2,897.600  2020 

Table 1 above shows all the Rice producing states of India and the production in the metric 

thousand tons. We see that Andhra produced 8.65 million metric tons of rice compared to 

Jharkhand which produced 3.01 million metric tons. 

> Figure 8: Volume of Rice production across Andhra and Jharkhand from the Financial year 2009 to 2020

From figure 8, we see that in 2020, rice production in Andhra Pradesh was 8.64 million tons. Rice 

production of Andhra Pradesh increased from 7.45 millio n tons in 2017 to 8.64 million tons in Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 92 

2020. Whereas in Jharkhand it decreased from 4.99 million metric tons to 3 million tons in 2020. 

As much as 63.5 lakh tons of rice have been dispatched from Andhra Pradesh to other rice deficit 

states by the FCI in t he last three years. 

One of the major initiatives to achieve this target is to implement modern technologies like AI in 

the farms and to provide accurate and timely information regarding crops, weather, and pest 

infection to the farmers. A group of local farmers from the Gudipalli, a small village in the Chittoor 

district of Andhra Pradesh state will vouch for this. In the past year, these farmers are harvesting 

the benefits of AI on their farms and increased their yield. Figures 9 and 10 below show the 

agriculture statistics of Chittoor district and Dumka district respectively before AI was introduced. 

> Figure 9: Agricultural Production, Area Harvested, and Yield (Rice) in Chittoor District
> Figure 10: Agricultural Production, Area Harvested, and Yi eld (Rice) in Dumka District

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 93 

Weather Statistics for Farming 

> Figure 11: Average Rainfall (mm) by month in Santhal Paragana and Chittoor region

Some climate parameters which have a direct influence on Jharkhand agriculture. Precipitation is 

lowest in Santhal Paragana region in December, with an average of 8 mm and most of the rainfall 

here falls in July as seen in figure11.  

> Figure 12: Average temperature around the year in Santhal Pargana and Chittoor District

At an average temperature of 30.1 °C, May is the hottest month of the year in Santhal Paragana 

region and January is the coldest month, with temperatures averaging 16.1 °C. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 94 

Figure 1 3: Average daily Sunshine hours per month in Santhal Pargana and Chittoor 

Table 2: Weather by Month (Average) in Santhal Pargana Region 

Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec 

Avg. Temp . °C  16.1  19.9  25.1  29.4  30.1  29.3  27.2  27  26.5  24.6  20.9  17.3 

Precipitation / 

Rainfall mm (in) 

17  21  19  26  86  201  306  246  223  88  12  8

-0.7  -0.8  -0.7  -1 -3.4  -7.9  -12  -9.7  -8.8  -3.5  -0.5  -0.3 

Humidity(%)  65%  56%  41%  39%  56%  71%  84%  85%  85%  78%  66%  66% 

Rainy days (d)  2 2 2 5 9 15  20  20  16  7 1 1

avg. Sun hours 

(hours) 

9 9.6  10.5  10.3  9.5  8.8  7.3  7 7.2  8.5  9 8.7 

Table 3: Weather by Month (Average) in Chittoor Region 

Jan.  Feb.  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec 

Avg. Temp °C  22.3  24.4  27.2  29.6  30.9  29.2  28.4  27.8  27.3  25.7  23.5  22.1 

Precipitation / 

Rainfall mm (in) 

9 7 13  21  62  85  83  96  121  153  107  52 

-0.4  -0.3  -0.5  -0.8  -2.4  -3.3  -3.3  -3.8  -4.8  -6 -4.2  -2

Humidity(%)  68%  58%  53%  55%  51%  57%  58%  62%  65%  73%  76%  74% 

Rainy days (d)  2 1 2 3 8 10  9 10  11  13  10  5

avg. Sun hours  7.6  8.8  9.8  10.3  11  10.9  10.2  9.9  9.7  8.3  6.7  6.3 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 95 

In the Santhal Pargana division, the month with the most daily hours of sunshine is March with an 

average of 10.51 hours of sunshine as seen in figure 13. With an average of 8.67 hours of 

sunshine each day, January is the month with the fewest daily hours of sunshine. August is the 

month with the highest relative humidity (85.03 percent). April is the month with the lowest relative 

humidity (38.56 percent). July is the month with the most number of rainy days (26.73 days). 

December is the month with the lea st number of rainy days (1.27 days). 

The major constraint for agriculture in these hilly areas is that more than 80 percent of the arable 

lands are rainfed. July is the favorable month to plant paddy. But for the last few years, they are 

being forced to w ait till the end of August which is not considered to be a good trend. Delayed 

monsoon and early exit, both result in poor yield or crop failure. Along with that, water bodies do 

not get filled up and the water table also does not recharge. 

Agriculture O perating Expenses and Revenues - National vs Jharkhand 

Jharkhand has a lower bank branch penetration rate than the national average. While the national 

average is 11.8 bank branches per lakh population, there are 9.16 bank branches per lakh 

population in J harkhand. 

Table 4: Proposition of Bank Branches by Type of Banks 

2014 -15  2015 -16  2016 -17  2017 -18  2018 -19  2019 -20  2020 -21 

Lead Banks  42.7  40.8  41.1  40.3  37.6  38  38 

Other Public 

Sector Banks 

30.8  32.3  32  32.5  32.1  28.5  28.4 

Private Sector 

Banks 

6 7.8  8.2  8.6  12.7  13.3  13.3 

Scheduled 

Commercial Banks 

79.5  80.9  81.3  81.4  82.4  79.8  79.7 

Regional Rural 

Banks 

16.3  15.2  14.8  14.7  13.9  13.9  13.8 

Cooperative Bank  4.2  3.9  3.9  3.9  3.7  3.7  3.7 

Small Finance 

Banks 

0 0 0 0 0 2.7  2.8 

Total  100  100  100  100  100  100  100 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 96 

Table 5: District Wise Proportion of Bank Branches (as of 30.06.2020) 

Percentage of Bank Branches  Names of Districts 

Above 14 %  Ranchi 

10% to 14%  East Singhbhum 

8% to 10%  Dhanbad, 

5% to 8%  Bokaro, Giridih 

3% to 5%  Deoghar,Dumka, Hazaribagh, Ramgarh, Godda, Palamau, 

Saraikela, West Singhbhum 

1% to 3%  Chatra, Garhwa, Gumla, Jamtara, Koderma, Pakur, 

Sahibganj, Simdega, Lohardaga, Latehar, Khunti, 

The bank -branches are mostly concentrated in the districts which are highly urbanized and have 

industrial, mining and commercial centres as shown in Table 5. 

Table 6: Deposit and Credit of the Banks as of 31 st March of Each Financial Year (Rs. In 

Crores) 

Item  2014 -15  2015 -16  2016 -17  2017 -18  2018 -19  2019 -20  2020 -21 

(up to 

Sept.) 

Deposits  139956  151224  186178  198114  218101  224364  243119 

Credits  65842  70728  81040  85519  95562  96107  94494 

C-D of Banks  47.04  46.77  43.53  43.17  43.82  42.84  38.87 

C-D Ratio in %, 

including RIDF 

and credit as 

per the place of 

utilization 

61.51  60.61  57.57  60.31  57.33  55.63  50.05 

The credit -deposit ratio (C -D ratio) has declined over the years to 55.6 percent in the year 2019 -

20. It has mostly remained less than the RBI benchmark of 60 percent. The slowdown of the 

national economy since the last one year and the COVID -19 pandemic of the current financial 

year have dried up the investment opportunities in the country and in Jharkhand. The PM -KISAN 

scheme is a Central Sect or Scheme with 100 percent funding from the GoI. Under this scheme Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 97 

an income support of Rs. 6,000/ - per year is provided to the small and marginal farmer families 

having combined land holding of up to 2 hectares. 

Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 

In order to improve the agricultural infrastructure, the GoI has pledged to give budgetary support 

for an interest subvention of 3% per annum on loans up to Rs. 2 crores. Jharkhand has a target 

of distributing Rs. 157 crores into 800 accounts of 3108 branches of the public sector banks, 

private sector banks, regional rural Banks, and cooperative Banks in the current financial year 

(2020 -21). With the NPJSY (Neelambar Pitambar Jal Sammridhi Yojana) Scheme, the 

government aims to help the marginal landholders an d farmers of the drought -hit region to store 

an increased volume of 5 lakh crore litres of rain and groundwater every year. 

A wide network of all -weather roads is significant not only in increasing rural connectivity but also 

in faster and sustainable rural development which will be helpful for the farmers. Different 

schemes for the construction of rural roads in the state are running in collaboration with the 

Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). 

Programs and Initiatives - National vs Jharkhand 

In the sphere of agriculture, there are a number of governmental policies and programs that 

benefit smallholders. Farmers' lives will be made easier by digital marketing platforms like 

electronic unified agricultural markets (e -NAM), negotiable warehousing, and commodity futures, 

as well as recent government efforts like the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) and 

Atmanirbhar Bhar at (self -reliant India). Agri -marketing reduces transaction costs and food losses 

by opening up agricultural markets to more competition and allowing farmers to sell what they 

want, when they want it, without any limits on the sale, stocking, movement, or export of farm 

produce. 

Agriculture and allied industries employ 43 percent of Jharkhand's overall workforce. In the 

financial year 2021 -22, Rs.1200 crores will be available under the Jharkhand Agriculture Loan 

Waiver Scheme. In each district, one village will be designated as a Birsa village under the 

Integrated Birsa Village Development Scheme. By creating the Kisan Service Center, a group of 

farmers will be informed about agricultural amenities such as markets and new technologies as a 

result of this. T he Jharkhand government's Kisan Samridhi Yojana plans to give solar -based 

irrigation to farmers through this scheme, and Rs 45.83 crore has been set aside in 2021 -22 to 

provide irrigation to a group of farmers using solar -based digging. 

Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture (CMSA) was implemented in several blocks with a 

distinct approach by trained Aajeevika Krishak Mitra (AKMs). The emphasis was on bringing the 

really poor into the agricultural fold and providing them with a proven set of methods. Th e Mahila 

Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana’s (MKSP) goal is to empower women in agriculture by improving 

their involvement in production, as well as to build and sustain agriculture -based livelihoods for 

rural women. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 98 

The GoI is implementing a slew of progra ms. However, due to a lack of coordination and 

convergence between state, national and local bodies, there is a mismatch between ground level 

activity funded from various sources, resulting in inefficiencies in resource utilization and failure 

to achieve e xpected results from investments. We believe that connecting farmers to markets 

through effective policy interventions is a fundamental and urgent necessity for future food and 

nutritional security. AIR is collaborating with our partners and is actively re searching and 

developing a prototype. During this research phase, we are attempting to improve the end -user 

product by initiating a feasibility analysis based on which approach best suits a specific region of 

Jharkhand. 

Research Limitations 

Food security and nutrition issues require coordinated actions on multiple fronts by all 

stakeholders at the local, national, regional, and global levels, involving both public and private 

actors, and spanning multiple fronts such as agriculture, trade, policy, health, the environment, 

gender norms, education, transportation and infrastructure, and so on. Better agricultural 

practices, yields, and a qualitative change in farmers' lifestyles are expected as a result of AI. 

Even though AI has a lot of potential in agricul ture, farmers in most parts of the world still need to 

be educated on how to employ high -tech machine learning solutions. 

The acceptance of logical AI solutions is critical to the future of Jharkhand agriculture. While large -

scale research is currently underway and some applications are now on the market, the industry 

remains severely underdeveloped. When it comes to tackling realistic challenges faced by 

farmers and using separate decision -making and predictive solutions to solve them, farming is 

still at a growing stage. Applications must be strong in order to explore the vast potential of AI in 

agriculture. Only then it will be able to handle frequent changes in external conditions, ease the 

real -time decision -making process and make use of an appropri ate platform for collecting 

contextual data in an efficient manner. Another important aspect is the sky -high cost of different 

cognitive solutions available in the market for farming. To ensure that technology reaches 

everyone, solutions must become more a ccessible, like in an open -source platform where 

solutions are more economical and quickly embraced by farmers. 

AI systems require a lot of data to train machines and make accurate predictions. Because of the 

lack of data infrastructure, it will take time to develop a powerful ML model. Jharkhand agriculture 

is still at an amateur stage when it comes to farmers’ decision -making independently and 

predictions using AI, as they are not yet technology ready. 

Conclusions 

AI in agriculture not only helps farmers to automate their farming but also shifts to precise 

cultivation for higher crop yield and better quality while using fewer resources. Agriculture in 

Jharkhand is known for its low productivity, which has resulted i n a high rate of rural poverty. Due 

to ill –governance, political instability, and corruption, there has been no noticeable improvement Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 99 

in people's economic conditions or rural infrastructure such as irrigation, water harvesting, rural 

connectivity and com munication, storage and marketing, and so on. The state must invest heavily 

in rural infrastructure which is a significant roadblock to agricultural development. Farmers should 

be lent more money by banking and cooperative organizations. Additionally, agri culture must be 

diversified in order to enhance farm income and employment. Following the implementation of 

these measures, there will be a greater likelihood of increasing agricultural productivity and 

production, as well as improving the economic situati on of rural people. 

From detecting pests to predicting what crops will deliver the best returns, AI can help humanity 

confront one of its biggest challenges that are feeding an additional 2 billion people by 2052, even 

as climate change pursues. Farmers c an use AI to determine the optimal date to sow crops, 

precisely allocate resources such as water and fertilizer, identify crop diseases for swifter 

treatment, and detect and destroy weeds. These activities become smarter over time as a result 

of machine le arning. It can also help farmers forecast the coming year by recommending how 

much seed to sow based on historical production data, long -term weather forecasts, genetically 

modified seed information, and commodity pricing predictions, among other inputs. A I solves the 

scarcity of resources and labor to a large extent and it will be a powerful tool that can help 

organizations cope with the increasing amount of complexity in modern agriculture It is past time 

for major corporations to invest in this area. 

Ac knowledgements 

Writing a book is harder than I thought and more rewarding than I could have ever imagined. 

Firstly, I would like to thank the almighty for giving me strength throughout the process of writing 

the paper and helping me in all the huddles. A very special thanks to Uday Teki, CEO, and 

Founder of AI For Rural, my mentor and a friend who brought me on as an intern, as a Research 

Fellow and then allowed me to rise through the ranks to become what I am now. I’ve greatly 

appreciated his counsel duri ng the final stages of completing the manuscript. I owe an enormous 

debt of gratitude to those Dr. Baktybek Abdrisaev, a Professor at Utah Valley University who gave 

freely of his time to discuss nuances of the text and pushed me to clarify concepts, explo re 

particular facets of insight work, and explain the rationales for specific recommendations. Finally, 

none of this would have been possible without my husband, Premkumar. He stood by me during 

every struggle and all my successes. A lifelong partner makes the journey and destination 

worthwhile. 

References 

‘Adaptation and Resilience Building - Resilient Mountain Solutions’ , ICIMOD. 

‘AI in Agriculture for tackling Social and Environmental Challenges’ (2019), The German Centre 

for Research and Innovation (DWIH), Tokyo. 

Angom, J, Viswanathan, PK & Ramesh, MV (2021), “The dynamics of climate change 

adaptation in India: A review of climate smart agricultural practices among smallholder Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 100 

farmers in Aravalli district, Gujarat, India”, Current Research in En vironmental Stability, 

Vol. 3. 

‘Annual Report 2020’, ICIMOD. 

Ayed, RB, Hanana, M 2021, "Artificial Intelligence to Improve the Food and Agriculture Sector", 

Journal of Food Quality, vol. 2021, 584754. 

CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change 2016, ‘ Towards climate resilience in agriculture 

for Southeast Asia: an overview for decision -makers’ India Environment Portal, India. 

‘Climate change impacts on Agriculture in India’, India Environment Portal, India. 

FAO (2019), ‘Mountain Agriculture - Opport unities for Harnessing Zero Hunger in Asia’, 

Bangkok. 

Current Science 2016, ‘A district level assessment of vulnerability of Indian agriculture to climate 

change’, India Environmental Portal, India. 

Dagdeviren, H, Elangovan, A & Paramalavalli, R 2021, ‘Climate change, monsoon failures and 

inequality of imp acts in South India’, Journal of Environmental Management, Science 

Direct, volume 299, 113555. 

Datta, P, & Bhagirath, B 2022, ‘Assessment of adaptive capacity and adaptation to climate 

change in the farming households of Eastern Himalayan foothills of West Bengal, India’, 

Environmental Challenges, Science Direct, volume 7, 100462. 

Ennouri, K, Sma oui, S, Gharbi, Y, Cheffi, M, Braiek, OB, Ennouri, M & Triki, MA (June 2021), 

"Usage of Artificial Intelligence and Remote Sensing as Efficient Devices to Increase 

Agricultural System Yields", Journal of Food Quality, Vol. 202. 

‘Importance of Drone Tech nology in Indian Agriculture, Farming: Overview of the agricultural 

industry in India’, Blog in Equinox’s Drones. 

FAO (2013), ‘Climate -smart Agriculture’. 

FAO (2018), ‘Sustainable food systems - Concept and framework’. 

FAO (2021),‘The White/Wiphala Pa per on Indigenous Peoples’ food systems’, Rome. 

FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP & WHO (2021), ‘The state of food security and nutrition in the world 

2021: The world is at a critical juncture’, Rome, Italy. 

‘FAO in India Programmes and Projects’, FAO. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 101 

‘FAO proj ects in India Trust Funds’, FAO. 

‘ICIMOD Mountain Prize 2020’, ICIMOD. 

‘INDIAN AGRICULTURE TOWARDS 2030: Pathways for Enhancing Farmers’ Income, 

Nutritional Security and Sustainable Food Systems’ (2021), FAO. 

Jerath, SG, Kapoor, R, Ghosh, U, Singh, A, Downs, S & Fanzo, J (June 2021),‘Pathways of 

Climate Change Impact on Agroforestry, Food Consumption Pattern, and Dietary 

Diversity Among Indigenous Subsistence Farmers of Sauria Paharia Tribal Community 

of India: A Mixed Methods Study’, Frontiers in S ustainable Food Systems,Vol.5. 

Kapos, V, Rhind, J, Edwards, M, Price, MF, Ravilious, C, & Butt, N 2000, ‘Developing a map of 

the world's mountain forests., Forests in sustainable mountain development: a state of 

knowledge report for 2000’, Task Force For Sustainable Mountain Development, 

Research gate, 1 January. 

Mountain Partnership, FAO. 

Khakpour, A & Colomo -Palacios, R ( 2020), “Convergence of Gamification and Machine 

Learning: A Systematic Literature Review”, Technology, Knowledge and Learning, Vol. 

26, pp. 597 -636. 

Klompenburg, TV, Kassahun, A & Catal, C (Oct. 2020), “Crop yield prediction using machine 

learning: A s ystematic literature review”, Journal of Computers and Electronics in 

Agriculture, Vol. 177. 

Kumar, R, Yadav, S, Kumar, M, Kumar, J & Kumar, M (March 2020), “Artificial Intelligence: New 

Technology to Improve Indian Agriculture”, International Journal o f Chemical Studies, 

Vol.8, pp. 2999 -3005. 

Mahapatra, R 2022, ‘Climate and food price rise: Extreme weather events triggering 

unprecedented food inflation’, Down To Earth, 28 January, 

https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/climate -change/climate -and -food -price -rise -

extreme -weather -events -triggering -unprecedented -food -inflation -81300. 

‘Managing climate risk using climate -smart agriculture’ 2016, India Environment Portal, FAO. 

Mohan GR 2021, ‘Tomato price rise: Farmers in Andhra say that is only part of th e whole story’, 

DownToEarth, 6 December, https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/climate -

change/tomato -price -rise -farmers -in -andhra -say -that -is -only -part -of -the -whole -story -

80540. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 102 

Miguel, A & Koohafkan, P 2008,‘Enduring Farms: Climate Change, Smallholder s and Traditional 

Farming Communities’, Research gate, January. 

Mohammed, ES, Belal, AA, Abd -Elmabod, SK, El -Shirbeny, MA, Gad, A & Zahran, MB (Dec. 

2021), “Smart farming for improving agricultural management”, The Egyptian journal of 

remote sensing an d space science, Vol. 24, pp. 971 - 981. 

Niyogi, DG (June 2016), ‘Climate -smart agriculture: an answer to climate change’. 

Pattanayak, A & Kumar, KSK 2019, ‘Assessment of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation: A 

Methodological Review and Application to Indian Agriculture’, Madras School of 

Economics, Chennai, India. 

Pratap, T 1995, ‘High -Value Cash Crops in Mountain Farming, Mountain Development 

Processes and Opportunities’, Mountain Farming Systems, International Centre for 

Integrated Mountain Dev elopment (ICIMOD), Kathmandu, Nepal. 

Pratap, T 1999, ‘Sustainable Land Management in Marginal Mountain Areas of the Himalayan 

Region’, Mountain Research and Development, International Mountain Society, vol.19, 

No. 3, pp. 251 -260. 

Rao, Ch S, Kareemulla , K, Krishnan, P, Murthy, GRK, Ramesh, P, Ananthan, PS & Joshi, PK 

(Oct. 2019), “Agro - ecosystem based sustainability indicators for climate resilient 

agriculture in India: A conceptual framework”, Ecological Indicators, Vol. 105, pp. 621 –

633. 

‘Regional Conference on Mountain Agriculture, with Focus on Ecosystem Services, Agri -

Extension, and Market Linkages’ (August 2017), Himalica, ICIMOD. 

‘Regional Training on Building Resilient Agriculture: Solution Packages for Farming 

Communities’ (May 2019), Adaptation and Resilience Building, ICIMOD, Kathmandu, 

Nepal. 

Romeo, R, Grita, F, Parisi, F & Russo, L 2020, ‘Vulnerability of mountain peoples to food 

insecurity: updated data and analysis of drivers’, FAO and UNCCD, Rome, Italy. 

Sangomla, A & Sajwan, R 2022, ‘On thin ice: Less snow, high temperatures have upturned the 

lives in Himalayan cold desert’, DownToEarth, 22 January, 

www.downtoearth.org.in/news/climate -change/on -thin -ice -less -snow -high -temperatures -

have -upturned -lives -in -himalayan -co ld -desert -81203. 

Saxena, P (July 2020), AI is sowing seeds of productivity and sustainability in India, 

‘NITI Aayog ropes in IBM to use AI in Agriculture’, (May 2018). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 103 

Sharma, NC (July 2016), ‘Farming to go hi -tech: Drones will monitor crop and soil health in India 

soon’. 

Shagun 2021, ‘Climate Crisis has cost India 5 million hectares of crop in 2021’, Down To Earth, 

22 December, www.downtoearth.org.in/news/climate -change/climate -crisis -has -cost -

india -5-million -hectares -of -crop -in -2021 -80809. 

Shan al Pradhan, S, Gupta, N, Jain, A, & Patel, N (2021), ‘Sustainable Agriculture in India 2021’, 

FAO, India. 

Singh, P & Kaur, A (2022), “Chapter 2 - A systematic review of artificial intelligence in 

agriculture”, Poonia, RC, Singh, V & Nayak,SR, Cognitive data science in Sustainable 

computing: Deep Learning for Sustainable Agriculture, Academic Press, pp. 57 – 80. 

Srinivasarao, Ch, Srinivas, T, Rao, RVS, Rao, NS, Vinayagam, SS & Krishnan, P 2020 ‘Climate 

Change and Indian Agriculture: Challenges and Adap tation Strategies’, ICAR -National 

Academy of Agricultural Research Management, Hyderabad, Telangana, India, pp -584. 

Subeesh , A & Mehta, CR 2021, “Automation and digitization of agriculture using artificial 

intelligence and internet of things”, Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture, Vol. 5, pp. 278 –

291. 

‘Summary of the Hindu Kush Himalayas’ (2019), ICIMOD, Kathmandu, Nepa l. 

‘The Future of the Koshi Basin’, ICIMOD. 

World Bank (May 2012), ‘Carbon Sequestration in Agricultural Soils’, Report no. 67395 -GLB. 

‘World Population Prospects 2019: Highlights’, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, UN, 

June 2019. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 104 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 105 

# The Contribution of Input -Output Multi -Objective Optimization 

# Model of Sustainable Consumption 

# and Production in Food -Energy -Water Nexus 

Isaac Okola (KCA University) 

Abstract 

Food, energy and water are essential for human survival. These resources consume each other 

thus enhancing security in one resource can reduce security in another resource. Multiobjective 

optimization approaches have been used to understand the complexity associated w ith the Food, 

Energy Water (FEW) Nexus. However most of these approaches focus on either maximizing 

resource production or minimizing resource consumption in the FEW Nexus but not addressing 

the two simultaneously. To achieve sustainability of the FEW Nexu s sustainable consumption and 

production of the resources need to be emphasized. In this paper, the Input -Output theory is used 

to develop a multiobjective optimization model that minimizes resource intensities. Minimizing 

resource intensities results into minimized consumption and maximized production of resources 

in the nexus. Using the developed model simulations are carried out to demonstrate its 

applicability in FEW Nexus. The results show that the model can be used to explore alternative 

ways of minim izing consumption and maximizing production simultaneously based on the concept 

of non -dominated solutions. 

Keywords: Input -Output Theory, Food -Energy -Water Nexus, Multiobjective Optimization Model, 

Sustainable Consumption and Production 

Introduction 

Su stainable consumption and production in Food, Energy and Water nexus has a direct or indirect 

link in achieving many if not all of the Sustainable Development Goals developed by United 

Nation. Many countries are concerned about addressing Sustainable Devel opment Goals in the 

midst of pressures emanating from rapid population growth and climate change. The FEW nexus 

approach is one that can be used to address the challenges of ever growing demand for food, 

energy and water. This nexus depicts some complex in teractions with hidden feedback 

connections among food, energy and water resources. The production of a specific resource 

requires the consumption of one or the two other resources thus playing a big role in determining 

the demand, supply and availability of the resources in the FEW Nexus. In relation to attaining 

global sustainability, managing the FEW Nexus has become a big challenge. This is due to the 

fact that increasing security of one resource may have a negative consequence on another 

resource. The purpose of this study is to design a multi -objective optimization algorithm based on 

Input -Output model. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 106 

Food, energy, and water resources are crucial for the survival of human beings and the systems 

involved in the production and consumption of these resources are tightly linked  (Yuan and Lo, 

2020) . The FEW nexus is a term used to depict the complex interactions o ccurring between food, 

energy and water systems. The nexus  is important in understanding existing interdependencies 

between the three resources (Itayi, Mohan and Saito, 2021) . Climate change, urbanization a nd 

population are well known stressors that influence and also are influenced by the FEW nexus 

(Lange, 2019) . Therefore, there is a need to develop adaptation and mitigation strategies to cope 

with the negative impacts of these stressors. One such strateg y is to ensure sustainable 

consumption and production patterns that is formulated as goal 12 of Sustainable Development 

Goals(SDGs) (United Nations, 2015) .

In FEW nexus water is consumed to produce energy and food, energy is consumed to produce 

water and food, food is consumed to produce energy. There exist some studies that have 

discussed measurements relating to the consumption and production in the FEW nexus. For 

instance, water consumption in energy production  (Gerbens -Leenes, Hoekstra and Van der Meer ,

2009; Chang et al. , 2016) , water consumption in food production  (Gerbens -Leenes, Mekonnen 

and Hoekstra, 2013) , energy consumption in water production  (Mo et al. , 2011; Gu et al. , 2016) ,

energy consumption in food production  (Carlsson -Kanyama, E kström and Shanahan, 2003; 

Chang et al. , 2016; Gellings and Parmenter, 2016)  and food consumption in energy production 

(Campbell et al. , 2008; Zhuang et al. , 2011; Bryngelsson and Lindgren, 2013) . The weakness of 

these studies is that they are very general and do not provide specific measurements relating to 

consumption and production in a specific scale. 

Sustainable consumption and production is about using less to produce more. This can be 

achieved by devising ways o f enhancing efficiency in consumption and production of resources 

in the FEW nexus. Simultaneous minimization of consumption and maximization of production 

normally leads to high efficiencies. Therefore, a resource use intensity tends to be minimized if 

th e amount of that resource consumed to produce one unit of another resource is reduced. Input -

Output Theory is used to address the concept of a resource being consumed to produce another 

resource (Ebiefung and Kostreva, 1993; Dietzenbacher and Lahr, 2004) .It has been used to 

compute resource intensities and allocation s in FEW nexus (Karnib, 2017a, 2018) .

In FEW nexus, minimizing resource consumption and production is a multiobjective optimization 

task  (Okola et al. , 2019) . Several studies have been done to demonstrate the applicability of 

mul tiobjective optimization approaches in FEW nexus. For instance, there is an approach that 

minimizes costs associated with water, food and energy production as well that of reducing carbon 

dioxide emission. (Zhang and Vesselinov, 2017) . Similarly a framework has been developed to 

minimize costs associated with consumption of water and energy in order to maximize food 

production  (Karnib, 2017b) . A multiobjective optimization approach has also been employed to 

assist in maximizing the electricity generated through hydropower while minimizing water 

reduction  (Uen et al. , 2018) . A reliability index is used to quantify each resource demand and 

supply in FEW nexus. Henceforth, the three indexes are maximized simultaneously  (Wicaksono 

and Kang, 2019) . A similar approach maximized a derived WEF nexus index to identify a cropping 

pattern that is optimized  (El -Gafy, Grigg and Waskom, 2017) . A nonlinear multiobjective Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 107 

optimization approach has been proposed to facilitate simultaneous maximization of benefits 

achieved from groundwater use and to minimize the destruction of resources associated with 

groundwater production. Therefore, the approach is able to depict the tradeoffs that occur in food, 

energy and groundwater production  (Radmehr, Ghorbani and Z iaei, 2021) .

Based on the few highlighted multiobjective optimization approaches, to the best of our knowledge 

none has emphasized on how to simultaneously minimize the resource consumption intensities 

in FEW nexus. The main goal of FEW nexus management tools is to identify synergies and 

tradeoffs that occur du ring complex interactions between systems linked in and to the nexus thus 

enhancing strategies used in resource allocations  (Borge -Diez, García -Moya and Rosales -

Asensio, 2022) . Therefore, in this study an approach has been proposed that simultaneously 

minimize several resource intensities thus assisting the decision maker to identify synergies and 

trade -offs from the many non -dominated solutions obtained. 

Input -Output Theory in Few Nexus 

Input -Output Theory 

The Input -Output theory specifies interrelationships among various industrial sectors, 

households, and government agencies in such a way that the output of an industry will appear as 

input distribution to other industries (Dietzenbacher & MLahr, 2004; Ebiefung & Kostreva, 1993) .

In this study we apply the Q -Nexus Model that consists of inter resource consumption quantities 

denoted by Z, final demand quantities denoted by y and the total of the two denoted by x  (Karnib, 

2017a) . Equations 1 is used to formulize the model. 

Z + y = x (1) 

The Leontief Input –Output model specifies quantitative relationships between the inputs 

consumed and the output s produced in a sector using linear equations. To achieve sustainability 

in the FEW Nexus, resource consumption and production need to be optimized simultaneously 

thus conflicting each other. 

Resource Consumption and Production 

In the FEW Nexus the main resources consuming each other are Food, Energy and Water. These 

resources can be broken down into specific types of food, energy and water  (Karnib, 2017; 

Wicaksono et al., 2019) .

i. Water resources include Surface water in rivers, lakes and reservoirs (W 1); Groundwater 

(W 2); Desalinated water from oceans (W 3); Others (W 4). 

ii. Energy resources include Electricity (Wind) (E 1); Electricity (Hydro) (E 2); Biofuels (E 3); 

Electricity (Fossil Fuels) (E 4); Imported Electricity (E 5); Electricity (Solar) (E 6); Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 108 

iii. Food resources include Fruits (F 1); Roots and Tubers (F 2); Cereals (F 3); Vegetables (F 4); 

Animal Products (F 5). 

Based on the Input -Output theory and the Q -Nexus Model, the consumption and production of 

resources in FEW nexus are represented using Table 1. 

Table 1: Resource Consumption in Producing Another Resource 

Inputs from the producing resources 

Total output of 

the resources 

water(w)  energy(e)  food(f)  demand 

water(w)  water -

water(ww) 

water -

energy(we) 

water -

food(wf) 

water -

demand(wd) 

energy(e)  energy -

water(ew) 

energy -

energy(ee) 

energy -

food(ef) 

energy -

demand(ed) 

food(f)  food -

water(fw) 

food -

energy(fe) 

food -

food(ff) 

food -

demand(fd) 

Table 1 is also formulated using equation 2 to 4 

𝑤  = 𝑤𝑤  + 𝑤𝑒  + 𝑤𝑓  + 𝑤𝑑  (2) 

𝑒  = 𝑒𝑤  + 𝑒𝑒  + 𝑒𝑓  + 𝑒𝑑  (3) 

𝑓  = 𝑓𝑤  + 𝑓𝑒  + 𝑓𝑓  + 𝑓𝑑  (4) 

Objective Functions 

The consumption of a resource to produce one unit of another resource is known as resource 

intensity coefficient. The water -energy, water food, energy -water, energy -food and food -energy 

intensity coefficients are given using equations 5 to 9. In this case we assume that the am ount 

used to produce water and the amount of food used to produce water is zero. These five equations 

also represent minimised objective functions. 

𝑎 𝑤𝑒  = 𝑤𝑒 /𝑒  (5) 

𝑎 𝑤𝑓  = 𝑤𝑓 /𝑓  (6) 

𝑎 𝑒𝑤  = 𝑒𝑤 /𝑤  (7) 

𝑎 𝑒𝑓  = 𝑒𝑓 /𝑓  (9) 

𝑎 𝑓𝑒  = 𝑓𝑒 /𝑒  (10) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 109 

Simulations 

Simulations were facilitated in MATLAB using gamultiobj function. This function allows the 

components of a Multiobjective Optimisation Problem( MOP) to be combined. These components 

include objective functions, constraints, lower and upper bounds. Multi -objective optimization 

approaches can be used to address conflicts in the FEW Nexus because they are known to deal 

with multiple conflicting real world problems. These approaches provide non -dominated solutions 

that identify tradeoffs and synergies in FEW Nexus. They have a great potential in solving multi -

objective optimization problems. They evolve solutions in each generation thus being able to 

produce non -dominated solutions which are closer to the Pareto -front. 

Simulations are based on the Business As Usual (BAU) resource consumption and production 

data obtained from the work of  (Karnib, 2018)  as indicated in Table 2. This data is set to be the 

values for the lower bound vector. The upper bound vector values are set to either BAU values 

or to infinity. Therefore, we perform simulations based on the BAU settings for the lower bound 

and infinity values for upper bound values. The results obtained are used to compare the intensity 

coefficients for each resource obtained from BAU situations and those obtained after optimization. 

Results and Discussion 

The results obtained from the simulations demonstrated differen t ways of attaining sustainable 

consumption and production. The purpose of the simulation was to demonstrate how consumption 

and production change when the final demand is changing and resource intensities are minimized 

simultaneously. 

The gamultiobj algo rithm generated 78 non -dominated solutions that represented various 

alternatives of decision making. Only five solutions out of 78 were considered for analysis. For a 

solution to be selected its resource intensity has to be the one with the lowest value am ong the 

78 solutions generated. For instance, the second row of table 3 indicates the lowest value of 

water -E1 intensity for a solution where water -energy intensity was the minimum among the 78 

solutions. In this scenario the water consumption to produce E 1 has increased from 60.000 to 

60.055 but the intensity is the same as the one for the BAU scenario that has a value of 0.02502. 

Water production has also increased from 1900.00 to 1914.39 as indicated in Table 7. If row 5 of 

table 3 is considered, the low est water intensity of 0.48494 is for producing F2. The amount of 

water consumption to produce F2 has increased from BAU value of 171.00 to 171.40 and also 

the water production has increased from a BAU value of 1900.000 to 1909.060 has shown in 

Table 7. Th e same kind of patterns can also be observed with energy consumption in production 

of water and food as well food consumption in production of energy. 

The resource intensities indicated on Table 3 demonstrate alternative options that can be 

identified by the decision maker in relation to matters of resource consumption and production in 

FEW nexus. For instance, a sustainable consumption and production pattern can be identified as 

the one where a resource intensity is reduced, the amount consumed to produce another resource Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 110 

has a slight increase as compared to BAU value and the total production of the resource has a 

large increase as compared to the BAU values. 

Table 2: Resource Consumption in FEW Nexus 

Table 3: Water Intensities in Energy and Food Production 

Table 4: Water Consumption in Energy Production 

## Water  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5 

## WconBAU  60.00000  141.00000  20.00000  1.00000  2.00000 

## WconWEmin  60.05516  142.36300  20.01827  4.08193  3.79890 

W1  W2  W3  W4  W5  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  F1  F2  F3  F4  F5  Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 

W1  0 0 0 0 0 40  110  20  0.5  1 120  110  100  180  300  30  1 4 28  0 1

W2  0 0 0 0 0 20  30  0 0.5  1 65  55  60  90  150  154  2 16  146  0 2

W3  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14  0 12  4 0 0

W4  0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 5 5 5 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 0

W5  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0

E1  10  12  10  5 5 0 0 0 0 0 100  60  70  80  150  1000  90  336  470  0 0

E2  80  110  25  2 1 0 0 0 0 0 40  20  30  30  70  1400  160  1071  465  0 0

E3  1 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 5 5 5 50  5 30  15  0 0

E4  1 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 4 0 0 0

E5  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 60  0 0 0 0 0

F1  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 80  1 10  1 2 50 

F2  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 228  0 10  2 10  102 

F3  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 600  1 225  0 2 26 

F4  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 100  2 72  2 40  292 

F5  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 160  0 0 0 0 15  2000  200  300  100  60  789 

Water  E1  E2  E3  E4  E5  F1  F2  F3  F4  F5 

WconBAU  0.02502  0.04024  0.15504  0.07692  0.03333  1.26490  0.48580  0.19393  0.54528  0.12610 

WconWEmin  0.02502  0.04058  0.15210  0.27189  0.06329  1.25401  0.48902  0.19420  0.54670  0.12635 

WconWFmin  0.02502  0.04063  0.15504  0.30744  0.06282  1.25593  0.48545  0.19393  0.54361  0.12610 

WconEWmin  0.02672  0.04151  0.18538  0.13707  0.07561  1.31742  0.49963  0.20427  0.54493  0.12846 

WconEFmin  0.02503  0.04070  0.15296  0.30709  0.06406  1.25425  0.48494  0.19409  0.54454  0.12612 

WconFEmin  0.03202  0.04607  0.11688  0.14083  0.32543  1.00409  0.52580  0.22663  0.55001  0.13874 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 111 

## WconWFmin  60.00000  142.35046  20.00000  4.07840  3.76944 

## WconEWmin  64.34103  145.87813  28.03132  4.16328  4.64557 

## WconEFmin  60.04082  142.65386  20.00340  4.15245  3.84508 

## WconFEmin  82.62565  168.57551  32.14853  17.38637  22.04613 

> Table 5: Water Consumption in Food Production

## F1  F2  F3  F4  F5 

## WconBAU  191.00000  171.00000  166.00000  277.00000  457.00000 

## WconWEmin  191.52346  172.90412  166.29951  278.86418  458.10222 

## WconWFmin  191.00000  171.00000  166.00000  277.00391  457.00000 

## WconEWmin  202.86205  178.91629  176.03808  283.05384  467.28074 

## WconEFmin  191.20968  171.40068  166.36794  277.24471  457.31991 

## WconFEmin  212.00274  208.91059  211.07518  310.35453  513.16323 

> Table 6: Final Demand for Water

## Y1  Y2  Y3  Y4  Y5  Y6 

## WconBAU  198.00000  3.00000  32.00000  178.00000  0.00000  3.00000 

## WconWEmin  198.13618  3.43253  33.63530  178.13705  0.00000  3.03897 

## WconWFmin  198.00000  3.00000  32.00000  178.00000  0.00000  3.00000 

## WconEWmin  201.46136  14.15120  35.58840  190.03563  0.00000  3.23605 

## WconEFmin  198.04670  3.21388  32.35969  178.15123  0.00000  3.04971 

## WconFEmin  219.30587  16.33831  65.74654  211.75857  0.00000  25.22890 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 112 

Table 7: Water Production 

## WATER  TOTAL 

## PRODUCTION 

## WconBAU  1900.0000 

## WconWEmin  1914.3908 

## WconWFmin  1906.2022 

## WconEWmin  1999.6830 

## WconEFmin  1909.0597 

## WconFEmin  2316.6667 

Conclusion 

The proposed model has capability to provide various scenarios that can identify synergies and 

tradeoffs in FEW nexus. Therefore, the non -dominated solutions given by the algorithm are 

considered as alternatives of optimization of resource consumption and production in the FEW 

Nexus. These solutions are creating multiple sustainable consumption and production patterns 

hence enabling policy and decision makers to meet the goal number 12 of SDGs. 

From the available literature, it is clear that water consumpt ion has been increasing and yet  Over 

2 billion people  are situated in countries with high level of water stress. Also households’ 

co nsumption of energy contributes 21% of carbon dioxide emissions. There is evidence showing 

that degradation of natural resource bases is leading to a decrease in food supply. All such issues 

can be addressed by formulating policies that are integrative in order to achieve a sustainable 

consumption and production situation. We therefore need effective tools that can be used to 

support policy and decision making processes hence avoiding resource wastage or over use. This 

will mainly address target 12.2 which states that “By 2030, achieve the sustainable management 

and efficient use of natural resources”. 

To the best of our knowledge existing approaches are not able to demonstrate ways of how to 

minimize the resource intensities simultaneously hence they have failed to generate several 

patterns that depict scenarios that can lead to sustainable consumption and production in FEW 

nexus. In future a novel Many Objective Optimization algorithm will be developed to handle five 

or more objectives in an effective way. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 113 

References 

Borge -Diez, D., García -Moya, F.J. and Rosales -Asensio, E. (2022) ‘Water Energy Food Nexus 

Analysis and Management Tools: A Review’, Energies , 15(3), p. 1146. 

Bryngelsson, D.K. and Lindgren, K. (2013) ‘Why large -scale bioenergy production on marginal 

lan d is unfeasible: A conceptual partial equilibrium analysis’, Energy Policy , 55, pp. 454 –

466. 

Campbell, J.E. et al.  (2008) ‘The global potential of bioenergy on abandoned agriculture lands’, 

Environmental science & technology , 42(15), pp. 5791 –5794. 

Carl sson -Kanyama, A., Ekström, M.P. and Shanahan, H. (2003) ‘Food and life cycle energy 

inputs: consequences of diet and ways to increase efficiency’, Ecological economics ,

44(2 –3), pp. 293 –307. 

Chang, Y. et al. (2016) ‘Quantifying the water -energy -food nexus: Current status and trends’, 

Energies , 9(2), p. 65. 

Dietzenbacher, E. and Lahr, M.L. (2004) Wassily Leontief and input -output economics .

Cambridge University Press. 

Ebiefung, A.A. and Kostreva, M.M. (1993) ‘The generalized Leontief input -output model and its 

application to the choice of new technology’, Annals of Operations Research , 44(2), pp. 

161 –172. 

El -Gafy, I., Grigg, N. and Waskom, R. (2017) ‘Water -food -energ y: nexus and non -nexus 

approaches for optimal cropping pattern’, Water Resources Management , 31(15), pp. 

4971 –4980. 

Gellings, C.W. and Parmenter, K.E. (2016) ‘Energy efficiency in fertilizer production and use’, 

Efficient Use and Conservation of Energy ; Gellings, CW, Ed.; Encyclopedia of Life 

Support Systems , pp. 123 –136. 

Gerbens -Leenes, P.W., Hoekstra, A.Y. and Van der Meer, T.H. (2009) ‘The water footprint of 

energy from biomass: A quantitative assessment and consequences of an increasing 

share of bio -energy in energy supply’, Ecological economics , 68(4), pp. 1052 –1060. 

Gerbens -Leenes, P.W., Mekonnen, M.M. and Hoekstra, A.Y. (2013) ‘The water footprint of 

poultry, pork and beef: A comparative study in different countries and production 

systems’, Water Resources and Industry , 1, pp. 25 –36. 

Gu, Y. et al. (2016) ‘Quantification of the water, energy and carbon footprints of wastewater 

treatment plants in China considering a water –energy nexus perspective’, Ecological 

indicators , 60, pp. 402 –409. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 114 

Itayi, C.L., Mohan, G. and Saito, O. (2021) ‘Understanding the conceptual frameworks and 

methods of the food –energy –water nexus at the household level for development -

oriented policy support: a systematic review’, Environmental Research Letters , 16(3), p. 

033006. 

Karnib, A. (2017a) ‘Water, energy and food nexus: The Q -Nexus model’, in 10th World 

Congress on Water Resources and Environment .

Karnib, A. (2017b) ‘Water -Energy -Food Nexus: A Coupled Simulation and Optimization 

Framework’, Journal of Geosc ience and Environment Protection , 5(04), p. 84. 

Karnib, A. (2018) ‘Bridging science and policy in water -energy -food nexus: using the Q -Nexus 

model for informing policy making’, Water Resources Management , 32(15), pp. 4895 –

4909. 

Lange, M.A. (2019) ‘Impa cts of climate change on the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle 

East and North Africa region and the water –energy nexus’, Atmosphere , 10(8), p. 455. 

Mo, W. et al. (2011) ‘Embodied energy comparison of surface water and groundwater supply 

options’, Wat er research , 45(17), pp. 5577 –5586. 

Okola, I. et al. (2019) ‘A Multiobjective Optimisation Approach for Sustainable Resource 

Consumption and Production in Food -Energy -Water Nexus’, in 2019 IEEE AFRICON .

IEEE, pp. 1 –5. 

Radmehr, R., Ghorbani, M. and Ziaei, A.N. (2021) ‘Quantifying and managing the water -energy -

food nexus in dry regions food insecurity: New methods and evidence’, Agricultural 

Water Management , 245, p. 106588. doi:10.1016/j.agwat.2020.106588. 

Uen, T. -S. et al. (2018) ‘Exploring syne rgistic benefits of Water -Food -Energy Nexus through 

multi -objective reservoir optimization schemes’, Science of the Total Environment , 633, 

pp. 341 –351. 

United Nations, U.N. (2016) ‘Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable 

development’. 

Wicaksono, A. and Kang, D. (2019) ‘Nationwide simulation of water, energy, and food nexus: 

Case study in South Korea and Indonesia’, Journal of Hydro -Envi ronment Research , 22, 

pp. 70 –87. 

Yuan, M. -H. and Lo, S. -L. (2020) ‘Developing indicators for the monitoring of the sustainability of 

food, energy, and water’, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , 119, p. 109565. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 115 

Zhang, X. and Vesselinov, V.V. (20 17) ‘Integrated modeling approach for optimal management 

of water, energy and food security nexus’, Advances in Water Resources , 101, pp. 1 –10. 

Zhuang, D. et al. (2011) ‘Assessment of bioenergy potential on marginal land in China’, 

Renewable and Sustain able Energy Reviews , 15(2), pp. 1050 –1056. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 116 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 117 

# The Universal Health Coverage in Nigeria: The Perception 

# of Public Health Professionals Towards 

# the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 3 

Andre Ben Moses Akuche (Madonna University, Nigeria), Kennedy Nsan (Obafemi Awolowo 

University), and Precious Tariela Ebikabowei Victor (Madonna University, Nigeria) 

Abstract 

The Ministry of Health have vast potential to facilitate the realization of uni versal health coverage 

(UHC) and health system development in Nigeria. Until now, significant gaps exist and threaten 

its sustainability in many low -income and middle -income countries. Therefore, this study 

examined nurses’ knowledge of UHC for inclusive a nd sustainable development in healthcare 

professional practice. This study was a cross -sectional survey. A convenience sample of 125 

currently practicing auxiliary, pediatric and critical -care nurses was recruited. Respondents 

completed a questionnaire whi ch was based on the perception, evaluation, implementation 

strategies advocated by the WHO Global Forum for nursing officers. Questions covered the 

government initiative, healthcare financing policy, human resources policy, and the respondents’ 

perception of importance and contribution of nurses in achieving UHC. The results of the study 

revealed that the effect of nurses’ knowledge on UHC on perception of development of healthcare 

services was significant ( β = .38; F= 23.29; p < .00). Also, the contributio n of the role of nurses in 

Nigeria was significant to the improvement in the perception of the universal health services for 

health workers [ β = .39; F = 32.77; p < .00] and the challenges faced by nurses was statistically 

significant to the decline in ach ievement recorded in the universal health coverage [ β=.42; F = 

27.19; p < .00]. In addition, nurses in both clinical practice and management perceived themselves 

as having more contribution and importance than those in education. They were relatively 

indif ferent to healthcare policy and politics. The study concluded that the survey uncovered a 

considerable knowledge gap in nurses’ knowledge of UHC in healthcare professional practice 

and shed light on the need for nurses to be more attuned to healthcare poli cy towards achieving 

the UN SDGs Goal 3. The educational curriculum for nurses should be strengthened to include 

studies in public policy and advocacy. Nurses can make a difference through their participation in 

the development and implementation of UHC in healthcare services. 

Keywords: Nurses Knowledge, Universal Health Coverage, Nigerian Healthcare Policy 

Introduction 

The international community has vast potential to facilitate the realization of universal health 

coverage (UHC) and health system development. Until now, significant gaps exist and threaten 

its sustainability in many low -income and middle -income countries (Sachs, 2013). People 

worldwide still lack access to basic healthcare. In response to this challenge, the United Nations 

General Assembly passed a resolution unanimously in December 2012. It called on all countries Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 118 

to plan or pursue the transition of thei r health systems toward universal coverage (United Nations 

General Assembly Resolution on Global Health and Foreign Policy, 2013). 

The World Health Organization, (2012), sets its objective to ensure that all people obtain the 

health services they need wit hout suffering financial hardship when paying for them. According to 

the WHO Director -General, Universal Health Coverage is the single most powerful concept that 

public health has to offer (Chan, 2013). This consensus has arisen as a mounting body of 

evide nce shows that Universal Health Coverage can deliver significant benefits: for individuals, in 

terms of access to health services and protection from financial ruin caused by ill health; for 

countries, in terms of population health and contribution to econ omic growth (Global Health 

Strategies, 2013). 

However, Nigeria faces challenges that delay the progress toward the attainment of the national 

government declared goal of universal health coverage. One such challenge is system -wide 

inequalities resulting f rom lack of financial protection for the healthcare needs of most Nigerians 

(Okolo, Nwankwo, Okoli and Obikeze, 2019). This paper aims to synthesize the research 

evidence on Universal Health Coverage and challenges as it affects health workers perception 

as well as present policy recommendations in an accessible way to stakeholders and 

policymakers who might not have a technical background in the plight of health workers. 

Universal health coverage (UHC) is defined as the entire spectrum of health services, ranging 

from health promotion, disease prevention, acute care and treatment, rehabilitation, to palliative 

care, and it should be financially affordable and geographically accessible to everyone in need 

(Awojumobi, Remilekun and Okpara, 2017). Th e definition embraces two key concepts, 

inclusiveness of the coverage and the sustainable development of the services provided. The 

former being, how the coverage is representative of the people and how far -reaching are its 

policies as well as sustaining c onsistency in effectiveness in accomplishing aims, while the latter 

portends the how plans, policies are integrated into local and international programmes and what 

strategies to adopt in other accomplish long and short -term objectives (Awojumobi et al. , 2 017). 

The multifaceted quest for sustainable health and development, communities represent a unique 

and potent resource. Communities that are healthy, empowered, and prosperous are the 

grassroots drivers of national and regional development (Woodward, Sma rt, Benavides -Vaello, 

2015). Without communities as partners and leaders, all our aspirations for health and 

development will amount to little more than rhetoric (Iwu, Ekeh and Austin -Evelyn, 2017). 

Community health workers who come from the communities t hey serve, are answerable to these 

communities, and receive training that is shorter than that required for doctors, nurses or other 

health professionals represent the essential missing gap, between broad societal yearnings and 

the communities who both nee d assistance the most and serve as essential vehicles for progress 

(Woodward et al ., 2015). Few, if any, of our health and development tools match the potential of 

community health workers to drive gains on multiple fronts. A substantial body of evidence 

demonstrates that community health workers increase uptake of health services, reduce health 

inequalities, provide a high quality of services, and improve overall health outcomes (Iwu et al. ,

2017). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 119 

Statement of the Problem 

The World Health Organization has been advocating UHC over the past few decades to ensure 

all human beings are able to seek health services and are not deprived of services because of 

financial hardship (Willmann, 2012). The elderly population is one of the most vulnerable groups 

that require extra effort to achieve UHC. This is partly because of the loss of gainful employment 

and partly because of the increased incidence of co -morbidity in this group of people (Willmann, 

2012). As expected, demands for health and social care will incre ase by many folds due to the 

trending rise in the aging population. Thus, the rights of elderly in accessing healthcare may face 

unprecedented levels of threat; Nigeria is no exception (Department of Health, 2015). 

In Nigeria, the healthcare system, inclu ding elderly services, relies on both public sector and 

private sector. While 88%of the secondary and tertiary healthcare services were provided by the 

public sector, nearly 70% of the primary healthcare services were provided by the private sector 

(Chimez ie and Faloye, 2014). All Nigeria citizens are eligible to seek medical services from the 

public sector at an extremely low fee. This fee may also be waived if the person covered by the 

comprehensive social security scheme (Chimezie and Faloye, 2014). 

The development of the nursing profession in Nigeria is considered relatively more mature than 

in many African countries, yet the level of nurses’ participation in politics was reported to be low 

(Tajudeen, Ifeanyi and Owoeye, 2015). Often, nurses were percei ved to be apathetic to political 

decisions, even if they were healthcare related (Nwanfor, Ogoribuno and Nza, 2018). Heavy 

workloads, a sense of powerlessness, gender bias, lack of understanding of the political and 

policy making process, and ethical confl icts between professional and political values may 

account for this. Nurses, as one of the major healthcare providers, are the key members in the 

provision of quality healthcare services, and advocate for health choices and health policies 

(Tajudeen et al , 2015). It is important for them to be knowledgeable of the implementation 

strategies for UHC, even if they do not fully understand. 

Healthcare services for impoverished in Nigeria are far from adequate, despite many new 

initiatives have been implemented (Nwanfor et al ., 2018). Many institutions, such as day centers, 

skilled nursing facilities and infirmaries want to support the initiatives; however, they cannot find 

enough nurses to do so. The goal of achieving UHC for public healthcare services is moving 

farther away. The situation does not appear to have any impact on nurses. This is rather unusual, 

as nurses have been very devoted to vulnerable people in Nigeria (Kayode and Ossai, 2018). 

Hence, this paper focuses on fundamental challenges of health work ers in the purview of the 

UHC. 

Now, a vast proportion of health policy debate is focused on realizing the 2030 Sustainable 

Development Agenda, a milestone which places specific importance on universal health coverage 

(UHC) a concept which supports a colle ctive credence that all people should have access to the 

health services they need without risk of financial ruin or impoverishment (World Health 

Organization,2012). However, considering the present inequalities within countries, achieving 

UHC in Africa an d particularly Nigeria, will require inclusive participation between health systems Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 120 

and the citizens across primary, secondary, and tertiary levels (Smith, 2004; Adongo, Phillips and 

Aikins, 2014). As a result, community health system performance has beco me increasingly 

relevant to both high -income countries and low -income and middle -income countries (London, 

2008). 

One of the fundamental problems associated with UHC is healthcare consolidation, funding, and 

investment (Adongo et al ., 2014). While the cas e for investment in health is clear, it is less 

straightforward to determine whether investments in health are more beneficial than those in 

areas such as education or infrastructure. Also, the strength of the case for investing in health 

varies among coun tries. The return on investment is likely to be highest for emerging economies; 

they can obtain significant improvements in health outcomes (e.g., life expectancy) through 

modest increases in health expenditure. However, higher income countries might alrea dy be at a 

level of expenditure where the marginal return, in economic and health terms, for increased 

investment would be relatively small (Adongo et al ., 2014). 

Where policymakers have decided to make transformative investments in health, there are further 

choices to be made, such as how to allocate resources between improving health services and 

addressing the social determinants of health. Improving water quality and sanitation, or funding 

girls’ education, may be as effective at improving health o utcomes as spending on health services. 

However, given that strengthening health systems is vital to improving health outcomes, Universal 

Health Coverage is a highly effective way for countries to deliver significant health, economic and 

political benefits .

Review of Related Literature 

The empirical evidence from various regions mostly supports the theoretical expectations 

described above. Several evaluations of a national health insurance program in Nigeria, for 

example, find positive impacts on health care utilization. Nwanfor, Ogoribuno and Nza, (2018) for 

example measure the subsidized regime component of the program finding the intervention to 

greatly increase utilization of medical care among poor and previously uninsured individuals 

Giedion et al. (2017). 

In a recent study, King et al . (2019) examine the impact of the randomly assigned Mexican 

universal health insurance program Seguro Popular. The phased rollout of the program provides 

an experimental design for a study of a program aimed at reach ing 50 million uninsured Mexicans. 

This study, however, shows Seguro Popular to have no significant impact on the use of medical 

services but it is important to note that the study is based on a time span of only 10 months. 

Galarraga et al . (2010) found th at in Seguro Popular there was a reduction of catastrophic health 

expenditures of 49 percent for the experimental evaluation database (the same used by King et 

al . but using a different method) and 54 percent for the whole country based on a DHS -like surve y. 

In addition, the authors found a reduction of out -of -pocket health expenditures for most types of 

services. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 121 

Findings in Asia are mostly positive. Chen et al . (2007) find that one year after the establishment 

of Taiwan’s National Health Insurance scheme, previously uninsured elderly people increased 

their use of outpatient care by nearly 28 percent. Previously insured elderly people increased their 

use by over 13 percent l eaving a chance of nearly 15 percent which can be solely attributed to 

the National Health Insurance scheme. In a study of a national rural health insurance scheme in 

China, Wagstaff et al . (2017) find that the scheme increased utilization of both inpatien t and 

outpatient care by 20 -30 percent but that the scheme had no impact on utilization among the poor. 

Yip et al . 2008) find that the China health insurance program increased utilization by 70 percent. 

Wagstaff and Moreno -Serra (2017) investigate the impa ct of the introduction of social health 

insurance in 14 countries in Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia and find an increase in 

acute in -patient admissions. 

There are few impact evaluations of health insurance in African countries and those that do exist 

demonstrate a weaker methodology than the articles reviewed above. One example is Smith and 

Sulzbach (2018) which examines the impact of health insurance in three African countries. The 

authors find a correlation between health insurance and use o f maternal health services but 

highlight that the inclusion of maternal health care in the benefits package of the insurance is key. 

In Jutting (2003), the author finds in a study of community -based health insurance in Senegal an 

increase in utilization o f hospitalization services but a failure of the program to address the needs 

of the poorest of the poor. In addition to impacts on health care utilization, health insurance is 

expected to provide financial protection because it reduces the financial risk a ssociated with 

falling ill. Financial risk in the absence of health insurance is equal to the out -of -pocket 

expenditures because of illness. 

Additional financial risk includes lost income due to the inability to work. There is little rigorous 

empirical ev idence measuring the impact of health insurance in its ability to provide financial 

protection. The existing literature examines the impact of health insurance on out -of -pocket 

expenditures for health care measured in either absolute or in terms relative to income 

(expenditures are labeled catastrophic if they exceed a certain threshold). King et al . (2009) in 

their study of the Mexican universal health insurance program Seguro Popular find reductions in 

the proportion of households that suffer from catastr ophic expenditures and a reduction in out -of -

pocket expenditures for in - and out -patient medical care (though no effect on spending for 

medication and medical devices). 

Wagstaff et al . (2007) find no impact on out -of -pocket health expenditures in rural Ch ina which 

contrasts with Wagstaff and Yu (2007) who find reduced out -of -pocket. Achieving universal health 

coverage in Nigeria one state at a time may involve payments, lower incidence of catastrophic 

spending and less impoverishment due to health expendit ures. By contrast, in a later study, 

Wagstaff and Lindelow (2018) find health insurance in rural China to increase the risk of high and 

catastrophic spending. The authors define high spending as spending that exceeds a threshold 

of local average income and catastrophic spending is defined as exceeding a certain percentage 

of the household’s own per capita income. This finding contradicts the hypothesis that health 

insurance always will reduce financial risk. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 122 

The above mentioned Wagstaff and Moreno -Serra (2017) study of Central and Eastern Europe 

and Central Asia finds an increase in government spending per capita on health but not in private 

health spending, while a switch to fee -for -service does increase private health spending. They 

find negative effect s of social health insurance on overall employment levels but positive effects 

on average gross wages in the informal sector. Since it is difficult to measure the impact of 

improvements in quality per se, and because few insurance interventions explicitly address the 

supply -side, the literature is unclear about the separate impact of quality improvements of the 

supply of care versus making health insurance available and affordable. 

Theoretical Explanation 

Public -Private Partnership Community -Based Model 

The necessary elements to ensure a functioning health system are: financing (risk pools and 

prepayment); administrative systems; health care providers such as clinics and hospitals, 

medication and laboratories; and the client/patient relationship. The de mand (financing) side and 

the supply (delivery) side should be aligned and managed to deliver care to the patient, who will 

therefore be willing to prepay to ensure the availability of quality services when needed. An 

alternative model is a public -private partnership community -based health insurance model (PPP -

CBHI). This model has the potential to contribute to the achievement of UHC by addressing many 

of the constraints described in the previous section. The PPP -CBHI model is based on three main 

pillars: 

1. Building on existing local public and private institutions and informal networks; 

2. Leveraging existing capital; an d

3. Empowering local clients and communities. 

Achieving universal health coverage in nigeria one state at a time. In this model, donor funds can 

be used to catalyze the development of a more sustainable health system by stimulating 

investment and risk pooling mechanisms. In this way both the demand and supply -side are 

addressed. In developed coun tries, public institutions facilitate economic exchange in society by 

reducing risk and moral hazard. Public and social goods like health care, water, sanitation and 

education are effectively organized by the state through public or semi -public institution s. 

However, in low and middle -income countries like Nigeria the limited functioning of the state and 

its institutions hampers economic development and the rendering of public goods and services. 

Informal institutions often take the place of public institut ions and transactions within those 

institutions are commonly enforced by social pressure and other social norms. Interventions 

therefore, that build on existing local and often informal institutions for which there may be greater 

trust, are more likely to succeed. 

This can be achieved by, for example, leveraging social capital of communities and their local 

leaders, and their existing ties with private providers. In this model, groups such as microcredit Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 123 

members, farmers, or market women are targeted to b uild on the existing social capital present 

in the group. Also, contributing to the strengthening of formal institutions (e.g. quality 

standards/accreditation, investment funds for social infrastructure), through involvement of the 

private sector in the de livery of essential public, semi -public and social goods, is a logical step. 

Leveraging Existing Capital 

In many developing countries, the private sector is an important provider of health care, including 

for its poor who pay for these private services l argely out -of -pocket. Increasingly, many of the 

facilitating functions for healthcare information, quality certification, technology support, human 

resources are also provided by the private sector. This makes the private sector an important 

partner to rea ch the primary beneficiaries, namely, low -income groups, and facilitate systemic 

change in a bottom -up approach. 

Harnessing the out -of -pocket expenditures into prepaid systems rather than crowding them out 

with public health funding is another important e lement of this model. Another important element 

is the leveraging of donor funding to mobilize private capital. 

Empowering Clients and Local Communities 

Ownership by and empowerment of clients and the communities they belong to is of crucial 

importance for the approach to succeed. A client -oriented approach requires knowledge about 

what clients want and need and what they can afford and are willing to (pre) pay. It implies the 

importance of delivering good quality care to the clients/patients, which requ ires building a strong 

health care supply chain: without good quality supply the willingness to prepay is likely to be low 

(Ogungbe and Eche -Gilbert, 2019). 

How the Model Works 

Based on these three main pillars, a multi -pronged approach for an alternativ e insurance model 

was developed by the Health Insurance Fund (HIF), a Dutch foundation set up in 2005 to increase 

access to quality basic health care and to provide financial protection through the provision of 

private community -based health insurance to l ow -income Africans. On the demand side, existing 

private resources for health care are used more efficiently to realize solidarity (based on health 

risk) and protect scheme members from unexpected financial shocks due to ill health. At the same 

time, the h ealth insurance schemes generate financial resources to build up an efficient supply 

chain and empower members to insist on high -quality care, creating a snowball effect. People 

who can pay are induced to pay into risk pools, thereby creating stable health care demand. 

Improved efficiency in the supply chain lowers costs and raises quality, increasing peoples’ 

willingness to pay. As more people buy health insurance, schemes grow, resulting in larger cross -

subsidization, which enhances equity. 

Through volu me effects, the costs and premiums can be further reduced. These schemes do not 

compete with government programs but complement them. Beneficiaries are involved in Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 124 

determining who has access to the schemes, the design of the benefits package, the level of 

premiums, and the costs to be covered. 

The supply side is strengthened through facilitating private investments, both debt and equity 

capital. Supply -chain upgrading is undertaken through quality -improvement programs with 

rigorous monitoring and control, preferably in cooperation with international accreditation 

organizations. Where regulatory capacity of the government is weak, enforcement of quality 

standards to ensure adequate delivery of care can be a task for the private sector. Output -based 

contractual agreements provide a good opportunity to do this while achieving universal health 

coverage in Nigeria is possible in one state at a time (Ogungbe and Eche -Gilbert, 2019). 

Donor funds are used to subsidize the community -based health insurance schemes’ premiums. 

Disease -specific donor programs such as for HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis support the 

insurance schemes through a risk -equalization arrangement built into the programs. These long -

term donor commitments are made with the solv ency of the insurance funds serving as collateral, 

which lowers the investment risk and makes investments in the health care supply chain feasible. 

Limited donor funding is also used to upgrade the supply chain. Finally, donor funding is used as 

a lever to mobilize additional private capital to scale up the interventions. 

The Health Insurance Fund and PPP -CBHI Model in Nigeria 

In 2006, Health Insurance Fund (HIF) received a £100 million grant from the Dutch Ministry of 

Foreign Affairs to launch, together with its implementing partner, community -based insurance 

programs in four African countries, including Nigeria. In this public -private partnership model of 

community -based health insurance, donor funds are linked to African health maintenance 

organizations (HMOs), insurance companies, or third party administrators. These organizations 

are responsible for the execution of HIF’s insurance programs and for contracting a network of 

public and private providers where scheme members can get their health services. Payment of 

insurers and providers is performance -based, measured as the medical care delivered and the 

number of enrollees. Insurers’ prices and profit margins are contractually fixed. 

The insurance package consists of primary and limited secondary care , including treatment for 

malaria, testing for HIV/Aids and TB. The programs are always complementary to regular public 

sector health programs. The programs create stable healthcare demand by subsidizing insurance 

premiums for target groups of African work ers that enroll with the HMOs. 

The program covers groups with at least some income, who must pay part of the (reduced) 

premium themselves. HIF’s resources are also used to upgrade medical and administrative 

capacity of the insurers and health providers c ontracted under the program. Quality and efficiency 

are further pursued by strictly enforcing medical and administrative standards through 

independent audits. This reinforces the output -based approach: payment only takes place if the 

patient has received treatment that meets the agreed quality requirements. The quality 

improvement activities of health care providers under the HIF program are formalized and put 

under the aegis of an independent quality improvement and evaluation body called SafeCare. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 125 

This o rganization acts as the custodian of internationally recognized standards covering the 

spectrum of basic health care for providers in resource -restricted countries. 

To date, HIF programs have been established for market women and farmers in Lagos, Nigeri a, 

coffee growers in Tanzania and for groups of dairy and tea farmers in Kenya. Currently, a total of 

121,000 people are enrolled. The expansion of the program to other African countries is currently 

under discussion. 

Conceptual Review 

This study reviewe d several literature concerning to the following areas such as; identifying and 

categorizing prospects and challenges for health workers especially nurse’s perception towards 

Universal Health Coverage within the Nigerian polity as well as theoretical frame work that 

explains specific areas of this study. The health and well -being of Africans are fundamental to 

Africa’s future. To ensure a healthier, more secure future, Africa has embarked on a historic effort 

to lay the foundation for sustainable health and development for all. 

Agenda envisages a 50 -year effort to galvanize a socioeconomic transformation across the 

continent. A key element of this transformation involves harnessing the “demographic dividend” 

to drive progress towards increased economic grow th, social development and shared prosperity. 

The African Union’s ‘Africa Health Strategy’ and the ‘Catalytic Framework to End AIDS, TB and 

Eliminate Malaria by 2030’ provide key goals, strategies and milestones for the journey towards 

a healthy and prospe rous Africa. Making optimal use of technology, including digital 

communications platforms where feasible, will play a pivotal role in achieving these aims. 

In this multifaceted quest for sustainable health and development, communities represent a 

unique a nd potent resource. Communities that are healthy, empowered and prosperous are the 

grassroots drivers of national and regional development. Without communities as partners and 

leaders, all of our aspirations for health and development will amount to little more than rhetoric. 

Community health workers who come from the communities they serve, are answerable to these 

communities, and receive training that is shorter than that required for doctors, nurses or other 

health professionals represent the essential “ missing link” between broad societal yearnings and 

the communities who both need assistance the most and serve as essential vehicles for progress. 

Few, if any, of our health and development tools match the potential of community health workers 

to drive gai ns on multiple fronts (Chizaram and Uchenna, 2017). 

A substantial body of evidence demonstrates that community health workers increase uptake of 

health services, reduce health inequalities, provide a high quality of services and improve overall 

health ou tcomes (Chizaram and Uchenna, 2017). Community health worker programmes also 

represent good jobs, bolster national and local economies and increase productivity by improving 

health and well -being. Investments in community health workers will also enable Af rica to turn the 

projected near -doubling in the youth population through 2050 from a potentially perilous “youth 

bulge” into a dynamic “demographic dividend” that drives economic growth and improves living 

standards. Indeed, investments in community health workers represent an ideal opportunity to Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 126 

tackle one of the most vexing problems in Africa, the perilously high levels of unemployment 

among young people. 

Impacts of Health Insurance in Low and Middle -Income Countries 

A broad range of risk -pooling mech anisms or insurance schemes are increasingly being utilized 

across the developing world to increase access and reduce the financial burden of health. The 

number of evaluations of such efforts is growing and while findings are mixed, the overall findings 

on impacts are encouraging. In theory, we expect health insurance to contribute to achievement 

of UHC because it increases access and utilization by lowering the price of health care. Individuals 

will have better health if they utilize preventive and curativ e health care when needed and in a 

timely manner (UNDP, 2011). 

Several studies that evaluate the impacts of programs ranging from NHI and SHI to CBHI on 

health care utilization and financial protection (Usoroh , 2012; Sachs, 2013). Broader definition of 

UHC given the lack of agreement on the specific systems that might be utilized to achieve it and 

because we argue that a national system may not be the only answer to achieving universal 

coverage. A systematic re view of the impacts of health insurance on health status in low and 

middle -income countries can be found in Giedion et al . (2013). 

Nigeria Strives to Achieve Universal Health Coverage 

Nigeria, with its population of around 162.5 million and a population growth rate of 2.5 percent, is 

the most populous country in Africa and the 8th most populous country in world (Iwu, et al., 2017). 

The country’s tumultuous history is reflected in its abundance of states beginning with only three 

states at the time of Nige ria’s independence from the United Kingdom in 1960 and now with 36 

states and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT), where the capital Abuja is located. This highlights 

the potential challenges of managing such a heterogeneous country. 

Nigeria is ranked as one of the fastest growing economies in the world with a growth rate of 6.4 

percent in 2007 and 7.4 percent in 2011 (Dutta and Hongoro, 2013). Nigeria’s GDP per capita in 

PPP adjusted dollars is $1,500 according to World Bank estimates from 2011. One of t he main 

issues facing the country is balancing oil sector revenues and government spending. Over the 

last few years, the accrued oil revenues have not led to improvements in the welfare of most of 

the population (Dutta and Hongoro, 2013). 

Poverty inciden ce has varied but remained high over the past decade. In 2004, the poverty rate 

was 54.4 percent., it rose to 62.6 percent in 2010 and dropped back down to 54.4 percent in 2011 

(Kayode and Ossai, 2018). There are great regional disparities, reflected in a contrast between 

rural areas with a poverty rate of 69.0 percent and 51.2 percent in the urban sector. The poorest 

zones of the country are those in the North while the South East zone has the lowest incidence 

of poverty. Inequality, as measured by the Gin i coefficient, rose steadily since 1985, save for a 

slight decline in 1992 (Kramer, Osagbemi, Tanović and Gustafsson -Wright, 2013). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 127 

As of 2011, the total population inequality is back at the only slightly better 1992 -levels with a Gini 

coefficient of 0.3 97. Human development indicators are staggeringly low considering the country’s 

GDP per capita. Nigeria ranks 156th out of 173 countries with data on the Human Development 

Index (HDI) (Okolo et al. , 2019). 

The State of Health in Nigeria 

Nigeria’s health indicators have either stagnated or worsened during the past decade despite the 

federal government’s efforts to improve healthcare delivery. Life expectancy at 52 years is below 

the African average, while the numbers on child mortality are astounding part ly because of the 

country’s size. Annually, one million Nigerian children die before the age of five due mostly to 

neonatal causes followed by malaria and pneumonia (Smith and Sulzbach, 2018). 

Maternal mortality is 630 per 100,000 live births which is co mparable to low -income countries 

such as Lesotho and Cameroon. An estimated 3.3 million Nigerians are infected with HIV and 

access to prevention, care and treatment is minimal. Nigeria also continues to combat the double 

burden of both communicable and non -communicable diseases (Smith and Sulzbach, 2018). 

Policymakers and political leaders face tough choices and trade -offs when considering where to 

allocate the limited resources at their disposal. Competing priorities make such decisions very 

hard, and pol itical dynamics often have a bigger role in determining the answers than evidence -

based evaluations of value for money. In this opening chapter we seek to briefly make the case 

for investment in UHC (Giedion and Díaz, 2010). 

The benefits of investing in h ealth are significant and not limited to improving the health of the 

population: there can be significant economic returns and social benefits. A recent report by the 

Lancet Commission on Investing in Health lays out the channels by which health improvemen ts 

have a direct impact on GDP: productivity (healthy people are more productive and less likely to 

take sick days); education (healthier children are more likely to go to school); investment (people 

are more likely to save when life expectancy is longer); access to natural resources (can be 

affected positively by a reduced risk from endemic diseases); temporary impact on ratio of 

working -age to dependent people (Tajudeen, Ifeanyi and Owoeye, 2015). It showed that 

reductions in mortality accounted for about 11 percent of recent economic growth in low - and 

middle -income countries, or even 24 percent of growth if the value of added life years is used to 

calculate a country’s ‘full income’ (Smith and Sulzbach, 2018). 

While the case for investment in health is clear, it is less straightforward to determine whether 

investments in health are more beneficial than those in areas such as education or infrastructure. 

Also, the strength of the case for investing in health varies among countries (Gertler and Gruber, 

200 2). The return on investment is likely to be highest for emerging economies: they can obtain 

significant improvements in health outcomes (e.g., life expectancy) through modest increases in 

health expenditure (Takian and Akbari -Sari, 2016). However, higher income countries might 

already be at a level of expenditure where the marginal return, in economic and health terms, for Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 128 

increased investment would be relatively small (Preker, Lindner, Chernichovsky and Schellekens, 

2013). 

Where policymakers have decid ed to make transformative investments in health, there are further 

choices to be made, such as how to allocate resources between improving health services and 

addressing the social determinants of health (Davig, Eric and Leeper, 2018). Improving water 

qual ity and sanitation, or funding girls’ education, may be as effective at improving health 

outcomes as spending on health services (Gerdtham and Magnus, 2020). However, given that 

strengthening health systems is vital to improving health outcomes, UHC is a h ighly effective way 

for countries to deliver significant health, economic and political benefits: 

a. Health: There is now significant evidence that UHC brings health improvements to the 

population of countries that implement it. Researchers using data from 153 countries 

concluded in The Lancet that “broader health coverage generally leads to better access 

to necessary care and improved population health, with the largest gains accruing to 

poorer people”.8 A recent review study9 found that UHC reforms have been a powerful 

driver for improving women’s health in a number of low - and middle -income countries 

in cluding Afghanistan, Mexico, Rwanda and Thailand. 

b. Economic: Apart from delivering the aforementioned economic benefits deriving from 

improved health, UHC can be an effective policy to reduce inequalities and poverty levels. 

The financial protection it provides can have further beneficial effects, for example helping 

reduce excessively high savings rates in famili es concerned about unpredictable 

healthcare costs as has been the case in China. UHC systems can help generate and 

support significant employment in the health and life sciences sectors. 

c. Political: The debate around the Affordable Care Act in the United States shows that the 

politics of UHC can be highly controversial. However, introducing UHC in a country with 

limited healthcare coverage for the majority of the population can provide significant 

benefits for politicians. The most recent example of this h as been President Joko Widodo 

(Jokowi) of Indonesia, whose focus on improving healthcare coverage has been an 

important driver in his political rise from city mayor, to Governor of Jakarta, to head of 

state. Politicians have also recognized the power of UH C to maintain social order and 

reduce the scope for conflict. Reporting on the decision of the Chinese Government to 

launch massive public health reforms in 2009, the then Minister of Health Chen Zhu said 

that the government’s primary motivation was to ens ure a harmonious society ( Gerdtham 

& Magnus, 2020). 

Nigeria’s Health System 

Nigeria has a federally funded National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), designed to facilitate 

fair financing of health care costs through risk pooling and cost -sharing arrangem ents for 

individuals. Since its launch in 2005 the scheme claims to have issued 5 million identity cards, 

covering about 3 percent of the population (Nyandekwe, Nzeribe and Kakoma, 2018). Under the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 129 

National Health Insurance Act 2008, the national health i nsurance started a Rural Community -

Based Social Health Insurance Program (RCSHIP) in 2012. The majority of the enrollees, 

however, are individuals working in the formal sector and the community scheme still leaves large 

gaps among the poor and informally e mployed (Nyandekwe et al. , 2018). 

Several proposals are currently in the works to expand the reach of NHIS. One such proposal is 

to make registration mandatory for federal government employees. The creation of a “health fund” 

collecting an earmarked “heal th tax” of 2 percent on the value of luxury goods was proposed 

(Opatunde & Zachariah, 2019). This fund would be used for the health insurance of specified 

groups of Nigerian citizens, including: children under five, physically challenged or disabled 

indivi duals, senior citizens above 65, prison inmates, pregnant women requiring maternity care, 

and indigent persons. At a broader level, the National Health Bill which was first proposed in 2006 

to improve its poor health sector by allocating at least 2 percent of the federal government’s 

revenue to the health sector is still not signed into law (Opatunde & Zachariah, 2019). 

Constraints to Achieving UHC in Nigeria 

According to Omehi and Azubuike, (2018) the constraints to achieving UHC in Nigeria are 

numerous and complex. Factors limiting Nigeria’s health outcomes are both demand and supply -

side including inadequate financing, weak governance and enforcement, inadequate 

infrastructure and poor service quality, weak governance and enforcement, household poverty 

and insufficient risk pooling. 

1. Inadequate Government Financing for Health 

Dehinde & Osagie (2019) postulated that there are four main sources of public funding for the 

public (non -federal) health sector: state governments, local governments, direct all ocations from 

the federal government, and private individuals and organizations, including non -governmental 

organizations and international donors in some states. The federal government and some state 

governments have increased funding to public health car e (PHC) over the past decade, with a 

dramatic increase between 2005 and 2007 (Dehinde & Osagie, 2019). 

Achieving universal health coverage in Nigeria one state at a time 7 increase in health sector 

allocations jumped from 31.4 percent to 86.2 percent. Non etheless, Nigeria spends a mere 5.3 

percent of its GDP,) or $139 (PPP) per capita on health care. This is extremely low, in particular 

when compared to other African countries such as Burkina Faso (6.7 percent) and the Democratic 

Republic of Congo (7.9 per cent), which have considerably lower GDP per capita (Dehinde & 

Osagie, 2019). 

The government contributes only 36.7 percent of the country’s total spending on health. In order 

to achieve effective access and financial protection, the government must begin by making a more 

serious commitment to spend on health. The absence of institutionalized National Health 

Accounts (NHA), however, contributes to the challenge of reassessing health spending in the 

country. Finally, low levels of external health financing reflect an unwillingness to invest in the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 130 

country. Just 9.2 percent of spending is donor funded, which is very low compared to, for example, 

Ghana with 16.9 percent, which has a comparable GDP per capita (Alhassan & Okonji, 2019). 

Weak Governance and Enf orcement 

The existing legislative structure for budget allocations to social sectors as well as weak 

governance and institutions leads to inefficient spending and lack of trust in the system. State 

governments in Nigeria have substantial autonomy and exercise consi derable authority over the 

allocation and utilization of their resources. This arrangement constrains the leverage that the 

federal government has over state and local governments in terms of getting them to invest in the 

health sector (Alli and Uwaji, 201 8). 

Therefore, top -down approaches continue to fail to produce improvements in access, financial 

protection, and health indicators. In addition, the public system lacks transparency and 

enforcement, making it subject to corruption and lending inadequate medical and administrative 

capacity to produce services efficiently and of adequate quality. A weak institutional framework 

leads to high uncertainty and risk and thereby low levels of trust which reduces the willingness of 

individuals to invest. Therefore , the willingness to prepay for health care remains low (Alli & Uwaji, 

2018). 

Inadequate Health Infrastructure and Poor Service Quality 

Low government spending combined with weak institutions and lack of enforcement lead to 

inadequate health infrastructu re and poor service quality. Due to the unwillingness to invest in 

health or prepay for health care, predictable revenue flow is unavailable for health providers to 

improve the supply chain leaving much of the country’s health infrastructure in a dismal st ate 

(Tangcharoensathien, Oyeneye & Jafarudeen, 2019). Many health facilities lack access to clean 

water and a reliable supply of electricity, face shortages of medical equipment, and are missing 

necessary medications or blood to treat their patients. 

In addition, there is a deficiency in qualified health professionals in particular in poor communities 

(Ogungbe & Eche -Gilbert, 2019). Large disparities exist between urban and rural areas and 

between states due to the variation in remuneration packages for h ealth professionals across 

states and between federal and state level, health professionals gravitate to better paying federal 

facilities and states (Ogungbe & Eche -Gilbert, 2019). Private providers mainly operate in urban 

settings where income levels are the highest. This situation results in a lack of qualified and 

competent health professionals for individuals who live in poor rural areas that tend to bear a 

greater disease burden ( Tangcharoensathien et al. , 2019). 

Gap in Literature 

The essence of thi s study is to fill the existing gap in knowledge where focus on the Nigeria’s 

quest towards achieving the Universal Health Coverage in line with Goal 3 of the United Nations Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 131 

Development Goals is being challenged by pragmatic policy focus because of lack o f knowledge 

of the UHC for inclusive and sustainable development in healthcare professional practice. 

Methodology 

A cross -sectional survey was conducted in June and July of 2021.The study made use of primary 

source of data collection. Through the administration of pencil -paper questionnaire to elicit 

responses from nurses. A list of potential respondents was generated from a pool of nurses who 

had experience interacting with the researcher and her research team. The respondents were 

informed about the purpose of the study and how the details of the study would help improve 

nursing practice. 

This research considered t he eligibility of the nurses who volunteered to participate in the study. 

Having obtained their consent to participate, the research team continued the exercise by giving 

out questionnaires to the (nurses) respondents electronically. Phone calls were sent to them two 

and four weeks after the initial distribution of the questionnaire. Names were not collected, to 

ensure anonymity of the respondents. 

Data analysis was conducted using the version 20 of the Statistical Package for Social Sciences, 

version 20 a nd to ensure ecological validity, the research team developed a demographic profile 

section and 4 questions initially based on the implementation biographical information as 

recommended by the WHO Global Forum for the Governmental Chief Nursing Officers an d

Midwives (GCNOMs). 

Apart from the demographic profile, there were two parts in the final version of the questionnaire, 

namely, knowledge of inclusiveness of UHC and the perceived contribution to sustainable 

development of UHC. Inclusiveness of UHC was c omposed of the government initiative (Q3), 

healthcare insurance and financing policy (Q1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12), and human 

resources policy (Q13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27. Respondents 

were asked to indicate how they evaluate the importance of contribution of Nurses in Nigeria to 

their level of knowledge of UHC. For sustainable development of UHC, respondents were asked 

to rate their perceived contribution (Q28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, and 36) and perceiv ed 

importance of nurses (Q37, 38 and 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44). 

Split half reliability was performed using Spearman’s coefficient which was satisfactory at 0.881. 

With the unique function of the Likert -type questionnaire system, the respondents’ answers were 

automatically compiled in a table format. Descriptive and inferential statistics were then computed 

and a comparison was performed by years of experience, job title, nature of one’s role, and their 

qualifications. 

Data Interpretation 

The study considered the analysis of data generated from the research study in relation to the 

responses obtained through questionnaire administration. A total of one hundred and thirty -one Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 132 

(131) questionnaires were initially distributed, however, only on e hundred and twenty -five (125) 

were retrieved. Three (3) healthcare facilities were engaged for this study namely; Federal 

Medical Centre, Airport Road, Jabi Federal Capital Territory, Abuja and Save -A-Life Mission 

Hospital Stadium Road, Port -Harcourt, Ri vers State, Nigeria, as well as, New General Central 

Hospital GRA, Asaba, Delta State, Nigeria. Respondents (Nurses) at the Federal Medical Centre, 

Airport Road, Jabi FCT, Abuja were sixty -nine, 69 making a total of 55%, of the entire population 

of the stu dy. Nurses from the Save -A-Life Mission Hospital Stadium Road, Port -Harcourt, Rivers 

State Nigeria were forty -one 41 making a total of 33% respondents and the nurses who 

participated in this study, from New General Central Hospital GRA, Asaba, Delta State, Nigeria 

were fifteen 15 making a total of just 12%. The responses or data retrieved from the questionnaire 

administration formed the basis of the following results. 

Table 3.1: Showing the Categories of Nurses (Respondents) from the 3 Hospitals that 

Part icipated in the Study 

s/n  Categories of Nurses  Frequency  Percent  Valid 

Percent 

Cumulative 

Percent 

1. 

2. 

3. 

Auxiliary Nurses 

Pediatric Nurses 

Critical Care Nursing 

Total 

56 

41 

28 

125 

44.8 

32.8 

22.4 

100 

45.0 

33.0 

22.0 

100 

45.0 

33.0 

22.0 

100 

> Source : Field Analysis, (2021).

From the result 3.1., categories of Nurses that participated in the study from the three hospitals 

used in the study suggest that auxiliary nurses had the highest population with 56(44%), closely 

followed by Pediatric Nurses who were 41(32.8%) of the entir e population and the least category 

were critical care nurses who were 28(22.4%) of the entire population. 

Table 3.2: Showing the Age Distribution Information of Nurses from the 3 Hospitals that 

Participated in the Hospital 

Age Range  Mean  Standard 

De viation 

Frequency  Percent  Valid 

Percent 

Cumulative 

Percent 

17 -30 

31 -50 

50above 

34.56  6.37 

66 

36 

23 

52.8 

28.8 

18.4 

53.0 

29.0 

18.0 

53.0 

29.0 

18.0 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2021).

From the result Table 3.2., revealed that age distribution of nurses with an average age of 34.56 

and the majority of respondents where within the age bracket of 17 -30 (53%), closely followed Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 133 

respondents within the age bracket of 31 -50 (29%), and age brac ket of 51 and above was 18.2% 

of the entire population of the study. Thus it can be inferred that the respondents of the study 

were knowledgeable enough to provide informed consent pertaining to the questions asked in the 

questionnaire regarding customer s atisfaction. 

Table 3.3: Table Showing the Gender Distribution of Respondents from the 3 Hospitals that 

Participated in the Study 

Genders  Frequency  Percent  Valid Percent  Cumulative 

Percent 

Male 

Female 

Total 

77 

48 

125 

61.6 

38.4 

100 

62.0 

38.0 

100 

62.0 

38.0 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2021).

The descriptive analysis in Table 3.3 indicated the gender distribution of respondents in this study. 

The analysis demonstrated that gender of respondents was representative the differences in the 

number of male and female respondents. Result showed that female respondents were the 

majority with 77 (61.6%) and male respondents were the least with 48 (38.4%), indicating that 

majority of the respondents were female. This implies that there are more females than male s in 

the study. 

Table 3.4: Showing Educational Qualification Obtained by Each of the Respondents from 

the 3 Hospitals 

Educational 

Qualification 

Frequency  Percent  Valid Percent  Cumulative 

Percent 

SSCE 

B.Sc. 

M.Sc. 

PhD. 

Total 

31 

66 

23 

05 

125 

24.8 

58.2 

18.4 

04.0 

100 

19.0 

58.0 

24.0 

04.0 

100 

19.0 

58.0 

24.0 

04.0 

100 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2020).

From the Table 3.4 majority of respondents had reportedly obtained bachelor’s degree, 66 

(58.2%), followed by respondents who had obtained Senior Secondary School Certification 

31(24.8%), this is followed by respondents with a Master’s degree 23 (18.4%), h owever, only 3 

respondents indicated that the highest qualification was Doctorate Degree making up 5(4%) of 

the total population. Thus, it can be inferred that the majority of the respondents of the study had 

university education, this indicates that the r espondents who were educated were more likely to 

report perceptions of universal health coverage is required to form opinion and responses on the 

items of the questionnaires. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 134 

Table 3.5: Showing Religious Belief as Indicated by Each of the Respondents fr om the 3 

Hospitals 

Religious Beliefs  Frequency  Percent  Valid Percent  Cumulative 

Percent 

Christian 

Muslim 

Others 

Total 

75 

41 

09 

125 

60.0 

32.8 

7.2 

100 

60.0 

33.0 

7.0 

100 

60.0 

24.0 

7.0 

100 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2021).

From the Table 3.5 majority of respondents indicated that they were Christians, 75 (58.2%), 

followed by respondents who reported that they were Muslims 41(18.4%), and the least category 

of respondents with other beliefs 9(18.4%). Thus, it can be inferred that the majority of the 

respondents of the study had been Christians. 

Data Presentation, Analysis and Discussion 

This section presents the results obtained from the study analysis in tabular formats where 

inferences were drawn. The study considered the analysis of data ge nerated from the research 

study in relation to the responses obtained from the questionnaire administration. A total of one 

hundred and twenty -five (125) were retrieved. Respondents (Nurses) at the Federal Medical 

Centre, Airport Road, Jabi FCT, Abuja were sixty -nine, 69 making a total of 55%, of the entire 

population of the study. Nurses from the Save -A-Life Mission Hospital Stadium Road, Port -

Harcourt, Rivers State Nigeria were forty -one 41 making a total of 33% respondents and the 

nurses who participated in this study, from New General Central Hospital GRA, Asaba, Delta 

State, Nigeria were fifteen 15 making a total of just 12%. The responses or data retrieved from 

the questionnaire administration formed the basis of the following results. The responses o r data 

retrieved from the questionnaire administration formed the basis of the following results. 

Testing of Results 

Nurses’ knowledge of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) for inclusive and sustainable 

development would not significantly influence the per ception of development of healthcare 

services in Nigeria. Below is the regression analysis for the test of hypotheses. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 135 

Table 4.1: Regression Analysis on Nurses’ Knowledge of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) 

on Perception of Development of Healthcare Services in Nigeria 

Model  Unstandardized 

Coefficient 

Standardiz 

ed 

Coefficient 

s

βeta 

T Sign.  Collinearity Statistics. 

Β Std. Error  Tolerance  df 

Constant 

Nurses’ 

Knowledge 

3.651 

3.771 

2.674 

.092 

.233 

.384 

.

2.87 

3.67 

.000 

.000  .078  1 (400) 

Model Statistics 

R

R2

Adjusted R 2

Standard Error Estimate 

F Statistic 

Level of Significance 

DW statistics 

.455 

.717 

.219 

3.331 

23.291 

.000 

1.390 

> *NOTE: Field Analysis, (2021).

The regression analysis above showed that the nurses’ knowledge on UHC was statistically 

significant on perception of development of healthcare services in Nigeria. The overall effect of 

nurses’ knowledge on UHC on perception of development of healthcare servi ces was significant 

(β = .38; F= 23.29; p < .00). Therefore, the null hypothesis 1 was rejected. This result implies that 

nurses’ knowledge on UHC is a significant contributor to the perception of development of 

healthcare services, such that, when increased level of nurses’ knowledge on univers al health 

coverage, this increases the tendency for nurses to perceive development of healthcare services. 

The result further revealed R 2 of .71, implying that the contribution of facets of customer service 

contributed 71% to the overall variance on custo mer satisfaction. This suggests that other 

variables not considered in this study may account for more than 29% of the total variance 

observed in the study. 

The contribution of the role of nurses in Nigeria would not lead to significant improvement in th e

perception of the universal health coverage for health workers. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 136 

Table 4.2: Regression Analysis Showing the Contribution of the Role of Nurses in Nigeria 

to Perception of the Universal Health Coverage for Health Workers 

Model  Unstandardized 

Coeffic ient 

Standardiz 

ed 

Coefficient 

s

βeta 

T Sign  Collinearity Statistics. 

Β Std. Error  Tolerance  Df 

Constant 

Contribution 

of the Role of 

Nurses to 

Perception of 

UHC 

2.93 

3.89 

2.342 

6.441 

.277 

.398 

2.13 

3.11 

.000 

.000  .091  1(400) 

Model Statistics 

R

R2

Adjusted R 2

Standard Error Estimate 

F Statistic 

Level of Significance 

DW statistics 

.356 

.632 

.341 

1663 

31.08 

.000 

3.111 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2021).

From the results above, the regression analysis above showed that there is a contribution of the 

role of nurses in Nigeria was significant to the improvement in the perception of the universal 

health services for health workers [ β = .39; F = 32.77; p < .00 ]. The overall contribution of the role 

of nurses in Nigeria was significant to the improvement in the perception of the universal health 

coverage. Therefore, the null hypothesis two was rejected. This result implies that technological 

innovation is a sig nificant contributor to customer satisfaction, such that, technological innovation 

increases, the higher the perception of customer satisfaction. 

The challenges faced by nurses in Nigeria will not lead to a decline in achievement recorded in 

the univers al health coverage . The result is presented in Table 4.3. 

Table 4.2.: Regression Analysis Showing the Relationship Between Challenges Faced by 

Nurses Would Decline in Achievement Recorded in the Universal Health Coverage 

Model  Unstandardized 

Coefficien t

Standardiz 

ed 

T Sign  Collinearity Statistics. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 137 

Β Std. Error  Coefficient 

s

βeta 

Tolerance  Df 

Constant 

Quality of 

Service Delivery 

1.771 

4.16 

2.332 

.311 

.389 

.422 

3.33 

3.92 

.000 

.000  .092  1, (400) 

Model Statistics 

R

R2

Adjusted R 2

Standard Error Estimate 

F Statistic 

Level of Significance 

DW statistics 

.344 

.502 

.513 

2.44 

27.19 

.000 

1.299 

> Source: Field Analysis, (2021).

The regression analysis above showed that the challenges faced by nurses was statistically 

significant to the decline in achievement recorded in the universal health coverage [ β=.42; F = 

27.19; p < .00], therefore, null hypothesis 3 was rejected. The overall challenges faced by nurses 

to the decline i n achievement recorded in the universal health coverage was significant. This 

result implied that the overall challenges faced by nurses in assessing universal health coverage 

is significant contributor to perception of the decline of universal health cov erage, such that 

decrease in the overall challenges faced by nurses leads to high perception of the decline in 

achievement recorded in the universal health coverage. The result signifies that the n urses’ 

knowledge of universal health coverage, the contribu tion of the role of nurses , as well as, when 

pulled together yield a multiple R of .34 and R2 of .50 [ F = (2, 125) = 27.19, p < 0.01]. 

Summary 

This study revealed that nurses showed low political involvement and powerlessness in the 

process of policy making, which was consistent with the findings from previous studies (Boswell, 

Cannon & Miller, 2019). Focusing on the difference between Auxiliary Nurses (AN’s) and Pediatric 

Nurses (PN’s), majority of the former believed that it was important for nurses to develop 

evidence -based policy for managing the nursing workforce, and to ensure the continuity of the 

health care system, pressure groups should be lobbied, while of the latter agreed that it was the 

nurse’s role and they should help support educational institutions in developing/implementing 

training programmes to meet the changing quantitative demand of healthcare delivery. 

This may reflect the importance of training and education in fostering nurses’ political sense, 

particularly their understanding of the policy making process. From the core competencies Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 138 

stipulated by The Nursing Council of Nigeria, AN’s are only required to practice in accor dance 

with policies while PNs and Critical -Care Nurses (CCNs) are expected to understand the process 

of developing health care policies. However, attention was suggested for teaching health care 

policies in the curriculum for nursing education. The inadequ acy of policy studies in nursing 

education can be reflected in the answers of the respondents to the questions about the perceived 

contribution to evidence -based policy making. Only ANs and PNs, respectively, claimed that they 

had more contribution in the development of evidence -based policy. This finding suggests that 

the majority of nurses feel powerless and remote from policy -making related to healthcare 

services. 

As a result, they are indifferent to the political process leading to UHC for healthcare workers to 

access healthcare services in Nigeria. This phenomenon warrants the immediate attention of the 

nursing profession. It may be timely and appropriate to reconsider the long standing suggestion 

to incorporate political education in the education of nurses. 

From the findings of this study, nurses with higher academic qualifications, such as the master’s 

degree and higher, perceived a significantly higher level of importance in helping to 

develop/strengthen policies to improve the quality of nursing education. In recent years, the 

Government has proposed several major changes in elderly care policy in response to the 

challenges evolving from our rapidly aging society, such as strengthening primary care, 

emphasizing aging in place, and a voluntary heal th insurance scheme. Understandably, these 

changes mean increasing demand for both ANs and PNs at the community level. 

The question is, will nurses be able to meet the demand, or an even better question may be, have 

nurses been prepared for it? Unfortunat ely, with the present ANs, PNs and CCNs mix, the answer 

is negative. The findings of this study reaffirmed this. It is crucial, therefore, to involve nurses in 

policy -making, particularly when a major change is expected to occur. To ensure nurses are 

compe tent in the political process, the professional body such as The Nursing Council of Nigeria 

should consider revising nursing curriculum to increase nurses’ knowledge on the universal health 

coverage. 

Conclusion 

Universal health care evolves from the ‘H ealth for All’ movement advocated by the WHO in the 

1970s. Since then, the Nigerian government has launched many initiatives in order to achieve 

UHC, particularly for inclusive and sustainable healthcare services for healthcare workers such 

as nurses. Alth ough the outcomes of these initiatives are yet to be seen, the researcher and her 

supervisor considered it to be appropriate to conduct the reported survey to identify nurses’ 

knowledge of and involvement in the process, including policy -making and impleme ntation. It was 

hoped that the findings would inform major stakeholders of some issues which may possibly affect 

the success of these initiatives. 

The survey has revealed some knowledge gaps among nurses. Their knowledge of healthcare 

financing, including health insurance, drug -dispensing, and human resource policy needs to be Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 139 

enhanced. The low perceived importance and contribution to the sustainable development of 

elderly healthcare services are deterrents to their possible involvement in the initiatives . After all, 

nurses constitute a major work force in healthcare. They should be better prepared to participate 

with policy -making knowledge for the benefit of the population that they serve. 

Recommendations 

Since the demand for healthcare services will increase in the future. To meet the escalating 

demand, the government needs to allocate additional resources, be they human or financial, to 

prepare the society. The nurses constitute the major healthcare workf orce in Nigeria. There is no 

reason for nurses to have such low level knowledge of the universal health coverage and to be 

unprepared for this forthcoming challenge. Based on the findings, the following recommendations 

were made for this study. 

1. It is cruc ial, therefore, to involve nurses in policy -making, particularly when a major change 

is expected to occur. To ensure nurses are competent in the political process, the 

professional body such as Nursing Council of Nigeria should consider revising the 

indica ted nursing curriculum and core -competency of nurses to strengthen the nurses’ 

knowledge and ability to participate in policy development. Thus, the gap between policy 

and practice could be bridged. 

2. Since nurse educators are responsible for nurturing the future generation of nurses, they 

should be role models for their students, and should equip themselves well in this area. 

There is an urgent need to involve more nurse educators in the political process leading 

to decision -making. 

3. The survey uncovered a considerable knowledge gap in nurses’ knowledge of UHC, but 

care must be taken in interpreting the findings from such a non -random sample. Having 

collected the data on nurses’ perceived contribution and importance to policy -making 

ac ross clinical, management and education sectors, the research team believes that, with 

the increase of the aged population, regulatory bodies such as the Nursing Council of 

Nigeria could do more to enhance their capacity at various fronts to support the 

go vernment’s initiatives to provide UHC for nurses and other healthcare workers. 

4. To ensure that more knowledge with regards to universal health coverage for nurses in 

Nigeria, the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), National Primary Healthcare 

Developm ent Agency (NPHCDA) as well as, the Hospital/Healthcare Management Boards 

(HMO’s) under the auspices of Ministry of Health are encouraged to reform the healthcare 

policy mandate nurses and other allied healthcare workers are to attend and actively 

particip ate in seminars, conferences and workshops on universal health coverage so as 

to assuage and increase knowledge regarding universal health coverage as it concerns 

health workers especially nurses in Nigeria. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 140 

References 

Books 

Giedion, U., Alfonso, E. A. & Díaz, Y. (2013). The impact of universal coverage schemes in the 

developing world: A review of the existing evidence . Washington, D.C., The World Bank. 

pp. 122 -125. 

Preker, A. S., Lindner, M. E., Chernichovsky, D. & Schellekens, O. (2013). Scaling up a ffordable 

health insurance staying the course. Washington D.C.: The World Bank. 

Usoroh, E. E. (2012). Achieving universal health coverage in Nigeria: The national health 

insurance scheme as a tool . Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. pp. 16 -17. 

Book Chapters 

Giedion, U., & Díaz, B. Y. (2010). Chapter 2: A review of the evidence. In Griffin, C., Escobar, 

M., and Shaw, R. (Eds.). Impact of health insurance in low - and middle -income countries 

(pp. 13 -32). Washington, D.C. Brookings Institution Pres s. 

Schellekens, O. P., van der Gaag, J., Lindner, M. E., & de Groot, J. (2013). Chapter 20: New 

development paradigm. In Preker, A. S., Lindner, M. L., Chernichovsky, D., and 

Schellekens, O. P. (Eds.), Scaling up affordable health insurance: Staying the c ourse (pp. 

539 -557). Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 

Journal Articles 

Adongo, P. B., Phillips, J. F. & Aikins M, (2014). Does the design and implementation of proven 

innovations for delivering basic primary health care services in rural communities fit the 

urban setting: The case of Ghana’s Community -based Health Planning and Services 

(CHPS). Health Resource Poli cy & System , 12(1), 23 -29. 

Alli, S. L. & Uwaji, O. P. (2018). The terrain of health policy analysis in low and middle income 

countries: a review of published literature 1994 -2007. Nigerian Health Policy Plan , 23(2), 

294 –307. 

Austin -Evelyn, K. (2019). Com munity health worker perspectives on a new primary health care 

initiative in South -Eastern Nigeria. PLoS One, 82(2), 112 -119. 

Awojumobi, A. J., Remilekun, E. I. & Okpara, N. W. (2017). Transforming the delivery of care in 

the post -health reform era: What role will community health workers play? African Journal 

of Public Health , 5(2), 101 -115. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 141 

Beegle, K., de Weerdt, J., & Dercon , S. (2008). Adult mortality and consumption growth in the 

age of HIV/AIDS. Economic Development and Cultural Change , 56(2), 299 -326. 

Boswell, C., Cannon, S. & Miller, J. (2014). Nurses’ political involvement: Responsibility versus 

privilege. Journal of Professional Nursing, 21(1), 5 -8. doi:10.1016/j. profnurs.2014.11.005. 

Boswell, C., Cannon, S. & Miller, J. (2019). Nurses’ political involvement: Responsibility versus 

privilege. Journal of Professional Nursery , 121(3):55 -58. 

Chan, S. W. C., & Cheng, B . S. (1999). Political participation in Nigeria: A study. Journal of 

Nursing Management, 18(7), 167 -175. 

Chen, L., Yip, W., Chang, M., Lin, H., Lee, S., Chiu, Y., & Lin, Y. (2007). The effects of Taiwan’s 

national health insurance on access and health sta tus of the elderly. Health Economics, 16, 

223 -42. 

Chimezie, R. S. & Faloye, E. J. (2014). Nigeria’s evolving community health worker system: 

qualitative assessment of client and provider perspectives. Human Resources for Health, 

12(2), 71 -76. 

Chizaram S. W. & Uchenna, B. S. (2017). Political participation in Hong Kong: A study. Journal 

Nursery Management , 18(7), 167 -75. 

Davig, T., Eric, M. & Leeper, O. (2018). Monetary –fiscal policy interactions and fiscal stimulus. 

European Economic Review, 155 (2): 211 –27. 

Dehinde, E. R. & Osagie, W. M. (2019). From research to national expansion: 20 years’ 

experience of community -based case management of childhood pneumonia in Nigeria. 

Bulletin World Health Organ, 86 (3), 339 -343. 

Fox, M. P., Rosen S., Macleod W. B., Wasunna, M., Bii, M., Foglia, G., and Simon, J. L. (2004). 

The impact of HIV/AIDS on labour productivity in Kenya.  Tropical Medicine & International 

Health, 9(3), 318 -324. 

Galarraga, O., Sosa -Rubi, S. G., Salinas -Rodriguez, A., & Sesma -Vazquez, S. (2010).  Health 

insurance for the poor: Impact on catastrophic and out -of -pocket health expenditures in 

Mexico. European Journal of Health Economics, 11 (5), 437 -447. 

Gerdtham, U. G., & Magnus, J. (2020). New estim ates of the demand for health: Results based 

on a categorical health measure and Indonesian micro data. Social Science & Medicine 149 

(10): 1325 –1332. 

Gertler, P. & Gruber, J. (2002). Insuring consumption against illness. American Economic 

Review, 92, (3) , 51 -70. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 142 

Gustafsson -Wright, E., Janssens, W., & van der Gaag, J. (2010). The inequitable impacts of 

health shocks on the uninsured in Namibia: The potential for low -cost health insurance 

schemes to protect the poor. Health Policy & Planning , 26 (2), 142 -156. 

Iwu, A. B., Ekeh, R. T., & Austin -Evelyn, K. (2017). Community health worker perspectives on a 

new primary health care initiative in the South -Eastern Nigeria. PLoS One, 12, 173 -178. 

Jutting, J. (2003). Do community -based health insurance schemes i mprove poor people’s 

access to health care? Evidence from rural Senegal. World Development , 32 (2), 273 -288. 

Kayode, E. E., & Ossai, M. (2018). Teaching mothers to provide home treatment of malaria in 

Tigray, Ethiopia: a randomised trial. Lancet, 356 (5), 550 -555. 

King, G., Gakidou, E., Imai, K., Lakin, J., Moore, R. T., Nall, C. & Llamas, H. H. (2009). Public 

policy for the poor? A randomized assessment of the Mexican universal health insurance 

programme. The Lancet, 103(2), 236 -241. 

Legislative Council, (2014). Residential care homes for the elderly. International Studies , 21(3), 

24 -29. 

Leung, J. L., Sezto, N. W., Chan, W. C., Cheng, S. P., Tang, S. H., & Lam, L. C. (2013). 

Attitudes and perceived competence of residential care home s staff about dementia care. 

Asian Journal Gerontology & Geriatric Studies, 8(1):13 -19. 

Litvack, J., & Bodart, C. (1993). User fees plus quality equals improved access to health care: 

Results of a field experiment in Cameroon. Social Science & Medicine , 3 7 (3), 369 -83. 

London, L. (2008). What is a human -rights based approach to health and does it matter? Health 

Hum Right s,10, (65), 23 -29. 

Nwanfor, M. K., Ogoribuno, S. K. & Nza, W. K. (2018). Improving health system quality in low -

and middle -income count ries that are expanding health coverage: A framework for 

insurance. International Journal of Quality Health Care , 25:497 –504. 

Nyandekwe, M. M., Nzeribe, A. R. & Kakoma, J. (2018). Universal health coverage in Nigeria 

and Rwanda: Dream or reality. Pan Afri can Medical Journal, 17(2), 228 -231. 

Ogungbe, M. J., & Eche -Gilbert, N. W, (2019). Transforming the delivery of care in the post -

health reform era: What role will community health workers play in Nigeria? American 

Journal of Public Health, 20(2), 104 -110. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 143 

Okolo, C., Nwankwo, A. C., Okoli, C., Obikeze, E. (2019). The challenges of establishing 

universal health coverage in Enugu State, South -East, Nigeria. Developing Country 

Studies , 9(4), 12 -19. 

Omehi, E. E. & Azubuike, J. (2018). Nigeria’s evolving community health worker system: 

Qualitative assessment of clien t and provider perspectives. Human Resources for Health, 

92 (3), 71 -81. 

Perker, A. S., Harding, A., and Travis, P. (2000). Make or Buy. Decisions in the production of 

health care goods and services: New services from Institutional economics and 

organizati onal theory. Bulletin of Psychology, 102(2), 89 -92. 

Sachs, J. D. (2013). High stakes at the UN on the Sustainable Development Goals. Lancet, 21: 

382, (9897):1001 -2. 

Smith J. (2004). Transnational processes and movements: The Blackwell companion to social 

movements, African Journal of Social Science, 23(2), 311 –335. 

Smith, K., & Sulzbach, S. (2008). Community -based health insurance and access to maternal 

health servic es: Evidence from three West African countries. Social Science & Medicine ,

66, 2460 -2473. 

Tajudeen, E. R., Ifeanyi, P. A., & Owoeye, M. A, (2015). Accelerating health equity: the key role 

of universal health coverage in the Sustainable Development Goals. BMC Medicine , 13(2), 

101 -109. 

Takian, A. & Akbari -Sari, A. (2016). Sustainable health development becoming agenda for 

public health academia. Iran Journal of Public Health , 45(2), 1502 -1522. 

Tangcharoensathien, V., Oyeneye, W. M., A, & Jafarudeen, K. P. (2019). Accelerating health 

equity: The key role of universal health coverage in the Sustainable Development Goals 

(SDG’s) . BMC Medicine , 23(2), 106 -111. 

Trujillo, A., Portillo, J. & Vernon, J. (2015). The impact of subsidized health insurance for the 

poo r: Evaluating the Colombian experience using propensity score matching. International 

Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 5, 211 –239. 

Wagstaff, A. & Lindelow, M. (2008). Can insurance increase financial risk? The curious case of 

health insurance in China. Journal of Health Economics, 27 (4), 990 -1005. 

Wagstaff, A. (2007). The economic consequences of health shocks: Evidence from Vietnam. 

Journal of Health Economics , 26, 82 -100. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 144 

Wagstaff, A., & Yu, S. (2007). Do health sector reforms have their intended impacts? The World 

Bank’s Health VIII project in Gansu province, China . Journal of Health Economics, 26, 505 –

535. 

Willmann, J. H. (2012). Advocating for nursing through public policy. Perioperative Nursing & 

Clinical Practice , 13;7(4):367 -74. 

Woodward, B., Smart, D., & Benavides -Vaello, S. (2015). Modifiable factors that support 

political participation by nurses. Journal of Professional Nursing , 16, (2), 23 -29. 

Official Documents 

Cotlear, D., Somil , N., Ajay, T. & Rafael, C. (2019). Going universal: How 24 developing 

countries are implementing universal health coverage from the bottom up. World Bank 

Publications. 

FMoH, (2009a). Nigeria demographic health survey of 2008. Federal Ministry of Health and 

ORC Macro., XVI, 178 -181. 

Gustafsson -Wright, E., Tanović, Z., & van der Gaag, J. (2013). The impact of private subsidized 

health insurance and clinic upgrades on health care utilization and financial protection in 

rural Nigeria Amsterdam: Amsterd am Institute for International Development. 

Kramer, B., Osagbemi, G. K., Tanović, Z., & Gustafsson -Wright, B. S. (2013). The impact of 

subsidized health insurance on hypertension in rural Nigeria: A population -based study. 

Amsterdam: Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development. 

Perry, H. & Zulliger, R. (2012). How effective are community health workers? Johns Hopkins 

Bloomberg School of Public Health: Baltimore (USA). 

The World Health Organization. (2009). WHO country cooperation strategy 20 08 -2013: Nigeria. 

Republic of Congo: World Health Organization, 2009. p. 8. 

UNDP (2011). Human development report 2011: Sustainability and equity: A better future for all. 

New York: United Nations Development Programme. 

United Nations Children’s Fund, (2014). Access to healthcare through community health 

workers in East and Southern Africa. Bulletin of the United Nations Children’s Fund: New 

York. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 145 

Conference/Seminar/Position Papers 

Alhassan, R. & Okonji , T. A. (2019). Africa’s got work to do: Employment prospects in the new 

century. Excerpt from the Proceedings of the 239th Summit on employment index in 

Sub -Saharan Africa. International Monetary Fund: Washington DC, XVI, 1073 -1086. 

Carrin, G. (2003). Community -based health insurance schemes in developing countries: Facts, 

problems and perspectives. Discussion Paper No. 1. Geneva: World Health 

Organization 

Dutta, A., & Hongoro, C. (2013). Scaling up national health insurance in Nigeria: Learning fro m

case studies of India, Colombia, and Thailand. Washington, DC: Futures Group, Health 

Policy Project. pp. 3 -4. 

Dutta, A., & Hongoro, C. (2013). Scaling up national health insurance in Nigeria: Learning from 

case studies of India, Colombia, and Thailan d. Washington, DC: Futures Group, Health 

Policy Project. p. 1. 

Opatunde, H. & Zachariah, A. B. (2019). How effective are community health workers? Johns 

Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health: Baltimore (USA), Research Paper XIX, 

1020 - 1034. 

Wagsta ff, A., & Moreno -Serra, R. (2007). Europe and central Asia’s great post -communist social 

health insurance experiment: Impacts on health sector and labor market outcomes. 

World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 4371. Washington, D.C 

Wagstaff, A., Linde low, M., Junc, G., Ling, X., & Juncheng, Q. (2007). Extending health 

insurance to the rural population: An impact evaluation of China’s new cooperative 

medical scheme. World Bank Impact Evaluation Series No. 12. 

WHO. (2008a). World health statistics, 20 08. Geneva: World Health Organization. 

WHO. (2008b). World health statistics, 2008. Geneva: World Health Organization. 

WHO. (2010). Health systems financing: The path to universal coverage. Geneva: World Health 

Organization. 

Yip, W. & Hsiao, W. (2008). The impact of rural mutual health care on access to care: 

Evaluation of a social experiment in rural China. Harvard School of Public Health. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 146 

Internets 

Chan, M. (2013). Opening remarks at a WHO/World Bank ministerial -level meeting on universal 

health coverage. Geneva: WHO. Available at: 

www.who.int/dg/speeches/2013/universal_health_coverage/en/ 

Department of Health, (2015). Major Health Indicators: Man aged -care analysis. Accessed on 

the 9th of May, 2021]. Retrieved from: 

http://www.healthcareindicators_djhospital.disponível em: 

http://www.healthyhk.gov.hk/phisweb/en/healthy_facts/health_indicators/ 

Food and Health Bureau (2014). Consultation documen t on voluntary health insurance scheme. 

Hong Kong: Food and Health Bureau; Dec. 193 p. 

http://www.vhis.gov.hk/doc/en/full_consultation_document/consultation_full_eng.pdf 

Global Health Strategies, (2013). Health for all, universal health coverage day. Av ailable at: 

www.universalhealthcoverageday.org/en/ 

Kim, J. K. (2013). Poverty, health and the human future. Geneva: World Health Assembly, 2013. 

Available at: www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2013/05/21/world -bank -group -

president -jim -yong -kim -speech -at world -health -assembly. 

National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS). Retrieved on 14 June 2013 from 

http://nhis.gov.ng/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=47:welcome -note -

from -executive -secretary&catid=34:home. 

Nigeria: Country profile. Retrieved o n 17 June 2013 from 

http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=Nigeria. 

The World Bank. (2011). Nigeria summary report. Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://iresearch. worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm?2. 

The World Databank. (2010). Maternal mortal ity ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live 

births). Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.MMRT. 

The World Databank: Health Nutrition and Population Statistics, (2010). Adults (age 15+) and 

children (0 -14 years) wi th HIV. Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from http://databank. 

worldbank.org/data/views/reports/tableview.aspx. 

The World Databank: Poverty and Inequality Database (2011). Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://databank. worldbank.org/data/views/reports/tablevi ew.aspx. 

The World Databank: Poverty and Inequality Database, (2010). Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/reports/tableview.aspx. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 147 

The World Databank: World Development Indicators. (2011). Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/reports/tableview.aspx?isshared=true&ispopul 

ar=series&pid=1. 

The World Bank. (2011). Nigeria population total. Retrieved on 17 June 2013 from 

http://data.worldbank.org/ country/nigeria; United Nations Statistics Division. 

United Nations General Assembly Resolution on Global Health and Foreign Policy (2013). 

A/67/L.3 approved 2012 December 10. Available at: www.un.org/ 

press/en/2012/ga11326.doc.htm 

Wagstaff, A. (2013). Universal health coverage: Old wine in a new bottle? If so, is that so bad? 

Retrieved on 19 June 2013 from http://blogs.worldbank.org/ developmenttalk/universal -

health -coverage -old -wine -in -anew -bottle -if -so -is -that -so -bad. 

WHO, (2014). Universal health coverage. Accessed May, 2021; from: 

disponívelhttp:/ /www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs395/en/http://www.who.int/mediac 

entre/factsheets/fs395/en/ 

WHO. (2011). Global health observatory data repository. Retrieved on 19 June 2013 from 

http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.75?lang=en. 

World Health Orga nization, (2012). What is universal health coverage? Available at: 

www.who.int/features/qa/universal_health_coverage/en/ 

World Health Organization, (2014). WHO global forum for government chief nursing and 

midwifery officers, 14 -15 May 2014, Geneva, Swi tzerland: Nursing and Midwifery 

Workforce and Universal Health Coverage. Forum Statement [Internet]. 2014 May 

[updated 2019 May]; Retrieved from: 

http://www.who.int/hrh/events/global_forum_chiefnursing/en/ 

World Health Organization, (2015). Universal health coverage (UHC). [Internet]. Sep [updated 

2014 Sep]; ; [Acesso 1 jul 2021]; Disponível em: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/ 

factsheets/fs395/en/http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs395/en/ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 148 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 149 

# Tsunami Preparedness in Indonesia: The WAVES Initiative 

Emmett Chad (Brigham Young University, Utah, United States), 

Sarah Hall (Utah Valley University, Utah, United States), 

Ron Harris (Brigham Young University, Utah, United States), and Carolus Prasetyadi 

(Universitas Pembangunan Nasional "Veteran" Yogyakarta, Indonesia) 

Abstract 

The Indonesia archipelago is highly vulnerable to earthquakes and tsunamis. The WAVES 

initiativ e uses experts in geology, engineering, communications, public health, and geology in a 

multi -disciplinary, cross -cultural effort to better understand and communicate risk to federal and 

local government agencies, schools, businesses, and communities. Effo rts include logging 

trenches dug on coastal plains to prospect for historical tsunami deposits, developing localized 

inundation maps, conducting social surveys on perceptions of tsunami threat and efficacy, 

creating and delivering educational sessions incl uding the “20/20/20 principle” to schools and 

communities, identifying localized safe zones out of the inundation zone and within a timely 

walking distance, conducting tsunami evacuation drills, mapping evacuation signs, conducting 

interviews, and working with local and federal government officials and schools to create 

evacuation plans. This paper details our research findings and corresponding educational 

intervention. 

Keywords: Tsunami, Indonesia, Natural Hazards, Education, Mitigation 

Introduction 

Natural Hazards in Indonesia 

Geophysical hazards in the Indonesian archipelago arise from its unique geological setting at the 

collisional junction of three of Earth’s largest tectonic plates. Most of Indonesia is on the southeast 

edge of th e Eurasian Plate, which is surrounded by convergent plate boundaries. The Indo -

Australian Plate converges from the south and the Pacific Plate from the east. The rapid 

convergent motion of these plates is buffered by the episodic release of pent -up energy in the 

form of volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and associated tsunamis and landslides (Harris and 

Major, 2017). Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world at over 272 million people 

(Badan Pusat Statistik, 2022). The Indonesian population has more than quadrupled since the 

1950s and is rapidly increasing (Our World in Data, 2022). Even relatively minor natural hazards 

over the last few decades have resulted in greater numbers of fatalities than those of the past. 

Tsunamis in Indonesia hav e occurred once every four years on average over the past 430 years 

(Latief, Puspito, and Imamura, 2000). The temporal distribution of the seismic events over the 

past 100 years indicates a 20 -30 year alternating cycle of frequent seismic activity followed by 

seismic quiescence (Harris and Major, 2017). The last period of quiescence began during the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 150 

mid -1980s and came to an end in 2004 when the Great Sumatra earthquake triggered the 

deadliest natural disaster in the 21st century. The 9.2 magnitude earthqua ke was the third largest 

ever recorded and was caused by the rupture of a gigantic segment of the boundary between the 

Asian and Australian plates off the northwest coast of Sumatra and Andaman Islands. The 

earthquake itself caused several buildings to col lapse and killed hundreds of people. The plate 

rupture occurred at an ocean depth of more than 3,000 meters. A massive amount of water was 

displaced, producing the largest earthquake -generated tsunami in recorded history. The tsunami 

killed more than 283,0 00 people; the majority were in Indonesia (Lay et al., 2005). There had not 

been any earthquakes larger than magnitude 8.5 globally for 39 years prior to this event (USGS, 

2022). 

Three months after the Great Sumatra Earthquake, the plate boundary segment immediately to 

the south ruptured, producing a magnitude 8.7 earthquake and large tsunami that claimed 

thousands of lives. This event was followed in 2006 by a magnitude 6.3 earthq uake near 

Yogyakarta that killed around 6,000 persons and displaced nearly half a million more. This event 

was nearly identical to what is found in historical records and was forecast to reoccur in central 

Java (Harris and Prasetyadi, 2002). Two months aft er the seismic disaster in Yogyakarta, a 

magnitude 7.7 earthquake struck south of the city, but offshore, which generated a tsunami that 

killed hundreds of people. In 2007, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake struck near Jakarta, a megacity 

with a population of abo ut 13,000 people per square kilometer (Martinez and Masron, 2020). Two 

months later, a series of earthquakes (magnitudes 8.5, 7.9 and 7.1) struck the southwest coast 

of Sumatra causing more fatalities. In 2008, three aftershocks between magnitude 7.0 -7.5 caused 

fatalities. In 2009, there were four destructive earthquakes between magnitude 7.0 -7.9 that 

accounted for more than 2,500 fatalities in Sumatra. In 2010, three more earthquakes between 

magnitude 7.2 -7.9 caused hundreds of fatalities, including the 2 010 Mentawai tsunami. A few 

hours before the 7.9 event, Merapi, a volcano in central Java, exploded with an intensity unseen 

since 1870. At least 200 fatalities resulted. Fortunately, close to 350,000 people were evacuated 

immediately before the eruption. In 2012, a magnitude 8.6 earthquake struck off the coast of 

northern Sumatra and was followed two hours later by a magnitude 8.2 earthquake near the same 

location. Additional fatalities from earthquakes occurred each year from 2013 -2017. 

A host of disast ers occurred in various parts of Indonesia in 2018, all striking in densely populated 

areas. Five strong earthquakes struck Lombok killing over 500 people and displacing over 4 

million inhabitants. In September, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake struck the Palu a rea of western 

Sulawesi. The earthquake generated hundreds of landslides, several of which occurred under the 

sea and caused destructive tsunamis. Massive mudflows associated with liquefaction demolished 

large areas of the city. Over 5,000 people died. In December, the partial collapse of Krakatoa 

volcano into the Sunda Strait generated a ‘silent’ tsunami that crashed into coastal communities, 

killing over 400 people. A paper in 2012 warned of the likelihood of this event (Terry and Goff, 

2012). From 2019 t o 2021, an additional 17 earthquakes have caused fatalities in Indonesia 

including four events >7.0 magnitude and one event in Sulawesi that caused over 100 fatalities 

in 2021 (USGS, 2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 151 

Tsunami disaster mitigation research in Indonesia began in earn est in North Sumatra and 

elsewhere after the 2004 Great Sumatra Earthquake. Since then, tsunamis have occurred in 

Indonesia in Nias in 2005, Java in 2006, Mentawai in 2010, and Sulawesi in 2018. Indonesia has 

around 54,720 kilometers of coastline, much of which is vulnerable to earthquake -triggered 

tsunamis (Embassy of Indonesia, 2022). More destruction is likely to occur before the seismic 

mega -cluster ends. Increased earthquake and tsunami mitigation measures are needed to 

reverse the growing loss of life and property. 

Current Tsunami Mitigation Efforts 

Since the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, efforts to describe and analyze what can be learned from 

past tsunamis and how to prepare for the future have increased around the world (Jain, Virmani, 

and Abraham, 2021; Repetto, Cordón, and Bronfman, 2022; Dhellemmes et al., 2021; Chen, 

Lindell, and Wang 2021; Rasyif et al., 2020; Sun, 2020; Wegscheider et al., 2011). Current 

tsunami mitigation efforts include Early Warning Systems, structural measures, construction of 

Temporary Evacuation Shelters (TES), and community education including identifying tsunami 

evacuation zones, evacuation planning, and tsunami evacuation drills. 

Despite progress in Early Warning Systems (EWS) (Safri et al, 2020; Harig et al., 2020) se veral 

studies have found the systems insufficient to warn individuals in the event of a tsunami. A recent 

study in Indonesia found a lack of operational communication networks to relay warnings to those 

who are vulnerable (known as ‘the last mile’ problem) (Rahayu et al. 2020). Another study in Aceh 

Indonesia found a lack of community engagement in EWS (Sufri et al. 2020). Since the 

implementation of Indonesia’s EWS in 2006 there have been six tsunamis, yet those at risk were 

often not warned in time to eva cuate. Either the warning was not received until after the tsunami 

struck, the warning was terminated early and people returned to low ground only to be hit with a 

second wave, or the warning underestimated the tsunami hazard (Suppasri, 2015). A combinatio n

of challenges is responsible for the failure of these technology -based early warning systems 

including the short distance between where the tsunami forms and the coastlines they impact. 

Most tsunamis are generated by earthquakes along the subduction inte rface of convergent plate 

boundaries surrounding Indonesia. For example, the Sumatra and Java Trenches are only 200 -

300 km offshore. In deep water, tsunamis travel at speeds of 600 km/hr, which means that there 

is only 20 -30 minutes from the time the tsuna mi forms until it arrives. Additionally, EWS are not 

always properly maintained. This suggests recognition of natural warning signs and immediate 

self -evacuation is timelier and more beneficial than waiting on a siren prior to evacuating (Hall et 

al. 2017) .

Natural tsunami barriers such as coral reefs and mangrove forests have been depleted due to 

tourism, shrimp farms, and foreign wood export (Niman, 2010; Barbier, 2006). Structural disaster 

mitigation measures include building vegetative barriers to abso rb some of the energy of the 

tsunami waves (Danielsen, 2005; Muhari et al., 2012) . The identification of tall sturdy buildings 

for evacuation or construction of Temporary Evacuation Shelters (TES) in low -lying areas is 

needed (Kemal 2020; Nakaseko et al., 2008; Hein, 2014). TES resemble parking garages with 

wide staircases for climbing and an open roof designed to hold a large number of people above Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 152 

the water. Establishing trust in these structures has been problematic, particularly in Aceh where 

lack of l ocal input is perceived as government control (Spahn et al. 2010). Another important 

structural measure is placement of tsunami evacuation signs. These signs are now common 

occurrences in coastal communities in Indonesia prone to tsunamis. Although signage directs 

individuals where to go in the event of a tsunami, they do not state under what circumstances to 

evacuate (e.g., after observation of a natural warning sign such as an earthquake or receding 

ocean), nor do they communicate the urgency of evacuatio n immediately after an earthquake 

(Hall et al. 2017). 

Geohazard education and implementation of disaster mitigation strategies are needed to reverse 

the growing losses to natural disasters. Health communication research suggests creating high -

threat (sus ceptibility and severity) and high -efficacy (self -efficacy and response efficacy) 

messages will be most effective in encouraging behavior change (Witte and Allen 2000). 

Messages related to tsunami threat may include communicating information about risk thr ough 

tsunami modeling and identification of inundation zones. Efficacy components may focus on 

educating those at risk to recognize natural tsunami warning signs and to immediately self -

evacuate to high ground rather than waiting for a siren which can caus e deadly delays. Another 

efficacy component includes identifying safe locations that can be reached by foot in a timely 

manner. Furthermore, tsunami evacuation drills increase efficacy by allowing communities or 

individuals in at -risk areas to practice eva cuation behavior before a disaster occurs (Hein, 2014; 

Nakaya et al., 2018; Sun and Yamori, 2018). In 2017, the United Nations Development 

Programme set out to increase tsunami awareness for school children in 18 countries of Asia and 

the Pacific. From 201 7-2018 over 61,000 students, teachers, and administrators in 115 schools 

participated in evacuation drills (United Nations Development Programme, 2019). 

WAVES Initiative 

The WAVES research consortium involves multi -disciplinary researchers and students from 

government agencies and universities in Indonesia and the United States. The mission of WAVES 

is to assess and communicate risk of natural hazards and implement risk re duction strategies. 

The Indonesian government has adopted the 20 -20 -20 principle for tsunami risk reduction, which 

was developed by WAVES. Generally, if ground shaking from an earthquake lasts more than 20 

seconds, nearby coastal communities have around 20 minutes to evacuate to 20 meters elevation 

for safety (Hall et al. 2017). Although there are many exceptions to the rule, such as tsunamis 

caused by landslides or volcanic eruptions, the 20 -20 -20 rule empowers those in harm's way to 

self -evacuate in a maj ority of the regions in Indonesia threatened by tsunami hazards. WAVES 

collaborates with local government leaders and natural disaster mitigators. Community -based 

activities include natural hazards education, including earthquake and tsunami evacuation 

dri lls. WAVES includes PhD’s and government leaders in geology, engineering, communication, 

public health, and geography. The geology and engineering team focuses on assessing natural 

hazard risk, such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Estimates of seismic ground motion and tsunami 

inundation from historical and geological records provide a way to make numerical models of 

previous and likely major earthquake and tsunami events. The public health team focuses on 

community assessments to determine perceptions of tsun ami risk and behavioral intentions. The Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 153 

team uses this information to develop key messages and tsunami preparedness campaigns. The 

geography team identifies safe evacuation areas out of the inundation zone, conducts tsunami 

evacuation drills, and discusse s evacuation plans with government officials. All fields work 

together to better understand local perceptions related to tsunamis and provide educational 

sessions to communities and schools in at -risk coastal areas. 

Methodology 

Geological and Geophysical Research Methods 

Using the principle that the past is the key to the present we query historical and geological 

records of past earthquake and tsunami events to identify areas most at risk. These methods 

involve logging trenches dug on coastal plains to prospect for tsunami deposits. We have 

discovered that many coastal cities are partially built on these deposits from previous tsunamis. 

Age analysis of the deposits provides a chronology of tsunamis that reaches back thousands of 

years. We also analyze historical accounts of earthquake and tsunami events that provide more 

detail about the impact of these events when they happen again (Harris and Major, 2016). 

With these data we construct numerical models that reconstruct many pre -instrumental 

earthquake events to determine the likely source, magnitude and recurrence intervals. The time 

difference between when the earthquake occurs and when the tsunami arrives at several different 

locations provides a method of tracing where the tsunami was gener ated. The height of the waves 

provides a way to estimate the earthquake magnitude. We are able to reconstruct these events 

using Bayesian statistical models and machine learning that aid in developing tsunami inundation 

maps that inform coastal zoning plan s and evacuation drills. 

The methods we use to assess risk of earthquakes and tsunamis are varied. For example, we 

employ a method known as Vs30 to determine the way the upper 30 meters of Earth’s surface 

will respond during an earthquake. The method inv olves striking a metal plate with a sledge to 

produce shock waves recorded by multiple sensors to determine how fast these waves move 

through the ground. If the shock waves move slowly the site is prone to amplification of seismic 

waves and much more damag e than other areas, even if these sites are far away from the 

epicenter. From our measurements we have mapped out many densely populated areas with low 

Vs30 values. These maps are essential for urban planning and earthquake zoning. We have also 

used ground penetrating radar and high -resolution drone surveys to map out the extent of tsunami 

deposits we discovered. As a result, we have discovered several areas previously inundated by 

tsunamis where the extent of inundation is estimated and used in inundation maps (Harris et al., 

in press). 

Social Survey 

We conducted social surveys to inform the development of our educational interventions. The 

pencil/paper survey was delivered in Indonesian and contained several categories of questions: 

(1) demographic (e.g. , sex, island of residence), (2) earthquake and tsunami risk and efficacy Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 154 

perceptions on a 1 -5 Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree , (3) personal warning 

preferences, and (4) behavioral intentions. The survey was validated in previous res earch (Hall 

et al. 2017). The surveys were conducted in coastal schools (N=50) in Java, Bali, Lombok, and 

Sumba. Schools were identified by leaders in Indonesia’s regional governmental disaster 

management agency ‘Badan Penanggulangan Bencana Daerah’ ( BPBD). Adolescents aged 12 -

18 (N=2,386) individually filled out surveys in class. We used Pearson’s Chi -square to compare 

the sampling distribution of sex across islands and no significant differences were found at p<0.5. 

Descriptive statistics were used t o analyze the number and percentage for each response by 

island and in total. We calculated the means and standard deviations for earthquake and tsunami 

susceptibility and efficacy perceptions for each island. Welch’s ANOVA was used to determine 

difference s in perceptions of threat and efficacy across the four islands. Significant findings were 

probed with the post hoc Games -Howell test. We used independent t -tests to determine whether 

there were significant differences in threat and efficacy perceptions b y sex. We also used a step -

wise logistic regression to determine the associations of additional demographic variables, 

tsunami information sources, and prior hazard experience with tsunami threat and efficacy 

perceptions; however, these are reported in ano ther paper and will not be discussed here (Hall et 

al., in Press). 

Educational Intervention 

The researchers, BPBD officials, and students from Indonesia and the United States developed 

and delivered an approximately one -hour long educational presentation that included lecture, 

images, videos, maps, stories, songs, games, and movement. The educational intervention 

included key messages based on previous survey results. The main intent of the presentation 

was to stress the tsunami vulnerability of coastal I ndonesia based on historical evidence, to 

encourage the use of the 20 -20 -20 guidelines, to stress the importance of immediate self -

evacuation instead of waiting for a siren or government warning, and to identify an evacuation 

plan. Most of our presentation s were given in schools, but we also presented to communities, 

factories, and officials in government, disaster preparedness, and tourism. We conducted 

evacuation drills for each school that desired. This consisted of a 20 -second earthquake 

drop/cover/hold followed by practicing a walking route to a safe high ground out of the inundation 

zone identified in our previous tsunami mapping. In every drill we were able to evacuate all 

students to safety in less than 20 minutes. Before and after our educational in tervention, we 

conducted informal interviews about tsunami perceptions and evacuation intentions with 

government officials, teachers and school administrators, community members, and students. 

While these interviews were not intended to serve as formal res earch findings, they provide 

additional directions for future research on religious, economic, and political factors related to 

tsunami mitigation. We also followed existing evacuation signs and discussed current community 

evacuation plans with community l eaders. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 155 

Results 

Geology Results 

The most significant results of our geological and geophysical research have been the discovery 

of geological and historical records of earthquakes and tsunamis and using these data in 

developing risk assessments for densely populated regions of Indonesia. We compiled and 

translated historical accounts of earthquake and tsunami events of Indonesia (Harris and Major, 

2016) to reconstruct several natural disasters in the past that claimed many lives. Reconstructing 

the 1852 Banda Sea earthquake provided a way to test a new code we developed that uses 

Bayesian statistical methods to predict the location, geometry and size of the earthquake from 

anecdotal accounts (Ringer et al., 2021). These results provide a way to incorporate historical 

accounts into seismic risk assessments and therefore extend the record of earthquakes and 

tsunamis much further back in time than instrumental records of earthquakes (<80 years). Since 

most fault zones have earthquake recurrence intervals of hundreds to thousands of years, we 

now have a way to estimate where and how large these events were and then how much strain 

energy has since accumulated on various fault zones. 

One of the most important geological discoveries is the common occurrence of boulder ridges on 

the south coast of Java and other islands adjacent to the eastern Sunda subduction zone. This 

subduction zone is interpreted as incapable of producing mega -thrus t earthquakes and large 

tsunamis due to the lack of instrumental records and historical accounts of earthquakes > 7.9 

(Newcomb and McCann, 1987). However, we discovered sparsely preserved layers of sand from 

tsunamis with ages of 500 and 1000 years before present and well preserved imbricated boulder 

ridges that were most likely formed by tsunamis (Harris et al., in press). The ages and extent of 

these tsunami deposits indicate that the eastern Sunda subduction zone is capable of producing 

megathrust earthq uakes and giant tsunamis. This discovery changes the earthquake and tsunami 

risk assessment for the densely populated coastal cities in this region. 

Social Survey Results 

Participants (N=2,386) resided in Java (N=649), Bali (N=388), Lombok (N=432), and Sumba 

(N=917). Our independent t -tests for sex indicated significant differences in perceptions of 

earthquake susceptibility, tsunami susceptibility, and tsunami efficacy. Females (M=3.53, 

SD=1.13) had a significantly higher mean for perceptions of earthqu ake susceptibility compared 

to males (M=3.37, SD=1.27); t(1881.99)= -3.07, SE=.05, p=.00. Females (M=3.30, SD =1.21) also 

had a significantly higher mean for perceptions of tsunami susceptibility compared to males (M= 

3.11, SD = 1.35); t(1875.54)= -3.44, SE= .06, p=.00. However, males had a significantly higher 

mean perception of tsunami efficacy (M=3.37, SD =1.22) compared to females (M= 3.22, SD = 

1.15), t(1936.06) = 3.00, SE=.05, p=.00. Java had a significantly higher mean perceived 

susceptibility for both earthquakes (M=3.81) and tsunamis (M=3.91) compared to other islands. 

Mean perceptions of both earthquakes (M=3.05) and tsunamis (M=2.69) were significantly lower 

in Sumba. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 156 

Table 1 shows mean perceptions of earthquake susceptibility, tsunami susceptibil ity, and tsunami 

efficacy for the four islands. There were significant differences in perceptions of earthquake 

susceptibility at the p=.05 level between the islands [F(3, 1145.93) = 56.27, p=.00]. Post hoc 

comparisons indicated no significant difference ( p=.99) in mean perceptions of earthquake 

susceptibility between Bali and Lombok. However, mean perception of susceptibility to 

earthquake was significantly higher in Java compared to Bali ( p=.00, SE=.06, 95%CI=.09, .38), 

Lombok ( p=.01, SE=.07, 95%CI=.03, . 40) and Sumba ( p=.00, SE=.06, 95%CI=.61,.92). Mean 

perceptions of earthquake susceptibility were significantly higher in Bali compared to Sumba 

(p=.00, SE=.06, 95%CI=.37, .69). Mean perceptions of earthquake susceptibility were 

significantly higher in Lomb ok compared to Sumba ( p=.00, SE=.07, 95%CI=.37, .74). We also 

found significant differences in perceptions of tsunami susceptibility [F(3, 1141.29) = 127.91, 

p=.00]. Post hoc comparisons again showed no significant differences between Bali and Lombok 

(p=.96) while showing significant differences between all other islands at the p<.05 level. Mean 

perceptions of tsunami susceptibility were significantly higher in Java compared to Bali ( p=.00, 

SE=.06, 95%CI=.54, .86), Lombok ( p=.00, SE=.07, 95%CI=.48, .85), and Sumba ( p=.00 SE=.06, 

95%CI=1.1, 1.4). Mean perceptions of tsunami susceptibility were significantly higher in Bali 

compared to Sumba ( p=.00, SE=.06, 95%CI=.36, .68) They were also significantly higher in 

Lombok compared to Sumba ( p=.00, SE=.07, 95%CI= .37, .74). There were significant differences 

in perceptions of efficacy in the event of a tsunami [F(3, 1132.78) = 11.75, p=00]. Post hoc 

comparisons showed no significant differences between Bali and Lombok ( p=.47) or Bali and 

Sumba ( p=.58). Mean percept ions of efficacy were significantly higher in Java compared to Bali 

(p=.00, SE=.06, 95%CI=.11, .44), Lombok ( p=.00, SE=.07, 95%CI=.20, .56), and Sumba ( p=.01, 

SE=.06, 95%CI=.03, .35). They were also significantly higher in Sumba compared to Lombok 

(p=.04, SE=.07, 95%CI=.01, .37). 

Table 1. Perceptions of Earthquake and Tsunami Threat and Efficacy on Four Islands 

Variable  Java 

M (SD) 

Bali 

M (SD) 

Lombok 

M (SD) 

Sumba 

M (SD) 

Sig .

Sus. Quake 

Sus. Tsunami 

Eff. Tsunami 

3.81 (.98) 

3.91 (1.11) 

3.47 (1.08) 

3.58 (.82) 

3.21 (.88) 

3.20 (.94) 

3.60 (1.17) 

3.25 (1.17) 

3.09 (1.12) 

3.05 (1.37) 

2.69 (1.33) 

3.28 (1.35) 

.00* 

.00* 

.00*   

> aANOVA results; asterisks indicate there was a significant difference between two or more message groups at p<.05.

Slightly fewer than half of our total survey participants either agreed or strongly agreed that they 

are susceptible to a tsunami. Participants wh o agreed or strongly agreed they were susceptible 

to a tsunami varied substantially depending on location: Java (77.2%), Lombok (49.3%), Bali Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 157 

(37.6%), and Sumba (35.9%). 31.8% of total survey participants disagreed or strongly disagreed 

they are susceptible to a tsunami. More than a quarter of survey participants in Lombok and more 

than half in Sumba disagreed or strongly disagreed that they are susceptible to a tsunami. Fewer 

than half of total participants (48.5%) agreed or strongly ag reed they would be able to save 

themselves in the event of a tsunami. Over half of participants in Java (57.2%) and Sumba 

(52.9%) agreed or strongly agreed they would be able to save themselves in the event of a 

tsunami. This was only true for about one -th ird of participants in Bali (36.9%) and Lombok 

(36.4%). Many participants disagreed or strongly disagreed that they would be able to save 

themselves in Java (21.3%), Bali (21.4%), Lombok (31.9%), and Sumba (33.9%). 

Table 2 shows cross -tabulation results for perception of tsunami risk and efficacy perceptions, 

preferred warning preferences, and behavioral intentions. The overall preferred warning 

preference of participants was a siren followed by tv and then natural warning signs. 76.7% of 

participants in Java reported that they would evacuate after observing natural warning signs 

compared to 58.8% in Sumba. The most common overall evacuation intention circumstance was 

an order or alert from the authorities although the percentage was higher in Java (84.7%) 

compared to all other islands (62 -67%). Uphill evacuation was the most common evacuation 

intention location followed by inland, and then climbing the stairs to a tall building. 93.4% of 

participants in Java reported they would evacuate uphill compared to only 65.7% in Bali. 48.7% 

of participants in Bali reported they would climb the stairs of a tall building, compared to 26 -29% 

of participants on other islands. 

Table 2. Perceptions of Earthquake and Tsunami Risk and Efficacy, Warning Preferences, 

and Beh avioral Intentions 

Question (N, %)  Java 

(N=649) 

Bali (N=388)  Lombok 

(N=423) 

Sumba (N -

917) 

Total 

(N=2,386) 

Earthquake 

Susceptibility 

Str. Disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

Str. Agree 

No Answer 

30: 4.6% 

45: 6.9% 

65: 10.0% 

382: 58.9% 

124: 19.1% 

3: 0.5% 

10: 2.6% 

14: 3.6% 

141: 36.3% 

181: 46.6% 

38: 9.8% 

4: 0.3% 

39: 9.0% 

35: 8.1% 

74: 17.1% 

192: 44.4% 

90: 20.8% 

2: 0.5% 

183: 20.0% 

155: 17.0% 

131: 14.3% 

314: 34.2% 

126: 13.7% 

8: 0.9% 

262: 11.0% 

249: 10.4% 

411: 17.2% 

1069: 44.8% 

378: 15.8% 

17: 0.7% 

Tsunami 

Susceptibility 

Str. Disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

Str. Agree 

39: 6.0% 

46: 7.1% 

58: 8.9% 

294: 45.3% 

207: 31.9% 

15: 3.9% 

53: 13.7% 

171: 44.1% 

128: 33.0% 

18: 4.6% 

46: 10.6% 

65: 15.0% 

103: 23.8% 

164: 38.0% 

49: 11.3% 

212: 23.1% 

268: 29.2% 

102: 11.1% 

245: 26.7% 

84: 9.2% 

312: 13.7% 

432: 18.1% 

434: 18.2% 

831: 34.8% 

358: 15.0% Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 158 

No Answer  5: 0.8%  3: 0.8%  5: 1.2%  6: 0.7%  19: 0.7% 

Tsunami Efficacy 

Str. Disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

Str. Agree 

No Answer 

29: 4.5% 

109: 16.8% 

135: 20.8% 

270: 41.6% 

101: 15.6% 

5: 0.8% 

13: 3.4% 

70: 18.0% 

157: 40.5% 

114: 29.4% 

29: 7.5% 

5: 1.3% 

29: 6.7% 

109: 25.2% 

131: 30.3% 

107: 24.8% 

50: 11.6% 

6: 0.7% 

114: 12.4% 

197: 21.5% 

111: 12.1% 

289: 31.5% 

196: 21.4% 

10: 0.01% 

185: 7.8% 

485: 20.3% 

534: 22.4% 

780: 32.7% 

376:15.8% 

26: 1.1% 

Warning 

Preferences 

Local leader 

Cell phone 

Radio 

Siren 

Nat. Warning 

TV 

Other 

49: 7.6% 

67: 10.3% 

78: 12.0% 

262: 40.4% 

135: 20.8% 

170: 26.2% 

31: 4.8% 

37: 9.5% 

65: 16.8% 

48: 12.4% 

189: 48.7% 

127: 32.7% 

85: 21.9% 

6: 1.5% 

70: 16.2% 

76: 17.6% 

76: 17.6% 

109: 25.2% 

149: 34.5% 

156: 36.1% 

16: 3.7% 

76: 8.3% 

121: 13.2% 

195: 21.3% 

69: 7.5% 

300: 32.7% 

372: 40.6% 

35: 3.8% 

232: 9.7% 

329: 13.8% 

397: 16.6% 

985: 41.3% 

711: 29.8% 

783: 32.8% 

88: 3.7% 

Evacuation 

Circumstances 

Alert from authority 

Family/Friend 

Others Evacuating 

Natural Signs 

Would not evacuate 

550: 84.7% 

283: 43.6% 

481: 74.1% 

498: 76.7% 

24: 3.7% 

256: 66.0% 

87: 22.4% 

94: 24.2% 

239: 61.6% 

5: 1.3% 

290: 67.1% 

116: 26.9% 

124: 28.7% 

278: 64.4% 

10: 2.3% 

575: 62.7% 

266: 29.0% 

271: 29.6% 

539: 58.8% 

31: 3.4% 

1671: 70.0% 

752: 31.5% 

970: 40.7% 

1554: 65.1% 

70: 2.9% 

Evacuation 

Intentions 

Climb building 

Go up hill/mountain 

Go toward ocean 

Go inland 

Stay in house 

Other 

189: 29.1% 

606: 93.4% 

17: 2.6% 

563: 86.7% 

12: 1.8% 

71: 10.9% 

189: 48.7% 

255: 65.7% 

11: 2.8% 

208: 53.6% 

6: 1.5% 

13: 3.4% 

113: 26.2% 

331: 76.6% 

10: 2.3% 

264: 61.1% 

8: 1.9% 

65: 15.0% 

267: 29.1% 

765: 83.4% 

23: 2.5% 

477: 52.0% 

18: 2.0% 

64: 7.0% 

758: 31.8% 

1957: 82.0% 

61: 2.6% 

1512: 63.3% 

44: 1.8% 

213: 8.9% 

> *Select all that apply question results in over 100% when responses are totaled.

Results of Geographical Survey 

This section outlines findings outside the survey results, considering various additional aspects 

of preparedness island by island. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 159 

All three cities that we surveyed in Java (Pelabuhan Ratu, Pangandaran, Pacitan) had mapped 

evacuation routes and identified gathering places. Along these routes, posted orange signs with 

a large rolli ng wave and a person running up a hill pointed the way (see Figure 1 ). In Pelabuhan 

Ratu the signs also included information listing the name of the evacuation destinations (park, 

hospital, government building etc.) and the distance, usually less than 1.5 kilometers. 

> Figure 1. Evacuation signs in Pelabuhan Ratu. All photos by Chad Emmett.

Interviews with many local leaders demonstrated a fear that they would be shamed if they called 

for an evacuation and no tsunami occurred. This included the head of the Indonesian Hotel and 

Restaurant Association (PHRI) for the Sukabumi regency, Dadang Hen dar, and the village chief 

of Cimaja who said: “If there is a twenty second earthquake and we evacuate, but there is no 

tsunami, then we have evacuated for nothing.” There is still confusion as to who is actually in 

charge of educating and preparing people for tsunami mitigation and sounding the alarm. The 

head of PHRI was in favor of identifying and marking evacuation routes and having hotels inform 

each guest about evacuation procedures but noted that this was the “duty of the country and not 

the duty of the hotels.” There was a perception that interest in tsunami awareness wanes over 

the years as memories of past tsunamis fade. The village chief of Cimaja mentioned that they had 

held a practice evacuation five years ago. He related that since there had no t been a tsunami, 

people lost interest in continuing to hold evacuation drills. The principal of the Pacitan Middle 

School 3 stated that his school had never held an evacuation drill. The fact that his school in the 

center of the coastal plain was 3 -5 kilo meters from any high ground made holding an evacuation 

drill most challenging due to time and distance. The principal stated that he assumed that 

tsunamis would happen at night when the children were in their own homes. He also believed that 

the police wo uld drive through town with a siren telling people to evacuate. 

The town of Pacitan with its surrounding villages was perhaps the best prepared. It was often 

women volunteers who were most involved and effective in the day -to -day tsunami mitigation 

effor ts. They commented that their involvement was due in part their motherly instincts of wanting 

to help and save others. The village of Kembang in southeastern Pacitan was one of the first 

municipalities that the BPBD worked with in 2013 to help with tsunami preparedness. Large signs 

in the village show inundation areas, evacuation routes, and safe gathering places (see Figure Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 160 

2). Additionally, the village widened and paved a path through rice paddies for easier evacuation 

and built two evacuation stairways up steep wooded hillsides to safe higher ground. 

> Figure 2. Directional sign along the evacuation route.

We were invited to host six evacuation drills in Pelabuhan Ratu. Reasons for not holding practice 

drills cited by school administrators included time constraints, unsafe evacuation routes due to 

heavy traffic, midday heat, and drills recently held or drill s already scheduled for a future date. 

The drills that were held provided an excellent learning experience and in some cases drew 

attention to problems. We held our first evacuation drill in the village of Cidadap. It was a hot, 

humid and sunny midday. Thi s proved to be our first introduction to the fact that adults are less 

inclined to participate in the heat. Cidadap had no evacuation signs or marked evacuation routes. 

The village leaders offered to drive us to the designated gathering point, but it was a circuitous 

route and defeated the purpose of empowering people to save themselves, preferably without 

relying on cars that can get stuck in traffic and in this case took them closer to the more vulnerable 

coast before heading inland to the hills. When ask ed, the children knew which way to go. To 

practice we used our phones to set a timer and identity our elevation and then set out with 50 

children and one father walking through the village, across the rice fields --walking on foot wide 

banks between the flo oded fields, through another cluster of houses and then climbing up a tree 

covered hillside to a safe elevation (see Figure 3 ).  It took 15 minutes to get to safety. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 161 

> Figure 3. Evacuation drill in Cidadap.

In Cisolok , the Junior High School is located across the coastal road from the beach and is very 

vulnerable. The village had never held a practice drill, but the school had held its first tsunami 

simulation practice two years earlier. For that event, students ran up the hill, 300 meters in 3 

minutes, to pre -designated areas for each class. Administrators were happy to do it again. After 

a morning of presentations, more than 600 eighth and ninth graders left the school yard via a back 

gate and walked 300 meters up the hill to a safe elevation of 40 meters (see Figure 4 ). Then the 

first in line all sat down on the side of one lane road while waiting for the rest to arrive. Within 10 

minutes all of the students were at a safe elevation. Afterwards, the physical education teacher 

observed that “it would be good to have eva cuation practices every year at school.” 

> Figure 4. Evacuation drill in Cisolok.

The easiest and most convenient evacuation drill we held was in the center of Pangandaran. All 

the elementary school children had to do was walk 50 meters to the end of the street, climb over 

a median planter in the center of the city’s main street and then go to the second floor (the 

women’s prayer section) of the main mosque which is a designated tsunami gathering place. 

Since the 2006 tsunami, Pangandaran has held annu al evacuation drills so the children at this Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 162 

school knew exactly where to go. While the second floor was high enough to provide protection 

during the 2006 tsunami, it would not have survived an Aceh strength tsunami. An encouraging 

development in Panganda ran is the recent opening of a Temporary Evacuation Shelter (TES) 

closer to the coast. 

During the 2006 tsunami the small village of Masawah (located right on the coast and about 30 

kilometers west of Pangandaran) lost 47 residents to the wave. Most were at work or at home 

and had not evacuated because they had not been taught that even a low intensity earthquake 

could be a sign of a tsunami. There was no warning from the government or local leaders either. 

To ensure that more people survive the next tsuna mi, the village erected a memorial made of an 

actual fishing boat that was broken in two by the tsunami as a reminder of what could happen 

again and as an incentive to be prepared for the next natural disaster. In the village elementary 

school about 40 stu dents participated in our evacuation drill. They first sought shelter under their 

desks while the earth “shook” then they ran through the village and up a steep hill via a cement 

stairway (installed after the last tsunami) to safety (see Figure 5 ). It took only a matter of minutes. 

The children knew exactly where to go and the cement stairway made it easy for everyone to 

easily ascend what could be a muddy, slippery mess during the rainy season. 

> Figure 5. Evacuation drill in Masawah.

The village of Si domulyo to the east of Pacitan had recently been awarded the provincial (East 

Java) prize for “self -reliance” because of its grassroots efforts to be prepared and trained for 

disasters. Practice evacuations were regularly held. At the start of our evacuati on drill, children 

took off out the front gate on a predetermined and marked evacuation route. After about 200 

meters inland the students knew to cross over a drainage ditch (a bottleneck in the evacuation 

route) on a log. Here the local leaders had the st udents stop, saying they had gone far enough. 

Of concern to our team was the fact that an elevation of 20 meters had not yet been reached. 

Further inspection of the rest of the route revealed that beyond the grove of trees the route ended 

at the base of a long and tall rock cliff. This thirty meter high rock face could be surmounted by Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 163 

agile adults and older youth, but it would be nearly impossible for the elementary school children 

to scale to a safe elevation. Later, back at the school when asked about t his problem, local officials 

readily noted that they were very aware of this problem and that previous evacuation plans had 

called for building some sort of steps up the side of the cliff, but they were held back by inadequate 

funding. Also planned, but pe nding funding is adding a gate to the inland side of the school yard 

so that evacuees don’t have to exit via the seaward front gate of the school yard. 

Bali not only had tsunami warning signs, marked evacuation routes, and designated gathering 

points, bu t also had monthly evacuation drills, a workable EWS, published brochures with tsunami 

evacuation information and maps of inundation zones, and a certification program that identified 

Tsunami -Ready hotels. Ida Bagus Purna Sideman, the executive director of the Indonesian Hotel 

and Restaurant Association, noted that it was only after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that Bali 

began to be aware of tsunami danger. Since then, there have been ongoing efforts to properly 

ensure that local Balinese and visiting tour ists are more aware of and better prepared for 

tsunamis. Tsunami mitigation efforts in Bali’s thriving hotel industry got their start in October of 

2013 when the Asia -Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum held its 25th annual gathering 

in Bali. In preparation for the meeting, embassies of the participating countries requested that 

local police conduct security inspections of event hotels. The initial security concerns focused 

primarily on terrorism; however, while making their inspections, the polic e happened upon a 

Tsunami Ready Certificate in a major hotel in Nusa Dua —an Indonesia based company that 

advises, trains, and certifies hotels and other tourism related businesses on tsunami 

preparedness. The certificate was passed on to the local Tourism Board which questioned its 

validity. This prompted a discussion between the BPBD, Red Cross, Bali Tourism Board, and 

police about the merits and possibility of having the government issue such a certificate. 

Eventually the BPBD was tasked with making inspe ctions and issuing Natural Disaster Ready 

Certificates which seems to have superseded the work of Tsunami Ready. Requirements for the 

government issued certificate include a safe assembly point, access (with direction signs) to the 

assembly point, and sto red water and food at the assembly point. In addition, some hotels chose 

to have drills to train staff members about how to evacuate guests to the assembly point. When 

drills are held, the guests are given advance warning and participation is optional. Som e hotels 

have reported that guests are in favor of these drills because it assures them that the hotel is a 

safe and ready place to be staying. Between 2013 -2017, only forty of the thousands of hotels in 

Bali were awarded the Natural Disaster Ready Certifi cate. Most of the tsunami ready hotels are 

larger chain hotels that require such safety measures. According to Sideman, this means that ‘the 

government has not given full attention to this matter.’ Of the thousands of hotels in Bali, 260 are 

classified as star (1 -5 star) hotels, 1,500 as non -star hotels, and 1,750 as homestays. The cheaper 

homestays and non -star hotels seldom have any type of disaster readiness. It is generally the 

high end hotels that express interest in becoming certified. Sideman notes t hat if tourism -

dependent Bali is perceived as ‘not being safe, then tourism will fail.’ To facilitate preparedness, 

he suggests improved coordination between the Bali Tourism Board (which includes the Hotel 

association), the Tour Guide Association (HPI) an d the Association of Recreational Parks 

(PUTRI). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 164 

Some multi -story hotels in Bali are readily identified as evacuation points. Two examples of hotels 

in tsunami vulnerable Tanjung Benoa, which straddles a narrow peninsula with no high ground, 

that could be considered ‘tsunami ready’ are the Novotel and the Grand Aston. Corporate policies 

of the Novotel international hotel chain requires that its hotels in Indonesia are prepared for 

tsunamis. Every guest room in the hotel has a brochure with a map and inform ation about what 

to do in case of a fire, earthquake, medical emergency or bomb threat. This brochure is generic 

and not site specific to a tsunami inundation area. Also, in each room is a very noticeable large 

placard on the door with an evacuation map of the hotel grounds and with detailed instructions 

about what to do in the event of a tsunami and other emergencies. It explains that if a guest feels 

a strong or long lasting earthquake there may be a tsunami. Guests are told to follow the 

instructions ann ounced in the hotel and on the beach by loudspeakers and megaphones. Guests 

are encouraged not to panic and to move to the designated assembly places in the hotel. Once 

gathered at the assembly points, the hotel guests are then directed 200 meters down the street 

to the Grand Mirage Hotel. A sign in front of the Novotel points the direction to the taller hotel. A

local elementary school has arranged to use the nearby Grand Mirage and Ion Hotels for 

evacuations. The Elementary school children would also fo llow these signs. 

The tsunami ready Grand Aston Hotel in Tanjung Benoa is not identified as a public gathering 

place, but it does have well marked signs near the beach and pool areas and on every floor in the 

hotel that leads guests up to the safety of t he hotel rooftop above the fourth floor (see Figure 6 ). 

While well marked with signs, at check in guests are not informed about the meaning and use of 

these signs and the emergency information posted on the doors of each room of this hotel is very 

generic and refers only to evacuating down and out of the building for emergencies like a fire. No 

mention is made to evacuate up to the rooftop in the event of a tsunami threat. 

> Figure 6. Tsunami evacuation sign at the pool of the Grand Aston Hotel.

The is land of Lombok is often referred to as an up and coming rival to Bali. It is more laid back 

and less congested than Bali while still offering beautiful beaches. The two main tourist 

destinations are the city of Kuta on the southern coast and the Gili islan ds off of the northwest 

coast. In 1977, a relatively small tsunami came ashore in Kuta. People remember the ocean 

turning black, easily catching stranded fish when the water first receded only to have a second Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 165 

wave wash out their catch, and people climbing coconut trees for safety. There were no deaths. 

Little action was taken after that tsunami: no signs were posted, memorials erected or inundation 

levels marked. The Aceh tsunami in 2004 was different. After se eing news reports of the 

devastation, several families in Kuta made the decision to leave their homes on the coastal plain 

and build new houses on the slopes of the nearby hills. Additionally, as in most parts of Indonesia, 

local and national disaster miti gation agencies started to act. In 2015, the BPBD put up evacuation 

signs and held a tsunami simulation. Local residents were recruited and compensated (20,000 

rupiah or about $2, a meal and a bottle of water) to gather on the beach and then run several 

hu ndred meters inland to the mayor’s office after a siren sounded. Residents were taught that 

earthquakes cause tsunamis and that they should run to higher elevations for safety. Several 

dozen tsunami evacuation signs were posted throughout the small town. U nfortunately, the signs 

were posted with the simulation in mind. All of the signs in town pointed to end -of -simulation 

gathering points like the mayor’s office, the central mosque, an elementary school and an artists’ 

market. These gathering points were fi ne as a place to offer compensation and a rice lunch, but 

they were not in line with teaching the need to head for the hills. 

When asked about the signs, some locals explained that they would go to one of the gathering 

points first and from there they expected that someone from the government would come with 

transportation to take them inland. Others were more pragmatic. When ask ed about the purpose 

and practicality of the gathering points, one father, who had built a home on the safety of the 

hillside, described the evacuation signs as “crazy” and noted that if they followed the signs to the 

gathering point “they would all die.” Several merchants with evacuation signs posted nearby, also 

explained that they would ignore the signs and run or ride a scooter to the hills. Several 

government officials also mentioned that the reason the signs pointed away from the hills was 

that the la nd belonged to private developers for future resorts and they did not want people 

“trespassing” during evacuation drills. 

While in Kuta our team held two evacuation drills. The first at Elementary School 2 showed the 

mixed -up futility of the signs and the reality that even school children knew that the best direction 

to go was up the nearby hills. The school is one of the designated gathering places so signs point 

first to the school and then from there the signs point to the additional gathering points fu rther into 

the center of the coastal plain. When presented with the need to quickly get to an elevation of 20 

meters, all of the fourth and fifth graders knew to run westward, against the signs, to the nearby 

hills only a few hundred meters away. 

The smal l city of Pemenang and its port of Bangsal are the ferry departure point to the Gili Islands. 

In 2012 a TES was built on the outskirts of the town (see Figure 7 ). The national governmental 

disaster management agency ( BNPB Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Benc ana) made the 

decision to build the shelter in part to provide protection for tourists. Curiously, most tourists only 

pass through Pemenang en route to the Gili Islands. Additionally, there are hills to the south of 

town that could provide tsunami refuge.  Sirens have yet to be installed. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 166 

> Figure 7. Temporary Evacuation Shelter in Pemenang

Soon after being built, the local BPBD held the first and only evacuation drill to the TES in which 

locals were paid to participate. Locals have mixed feelings about the building. Interviews with 

locals indicated that many in town attribute the construction of the TES to corruption and collusion 

that enriched some but made no sense to most. Some feel that the Gili Islands will stop a tsunami 

from reachin g the town thus rendering such a structure as useless. A local non -profit (Pasir Putih) 

led a crusade to use the building for community activities as a way of helping suspicious locals 

become more accepting of the building and thus more willing to use it f or evacuations. In 2016 

the first annual Bangsal Meggawe Festival was held at several locations around town including 

the TES. The festival included cultural performances, activities, cinema showings and artists in 

residence. Many of those artists were the n recruited to decorate the TES which they renamed 

Taman Evakuasi Seniman (evacuation park artists) which still uses the same acronym. Upbeat 

murals now decorate the ramps and the top two floors of the structure. Included in the decorations 

are dozens of y ellow ducks leading the way up the ramps; a humorous slogan encouraging people 

to open their umbrellas before being rolled up by the waves, and a mural of clenched fists stating, 

“Together we our strong.” Another mural covers the whole floor of the top lev el and is easily seen 

from the air. It depicts a person with raised arms floating on half of an avocado with the large 

words “I’M HERE” written to the side. When not in use for the artist festival local children use the 

structure to play badminton in the o pen atrium and for athletic training on the top floor. Sadly, the 

2018 earthquake in Lombok rendered the TES unsafe and destroyed the colorful main mosque 

in the center of town. 

The island of Sumba is unique among most of the major islands of Indonesia in that it is not 

volcanic. It is an uplifted slab of limestone with low lying hills and limited fertility. It sits astride the 

Java Trench and is as prone to earthquakes and tsunamis as the other islands along Indonesia’s 

southern perimeter. Sumba is also the only Christian majority island included in our survey with a 

mix of Protestants and Catholics. Sumba and the other eastern islands of Indonesia are less 

developed and less populated compared to Java and Bali. They do not receive as much access 

to gove rnment resources and programs. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 167 

In our many classroom presentations and from survey results and interviews it became evident 

that most inhabitants of Sumba do not think their island is susceptible to tsunamis. This stems in 

part from the lack of worrisom e volcanoes which are constant reminders of subducting plates 

below and a limited awareness of the island’s seismic history in which there have been 21 

tsunamis in the past 388 years beginning in 1629 (an average of one tsunami every 18 years). 

The most re cent tsunami was in 1977 and before that 1938. None of these recorded tsunamis 

were major. Most of them originated from earthquakes along lesser faults to the north or east. 

The lack of tsunamis from the south suggests that there is considerable buildup of pressure along 

the section of Java Trench to the south of Sumba. The lack of any heavily destructive tsunamis 

in the past 400 years may explain why there is a local perception that Sumba is tsunami free and 

may also explain why Sumba, unlike Java, seems t o have no folk tales or guardian deities 

associated with tsunamis or the sea to serve as a reminder of past disasters. Locals commonly 

expressed sentiments such as “tsunamis don’t come here, that happens in Aceh.” Sumba is the 

island furthest east and away from Sumatra of all our surveyed islands. 

When visiting with local BPBD officials we were told that they were allocated a small budget from 

the BNPB (national agency) for posting evacuation signs. The budget was based on previous 

reporting of natural dis asters, most of which were landslides during the rainy season. Signs were 

therefore posted in the areas where landslides have occurred leaving coastal tsunami areas with 

limited signage. There was no evidence of municipalities on other islands having to ch oose which 

disasters to focus on because of limited budgets. The focus on landslides has meant that in the 

rural outskirts of Waingapu, some of the evacuation signs (using the standard tsunami wave) 

point out into the rice paddies —which provide safety from landslides instead of up onto the 

surrounding hills which provide safety from tsunamis. 

The undulating physical geography of Waingapu makes the establishment of evacuation routes 

and gathering points much more problematic than most coastal towns where it was easy to see 

and know what was high and what was not. On one day of field work we were discouraged to 

observe that there were no identified evacuation routes leading from the port area to safe areas. 

There were also no hills within sight. There was how ever a gradual rise in elevation leading away 

from the port. At the top of the rise stood a large mosque with a second story. When we inquired 

at the mosque as a potential evacuation site we were told that there had never been any thought 

of using the mosq ue and that a better option would be to evacuate down the rise across a river 

bottom and then up another rise to the government complex to safety. That rise was also a safe 

place, but the distance, especially for those coming from the port was too far outs ide the 

evacuation window to individuals to reach in safety. 

In Waingapu we met with about two dozen local disaster officials to share our findings. We showed 

a map of the city that highlighted the inundation zone (see Figure 8 ). We pointed out the few 

ev acuation signs posts that confusingly point in opposite directions. We then recommended 

evacuation sites (red stars), including the mosque up the incline from the harbor, that were in 

safer locations than the currently identified gathering places. Laying o ut and marking routes to 

these evacuation sites and then holding evacuation drills along the routes will help the people of 

Waingapu to be ready for a future tsunami. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 168  

> Figure 8. Waingapu inundation map by Bryce Berrett.

Conclusion 

Our survey results demonstrate a great need for communicating tsunami risk and efficacy 

messages throughout Indonesia. Java, Bali, and Lombok tsunami susceptibility perceptions fell, 

on average, between neutral and agree while average tsunami susceptibilit y perceptions for 

Sumba fell between disagree and neutral . Tsunami risk and efficacy perceptions varied 

substantially by island suggesting the importance of needs assessments and culturally -tailored 

interventions when planning educational campaigns. Proxim ity to Aceh, funding for safer 

evacuation routes, lack of tall structures for evacuation, and varying terrains were shown to impact 

threat and efficacy perceptions depending on location and these factors must be addressed in 

localized initiatives. 

Survey participants overall preferred to be warned by siren and TV over natural warning signs 

(e.g., ground shaking, receding ocean). There was also an overall preference to “order or alert 

from an authority” over “natural warning signs” in terms of evacuation ci rcumstance. The history 

of delays, failures of EWS, and reluctance of local leaders to prompt community evacuation (since 

they believe they may be shamed if a tsunami does not come) necessitates a shift in attitude in 

terms of recognizing natural warning s igns and immediately self -evacuating. This key message 

is included in the 20/20/20 campaign. The majority of participants said that they would evacuate 

uphill, followed by inland, followed by climbing the stairs of a tall building. Some of our research 

are as did not have hills or sufficiently tall buildings and we recommend TES are built in these 

areas as structural mitigation measures. Conservation of natural vegetative barriers is also 

important in many of the high -tourist locations where mangrove forests are cleared for tourist 

beaches and coral reefs are being depleted. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 169 

Since 2004, many coastal communities on the southern rim of Indonesia have made significant 

improvements to prepare residents for future tsunami disasters. National and local disaster 

mitigation agencies have installed tsunami warning systems (some of which no longer work), 

posted evacuation and tsunami inundation signs, identified safe gathering areas, built evacuation 

shelters, identified other tsunami ready evacuation struct ures, and conducted evacuation drills. 

Additionally, some locales have distributed tsunami maps showing routes and inundation zones, 

placed evacuation directions in hotels, and built tsunami memorials as a reminder of what has 

once happened and what might again happen. 

In spite of these efforts there are still many who believe they live in a safe area or think that the 

government will be able to warn and transport them to safety in time. Efforts at all levels of 

governance need to continue to foster tsuna mi awareness.. Each new cohort of school children 

needs to regularly practice evacuation drills and be taught the principles of 20/20/20. Complacent 

adults should formulate or adjust plans so that they know how to recognize tsunami signs, where 

to go for s afety and the time frame of how long it will take to reach a safe place. Additionally, more 

funding should be made available to make sure each village and city has evacuation routes and 

gathering places identified and appropriate signage posted to show the way. Future actions could 

include posting tsunami high water markers/signs along the coast, making sure that tsunami 

warning systems are installed and kept working, and developing rapid alert systems that are 

connected to increasingly common hand phones. 

References 

Badan Pusat Statistik. Census Data. Number of Mid -Year Population (Thousands) 1960 -2021. 

Available at: https://www.bps.go.id/indicator/12/1975/1/mid -year -population.html 

(Accessed March 28, 2022). 

Barbier, E. B. (2006). Natural barriers t o natural disasters: replanting mangroves after the 

tsunami. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 4(3), 124 -131. 

Chen, C., Lindell, M. K., & Wang, H. (2021). Tsunami preparedness and resilience in the 

Cascadia Subduction Zone: A multistage model of expected evacuation decisions 

and mode choice. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction , 59 , 102244. 

Danielsen, F., Sørensen, M. K., Olwig, M. F., Selvam, V., Parish, F., Burgess, N. D., ... & 

Suryadiputra, N. (2005). The Asian tsunami: a prote ctive role for coastal vegetation. 

Science , 310 (5748), 643 -643. 

Dhellemmes, A., Leonard, G. S., Johnston, D. M., Vinnell, L. J., Becker, J. S., Fraser, S. A., & 

Paton, D. (2021). Tsunami awareness and preparedness in Aotearoa New Zealand: The 

evolution of community understanding. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction ,

65 , 102576. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 170 

Embassy of the Republic of Indonesia, Washington D.C. Facts and Figure s. Available at: 

https://www.embassyofindonesia.org/basic -facts/ (Accessed March 28, 2022). 

Hall, S., Pettersson, J., Meservy, W., Harris, R., Agustinawati, D., Olson, J., & McFarlane, A. 

(2017). Awareness of tsunami natural warning signs and intended e vacuation behaviors 

in Java, Indonesia. Natural hazards , 89 (1), 473 -496. 

Harig, S., Immerz, A., Griffin, J., Weber, B., Babeyko, A., Rakowsky, N., ... & Weber, R. (2020). 

The Tsunami Scenario Database of the Indonesia Tsunami Early Warning System 

(InaT EWS): evolution of the coverage and the involved modeling approaches. Pure and 

Applied Geophysics , 177 (3), 1379 -1401. 

Harris, R., & Major, J. (2017). Waves of destruction in the East Indies: the Wichmann catalogue 

of earthquakes and tsunami in the Indonesian region from 1538 to 1877. Geological 

Society, London, Special Publications , 441 (1), 9 -46. 

Harris, R., & Major, J . (2016).Waves of destruction in the East Indies: The Wichmann catalogue 

of earthquakes and tsunami in the Indonesian region from 1538 to 1877. Geological 

Society, London, Special Publications, 441, SP441 –2. https://doi.org/10.1144/sp441.2 

Harris, R. A. , Prasetyadi, C., & Nasional, U. P. N. Assessing Vulnerability to Geophysical 

Hazards in Densely -Populated Regions of Indonesia. 

Harris, R.A., Claire Ashcraft, William Meservy, Han Deng, Kevin Stewart, Michael Bunds, Daniel 

Horns, Jared Whitehead and Br yce Berrett. (In press). Discovery of tsunami deposits 

throughout the eastern Sunda subduction zone, Indonesia, Natural Hazards .

Hein, P. (2014). Expecting the unexpected: a case study on tsunami mitigation in Fujisawa 

(Japan). Environmental Hazards , 13 (1), 1 -20. 

Jain, N., Virmani, D., & Abraham, A. (2021). Tsunami in the last 15 years: a bibliometric analysis 

with a detailed ove rview and future directions. Natural Hazards , 106 (1), 139 -172. 

Kemal, B. M., & Putra, H. (2020). Exploring key issues related to tsunami shelter in Padang 

city –Indonesia. In E3S Web of Conferences (Vol. 156, p. 04002). EDP Sciences. 

Lay, T., Kanamori, H ., Ammon, C. J., Nettles, M., Ward, S. N., Aster, R. C., ... & Sipkin, S. 

(2005). The great Sumatra -Andaman earthquake of 26 december 2004. Science ,

308 (5725), 1127 -1133. 

Latief, H., Puspito, N. T., & Imamura, F. (2000). Tsunami catalog and zones in Ind onesia. 

Journal of Natural Disaster Science , 22 (1), 25 -43. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 171 

Martinez, R., and Masron, I.N. (2020). National Library of Medicine. Jakarta: A City of Cities. El 

Sevier Public Health Emergency Collection. Available at: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/art icles/PMC7442427/ (Accessed March 28, 2022). 

Muhari, A., Mück, M., Diposaptono, S., & Spahn, H. (2012). TSUNAMI MITIGATION PLANNING 

IN PACITAN, INDONESIA: A REVIEW OF EXISTING EFFORTS AND WAYS AHEAD. 

Science of Tsunami Hazards , 31 (4). 

Nakaseko, T., Kim ata, F., Tanaka, S., & Takahashi, M. (2008, November). Tsunami warning 

and evacuation system in Nishiki of central Japan. In International Conference on 

Tsunami Warning, Bali, Indonesia .

Nakaya, N., Nemoto, H., Yi, C., Sato, A., Shingu, K., Shoji, T., . .. & Tomita, H. (2018). Effect of 

tsunami drill experience on evacuation behavior after the onset of the Great East Japan 

Earthquake. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 28, 206 -213. 

Newcomb, K. R., & McCann, W. R. (1987). Seismic history and seismotectonics of the Sunda 

Arc. Journal of Geophysical Research, 92(B1), 421 –439. 

https://doi.org/10.1029/jb092ib01p00421 

Niman MI (2010) The political tsunami: not all death and destruction is natural. Tsunami 

Communication:(Inter) personal/intercultural, Media, Technical, Ethical, Philanthropic, 

Development, and Personal Responses, pp 85 –99. 

Our World in Data. Indonesia Popul ation, 1 -2021. Available at: 

https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/population?time=0..latest&country=~IDN (Accessed 

March 28, 2022). 

Rahayu, H. P., Comfort, L. K., Haigh, R., Amaratunga, D., & Khoirunnisa, D. (2020). A study of 

people -centered early warni ng system in the face of near -field tsunami risk for 

Indonesian coastal cities. International journal of disaster resilience in the built 

environment .

Rasyif, T. M., Suppasri, A., Fahmi, M., Al'ala, M., Akmal, W., Hafli, T. M., & Fauzia, A. (2020). 

Cha llenges in increasing community preparedness against tsunami hazards in tsunami -

prone small islands around Sumatra, Indonesia. International journal of disaster risk 

reduction , 47 , 101572. 

Repetto, P., Cordón, P., & Bronfman, N. (2022). The relationship between political ideology and 

current earthquake and tsunami preparedness. Global Environmental Change , 72 ,

102444. 

Ringer, Hayden, Jared Whitehead, Justin Krometis, Ron Harris, N. Glatt -Holtz, S. Giddens, C. 

Ashcraft, G. Carver, A. Robertson, M. Har ward, J. Fullwood, K. Lightheart, R. Hilton, A. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 172 

Avery, C. Kesler, M. Morrise, and M. H. Klein, 2021, Methodological reconstruction of 

historical seismic events from anecdotal accounts of destructive tsunamis: a case study 

for the great 1852 Banda arc m ega -thrust earthquake and tsunami, J. of Geophys. Res, 

doi: 10.1029/2020JB021107. 

Spahn, H., Hoppe, M., Vidiarina, H. D., & Usdianto, B. (2010).  Experience from three years of 

local capacity development for tsunami early warning in Indonesia: challenges, lessons 

and the way ahead. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences , 10 (7), 1411 -1429. 

Sufri, S., Dwirahmadi, F., Phung, D., & Rutherford, S. (2020). Enhancing community 

eng agement in disaster early warning system in Aceh, Indonesia: opportunities and 

challenges. Natural Hazards , 103 (3), 2691 -2709. 

Sufri, S., Dwirahmadi, F., Phung, D., & Rutherford, S. (2020). Progress in the early warning 

system in Aceh province, Indones ia since the 2004 earthquake -tsunami. Environmental 

Hazards , 19 (5), 463 -487. 

Sun, Y., & Yamori, K. (2018). Risk management and technology: Case studies of tsunami 

evacuation drills in Japan. Sustainability , 10 (9), 2982. 

Sun, Y. (2020). New approaches t oward tsunami risk preparedness in Japan. In Disaster Risk 

Communication (pp. 17 -38). Springer, Singapore. 

Suppasri, A., Goto, K., Muhari, A., Ranasinghe, P., Riyaz, M., Affan, M., ... & Imamura, F. 

(2015). A decade after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami: the progress in disaster 

preparedness and future challenges in Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and the Maldives. 

Pure and Applied Geophysics , 172 (12), 3313 -3341. 

Terry, J. P., & Goff, J. R. (Eds.). (2012). Natural hazards in the Asia -Pacific region: Rec ent 

advances and emerging concepts. Geological Society of London. 

United Nations Development Programme. Strengthening School Preparedness for Tsunamis in 

Asia and the Pacific. Available at: https://www.asia -

pacific.undp.org/content/rbap/en/home/program mes -and -

initiatives/SchoolTsunamiPreparedness.html (Accessed March 28, 2022). 

United States Geological Survey (2022). Available at : https://www.usgs.gov/ (Accessed March 

28, 2022). 

Wegscheider, S., Post, J., Zosseder, K., Mück, M., Strunz, G., Riedlinger, T., ... & Anwar, H. Z. 

(2011). Generating tsunami risk knowledge at community level as a base for planning 

and implementation of risk reduction strategies. Natural Hazards and Earth System 

Sciences , 11 (2), 249 -258. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 173 

Witte, K., & Allen, M. ( 2000). A meta -analysis of fear appeals: Implications for effective public 

health campaigns. Health education & behavior , 27 (5), 591 -615. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 174 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 175 

# Reducing Child Mortality in Sierra Leone with 

# a Sustainable Diagnostics Device for Sickle Cell Disease 

Alice Chen, Laura Duffany, Kathleen Gifford, Katie Goettle, 

Dream Intarachumnum, Lauryn Jones, Wei Ngai, Tiffany Pang, Heidi Shen, 

Jannah Wing (Lehigh University, Pennsylvania, United States) 

Abstract 

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a genetic blo od disorder that affects more than 250 million people 

globally (Ilesanmi, 2010). The disease arises from an abnormal variant of hemoglobin in the 

bloodstream, which causes healthy red blood cells to assume a sickle shape. Aggregations of 

these atypical blo od cells can inhibit circulation and lead to many health complications that can 

become fatal if left untreated. When the disease reached the United States during the 20th 

century, there were sufficient resources for the innovation of advanced diagnostic pr ocedures to 

identify SCD in its early stages. However, low -to -middle income countries (LMICs) in Sub -

Saharan Africa lack the means to effectively cope with the disease, thus demonstrating the 

healthcare inequalities between LMICs and developed countries. Between 50 -90% of SCD -

affected individuals in this region die before the age of 5, accounting for over half of the global 

SCD -related deaths in children under 5 (Tshilolo, 2019). To address this health crisis, the Lehigh 

University Sickle Cell Diagnostics team (SicklED) is developing a low -cost, point -of -care 

screening device for SCD that is designed for implementation as a neonatal standard operating 

procedure (SOP) in local hospitals. Because the lateral flow device is paper -based, its fabrication 

is sustainable and easily constructible without advanced medical training. With help from 

sponsors and the team’s established network of healthcare and soci al workers in Sierra Leone, 

SicklED’s plan is to assist the efforts present in Sub -Saharan Africa to help raise public awareness 

of the importance of healthcare and definitively diagnose SCD in these regions. 

Keywords: sickle cell disease, lateral flow device, test strips, sustainable global health, low -cost 

diagnostic, LMIC 

Purpose 

Universal screening and early intervention programs for SCD are crucial to preventing patient 

fatality, as they are proven to increase the life expectancy of those who have the disease (Kanter, 

2015). However, LMICs such as Sierra Leone lack the resources and knowledge to definitively 

test for SCD. While primary diagnostic methods used in high resource countries include Isoelectric 

Focusing (IEF) and High -Perfo rmance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), these technologies are 

costly, limited to a lab, and require a continuous reliable supply of electricity (Ilesanmi, 2010), thus 

making them unfeasible in LMICs. Additionally, Sierra Leone is one of the least developed 

countries worldwide, with uneven distribution of resources throughout the country (Caviglia, 2021). 

The vast majority of hospitals are concentrated in the country's capital, Freetown, thus preventing Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 176 

individuals living in rural communities from access to healthcare. Furthermore, the poor service 

quality and lack of skilled medical staff contribute to increasing out -of -pocket expenses, as this 

high demand towards a low supply exacerbates the issue and skyrockets prices (Caviglia, 2021). 

With 53% o f the population living below the poverty income line of $1.25 U.S. dollars a day, 

medical care is not feasible unless it is cost -effective (World Food). Therefore, with an already 

existing lack of education and awareness about the disease, there are scarc e opportunities for 

SCD diagnosis. 

While several small -scale screening initiatives have been implemented throughout LMICs, these 

initiatives were time -consuming and expensive, thus making it infeasible to continue these 

practices in LMIC and furthering the disparity between health care between high -and low -income 

countries. Two such programs were initiated in Angola and Uganda, and involved collecting dried 

blood spot (DBS) samples from newborns in high -risk areas, and sending them to central ized 

laboratories for isoelectric focusing analysis (Mvundura, 2019). 

These programs had costs estimated to be $15.36 and $9.94 per test, respectively, and the time -

consuming operations of the initiatives did not account for the need for early diagnosis of SCD. 

Evidently, the lack of a low -cost, point -of -care screening device in LMICs leads individuals with 

SCD to be left undiagnosed until they are present with clinical symptoms in late childhood, when 

treatments such as folic acid penicillin prophylaxis are less effective (Italia, 2019).This makes the 

illness a multifaceted issue in these regions, requiring not only the innovation and implementation 

of an accurate screening device, but also a campaign to spread awareness about the disease and 

its trajectory to local communities. SicklED acknowledges each dimension of the required solution 

to the problem by addressing aspects of SCD education, device cost and accessibility, and testing 

accuracy to advocate for sustainable global health. 

The SicklED screening device provides an affordable and effective solution for SCD testing in 

LMIC. The paper -based test strip is designed to differentiate between individuals who have SCD, 

carry the sickle cell trait (SCT), or are healthy. Additi onally, SicklED pushes forth an educational 

campaign by informing locals of what SCD is and how early detection is crucial to increasing the 

life expectancy of an affected individual. With increased awareness, people in LMICs will be more 

inclined to use t he device, thus promoting long -term healthy living. These plans have been made 

possible through the connections that SicklED has been fostering with in - country organizations 

such as World Hope International, the Sickle Cell Carers Awareness Network, and S ickle Cell 

Society in Sierra Leone. This collaborative combination of screening, education, and treatment led 

by partnerships between SicklED and other SCD organizations, as well as local physicians, clinics, 

and hospitals, will promote well -being across a ll ages to ensure and maintain standards of healthy 

living in accordance with local community life. Upon success in Sierra Leone, the device will 

maintain sustainability through its implementation into Sierra Leone’s health infrastructure through 

the Free Healthcare Initiative (FHCI), which provides basic health services to pregnant women and 

children under five (Witter, 2016). Upon local implementation, SicklED operations will be handed 

off to the Sierra Leone Ministry of Health, where the device can continue to be developed and 

optimized further without SicklED’s involvement. Successful SicklED operations have the potential 

to expand to other Sub -Saharan countr ies to improve the life quality and life expectancy of SCD -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 177 

affected individuals, thus creating value for patients, their families, and the global healthcare 

system overall. 

Design and Approach 

The SicklED device design meets standards of accuracy, susta inability, affordability, and portability 

such that unnecessary costs are minimized and accurate results are guaranteed. In alignment 

with the sustainable development goals (SDG) of the United Nations (UN), the SicklED diagnostic 

device will reduce financi al burden and healthcare inequality by improving long -term health 

outcomes for SCD -affected individuals. While SicklED’s primary focus is to lower the SCD -related 

child mortality rate in Sierra Leone and other LMICs, the concentrations and volumes of the 

antibodies in the SicklED screening device are designed to be manipulated and optimized for use 

with varying forms and concentrations of hemoglobin across all age ranges. Thus, the test strip is 

designed to have a wide dynamic range betw een infants and adults, with the ability to distinguish 

between individuals who have SCD, SCT, and are healthy. 

Beginning with screening and diagnosis of diseases, SicklED promotes the well -being of 

individuals at all ages and allows for the administratio n of proper treatment. This will significantly 

reduce the number of preventable deaths and promote good health as outlined in SDG 3. 

Additionally, the SicklED implementation phase, which includes collaboration with multiple SCD 

advocacy networks in Sierra Leone, demonstrates alignment with SDG 10 because of its 

commitment to reducing global healthcare inequalities. 

The SicklED test strip employs simplified immunoassay techniques with small quantities of 

reagent, thus ensuring accurate results without compr omising device affordability. Modeled after 

the common pregnancy test, the structure of the SicklED test strip is built based on a lateral flow 

sandwich assay (Figure 1), where an antigen -antibody complex with conjugated beads allows for 

control or test li nes to appear. Lateral flow immunoassays are largely employed in point -of -care 

settings due to their simplicity and the minimal resources required (Easthope, 2021), the SicklED 

device adopted its paper -based design as a lateral flow assay with an assembly that does not 

require advanced medical training. Thus, the SicklED test strip will allow for increased SCD 

diagnostics accessibility within local health clinics in Sierra Leone and other LMICs, given that 

local healthcare workers will be able to construct and administer the SicklED device without more 

than an information manual for both purposes. In this way, a method for SCD diagnostics will 

become widely available and accessible in LMICs . 

> Figure 1: The sandwich structure formation

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 178 

Blue latex beads conjugated with an anti -HbA/ anti -HbS antibody detect the HbA/HBS analyte in 

the sample and create visible test lines. The blue test lines then indicate whether the patient has 

normal blood, SCD, or sickle cell trait. 

The SicklED E -junction lateral flow test strip is constructed from four main components: a

nitrocellulose membrane, an adhesive polystyrene backing card, a CF5 absorbent pad, and 

conjugate release pad (Figure 2). T he nitrocellulose membrane of the test strip contains the printed 

antibody lines, which include a control line and a test line for each antigen in the sample deposited 

on the test strip. The paper -based absorbent pad (5mm x 15mm) is attached on the end, ne arest 

to the antibody lines, as the sample is located at the ends of each arm where the sample will be 

applied. The backing card is beneath the nitrocellulose membrane, absorbent pad, and sample 

pads, providing the device with structure and support. These materials each have a paper base, 

thus providing for the sustainable qualities of the SicklED test strip, which range from its availability 

to its biodegradability. While lateral flow devices that are based on polymer microfabrication lack 

environmental qu alities and will likely contribute to the accumulation of plastics in the environment 

(Saidykhan, 2021), the SicklED device avoids this issue, thus providing a rapid, affordable, and 

environmentally sustainable method for SCD diagnosis. 

Paper is not only manufactured locally in an abundance of locations around the world, but is often 

available in various engineered forms, giving it a range of material properties. Given its paper 

base, SicklED test strip administration does not rely on an active pump o r external power source, 

and instead relies on the advantageous capillary effects of paper to carry the necessary reagents 

up the strip for diagnosis (Chiang, 2019). This is an essential aspect of the device, considering 

that many health clinics in sub -Sah aran Africa do not have reliable access to electricity. Similarly, 

the small size of the SicklED test strips and their requirement of only small volumes of samples 

and reagents for diagnosis makes the device easily distributable, thus contributing to the 

sustainable cost and local accessibility of the SicklED test strip. With paper - based microfluidics 

that benefit the environment in Sierra Leone, SicklED serves a valuable purpose in LMICs with 

regard to healthy and sustainable living.  

> Figure 2: E-junction test strip assembly.

The E -junction design incorporates three sample pads (5mm x 10mm), attached 5mm apart and 

positioned perpendicular to the nitrocellulose membrane (5mm x 35 mm) with clear laboratory 

tape. The sample pads and absorbent pads overlap the nitrocellulose membrane by 2mm, 

respectively. The nitrocellulose membrane facilitates capillary action such that the analyte, wash Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 179 

buffer, and beads are pulled up to the absorbent pad, which increases the volume drawn and 

allows for the sample to fully travel to the test lines. The control, HbA, and HbS antibodies are 

printed right below the absorbent pad. 

Translation of SicklED’s technology into practice will be conducted through the Lehigh University 

Office of Creative I nquiry and its close collaborations with clinics in Sierra Leone. The SicklED 

team has recently received Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval from the Sierra Leonean 

Pharmacy Board Control to conduct alpha testing groundwork and is in the process of receiving 

IRB approval from Lehigh University. Once the device reaches clinical testing stages, SicklED will 

work towards district, regional, and national care system approvals before clinical and hospital 

implementation. In -country partnerships and mass manufacturing by Wancheng Bioelectron Co. 

is anticipated to supply distribution to hospital and physician health units; the team will then work 

with World Hope International and local health ministries to distribute materials. In -country 

partners hips and mass -manufacturing by Wancheng Bioelectron Co. is anticipated to supply 

distribution to hospital and physician health units; the team will then work with World Hope 

International and local health ministries to distribute materials. Upon successful implementation 

in local healthcare clinics, SicklED operational management will be given to the Sierra Leone 

Ministry of Health, which will continue to sustain and build upon progress. 

Aside from diagnosis, education and treatment are essential component s of the SicklED venture 

that contribute to its alignment with the SDGs. Raising awareness of SCD symptoms in Sierra 

Leonean communities and incorporating the screening device into the FHCI will allow for the 

SicklED to become integrated into local infrast ructure, thus definitively promoting a reduction in 

healthcare inequities between LMICs and developed countries. In -country healthcare providers 

will be trained to operate the test strip and teach other clinicians, thus promoting widespread free 

and easy a ccess to screening. Once patients are diagnosed, they will be connected to receive 

proper treatment at a nearby hospital. These elements contribute to increasing the likelihood of 

life quality and life expectancy for children and adults affected by SCD. As more information about 

the experience of SCD patients in LMIC is collected, the SicklED education campaign will be 

further developed to address additional needs. This knowledge will further increase the long -term 

sustainability of the SicklED device as it will improve the understanding of the need to be 

screened. 

SicklED operates under the strong belief that early detection of SCD is crucial to proper treatment 

and a healthy life. Beyond testing, the team strives to collaboratively contribute to educational 

efforts in LMIC, beginning in Sierra Leone. The connections that SicklED has fostered with in -

country organizations such as World Hope International, Sickle Cell Carers Awareness Network, 

and Sickle Cell Society in Sierra Leone will allow for c ommunity members to be properly educated 

on the effects of the disease and subsequently connected to affordable treatment options 

including folic acid and penicillin prophylaxis (Italia, M. et al 2019). This collaborative combination 

of screening, educatio n, and treatment led by partnerships between SicklED and other SCD 

organizations will promote well -being across all ages and ultimately help reduce the healthcare 

inequalities present between high and low income countries. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 180 

Findings 

Findings by the team involve multiple aspects of laboratory and sociodemographic research 

results, which influenced changes in the device configuration and the approach that SicklED will 

take in implementation. In designing the test strip, SicklED team members evaluated antibodies 

which respectively target HbA and HbS in varying combinations of volume and concentration to 

maximize test line intensities of the device and improve dynam ic range of the device. The dynamic 

range of the device is important to ensure that the SicklED device is usable across a wide variety 

of individuals, while test line intensity, indicated by the darkness of the blue lines on the strip, 

visibly demonstrates the specific detection of HbA and HbS by the antibodies, despite varying 

concentrations of antigen. These two design factors were found as important metrics of the 

SicklED device diagnostic ability as they affect the extent to which the use of the test st rip can 

impact the healthcare community. 

Evaluation of device performance was performed using straight -line test strips dipped into wells 

of analyte, wash buffer, and conjugated beads. SicklED utilizes two specific capture antibodies, 

antibody HbA and ant ibody HbS, from Rockland Antibodies and Assays Inc. to help form the 

antigen -antibody complex on the test strip with purified antigens acquired from Sigma -Aldrich. 

Quantification of the test line intensities involved the use of ImageJ software to analyze and 

compare test line intensities from multiple test strips. Once a test strip was completely developed, 

images were taken under uniform lighting and with consistent camera settings to minimize 

variation in image quality. ImageJ subsequently served to standardize the intensity and create an 

equal platform for comparison. Following a phase of experimentation with the test strips, a 

predetermined background intensity value is found from an unused test strip and is used as a 

baseline for comparison whe n ascertaining test line intensity values for each test line. The 

background value is then subtracted from the test line value, and this computed intensity is then 

compared between remaining developed test strips. 

However, initial results (Figure 3a) show ed low intensity values, which is an indication of cross -

reactivity between the test line and the antibodies placed on the strip. Hence, recent efforts in the 

lab have focused on optimizing the biofunctionality of the test strip and finding the most effici ent 

buffer to reduce cross reactions, which helps to improve sensitivity and specificity. Sensitivity and 

specificity are metrics of the device’s dynamic range, thus allowing for more widespread detection 

of SCD and equal access to the device by diverse individuals. To this effect, an aspect of recent 

laboratory findings included the balance in concentrations which minimize cross -reactivity 

between antibody -antigen complexes on the test strip. 

After varying the concentrations of different blockin g agents in the running buffer, SicklED has 

determined that the combination of 2.5% nonfat dairy milk (NFDM) diluted in phosphate -buffered 

saline (PBS) and Tween -20 efficiently minimize antigens from binding to the antibodies spotted 

on the membrane nonspe cifically and to decrease background noise. The volume of beads on the 

strip and printed antibody concentrations were also optimized, reducing the amount of beads from 

2uL to 1uL to reduce nonspecific binding. The intensities of the test lines with 1uL rem ain visible 

with 0.2mg/mL (20% diluted) anti -HbA, whereas with 0.2mg/mL (20% diluted) anti -HbS, the test Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 181 

line was difficult to visualize therefore the HbS test line will remain at 1mg/mL (100%) anti -HbS 

undiluted. 

The SicklED device is currently able to identify purified hemoglobin -HbA and hemoglobin -HbS. 

The antigen binds specifically to the printed HbA/HbS test line antibody; however, the future 

optimization of the device will include further minimization of the test line antibody interactions, 

quality control of temperature conditions and storage life -span of the buffers. Furthermore, clinical 

testing of the device using whole blood samples will be carried out such that the SicklED device 

will be run with healthy, SCD , and SCT whole blood samples. 

Each diagnosis will be compared against the gold standard (HPLC/IEF) to determine a false 

positive/negative statistic. Initial clinical testing will be completed within the lab using obtained 

blood samples from the local hos pital. Following successful device results from in lab testing, 

clinical testing will be carried out in the field. Using connections, developed though World Hope 

International and the Sickle Cell Cares Awareness Network in Sierra Leone (SCCAN), the device 

will be run on confirmed SCD and SCT individuals to further confirm device accuracy and ensure 

device usability in a LMIC setting. 

To facilitate transport of materials for fieldwork, SicklED adapted the running buffer used on the 

test strips to carry antigen up the device arms; thus leading to more findings with regards to the 

buffer’s shelf life. To prepare for travel, the team stored the nonfat dairy milk (NFDM) powder 

separately from the liquid component of the buffer, thereby allowing for longer sh elf life, as the 

NFDM usually aggregates into clumps, making the buffer ineffective during the running of the strip. 

The buffer is stored at room temperature; therefore, no electricity for refrigeration is required, 

making the test strip a portable and sus tainable option for SCD diagnosis. The SicklED laboratory 

stores reagents and conducts experiments with temperature and humidity conditions like those of 

Sierra Leone to replicate the in -country environment and optimize development.   

> Figure 3: SicklED e valuatory phase of HbS and HbA antibody concentrations for the test strip.

(a) Experimental straight test strip results; 20mg/mL of HbA/HbS concentration resulted in minimal 

cross -reactivity on the test strip. (b) ImageJ quantification of test line intensities presenting a

promising result of low level of cross reactivity. 

Additional previous work in the SicklED laboratory utilized enzyme -linked immunosorbent assays 

(ELISA) to confirm antibody bead conjugation; however, ELISA was labor -intensive, ex pensive Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 182 

and was highly variable. Successful bead conjugation is now confirmed through the development 

of the control and test line intensities. It was evident that the aspects of the previous design of our 

lateral flow strip could potentially infringe on current patents; therefore, SicklED research into 

patents led to findings of current SCD diagnostic methods on the market. For example, a 

prominent US patent that exists for the device is a lateral flow immunoassay rapid test detecting 

the pres ence of hemoglobin A, C, and S (US20160116489A1). In this patent, the claims protect 

specific antibodies used for the detection of these hemoglobin types and their amino acid 

sequences, immunoassays using these antibodies (including competitive and noncomp etitive 

immunoassays), and a lateral flow device using these antibodies. 

In further evaluating current SCD devices on the market, several substantially equivalent SCT and 

SCD diagnostic devices were found. Analogous devices, such as SickleSCAN, are classi fied as 

a class II device and serve as a predicate example for substantial equivalency. 

Another device that can qualify as being substantially equivalent is Arlington Scientific, Inc.’s 

Sickle Cell Test Kit, found in the FDA 510(k) database by the reference number K960947. This kit 

uses a number of reagents to detect the presence of HbA or HbS hemoglobin, but does not 

differentiate between SCD and SCT. The SICKLEDEX kit, located in the FDA 510(k) database by 

reference number K013316, is also approve d by the FDA and may be another potential device 

that can qualify as substantially equivalent to as the device uses a number of reagents to 

differentiate between SC blood and normal blood by solubility differences. Finally, SicklED 

identified a CE -marked d evice that does not have FDA approval called HemoTypesSC. This 

device is also a lateral flow test and differentiates between HbA, HbS and HbC by mixing the 

blood samples with reagent before depositing them onto the strip. 

With this research into account, the SicklED team began experimentation with unique test strip 

configurations to prevent contravention of any patents in place. Before landing on the E-junction 

geometry, SicklED considered the T -junction and Y -junction test strips, and experimentation with 

these configurations led to the finding of the “hook effect”, which occurs when the antigen is 

present in very high amounts of concentration, blocking all the capture and detection antibody 

binding sites. This obstructs the sandwich structure of the devic e mechanism from forming, 

consequently revealing no visible line and producing false negatives and false positives. In the 

case of the “hook effect”, the blood sample is directly deposited onto the test strip, but the exact 

concentration of the hemoglobin in a single drop of blood is unknown, so the oversaturation 

phenomenon of the hook effect could inhibit the intensities of the test lines that form. The E -

junction configuration of the test strip helps minimize this occurrence, with the incorporation of 

two wash steps which helps reduce the concentration of antigen present on the test strip. 

SicklED's collaboration with World Hope International (WHI), a multinational, nonprofit 

organization dedicated to alleviating global poverty and improving global health, has allowed the 

team to access networking opportunities within Sierra Leone during the developm ental phase of 

the device. For example, through connections with WHI, SicklED met with other SCD advocacy 

networks in Sierra Leone which provided access to local healthcare clinics and patients. 

Specifically, WHI’s network team has allowed for connection w ith the Sickle Cell Society, the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 183 

Sickle Cell Cares Awareness Network (SCAAN), as well as the Masanga Hospital. These 

organizations and individuals identified the pressing need for a low -cost screening device and 

expressed an interest in SicklED’s proposed solution. In this way, SicklED has grown in ways that 

are truly beneficial for the local community. Metrics of success in this regard are the direct 

feedback from the local health workers who SicklED works with to administer the test. 

During each fieldwork cycle, the team continues to explore implementation strategies that follow 

the FHCI of Sierra Leone which provides free healthcare for children and nursing mothers. The 

plan for this exploration is to administer diagnoses to children before the a ge of 5 years or 

neonatal screening. Through this screening program, children will receive preventative treatments 

early and begin practicing methods of symptom management at a young age, which has been 

proven to be beneficial in reducing the intensity of SCD symptoms. 

Research Limitations/Implications 

The lack of community understanding in Sierra Leone with regards to preventative medicine is 

one of the primary difficulties of improving healthcare in local, non -urban areas (Rahimy et al., 

2009). Parental understanding, voluntary participation, and informed consent are instrumental to 

the success of projects intended to reduce SCD burden. Because there are only a small number 

of newborn screening (NBS) programs in Sierra Leone, many parents are skeptical when informed 

that their seemingly healthy infant has SCD. It is increasingly more difficult to spread awareness 

about SCD diagnosis, considering the stigma that surrounds healthcare facilities in countries like 

Sierra Leone. During 2019 fieldwork, a Peace Corps volunteer in Sierra Leone shared with the 

team that the community often considers hospitals to be “the place where you go to die,” indicating 

that healthcare is only sought out in times of need, instead of for preventative measures. As per 

these shar ed beliefs, many individuals in local communities refuse preventative treatments due to 

their lack of understanding about the long -term purpose. This mindset is also reflected in follow 

up appointments, as individuals that do seek treatment often do not return for subsequent visits 

(Kachimanga et al., 2021). As a result of this lack of educational awareness about the healthcare 

system, it is difficult for physicians to hold their patients accountable. There is a lack of structure 

in healthcare, as patient s do not recognize the importance of follow -up treatments, and clinics 

often have scarce resources that limit the amount of days they can consistently remain open. The 

negative stigma surrounding the healthcare system has also been found to apply to the sp ecific 

illness that the patient suffers from. For example, when SicklED team members conducted 

fieldwork in 2019 and visited a local clinic, one of the maternal and child health aids expressed 

that, “If someone has sickle cell, they tie them up and tie the m down because they believe the 

devil is inside them… so they don’t come here.” These stigmas and misconceptions about SCD 

in the Sierra Leonean community prevent locals from going to the clinic. This underscores the 

importance of educational efforts on NB S and SCD in order to increase public awareness and 

combat the stigma that leads community members to put their lives at risk by avoiding healthcare 

facilities despite their clear need. 

“Brain drain,” or the departure of educated healthcare workers to cou ntries with higher 

compensation (Merriam Webster Dictionary), has also been a challenge to third -world countries Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 184 

when it comes to improving healthcare operations. The problem is rooted in lower compensation 

for medical technologists and medical doctors in Sierra Leone, where they only make a monthly 

income of approximately $659 and $1370, respectively. Meanwhile, the same professions can 

earn an income that exceeds $5,850 and $24,500 per month in other countries. As educated 

workers voluntarily depart the region, citizens face diminished resources and personnel required 

for conducting intensive blood tests. There also exists a scarcity of resources for advanced blood 

work procedures in Sierra Leone and other Sub -Saharan African countries. Companie s such as 

LabCorp and Quest Diagnostics in the United States are responsible for running blood tests that 

diagnose for SCD, and prices range from $50 to $100. As follows, healthcare providers face a 

financial burden to obtain the diagnostic tools needed to ascertain early intervention, an 

instrumental step to preventing such elevated childhood mortality rates. This creates a need for 

asimple, yet affordable, diagnostic tool that can be rapidly utilized for early detection. The SicklED 

screening device is e asy to assemble and operate, so it’s feasible for current healthcare workers 

in the system to readily understand the mechanism and learn how to use it. While successful 

implementation of the device in Sierra Leone for early SCD diagnosis can help lower the 

staggering mortality rate, the most important aspect of the procedure is making sure that patients 

who test positive have access to treatment and support that they need. These patients are not 

guaranteed to seek out necessary treatment post -diagnosis – ho wever, education and 

collaboration with SicklED can encourage them to do so. Patient attendance needs to be 

advocated for; keeping electronic records to track the patients’ health history will help generate a 

more structured and organized plan of care. 

NBS benefits to patient outcomes have been proven in many regions of Sub -Saharan Africa. 

Successful implementation of NBS in Angola, with an SCD clinic established at the National 

Children’s Hospital in the capital city of Luanda, serves as evidence of success, as approximately 

1000 patients are seen there annually (Therell et al., 2020). As follows, infants with abnormal FS 

or FSC patterns were enrolled in a newborn clinic (McGann et al., 2020). During the first clinical 

visit, all newborns received medication, such as the first dose of the 13 - valent pneumococcal 

conjugate vaccine (PCV -13, Pfizer, Inc.), an insecticide -treated mosquito bed net for malaria 

prophylaxis, and initiated Penicillin prophylaxis, as well as comprehensive sickle cell educati on. 

As a result, the calculated first -year mortality rate for babies with SCD compared favorably to 

Angola's national initial mortality rate, where 3.6% of enrolled infants have died during the follow -

up period. According to this aforementioned success, ou r initiative of promoting NBS as well as 

serving SCD education to the broader community yields a promising outcome to combat the SCD 

burden in Sierra Leone. At the first and subsequent clinic visit, families were educated in the 

warning signs of emergency complications (fever, pallor, splenomegaly), and were instructed to 

seek emergency care if they noted any of the signs. The majority of the families did seek care as 

instructed. However, gaps in the medical system and the lack of awareness among Angolan 

he althcare providers prevented these children from receiving appropriate and timely care. 

A study from 2015 on cost -effective analysis reveals that the NBS program in Angola is cost -

effective; however, the downstream medical costs, including acute care wer e not included in the 

report (Therell et al., 2020). The screening costs included supplies for sample collection, maternity 

nurses labor for specimen collection, transport of samples to the central laboratory, and laboratory Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 185 

costs for personnel to perform isoelectric focusing on all samples. SicklED aims to eliminate the 

demanding cost of isoelectric technology through the point -of -care approach. 

SicklED's long -term goals aim to screen all newborns for SCD while also spreading awareness of 

the effects of SCD. These factors will depend on strengthening the communities’ positive attitudes 

towards the idea of diagnosing SCD. SicklED success will not be labeled by the completion of the 

diagnostic device, but through ensuring that the diagnostic device is implemented in LMICs 

followed by the receival of treatments to those in need. 

Value 

The SicklED effort towards implementation of the diagnostic device has significant value with 

regards to reducing inequities in healthcare on a global level. It is understood that diagnosis is 

merely the first step towards improving the life quality of SCD subjects, and access to SCD 

treatment is necessary to combat the high child mortality rate in Sierra Leone and other LMIC. 

The multidimensional approach by SicklED to reduce child mortality in Sierra Leone requires 

collaboration across the board, from Western donors and funding agencies to local government, 

non -profit organi zations, clinics, and healthcare providers at different levels in Sierra Leone. 

Parallel to the SicklED lab efforts in technical development and clinical evaluation, SicklED has 

established connections with various healthcare sectors in Sierra Leone over time, with 

contributions from the Lehigh University Office of Creative Inquiry. Partners such as Dr. Cheedy 

Jaja, SickleSCAN and World Hope International have provided us with insight on the current local 

community in Sierra Leone. This deeper understanding of the environment has significantly 

helped us in optimizing the test strip to be as useful as possible for the environment it will be 

implemented in. 

The education and advocacy of SCD prevention presents value to researchers already conduct ing 

studies in Sierra Leone. In the summer of 2019, SicklED had the opportunity to validate the 

developing device, where the team gained a greater understanding of the device’s current 

limitations and its usability in the field through Dr. Jaja and his med ical team. He and his team 

have experience with diagnosing and treating SCD in Sierra Leone due to the numerous clinics 

they operate in. He has provided numerous resources that were crucial to SicklED development. 

After lab validation of the diagnostic de vice in the US using blood samples from healthy, SCT and 

SCD subjects, field evaluation of the diagnostic device will be carried out in collaboration with Dr. 

Cheedy Jaja. Dr. Jaja’s research team has been investigating the feasibility of point -of -care tes ts 

(POCT) to diagnose newborns with SCD in low -resourced community healthcare settings in Sierra 

Leone since 2017. Specifically, within the framework of the Sierra Leone Sickle Cell Disease Data 

Collection Project, Dr. Jaja works to determine the best prac tices for the implementation and 

routine adoption of POCT diagnostic tools, such as SickleSCAN and HemoTypeSC across 

different clinical settings (including rural and urban hospitals, clinics and health care centers) by 

involving nurses, midwives, and healt h workers. His group has extensive experience screening 

patients with the SickleSCAN device, strong support from the Government of Sierra Leone, and Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 186 

strong commitments from local partners (SCCAN & AMMCHC). Integral to the Sierra Leone Sickle 

Cell Data Collect Project is planned care management for confirmed cases, care coordination, 

and active patient/caregiver engagement. These are crucial steps in providing comprehensive 

care and tackling the vexingly high rates of infant mortality associated with SCD . SicklED’s 

partnerships with organizations rich in clinical experience involving POCT diagnostics will be 

leveraged to translate the proposed device for utilization. Through developing the screening 

device in parallel with the translational research of Dr . Jaja’s team in the implementation of POCT 

for SCD screening, especially the effort with newborn screening, the operation and performance 

specifics of the device will evolve with and be optimized for proper settings to facilitate 

downstream wide adoption. 

After successful implementation on a small scale, widespread implementation throughout Sierra 

Leone and other LMICs will be pursued. Widespread implementation of the diagnostic device will 

be in conjunction with the development of infrastructure to treat diagnosed SCD individuals. In 

addition to the collaboration with Dr. Jaja, SicklED has sought out continuous feedback on device 

development from partners in Sierra Leone. Partner relationships were formed during the initial 

visit (August, 2019) to Sierra Leone to distinguish developmental frameworks for the device. The 

SCCAN and the Sickle Cell Society allowed SicklED access to patients and local healthcare 

workers who provided insight with regards to the current screening situation as wel l as the 

socioeconomic and demographic impact on individual’s outcome. Mutual collaboration between 

the groups is beneficial to each party as we all share the same interest of lowering the high 

mortality rate of SCD disease in Sierra Leone. While SCANN and Sickle Cell Society provide us 

with information on the social aspects of SicklED, we help solve the problem at its root with a 

technical device. With continuation of SicklED partnerships, the goal of lowering mortality while 

providing necessary treatments to those in need will be feastable. Upon implementation, the 

device will be an asset to these two organizations and their SCD diagnosis and treatment facilities. 

The SicklED device will be optimized to be affordable for clinical implementation in low res ource 

areas that are highly affected by SCD. The screening device is capable of sustaining functionality 

without the usage of electricity or large equipment currently required for diagnosis. The lateral 

flow technology combined with the geometry of the tes t strip eliminates the cost of reagents. 

Affordability is important in LMICs, such as Sierra Leone, due to the health inequities present. 

Families in Sierra Leone have limited access to resources due to their income, which makes it 

difficult for them to pr ioritize health as a concern. Due to the current high financial costs of 

healthcare, individuals tend to invest their financial resources into other concerns such as food, 

clean water, and housing. However, the World Health Organization’s ASSURED framework 

defines the most suitable screening devices for use in LMICs as affordable, sensitive, specific, 

user -friendly, rapid and robust, equipment -free, and deliverable to end -users (Kosack). Therefore, 

the application of the lateral flow mechanism repr esents the ability to adapt healthcare technology 

such that inequalities such as cost and accessibility within LMICs due to lack of resources may 

be alleviated. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 187 

References 

Bognini, J. D., Samadoulougou, S., Ouedraogo, M., Kangoye, T. D., Malderen, C. V., Tinto., H., 

& Kirakoya, F. Socioeconomic inequalities in curative healthcare -seeking for children 

under five before and after the free healthcare initiative in Sierra Leone: analysis of 

population -based survey data. Retrieved from March 30, 2022 fro m

https://equityhealthj.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12939 -021 -01474 -7

Caviglia, M., Dell’Aringa, M., Putoto, G., Buson, R., Pini, S., Youkee, D., Jambai, A., Vandy, M. 

J., Rosi, P., Hubloue I., Corte, F. D., Ragazzoni, L., & Barone -Adesi F. Improving Access 

to Healthcare in Sierra Leone: The Role of the Newly Developed National Emergency 

Medical Service. Retrieved March 30, 2022 from 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8472563/ 

Chiang, C., Kurnia, A., Kai, C., & Wang, M. Single s tep and mask -free 3D wax printing of 

microfluidic paper -based analytical devices for glucose and nitrite assays. Retrieved 

March 30, 2022, 

from 

https:// www.sc iencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0039914018311512?via%3Dihu  b

Easthope, E. (2021, May 14). Benefits of Lateral Flow Immunoassays for Point -Of -Care Testing. 

Retrieved March 30, 2022 from https:// www.jacksonimmuno.com/secondary - antibody -

resource/immuno -techniques/benefits -of -lateral -flow -immunoassays -for -point - of -care -

testing/ 

Ilesanmi, O. O. Pathological basis of symptom s and crises in sickle cell disorder: implications for 

counseling and psychotherapy. Hematol Rep 2010, 2 (1), e2. 

Italia, M. B., & Kirolos, S. (2019, July 12). Sickle cell disease in anaemic children in a Sierra 

Leonean District Hospital: A case series. OUP Academic. Retrieved December 16, 2021, 

from https://academic.oup.com/omcr/article/2019/7/omz061/5531394 

Kachimanga, C., Dibba Y., Patino, M., Gassimu, J.S., Lavallie, D., Sesay, S., Lado, M., &

Kulinkina, A.V. (2021, September 08). Implement ation of a non -communicable disease 

clinic in rural Sierra Leone: early experiences and lessons learned. Retrieved March 30, 

2022, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8452567/ 

Kanter, J., Telen, M. J., Hoppe, C., Roberts, C. L., Kim, J. S. , Yang, X., Validation of a novel 

point of care testing device for sickle cell disease. BMC Med 2015, 13, 225. 

Kosack, C. S., Page, A., & Klatser, P.R. (2017, September 05). A guide to aid the selection of 

diagnostic tests. Retrieved March 30, 2022, from 

https:// www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/95/9/16 -187468/en/ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 188 

McGann P.T., Ferris M.G.,, Ramamurthy, U. et. al. (2013). A prospective newborn screening and 

treatment program for sickle cell anemia in Luanda, Angola. Am J Hematol 88(12):984 –

989. 

Rahimy, M. C., Gangbo, A., Ahouignan, G., & Alihonou, E. (2009). Newborn screening for sickle 

cell disease in the republic of benin. Journal of Clinical Pathology, 62(1), 46. doi: 

http://dx.doi.org.ezproxy2.library.drexel.edu/10.1136/jcp.2008.059113 

Saidykhan J., Selevic L., Cinti, S., May J. E., & Killard A. J. Paper -Based Lateral Fl ow Device 

for the Sustainable Measurement of Human Plasma Fibrinogen in Low -Resource 

Settings. Analytical Chemistry 2021 93 (41), 14007 -14013. 

https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03665 

Therrell Jr, B. L., Lloyd -Puryear, M. A., Ohene -Frempon g, K., Ware, R. E., Padilla, C. D., 

Ambrose, E. E., ... & Watson, M. S. (2020). Empowering newborn screening programs in 

African countries through establishment of an international collaborative effort. Journal of 

community genetics, 11(3), 253. 

Tshilo lo, L. & Gonzalez J. Sickle Cell Disease: A One Health Solution to a Neglected Generic 

Disease. Retrieved March 30, 2022, from https:// www.vet.k - state.edu/about/news -

events -publicati ons/OneHealth/Vol13 -Iss1/sickle_cell.html 

Witter, S., Brikci, N., Harris, T., Williams, R., Keen, S., Mujica, A., Jones, A., Matthew -

Zmijewski, A., Bale, B., Leigh, B., Renner, A. (2018, July 12). The free healthcare 

initiative in Sierra Leone: Evaluat ing a health system reform, 2010 -2015. Retrieved 

March 30, 2022, from 

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/hpm.2484?author_access_token=iJWz7 

zwprzqVpssV0Sd4804keas67K9QMdWULTWMo8NXM6W9vLgH52xAeRYDgLnoBw 

rvPsnOT_tvBNGireGoU_wSI5BNtK -VfXsdcSmc2wkuatZ6y4gBEU -g-rRUKmT_ 

Yang, X., Kanter, J., Piety, N. Z., Benton, M. S., Vignes, S. M., & Shevkoplyas, S. S. (2013). A 

simple, rapid, low -cost diagnos tic test for sickle cell disease. Lab on a Chip, 13(8), 1464. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/c3lc41302k Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 189 

# Can just any Country Achieve UHC?: Lessons 

# from Different Health Systems 

Karuna Jain and Sandhya Mishra (Indian Institute of Technology, India) 

Abstract 

The UN’s Sustainable Development Goals -3, to ensure healthy lives and promote well ‑being for 

all at all ages, adopts Universal health coverage (UHC) as one of the targets to reduce the 

inequality and fight poverty. Universal Health coverage (UHC) is the aspiration of the world and 

the global impetus for a very long time now. Even though WHO shares a framework to achieve 

UHC, there is no universal way to achieve it, thus, there exists many pathways depending on the 

socio -economic and political issu es faced by the country and yet none of the single pathway is 

complete in itself to sustain the coverage. Hence we see countries seek to diversify the sources 

of revenue by using hybrid financing models or make healthcare reforms to sustain UHC. This 

calls for an innovation in the ways healthcare system is financed. There are many policy levers 

and combination of factors that may help when implemented to achieve UHC that is inclusive and 

sustainable in the long -run. Pursuing UHC though is expensive, complex and definitely not easy, 

but it is achievable. 

The study reviews the evolution of diverse health systems of 5 distinct countries (Japan, Thailand, 

Rwanda, Brazil and Turkey) into achieving UHC as well as draws useful lessons to attain universal 

coverage for India and any aspiring country from their experience. 

Keywords: UHC, Universal healthcare, sustainable development goals, health systems, 

components of health system 

Introduction 

The countries in the world have wrestled with the cost benefit analysi s of raising their healthcare 

sectors. Each time a country invests more on health, it is left with a lesser budget for other 

investments like infrastructure, defense etc. At the same time, better health of people is linked 

with more productivity and hence healthier economy. Each nation set its own constraints and 

priorities towards providing equitable healthcare to its people, termed as Universal health 

coverage (UHC). Though many countries in the world have already accepted UHC as a first 

concern of health system, more than half of the global population do not have access to essential 

health services and each year millions are getting pushed into extreme poverty because of the 

high health expenses (WHO and World Bank). Though improving access to quality hea lthcare 

and universal coverage is a global problem, there is no universal solution to it, given the diversity 

of demographics, economic history and political issues within the nation and cross countries. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 190 

The United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals -3 (SDG -3), “to ensure healthy lives and 

promote well 

‑being for all at all ages” , adopts UHC as one of the targets of SDG -3 to reduce the 

inequality and fight poverty. Strengthening the healthcare systems will not only help reach SDG -

3 target of achieving UHC but also positively affect the other SDG’s to reduce poverty and 

unemployment, ensure food security, better education, equality, inclusive societ ies and economic 

growth (ONU, 2019). The WHO defines healthcare systems as, “A health system consists of all 

organizations, people and actions whose primary intent is to promote, restore or maintain health.” 

The strengthening of the health system demands h olistic investments in various components of 

healthcare alongwith embracing reforms in these structures that talk to each other so as to create 

an optimal system that caters to health needs of the people. There is no standard or universal 

path to achieve u niversal health coverage, thus, many pathways and arrangements exists to 

achieve the basic goal of a healthcare system depending on the socio -economic and political 

issues faced by the country. The healthcare systems aim at constantly improving patient hea lth, 

meeting patients need and ensure sustainability for the longer run. While doing so the health 

systems have to deal with changing demographics, technology advancement, rising cost of 

healthcare. 

The paper proceeds with the evolution of health systems of different countries (Japan, Thailand, 

Rwanda, Brazil and Turkey) that have followed one of these model into attaining universal 

healthcare along with brief introduction of healthcare system of India. It then progresses to 

compare the health system of th ese countries based on four themes namely, health financing, 

healthcare reforms, care provisions and human resource. Finally, the paper concludes to draw 

lessons for the developing countries like India, which is taking bigger strides to achieve UHC. 

Japan 

Japan’s population is declining owing to the stage 5 of demographic transition of the country. The 

ageing population is causing a significant financial burden on sustaining the healthcare cost of 

Bismarckian model of Japan. The first health insurance act came in 1922, which resulted in the 

formation of The Employees’ Health Insurance Law (EHI) and Community -based Health 

Insurance Law (CHI). Even before the act, Japan had its private and public employee covered 

under some voluntary associations that were n ot so much of appeal to workers. After the first 

world -war, the poor economic situation prompted the government and industrial sectors to come 

up with EHI from health insurance act 1922. The act was more of an industrial policy rather than 

a medical one an d premium were parked on income of individuals usually averaging 10%, capped 

at 13%. The Great Depression of 1929, hugely affected the Farming community. US being one of 

the biggest importer of Japan’s bumper crop, the plummeting price of rice along with o ther 

agricultural product multiplied the economic problems of farmers. Japan, which was gearing up 

for the second world war, used this opportunity to rope in farmers to build its military. It was then 

decided by government to provide CHI to cover temporary workers from unorganized sector 

starting with farmers to fisherman to self -employed. Post second world -war, healthcare were 

destructed and there was a political conflict to provide health cover to unemployed and poor 

people that pressured the then LDP gov ernment to enact mandatory National Health Insurance 

(NHI) in 1958 replacing the voluntary CHI to attain equitable health care as well as to sustain his Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 191 

own cabinet. Those living below poverty line enjoyed free healthcare service financed by 

government su bsidies. The premium varied with respect to income ranging from 7.3% to 15.9%. 

This marked attainment of universal healthcare in Japan in 1961. Though there was UHC, people 

had to pay 50% copayment from their own pocket. The subsequent reforms by LDP as pr essured 

by the socialist party reduced the copay to 30% and provided free healthcare to elderly above 70 

years. This populist policy later imposed heavy financial burden on the Japanese health system. 

At the same time, rapidly ageing population caused incr ease in number of retired unemployed 

pool of NHI thus increasing the health expenditure paid on behalf of this population. Finally the 

government had to abolish the free healthcare to elderly and made some independent pools out 

of NHI. 

The elderly health systems (EHS) act 1982 requested 10% copay from elderly above 70 years 

who earlier enjoyed free healthcare. This act was later modified into an independent scheme 

called Elderly health security act (EHCSA) in 2008. Similarly, the Long term care act (LTCA) 1997, 

was created as an independent insurance scheme for people with disability, chronic illness or 

requiring long term care treatment at 10% copay. Thus, the NHI was unburdened and Japan now 

has 4 mandatory independent schemes i.e. EHI, NHI, LTCA and EHCS A. 

There are more than 3000 insurers in Japan that are managed by Ministry of Health and Labor 

Welfare (MHLW) and classified based on occupation, place of residence and age. The hospitals 

are predominantly private, licensed by local governments and are no t for profit. The MHLW sets 

the uniform fee schedule to bring prices of the treatment under ambit including those under NHI 

and all providers must adhere to schedule. The hospitals and clinics submit the claims every 

month with CRROs (Claims Review and Rei mbursement Organizations) chartered in every 

prefectures that review the claims before sanctioning it to the providers’ basis fee schedule. 

MHLW employs database that banks all the claim data received from providers, known as 

National Receipt Database (NDB ) so as to audit and control the cost efficiently. There is no 

gatekeeping system in Japan as it takes pride in featuring “free access to healthcare facilities”, 

however, patients need to pay an additional fee to access tertiary care if they do so without a

referral from primary or secondary healthcare facility. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 192 

Figure 1: Japan Health System Evolution 

Thailand 

Thailand is considered to have one of the most efficient UHC in the world, an outcome of a well -

researched and thoughtful policy. 

The Medical Welfare scheme 1975, established by Ministry of Public Health (MPOH) marked the 

first major health insurance program to cover poor people to elderly, children and other 

unprivil eged groups. The program suffered from poor funding and ineffective targeting of 

beneficiaries and thus, failed. 

By the end of the decade, Thailand had array of insurance schemes for government employees, 

private employees, community health insurance for people in unorganized sectors, welfare 

schemes for poor, voluntary health card schemes etc. and despite its versat ile approach to cover 

people from every strata, the country was facing issues in providing a universal care. 

The careful analysis reflected some challenges and issues with the coverage schemes: 

1. There was a difficulty in assessing the target population; s ome individuals were covered 

under two or more schemes while other few had none. 

2. The staffs providing care were not well trained. 

> Source: (Health & Systems, 2021; Sakamoto et al., 2018)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 193 

3. The voluntary nature of schemes led to adverse selection and moral hazard. 

4. There were no proper infrastructure as facilit ies provided were limited and geographically 

not accessible to many. 

Thailand ultimately realized that having a universal coverage is not the solution to achieving 

universal healthcare. It started building on its infrastructure which gained momentum in th e late 

1990’s. 

There were three major schemes that rolled out in this period. 

The Civil Servant Medical Benefit Scheme (CSMBS) 1980, managed by Ministry of Finance 

(MOF) covered all the government employees and their dependents without any contribution f rom 

their salaries. The scheme is solely financed from the government budget. The beneficiaries could 

go to any public provider to avail services and also private providers in case of emergency. 

The Social Security Scheme (SSS) 1990, replaced worker compe nsation scheme (1972) and 

covered all private employees but not their dependents and was facilitated by tripartite 

contribution from employee, employer as well as government to provide the mandatory cover 

under the social security act 1990. 

The Universal care scheme (UCS) 2001, funded by general taxes covered the entire population 

not covered under CSMBS and SSS that is 75% of the total Thai population. It was an improved 

version of a very popular 30 -baht scheme introduced by TRT (Thai Rak Thai) leader as an election 

campaign that said “30 Baht treats all diseases” to provide free healthcare to its people at just 30 

baht copay. The copay was later removed to provide absolute free healthcare to people. There 

are no deductibles, co -sharing, copayment or limit on maximum coverage. 

Thai health system focusses on primary health system, which acts as a gatekeeper to 

comprehensive curative and rehabilitative care thus keeping the cost under control. The providers 

are mostly public and reimbursed by the government. There are no insurer but managing 

agencies for 3 schemes i.e. the Comptroller General’s Department, Ministry of Finance for 

CSMBS, the Social Security Office, Ministry of Labour for SSS and National Health Security Office 

(NHSO) for UCS. There are volunta ry insurers offering same service with more choices of private 

hospitals. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 194 

Figure 2: Thailand Health System Evolution 

Rwanda 

Rwanda is a poor small country grappling with communicable diseases that are preventable 

through improved hygienic measures but in recent decades it has seen great improvements and 

managed to achieve universal health coverage for its people. 

Following the independence in 1962, Rwanda which was still under European powers endured 

decades of violence, bloodshed and civil war. In 1988, Rwanda adopted the Bamako initiative as 

health development strategy popular among many sub -saharan nations to strengthen the equity 

in access to healthcare. Embracing the initiative, Rwanda decentralize d the care to the district 

level with the development of provincial to district level health system. The whole progress was 

disrupted following the 1994 genocide that not only destroyed the infrastructure, equipment, 

personnel and the health system itself but also plagued the society with ill health and diseases. 

In 1995, the government began to restructure the healthcare with the same Bamako initiative, 

however, the health system was severely under -resourced which affected the access as well as 

quality. It rolled out Community based health insurance scheme or Mutuelles de Santé 

(CBHI/Mutuelles) in the year 1999 in the select areas as health insurance pilots. Meanwhile, GoR 

also initiated health insurance plans for the Civil Servants called Rwandaise d’Assu rance Maladie 

(RAMA) in the year 2001 followed by Military Medical Insurance scheme (MMI) in 2005 to cover 

military personnel. The salaried individual working in the private sector are ensured medical 

insurance by their employers either through private ins urance companies or RAMA affliation. 

CBHI later quickly scaled across the country and became a national policy in the year 2004. In 

> Source: (Haines et al., 2019)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 195 

the year 2004, the CBHI was made mandatory for every individual not covered under any other 

scheme and by 2011 the coverage rose to 91%. 

Every citizen is identified in the national database based on the socio -economic category to the 

village level an individual belongs to. This database helps the GoR to set appropriate insurance 

premium for each population category. Under CBH I, healthcare centres are reimbursed on fee -

for -service basis. The national database is used to categorize the beneficiary in three groups. The 

premium paid by different categories are different and the most poor of all, is exempted from 

paying the premium . The copayment is fixed at 10% of the total hospital bills. The community 

healthcare is the gatekeeping system in Rwandan healthcare where community healthcare 

workers form the first point of contact with patients. From the CHW, patients move to the Healt h

Post or dispensary to the Health Centre to the District hospital and ultimately to the Provincial or 

Referral hospitals. Apart from the public sector that facilitates and manages healthcare at various 

levels with respect to the ‘minimum package of activi ties’, GoR has also authorized government 

assisted health facilities (GAHF), private providers, and quacks to join the work task force. 

Rwanda has maintained its own measure of geographical accessibility to healthcare i.e. a service 

is said to be accessible if a patient could visit a nearest healthcare worker ‘in less than 1.5 hours 

by walk’ and with this definition, more than 85% of the p opulation have access to healthcare 

service in Rwanda. 

> Source: (Aly et al., 2000; Jarl, 2011; USAID, 2013)

Figure 3: Sources of Funding for CBHI, 2012 -13 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 196 

Figure 4: Rwanda Health System Evolution 

Brazil 

Brazilian health system started officially in 1923 with the launch of social security system (SSS) 

for those working with private organizations. The SSS was based on mandatory contributions 

from both employer and employee and this system that did not cover majority of the Brazil, 

remained in order until the health reforms began in 1970. Though, healthcare for the people were 

still not considered a right, the Ministry of Health started with providing basic medical care to the 

people not covered under SSS. 

In 1985, after the political power in Brazil was finally returned to the civilians, re - democratization 

brought a brand new constitution which was more inclusive of social and civil rights of people that 

guaranteed right to health in order to achieve unive rsal healthcare. Brazil introduced, SUS 

(Sistema Único de Saúde) as a first step towards UHC that covered whole population. By the next 

decade, the SUS grew substantially to provide universal coverage to Brazilians. 

The SUS, a national health system of th e country provides free healthcare to anyone residing in 

the country legally including visitors. Apart from comprehensive curative and specialized care, 

SUS focusses on preventive care, primary care as well as mental health. In 1994, the family health 

stra tegy was introduced as a national policy to expand the primary care in SUS, while 

municipalities controlled the managing and delivering part of it. It presents health team comprising 

of a doctor, a nurse, a nursing assistant and maximum 12 CHW. Each team c aters to 2000 to 

4000 individuals in the population. Similar to health team, oral health team comprising of one 

> Source: Ministry of Rwanda

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 197 

dentist and 1 - 2 dental assistant cater to the same population size. The model is financed by 

federal government and its success led to the app reciable reduction in the in -patient admission. 

The SUS system is decentralized, has gatekeeping mechanism and is jointly financed by tax 

revenues, federal and municipal contribution. The contribution rate for health expenditure as per 

the law is at least 15% for both Federal and Municipal level separately and 12% from the State 

level of their own total revenue. In 2017, the federal share was 43% of the total public healthcare 

expenditure while state and municipalities contributed 26% and 31% respectively. 

The patients do not have to pay any premium or copay to avail health service, nevertheless, there 

are limited set of medications that are available under SUS. The care delivery and administration 

are dealt by state and municipalities. Though health is fr ee at the point of care for the population, 

almost 25% Brazilian go to private healthcare centres to avail paid services with their private 

health plans to avoid bottlenecks to access public health centres. Many people working with 

private sector also rece ive health insurance in the form of employee welfare schemes. 

Brazil spends more than 9.5% of its GDP to the healthcare of which almost 50% is the public 

spending. The cost of medicines that are not covered under the SUS account for one of the 

primary rea son for ~27% of the OOP expenditure. The ever increasing copayment from private 

health plans is another major reason for high OOP. 

Figure 5: Brazil Health System Evolution 

> Source:(Massuda et al., 2020)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 198 

Turkey 

The history of public health in Turkey dates back to 1920’s when the first minister of health brought 

some radical changes to healthcare system. The law on public health was created, detailed 

framework of public health was established along with provincial health directorates and public 

hygiene institute (1928). The main agency of health i.e. Ministry of Health which was constituted 

in the year 1920 built numune (ideal) hospitals as an example of best hospitals to guide local 

governments that were responsib le for providing in -patient care. To deal with scarce medical staff, 

state government subsidized the medical education of poor students along with providing 

additional benefits and this led to a doubling in number of doctors with each passing decade. 

Medic al staff working in preventive healthcare were paid better salaries than those working at 

other level. 

However, with the passing time focus from primary care shifted to in -patient care and more 

hospitals were build. The healthcare facilities under differe nt ministries and municipalities were 

centralized under Ministry of health. Health centres were built for villages, many vertical programs 

were introduced for malaria, tuberculosis etc. and few more healthcare laws were created but yet 

Turkish people livin g in the rural area had no access to even basic healthcare services. This called 

for the introduction of another law to socialize the healthcare services in the year 1961. Under 

this law, health centres were established with one doctor and allied healthcar e staff per 5000 

population, a health post with one midwife nurse per 2000 population. The infrastructure prolifered 

and by 1983, whole population was covered. In 1946, the social insurance scheme called Sosyal 

Sigortalar Kurumu (SSK) was launched to provi de cover to the daily wage or meagre salaried 

workers of public sector. To provide the cover to the rest of the public employees, Turkey started 

Government Employee’s Retirement Fund (GERF) called “Emekli Sandigi” in the year 1950. In 

1971 Social Insurance Agency (Bağ -Kur) scheme started for those working in unorganized sector 

and self -employed. These schemes acted as a major health policy over the years and on the 

backdrop, UHC occupied the health agenda for several coming decades. As a temporary means 

in 1992, the Green Card scheme was introduced to cover all the uninsured and poor people who 

can certify that their income is lower than one -third of the base wage rate determined by the state. 

The scheme provided access to all level of care with 20% copay on pharmacy and OPD care. 

Nevertheless, the effort continued to improve public health, develop a patient -centred system and 

attain a single universal program for the entire population. In 1993, MoH published a document 

outlining the framework to plan the future of health system but the reforms never got implemented 

because of the deep political turmoil faced by Turkey at t he same time that lasted till 2002. 

The new government in 2003, rolled out Health Transformation Programme to streamline the 

healthcare system that gained momentum by the year 2008 and all the insurance schemes were 

brought under a single umbrella. The, S SK, GERF, Bağ -Kur, Green Card holders, refugees and 

foreign individuals not covered in their home country were now under the ambit of General Health 

Insurance Scheme (GHIS) with effect from October 2008. In the year 2008, 94.2% of the 

population were offic ially covered by the public health insurance. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 199 

The Turkish healthcare system is financed through tax revenue, contributions from employed 

individuals and OOP. The healthcare is totally free for pregnant women, war veterans, 

tuberculosis and diabetic patie nts. 

Figure 6: Turkey Health System Evolution 

India 

India has a rich heritage of traditional medicine that can be traced back to Vedic times, however, 

modern medicine was introduced in and evolved after 1600s with the Portuguese, French and 

British rule. Pre -independence, India had more than 7000 hospitals and clinics across the country 

(Chakrabarti, 2014) . Post -independence, India prioritized the healthcare needs of its people that 

led to the foundation of Ministry of Health and Family welfare (MoHFW) in the year 1947. In 1946, 

Health Survey & Development Committee also known as Bhore Committee submitted a report 

that laid emphasis on integration of curative and preventive medicine at all levels healthcare, 

continues to be the basis of health structures of India. Around 1975, India was launching schemes 

aimed at improving the nutr ition and health status of children in the age group of 0 -6 years called 

as Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) and vertical health programmes aimed at 

controlling the diseases like AIDS, polio, leprosy etc. The public healthcare of India took the giant 

stride with the launch of National Health Policy in 1983 and with that started a series of five year 

plans each of which determines state spending priorities for the coming five years. In 2005, 

National Health Mission (NHM) was started that encompas ses its two Sub -Missions National 

Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM) focusing on specific 

needs of rural and urban India together envisaging achievement of universal access to equitable, 

> Source: (Mollahaliloglu et al., 2021; Tatar et al., 2011)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 200 

affordable & quality health care services that are accountable and responsive to people’s needs. 

To revive the profound knowledge of traditional Indian systems of medicine, GOI started with 

Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and Homoeopathy 

(Ministry o f AYUSH) in the year 2014. 

At central level, (MoHFW) provides administrative and technical assistance to the states in health 

subject along with implementation of various programs at the national level to prevent and control 

AIDS [National AIDS control P rogramme], Tuberculosis [National TB Programme (NTP)], and 

other major communicable diseases, promotion of indigenous systems of medicines [AYUSH], 

etc. There are also certain insurance programs offered at national level as a welfare schemes for 

poor peopl e. The national health insurance schemes like CGHS (Central Government Health 

Scheme) provides comprehensive health care facilities for the Central Govt. employees and 

pensioners and their dependents, ESIS (Employees’ State Insurance Scheme) is a

multidime nsional social security system tailored to provide socio -economic protection to worker 

population and their dependants, CHSS (Contributory Health Service Scheme), ECHS (Ex -

servicemen Contributory Health Scheme), RELHS (Retired Employees Liberalized Health 

Scheme). The national welfare schemes like Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY), Aam 

Admi Bima Yojana (AABY), Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) and others aims to provide health 

insurance coverage for Below Poverty Line (BPL) segment of population. 

The feder al system of government tasks healthcare as a state subject and hence each of the 28 

states and 8 union territories independently govern their public health system. This has resulted 

in different health insurance schemes offered by different state governme nt that also differ in 

coverage, availability and access. Most of the health insurance schemes offered at state level are 

very similar to the ones offered at national level that has resulted in overlapping of central and 

certain state insurance schemes for the beneficiaries. 

There has been several attempts to achieve UHC by the Government of India (GOI), the most 

recent being Ayushman Bharat –Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY - 2018) that is 

world’s largest tax financed scheme aiming to cover soci o-economically backward population that 

forms (approx. 50 crore beneficiaries) the bottom 40% of India’s population. It provides health 

cover of 5 lakh rupees per family for hospitalization at any empanelled secondary or tertiary care 

public or private hos pitals. The scheme also transforms primary healthcare by providing health 

and wellness centres and thus aims to offer comprehensive healthcare to all beneficiaries. 

However, so far only 17 crore beneficiaries have been verified from 3 years of launch of th e

scheme (Bhushan, 2021) 

Theoretically, almost 70% of the population is covered under some form of insurance coverage 

including state government insurance schemes, central and state government employee 

insurances, private employee insurances, private individual insurances. For the remaining 30% 

of the ‘missing middle’ population, GOI has come up with Arogya Sanjeevani policy (Sarwal and 

Kumar, 2021) as this population segment are not poor enough to be covered under any social 

security scheme and not rich enough to buy private health insurance but have high odds of getting 

pushed into poverty be cause of financial hardships caused by adverse health events. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 201 

India also has a rich pool of community health insurance (CHI) schemes organized by 

community/NGO/cooperative society/union members where they pool funds to offset the cost of 

healthcare. The micro insurance regulations of 2005 offered many such schemes to buy micro -

insurance products thus protecting them from catastrophic losses and promote ethical practice. 

The healthcare service providers are both public and private. The outpatient care is f ree and 

inpatient care is highly subsidized at public hospitals but the private health -care providers are 

more in demand because patients have better access to medical staff, medicines and quality 

healthcare. Private providers are concentrated more in urba n India because of the high 

purchasing power of people, providing secondary and tertiary health -care services resulting in 

high OOP expenditure. 

Figure 7 Time line of Important Events in Indian Healthcare 

Table 1: Comparing Countries            

> Japan Thailand Rwanda Brazil Turkey India
> Developme nt
> Status
> Developed
> country
> Developing
> country
> Least
> Developed
> country
> Developing
> country
> Developing
> country
> Developing
> Country
> Model of
> Healthcare
> System
> Bismarck Beveridge NHI Beveridge NHI Mixed

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 202                     

> SDI (2017) 0.8 0.68 0.41 0.66 0.73 0.55
> UHC Index
> (2017)
> 83 80 57 79 74 61
> UHC adopted
> in the year
> 1961 2002 2004 1988 2003 NA

The Table: 1 shows the development status and model of different healthcare system by 

comparing the Socio -demographic index (SDI) and Universal health coverage (UHC) index that 

have strong correlation with the health outcomes. Though countries have started with some model 

of healthcare, few have transitioned into creating the hybrid model by absorbing features from 

other model so as to sustain the universal coverage. 

Methodology 

This study aims to study the evolution of some diverse health systems showcasing equally diverse 

socio -economic background into accomplishing a common goal, universal health coverage. The 

deliberate selection of 5 countries with UHC have been done bearing varied development status 

and health systems viz. Japan, Thailand, Rwanda, Brazil and Turkey. The study proposes to 

review the evolution of these health systems into achieving UHC and comparing these systems 

by focusing on four components namely health fin ancing, healthcare reforms, care provisions and 

human resource, as well as drawing useful lessons to attain universal coverage for India and any 

aspiring country from their experience. 

For the study, data collection has been done from WHO website, nationa l repository of respective 

countries, and literature review of peer -reviewed journals including grey literature. 

Health Financing 

Japan’s health financing through payroll premium contribution is quickly condensing since several 

decades because of the ret iring population that are no longer contributing to the pool (Sakamoto 

et al., 2018). Hence, the country is principally relying on tax revenue and premium contribution to 

finance its healthcare expenditure. On the other hand Japanese are one of the highest tax payers 

in the world with effective top marginal tax rate being around 55% of their income (Tajika, 2018) .

The capping on OOP has further reduced the source of finance to the system. 

The three coverage schemes of Thailand CSMBS, SSS and UCS manifest highly skewed per -

beneficiary expenditure because of the poor redistribution of resources across them (Reich et al., 

2016). 

Rwanda too struggles with the increasing cost of care which is putting the question on 

sustainability of its mutuelles scheme that is funded majorly by the contribution from the 

beneficiaries, government subsidies and external aid. So as to understand the cost of service Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 203 

delivery and ensure sustainability, Rwanda is executing a costing study with RTI, USAID and 

public health school (Kayonga, 2007) .

Thailand being a developing country has achieved UHC with just 3.8% of GDP spending on 

healthcare and there are many strategies that has led to its low cost, predominant adoption of 

public providers being one of them. Particularly on the supply side, there is a capping on inpatient 

payments using DRGs, limited spending on primary care by capitation, substantial use of generic 

medicines etc (Hanvoravongchai, 2013) .In Turkey, the alarmingly increasing unemployment rate 

(13.7%, 2019) is bound to hit hard the premium collection thus affecting the UHC. 

Brazil and Thailand allow the breeding of private providers as well as private voluntary health 

insurers which has not only led to the increased private spending and OOP as high as 30% (Table 

2) in Brazil is also affecting the efficiency of the public h ealthcare and thus raising inequity (Reich 

et al., 2016). Though health is free at the point of care for the population, almost 25% Brazilian 

go to private healthcare centres to avail paid services with their private health plans to avoid 

bottlenecks to ac cess public health centres. The cost of medicines that are not covered under the 

SUS account for one of the primary reason for ~27% of the OOP expenditure. The ever increasing 

copayment from private health plans is another major reason for high OOP. 

The Table 2, compares the GDP contributions of each country towards total healthcare 

expenditure (THE) and the public contribution to the THE. The GDP to THE is the highest with 

respect to Japan and Brazil but the government contribution is at the second lowest in Brazil. 

Healthcare Reforms and Political Leadership 

UHC goals adoption in most of the countries have shown a pattern with mostly beginning after 

some major socio -economic or political change (Reich et al., 2016). The UHC became the 

national priority following the reconstruction efforts post second world war in Japan, following a 

financial crisis in Thailand and Turkey, during re -democratization in Brazil and post genocide in 

Rwanda. 

In Japan, the primary push to start UHC was to build more of a warfa re state of healthy individual 

rather than for establishing a welfare state but the strong political commitment with concrete goals 

led to the accomplishment of the UHC (Ikegami, 2014). Thailand & Turkey’s UHC is the result of 

determined commitment and lea dership of its government together with sharp economic growth. 

(Tatar et al., 2011). 

The strong social movements in Thailand accelerated UHC that was high on the political agenda 

and boosted the government leadership in reforming the healthcare and the sa me is with Brazil 

(Massuda et al., 2020; Reich et al., 2016). The strong commitment of the political leaders at local, 

district and national levels in Rwanda has led to the mobilization of population in enrolling, paying 

premiums and development of the uni versal community health insurance program (Ministry of 

Health, 2008). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 204 

Japan has national fee schedule that it updates twice annually which is a two -step approach of 

setting a global revision rate, revising pricing item by item and this has tremendously helped in 

containing cost by leveraging policies. Thailand has separated the healthcare purchaser and 

provider functions to keep accountability a priority and that resulted in creation of capable 

governance (Haines et al et al., 2019; Reich et al., 2016). It also demonstrates strong capacity for 

strategic goal setting, for the evaluation of new technologies and pharmaceutical products to be 

included in benefit packages. Brazil with its new leadership initiatives has started with innovative 

form of providing care by contracting the primary healthcare at the state level in order t o improve 

quality and efficiency (Araujo et al. , 2014) . To manage opposition of the UHC reforms from the 

interest groups, Turkey and Thailand developed strategies by creating an oversight board to 

understand their motiv ation and potential effects on the reform process (Haines et al et al., 2019; 

Tatar et al., 2011). 

Care Provisions 

Primary healthcare is fundamental in designing a cost effective and efficient system as it focusses 

on prevention of disease, health promot ion and outpatient care is the principal means of 

accessing it (Attaran & Capron, 2014; Bloom, 2017). Several studies demonstrate that not only 

hospitalization but also outpatient care leads to impoverishment of households (Aggarwal et al. ,

2012) . The Green -card insurance scheme of Turkey introduced as part of a transition to UHC, 

provides comprehensive outpatient cover along with secondary and tertiary care with rigorous 

eligibility check, gatekeeping, cosharing to regulate and at the same time p roviding unrestrained 

access to healthcare (GÜRSOY, no date) ; (Tatar et al. , 2011) .

Japan brags one of the best UHC service coverage index (83) with no gatekeeping mechanism, 

maximum number of hospital beds per capita (13/1000), free choice of physicians and minimum 

waiting time (Health & Systems, 2021). Howbeit, the same privileges provide little determent to 

overuse of specialized and expensive care. Japan also has the highest average length of stay 

(ALOS) i.e. 16.1 days per admission leading to supply side moral hazard, h owever, been steadily 

declining because of the fee schedule revision to incentivize the reduction of chronic care beds 

at hospitals (Sakamoto et al. , 2018) .

In Thailand, the gatekeepin g system are strictly followed care and bypassers are held liable to 

pay full user fees (Tangcharoensathien et al. , 2019) .

Thailand however, exhibits clear disparities and inequity across the three schemes with respect 

to quality of care and access to specialized care because of the pro -rich bias, where profit hungry 

private facilities cater mostly to rich urban population and the poo r people received care from 

government facilities and health centres with poor choice of providers, insufficient referrals 

etc. (Rodney and Hill, 2014) . Nevertheless, the poor people could still have equitable access to 

primary health care. Similarly, Ja pan faces a political economy challenge by not being able to 

improve the fairness by creating an integrated risk pool (Reich et al., 2016). The low risk pool do 

not want their premium rates increased to subsidize for increasing high risk pool that is 

respo nsible for widening the premium rates. Though Thailand has relatively small aggregate of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 205 

private sector around 25% of total hospitals, this pro -rich bias has also resulted in concentration 

of private sector providing specialized care in the urban areas wh ile primary care in such affluent 

areas remain weak (Haines et al et al. , 2019) . The bottl enecks to access healthcare like long 

waiting time, poor infrastructure etc has resulted in one fourth of the population utilizing private 

healthcare despite having free unified health systems in Brazil  (Massuda et al. , 2018) , 2020; 

(Reich et al. , 2016) .

Rwanda’s strikingly distinct strength of care provision is having an efficient bottom - up and top -

down mechanisms for layering the population into four different socio - economic categories with 

the help of the national database (Ministry of Health, 2008) . This has helped in unbeatable cross -

subsidisation from rich to poor using health insurance schemes while the poor are paid for by the 

government and development partners. The growing physician workload, lack of population trust 

in PHC’s hindered the implementation of compulsory gatekeeping in Turkey. 

The countries have witnessed a clear improvements in the health indicators, economic g rowth 

with large GDP improvements with the dawn of universal primary care service utilization as in the 

case of Rwanda, Thailand and Turkey ( (Jarl, 2011) ; (Mollah aliloglu et al. , 2021) ; (Thaiprayoon 

and Wibulpolprasert, 2017) .

Rwanda faces an ongoing challenge in engaging the members in th e scheme which can be 

improved by providing a better quality of care. 

Human Resource 

In Japan, both private and public sector follow the single fee schedule which is the only cost 

control measure in the system that favours clinic services over hospitals (Ikegami, 2014) . This 

also positively incentivizes the desirable workforce distribution. Thailand incentivizes healthcare 

workers to work in ru ral areas and thus ensures decent geographical distribution (Haines et al et 

al. , 2019) . A healthcare professional working in rural area are paid twice than the urban fellow. 

The school students are recruited from the underserved area into medical and nursing courses 

and made to work in their home districts after graduating. These incentives have tremendously 

increased (20%) the admissions of medical students (Sundararaman, 2018) . In Turkey, in the 

framework of the HTP, certain measures to attract the healthcare workers like contract recruitment 

has led to the balanced geographical distribution of the physic ians (Mollahaliloglu et al. , 2021) .

The national ‘prioritisation system’ also takes care of the proper geographical distri bution of the 

healthcare workers by assigning the healthcare staff to the places where the need is compelling 

and care needed the most (Mundy, Trowman and Kearn ey, 2018) Similar efforts have been taken 

by the Brazillian government where it constantly strengthens the policies and provides incentives 

to increase influx of primary care physicians, medical schools and other healthcare infrastructures 

in resources s tricken area where the healthcare access is limited (Massuda, Atun and Castro, 

2020) 

Thailand also trains paramedical staff with a three year bachelor’s degree to fill the human 

resource gap and deploying them at below district levels to provide care (Haines et al et al. , 2019) .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 206 

Rwanda has sheer shortage of healthcare personnel (Table 5, 0.1 physician per 1000 population) 

with fundamentally zero advanced level physiotherapists, radiologists, anesthesiologists, 

midwives, or laboratory tech nicians and to fill their gaps, it coaches paramedicals and readies 

them for the same positions (Aly, Avila and Cram, 2000) . Thailand also has rich pool of community 

health workers that maintains, one CHW per 20 households. 

The family health strategy, which relies on CHW is the essence of UHC in Brazil. The extensive 

ne twork CHW perform monthly visit to every family enrolled in the programme and run health 

promotion, prevention activities and check whether family members are complying with any 

treatment they are on (Massuda et al. , 2018) . Thus, volunteers from community play a key role in 

managing the relationship between society and the healthcare system. 

Conclusions 

The comparisons of the health systems of d ifferent countries is useful as it offers potential learning 

of the different approaches the countries take to work out on the similar problems and challenges 

to achieve the common health system goals. 

The study shows that systems not only go through turb ulent reforms to adopt UHC but also go 

through continuous adjustments to meet changing demands and rising costs to sustain the UHC. 

The ripened systems like Japan is gradually shifting its healthcare model (bismarckian) to sustain 

the current challenge of presented by ageing population. This calls for an innovation in the way 

healthcare systems are financed. Thus UHC requires a continuous commitment. The health 

financing of the country should be such that it protects people from paying from their own pocket 

to avail healthcare that creates inequity in the level of healthcare utilization by different social 

class. The merger of different schemes has showed improvement in the cross -subsidization 

among the risk pools in the population as in the case of Thailand , Brazil and Turkey thus also 

improving equity and access to healthcare. In many of these countries, health sector reform and 

decentralization have brought about shifts in functions between the central and peripheral levels. 

The inequity can still revive e ven after UHC reforms and so regular monitoring and effective 

measure of the equity should be persistent with particular attention on the need of the population 

to ensure any detrimental or inimical effects are taken care with suitable policy introduction. The 

presence of strong political will, commitment and policy objectives to build a robust health 

financing, equitable service delivery and good governance is essential in order to successfully 

implement and keep going with such national level schemes. The Investments in quality primary 

health care will be the cornerstone for achieving UHC around the world. The evidence from the 

UHC success of developing and least developed nations confirms that UHC can be achieved 

even with modest but strategic funding to healthcare. The gatekeeping mechanism or referral 

system using well equipped and comprehensive PHC’s have proved to not only reduce 

hospitalization but also the cost of the healthcare system as in the case of Thailand. The public 

health sector needs to ass ume the roles of promoter, provider, contractor, regulator, and steward. 

The private sector’s role also needs to be clearly defined and regulated. The inherent shortage of 

healthcare professionals with poor geographical distribution is a global problem tha t can be 

handled with a strong network of ground level primary or community healthcare workers as in the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 207 

case of Thailand, Rwanda and Turkey. The informal healthcare workers thus can be trained to 

strengthen the referral system. Thus, a systemic reforms m ust ensure effective functioning and 

delivery of healthcare services in both rural and urban areas. Since UHC is not only about the 

provision of universal coverage but also the quality of the care, infrastructure and access to 

services provided under the c overage, it is imperative to develop robust public health financing 

structure, meet the skilled health workforce requirement to ensure improved health outcome. 

Any developing country like India, that typically has large population and inadequate resources, 

struggles with meeting healthcare needs of its people. Such countries can learn from the example 

of these developed, developing and least -developed countries t hat have successfully and fairly 

achieved UHC by leveraging different policy levers, combination of cross - system elements and 

focus on health system components to gravitate to UHC realization that is inclusive and 

sustainable in the long -run. Thus justify ing, that pursuing UHC though is expensive, complex and 

definitely not easy, but it is achievable. 

References 

Aggarwal, A. et al. (2012) ‘Clinical & immunological erythematosus patients characteristics in 

systemic lupus Maryam’, Journal of dental education , 76(11), pp. 1532 –9. doi: 

10.4103/ijmr.IJMR. 

Aly, A., Avila, E. and Cram, A. E. (2000) ‘Overview of health system in Rwanda’, Surgical Clinics 

of North America , 80(5), pp. 1373 –1382. 

Araujo, E. et al. (2014) ‘Contracting for Primary Health Care in Brazil: The Cases of Bahia and 

Rio de Janeiro’, World Bank Group - Health, Nutrition & Population , p. 32. 

Bhushan, I. (2021) CEO Message , PMJAY . Available at: https://www.pmjay.gov.in/hi/blog -

details/3485. 

Chakrabarti, P. (2014) Medicine & Empire: 1600 -1960 . Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.  Available at: 

false. 

GÜRSOY, K. (no date) ‘An Overview of Turkish Healthcare System after Health Transformation 

Program : Main Successes , Performance Assessment , Further Challenges , and Policy 

Options Sağlıkta Dönüşüm Programı Sonrası Türk Sağlık Sistemine Genel Bir Bakış : 

Başarılar , Performa’, pp. 83 –112. 

Haines et al, 2019 et al.  (2019) ‘T he Kingdom of Thailanda Health System Review’, Journal of 

Chemical Information and Modeling , 53(9), pp. 1689 –1699. 

Hanvoravongchai, P. (2013) ‘Health financing reform in Thailand: toward universal coverage 

under fiscal constraints’, The World Bank , (20) , pp. 1 –36. Available at: 

http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/01/17208145/thailand -health -financing -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 208 

reform -thailand -toward -universal -coverage -under -fiscal -constraints. 

Ikegami, N. (2014) Factors Determining the Allocation of Physicians in Japan , Universal Health 

Coverage for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: Lessons from Japan . doi: 

10.1596/978 -1-4648 -0408 -3_ch7. 

Jarl (2011) ‘Health in Rwanda is Improving! Mid Term Review of the Rwanda Second Health 

Sector Strategic P lan’, (JUNE). 

Kayonga, C. (2007) ‘Towards Universal Health Coverage in Rwanda’, Brookings global 

economy and development , pp. 1 –6. Available at: 

http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/events/2007/10/22 rwanda/1022_rwanda.pdf. 

Massuda, A. et al. (2018) ‘The B razilian health system at crossroads: Progress, crisis and 

resilience’, BMJ Global Health , 3(4), pp. 1 –8. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh -2018 -000829. 

Massuda, A., Atun, R. and Castro, M. C. (2020) ‘The Brazilian Health Care System’, 

International Profiles of Health Care Systems , pp. 17 –25. 

Ministry of Health (2008) ‘Health Financing Systems Review: Options for universal coverage’, p. 

181. 

Mollahaliloglu, S. et al. (2021) ‘Change in the geographic distribution of human resources for 

health in Turkey, 2002 -2016’, Rural and Remote Health , 21(2), pp. 1 –7. doi: 

10.22605/RRH6478. 

Mundy, L., Trowman, R. and Kearney, B. (2018) ‘OVERCOMING the BARRIERS to 

ACHIEVING UNIV ERSAL HEALTH CARE in the ASIAN REGION’, International Journal 

of Technology Assessment in Health Care , 34(4), pp. 393 –399. doi: 

10.1017/S0266462318000417. 

Reich, M. R. et al. (2016) ‘Moving towards universal health coverage: Lessons from 11 country 

stu dies’, The Lancet , 387(10020), pp. 811 –816. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -6736(15)60002 -2. 

Rodney, A. M. and Hill, P. S. (2014) ‘Achieving equity within universal health coverage: A 

narrative review of progress and resources for measuring success’, International Jo urnal 

for Equity in Health , 13(1), pp. 1 –8. doi: 10.1186/s12939 -014 -0072 -8. 

Sakamoto, H. et al. (2018) ‘Japan Health System Review. Vol. 8 No. 1.’, Health Systems in 

Transition , 8(1), pp. 2 –22. Available at: 

http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10 665/259941/9789290226260 -

eng.pdf;jsessionid=793E7F28273806A2F763882D242BCB1A?sequence=1. 

Sarwal, R. and Kumar, A. (2021) Health Insurance for India’s Missing Middle . Available at: Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 209 

http://dx.doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/s2x8r. 

Sundararaman, T. (2018) ‘Lesso ns from Thailand: For universal health coverage, invest in 

public systems and human resources’. Available at: 

https://scroll.in/pulse/869170/lessons -from -thailand -for -universal -health -coverage -invest -

in -public -systems -and -human -resources. 

Tajika, E. (2 018) ‘What needs to be done of personal income tax of Japan ? A perspective for 

reform under deflation and aging population *’, 14(2). 

Tangcharoensathien, V. et al. (2019) ‘The Political Economy of UHC Reform in Thailand: 

Lessons for Low - and Middle -Inc ome Countries’, Health Systems and Reform , 5(3), pp. 

195 –208. doi: 10.1080/23288604.2019.1630595. 

Tatar, M. et al. (2011) ‘Turkey. Health system review.’, Health systems in transition , 13(6). 

Thaiprayoon, S. and Wibulpolprasert, S. (2017) ‘Political and Policy Lessons from Thailand ’ s 

UHC Experience’, Observer Research Foundation , (174). Available at: 

https://www.orfonline.org/research/political -policy -lessons -thailand -uhc -experience/. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 210 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 211 

# The State of Food Security and Nutrition : Building 

# Climate Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition 

# in the South West Region, Cameroon 

Mireille Sylviane Dongmo Nguepi, Bernard Tientcheu, and 

Achidi Aduni Ufuan (University of Buea, Cameroon) 

Abstract 

Purpose : Climate change poses a growing threat to the achievement of adequate nutrition; it is 

projected to negatively affect human wellbe ing and nutrition. The aim of this paper is to compare 

empirical literature from FAO food composition table (FCT) (1966) with our actual nutrients 

experimental data, to better understand the pathways linking climate change and nutrition after a 

period of 5 5 years (1966 -2022) and to provide mitigating/resilience studies for this global syndemic 

between climate change and nutrition. 

Design: A conceptual search on climate change related conditions that may affect 

agricultural/food/water chain and quality in South West region Cameroon was done. Secondly, 

staple foods were purchased to establish and compare their nutrient composition with the F CT. In 

a bid to mitigate and be resilient to the impact of climate on nutrients deficit, two pilot food studies 

(nutrients enhancement studies) were conducted in partnership with local small scale producers. 

Findings: Results of conceptual framework revea led that, heat -waves, droughts, heavy 

precipitations and floods, due to climate and global environmental change events could be the key 

drivers behind the rise in malnutrition because they impact on water, crop yields, vegetation and 

food security. Further more, comparing 1966 food composition table with the analysed chosen 

staple foods showed a significant decrease of the micronutrient content with years; indicating that 

food systems are vulnerable to the increased variability in the weather and ecosystem a s a result 

of climate change. Pilot studies with our partners revealed that formulated Fortified foods studied 

improved the micronutrients adequacy. 

Keywords: Climate change, Nutrition, Food composition table, Human health, Nutrient, Staple 

foods, Food s ecurity 

Introduction 

Climate change and malnutrition in all its forms  constitute two of the greatest threats to planetary 

and human health. The costs of unmitigated climate change, which will disproportionately affect 

low -income countries (Swinburn et al., 2019). The future of our health and that of our planet 

depend on our ability to massively reduce our contribution to climate change . No single solution 

will suffice. Nonetheless, changes in the food choice , and agricultur al system can help mitigate 

climate change impacts on nutrition . The pandemics of malnutrition and climate change constitute Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 212 

a syndemic (Kahn et al., 2019 ): they interact in time and place, have synergistic adverse effects 

on each other, and importantly, share common underlying  features .

As the climate changes, ensuring long -term access to sufficient and nutritious food for all 

becomes an even greater challenge faced by humanity. The effects of climate change on 

under -nutrition would be devastating, and would undermine current efforts to reduce hunger 

and ensure good nutrition. Despite the obvious critical situation and strong interconnection, 

food and nutrition security is still marked ly absent in climate change negotiations. While 

strengthening further efforts on mitigation, it is time for climate negotiators, governments and 

donors to focus their attention on the consequences of climate change on under -nutrition/over -

nutrition, and commit urgently to help the most vulnerable to adapt to an increasingly unpredictable 

climate and world. If not, irreversible consequences can be expected .

Adverse effects of climate change are a reality: the number of climate -related disasters (drou ght, 

floods, cyclones, etc.) in the previous decade has more than doubled relative to the nineties 

(WMO , 20 21 ). It is proved that they are main drivers affecting food insecurity both in the 

aftermath of a disaster and in the long -term (Shim ada , 2022 ). Climate -related events, 

disturbances in seasonal patterns, and gradual climate and temperature changes increase 

the overall risk of hunger. This is particularly alarming as there are still 842 million people 

suffering from hunge r and more than 180 million children affected by under -nutrition (FAO, 2013) .

The situation is very likely to get worse considering the various predicted impacts of climate 

change. With a +2°C global average temperature increase, the most optimistic projec ted warming 

scenario is that the rate of undernourishment in the sub -Saharan African population will increase 

by 25 % - 90% by 2050 , relative to today (Lloyd et al., 2011 ; FAO, 2017 ). Climate change will 

affect the world’s poorest households, whom have insignificantly contributed to greenhouse gas 

emissions. Furthermore, the most affected are those who have the least capacity to adapt to 

climate change related impacts. 

The South West Region of Cameroon is blessed with a variety of natural resources su ch as; 

forests, water bodies (waterfalls, rivers, lakes, and ocean), mountains and abundant wildlife 

species. Moreover, climate in this region favors human habitation with temperature ranging from 

16 to 26 o C and an annual rainfall of 1432.2 mm, thus promo ting agricultural practices. The most 

visible effect of urban expansion in South West Region of Cameroon is discernible in the urban 

and peri -urban areas, especially in Buea, Tiko and Limbe which have witnessed rapid population 

growth, ecosystem and enviro nmental destruction and climate change (Nde -Fon and Assob, 

2013). 

Cameroon has witnessed a rapid and uncontrolled urban growth, especially at the peri -urban 

fringes (Akoko et al., 2019). With a constant rise and change of climate, urban dwellers are obliged 

to record a high household dependency ratio. In response, househ olds have developed resilience 

techniques to cope with the changing climate and changing food. To survive within the urban and 

semi -urban areas of the region, the situation is more challenging among the poor whose 

purchasing power has consistently been ero ded by falling real wages, inflation and the rising cost 

of living despite attempts by the government to increase minimum wages (Bronhilda, 2012). The Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 213 

objective of this paper is  to investigate on nutrition from a climate change perspective and to build 

re silience for food insecurity in the South West Region, Cameroon .

Ma terials and Methods 

Study Design 

This work is divided into three sections (Figure 1): First, a conceptual work linking environmental, 

anthropometrical and natural climate change key drivers in the South West Region that may 

impact nutrition. Secondly, comparison of empirical literature from food composition table (1953) 

published in 1966 by the FAO to explore the nutrients content of common staple foods with our 

actual experimental da ta (year 2022). Thirdly, in order to mitigate food insecurity, we proposed 

two pilot food studies conducted in partnership with local small scale producers as resilience 

strategy. 

Study Area 

This research takes into account three municipalities in the F ako Division of the South West 

Region of Cameroon, namely; Limbe, Buea and Tiko municipalities (Figure 2). Limbe is a seaside 

city located along latitude 4° 00’ 60.00’’ N and longitude 9° 12’ 60.00’’ E of the Greenwich 

meridian. The area called Limbe is ac tually comprised of the main city of Limbe, surrounded by 

smaller villages such as Batoke, Ngeme, Debunscha, Idenau, Mokundange, Bonadikombo, 

Wututu and Bonjongo. The population of Limbe is 72106. The majority of people here are traders, 

with those in the neighboring villages and creeks mostly surviving on fishing and agricultural 

activities (Geonames, 2022). 

Buea is a small town located at the eastern slope of mount Cameroon, and lies along latitude 4° 

09’ 9.72’’ N and longitude 9° 14’ 27.60’’ E of the G reenwich meridian. As of the 2013 census, it 

had a population of about 300,000 (NIS, 2015). It is made of localities like Molyko, Bunduma, 

Tole, Soppo, Bova, Mile 16, Mile 14, Gbitingi and Bokwaongo. Majority of the adult population are 

business people wit h a considerable student population since Buea is hosting one of the state 

Universities. Buea has a typical mountain equatorial climate with a rainy season and a dry season 

having an annual rainfall between 3000 -5000 mm. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 214 

Figure  1: Overall  Work Design Flow Chart 

Figure  2: Map of the Study Areas 

Tiko is a town located along parts of the Atlantic Ocean, along latitude 4° 04’ 30.00’’ N and 

longitude 9° 21’ 36.00’’ E, and is made of localities like Likomba, Tiko, Mutengene, Ombe, 

Mudeka, Mondoni, Misselele and Matte. It is host to the CDC and has a population of about 78,885 

as at 2015 (NIS, 2015). The majority of people in this area are small scale farmers, and CDC 

workers.  

> Study Area
> South West Region: Fako, Cameroon
> Natural and Anthropometric
> Activities Threatening
> Climate/Ecosystem

Food composition table 1953  Mitigating Pilot studies with 

> partners:
> Dietary diversification

Actual Data of staple food (2022) 

Upland/Wetland 

Impacts 

> Methods of nutrients enhancement:
> formulation

Comparisons 

> Nutrients content

Climate Resilience/mitigation for 

Food Security and Nutrition 

Analysis  Analysis Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 215 

Conceptual Framework on Natural and Anthropometric Activities Threatening Climate and 

Ecosystem of the Region 

In order to conceptualize pathways and links that may alter nutrition at upland and wetland level 

of the study area (climate, environment, ecosystem and anthropometric activities on dry and 

wetland), we did a combination of scoping internet searches, snowballing, and citation tracking 

(Neba et al., 2021; Forkam et al., 2020; Akoko et al., 2019; Bate et al., 2019; Balgah et al., 2017; 

Azinwi et al., 2012; Molua, 2010; Molua, 2009; Feka and Manxano, 2008) to come up with 

frameworks. W e merged nine frameworks which we found to accurately represent the climate and 

agricultural practices and nutrition science to create our own “meta -framework” (Figure 1). The 

choice of these frameworks was based on detailed comparison of identified framew orks and 

discussion among the article authors, which included representation of experts on climate change, 

public health nutrition, human activities, and natural seasonal change; the information derived 

was recapitulated into factors affecting highland and lowland of the studied area. 

Nutritional Analysis 

Empirical Food Composition Table 

To compare empirical literature from food composition table (1953) published in 1966 by FAO, to 

explore the micronutrient content of common staple foods with our actual experimental data, to 

better understand the pathways linking climate change and nutrition after a period of 55 years 

(1966 -2021) and to provide recommendations to mitigate the global syndemic between climate 

change and nutrition, a document (food Composit ion table) was downloaded from 

https://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl -doc/pleins_textes/pleins_textes_5/b_fdi_14 -15/20430.pdf 

and  https://www.fao.org/infoods /infoods/tables -and -databases/cameroon -archives/en/  with the 

following reference  https://www.fao.org/infoods/infoods/tables -and -databases/cameroon -

archives/en/ .

https://horizon.documentation.ird.fr/exl -doc/pleins_textes/divers13 -01/09986.pdf , and was used 

for comparison with our actual 2021 -2022 food composition (empirical work). 

Determination of our Actual Staple Food Composition 

Sample Collection 

The major foods which are cultivated in these municipalities include yellow corn maize, beans, 

cassava, cocoyams, plantains, yams, rice, Irish potatoes, tomatoes and sweet potatoes. The raw 

ingredi ents for the formulation of the complementary food and juices; were rice, corn, soybeans, 

sweet potatoes, irish potatoes, eggs, sugar, soybeans oil, pawpaw, watermelon, pineapple, 

oranges and sugar. They were bought from the local farmers of the region. Th e samples were 

taken in a polythene bag to the University of Buea Life Science Laboratory for formulation and 

nutritional analyses. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 216 

Proximate Analysis and Minerals Content 

Standard procedures of AOAC were used to determine the moisture content, crude fa t, crude 

protein (N x 6.25), crude fibers and ash. The total carbohydrate was obtained by difference. 

Energy value was calculated using the Atwater's conversion factors. Minerals were determined 

by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, Hitachi Model 180 -80, and Ion Chromatographic 

Analyzer ICA model IC 100 (AOAC, 2005). 

Climate Resilience/Mitigating Pilot Studies with Partners: Methods of Nutrient 

Enhancement: Dietary Diversification, Formulation, Fermentation Fortification 

In order to solve any possible micronutrient deficiencies that may have been impacted by climate 

and ecosystem modification on the nutrient quality of foods, two pilot food studies were conducted 

in partnership with local small scale producers (Hest, Jourlaitcam, Saphi Beverages Scoop a nd 

Islamic Development Bank). The studies focused on formulation of natural juice by blending 

several ingredients while the other focused on formulation and fortification of complementary food 

using germination/fermentation technology. This was done on sta ple foods in a bid to improve on 

the human micronutrients requirement. 

First Pilot Study: Juice Formulation 

Sample Collection 

Healthy mature, ripe lemon, honey and orange fruits and fresh ginger were bought from local 

farmers at the Buea Central Market. The samples were taken to the University of Buea Life 

Science Laboratory in a polythene bag for juice formulation and nutritional analyses. 

Sample  Preparation 

The fruits (orange and lemon) were washed, weighed, peeled and reweighed. The lemon and 

orange juices were extracted separately using an electronic juice extractor (Citrus juicer, CJ625). 

Both juices were filtered and then bottled and kept for formulation and pasteurisation. 

The ginger on the other hand, was washed, weighed, chopped into sm aller sizes and blended 

with 600mL of water using a Moulinex (PHILIPS). The ginger due to its rich fibre content had 

much chaff hence, was squeezed and filtered with a 0.2μm sieve, before the tea sieve was used. 

This was also ready for formulation and past eurisation. 

Juice Formulation 

Five (5) juice formulas (Blending recipes termed: F1, F2, F3, F4 and F5) (Table 1) were made 

ranging from 5% to 10% orange or lemon fruit base and were labelled from F1 to F5. This was 

done using a formulation table (Table 1). The juices were pasteurized at 90 ºC for 10 minutes. 

They were allowed to cool for 45 minutes and filled into sterile labelled bottles and were analysed 

nutritionally as described previously in section 2.4.2. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 217 

Table 1: Formulation Table 

Juice 

Code 

Orange  Lemon  Ginger  Honey  Table 

sugar 

Vanilla 

sugar 

Water  Total 

(mL) 

F1  5 0 5 10  5 0 75  100 

F2  10  0 5 10  0 5 70  100 

F3  0 10  5 10  5 0 70  100 

F4  0 5 5 10  5 0 75  100 

F5  0 10  5 10  0 5 70  100  

> F1, F2, F3, F4 and F5= different formulated juices

Second Pilot Study: Complementary Food Formulation 

Sample Preparation and Processing 

Preparation of Flours 

Malted corn flour was prepared by soaking overnight, kept in a cool dry place, and covered with 

plastic bags for germination. T he fermented and malted corn flour was obtained using the optimal 

processing conditions as defined by Kameni et al. (2008) 

Rice flour: This was done using the method described by An -I (2004). 

Sweet potato flour: This was produced using the method propos ed by Maninder and Kawaljit 

(2016). 

Irish potato flour: This was produced using the method described by Maninder and Kawaljit 

(2016). 

Soy protein flour: It was prepared following processing unit described by Wang et al. (2004). 

Egg white flour: 90 fre sh eggs were cracked open, and the yolks removed. The whites were dried 

at 50°C for 24 hours, ground using a dry electric blender, and sieved. The resulting flour was 

stored in zip -lock bags, inside an air -tight container at room temperature (Nahariah et a l., 2018) 

Extraction of Fruit Juices for Micronutrient Fortification of Foods 

Fifteen medium sized oranges, 2 large pineapples, 2 large pawpaw fruits and one large 

watermelon were washed in running tap water and peeled. The peeled fruits were juiced 

individually using an electric juicer machine, sieved using a 0.1mm sieve, and stored in separate 

sterile containers at 4°C till when it was ready to be used as natural fortificants to enrich the 

formulae. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 218 

Blending, Formulation and Fortification 

Table 2 is a summary of how the flours and juices were mixed in ten different proportions to give 

ten different food blends. Blend A, for example, consisted of 58g of malted corn flour, 10g of egg -

white flour, 10g of soybeans flour, 8g of sugar, 5ml of so ybeans oil, 50ml of watermelon juice, 

10ml of orange juice, 40ml of pawpaw juice, 5ml of milk flavour, 5ml of coconut flavour and 12g 

of baking powder. After mixing of flours, juices and flavours, the mixtures were homogenized 

using an electric blender, pl aced on sterile trays and dried at 50°C for 24 hours using a hot -air 

oven. The resulting dry matter were ground using a dry blender, sieved and the fine flours (instant 

baby ready to eat foods) stored in sterile zip -lock bags at room temperature. 

Table 2. Formulation of Ten Different Complementary Food Blends 

Food samples/ 

Blends 

A B C D E F G H I J

Corn Flour (g)  58  0 0 0 29  29  29  0 0 0

Rice Flour (g)  0 58  0 0 29  0 0 29  29  0

SP Flour (g)  0 0 58  0 0 29  0 29  0 29 

IP Flour (g)  0 0 0 58  0 0 29  0 29  29 

Egg White Flour (g)  10  7 8 6 10  8 6 5 3 5

Soy Protein Flour (g)  10  7 8 6 10  8 6 5 3 5

Sugar (g)  8 10  0 7 10  5 7 5 7 5

Soybeans oil (ml)  5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

Watermelon juice (ml)  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50  50 

Pineapple juice (ml)  0 10  0 10  0 0 0 10  0 0

Orange juice (ml)  10  0 10  0 10  0 0 0 0 0

Pawpaw juice (ml)  40  40  40  40  40  50  50  40  50  50 

Milk flavour (ml)  5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

Coconut flavour (ml)  5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

Baking soda (g)  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12  12 

SP: Sweet potato; IP : Irish potato 

Statistical Analysis 

Raw data were computed using Microsoft EXCEL 2007. All data were presented as mean ± SD 

and was analysed using one -way analyses of variance (ANOVA) using Graphpad software to test 

the level of significance at 5 % probability (p<0.05). Bonferroni Test was used to 

separate/compare the means where significant differences existed. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 219 

Results and Discussion 

Conceptual Framework: Natural and Anthropometric Activities Threatening 

Climate/Ecosystem of the Region 

The first section of the conceptual framework ( Table 3) lays that heat waves, season short term 

trends, variation in precipitation or temperature, and meteorological events such as heat waves, 

droughts, and floods (Erudef, 2021) due to climate and global environmental change events are 

the key drivers behind the rise in hunger because they impact on water, food and nutrition security, 

particularly in developing countries. These were observed through many years of 

weather/meteorological variability. Consequently they alter relationships among crops, pest s, 

weeds, pathogens; and exacerbate several trends including increasing water scarcity, decline in 

fishery /sea food and ocean productivity as well as an induced decrease crop productivity, land 

degradation, high market prices, and negative impacts on live lihoods, and increased malnutrition 

(Erudef, 2021). Climate change will impact malnutrition by affecting patterns in weather, including 

trends in precipitation and temperature, as well as the frequency and magnitude of extreme 

weather events. It is difficu lt to study climate associations (Molua, 2009). Erudef (2021) reported 

that, over the past 2 decades, this region has been exposed to climate change as a result of 

Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission. 

Table 3. Summary of the Conceptual Framework Showing Climat e Change Conditions that 

Pose a Growing Threat to Nutrition in the Study Area 

South 

West 

Location 

Climatic and ecosystem Impact  References 

Upland 

(Buea 

Highland) 

- Wild and bush fire (destruction of vegetation); Huge 

smoke : air pollution (particles, sulfur dioxide, ozone, Carbon 

monoxide) 

- Disappearance of bush meats and edible insects causing 

pressure on cow meat price. 

- Destruction of sol, erosion, destruction or ac tivation of soil 

microorganisms (azobacter). Soil leaching, leading to 

excessive utilization of fertilizer, insecticides and chemicals 

that facilitate plant growth and affect original food taste. 

- Change of agricultural practices to adapt to new soil. 

- Defo restation. 

- Urbanization: destruction of cultivable surface 

- Violent winds, high temperatures, irregular rainfall, floods and 

landslides which endanger communities’ ecosystems and the 

services they provide. 

- Poor agricultural techniques, poor waste disposal, plastic 

pollution 

- Increase in epidemics, food and water scarcity, changes in 

Neba et al., 2021; 

Akoko et al., 

2019; Forkam et 

al.,2020; 

Feka and 

Manxano, 2008; 

Molua, 2009; 

Molua, 2010; 

Azinwi et al., 

2012; 

Bate et al., 2019; 

Balgah et al., 

2017 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 220 

temperature and precipitation, leading to droughts and floods.  Nde -Fon and 

Assob, 2013 

Aaron et al., 2014 

Neba et al, 2021 

Erudef, 2021 

Wetland 

(Tiko, 

Limbe) 

- Seasonal inconstancy (modification of rain flow rate and rain 

precipitations. 

- Flow of mangrove, destruction of mangrove for firewood that 

affect phytoplankton’s, development of toxic wild algae that 

reduce dissolvable oxygen, fish scarcity, animal migrati on. 

- Increase of sea level, Water acidification, heavy metal 

accumulation 

- Change of vector, pest and insects life cycle, 

- Water borne disease , Contamination of ground water by run -

off water and toilet. 

- Human anthropometric activities: laundry contaminate 

dri nking and domestic water sources (well, river, bore water, 

food contamination, food intoxication, 

Consequently, the population are facing abnormal recurrence of extreme weather phenomena 

such as violent winds, high temperatures, irregular rainfall, floods and landslides which endanger 

communities’ ecosystems and the services they provide. These environ mental hazards are as a 

result of uncontrolled human activities which are not in conformity to environmental principles and 

disciplines, hence causing global warming. These activities include, but not limited to 

deforestation, poor agricultural techniques, poor waste disposal, plastic pollution and the absence 

of infrastructural town planning. There is much scientific evidence that climate change is 

responsible for increase in epidemics, food and water scarcity, changes in temperature and 

precipitation, lea ding to droughts and floods, poor agricultural yields and malnutrition (Nde -Fon 

and Assob, 2013). As climate change appears to be progressing too quickly for decisions to be 

delayed, we need to develop national and local climate change institutional framew orks to 

strengthen the coordination, networking and information flow at different levels of governments 

and local civil society to have better response to climate change eradication. 

Comparison of Food Composition Table (1953) and Actual Data of Staple F ood (2021 -2022) 

Table 4 presents the composition of some selected staple foods grown in the South West Region 

of Cameroon. According to this, different types of food are found in the region including cereals, 

tubers/roots, vegetables and fruits. The diffe rent micronutrients vary according to the type of food 

concerned with the highest amount of carbohydrates and proteins found in cereals in general and, 

particularly in fresh corn and the smallest value in fruits. The highest value of ash (total minerals) 

was found in fruits. The highest amount of calcium was found in pineaple, whereas phosphorous 

and iron were found in corn and rice in highest amount. This table also presents the nutrient 

composition of some staple foods recently evaluated for their nutrien t content. This study revealed 

that the amount of micronutrients initially present generally reduced, while macronutrient 

increased and the food became more starchy and bulky. These modifications of staple food 

nutrients can lead to malnutrition (micronutr ient deficiency and over -nutrition). Diet is changing 

too, especially among urban groups, with increased consumption of ultra -processed food and 

beverages, beef and dairy products, whose production is associated with high GHG emission Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 221 

intensities (Gill et al., 2015). These changes between 1966 and 2022 may be due to the rising 

levels of carbon dioxide from human activities. Gill et al (2015) reported that CO 2 can make staple 

crops less nutritious; elevated CO 2 generates hidden hunger by reducing mineral co ntents in 

cereal crops. 

Research led by Myers et al. (2014) found that when food crops like wheat, corn, rice and soy are 

exposed to CO 2 at levels predicted for 2050, the plants lose as much as 10 % of their zinc, 5 % 

of their iron, and 8 % of their prote in content. Studies by Nelson et al. (2009) revealed that the 

number of malnourished will probably increase due to climate change, with the majority of these 

children living in sub -Sahara Africa. People eat different diets and therefore the starting points in 

making dietary changes to move towards healthy and sustainable diets vary between people 

(Reynolds et al., 2019). 

Table 4. Nutrient Composition of Some Staple Foods Derived for FAO (1966) Food 

Composition Table 

Proteins(g)  Carbohydrate 

(g) 

Minerals 

(Ash (g)) 

Calcium 

(mg) 

Phosphoru 

s (mg) 

Iron (mg) 

Food  FC  AC  PC  AC  PC  AC  P

C

AC  PC  AC  PC  AC 

Fresh corn  9.8  9.0  76.4  77.4  1.1  0.8.  12  10  220  218  2.0  1.7 

Dry corn  6.6  6.6  48.8  50.4  0.5  0.4  32  30  137  133  3.2  2.2 

Banana  1.2  1.0  25.5  28.5  0.8  0.3  4 3 40  39  0.7  0.6 

Plantain  1.1  1.0  27.6  26.9  0.8  0.4  11  12  3.5  1.4  0.5  0.3 

Cassava  0.9  1 37.7  38.5  1 1.  25  20  30  29  1.2  1.0 

Tomato  1.2  0.9  5.6  3.2  0.4  0.1  10  7 45  42  0.7  0.6 

Cocoyam  2.8  1.8  33.4  38.4  1.2  1.0  8 7 35  30  0.9  1

Rice  7 4.7  79.1  53.1  0.6  0.6  5 5 90  80  1 0.6 

Yam  3.2  5.2  22.1  20.5  0.8  0.7  24  21  27  26  0.2  0.1 

Sweet potato  1.8  3.3  25.3  30.6  0.9  0.8  36  30  60  56  1.4  1.2 

Irsih potato  2.1  2.1  21.4  27.8  1.4  1.4  12  9 40  35  0.9  0.9 

Mango  0.6  0.4  14.3  17.0  0.3  0.2  20  15  15  17  0.6  0.6 

Pineapple  0.6  0.5  15.1  18.2  0.3  0.4  56  51  15  16  0.9  0.8 

Avocado  2 2.1  6 8.3  1 0.9  18  14  57  51  0.8  0.6 

Orange  0.8  0.6  12.2  9.2  0.5  0.3  28  22  28  18  0.1  0.2  

> FC: food composition from food composition table FAO, 1966 ; PC : Actual composition 2021 -2022

There has been relatively limited consideration, however, of potential climate impacts on 

malnutrition through mechanisms of changing nutrient content of foods (Figure 3). Macronutrients 

and micronutrients are part of a healthy diet, and they ensure appropriate development and 

wellbeing and prevent diseases. Children aged between 6 months and 5 years in particular may 

suffer from micronutrient deficiencies (WHO, 2014). Vitamin A, calcium, and iron are the most 

common deficiencies and a concern for public health (WHO, 2021). Iron deficiencies in pregnant Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 222 

women increase the risk of maternal and child mortality, and low birth weight. Calcium deficiency 

affects the bone development of children, while vitamin A deficiency raises the probab ility of 

blindness and mortality due to infectious diseases during childhood (WHO, 2014). A 2018 study 

by Scheelbeek et al (2018) systematically investigated the effect of environmental change on 

vegetable and legume yields, in particular exploring project ions in the potential future nutritional 

quality of vegetable and legume yields under environmental change. Generally, climate change 

affects the molecular function, the developmental process, the morphology and the physiological 

responses of plants (Myers et al., 2014). Elevated CO 2 promotes higher yields, but alters the 

equilibrium of the plant carbon metabolism and mineral composition (Soares et al., 2019: 

Nakandalange and Seneweera, 2018). For example, drought and high temperatures induce 

oxidative damage in legume plants accordin g to the review of Soares et al. (2019), and this is 

more likely to have an effect on the macronutrients. 

Some modelling and experimental studies conducted in laboratory have identified correlations 

between climate change or meteorological variation and a decrease in food quality in terms of 

diversity, nutrient density, and safety (Patz et al., 2005). Carbon dioxide (CO 2), for example, may 

have a negative effect on the nutritional content of several crops (Figure 3) (FAO, 2016; Porter et 

al., 2014). For ex ample, concentrations of iron and zinc in wheat and rice are more likely to be 

reduced due to increased greenhouse gas emissions (Myers et al., 2014). Higher CO 2 associated 

with climate change is hypothesised to lead to micronutrient deficiencies (Smith et al., 2017; 

Müller et al., 2014; Myers et al., 2014). Among people worldwide that lack food, more have 

deficiencies in essential nutrients; 76% of the world’s population gets most of its daily nutrients 

from plants -yet climate change is already causing dro ughts and flooding that can destroy staple 

food crops. If extra CO 2 in the atmosphere makes those crops less nutritious (Figure 3), it will be 

even harder to feed the world’s growing population. While severe food insecurity and hunger are 

associated with l ower obesity prevalence, mild to moderate food insecurity is paradoxically 

associated with higher obesity prevalence among vulnerable populations (Swinburn et al., 2019). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 223 

> Figure 3: Climate change and nutrients (FAO, 2016 and NZFSSRC, 2019)

Mitigating Pilot Studies with Partners for the Nutrients Enhancement: Dietary 

Diversification, Formulation and Fortification 

Proximate and Mineral Composition of Formulated Juices 

Proximate  Composition of Juice 

The proximate composition of the best formulated juice is shown on Table 5. The protein content 

of the fruit juices was low. The general low protein content of fruit juice has also been reported for 

orange/pineapple juice blends and fresh beetroot juice (Ohwesiri et al., 2016; Emelike et al., 

2015). According to Emelike et al. (2015) fruit juices are not good sources of protein. The 

carbohydrate content is higher than a reported range of 8.16 – 16.19% for orange/pineapple juice 

blends (Ohwesiri et al., 2016) and 7.3% for fresh beetroot juice (E melike et al., 2015). The 

variations in these values could be associated with different fruits being analysed. The ash 

(mineral) content (0.51 -1.13%) of the juices was similar to the range of 0.42% - 2.68% for 

orange/pineapple juice blends (Ohwesiri et al. , 2016) and 0.64% – 1.32% for different brands 

orange juices (Ndife et al., 2015). Generally, the juices were rich in carbohydrate and moisture, 

but low in protein, fibre, fat and ash. The difference between the treatment means was significant 

(P ≤ 0.05). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 224 

Table 5: Proximate Composition of Juice 

Code  Moisture 

content (%) 

Protein 

(g/100mL) 

Carbohydrate 

(g/100mL) 

Fiber 

(g/100mL) 

Fat (g/100mL)  Ash (g/100mL) 

F1  96.84 a ± 0.00  0.56 b ± 0.00  21.83 a ± 0.48  0.01 a ± 0.00  0.11 a ± 0.01  0.63 a ± 0.00 

F2  97.10 a ± 0.36  0.01 a ± 0.00  20.30 a ± 0.99  0.02 a ± 0.01  0.10 a ± 0.00  0.51 a ± 0.00 

F3  96.84 a ± 0.00  0.02 a ± 0.00  22.99 a ± 1.34  0.09 a ± 0.00  0.10 a ± 0.01  0.51 a ± 0.01 

F4  82.45 b ± 1.86  0.01 a ± 0.00  20.15 a ± 2.04  0.02 a ± 0.00  0.05 b ± 0.01  1.13 b ± 0.01 

F5  79.31 b ± 2.58  0.06 a ± 0.00  16.39 b ± 1.99  0.07 a ± 0.00  0.10 a ± 0.01  1.02 b ± 0.00    

> Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; a,b, Means with the same letter in the same column are not
> significantly different at p>0.05. F1, F2, F3, F4 and F5= different formulated juices

Mineral Analysis of Juice 

Mineral content of the best formulated juice is presented on Table 6. The most abundant mineral 

was Potassium followed by Calcium while Zinc was the least. F1 was most abundant in 

Phosphorus and Magne sium, F2 in Iron, Zinc and Sodium, F3 in Potassium and F5 in Calcium; 

F4 was generally low in minerals. Minerals were significantly different (P ≤ 0.05). This is in 

agreement with the results reported by Dosumu et al. (2009) and Ijah et al. (2015). The mic ro 

minerals, Iron (Fe) and Zinc (Zn) were present in trace amounts. Potassium is an essential mineral 

that works to maintain the body’s water and acid balance. As an important electrolyte, it plays a 

role in transmitting nerve impulses to muscles, in muscl e contraction and in the maintenance of 

normal blood pressure. While deficiency of potassium is rare, there is some concern that a high 

sodium -to -potassium intake ratio may be a risk factor for high blood pressure (Whitney and 

Rolfes, 1999). Generally, ina dequate intake of micronutrients (minerals) has been associated with 

severe malnutrition, increased disease conditions and mental impairment (Dosumu et al., 2009). 

Table 6: Mineral Composition of Juice 

Mineral 

(mg/mL) 

F1  F2  F3  F4  F5 

P 0.12 c ± 0.02  0.08 b ± 0.04  0.10 b ± 0.01  0.01 a ± 0.00  0.06 b ± 0.00 

Fe  0.06 b ± 0.01  0.10 b ± 0.03  0.07 b ± 0.01  0.06 b ± 0.02  0.06 b ± 0.01 

Ca  0.21 c ± 0.05  0.19 c ± 0.00  0.20 c ± 0.03  0.19 c ± 0.00  0.24 c ± 0.00 

Mg  0.07 b ± 0.01  0.06 b ± 0.03  0.06 b ± 0.02  0.05 b ± 0.00  0.04 a ± 0.01 

Zn  0.01 a ± 0.00  0.02 a ± 0.01  0.01 a ± 0.00  0.01 a ± 0.00  0.01 a ± 0.00 

K 0.23 c ± 0.08  0.23 c ± 0.08  0.29 c ± 0.00  0.23 c ± 0.08  0.23 c ± 0.08 

Na  0.08 b ± 0.03  0.10 b ± 0.00  0.08 b ± 0.03  0.06 b ± 0.00  0.06 b ± 0.00   

> Results are expressed as mean ± standard deviation; a,b,c, Means with the same letter in the same row are not
> significantly different at p>0.05. F1, F2, F3, F4 and F5= different formulated juices

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 225 

This juice formulation section showed that blending or div ersifying fruit can be a good mitigating 

strategy for the global challenges of ensuring sufficient safe and nutritious food for all. As our 

planet's population continues to grow, and as the impacts of climate change and environmental 

pollution become more visible to all, juice fortification and formulation solutions need to be 

promoted because it will be a good strategy to satisfy a daily human nutrient requirement in terms 

of recommended daily allowance (RDA). 

Complementary Food Formulation 

The nutritional composition of the formulated food is presented in table 7. For the ash contents, 

three out of five (Formula B, C and D) formulas had higher ash contents than the recommended 

value of 2.9. Formulas A and E had the least ash contents (2.65%), an d these were the only two 

formulas whose ash contents were within the reference range. The formula with the highest ash 

content turned out to be B, with 3.70% (Table 7). In terms of RDA for total mineral, formulae A 

and E were the best. The presence of ash in the formulas is indicative of the presence of minerals 

in them, and hence the formulated complementary foods could be used in the fight against 

micronutrient deficiency in children. WHO recommends an ash content of 2.9g for every 100g of 

food sample fo r complementary foods, and the five formulas all have ash contents within this 

range, with some slightly higher, like formula B (the most preferred formula), whose ash content 

was up to 3.7%. Mahmoud and Mohammed (2014) found an ash content of 2.91% for th eir 

complementary food formulated from rice, sweet potatoes, faba beans and peanut oil, while 

Tiencheu et al. (2016) and Akinola et al. (2014) recorded higher ash contents (4.32% - 4.85% and 

5.21% -7.52%, respectively) for their own formulations made out of egg whites, fermented maize, 

pawpaw and beans, guinea corn, millet, groundnuts, carrots and crayfish. 

The fiber content of all the formulas was higher than the recommended value of 3.8% for 

complementary foods. However, there was no significant differenc e (P>0.05) between the fibre 

content of any of the formulas and the standard recommended value (3.8%) by WHO. The findings 

in this study were contrary to findings reported by Shewangzaw et al. (2021) from their 

complementary food formulas made from a mix o f soybeans, teff, white maize and honey bee 

larvae, where they found much lower fibre contents in the range of 2.75% – 4.52%. 

For protein contents, all samples had very high protein than the standard value of 15%, which is 

prescribed by WHO for complemen tary foods. This difference between the formulas and the 

standard value was however insignificant (P>0.05) for four out of five formulas. The lowest protein 

content was found in formula C (17.72%) and E (18.11%). The high protein content of the five 

formul as could be considered a good thing, since protein energy malnutrition rates are still so 

high in Africa. Mahmoud and Mohammed (2014) found a 7.48% and 4.94% protein content for 

rice and sweet potato flours respectively, implying that rice has more crude p roteins than sweet 

potatoes. The germination and malting of the maize used in this study improved on its protein 

content, making the blend with maize as main starch source to have the second highest protein 

content, after the one with rice. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 226 

The results obtained from the analysis of the fat content of the formulas showed them having fat 

contents in the range 9.5% - 14%, all of which are above the reference value of 8%. The only 

formula which showed a statistically significant difference (P<0.05) between i ts fat content and 

the standard value was formula D. The lowest fat content was recorded in E (9.5%), though this 

was still higher than the reference (Table 7). A higher fat content could be a good, as well as it 

could increase the energy density of food; but must decrease it shelf live. Aduni et al. (2016) found 

fat contents in the range of 3.15% to 14.35% for their nine instant weaning foods made out of 

crayfish, carrot, irish potatoes, soybeans and Ndop rice. 

The carbohydrate contents were all lower than the standard value of 64.68%, with the least 

content obtained from B (38.74%), and the highest from C (63.58%) (Table 7). Anigo et al. (2010) 

obtained dissimilar results for carbohydrate content from their formula (88.75% - 90.89%) which 

was a blend of so ybeans, groundnuts, guinea corn, sorghum, corn and millet in different 

proportions. 

Table 7: Proximate Analysis of the Formulae 

Samples 

Ash 

Content 

(%) 

Fibre 

Content 

(%) 

Protein 

Content 

(%) 

Fat 

Content 

(%) 

Carbohydrate. 

Content 

(%) 

Energy 

Content 

(Kcal) 

WHO 

standard  2.9  3.8  15  8 64.68  400 

Formula A  2.65±0.15 a 7.13±1.43 a 25.82±3.07 a 11.00±1.00 a 53.14±2.92 a 414.8±8.40 a

Formula B  3.70±0.40 a 7.32±1.42 a 37.72±9.54 b 11.50±0.50 a 38.74±8.49 b 409.3±0.30 a

Formula C  3.10±0.00 a 7.29±0.73 a 17.72±0.66 a 11.00±2.00 a 63.58±2.04 a 433.2±1.80 b

Formula D  2.95±0.05 a 6.43±2.23 a 20.13±0.44 a 14.00±0.00 b 56.53±0.29 a 432.6±0.60 b

Formula E  2.65±0.05 a 9.27±0.15 a 18.11±1.05 a 9.50±0.50 a 59.24±1.50 a 394.9±2.70 a 

> The superscripts a = statistical significance at p < 0.05 and b = significance at p < 0.01 compare to WHO reference
> pattern value

The energy content of the five formulas, which is a function of the carbohydrate, fat and protein 

content of each one of them, was higher than the recommended value of 400Kcal for four out of 

the five formulas., it was noted that apart from formula E whose energy content was below 

(394.9Kcal) the reference value of 400Kcal, all other formulas had energy contents above this 

standard value (Table 7). Comparing th ese values with the standard value showed no statistically 

significant difference (P>0.05) between formulas A, B, E and the standard, while formulas C and 

D showed statistically significant differences from the standard (P<0.05). Araro et al. (2020) got 

si milar results in their complementary food mixes made with sweet potatoes, brown teff, and dark 

red kidney beans. Their mixes had energy levels in the range of 339.07% - 356.74%, values which 

were all slightly lower than the recommended value. The high ener gy levels of the five formulas, 

which are as a result of high protein, carbohydrate and fat levels, makes them a suitable 

complementary food to overcome the deficit that may have been caused by climate change and 

environmental challenges. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 227 

Micronutrient A nalysis 

Table 8 gives a summary of minerals analyses of the five formulae, pap and the WHO standard 

values for each of these micronutrients. From the mineral analysis of the samples, the calcium 

content of the formulas was above the reference value (341.2 mg/100g). This difference was 

however, not statistically significant (P>0.05), except for formula B. Among the five formulas, 

formula B, whose main starch source was rice, had the highest calcium content (632mg/100g), 

followed by C with 454mg/100g of calci um, then formulas D and E with calcium contents of 

408.0mg/100g. It is of utmost importance that the novel formulas are up to standard with their 

calcium content, as calcium is extremely important for the brain and bone development of the 

infant. Plahar (2 018) found similar results for his sweet potato -based formulas which contained 

groundnuts (357.89mg/100g -256.57mg/100g)), but lower calcium content (100.73 -

91.96mg/100g) in similar sweet potato -based formulas which did not contain groundnuts. Ajiwe 

and Nwa igbo (2014) had dissimilar results in their formulas made from different proportions of 

yellow maize, millet, red sorghum, wheat, brown spotted African yam bean, bambara groundnut, 

pigeon pea and soybeans (42.19 – 140.76mg/100g). 

The iron content of the formulas ranged from 4.73mg/100g (formula E) to 8.59mg/100g (Formula 

C). They were generally lower than the reference value of 8.5mg/100g, except C, with sweet 

potatoes as main starch source, which had an iron content of 8.59mg/100g. This could be 

explaine d by the fermentation process done on the corn, since fermentation has been shown to 

enhance the bioavailability of several micronutrients which are usually coupled to phytates in the 

unfermented grains. Satter et al. (2014) found similar results from thei r complementary food 

formulated from wheat, soybeans, sugar, mango, skimmed milk and jackfruit. They had values 

for iron content in the range of 7.56 - 8.22mg/100g. Ikujenlola and Adurotoye (2014) had much 

higher values of iron content (260 -390mg/100g) in their complementary food formulated from high 

protein maize and steamed cowpea. The infant’s daily requirements for iron are met, as the role 

of iron in the body is very vital in malaria endemic zone like Cameroon, and it is important that its 

RDA is alway s met. 

The WHO standard for phosphorous, in a complementary food, is set at approximately 

100mg/100g. All five formulas were found to be higher in phosphorous than the standard value; 

with C having the highest phosphorous content (136.49mg/100g), followe d by A with a content of 

119.28mg/100g. The range of phosphorous values were from 109.04 -136.49mg/100g, with 

formula C, containing sweet potato as main starch source, having the highest phosphorous 

content. Except for formula C, the difference in phosphoro us content between the standard values 

and the values obtained in the formulas was not statistically significant (P>0.05). Tiencheu et al. 

(2016) had much higher values (286.37 -365.08mg/100g) for phosphorous in their complementary 

food formulated from maiz e, pawpaw, red beans and mackerel fish meal, same as Anigo et al. 

(2010) who had higher values in the range of 148.98 – 219.98mg/100g in their formulations made 

from guinea corn, sorghum, maize, millet, soybeans and groundnuts. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 228 

The analysis of zinc content revealed that all five samples were lower than the recommended 

value of 3.7mg/100g set by the WHO. The range of zinc content of the five samples was 

1.47mg/100g to 2.35mg/100g. This difference between the standard value and the values 

obtained from the samples was statistically significant (P<0.05) for two out of five samples (C and 

D), but not statistically significant for the other three formulas (A, B and E). Among the five 

formulas, formula A was richest in zinc (2.35mg/100g), followed by B with 2.32mg/100g. Gemede 

et al. (2020), had slightly higher values, in the range of 2.73 – 3.00 mg/100g for zinc content of 

their complementary food formulated from maize, pea and anchote flours, while Asouzu and 

Nkemjika (2020) had similar results ranging fr om 1.52 -2.61mg/100g in their complementary food 

formulated with maize and supplemented crayfish and carrot flour. 

The analysis of magnesium content of the five samples showed that the two formulas with the 

highest magnesium contents were C (85.19mg/100g) and H (75.75mg/100g). Formula B had a 

magnesium content of 72.91mg/100g, while A had 70.6mg/100g. The least formula was D, with 

58.32mg of magnesium per 100g of formula. The WHO standard for magnesium in 

complementary foods is 48.7mg/100g, and this standar d was clearly met and surpassed by all 

five samples, though the difference was statistically insignificant (P>0.05) for all five samples. 

Bolarinwa et al. (2019) had dissimilar values, ranging from 0.21 - 0.24mg/100g while Mohammed 

et al. (2021) had similar results of magnesium content, a value of 54.44mg/100g for their 

complementary food mix made up of an improved variety of yellow maize, soybeans and African 

catfish meal. 

The sodium content of the five formulas was analyzed and it was realized that there was a 

statistically significant difference (P<0.01) between four of the formulas (B, C, D and E) and the 

reference value of 60mg/100g. Only formula A had no statistically significant difference with the 

reference value. For the five formulas, the sodium co ntent ranged from 102.42mg/100g (formula 

A) to 189.41mg/100g for formula B. Also, the analysis of potassium content revealed that formulas 

B, D and E had similar potassium contents (611.49mg/100g), and this was the highest value 

observed among the five for mulas; C had a potassium content of 728.82mg/100g, while A had 

least value (319.2mg/100g). The recommended value for potassium for a complementary food is 

408.7mg/100g. Apart from formula A whose value for potassium content was below standard, all 

the othe r formulas had higher than the standard values for potassium content. Aduni et al. (2016), 

on the other hand, had similar results for sodium and potassium contents for their complementary 

foods, with sodium ranging from 74.50 – 88.17, and potassium from 24 1.87 – 1322.27mg/100g. 

The most preferred formula (B) had the highest sodium content and satisfactory potassium 

content as well. Solomon (2005) obtained values of 11.1 -21.1mg/100g for sodium content, and 

99.7 to 129.7mg/100g of potassium for a complementar y food based on rice, maize, acha grains, 

soybeans, groundnuts, bambara nuts and crayfish, both of which were below the standard. 

This section showed that infant’s micronutrients requirements in terms of recommended dietary 

allowance (RDA) that cannot be covered due to climate change consequences on food 

composition, and can be improved through dietary diversification, fermentation, germination and 

food formulation strategies applied in this study. Such mitigation techniques need to be 

encouraged and prom oted. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 229 

Table 8: Micronutrient Analysis of the Formulated Complementary Foods 

SAMPLES  WHO 

standard  Formula A  Formula B  Formula C  Formula D  Formula E 

Ca (mg/100g)  341.2  378.0±14.0 a 632.0±12.0 b 454.0±2.0 a 408.0±16.0 a 408.0±16.0 a

Fe (mg/100g)  8.5  6.03±0.21 a 6.27±1.3 a 8.59±2.7 a 6.30±0.8 a 4.73±0.3 a

P (mg/100g)  100  119.28±8.8 a 109.98±2.3 a 136.49±8.4 b 114.63±1.4 a 109.04±10.7 a

Zn (mg/100g)  3.7  2.35±0.63 a 2.32±0.37 a 1.56±0.06 b 1.47±0.18 b 1.87±0.28 a

Mg(mg/100g)  48.7  70.6±21.74 a 72.91±9.73 a 85.19±12.01 a 58.32±9.72 a 75.75±6.31 a

Na (mg/100g)  60  102.42±0.0 a 189.41±14.2 c 162.02±13.18 b 136.72±12.13 b 136.72±12.13 b

K (mg/100g)  408.7  319.2±0.0 b 611.49±22.5 c 728.82±0.0 c 611.49±22.5 c 611.49±22.5 c 

> The superscripts a = statistical significance at p < 0.05, b = significance at p < 0.01 and c = significance at P < 0.001,
> compared to WHO reference pattern value.

Conclusion 

The impacts of climate change are perceptible in the South West region and are likely to be 

greater in areas w ith existing poor food security, as the nutrient content from 1966 to 2022 were 

noted here after a period of 55 years. Therefore, government and organisations need to put more 

financial and technical support toward adaptation in least developed countries, as currently, 

financial contributions remain insufficient to meet adaptation needs. Nutrient enhancement 

strategies should be vulgarised and promoted through training of trainees. We therefore 

recommend that nutritional education campaigns should be organi sed at community levels to 

empower the key actors, with practices (diversification and fortification) before 2030; Additionally, 

Green Climate Eco -nutritional fund should be created to encourage efforts of developing countries 

in responding to the challeng e of climate change. Immediate additional public funding is required 

in order to support these adaptive strategies of the world’s poorest to climate change. Better 

nutritional health can improve the resilience of a population to climate -related shocks and 

stresses. Governments and donors should support nutrition focused adaptation and Disaster Risk 

Management strategies and target women and children most at risk for under -nutrition as a 

priority. Guaranteeing food and nutritional security should be a priori ty for donors that finance 

adaptation measures. Therefore, these findings may contribute to effort geared toward 

Cameroon’s attaining the SDG’s, notably SDG 3 on health and wellbeing, SDG 13 on climate 

change and SDG 2, zero hunger. 

References 

Aduni, U., Tiencheu, B., Tenyang, N., Womeni, H., Moyeh, M., Ebini, L., Tatsinkou, F. (2016). 

Quality evaluation of nine instant weaning foods formulated from cereal, legume, tuber, 

vegetable and crayfish. International Journal of Food Science and Nutr ition Engineering, 

6 (2): 21 -31 doi:10.5923/j.food.20160602.01. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 230 

Ajiwe, V.I., Nwaigbo, B.I. (2014). Quality Evaluation of Weaning foods Formulated from some 

local cereals and legume blends. Int. J. Pure and Appli. Biosc., 2(4):75 -81. 

Akinola, O., Opreh, O., Hammed, L. (2014). Formulation of local ingredient -based 

complementary food in south -west Nigeria. Journal of Nursing and Health Science, 

3(6): 57 –61. 

Akoko, R.M., Monono, E.N, Pčolinská L. (2019). Urbanization and food security in Buea: an 

appraisal of household food security situation and resilience in Bolifamba -Buea 

Cameroon. int. J. Mod. Anthrop., 2(12): 173 –187. 

An -I Y. (2004). RICE: Chemistry and Technology, Chapter 17. Third edition. Pp. 495 – 539. 

Anigo, K., Ameh, A. , Ibrahim, S., Danbauchi, S. (2010). Nutrient composition of 

complementary food gruels formulated from malted cereals, soybeans and 

groundnut for use in North -western Nigeria. African Journal of Food Science, 4(3): 

65 –72. 

AOAC: Official methods of Anal ysis (2005). Determination of lead, cadmium, and minerals 

in fods by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (method 999.11/985.35). 

Association of Official Analytical Chemists, Gaithersburg, USA. 

Araro, T., Gemechu, F., Wotango, A., Esho, T. (2020). Chemic al formulation and 

characterization of complementary foods from blend of orange -fleshed sweet potato, 

brown teff and dark red kidney beans. Int. J. Food Sci., 2020: 4803839. 

Asouzu, A., Nkemjika, U. (2020). Production and evaluation of complementary f ood made 

from maize (Zea mays) supplemented with crayfish (Euastacus spp.) and carrot flour. 

Current developments in Nutrition, 4(2): 505. 

Azinwi, G.N., Ndonwi, A.S., and Mimba, A. (2013) Impacts of Climate Variability and 

Change on Banana Yields in th e CDC - Delmonte Banana Project, Tiko, South West 

Region, Cameroon. Journal of the Cameroon academy of sciences, 11 (2 & 3). 

Balgah, S.N., Tata, E.S., Mbella, M.F. (2017).  Effects of Rainfall and Temperature 

Oscillations on Maize Yields in Buea Sub -Divis ion, Cameroon. Journal of Agricultural 

Science, 9(2):63. 

Bate, B.G.; Kimengsi, J.N.; Amawa, S.G. (2019). Determinants and Policy Implications of 

Farmers’ Climate Adaptation Choices in Rural Cameroon. Sustainability, 11: 1921. 

Bolarinwa, I.S., Majida, F .A., Carew, I., Muhammad, K. (2019). Nutritional value of 

legumes in relation to human health. Adv. J. Food Sci., 17(5):72 -85. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 231 

Bronhilda, M. (2012). Food production, urban areas and policy response in Cameroon. 

Unpublished M Sc thesis, University of Bu ea. 

Dosumu, O.O., Oluwaniyi, O.O., Awolola, G.V. and Okunola, M.O. (2009). Stability studies 

and mineral concentration of some Nigerian packed fruit juices, concentrate and local 

beverages. African Journal of Food Science, 3: 82 -85. 

Emelike, N.J.T., Hart, A.D., and Ebere, C.O. (2015). Influence of drying techniques on the 

properties, physicoche mical and mineral composition of beetroot juice. Journal of 

Environmental Science, Toxicology and Food Technology, 9(12): 20 -26. 

ERuDef, (The Environment and Rural Development Foundation) (ERuDeF) 2021 Climate 

Change Hits Its Peak In Cameroon’s Southwes t Region. https://erudef.org/climate -

change -hit -its -peak -in -cameroons -southwest -region/ 

FAO 2016 Climate change and food security: risks and responses (available at: www.fao.org/ )

(Accessed: 27 January 2020). 

FAO, (1966). Table Provisoire de Compositio n des Aliments du Sud -Cameroun B 

Bergeret, R Masseyeff - Nutrition Section, Office de la Recherche Scientifique et 

Technique Outre -Mer, Yaoundé - Ann Nut Alim, Vol XI, pp 47 -69 1957 (French). Les 

Aliments d'Origine Végétale au Cameroun J Pele, S Le Berr e - Nutrition Section, Office 

de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre -Mer, Yaoundé 1966 (French). 

FAO, (2013). The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2013. 

FAO. (2017). Regional Overview of Food Security and Nutrition in Africa. The food secu rity 

and nutrition –conflict nexus: building resilience for food security, nutrition and peace. 

Accra. 

Feka, N. Z. and Manzano, M. G. (2008). The implications of wood exploitation for fish 

smoking on mangrove ecosystem conservation in the South West Province, Cameroon. 

Tropical Conservation Science, 1 (3):222 -241. 

Forkam, D.C., Ajonina, G.N., Ajonina, P.U., Tchamba, M.N. (2020). Framework for 

assessing the level of stakeholders, involvem ent and governance in mangrove 

management: Case of selected local communities in the south west coastal Atlantic 

Region, Cameroon. Journal of Ecology and The Natural Environment, 12(4), 150 -164. 

Gemede, H. (2020). Nutritional and antinutritional evaluat ion of complementary foods 

formulated from maize, pea and anchote flours. Food Science and Nutrition, 8(4): 2156 -

2164. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 232 

GeoNames, (2022). The GeoNames geographical database covers all countries. World 

Population Review. https://worldpopulationreview.c om/countries/cities/cameroon. 

Gill, M., Feliciano, D., Macdiarmid, J., Smith, P. (2017). The environmental impact of 

nutrition transition in three case study countries. Food Security, 7(3): 493 -504. 

Ijah, U.J.J., Ayodele, H.S., and Aransiola, S.A. (201 5). Microbiological and Some Sensory 

Attributes of Water Melon Juice and Watermelon -orange Juice Mix. Journal of Food 

Resource Science, 4 (3): 49 -61. 

Ikujenlola, A., Adurotoye, E. (2014). Evaluation of Quality Characteristics of High Nutrient 

Dense Com plementary Food from Mixtures of Malted Quality Protein Maize (Zea mays 

L.) and Steamed Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata). J. Food Process. Technol., 5(1). 

Kahn, M.E., Mohaddes, K., Ng, R.N.C., Pasaran ,M.H., Raissi, M., Yang, J -C. (2019). Long -

Term Macroeconomic Effects of Climate Change: A Cross -Country Analysis. 

Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1965, Faculty of Economics, University of 

Cambridge. 

Kameni, A., Kouebou, C.P., Fendoung, G., Aboubakar, A.K.D., The, C., Mbofung, C.M.F 

(2008). Effects of malting conditions on the properties of malt flour from some 

selected Cameroon maize varieties. Cameroon Journal of Experimental Biology, 04 (01): 

43-51. 

Lloyd, S.J., Kovats, R.S., & Chalabi, Z. (2011).  Climate Change, Crop Yields, and 

Undernutrition: Development of a Model to Quantify the Impact of Climate Scenarios 

on Child Undernutrition. Environmental Health Perspectives, 119. 

Mahmoud, A., Moh ammed, A. (2014). Nutritional and sensory evaluation of a 

complementary food formulated from rice, faba beans, sweet potato flour and peanut 

oil. Food and Nutrition, 35(4):403 -13. 

Maninder, K., Kawaljit, S. (2016). Sweet potato flour and starch: product ion, processing and 

technology. Tropical roots and tubers, :479 – 506. 

Mohammed, Z., Petrol, B., Ahmad, U. (2021). Formulation and nutritional evaluation of a 

complementary food blend made from fermented yellow maize (improved variety), 

soybean and Af rican catfish meal. Nigerian Journal of Biotechnology, 38(1):98 –108. 

Molua, E.L. (2010). CEEPA Discussion Paper No. 46 CEEPA Discussion Paper Series ISBN 

1-920160 -01 -09 Discussion Paper ISBN 1 -920160 -46 -9, March 2010 climate and 

location vulnerability in southwestern cameroon: assessing the options and cost of 

protection to property in coastal areas. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 233 

Molua, E.L. (2009). Accommodation of climate change in coastal areas of Cameroon: 

selection of household -level protection options. Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change, 

14:721 –735. 

Müller, C., Elliott, J. and Levermann, A. (2014). Food security: Fertilizing hidden hunger. Nature 

Clim Change, 4: 540 –41. 

Myers, S.S. Zanobetti, A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leakey, A.D.B., Bloom, A.J. Carlisle, E., 

Dietteri ch, L.H, Fitzgerald, G., Hasegawa, T., Holbrook, N.M., Nelson, R.L., Ottman, M.J, 

Raboy, V., Sakai, H., Sartor, K.A., Schwartz, J., Seneweera, S., Tausz, M., Usui, Y. 

(2014). Increasing CO2 threatens human nutrition. Nature, 510(7503):139 –142. 

Naharia h, N., Legowo, A.M., Abustam, E., Hintono, A. and Hikmah, H. (2018). Functional 

Characteristics of Fermented Egg White Powder After Pan -drying at Different 

Temperatures and Times. International Journal of Poultry Science, 17: 134 -139. 

Nakandalage, N., a nd Seneweera, S. (2018). Micronutrients use efficiency of crop -plants 

under changing climate. In Plant micronutrient use efficiency (pp. 209 -224). Academic 

Press. 

Nde -Fon, P., Assob, J.C.N (2013).  The human health chapter of climate change and ozone 

depletion. Journal of The Cameroon Academy of Sciences, (11): 2 & 3. 

Ndife, J., Awogbenja, D. and Zakari, U. (2013). Comparative evaluation of the nutritional and 

sensory quality of different brands of orange -juice in Nigerian market. African 

Journal of Food Science, 7(12): 479 -484. 

Neba, A. G., Anyinkeng, N., Mumbang, C., and Fonge, A.B. (2021). Benthic Algal 

Community in Relationship to Perturbation in the Tiko Mangrove Estuary Cameroon. 

Open Journal of Ecology, 11: 540 -564. 

Nelson, G.C., Rosegrant, M.W., Koo, J., Robertson, R., Sulser, T., Zhu, T., Ringler, C., 

Msangi, S., Palazzo, A., Batka, M., Magalhae s, M., Valmonte -Santos, R., Ewing, M., 

and Lee, D. (2009). Climate change: impact on agriculture and costs of adaptation. 

Washington, D.C.: IFPRI, No 21, Food policy reports from International Food Policy 

Research Institute (IFPRI). 

NIS (National Insti tute of Statistics). (2015) Cameroon ORIGINAL DATA. Population and 

Housing Census Of Cameroon, 2015. Published by source: 10 September 2015. 

http://cameroon.opendataforafrica.org/ 

NZFSSRC 2019 MPI SLMACC - Adapting to climate change: Information for the New 

Zealand food system New Zealand Food Safety Science and Research Centre 

www.nzfssrc.org.nz/node/73. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 234 

Ohwesiri, M., Kiin -Kabari, D. and Ebere, C. (2016). Quality Characteristic s of Orange / 

Pineapple Fruit Juice Blends. American Journal of Food Science and Technology, 4 (2): 43 -

47. 

Patz, J.A., Campbell -Lendrum, D., Holloway, T. and Foley, J.A. (2005) Impact of regional 

climate change on human health. Nature, 438: 310 –7. 

Pl ahar, W. (2018). Development and quality evaluation of weaning foods based on 

Orange -Fleshed Sweetpotato (OFS) flour to alleviate infant malnutrition in Ghana. CSIR -

Food Research Institute Accra, Ghana. 

Porter, J.R., Xie, L., Challinor, A.J., Cochrane, K., Howden, S.M., Iqbal, M.M. (2014). Food 

security and food production systems. InC. B. Field et al. (Eds.), Climate change 2014: 

Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 

Assessment Report of the Intergovern mental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 485 –533). 

Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 

Reynolds, C.J., Horgan, G.W., Whybrow, S. and Macdiarmid, J.I. (2019). Healthy and 

sustainable diets that meet greenhouse gas emission reduct ion targets and are 

affordable for different income groups in the UK. Public health nutrition , 22(8): 1503 - 1517. 

Satter, M., Jabin, A., Abedin, N., Islam, M., Parvin, R., Dhali, M., Amin, Z. (2014). 

Development and evaluation of weaning foods using loc ally available nutritious fruits 

in Bangladesh. Malaysian Journal of Nutrition, 20(1):83 –92. 

Scheelbeeka, P.F.D., Birda, F.A., Tuomistob, H.L., Greena, R., Harrisa, F.B., Joya, E.J.M., 

Chalabic, Z., Allend, E., Hainesc, A., and Dangoura, A.D. (2018). Ef fect of environmental 

changes on vegetable and legume yields and nutritional quality. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences. June 11, 2018 | 115 (26) | 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800442115. 

Shewangzaw, A., Kinyuru, J., Mokua, B., Tenagasha w, W. (2021). Nutritional Quality and 

safety of complementary foods developed from blends of staple grains and honey bee 

larvae (Apis mellifera). International Journal of Food science, 2021 Article ID 5581585, 12 

pages, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1155/20 21/5581585. 

Shimada, G. (2022). The Impact of Climate -Change -Related Disasters on Africa’s 

Economic Growth, Agriculture, and Conflicts: Can Humanitarian Aid and Food 

Assistance Offset the Damage? Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 19: 467. 

https://do i.org/10.3390/ijerph19010467 .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 235 

Soares, J.C., Santos, C.S., Carvalho, S.M.P., Pintado, M.M. and Vasconcelos, M.W. (2019). 

Preserving the nutritional quality of crop plants under a changing climate: importance 

and strategies. Plant Soil, 443:1 –26 

Solomon, M. (2005). Nutritive value of three potential complementary foods based on cereals 

and legumes. African Journal of Food Agriculture, Nutrition and Development, 5(2). 

Swinburn, B.A., Kraak, V.I., Allender, S., Atkins, V.J , Baker, P. I., Bogard, J.R., Brinsden, 

H., Calvillo, A., De Schutter, O., Devarajan, R., Ezzati, M., Friel, S., Goenka, S., 

Hammond, R.A., Hastings, G., Hawkes, C., Herrero, M., Hovmand, P.S., Howden, M., 

Jaacks, L.M., Kapetanaki, A.B., Kasman, M., Kuhnlein, H.V., Kumanyika, S.K., 

Larijani, B., Lobstein, T., Long, M.W., Matsudo, V.K. R., Mills, S.D.H., Morgan, G., 

Morshed, A., Nece, P.M., Pan, A., Patterson, D.W., Sacks, G., Shekar, M., Simmons, 

G.L., Smit, W., Tootee, A., Vandevijvere, S., Waterlander, W.E., Wolfenden, L., Dietz, 

W.H. (2019). The global syndemic of obesity, undernutrition, and climate change: the 

Lancet Commission report. Lancet., 393(10173):791 –846. 

Tiencheu, B., Aduni, A., Tatsinkou, B., Tenyang, N., Tiepma, F., Womeni H. (2016). 

Formulation and Nutri tional Evaluation of Instant Weaning Foods Processed from Maize 

(Zea mays), Pawpaw (Carica papaya), Red Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) and Mackerel Fish 

Meal (Scomber scombrus). American Journal of Food Science and Technology, 4(5): 

149 -159. 

Wang, H., John son, L.A., and Wang, T. (2004). Preparation of soy protein concentrate and 

isolate from extruded -expelled soybean meals. Journal of the American Oil Chemists' 

Society, 81(7):713 -717. 

Whitney, E. and Rolfes, S. (1999). Understanding nutrition. Rolfes, W. (ed). Eighth edition. 

Belmont, California: West/Wadsworth. 

WHO. (2021). The Global Nutrition Targets: Tracking Tool. 50% Reduction of Anemia in 

Women of Reproductive Age. Available online: https://extranet.who.int/nhdtargets/en/ 

Anaemia (accessed on 24 march 2022). 

WHO. Global Nutrition Targets (2025). Policy Brief Series. 2014. Available online: 

https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO -NMH -NHD -14.2 (accessed on 24 Mach 

2022). 

WMO (The World Meteorological Organization), (2021). State of Climate in 2021: Extreme 

events and major impacts. WMO provisional report. Published 31 October 2021 Press 

Release Number: 31102021. https://public.wmo.int/en/media/press -release/state -of -

climate -2021 -extreme -events -and -major -impacts .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 236 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 237 

# Trends of Malaria in the South West Region of Cameroon: 

# Overview, Challenges and Perspectives (SDG3) 

Esum M.E., Roland N. Ndip, and Sumbele I. U.N. (Cameroon) 

Abstract 

Background: The South West Region of Cameroon falls in the large equatorial forest of the south, 

where malaria parasite transmission is high and perennial. It is one of the two English - Speaking 

Regions affected by the on -going social crisis with displaced populations which could c onstitute 

an enormous challenge to malaria control efforts. If we hope to attain Target 3.3 of the Sustainable 

Development Goals, then it matters that evidence -based data as the basis for aggressive 

measures to reduce the burden of malaria in the region be generated. A review of the literature 

of malaria in the region was done to establish a trend in epidemiological, parasitological and 

entomological indicators of malaria and identify gaps in knowledge and make proposals for future 

steps. 

Methods: A total of 47 scientific and policy documents were extracted from online bibliographic 

databases and reviewed. The major findings were noted, the gaps identified and future steps 

proposed. 

Major findings: Plasmodium falciparum is the dominant species responsible for malaria infection 

in the region. Infection in children, pregnant women and adults range from 7.1% to 43.3%, 20.3% 

to 43% and 5.38% to 25.6%, respectively. The main vector that transmits malaria is the Anopheles 

gambiae s.l. Artemisinin and its derivati ves are the drugs for malaria treatment. 

Conclusion: All the studies conducted on malaria over the years were sporadic in nature and no 

trends of malaria transmission in the region could be established. 

Perspectives: There is need for longitudinal pros pective studies to monitor trends in malaria in 

the region. 

Keywords: South West Region, Malaria, Trends, Epidemiology, Social crisis, Sustainable 

Development Goal. 

Introduction 

Malaria is a mosquito -borne disease of humans and other animals caused by p arasitic protozoans 

of the genus Plasmodium . It is transmitted through the bite of an infected female Anopheles 

mosquito. The World Health Organization (WHO) reported 229 million malaria cases in 2019 of 

which an estimated 215 million occurred in the Afric an Region accounting for about 94% of cases. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 238 

The majority of malaria cases (82%) and deaths (94%) that were averted occurred in the African 

Region.  Cameroon accounts for 3% of this number (215 million)  (World Malaria Report, 2020). 

Despite decades of control and prevention efforts, malaria remains one of the greatest causes of 

morbidity and mortality in Cameroon. According to the National Malaria Control Programme 

(NMCP) 2008 annual report, malaria accounts for 35% to 43% of all deat hs in health units, 50% 

to 56% of morbidity among children under the age of 5, 40% to 45% of medical consultations and 

30% to 47% of hospitalizations. It is also the cause of 26% of absences in the workplace and 40% 

of the health expenditure of households. Malaria is responsible for 49% consultations and 59% of 

hospitalizations during pregnancy leading to abortions and premature labour and deliveries as 

well as low birth weight, all exposing the babies to early deaths and mothers to death during 

delivery (N MCP Report, 2008; Ngum et al ., 2010). In 2019, 25,876,387 Cameroonians were at 

risk of malaria infection, 4,266,684 confirmed cases, 11,233 deaths, 66,071 under five deaths 

(WHO World Malaria Report, 2020; UNICEF, 2020). 

Although malaria is endemic nation wide, the level of endemicity greatly varies from one 

geographical, ecological and climatic zone to another. The three main epidemiological zones 

linked to geo -climatic variations are the sudano -sahelian zone (areas of the Far North and North 

regions), the large savanna area of interior plateau (Adamawa region) and the large equatorial 

forest of the south (the remaining 7 regions of the southern part of the country). The existing 

climatic conditions are favorable for the development of the malaria vectors a nd the parasites. 

Plasmodium falciparum is the most common species of Plasmodium (95%), followed by P. 

malariae and P. ovale (NMCP Report, 2012; Ngum et al ., 2010). 

The South West Region, which is one of the ten administrative regions of Cameroon, falls in the 

large equatorial forest of the south, where malaria parasite transmission is high and perennial. 

The climatic conditions and ecological settings of this region are optimal for continuous 

transmission throughout the year. The region comprises six adm inistrative Divisions and 31 Sub 

Divisions. It has a population of 1,553,300 inhabitants covering a surface area of 25,410 km 2.

The region has an east -west extension of about 110 km and north -south, it is approximately 190 

km . It is located between latitu de 3. 80 o – 6.70 oN and longitude 8.30 o - 10.20 o E with altitude 

ranging from 0 to 4095 m.a.s.l. The region is bordered by the North West Region in the north, the 

Atlantic Ocean in the south, the Littoral and West Regions in the east and Nigeria in the west .

The region is characterized by a succession of vegetation including mangrove at the Atlantic coast 

through the deep equatorial evergreen forest to the humid savannah in the far north (Akwaya Sub 

Division) of the region. The climate comprises two seasons, the rainy season from March to 

October, while the dry season goes from November to February with annual rainfall varying 

between 1500 mm/ year inland to 4000 mm/year on the sea coast (Suchel, 1998). The region is 

considered as belonging to a holoendemic s tratum with high and perennial malaria parasite 

transmission but in the highlands, it is seasonal with high transmission observed during the rainy 

season months (Wanji et al ., 2012). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 239 

Antonio ‑Nkondjio and colleagues (2019) reviewed the malaria situation in Cameroon in 2019, 

including that of the South West Region. However, covering the whole country, some important 

trends and details for the region might have been left out. 

The social crisis affecting the South West region of the country with a displaced population could 

be affecting malaria epidemiology in the area and this could constitute an enormous challenge 

that could impede malaria elimination or control efforts in this region. If we hope to att ain Target 

3.3 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by ending epidemics of malaria and ensure 

healthy lives and promote the well -being of all at all ages by 2030, then it matters that evidence -

based data as the basis for aggressive measures to drast ically reduce the burden of malaria in 

the region be generated. This paper attempts a review of the literature of malaria in the South 

West Region in order to establish a trend in epidemiological, parasitological and entomological 

indicators of malaria and identify gaps in knowledge and make proposals for perspective and 

future steps. 

Methodology 

Data Retrieval 

Information on malaria in Cameroon and the South West Region in particular were extracted from 

online bibliographic databases. PubMed, Google and Google Scholar were used to search for 

information. Terms used to guide these searches included malaria parasites and transmission, 

malaria vectors and ecology, ma laria incidence and prevalence, morbidity and mortality rates, 

epidemiology, pathologies, diagnosis, treatment and management, vector control, Plasmodium ,

LLINs, insecticide resistance, Anopheles. Information was also extracted from published reports: 

WHO, UNICEF, NMCP, Cameroon Demographic Health Surveys (DHS). The search period 

included 1960 to 2021. The search resulted in 100 articles. Fifty three papers were excluded 

because they were not reporting data from the South West Region of Cameroon. Scientific 

publications downloaded were categorized as follows: Plasmodium species (4), Epidemiology 

(11), Genetics (1), Immunology (3), Pathology (7), Diagnosis (4), Treatment and management 

(4), Vector biology (4), Prevention and control (9). 

Results 

Situation o f Malaria in the South West Region 

Plasmodium Species 

Very few studies have attempted identification of the Plasmodium species circulating in the South 

West Region. Wanji et al . (2008) evaluating the performance and usefulness of the Hexagon 

Combi rapid diagnostic test in asymptomatic children in the Mount Cameroon region revealed the 

dominance of Plasmodium falciparum . The limitation of the Hexagon rapid test was its inability to 

detect mixed infections. Kwenti and colleagues in 2017 identifying Plasmodium species in five 

epidemiological strata in Cameroon including the coastal areas of Limbe, by polymerase chain Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 240 

reac tion (PCR), concluded that P. falciparum was the only species causing clinical malaria in the 

target population. Kimbi and colleagues in 2005, reported P. vivax -like asymptomatic infections 

in 33.3% of school children (Kimbi et al ., 2005). However, diagnos is was done by light microscopy 

and the researchers were not certain about the speciation, especially because of the notion that 

Africans are refractory to P. vivax infection due to lack of the Duffy antigen receptor needed by P. 

vivax to attach and invade red blood cells. As such, there was no follow -up study for proper 

identification by the researchers. 

One of the few studies that employed molecular typing revealed a substantial Plasmodium vivax 

infection of 14.7% (13/87) in asymptomatic adults in a rura l community in Buea (Fru -Cho et al ., 

2014). The study also revealed a prevalence of 50% (6/12) Duffy positive individuals. The results 

of this study provided the first molecular evidence of indigenous P. vivax infection in the South 

West Region and Cameroo n at large. Larger studies are needed in order to establish the 

prevalence of P. vivax infection in the region. 

Malaria Vectors 

Although there are 48 Anopheles species recorded throughout Cameroon, only 18 are 

responsible for malaria transmission (Fonten ille et al ., 2004; Antonio -Nkondjio et al ., 2006; Ayala 

et al ., 2009; Sinka et al., 2010). The principal vectors of malaria in Cameroon are Anopheles 

gambiae (s.s .), An. funestus (s.s. ), An. arabiensis , and An. coluzzii . An. carnevalei , An. coustani ,

An. h ancocki , An. leesoni , An. marshallii , An. melas , An. moucheti, An. nili , An. paludis , An. 

pharoensis , An. ovengensis , An. rivulorum -like , An. wellcomei and An. ziemanni play a secondary 

role (Carnevale et al ., 1992; Njan et al ., 1993; Fontenille et al ., 2000; Antonio -Nkondjio et al ., 

2002). 

In the South West Region of Cameroon, a few studies have identified the malaria vectors 

implicated in the transmission of malaria. Wanji et al . (2003) investigated the biting habits, feeding 

behaviour and entomologic al inoculation rates of different Anopheles species during the dry and 

rainy season in the Mount Cameroon region. Five Anopheles species were identi fi ed: Anopheles 

gambiae s.l ., An. funestus , An. hancocki , An. moucheti and An. nili . An. gambiae , An. funestu s

and An. hancocki , recorded during both seasons, were the main vectors of malaria in the region. 

An. gambiae s.s . was the only member of the An. gambiae (Giles) complex. These three species 

had their peak activity between 1 and 2 am. The sporozoite rate, for all vectors together, was 

signi fi cantly higher in the rainy season (9.4%) than in the dry season (4.2%) with all the species 

infected by Plasmodium falciparum . The average inoculation rate was 0.44 infective bites per man 

per night, which adds up to 161 infective bites per year in this study area. No malaria vector was 

caught at 1200 m a.s.l. 

Bigoga et al . (2007) studied malaria vectors and transmission dynamics in coastal south western 

Cameroon and reported Anopheles gambiae (78.2%), Anopheles funestus (17.4%), Anopheles 

nili (7.4%) as the dominant species. Anopheles gambiae accounted for 72.7% of transmission, 

Anopheles funestus (23%) and Anopheles nili (4.3%). The entomological inoculation rate of 287, 

160 and 149 infective bites/person/year was recor ded for Tiko, Limbe and Idinau, respectively. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 241 

Amvongo -Adjia et al . (2018) investigated the bionomics and vectorial role of anophelines in 

wetlands along the volcanic chain of Cameroon with Tiko, Meanja, Kumba and Mamfe (all in the 

South West Region) as p art of the study sites. Eight malaria vectors: Anopheles arabiensis , An. 

coluzzii , An. funestus (s.s. ), An. gambiae , An. hancocki , An. melas , An. nili and An. ziemanni ,

were found biting humans. Anophelines were more exophagic (73.6%) than endophagic (26.4%), 

showing a marked nocturnal activity (22:00 –4:00 h) for An. coluzzii and An. gambiae while An. 

funestus (s.s. ) was mostly caught between 1:00 and 6:00 h and An. zie manni having an early 

evening biting behaviour (18:00 -00:00 h). The transmission level was low with entomological 

inoculation rates estimated to 0.7 infected bites per person per month (ib/p/mth) in Tiko and 1.4 

ib/p/mth in Mamfe. 

Boussougou -Sambe et al . (2018) assessed the susceptibility of Anopheles gambiae (s.l. )

mosquitoes from South -West Cameroon to deltamethrin, permethrin and malathion identified two 

species of the An. gambiae (s.l .) complex, An. coluzzii and An. gambiae (s.s. ) in all three study 

locations with high proportions of An. coluzzii in Limbe (84.06%) and Tiko (92.2%), while in Buea, 

An. coluzzii (55.6%) and An. gambiae (s.s. ) (44.4%) occurred almost in the same proportions .

Epidemiology 

In changing climatic and environmental conditions coupled with different malaria prevention and 

control measures put in place by the government, the epidemiology of malaria in the region cannot 

be expected to remain the same over the years. Temperature, pr ecipitation, vegetation and 

altitude are important predictors of the geographical distribution of malaria in Cameroon (Massoda 

et al ., 2015). During the last two decades, an increase in temperature of 0.4 °C and decrease in 

rainfall of 10% – 20% have been reported, compared to the period 1951 –1980 (Sighomnou, 

2004). Most of the studies that have been conducted on malaria in the region have focused on 

the incidence and prevalence in vulnerable populations (children and pregnant women). Ikome et 

al ., (2002), reported a prevalence of 50.9% uncomplicated malaria and 7.1% cerebral malaria in 

children below 15 years of age in Limbe. Between 2008 and 2019, varied prevalence of malaria 

parasitaemia were reported in children below 15 years in the Mount Cameroon area ranging from 

24.8% to 43.3% (Wanji et al ., 2008; Nyasa et al., 2015; Kimbi et al. , 2013; Sumbele et al ., 2015; 

Bate et al ., 2016; Eposi et al ., 2019). The highest prevalence (43.3%) was recorded in 2019, after 

many years of free subsidized treatment for children and free Long -Lasting Insecticide -Treated 

bed nets (LLINs). Outside the Mount Cameroon area, Fokam et al . (2016) and Nyasa et al. (202 1) 

reported prevalence in children of 40.7% and 21.35% in the Tombel and Nguti areas of the Kupe 

Muanengouba Division respectively. Asoba et al . (2009) and Fokam et al . (2016) reported 

prevalence of 43.2% and 20.3% in pregnant women in the Mount Cameroon a rea (Buea, Muea 

and Mutengene) and Tombel Health District respectively. Studies in adult populations recorded 

prevalence of 25.6%, 32.3%, 26.5% and 5.38% in the Mount Cameroon area (Ebako et al ., 2010; 

Fru -Cho et al ., 2014; Nyasa et al ., 2015; Nyasa et al ., 2021) and Kupe Muanengouba Division. 

The least prevalence (5.38%) was in Kupe Muanengouba. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 242 

Diagnosis 

Early diagnosis and treatment of malaria remains critical to preventing death, reducing the 

disease and its transmission (WHO, 2015; World malaria report, 2020). Current malaria 

management guidelines recommend prompt parasitological confirmation of all suspected malaria 

patients by microscopy and/or rapid diagnostic test (RDT) prior to antimalarial treatment (WHO, 

2015). Some communities in malaria -en demic areas lack healthcare facilities, and diagnosis of 

malaria relies predominantly on its clinical presentation which is nonspecific. Although 

presumptive diagnosis of malaria is less expensive (Ansah et al ., 2013), the accompanying 

prescription could l ead to the treatment of patients without malaria (Perkins et al., 2008), over 

prescription of antimalarial drugs (Rafael et al. , 2006), thus contributing to antimalarial drug 

resistance (White, 2004). It is worth noting that WHO recommends parasite -based d iagnosis first 

for older children, adults and all suspected cases of malaria regardless of patient age (Bell et al ., 

2018). The examination of Giemsa -stained blood smears for the detection of malaria parasites 

using light microscopy therefore remains the g old standard for malaria diagnosis, as it provides 

information on both parasite species and density (Moody, 2002). However, microscopy requires 

basic laboratory infrastructure, quality equipment and reagents and is labour intensive and needs 

a trained tech nician. In order to overcome the deficiencies of light microscopy, RDTs have thus 

been designed as alternatives. RDTs require little training, produce rapid as well as prompt results 

after 15 to 30 minutes, require no laboratory infrastructure and therefor e allow them to be used in 

the most remote settings. RDTs are vastly sensitive and specific compared with microscopy and 

also compare favourably with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Moyeh et al ., 2019; Berry et 

al ., 2008). However, RDTs are limited ma inly by their inability to detect infections at low 

parasitaemia. In addition, false positive or negative results may be reported due to the persistence 

of target antigen even after successful treatment or deletions in the PfHRP2 gene, respectively 

(Hadits ch, 2004; Gamboa et al ., 2010). Nevertheless, they are affordable, easy -to -perform, fast, 

reliable and effective diagnostic point -of -care tools for malaria case management especially in 

endemic rural settings and areas with limited laboratory facilities (W HO, 2011). 

It is worth noting that newer diagnostic techniques such as amplification of parasite DNA with 

polymerase chain reaction are specific and can detect low concentrations of parasites but take 

time and requires specialised equipment and are thus n ot suitable in most field settings. The use 

of malaria RDT has expanded both in endemic and non -endemic settings, with over 60 different 

RDT brands and more than 200 developed products (Bell, 2011). Yet, results from field trials 

suggested highly variable field performance. Procuring excellent quality RDTs does not 

necessarily guarantee good field performance because factors such as shipping, handling and 

storage could affect the RDT accuracy (Bell, 2011). 

Despite persistent high malaria prevalence, and t he continuous influx of RDTs into our markets, 

the surveillance of RDTs in Cameroon and the South West Region in particular seems virtually 

ignored. Between 2008 and 2021, a number of studies evaluated the validity and usefulness of 

different brands of RDT s in the South West Region. Wanji et a l. (2008) evaluated the performance 

of the Hexagon Combi TM Rapid Diagnostic Test in children with asymptomatic malaria in the 

Mount Cameroon area and obtained 85.33%, 95.05% and 91.40% for sensitivity, specificity and Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 243 

accuracy respectively. They also noted that sensitivity and specificity increased with increase 

parasitaemia. It was concluded that the Hexagon Combi TM Rapid Diagnostic Test can be used in 

mass surveillance programmes. Teh et al . (2019) investigated the c oncurrence of CareStart ™

Malaria HRP2 RDT with microscopy in a population screening for Plasmodium falciparum 

infection in the same area. Sensitivity, Specificity, Positive Predictive Value (PPV), Negative 

Predictive Value (NPV) and accuracy were 82.4%, 76 .6%, 57.4%, 91.9% and 78.2%, respectively. 

Sensitivity depended on parasitaemia and reached 96.1% at densities ≥200 parasites/ μL of blood. 

The overall concurrence of CareStart ™ Malaria HRP2 pf Ag RDT with microscopy in the detection 

of P. falciparum infect ion was moderate and most useful at parasitaemia ≥200 parasites/ μL of 

blood. The conclusion drawn from this study was that the RDT could be effective as a diagnostic 

test for confirmation of clinical cases of malaria, but its applications in population scr eening with 

a higher proportion of asymptomatic cases are limited. Moyeh et al . (2019) compared the 

accuracy of four malaria diagnostic methods in a high transmission setting in coastal Cameroon 

and observed that SD Bioline can be an addition to or alternative to light microscopy in the 

diagnosis of malaria in the South West Region of Cameroon. With a diagnostic sensitivity that is 

above 90% as required for confident diagnosis of malaria, SD Bioline could replace light 

micro scopy in remote areas with difficult access to reagents and electricity. Apinjoh et al . (2021) 

evaluated and compared the diagnostic performance of a PfHRP2/pLDH ‑based malaria rapid 

diagnostic test (mRDT) on patients’ blood, saliva and urine relative to co nventional light 

microscopy and nested PCR at outpatient clinics in the Buea and Tiko Health Districts of 

southwestern Cameroon. The sensitivity and specificity of presumptive diagnosis, light 

microscopy and mRDT on blood, saliva and urine were 86.9% and 1 9.7%, 77.8% and 96.1%, 

75.8% and 96.6%, 74.5% and 93.1%, and 70.7% and 81.8%, respectively. They concluded that 

the agreement between mRDT on saliva (k = 0.696) and microscopy (k = 0.766) compared to 

PCR was good. 

HRP2 is the most widely used antigen in m RDTs either alone or in combination with other 

antigens, due to its abundance, specificity for P. falciparum infection, and high sensitivity and 

thermal stability (WHO, 2012). However, large numbers of genetic deletions of pfhrp2 and/or 

pfhrp3 genes in nat ural populations of P. falciparum have been reported in parasite populations 

in Peru and subsequently in many countries including Africa (Gamboa et al , 2010; Maltha et al., 

2012; Koita et al ., 2012; Berhane et al ., 2018). 

In Africa, where malaria is ende mic and the use of RDTs is widespread, there is scarce 

information on pfhrp2/3 deletions, although a few surveillance studies have reported on their 

existence. Systematic reviews by Agaba et al ., in 20 19 (Figure 1), and Kojom and Singh in 2020 

provided une quivocal evidence of the existence and occurrence of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 gene 

deletion. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 244    

> Figure 1: Distribution of pfhrp2/3 gene deletion across Africa (Agaba et al ., 2019)

So far, there are no data available for pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 gene deletion in Cameroon. Determining 

the existence and prevalence of deletion is crucial for accurate malaria diagnosis which may help 

in curbing the disease. Esum et al . ( in press ) recently conc luded an investigation on this 

phenomenon in febrile patients in Buea and Limbe Health Districts of the South West Region and 

may provide the first evidence of pfhrp/pfhrp3 gene deletions in the region and Cameroon. 

Prevention and Control 

The main strategies for malaria prevention in Cameroon are intermittent preventive treatment 

(IPT) for pregnant women and vector control through the use of LLINS, especially for pregnant 

women and under -five children (Ntonifor & Veyufambom, 2016) . The WHO in 2004 recommended Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 245 

a package of intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) with sulfadoxine -

pyrimethamine (SP) and use of insecticide -treated nets (ITNs), together with effective case 

management of clinical malaria and anaemia. During the period 2010 –2017, 1.45 billion 

artemisinin -based combination therapy (ACT) treatment courses were delivered by NMPs, of 

which 1.42 billion (98%) were in the WHO African Region .

In Cameroon, this policy was adopted and implemented by the Ministry of Public Health in 2004 

immediately after WHO recommendations and consisted of at least three free SP doses between 

the 16 th and the 36 th weeks of pregnancy alongside the use of ITNs. These interventions are 

commonly delivered in antenatal clinics (ANC) through the collaboration between malaria and 

reproductive health programmes (World Malaria Report, 2015). According t o the World Malaria 

Report in 2011, in most malaria endemic countries in Africa, 40 % of pregnant women sleep under 

ITNs. In Cameroon, data on coverage on malaria control interventions show that only 13.1 % of 

children belowr five years sleep under insecti cide -treated mosquito nets, 37% of pregnant women 

receive the second dose of Sulfadoxine -Pyrimethamine and only 58% of complicated cases of 

malaria are promptly and properly managed. In a recent study in Obala Health District (Cameroon 

Coalition Against Ma laria: Obala Malaria Campaign Baseline Survey, Feb 2010), the coverage 

was as follows: 15.1% for ACTs, 41% for LLINs, 67% for IPT2. 

Treatment and Case Management 

WHO recommends artemisinin -based combination therapies (ACTs) for the treatment of 

uncomplic ated malaria caused by P. falciparum (WHO, 2015). By combining two active 

ingredients with different mechanisms of action, ACTs are the most effective antimalarial 

medicines available today. WHO currently recommends five ACTs for use against P. falciparum 

malaria. The choice of ACT should be based on the results of therapeutic efficacy studies against 

local strains of the parasite. 

The Cameroon government launched the policy of free malaria treatment which was adopted in 

Cameroon in 2011 and 2014, for the treatment of simple and severe malaria respectively 

(MINSANTE,PNLP, 2014; Sieleunou et al ., 2015). The free malaria treatment is a package that 

includes subsidized diagnosis of malaria and treatment for under five children and pregnant 

women for severe and simple malaria provided in all health facilities (Khun et al ., 2008; O'Meara 

et al ., 2010; MINSANTE, PNLP, 2014; Sieleunou et al ., 2015). 

After the introduction of the malaria prevention and control policy in Cameroon, few studies in the 

South West regi on have evaluated the effectiveness of the measures adopted. Fokam et al .

(2016) assessed the usage and effectiveness of intermittent preventive treatment and insecticide -

treated nets on the indicators of malaria among pregnant women attending antenatal c are in the 

Buea Health District. They reported coverage of ITN as 32.4 % while that of ITPp was 63.2 %. 

Malaria prevalence was least (7.2 %) amongst women using both IPTp ‑ SP and ITN, while those 

with no intervention had the highest malaria prevalence of 1 8.6 %, and concluded that repeated 

doses of SP in combination with ITN use are effective in reducing malaria parasitaemia and 

improving haemoglobin level of pregnant women. Kimbi et al . (2012) assessed the ef fi cacy and Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 246 

tolerability of Malartin and Sulphadoxine -Pyrimethamine combination against uncomplicated 

falciparum malaria in Dibanda, south west Cameroon. They administered malartin for 3 days and 

SP as a single dose on day 0 and observed an overall success rate of 92.53% of the drug 

combination. The prevalence of anaemia decreased from 22.99% at enrolment to 9.77% on day 

14. The study concluded that malartin and SP are e ff ective and safe against uncomplicated 

falciparum malaria and suggested that this drug combination is a better alternative for th e patients 

that react to malartin/amodiaquine combination in Cameroon. 

Anchang ‑Kimbi et al . (2020) evaluated the coverage and effectiveness of intermittent preventive 

treatment in pregnancy with sulfadoxine –pyrimethamine (IPTp ‑SP) on adverse pregnancy 

ou tcomes in the Mount Cameroon area, South West Cameroon. The prevalence of falciparum 

malaria was 18.5% where uptake of SP was ≥ 3 doses and three or more dosing was associated 

with increased falciparum malaria density notably among women from semi ‑urban ar eas. The 

prevalence of low birth weight infants was 7.3% and was generally observed in anaemic and 

semi ‑rural women. They concluded that, reported uptake of IPTp with ≥ 3 SP doses in the Mount 

Cameroon area did not provide observable prophylactic benefits and suggested that SP 

resistance efficacy studies are necessary. 

The Demographic Health Survey of 2018 (DHS Report, 2018) reported that the household 

population of the South West Region with access to ITN was 46%. 

Drug Resistance 

Since early 60s the sen sitivity of the plasmodium parasites to chloroquine, the best and most 

widely used drug for treating malaria, has been on the decline. Newer antimalarials were 

discovered in an effort to tackle this problem, but all these drugs are either expensive or have 

undesirable side effects. Moreover after a variable length of time, the parasites, especially the 

falciparum species, have started showing resistance to these drugs also. The Asia Pacific region 

has traditionally been the focus of resistance to antimalari al drugs and now we have artemisinin 

resistance primarily on the Thai -Cambodian border. (WHO :Drug 

Resistance.http://www.who.int/tdr/research/progress9900/methods/malaria -resistance.htm: 

Accessed December10, 2021) If it is not contained, it can have globa l implications and the most 

serious effect would be in Africa which has a high disease burden and the highest mortality rates. 

The best way to prolong the use of the drug would be to use it in combination with other anti -

malarial drugs (Whegang et al ., 201 0). 

In Cameroon, resistance to anti -malarial drugs has been reported (David et al., 2009). 

Chloroquine, which was most accessible and used as the first line treatment for uncomplicated 

malaria, developed resistance, which was depicted for the first time i n 1985 in the Limbe Township 

of the South West Region and later in other localities in the country with high rates of therapeutic 

failures observed. Confronted with this situation, other molecules (Amodiaquine, Sulfadoxine -

pyrimethamine as well as more re cent artemisinine associated therapies) were proposed for use 

in chloroquine resistant areas (Whegang et al ., 2010). However, therapeutic failures to 

Artemisinine Combination Therapies (ACT) are now being registered in some towns in Cameroon Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 247 

including Lim be, where a therapeutic failure rate of 14% related to combination of Atesunuate and 

amodiaquine + sulfadoxine -pyrimethamine was reported between 2004 and 2006 (NMCP 

Strategic Plan, 2007 - 2010). 

Moyeh et al . (2018) investigated the effects of Drug Policy Changes on evolution of molecular 

markers of Plasmodium falciparum resistance to chloroquine, amodiaquine, and sulphadoxine -

pyrimethamine in the South West Region of Cameroon. They reported that the Pfcrt 76T mutation 

was observed in 91.7% (211/230) of sa mples while the mutant 86Y, 184F, and 1246Y of the 

Pfmdr1 gene were observed in 58.8% (133/226), 82.1% (183/223),and1.3% (3/226), respectively. 

The study showed that the evolution of treatment policies in Cameroon had led to the gradual 

return of the sensi tive genotype of the 4 -aminoquinoline resistance markers. The gradual return 

to the CQ -sensitive genotype showed that return to its clinical efficacy can be anticipated as was 

the case in Malawi. 

Insecticide Resistance 

The prevention of malaria in Camero on is based essentially on vector control through use of 

Insecticide Treated Mosquito Nets (ITN) and Indoor Residual Spray (IRS) (David et al ., 2009). 

The efficacy of IRS and ITNs depends, among other things, on the proportion of vectors resting 

on the spr ayed surface and the susceptibility of the vectors to the insecticide used. It is therefore 

important to monitor development and extent of insecticide resistance in the particular vector 

population. A number of insecticide sensitivity studies have been ca rried out by the NMCP as 

well by other research institutions in different parts of the country. The results derived through 

these studies show that there is optimum sensitivity of An. gambiae s. I. to carbamates and 

organophosphates. However, An. gambiae is more resistant to DDT than is An. arabiensis in the 

tropical zone. No vector resistance, what so ever, has been noticed in Maga and Tiko for all 

insecticides tested. (NMCP Strategic Plan, 2007 – 2010) 

Boussougou -Sambe et al. (2018) investigated the insecticide susceptibility status of Anopheles 

gambiae (s.l. ) in South -West Cameroon four years after long -lasting insecticidal net mass 

distribution. Two species of the An. gambiae (s.l. ) complex, An. coluzzii and An. gambiae (s.s. )

were identified in all three study locations with high proportions of An. coluzzii in Limbe (84.06%) 

and Tiko (92.2%), while in Buea, An. coluzzii (55.6%) and An. gambiae (s.s .) (44.4%) occurred 

almost in the same proportions. Tested sam ples were found resistant to pyrethroids (deltamethrin 

and permethrin) in all locations (< 90% mortality), with > 3 -fold increase of KDT50 values 

compared with the Kisumu susceptible reference strain of An. gambiae (s.s .). However, the 

mosquito populations from Limbe and Buea were fully susceptible to malathion. The L1014F kdr 

was found in both An. coluzzii and An. gambiae (s.s .) with the highest frequencies found in An. 

gambiae (s.l. ) populations from Tiko (94%) and Buea (90%) compared with the Limbe popul ation 

(66%). No kdr L1014S was observed in analyzed samples. Their findings indicate ongoing 

development of An. gambiae (s.l. ) resistance to pyrethroids used in impregnating LLINs and 

suggest the use of malathion as an alternative insecticide for IRS in co mplementarity with LLINs. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 248 

Conclusion 

All the studies conducted on malaria in the region over the years were sporadic in nature and no 

trends of malaria transmission in the region could be established. About 95% of the research on 

malaria in the region was conducted in the Mount Cameroon area (Fako Division) and very little 

is known in the other areas. It is therefore difficult to determine whether malaria control efforts will 

produce the desired results in the region by 2030. 

Challenges 

Insecurity due to the ongoing social crisis affecting the South West Region of the country may 

present an uncondusive environment for research and handicap accessibility to remote health 

districts, health areas and communities. 

Environmental Sanitation is a very weak component of malaria vector control efforts in the South 

West Region. This warrants a change in the mentality of the population through tailored 

sensitization messages adapted to the socio -cultural context of the region. 

Perspectives 

There is need to us e molecular biology techniques to identify Plasmodium and Anopheles species 

circulating in the region in order to adopt appropriate control strategies. A multi -disciplinary 

approach to design and conduct longitudinal prospective studies to monitor trends i n malaria 

epidemiology, parasitology and entomology in the region in the next eight years is paramount. 

These are long -term studies carried out regularly, e.g. monthly or half -yearly, for the purpose of 

evaluating the impact of control measures. They provi de up to date information on incidence, 

prevalence, morbidity and mortality rates as well as changes in vector density, infection rates, 

behaviour, and susceptibility of vectors to insecticides. 

Quality assurance procedures and structures are needed to monitor the performance and 

guarantee the quality of the RDTs used in the region. 

Collaborative studies are envisaged between the University of Buea and the National Malaria 

Control Programme and Municipal councils. Funds for these studies will be solici ted from national 

and international bodies through competitive research grants. 

Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to the University of Buea SDG, Review and Technical Committees for their 

coordination and scientific inputs. We thank the Vice Chancellor of the University of Buea for 

supervising this paper. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 249 

References 

Agaba, B.B., Yeka, A., Nsobya, S., Arinaitwe, E., Nankabirwa, J., Opigo, J., Mbaka, P., Lim, 

C.S., Kalyango, J.N., Karamagi, C., and Kamya, M.R. (2019), “Systematic review of the 

status of pfhrp2 and pfhrp3 gene deletion, approaches and methods used for its 

estimation and reporting in Plasmodium falciparum populations in Africa: review of 

published studies 2010 –2019”, Malaria Journal, 18(1): 4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12936 -

019 -2987 -4. 

Anchang -Kimbi, J. K., Laken N. K., Mbacham, H. F., Wepnje G. B., Apinjoh T. O., Sumbele I. U. 

N., Dionne -Odom J., Tita A. T. N. an d Achidi E. A. (2020), ”Coverage and efectiveness 

of intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy with sulfadoxine –pyrimethamine 

(IPTp -SP) on adverse pregnancy outcomes in the Mount Cameroon area, South West 

Cameroon”, Malaria Journal, 19: 100. 

Ansah , E. K., Epokor, M., Whitty, C. J., Yeung, S., Hansen, K.S. (2013), “Cost -effectiveness 

analysis of introducing RDTs for malaria diagnosis as compared to microscopy and 

presumptive diagnosis in central and peripheral public health facilities in Ghana”, 

American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 89:724 –36. 

Antonio -Nkondjio, C., Awono -Ambene, P., Toto, J., Meunier, J.Y., Zebaze -Kemleu, S., 

Nyambam, R., et al.  (2002), “High malaria transmission intensity in a village close to 

Yaounde, the capita l city of Cameroon”, Journal of Medical Entomology, 39:350 –5. 

Antonio -Nkondjio, C., Kerah, C., Simard, F., Awono -Ambene, P., Chouaibou, M., Tchuinkam, T., 

et al. (2006), “Complexity of the malaria vectorial system in Cameroon: contribution of 

secondary vectors to malaria transmission”, Journal of Medical Entomology, 43:1215 –

21. 

Antonio ‑Nkondjio C., Ndo, N., Njiokou, F., Bigoga, J. D., Awono ‑Ambene, P., Etang, J., Same -

Ekobo, A. and Wondji, C. S. (2019), “Review of malaria situation in Cameroon: techn ical 

viewpoint on challenges and prospects for disease elimination”, Parasites and Vectors, 

12: 501. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071 ‑019 ‑3753 ‑8. 

Apinjoh, T. O., Ntasin, V. N., Tataw, P -C. C., Ntui, V.N., Njimoh, D. L., Cho -Ngwa, F. and 

Achidi, E. A. ( 2021), “Comparison of conventional and non -invasive diagnostic tools 

for detecting Plasmodium falciparum infection in southwestern Cameroon: a cross -

sectional study”, Infectious Diseases of Poverty, 10: 75. 

Asoba, G. N., Ndamukong, K. J. N. and Achidi E . A. (2009), “Prevalence of malaria parasite 

infection in pregnant women in three towns of the South West Region of Cameroon”, 

Journal of the Cameroon Academy of Sciences, Vol. 8 No. 2/3. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 250 

Ayala, D., Costantini, C., Ose, K., Kamdem, K., Antonio -Nkondjio , C., Agbor, J. et al.  (2009), 

“Habitat suitability and ecological niche profile of major malaria vectors in Cameroon”, 

Malaria Journal, 8:307. 

Bate, A., Kimbi, H. K., Lum, E., Lehman, L. G., Onyoh, E. F., Ndip, L. M. et al. (2016), “Malaria 

infecti on and anaemia in HIV ‑infected children in Mutengene, Southwest Cameroon: a 

cross sectional study”, BMC Infectious Disease, 16:523. 

Bell, D., Cunningham, J. (2011), “Malaria rapid diagnostic test performance; results of WHO 

product testing of malaria RDTs: round 3, 2010 –2011”: https:apps. 

who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/204118/9789241510035_eng.pdf; 

jsessionid=430E08DE8C95D56CDB 354E49DA1FD6E2sequence=1. (Accessed, 

December 10, 2021). 

Berhane, A., Anderson, K., Mihreteab, S., Gresty, K., Rogier, E., Mohamed, S., Hagos, F., 

Embaye, G., Chinorumba, A., Zehaie, A., Dowd, S., Waters, N.C., Gatton, M.L., 

Udhayakumar, V., Cheng, Q. and Cunningham, J. (2018), “Major Threat to Malaria 

Control Programs by Plasmodium falciparum lacking Histidine -Rich Protein 2, Eritrea”, 

Emerging Infectious Diseases , 24(3), pp.462 –470. 

Berry, A., Benoit ‑Vical, F., Fabre, R., Cassaing, S., Magnaval, JF. (2008), “PCR ‑based methods 

to the diagnosis of imported malaria”, Parasite, 15(3):484 –8. 

Boussougou -Sambe, S. T., Wolfgang, E. E., Geraud, C. T. T., Mandeng, S.E., Mbakop L. R., 

Enyong, P., Etang, J., Fokam, E. B. and Awono -Ambene, P. H. ( 2018), “Insecticide 

susceptibility status of Anopheles gambiae (s.l.) in South -West Cameroon four years 

after long -lasting insecticidal net mass distribution” , Parasites & Vectors, 11:391 

David, H. P., Sameh, El -Saharty, Banafsheh, S., Katja, J., Mark o, V. (2009), “Improving Health 

Service Delivery in Developing Countries: From Evidence to Action”, World Bank. 

Ebako, N. T., Achidi, E.A., Ndumbe P.M. (2010), “An update on malaria infection and anaemia 

in adults in Buea, Cameroon”, BMC Research Notes, 3:121 

Eposi, H. N., Ngowe N. M., Fokam, P., Nkfusai, J. F., Ndeso, S. A., Ngwayu, C. N., Mbouamba, 

B. Y., Tsoka -Gwegweni, J. M., Cumber, S. N. (2019), “The effect of subsidized malaria 

treatment among under -five children in the Buea Health District, C ameroon”, Pan African 

Medical Journal, 2019;33:152. doi:10.11604/pamj.2019.33.152.16832 

Esum, M. E., Etutu, S. J. M., Fru -Cho J., Nyasa, B. R., Kwenti, E. T. and Moyeh, M. N. ( In 

Press ), Plasmodium falciparum Histidine -Rich Protein 2 ( pfhrp2 ) and His tidine -Rich 

Protein 3 ( pfhrp3 ) Genes Deletion in the Mount Cameroon Region, International Journal 

of Infectious Diseases Regions , IJREGI -D-22 -00055 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 251 

Fokam, E., Dzi, K. T. J., Ngimuh, L. and Enyong, P. (2016), “The Effect of Long Lasting 

Insecticide Bed Net Use on Malaria Prevalence in the Tombel Health District, South 

West Region -Cameroon”, Malaria Research and Treatment, Article ID 3216017, 6 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/3216017 

Fontenille, D., Simard, F. (2004). “Unravelling complexities in human malaria transmission 

dynamics in Africa through a comprehensive knowledge of vector populations”, Comp 

Immunol Microbiol Infectious Disease, 27:357 –75. 

Fru -Cho, J., Bumah, V., Safeukwi, I., Nkuo -Akenji, T., Titanji, V.P.K and Kasturi Haldah (2014), 

“Molecular typing reveals substantial Plasmodium vivax infection in asymptomatic adults 

in a rural area of Cameroon”, Malaria Journal, 13:170 

Gamboa, D., Ho, M ‑F, Bendezu, J., Torres, K., Chiodini , PL., Barnwell, JW. et al. (2010), “A 

large proportion of P. falciparum isolates in the Amazon Region of Peru Lack pfhrp2 and 

pfhrp3: implications for malaria rapid diagnostic tests”, PLoS One, 5(1):e8091. 

Ikome, L. E., Ndamukong, K. J. N., Kimbi, H. ( 2002), “Prevalence and case -control study of 

cerebral malaria in Limbe of South West Cameroon”, African Journal of Health Science, 

61 -67 

Khun, S., Manderson, L. (2008), “Poverty, user fees and ability to pay for health care for 

children with suspected dengue in rural Cambodia”, International Journal of Equity and 

Health, 25;7:10. 

Kimbi, H. K., Ajeagah, H. U., Keka, F. C., Lum, E., Nyabeyeu, H. N., Tonga, C. F. et al.  (2012), 

“Asymptomatic malaria in school children and evaluation of the performance 

characteristics of the PartecCyscope® in the Mount Cameroon region”, Journal of 

Bacteriology and Parasitology, 2012;3:2. 

Koita, O. A., Doumbo, O. K., Ouattara, A., Tall, L. K., Konaré, A., Diakité, M., Diallo, M., Sagara, 

I., Masinde, G. L., Doumbo, S. N., Dolo, A., Tounkara, A., Traoré, I. and Krogstad, D. J. 

(2012), “False -negative rapid diagnostic tests for malaria and deletion of the histidine -

rich repeat region of the hrp2 gene” The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and 

Hygiene , 86 (2), pp.194 –198. 

Kojom, L. P. and Singh, V. (2020), “Prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum field isolates with 

deletions in histidine -rich protein 2 and 3 genes in context with sub -Saharan Africa and 

India: a systematic review and meta -analysis”, Malaria Journal , 19(1). 

Kwenti, T. E., Tayong, D. B. K., Njunda, L. A., Latz, A., Kukwah, A. T. and Nkuo -Akenji, T. 

(2017, “Identification of the Plasmodium species in clinical samples from children 

residing in five epidemiological strata of malaria in Cameroon ”, Tropical Medicine and 

Health, 45:14 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 252 

Maltha, J., Gamboa, D., Bendezu, J., Sanchez, L., Cnops, L., Gillet, P. and Jacobs, J. (2012), 

“Rapid Diagnostic Tests for Malaria Diagnosis in the Peruvian Amazon: Impact of pfhrp2 

Gene Deletions and Cross -React ions”, PLoS ONE , 7(8), p.e43094. 

Massoda, T. S. G., Kouambeng, C., Wounang, R., Vounatsou, P. (2015), “Challenges of DHS 

and MIS to capture the entire pattern of malaria parasite risk and intervention effects in 

countries with different ecological zone s: the case of Cameroon”, Malaria Journal, 

17:156. 3. 

Ministry of Public Health: National Malaria Control Programme Report. Republic of Cameroon 

2008. Available http://www.who.int/alliance -hpsr/projects/ alliance hpsr_ policy brief 

scaling up malaria Cameroon. pdf.  (Accessed December 12, 2021). 

MINSANTE, Plan strategigue national de lutte contre le paludisme au Cameroon 2014 -2018 

(PNLP).  2014. 

Moody, A. (2002), “Rapid diagnostic tests for malaria parasites”, Clinical Microbiology Review, 

15:66 –78. 

Moyeh, M., Njimoh, D. L., Evehe, M. S., Ali, I. M., Nji, A. M., Nkafu, D. N., Masumbe, P. N., 

Atogho -Tiedeu B., Ndikum, V. N. and Mbacham, W. F. (2018), “Effects of Drug Policy 

Changes on Evolution of Molecular Markers of Plasmodium falciparum Resistance to 

Chloroquine, Amodiaquine, and Sulphadoxine -Pyrimethamine in the South West Region 

of Cameroon”, Malaria Research and Treatment, Volume 2018, Article ID 7071383, 7 

pages htt ps://doi.org/10.1155/2018/7071383 

Moyeh, M. N., Ali, I. M., Njimoh, D. L., Nji, A. M., Netongo, P. M., Evehe, M. S. et al. (2019), 

“Comparison of the accuracy of four malaria diagnostic methods in a high transmission 

setting in coastal Cameroon”, J. Par asitol Res., 1 –8. 

National Malaria Control Programme: Plan Stratégique National de Lutte contre le Paludisme au 

Cameroun 2007 -2010. 

Ngum, J. W., Ongolo -Zogo, P., Tallah, E., Leke, R., Mbacham, W. (2010), “Policy Brief on 

Scaling up Malaria Control I nterventions in Cameroon. Cameroon Coalition Against 

Malaria and Centre for Development (CCAM) and Best Practices in Health (CDBPH)”, 

Available: http://www. cdbph .org/ documents/ Policy Brief_ Scalingup (Accessed, 

December 14, 2021). 

Nyasa, R. B., Ese ndege, L. F., Ndip, R. N. (2021), “Trends in malaria prevalence and risk 

factors associated with the disease in Nkonghombeng; a typical rural setting in the 

equatorial rainforest of the South West Region of Cameroon”, PLOS ONE, 

https://doi.org/10.1371/j ournal.pone.0251380 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 253 

Nyasa, R. B., Zofou, D., Kimbi, H. K., Kum, K. M., Ngu, R.C., Titanji, VPK (2015), “The current 

status of malaria epidemiology in Bolifamba, atypical Cameroonian rainforest zone: an 

assessment of intervention strategies and seasonal variations”. BMC Public Health, 

15:1105. 

Perkins, M. D., Bell, D. R. (2008), “Working without a blindfold: the critical role of diagnostics in 

malaria control”, Malaria Journal, 7:S5. 

PNLP. Plan Strate gique nationale de lutte contre le paludisme 2011 –2015.  Rapport Minsante 

Cameroun; 2012. p. 1 –82. 

Rafael, M. E., Taylor, T., Magill, A., Lim, Y -W., Girosi, F., Allan, R. (2006), “Reducing the burden 

of childhood malaria in Africa: the role of improved”. Nature, 444:39 –48 

Sieleunou, I., Betsi, E., Kouontchou, J. C., Nguela, A. T. (2015), “Removing the user fees for 

the under -fives' simple malaria treatment in Cameroon effect on the health services 

utilization”, Journal of community medicine and Healt h Education, 5:383. 

Sighomnou, D. (2004), “Analyse et definition des regimes climatiques et hydrologiques du 

Cameroun: perspectives d’evolution des ressources en eau”.  PhD Thesis, University of 

Yaoundé 1 , Yaoundé 

Sinka, M., Bangs, M., Manguin, S., Co etzee, M., Mbogo, C., Hemingway, J. et al. (2010), “The 

dominant Anopheles vectors of human malaria in Africa, Europe and the Middle East: 

occurrence data, distribution maps and bionomic précis”, Parasites and Vectors, 3:117. 

Suchel, J. -B. (1998), “Les Climats du Cameroun”, Ph.D. Thesis, Université de Saint -

Etienne,Saint -Etienne,France,1988. 

Sumbele, I. U. N., Kimbi, H. K, Ndamukong ‑Nyanga, J. L, Nweboh, M., Anchang ‑Kimbi, J. K. 

(2015), “Malarial anaemia and anaemia severity in apparently healthy primary school 

children in urban and rural settings in the Mount Cameroon area: cross sectional 

survey”, PLoS ONE, 2015;10:e0123549. 

Wanji, S., Tanke, T., Sali, N. A., Ajonina, C., Tendongfor, N. and Fontenille, D. (2003 ), 

“Anopheles species of the mount Cameroon region: biting habits, feeding behaviour and 

entomological inoculation rates”, Tropical Medicine and International Health , volume 8 

no 7 pp 643 –649. 

Wanji, S., Kengne -Ouafo, A. J., Eyong, E. E. J., Kimbi, H. K., Tendongfor, N., Ndamukong -

Nyanga, J. L., Nana -Djeunga, H. C., Bourguinat, C., Sofeu -Feugaing, D. D., Charvet, C 

.L. (2008), “Genetic diversity of Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface protein -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 254 

1block2 in sites of contrasting altitudes and malaria endemicities in the Mount Cameroon 

region”, American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 86, 764 –774. 

White, N. J. (2004), “Antimalarial drug resistance” Journal of Clinical Invest.113:1084 –92. 

World Malaria report 2015. Geneva: World Health Organ ization, 2015. 

http://www.who.int/malaria/media/world ‑malaria ‑report ‑2015/en/. (Accessed, December 

14, 2021). 

World Health Organization, Global Malaria Programme. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. 

2015 

World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund, 2005. World Malaria Report. 

Available at: http://www.who.int .org. (Accessed, December 20, 2021). 

World Health Organization, Global Malaria Programme. Universal access to malaria diagnostic 

test ing: an operational manual. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011. 

World Health Organization: Factsheet on the World Malaria Report 2014. 

http://www.who.int/malaria/media/world_malaria_report_2014/en/.. (Accessed, 

December 20, 2021). 

World Malaria R eport 2020: 20 years of global progress and challenges. 2020 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 255 

# Understanding the True Healthcare Impact of Nonprofits 

# Serving the Navajo Tribe During 

# the COVID -19 Pandemic 

Mohan Sudabattula (Project Embrace, Utah, United States), 

Samuel Philips (University of Utah, Utah, United States), 

Gabrielle Hoyer (University of California, San Francisco/Berkeley, Utah, United States), 

and Audrey Pozernick (University of Utah, Utah, United States) 

Abstract 

Undeniably, the disruption caused by the COVID -19 pandemic has elevated healthcare needs 

and regressed advancement made toward Sustainable Development Goal 3. Marginalized and 

low -resource populations, such as the Navajo tribe, were disproportiona tely affected by the 

pandemic, as was seen in metrics such as morbidity rates, food security, and domestic abuse/ 

intimate partner violence occurrences. As a result, the pandemic exposed heightened pain points 

of vulnerable populations and introduced oppor tunities for nonprofits to address the urgent 

healthcare needs of susceptible communities. This paper determines the sustainable impact of 

the medical supply campaigns hosted by 501c(3), Project Embrace, as a case study to further 

evaluate the success of n onprofits and the progress of Sustainable Development Goals during 

the pandemic. 

Keywords: Indigenous, Healthcare, Nonprofit, Pandemic, Rural, Supply Chain 

Introduction 

Nonprofit organizations play an essential role in the progression of the Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs). Often, nonprofit organizations work closely with marginalized and disenfranchised 

communities to provide essential services to advance the agendas of the SDGs. The COVID -19 

pandemic heightened the demand to achieve these goals, a s the pandemic has either halted or 

reversed the progress of the SDGs (Zhenmin, 2021). Indeed, this was the case in indigenous 

communities within the United States. Health disparities were intensified during the pandemic as 

the demand for healthcare servic es increased, while funding and resources for indigenous tribes 

were diminished, and access to healthcare was devastated (Shah et al., 2020) . As a result, the 

emergence and prevalence of community initiatives developed and deployed by nonprofits, such 

as P roject Embrace, increased throughout the duration of the pandemic. These community 

initiatives allowed for the progression of Sustainable Development Goal 3, despite the obstacles 

that the pandemic has presented. Project Embrace is focused on addressing SD G Target 3.8 

within the Navajo community as the provision of essential, and affordable healthcare services is 

necessary to counteract the damage incurred by the pandemic (United Nations, 2021). However, 

despite the increase in community initiatives, the im pact and implications of these programs have 

seldom been discussed. It is necessary to evaluate these initiatives and their overall effectiveness Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 256 

in progressing the SDGs, specifically during the pandemic. Thus, the purpose of this paper is to 

evaluate the effectiveness of the medical campaigns facilitated by Project Embrace to the Navajo 

Reservation, in the context of SDG Target 3.8. 

Background 

The Navajo Community Prior to the Pandemic 

The United States has had a poor relationship with indigenous communities, including but not 

limited to the Navajo tribe (Tajmajer, 2021). As a result, these communities face a lack of access 

to basic and necessary infrastructure, including but not limited to clean piped water, electricity, 

internet, road development and maintenance, housing, healthcare, and education (The World 

Bank, 2021). Consequently, this has and continues to contribute to a lower quality of life and poor 

health outcomes for indigenous communities. Although there are a variety of socia l determinants 

of health, the scope of this evaluation is limited to factors within the healthcare system, and more 

specifically the provision of necessary medical technologies for lifestyle assistance. 

One of the most effective public health policies to improve health outcomes is the implementation 

of handwashing to reduce the spread of disease. Having access to clean piped water to wash 

hands is necessary to slow the spread of disease within a household and the greater community 

(Purvis Lively, 2021; Lar son, 2020). The Navajo community has long suffered from a lack of 

access to clean piped water and it is estimated that 9,500 homes on the Navajo Reservation do 

not have piped water (Brown, 2020). Consequently, many homes must transport in clean water 

which can be financially burdensome, time consuming, and may reduce handwashing frequency. 

Similarly, barriers in navigating healthcare infrastructure greatly contribute to poor health 

outcomes (McMaughan, Oloruntoba and Smith, 2020). In particular, socio -eco nomic status and 

distance traveled for care can affect the ability to access healthcare. The Federal Reserve Bank 

of Minneapolis (2017) found that the Navajo Reservation had a poverty rate of 40.5% compared 

to a reported U.S. poverty rate of 14.6% (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 2017). 

Furthermore, socio -economic status can contribute to transportation difficulties that may inhibit a 

patient’s ability to access the healthcare system (Rural Health Information Hub, 2011). In context, 

the Navajo reservat ion is roughly the size of West Virginia, and Indian Health Services runs just 

14 hospitals throughout the Navajo Nation. It was determined that on the Arizona portion of the 

Navajo Reservation, the average distance traveled to the nearest provider was 26. 81 miles and 

the distance to the next provider was 44.57 miles (Navajo Nation Primary Care Area: 2020 

Statistical Profile, 2021). This data does not account for the distance traveled to see a specialist 

or to a Level I trauma center, greatly affecting the Navajo community’s ability to seek specialized 

and comprehensive emergency care. 

Furthermore, many of the people who live on the reservation are in a food desert, with only 13 

full -service grocery stores throughout the greater reservation. The average re sident has to drive 

hours to buy food, and extreme poverty prevents many from buying more expensive items such 

as fresh produce. As a population, American Indians and Alaska Natives have the highest rates Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 257 

of diabetes, resulting in high demand for mobility and lifestyle assist technology (NICOA, 2019). 

In the Navajo Area, 1 in 5 have diabetes and it is estimated that 75,000 have prediabetes, 

according to (Noble, 2017). Cycles of poverty further enable the in crease of noncommunicable 

diseases throughout the greater tribe. 

Project Embrace facilitated medical campaigns in four of the six counties that include the Navajo 

Reservation (San Juan County, UT; Navajo County, AZ; Apache County, AZ; and McKinley 

County , NM). In 2019, County Health Rankings compiled social determinants of health data to 

rank each U.S. county’s health outcomes and health factors against all other counties in the 

respective state. All four aforementioned counties scored in the bottom 25% f or their state in both 

health outcomes and health factors (County Health Rankings, 2020a; County Health Rankings, 

2020b; County Health Rankings, 2020c; County Health Rankings, 2020d). This data illustrates 

the grim reality of health outcomes within the Nav ajo community prior to the pandemic. 

The Navajo Community During the Pandemic 

In both 2020 and 2021, the aforementioned counties maintained health outcome and health factor 

rankings in the bottom quarter for their respective states (County Health Rankin gs, 2021a; County 

Health Rankings, 2021b; County Health Rankings, 2021c; County Health Rankings, 2021d; 

County Health Rankings, 2022a; County Health Rankings, 2022b; County Health Rankings, 

2022c; County Health Rankings, 2022d). While the rankings did not change from 2019, it must be 

recognized that rankings could not decrease as the counties were already in the bottom quarter. 

Additionally, the pandemic generally exaggerated hardships further influencing the social 

determinants of health and worsening heal th outcomes (Orgera, Garfield and Rudowitz, 2021). 

Moreover, it is well established that the pandemic has disproportionately affected vulnerable 

communities (Sequist, 2020). The regular obstacles faced within the Navajo community have only 

been amplified by the severity of the COVID -19 pandemic. In particular, the mortality rate of 

COVID -19 is approximately 2.5 times higher on the Navajo Reservation than it is in the United 

States as a whole (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022; Navajo Depart ment of 

Health, 2022). Thus, the pre -pandemic state of the social determinants of health has undoubtedly 

worsened throughout the duration of the pandemic. 

About Project Embrace 

A 501c(3) with the mission to ‘increase access to health care services for a ll through the provision 

of necessary medical resources to low -income, isolated, marginalized, or low -resource 

communities in the Mountain West and abroad.’ Project Embrace’s operations consist of five key 

phases 1) collection and storage, 2) sanitization and refurbishment, 3) community partner 

research and outreach, 4) transportation, and 5) distribution (Project Embrace, 2022). 

First, gently used medical technology is collected from vendors within the community and stored 

at our facility. Se cond, with the help of volunteers, the medical technology is then thoroughly 

cleaned, sanitized, and refurbished as necessary. Thirdly, community partners (CP) within an Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 258 

identified community are contacted to gauge the need for medical technologies and req uests from 

the CPs are collected. The devices are then assigned to a CP and loaded into a transport vehicle. 

Next, the Project Embrace team transports the devices to the region of the medical campaign and 

finally distributes the requested medical technolo gies to each CP. The entirety of this process 

from planning to execution, can be accomplished within 4 months. 

When appropriate, the team will learn more about each community partner, including the adversity 

they and their patients face. This is essential for Project Embrace to build trust within the 

respective target community, this was especially the case during the pandemic. Having a strong 

history of working in vulnerable and low -resource settings, Project Embrace ensures that no 

community partner or patient will pay for the medical technologies. Indeed, Project Embrace aims 

to equip already effective community organizations to increase their overall efficiency by supplying 

experts with needed resources and technology to more urgently address the observed needs of 

the community. 

Project Embrace’s Relationship with the Navajo Community 

Project Embrace was first introduced to the Navajo community in November 2018 by the Moran 

Eye Center’s Global Outreach team. This medical campaign allowed Project Embrace to begin 

building a relationship with the Navajo community and showcased the need for medical 

technologies. Th e following medical campaign in 2019 was again facilitated in collaboration with 

the Moran Eye Center and further strengthened relationships with community partners from the 

previous campaign. Additionally, the 2019 medical campaign introduced Project Embr ace to new 

regions of the Navajo Reservation and allowed for the development of new relationships. 

Over the course of the past two years, Project Embrace has worked in close collaboration with 

NavajoStrong, a local 501c(3) organization dedicated to incre asing health and wellness for the 

Navajo people. Project Embrace and NavajoStrong have worked closely as first responders in 

the Navajo Reservation during the COVID -19 outbreak (Navajo Strong, 2022). While Project 

Embrace works directly with hospitals and clinical settings through the provision of medical 

technologies, NavajoStrong specializes in working with isolated patients who often lack a 

household address, via the provision of care kits (clothing, food, school supplies, etc.). Both 

Project Embrace and Navajo Strong have a strong history of collaboration with indigenous 

communities making communication of healthcare needs easier. One of the greater obstacles in 

accessing this community is not in the funding of our programs, but rather in the relationshi p

development with the Navajo . The coordination of both organizations has helped increase access 

to vital community contacts on the reservation, leading to more frequent outreach during the 

COVID -19 pandemic. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 259 

Methods 

Overview 

The aim of this evaluation is to determine if Project Embrace was successful in supporting the 

Navajo community through its medical campaigns facilitated between November 2018 and 

January 2022. Hereafter, success will be defined as increasing or maintaining a threshold of 

financial efficiency and the ability to adequately meet the needs of community partners (CP) for 

each campaign (services rendered). Both conditions must be met to deem Project Embrace’s 

initiatives to the Navajo community as successful. The conditions wil l be evaluated using the 

following metrics determined for each medical campaign: 1) cost to facilitate, 2) quantity of 

medical technologies donated (QMTD), 3) total monetary value of the medical technologies 

donated, and 4) delivery cost per medical techno logy (DCMT). 

Calculation of the Medical Technology Value 

The device value calculated for each medical campaign is calculated by device type. For each 

medical technology type and subtype (i.e. adult, pediatric, bariatric), ten current market prices are 

co llected from different manufacturers and retailers; these prices are then averaged to find the 

average retail price for the medical technology subtype. A 15% deduction is applied to the average 

retail price to account for the medical technology being pre -owned. The average pre -owned price 

is then used as the standard medical technology subtype value (MTSV). The MTSV is then 

multiplied by the distribution quantity and repeated for the quantity in each subtype. These values 

are then summed to return the total medical technology value for the medical campaign. 

The medical technology types and subtypes (shown in parentheses) distributed during the 

medical campaigns includes the following: 

• Indoor manual wheelchair (adult, pediatric, bariatric) 

• Outdoor manual wheelchair (adult, pediatric, bariatric) 

• Motorized wheelchair (adult, pediatric) 

• Four -wheeled walker (adult, pediatric) 

• Two -wheeled walker (adult, pediatric) 

• Basic walker (adult, pediatric, bariatric) 

• Single point cane (adult) 

• Quad point cane (adult) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 260 

• Commode 

• Toilet riser 

• Shower chair 

• Shower bench 

• Knee scooter 

• Forearm crutches (adult, pediatric) 

• Basic crutches (adult, pediatric) 

• Ankle brace 

• Sling 

• Orthopedic boot (adult, pediatric) 

• Wrist brace 

• Pantiliners* 

• Tampons* 

• Menstrual pads* 

> *These medical technologies were not accounted for in the calculations or reported metrics. See limitations.

Calculation of the Financial Data 

The cost to facilitate the medical campaign is calculated by collecting the receipts and summi ng 

the funds used to facilitate the medical campaign. Costs are categorized by logistics, lodging, and 

meals. Logistics is generally the costliest category as it includes: vehicle daily rental rate, vehicle 

mileage rate, insurance, and fuel. 

DCMT is calc ulated by dividing the total cost to facilitate the medical campaign by the QMTD, as 

shown in Equation 1. 

Eq. 1  𝐷𝐶𝑀𝑇  = 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡  𝑡𝑜  𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑔𝑛      

> 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑡𝑒𝑐 ℎ𝑛𝑜𝑙𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 261 

Adjusted DCMT is used to account for monetary support in the form of alleviating or reducing the 

costs of logistics, lodging, meals, or some combination thereof. Generally, this is the result of 

collabo ration with another organization, which may alleviate or reduce certain costs. 

Consequently, the reported total cost to facilitate the medical campaign is lower than if 

collaboration did not occur. To standardize the medical campaign metrics, estimated val ues of 

the costs avoided were factored into the total cost to facilitate the medical campaign. Thus, the 

adjusted DCMT is calculated using Equation 2. 

Eq. 2  𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝐷𝐶𝑀𝑇  = (𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡  𝑡𝑜  𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙  𝑐𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑎 𝑖𝑔𝑛 )+(𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒  𝑜𝑓  𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑠  𝑎𝑣𝑜𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑑 )     

> 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑡𝑒𝑐 ℎ𝑛𝑜𝑙𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 𝑑𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑

Determination of the Financial Efficiency Threshold 

Financial efficiency is determined by comparing the trend in the QMTD to the trend in the DCMT, 

or adjusted DCMT when applicable, over the five medical campaigns. Therefore, QMTD and 

DCMT were plotted over time within the same figure to visualize trends (Fig. 1, 2). Additionally, 

the QMTD per campaign was plotted separately using a scatter plot. Linear regression was 

performed to determine a trendline with an equation and R 2 value. The slope of the reported 

equation represents the change in the QMTD per medical campaign, and thus over time. 

To deem the medical campaigns financially efficient, one of three financial conditions must be 

met. 

1. The DCMT trend remains relatively constant while the QMTD displays an increasing 

trend. 

2. The DCMT displays a decreasing trend while the QMTD trend remains relatively constant. 

3. The DCMT displays a decreasing trend while the QMTD displays an increasing trend. 

Determination of the Services Rendered Range 

The services rendered range is defined by balancing the supply and demand of medical 

technologies, over a predetermined time range. Given that Project Embrace requires adequate 

time to prepare for a medical campaign, the minimum range for the services rend ered evaluation 

is set to four months (16 weeks). To account for the potential to overwhelm the community, it is 

imperative that the supply does not exceed six months (24 weeks). Consequently, the supply of 

medical technologies must last between four and s ix months to adequately meet the community’s 

demand, and deem Project Embrace’s services rendered successful. 

The information used to evaluate services rendered is sourced from in person surveys conducted 

with the CPs during the medical campaigns. During these surveys, the CPs were asked to 

estimate the time to distribute the delivered medical technologies. This information will be 

supplemented with information regarding the circumstance of the Navajo community, to provide 

insight into supply and demand c hanges between medical campaigns. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 262 

Results 

Overview 

Project Embrace facilitated two medical campaigns within the Navajo community prior to the 

pandemic (November 2018 and May 2019), followed by an additional three medical campaigns 

during the pandemic (July 2020 to January 2022). The first medical campaign, November 2018, 

served as a sample set to determine the demand for medical technologies within the community. 

The subsequent medical campaigns increased in volume and scope as the needs of th e Navajo 

community increased. Furthermore, the latter three medical campaigns were facilitated during the 

pandemic, requiring a substantial increase in quantity of medical technologies donated (QMTD) 

(Table 1). 

Table 1: Medical Campaign Metrics 

Medical Campaign 

Medical 

Technology Value 

Quantity of 

Medical 

Technologies 

Quantity of Community 

Partners Worked With 

November 2018*  $401.19  20  1

May 2019*  $2,531.14  80  1

July 2020  $5,898.71  110  5

December 2020  $25,363.36  288  6

January 2022  $37,284.23  342  6

> *Pre -COVID -19 pandemic medical campaign

Financial Evaluation 

As previously mentioned, the trends in both donation cost per medical technology (DCMT) and 

QMTD are compared to determine if the medical campaigns were financially efficient. While 

DCMT accounts for the costs incurred, it is also important to account for the contributions of 

medical campaign collaborators to standardize the metrics used to determine overall medical 

campaign financial efficiency. Thus, adj usted DCMT will also be used to evaluate financial 

efficiency. 

Figure 1 visualizes the trends of DCMT and QMTD over time. Although, the DCMT of the May 

2019 campaign is relatively large, the DCMT of the other campaign is fairly consistent around $8. 

The Q MTD displays an increasing trend as the medical campaigns grew in volume over time. 

Thus, the data represented in Figure 1 meet the criteria for financial efficiency under condition 1. 

However, the DCMT values displayed do not accurately reflect the circum stances for the 

November 2018 and May 2019 campaigns as DCMT values are kept artificially low through costs 

covered by the Moran Eye Center through subsidized lodging. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 263 

To account for the subsidized lodging, adjusted DCMT values for the two pre -pandemic 

campaigns were calculated. Typically, the cost of lodging in the area is estimated at $80.00 per 

room per night. During the November 2018 medical campaign, the Moran Eye Center covered 

the cost of two rooms for one night for a value of $160.00. Consequently , the adjusted DCMT for 

the November 2018 medical campaign would be $15.50. Likewise, the Moran Eye Center covered 

the cost of one room for one night during the May 2019, a value of $80.00, for an adjusted DCMT 

of $12.29 (Table 2). These adjusted DCMT valu es for the pre -pandemic medical campaigns 

replaced the respective original DCMT values in Figure 2. Although the QMTD trend remained 

unchanged, the adjusted DCMT trend exhibits an almost exponential decay. Given the now 

decreasing trend in adjusted DCMT, t he data visualized in Figure 2 meets financial consideration 

3. 

Despite the varying DCMT trends in Figures 1 and 2, in both cases the data support one of the 

financial conditions. Additionally, regardless of the difference in DCMT and adjusted DCMT of the 

November 2018 and May 2019 medical campaigns, the latter three medical campaigns 

demonstrate financial efficiency. On average the QMTD per medical campaign increased by 85, 

while maintaining a relatively similar DCMT across the three medical campaigns (Fi gure 3). 

Furthermore, the DCMT of July 2020 and January 2022 vary the least from $7.75 and $7.77; yet 

the total monetary value and QMTD increase drastically (Table 2). Conclusively, Project Embrace 

improved financial efficiency throughout the execution of its medical campaigns and is thus 

financially successful. 

> Figure 1: Comparison of DCMT and Total Medical Technologies Donated Over Time

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 264 

> Figure 2: Comparison of Adjusted DCMT and Total Medical Technologies Donated Over Time

Table 2: DCMT and Adjusted DCMT Across Medical Campaigns 

Medical 

Campaign 

Total Medical 

Campaign 

Cost  DCMT 

Adjusted 

Total Medical 

Campaign 

Cost  Adjusted DCMT 

November 2018*  $150.00  $7.50  $310.00  $15.50 

May 2019*  $903.27  $11.27  $983.37  $12.29 

July 2020  $852.10  $7.75  N/A  N/A 

December 2020  $2,374.86  $8.25  N/A  N/A 

January 2022  $2,657.31  $7.77  N/A  N/A 

> *Pre -COVID -19 pandemic medical campaign

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 265 

> Figure 3: Total Medical Technologies Donated versus Medical Campaigns

Services Rendered Evaluation 

In order for Project Embrace to truly be considered successful, the organization must not only be 

financially efficient, but must also demonstrate the ability to adequately address the needs of the 

target population. This can only be accomplished through evaluating th e success of the services 

rendered by Project Embrace. As previously mentioned, the supply must last between 16 to 24 

weeks to adequately meet the demand of the Navajo community. 

As shown in Table 3, the estimated time to for CPs to distribute the medical technologies provided 

was collected from each medical campaign’s field notes. The November 2018 medical campaign 

is neglected as its purpose was to provide a sample set, and not to adequately meet the needs 

of the Navajo community. The May 2019 medical ca mpaign exceeded the 24 -week threshold, 

meaning the CP was overwhelmed with the QMTD and Project Embrace did not adequately meet 

the demand of the community. Similarly, the following three campaigns (July 2020, December 

2020, January 2022) did not adequatel y meet the demand present, as the estimated distribution 

times all fell below the 16 -week minimum. Thus, Project Embrace was not successful in its 

services rendered as it failed to meet the demand of the community in all medical campaigns 

evaluated. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 266 

Table 3: QMTD vs Estimated Distribution Times 

Medical Campaign 

Quantity of 

Medical 

Technologies 

Estimated 

Community 

Partner 

Distribution Time 

November 2018*  20  N/A** 

May 2019*  80  32 weeks 

July 2020  110  12 weeks 

December 2020  288  6 weeks 

January 2022  342  ≤ 1 week 

> *Pre -COVID -19 pandemic medical campaign
> **Sample set

Discussion 

Supply and Triage 

Outlined in the Methods portion of this paper was two conditions that needed to have been met 

in order for Project Embrace’s initiatives to the Navajo community to have been considered 

successful. The first being financial efficiency which Project Embrace met under condition 3, and 

the second being an evaluation on services rendered. Here, Project Embrace needed to have 

provided an adequate amount of medical technologies that should have been distributed to 

patients within an appropriate timeframe of 16 to 24 weeks, which Project Embrace was not able 

to do. Interestingly, this comes not as a lack of effort from Project Embrace but rather because 

the healthcare needs of the Navajo community increased substantially. With an average increase 

of 85 medical techn ologies donated per medical campaign, the amount of medical resources 

supplied was not sufficient across all three pandemic campaigns (Figure 3 and Table 3). 

However, per SDG Target 3.8, it is arguable that Project Embrace made strides towards 

increasing greater access to quality healthcare services through the provision of medical 

technology that was not made available otherwise. Nonetheless, even if Project Embrace was 

able to provide a satisfactory supply of medical technologies to the Navajo populatio n, the 

increase in demand for medical technology is symptomatic of greater indicators in inaccessibility 

in healthcare that Project Embrace was not addressing. Certainly, the COVID -19 pandemic 

affected many throughout the greater United States but took an especially large toll on isolated, 

low -resource communities like the Navajo tribe. As the pandemic continued to progress 

throughout the community, extenuating protocols and procedures were deployed by the Navajo, 

local, and federal government to prioritize COVID -19 control, often at the expense of existing and 

essential healthcare services. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 267 

As spending in healthcare increased and funding tightened, the expectation to triage in healthcare 

settings became certain. Throughout the United States, the need to prioritize COVID -19 protocols 

was apparent; from increasing work hours of healthcare professionals, to allocating more ICU 

beds to accommodate for more cases, to prioritize spending on personal protective equipment, 

to expediting vaccine rollout, etc. (Tan gcharoensathien et al., 2021). The consequence of needing 

to triage an overwhelmed system meant that certain programs and care had to be cutback. While 

more urbanized settings were able to handle these stresses, rural settings like the Navajo 

Reservation f aced greater obstacles in triage, and as a result had to take more extreme measures 

to preserve what little care was being offered. More often than not, the first expense to be cut in 

Navajo settings was basic medical technologies in favor necessary COVID -19 resources. 

Understanding this, it is observed the that greater need for medical technology, that is no longer 

being made available in clinical settings, increases by patient demand. 

Violence Against Indigenous Women 

In addition to the strain faced by healthcare settings throughout the Navajo Reservation, certain 

parameters placed by local authorities further perpetuated and enabled harm to the greater 

community. Combined with a general increase in unemployment, the go vernment of the Navajo 

Nation instituted a curfew throughout the course of the pandemic in an attempt to limit excess 

social exposure (Touchin and Curley, 2020). Because more denizens of the Navajo Reservation 

were staying at home more often and for prolon ged amounts of time, the increase of harmful 

amounts of alcohol consumption escalated resulting in unintended harms against indigenous 

women. 

During its last medical campaign, Project Embrace worked a local domestic violence shelter, Amá 

Dóó Áłchíní Bígh an, Inc (ADABI), where staff of the shelter shared the alarming fact that there 

has been a substantial spike in domestic violence (DV) throughout the greater reservation. Local 

experts attribute this to the rampant increase in alcohol consumption, and fami lies being forced 

to stay together inside for longer. The increase in communal isolation, and alcoholism predictably 

has led to poorer mental health outcomes and, conversely, an increase in DV. This was further 

reinforced by ADABI through its reporting of increased clientele of indigenous women throughout 

the pandemic. Another important factor that plays into an increase in DV is the increased abuse 

of harmful substances. According to the staff at ADABI, prior to the pandemic, one of the more 

prevalent subs tances abused on the reservation was marijuana; however, as the pandemic 

reeked more havoc on the community, an observed increase of cocaine and methamphetamines 

abuse became apparent. Unfortunately, these drugs acted as an aggravating factor in the 

egregi ous nature of violence that was being reported to local community centers like ADABI. 

Most cases of violence were not, and have not, been reported to local authorities as the 

municipalities of the Navajo community have taken a hit in funding. That couple d with a general 

distrust in how local law enforcement has responded to domestic disturbances, has led to many 

women on the reservation to not seek services. ADABI shared with Project Embrace that there 

has been an unsettling increase in the rate of missin g indigenous women as the pandemic and 

curfew have wagered on. For those that do report, justice is rarely found as the Navajo court Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 268 

system has been shut down due to concerns surrounding COVID -19 (Navajo Courts, 2022). 

Systemic failures that do not allow survivors of DV to come forward enable the cycle of violence 

against women on the reservation. This all comes under the continued consequences of the 

pandemic. 

Conclusively, while Project Embrace was able to provide medical technologies to community 

orga nizations like ADABI, the needs of the Navajo community extended far past any materials -

based problems. An increase in supply came as the result to assist battered women and children 

in situations that otherwise were enabled and worsened by the COVID -19 pa ndemic. 

Acknowledging this, it is clear that the services rendered by Project Embrace would not have been 

able to sufficiently address the more urgent needs of the community even if there was a greater 

supply of medical technologies to donate. Donations do not stop violence against women. In order 

to truly “ensure healthy lives and promote well -being for all at all ages”, direct acts of violence 

must be addressed (SDG 3). 

Limitations 

Due to collaborative medical campaigns with the Moran Eye Center, COVID -19 safety concerns, 

and funding constraints Project Embrace was limited in the geographical scope of the medical 

campaigns. Although the focus of the medical campaigns excluded Coconino County, AZ and 

San Juan County, NM, the reduced geographic scale of t he medical campaigns allowed Project 

Embrace to further develop relationships in the other four counties within the Navajo Reservation. 

The scale of the medical campaigns steadily increased throughout the four years of Project 

Embrace’s support to the Navajo community. It is clear that the societal and economic implications 

of COVID -19 increased the need for, and consequently the distribut ed volume of necessary 

medical technologies. However, this increase is also a result of the Project Embrace team’s 

maturation and growth throughout years of working with the Navajo community. The increased 

movement of medical technology required innovation and a better understanding of the Navajo 

community, which would not have been possible without the team’s continual growth. 

Within the timeframe of this evaluation, Project Embrace has donated a substantial quantity of 

menstrual products to various CPs throughout the Navajo community. However, Project Embrace 

does not currently have a system to attribute monetary value to menstrual products. Thus, 

menstrual products are neglected in the calculation of both the total value of medical technologies 

and the DCMT. This is due to the immense diversity in products, retail size units, and the interests 

of the CPs. Project Embrace hopes to implement a system for standardization of menstrual 

products to allow for more accurate reporting of the value of medical tech nologies and the DCMT. 

While there is a substantial amount of data published in regards to the Navajo community, 

the vulnerable nature of the Navajo community reduces the prevalence of public data. 

Furthermore, due to the constraints of the Navajo Reser vation’s infrastructure and rural nature, 

truly representative data is extremely limited. Given the constraints of the pandemic, these issues 

only furthered incomplete data collection and dissemination. Consequently, the COVID -19 data Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 269 

reported by organiza tions like the Navajo Department of Health does not accurately convey the 

severity of the pandemic within this community. 

Recommendations 

The Sustainable Development Goals were adopted as a greater call to action for the global 

community. To accomplish these goals requires collaboration and partnership across the private, 

public, and nonprofit sectors, especially in the case extenuating global circumstances. While 

significant strides were made towards these greater global agendas, the COVID -19 pandemic 

regressed the progress of these goals in ways the world is still trying to understand. Indeed, it is 

essential for all proponents of the SDGs to evaluate their actions during the pandemic to 

understand the sustainability of their impact, especial ly if said proponents are working with 

vulnerable communities like the Navajo tribe. 

While it is important for nonprofits such as Project Embrace to evaluate its overall capacity to 

serve during an otherwise difficult time, a more critical understanding o f the community’s needs 

and obstacles surfaced during the pandemic is essential to comprehend the totality of need of the 

community in question. Efficiency in programming alone is not sufficient in addressing the 

exigences produced by the pandemic. It is r ecommended that nonprofits continue to operate 

effective programs that assist underserved populations. Likewise, it is cautioned for these same 

nonprofits to maintain a deeper comprehension of their target communities as the pandemic has 

undeniably shifted the needs of vulnerable populations. The need for nonprofits to evolve and 

remain dynamic towards those they serve provide a new perspective on the advancement of the 

SDGs in context of the pandemic. In addition, it is recommended that nonprofits should h old 

themselves accountable to the dissemination of accurate information, creation of solutions, and 

responsible advocacy of communities in need. It is imperative to understand the greater 

implications of the pandemic in the context of nonprofits’ respectiv e work. 

Reference List 

Andraska, E.A., Alabi, O., Dorsey, C., Erben, Y., Velazquez, G., Franco -Mesa, C. and Sachdev, 

U. (2021).  Health care disparities during the COVID -19 pandemic. Seminars in Vascular 

Surgery , [online] 34(3), pp.82 –88. Available at: 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8349792/ [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

Brown, R. (2020). Increasing Access to Safe Water on the Navajo Nation during the COVID -19 

Pandemic | December 2020 Blogs . [online] Indian Health Service. Available at: 

https ://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/ihs -blog/december2020/increasing -access -to -safe -water -

on -the -navajo -nation -during -the -covid -19 -pandemic/ [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022). COVID Data Tracker . [online] Centers for 

Disease Control and Prevention. Available at: https://covid.cdc.gov/covid -data -

tracker/#datatracker -home [Accessed 23 Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 270 

County Health Rankings. (2020a). County Health Rankings: Apache, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthrankings .org/app/arizona/2019/rankings/apache/county/outcom 

es/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2020b). County Health Rankings: McKinley, New Mexico . [online] 

Available at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/new -

mexico/201 9/rankings/mckinley/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 

2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2020c). County Health Rankings: Navajo, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/arizona/2019/rankings/navajo/county/o utcome 

s/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2020d). County Health Rankings: San Juan, Utah . [online] Available 

at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/utah/2019/rankings/san -

juan/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2021a). County Health Rankings: Apache, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthranki ngs.org/app/arizona/2020/rankings/apache/county/outcom 

es/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2021b). County Health Rankings: McKinley, New Mexico . [online] 

Available at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/new -

mexico /2020/rankings/mckinley/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 

2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2021c). County Health Rankings: Navajo, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/arizona/2020/rankings/navajo/cou nty/outcome 

s/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2021d). County Health Rankings: San Juan, Utah . [online] Available 

at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/utah/2020/rankings/san -

juan/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2022a). County Health Rankings: Apache, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/arizona/2021/rankings/apache/county/outcom 

es/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 271 

County Health Rankings. (2022b). County Health Rankings: McKinley, New Mexico . [online] 

Available at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/new -

mexico/2021/rankings/mckinley/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 

2022]. 

County Health Ra nkings. (2022c). County Health Rankings: Navajo, Arizona . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/arizona/2021/rankings/navajo/county/outcome 

s/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

County Health Rankings. (2022d). County Hea lth Rankings: San Juan, Utah . [online] Available 

at: https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/app/utah/2021/rankings/san -

juan/county/outcomes/overall/snapshot [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. (2017). Navajo Nation Reservation . [online] Available at: 

https://www.minneapolisfed.org/indiancountry/resources/reservation -profiles/navajo -

nation -reservation [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

Larson, R. (2020). Water law and the response to COVID -19. Water International , 45(7 -8), 

pp.716 –721. 

McMaughan, D.J., Oloruntoba, O. and Smith, M.L. (2020). Socioeconomic Status and Access to 

Healthcare: Interrelated Drivers for Healthy Aging. Frontiers in Public Health , [online] 

8(231). Available at: https://dx.doi.org/10.3389%2Ffpubh.2020.00231. 

Navaj o Courts. (2022). Navajo Courts: Announcements . [online] Available at: 

http://www.courts.navajo -nsn.gov/ [Accessed 27 Mar. 2022]. 

Navajo Department of Health. (2022). COVID -19 . [online] Available at: https://www.ndoh.navajo -

nsn.gov/COVID -19 [Accessed 23 Mar. 2022]. 

Navajo Nation Primary Care Area: 2020 Statistical Profile. (2021). [online] Arizona Department 

of Health Services: Arizona Department of Health Services, p.1. Available at: 

https://www.azdhs.gov/documents/prevention/health -systems -development/data -reports -

maps/primary -care/navajo/8.pdf [Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

NavajoStrong (2022). About NavajoStro ng . [online] NavajoStrong. Available at: 

https://www.navajostrong.org/ [Accessed 12 Mar. 2022]. 

NICOA (2019). Diabetes Still Highest Among AI/AN . [online] National Indian Council on Aging, 

Inc. Available at: https://www.nicoa.org/diabetes -still -highest -among -ai -an/ [Accessed 11 

Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 272 

Noble, S. (2017). IHS Navajo Area Launches Prediabetes Awareness Campaign | May 2017 

Blogs . [online] Indian Health Services. Available at: https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/ihs -

blog/may2017/ihs -navajo -area -launches -pre diabetes -awareness -

campaign/#:~:text=As%20a%20population%2C%20American%20Indians [Accessed 11 

Mar. 2022]. 

Orgera, K., Garfield, R. and Rudowitz, R. (2021). Tracking Social Determinants of Health During 

the COVID -19 Pandemic . [online] KFF. Available at: https://www.kff.org/coronavirus -

covid -19/issue -brief/tracking -social -determinants -of -health -during -the -covid -19 -

pandemic/ [Accessed 11 Mar. 2022]. 

Project Embrace (2022). Overview of Project Embrace . [online] Project Embrace. Available at: 

https://www.projectembrace.org/ [Accessed 1 Apr. 2022]. 

Purvis Lively, C. (2021) “ COVID -19 in the Navajo Nation Without Access to Running Water : 

The lasting effects of Settler Colonialism”, Voices in Bioethics , 7. doi: 

10.7916/vib.v7i.7889. 

Rural He alth Information Hub. (2011). Needs Related to Transportation in Rural Areas – RHIhub 

Toolkit . [online] Available at: 

https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/transportation/1/needs -in -rural [Accessed 7 Mar. 

2022]. 

Sequist, T. (2020). The Disproportion ate Impact of Covid -19 on Communities of Color . [online] 

NEJM Catalyst. Available at: https://catalyst.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/CAT.20.0370 

[Accessed 7 Mar. 2022]. 

Shah, A., Seervai, S., Paxton, I., Barlow, A. and Shah, T. (2020). The Challenge of COVI D-19 

and American Indian Health . [online] The Commonwealth Fund. Available at: 

https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2020/challenge -covid -19 -and -american -indian -

health [Accessed 10 Mar. 2022]. 

Tajmajer, J. (2021). The United States Is Still Wronging It s Indigenous Communities . [online] 

Brown Political Review. Available at: https://brownpoliticalreview.org/2021/11/the -united -

states -is -still -wronging -its -indigenous -communities/ [Accessed 10 Mar. 2022]. 

Tangcharoensathien, V., Bassett, M., Meng, Q. and Mills, A. (2021). Are overwhelmed health 

systems an inevitable consequence of covid -19? Experiences from China, Thailand, and 

New York State. BMJ , 372(83). 

The World Bank (2021). Indigenous Peoples . [online] The World Bank. Available at: 

https://www.wo rldbank.org/en/topic/indigenouspeoples#1 [Accessed 10 Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 273 

Touchin, J. and Curley, C. (2020). Navajo Nation to implement more public health measures on 

Monday as health experts recommend online learning and advise against reopening 

casinos . [onl ine] Office of the President and Vice President of the Navajo Nation. 

Available at: https://www.opvp.navajo -

nsn.gov/Portals/0/FILES/PRESS%20RELEASES/2020/Nov/FOR%20IMMEDIATE%20R 

ELEASE%20 -

%20Navajo%20Nation%20to%20implement%20more%20public%20health%20me asure 

s%20on%20Monday%20as%20health%20experts%20recommend%20online%20learnin 

g%20and%20advise%20against%20reopening%20casinos_HO29_HO30.pdf [Accessed 

9 Mar. 2022]. 

United Nations (2021). Goal 3 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs . [online] 

sdgs.un.org. Available at: https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal3 [Accessed 6 Mar. 2022]. 

World Health Organisation (2022). Social Determinants of Health . [online] World Health 

Organisation. Available at: https://www.who.int/health -topics/social -det erminants -of -

health#tab=tab_1. 

Zhenmin, L. (2021). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2021 . [online] United Nations ,

United Nations, p.5. Available at: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2021/The -

Sustainable -Development -Goals -Report -2021.pdf [Acc essed 10 Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 274 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 275 

# For Objective 3: Good Health and Well -Being 

# Eye Health Management 

Chunhong Yan (He University, China) 

Abstract 

The "Specially Invited Major Report on Global Eye Health" published by The Lancet Global Health 

pointed out that 1.1 billion people have untreated vision impairment by 2020, this number will be 

increased to 1.8 billion in 2050. The incidence of vision abno rmalities in China is rapidly 

expanding and tends to be younger. Vision problems seriously affect the healthy growth of 

children and adolescents, which have become a public health issue of increasing concern. 

According to the results of a joint survey cond ucted by the Ministry of Education and the Ministry 

of Health, the incidence of myopia in China exceeds 60%, ranking first in the world, which is a 

threat to the health of children and adolescents as well as the sustainability of social -economic 

developmen t. Refractive error is the main cause of abnormal vision development in preschool 

children, it is also the most common cause of amblyopia and strabismus in children. This study 

will explore an efficient and convenient method of ophthalmology public health screening through 

cross -sectional screening of vision and refractive status for children and adolescents in China. 

For Kaleidos, a portable optometry device, the refractive status of adolescents and children will 

be tested, and the influencing factors by p arents will be surveyed, obtain the original test data. 

To compare with the diagnosis of the medical optometrist and the screening results (gold 

standard), analyze the reliability and validity of the Kaleidos screening results to determine 

whether Kaleidos can correctly classify the tested population into the corresponding myopia 

category, the unconditional Logistic regression model is used to conduct a binary multi -factor 

analysis of related influencing factors after stepwise regression, the main influenci ng factors were 

screened out, and the correlation with the prevalence was analyzed. Accurate vision test data 

will help the World Health Organization and domestic health agencies to allocate the limited 

health resources when formulating effectively and rea sonably eye health hygiene strategies. The 

research results can also be used as the basis for the evaluation of Kaleidos screening results, 

which can provide information on the reliability and validity of the optometry equipment for the 

field of eye health and blindness prevention, and provide a new screening method for eye health 

management in China. If the problem of preventable early vision loss in adolescents is solved, it 

will play an important role in realizing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs2 03) of China 

and the United Nations as a whole. 

Keywords: Opthalmic public health, refractive errors, screening modalities, screening tools Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 276 

Introduction 

Myopia Screening Models Globally 

Globally, more than 253 million people are visually impaired ，among them, 217 million have 

moderate to severe vision impairment and 36 million are blind. Up to 81% of people who are blind 

or have moderate or severe vision impairment are aged 50 years and above [1] . More than 90% 

of the world's visually impa ired people live in low - and middle -income countries. Except in the 

most developed countries, cataract remains the leading cause of blindness [2] . The prevalence of 

eye disease has increased steadily from 1990 to 2015, a trend which will continue at least u ntil 

2020. Vision loss is recognized as the third -most common impairment worldwide. The 

productivity loss due to visual impairment and the direct expense on education and recovery has 

been a huge burden on families, communities and the society. It has been estimated the global 

economic productivity loss for vision impairment would be reached to $110 billion in 2020 without 

any intervention. 

In 1999, WHO and IAPB initiated Vision 2020 —Right to Sight, aimed at alleviating avoidable 

blindness by 2020, in whi ch many NGOs, professional institutions and eye care organizations 

have participated. The mission of Vision 2020 is to eliminate the key causes of avoidable 

blindness by promoting the design, development and implementation of sustainable national -level 

eye care programs by the end of 2020. The three core strategies of Vision 2020 are disease 

control in combination with primary health care; human resources development; and deployment 

of infrastructure and appropriate technology. The inclusion of equitable, sustainable and 

comprehensive models of eye care within national health care systems is considered as the best 

way to realize the goals of Vision 2020. 

When we can prevent a disease, we should use effective methods to prevent it, which is the 

primary pre vention of the disease. When a disease is not yet preventable, we should detect it and 

treat it early, which is the main content of secondary prevention. Disease screening refers to the 

systematic application of some tests, examinations, or other measures in a group of people to 

identify some asymptomatic, undetected patients who may have a certain disease, suspicious 

people, or people with a high risk of developing such a disease, which is an important method to 

detect. The main goals of epidemiological re search are controlling the occurrence and prevalence 

of disease and reducing disability and death, and disease screening is also intended to achieve 

such goals. Performing disease screening is part of epidemiological studies of diseases and can 

determine t he occurrence or natural course of some diseases. Disease screening allows early 

detection of patients for early diagnosis and early treatment. Through disease screening, it is 

possible to identify people at high risk of suffering from certain diseases and take measures to 

prevent diseases from an etiological point of view as early as possible. After early detection of the 

disease, follow -ups can be conducted to understand the natural history of the disease in the 

population or to take treatment measures an d observe the efficacy. 

Refractive error is an important visual problem in children, and there is a necessity and importance 

for screening. Many developed countries have established routine visual acuity and refractive Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 277 

error screening policies, both as part of the government hea lth service system and as a separate 

operation for commercial purposes. In Sweden, vision screening is mandatory for preschool 

children and is repeated at ages 7 and 10 years. The European Association for Myopia Research 

has been established. It includes a working network that aims to combine the resources and 

insights of dozens of experts from seven European countries to develop regulations and policies 

that can be used to control the increasing development of myopia in children [1] . The American 

Associatio n for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus (AAPOS) advocates screening children 

for visual impairment and refractive error. They encourage trained volunteers and optometrists to 

perform screenings and recommend pediatric ophthalmology professionals to ma nage pediatric 

eye diseases. At the 2005 AAPOS Annual Meeting, a workshop explored the topic of working 

intensely to make screenings for childhood vision and refractive errors mandatory in every state. 

In the United States, a system of childhood eye screen ing has been established, with specific 

programs and measures varying by state, such as in Ohio, where children receive biennial eye 

screenings in kindergarten. In the UK, although in those areas where screening for childhood eye 

disease is important, ever y student has the opportunity to receive a vision screening at school, 

mass screening of vision and refraction has been declining in some regions. Some scholars are 

skeptical about the effectiveness of screening, and one study analyzed the effect of screen ing 

after it was discontinued and found that most of the vision loss found with screening was mild. 

Many children with eye disease had already received treatments when they were screened [2] .

Although vision screening programs have been introduced to dev eloping countries, most children 

still do not receive eye examinations. They usually have little access to health services, especially 

in rural areas. School vision screening is becoming more common in India, especially in urban 

areas [3] . Despite the high prevalence of myopia, many Southeast Asian countries other than India 

have not established appropriate screening measures for refractive error and vision in children. 

Although the visual acuity scale method is widely used as a visual acuity screening tool , the 

development of screening thresholds has not been fully standardized. In China, naked distance 

visual acuity has long been used as a monitoring indicator. However, there are certain defects in 

naked distance visual acuity as a monitoring indicator bec ause it is not only affected by eye 

refraction but also by eye nerve adjustment ability and is related to individual mental and 

psychological factors. Therefore, the weak distance vision is often not equivalent to myopic 

refraction, and the severity of vis ual refraction cannot be estimated based on nor can it be based 

on the degree of vision loss. There is a large body of research literature on low visual acuity in 

primary and secondary school students in China, but there is little conferment in survey meth ods. 

Moreover, the survey methods are not uniform, and the results are poorly comparable [4 -5] .

Currently, there is no standardized screening system for childhood eye diseases in China. In the 

southern urban areas of China, 9.6% of children aged 5 -15 years old have correctable visual 

acuity loss, 95% of which is due to uncorrected refractive errors. Although ciliary muscle paralysis 

detection shadowing is the basis for clinical diagnosis of refractive error and prescription of wear 

lenses, it is a time -cons uming and interventional examination method that is not suitable for mass 

level screening [6] . Computerized automated optometry is small, light, portable, and quick to 

operate, which is suitable for screening at the large -scale population level. Screening children's 

refractive errors with this computerized automated optometry aligns with the screening principles 

of simplicity, speed, and ease of acceptance. Domestic and foreign scholars have also studied Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 278 

the evaluation of the accuracy of computerized autom ated optometry. Pesudovs et al. compared 

the consistency of two automated optometry devices, NIDEKARF.700A and TOPCONKR -8000, 

with subjective optometry and found that the difference was not statistically significant. Allen et al. 

applied NIDEKARF.600A to c ompare the repeatability of the refractive state of healthy adult eyes 

with subjective optometry and found that the NIDEKAR series of optometers had good 

repeatability and high consistency with subjective optometry [7]. Cordonmer et al. screened 897 

childr en for high myopia using a Retinomax handheld automated optometer with a non -ciliary 

muscle paralysis method. The results showed that using +1.5 D as the positive diagnostic 

threshold yielded good specificity (94.6%), sensitivity (70.2%), and positive pred ictive value 

(78.6%) [8] . They concluded that non -ciliary muscle paralysis automated optometry for refraction 

is an effective and feasible method for screening children for hyperopia, provided that the positive 

threshold for screening is adjusted according ly. Several studies have reported that students with 

abnormal visual acuity are about twice as likely to be recommended for further testing with glasses 

compared to those without glasses. This result further suggests that students who wear glasses 

should a lso participate in vision screening at school [9] . The key point of successful correction of 

childhood eye disease is early detection and early treatment to avoid missing the critical period 

of visual development. Therefore, screening is undoubtedly an ess ential tool for the early 

detection of refractive errors [10] . Nicola et al. found that if screening is for detection and treatment 

of amblyopia, the target population should focus on preschool children; if screening is for detection 

and correction of refr active errors, a more appropriate screening program is for optometrists to 

screen school -age children. Myopia is most likely to occur and develop during elementary school, 

especially at 8 to 12 years. Therefore, screening at this age is considered necessar y [11] .

Human Resources for Myopia Screening in Low Resource Settings 

Compared with health supervision, disease prevention and control, etc, there are large differences 

in the number, educational background and age of grassroots vision screening practitioners in 

rural China. The overall grass -roots vision screening team has the phenomenon of "two lows and 

one high", that is, low educational background, low professional title, high age, and lack of 

profession al talents. Personnel engaged in primary vision screening should not only possess 

certain professional abilities, but also have practical experience. Most of the staff engaged in 

vision screening at the grass -roots level are those who do not have clinical practice skills or whose 

qualifications do not meet the requirements of practice. 

Current Situation Regarding Myopia Screening in China 

According to statistics, the annual loss of GDP due to refractive errors in the world can reach 202 

billion US dollars [12] . The world still needs a large number of optometrists and optometry 

technicians to meet the untreated refractive problems worldwide. The prevention and control of 

abnormal vision in children and adolescents has become a destiny issue related to natio nal 

rejuvenation and the future of the country, a crisis issue related to national physical health, and a 

public issue that the people expect. In August 2018, the Ministry of Education and other eight 

departments jointly researched and formulated the imple mentation plan for the comprehensive 

prevention and control of children's myopia, and the "Comprehensive Prevention and Control of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 279 

Myopia in Children and Adolescents Implementation Plan" was issued. Among the goals of the 

plan, our country is required to control the myopia rate of 6 -year -old children to about 3% by 2030, 

and requires medical and health institutions to establish children's vision health care files, strictly 

implement the national basic health service requirements for eye care and vision exa minations 

for children aged 0 -6, realize early monitoring, early detection, and early treatment, and achieve 

annual coverage of eye care and vision examinations rate exceeds 90% for children aged 0 -6 in 

our country by 2019 [13] . The United States Preventiv e Services Task Force (USPSTF) also 

requires all children to undergo at least one vision screening between the ages of 3 and 5 [14]. 

Traditionally, the commonly used refraction methods in China are retinoscopy after cycloplegia 

and automatic refractometers on desktop computers (such as Topcon, Nidek, etc.). In the process 

of pediatric ophthalmology examination, the cooperation of children is very important. Many 

clinical examinations often fail because children do not cooperate, which may delay the diagnosi s

and treatment of some children with amblyopia. Among the traditional methods of refraction 

examination, retinoscopy is time -consuming and requires high levels of cooperation for children 

and professional skills of examiners. It is difficult for those wit hout professional training to master 

in a short period of time. The Topcon computer refractometer also requires the good cooperation 

of children to obtain relatively stable and accurate results. In addition, the desktop refractor is 

large in size and diffi cult to transport. It requires a special examination room, which is inconvenient 

and not suitable for extensive, large -area refractive screening. An ideal screening model for 

children at high risk of amblyopia should be able to screen children who may have high risk factors 

for amblyopia from children with low vision through rapid testing, examination or other measures 

> [15]

. At present, various types of vision screeners are constantly on the rise. Because of their simple 

inspection methods, no need for mydr iasis, and high reliability of results, they have been widely 

used around the world [16 -18] ; The screening instrument can only analyze the refractive status of 

children, and the screening age group is not comprehensive. There are few studies on 

simultaneou s vision screening, pupil and interpupillary distance investigation, and gaze position 

status of children aged 0.6 -6; The Kaleidos used in this study can not only analyze the refractive 

status of children, but also has a quick and simple operation. The exa miner can master it without 

professional training. Because the instrument is far away from the child during the examination, 

and there are sounds and a circle of rotating bright spots, children are easy to cooperate with. In 

addition, it is easy to carry a nd reliable in inspection results. It is now widely used in children's 

vision screening and eye care. It can also simultaneously detect children's interpupillary distance, 

pupil size, gaze position and other parameters. Pupil size is closely related to vis ual quality, it 

determines the amount of external light entering the retina, can reduce the chromatic aberration 

caused by the cornea and lens, and can increase the depth of vision, etc. [19 -23] ; It has been found 

that pupil size in children with amblyopia is larger than that in normal non -amblyopic children [24 -

> 26]

. At present, the prevalence of refractive errors in children is high. The main way to correct 

myopia in our country is to wear frame glasses. When optometry and fitting frame glasses, the 

eye po sition plays a guiding role when the optometrist gives the prescription for optometry. The 

purpose of the measurement is to make the optical center distance of the lens consistent with the 

pupillary distance of both eyes, and to avoid the prism effect of t he lens. Therefore, the 

measurement of pupil, interpupillary distance, and eye position is also crucial in children's vision 

screening [27] .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 280 

Study Aims 

To discuss more efficient and convenient ophthalmic public health screening methods. Comparing 

the screening results of portable barrel optometry equipment (Kaleidos) with the diagnostic results 

of medical optometrists (Gold Standard), analyze the reliability and validity of the Kaleidos 

screening results to determine whether Kaleidos can correctly categorize into the corresponding 

myopia category. 

A total of 4 data collections were completed in this study. They were: 232 cases of data were 

collected in Zhangwu County, Fuxin City on April 26, 2019; 114 cases of data were collected in 

Xinm in City on May 16, 2019; 113 cases of data were collected in Shenyang He Eye Specialist 

Hospital from 29th July 2019 to August 13th 2019; 127 cases of data were collected in Zhuanghe 

City on November 8 2019, and total 529 cases were valid. 

Materials and M ethods 

Study Objectives 

The study subjects were students in grades 1 to 3 (aged 6 -10) who enrolled in the primary schools 

and were designated to participate in this study, excluding students in the other grades or students 

aged 6 -10 who did not obtain an informed consent. 

Methods and Analysis 

Screening Method Evaluation 

The eyes of the eligible subjects will be examined, followed by non -cycloplegic computerized 

optometry, non -cycloplegic autorefraction and lens insertion refraction, Kaleidos (Fig 4.1) 

refraction and retinoscopy optometry under the ciliary muscles paralyze d in chronological 

sequence. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 281 

Illustration of the Use of Kaleidos 

Kaleidos Being Used at Rural Community Setting 

In the project, retinoscopy optometry after cycloplegia (known as mydriasis optometry) was Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 282 

selected as the gold standard in the screening evaluation process, The gold standard optometry 

result was used as the only standard for refractive error results; an d the optometry results by 

Kaleidos (Fig 4.2) were compared with the gold standard results to analyze the validity and 

reliability of screening methods. 

1. Validity evaluation: indexes include sensitivity, specificity, Youden index (YI) and likelihood 

ratio (LR). 

Table 1. 1 Classification of Screening Results 

Methods  Gold Standard 

Patients  Non -patients 

Positive  True Positive （TP ） False Positive （FP ）

Negative  False Negative （FN ） True Negative （TN ）

Total  C1  C2 

(1) Sensitivity: known as TP rate, the percentage of patients with the disease and diagnosed as 

positive by the screening method, reflecting the ability of the screening method to find the patient. 

(2) Specificity: known as TN rate , the percentage of patients without disease and diagnosed as 

negative by the screening method, reflecting the ability of the screening method to identify non -

patients. 

(3) YI: screening method can discover the real patients and non -patients. 

(4) LR: comprehensive indicators of sensitivity and specificity, including positive LR and negative 

LR. 

2. Reliability evaluation : to evaluate the consistency of the results under different detection 

methods, the Kappa value was used as an index to evaluate the degree of consistency. %100 ySensitivit += FN TP TP %100 ySpecificit += TN FP TN ( )

# 1-ySpecificit ySensitivit YI +=ySpecificit -1ySensitivit 

# ==+ TN TP LR ySpecificit ySensitivit -1- == TP TN LR Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 283 

PA is the actual observed consistency rate, P E is the expected consistency rate, the consistency 

of the results checked by different methods is caused by chance. 

Consistency Analysis 

Using different examination methods to observe subjects requires evaluating the consistency of 

repeated tests, if the consistency is low, it indicates that the reliability of tested results is affected 

by the inconsistent of repeated test results; if the consistency is high, it indicates that the repeated 

test results a re reliable. 

In the actual test, it is difficult to avoid the inconsistency of results caused by repeated 

examination, Kappa is used to evaluate its consistency: 

Table 1.2 Consistency Evaluation by Kappa 

Method 1  Method 2  Total 

Level 1  Level 2  Level 3 

Level 1  a1  a2  a3  Na1 

Level 2  b1  b2  b3  Na2 

Level 3  c1  c2  c3  Na3 

Total  Nc1  Nc2  Nc3  N

In the formula, A is the actual value observed by different examination methods, a1, b2 and c3 in 

the table. 

PE is the expected consistency rate, the consistency rate of the two examination results by 

chance, referred to as the expected rate. 

In the formula, E is the expected value, taking a1 in the table as an example, its corresponding 

Ea1 is Na1*Nc1/N. PPP

> EEA

# -1-Kappa =PPP

> EEA

# K -1-appa =NA

# PA

# =NE

# PE

# =Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 284 

The Kappa value is between -1 and +1, Kappa=+1, indicating that the results of the two tests are 

completely consistent; Kappa= -1, indicati ng that the results of the two tests are completely 

inconsistent; Kappa=0, indicating that the results of the two observations are occurred by chance. 

U test for Kappa value : the Kappa value calculated according to the actual data is a sample 

statistic wi th sampling error. Whether the calculated Kappa value comes from the population with 

a total Kappa value of zero requires hypothesis testing to calculate the U value: 

In the formula, S K is the standard error of Kappa value, and the formula is: 

Method of Examination 

The examination methods used in the project include computerized optometry, lens insertion 

optometry, mydriatic refraction and Kaleidos refracti ve error detection. 

Kaleidos is a portable binocular refractometer and vision analyzer that can measure both eyes 

under real -life conditions. It combines high technology to fully detect refractive errors, eye 

deformities and eyesight defective by testing the target refraction in the range of -15D to +15D. 

There are no special requirements for the use of Kaleidos photorefractometer. Only need to put 

patients’ head on the top of tube of Kaleidos, look at the red light in the tube for 3 -5 seconds, save 

the da ta directly to the tablet or mobile phone, and a complete vision test report will be displayed, 

which can be shared with collaborators, colleagues and patients. 

After test by Kaleidos, an experienced ophthalmologist examined the conjunctiva, cornea, anter ior 

segment, iris, pupil morphology, intraocular pressure, and fundus conditions using a portable slit 

lamp and a direct ophthalmoscopy. 

Definition of Myopia 

The result of retinoscopy optometry after cycloplegia (gold standard): 

any eye with spherical equivalent (SE) power > -0.5D is classified as normal or hyperopic; 

any eye with SE power ≤ -0.5D & > -3.0D is classified as mild myopia; 

any eye with SE power ≤ -3.0D & > -6.0D is classified as moderate myopia; SK

# KU appa 

# =( )

# ( )

# NE

# PNNNNNPPS EEK -1- 3caca2  ++=Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 285 

any eye with SE power ≤ -6.0D is classified as high myopia. 

According to the classification standards of true and false myopia formulated by the Chinese 

Ophthalmological Society in 1986, the gold standard for pseudo -myopia is that the patient with 

far vision is lower than normal and near vision is normal. After usi ng atropine, myopia disappeared 

and the result showed normal or mild hyperopia as pseudo -myopia. The myopia diopter is not 

reduced or the degree of reduction is less than 0.5DS which is true myopia; myopia diopter was 

significantly reduced (>0.5DS), but th ose who did not return to normal were mixed myopia. 

Kaleidos test results for normal or hyperopia, mild myopia, moderate myopia, high myopia is the 

same as the gold standard results. 

Diagnosis of pseudomyopia by Kaleidos: Kaleidos can only detect the sph erical refractive 

information of the subjects, and has no function of detecting pseudomyopia without pupil dilation. 

Data Analysis 

Analysis of Gold Standard Alternative Methods 

The data analysis of this project needs to use the gold standard to classify the research subjects, 

dividing the population into patients and non -patients. The results could be divided into positive 

and negative, and the effect of screening was evaluated based on the above data. 

In the actual work of eye screening, subjects usual ly undergo computerized optometry or lens 

insertion optometry first. After the above test, the results show that for the patient with myopia, 

dilated pupil test is carried out after the consent of subjects with myopia. According to the previous 

data rules, more than 95% of the people who participated in dilated pupil tests were ametropia 

patients diagnosed by the gold standard. The number of non -patients who received the gold 

standard test was less than 5%, which resulted in the inability to obtain negative diagnostic data 

during the final evaluation of the screening, so it was impossible to evaluate most of the indicators 

of the authenticity of the screening results. 

Based on the above situation, in order to ensure the integrity of screening effect evaluat ion, 

attempted to explore alternative methods to the gold standard, conducted reasonable analysis on 

the alternative methods, and evaluated the consistency of the examination results between the 

alternative methods and the gold standard. The examination re sults of the screening method in 

this project are compared with the alternative method to obtain the most realistic evaluation 

results. 

The selection of alternative methods should be based on the principle that it does not excessively 

increase the difficu lty of actual screening or eye health examination, and computerized optometry 

and lens insertion optometry are preferred. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 286 

Data Analysis of Gold Standard Alternative Method 

During the analysis of the gold standard alternative method, we selected 150 subjects under their 

consent, collected each persons' data of computerized optometry, lens insertion optometry, and 

retinoscopy optometry under the ciliary muscles paralyzed. There are three optometry test results, 

excluding the incomplete data from the ab ove data, a total of 95 -98 cases used for analysis. 

Consistency Analysis of Test Results by Computerized Optometry and Gold Standard 

Referring to the definition of myopia, the test results by computerized optometry and gold standard 

were classified as no rmal, mild myopia, moderate myopia and high myopia. A total of 98 cases of 

valid data from the consistency analysis of computerized optometry and gold standard test results, 

the analysis was carried out using the method of rank data consistency analysis as follows: 

Table 1.3 Consistency Analysis of Test Results 

Computerized 

optometry 

Gold standard  Total 

Normal  Mild  Moderate  Severe 

Normal  1 0 0 0 1

Mild  4 78  0 0 82 

Moderate  0 4 9 0 13 

High  0 0 0 2 2

Total  5 82  9 2 98 

PA is 0.918, P E was 0.713, and the calculated Kappa value was 0.72. At this time, Kappa value 

was a sample statistic, and there was a sampling error. U test was needed, the statistic u was 

9.31, and gold standard test results U0.01 =2.58, P<0.01. It can be considered that the 

computerized optometry results were consistent with the gold standard test results, referred to 

the definition of Kappa value: 

0.0 -0.20 extremely low consistency (slight); 

0.21 -0.40 general consistency (fair); 

0.41 -0.60 moderate consistency; 

0.61 -0.80 high degree of consistency (substantial); 

0.81 -1 is almost perfect. 

In this case, the Kappa value was 0.72, and the 95% confidence interval (CI) was (0.56, 0.87), 

which could be considered highly consistent. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 287 

Consistency Analysis of the Test Results by Lens Insertion Optometry and Gold Standard 

A total of 95 cases with valid data were obtained from the test results of the lens insertion 

optometry and gold standard. The results of the consistency analysis according to the rank data 

were as fol lows: 

Table 1.4 Consistency Analysis of Test Results 

Insertion optometry  Mydriasis test  Tota l

Normal  Mild  Moderate  High 

Normal  0 0 0 0 0

Mild  4 75  0 0 79 

Moderate  0 6 8 0 14 

High  0 0 0 2 2

Total  4 81  8 2 95 

PA was 0.895, P E was 0.722, and Kappa value was 0.62. Then the U test was performed, and the 

calculated statistic u was 7.86, U0.01=2.58, P<0.01. It could be considered that there was 

consistency and high consistency between the insertion optometry and the mydriasis test, and 

the 95% CI was (0.47 , 0.78). 

Determination of Gold Standard Alternative Method 

According to consistency analysis of test results of the above computerized optometry, lens 

insertion optometry and the gold standard, the conclusions were all high con sistent. Therefore, 

computerized optometry and insertion optometry used as an alternative methods to the gold 

standard in this project. 

According to the conventional results of diopter detection, the accuracy of lens insertion optometry 

was higher than th at of computerized optometry, and the consistency of lens insertion optometry 

and gold standard detection was higher than that of computerized optometry and gold standard 

in this test. However, the results of this test showed the opposite result. The reaso n was that in 

the experiment of exploring alternative methods, computerized optometry was used for all 

subjects tested after mydriasis, the data of computerized optometry before mydriasis were more 

close to the results of mydriasis detection, the final res ult shown was that the consistency of the 

two was higher, and there was a possibility of bias. 

In the analysis of project, it was necessary to clarify which method to use for the detection of the 

subject after mydriasis. The gold standard alternative meth od needed to use the same method, 

so that the alternative method was more consistent and more qualified as an alternative method 

to the gold standard. At the same time, it was necessary to consider the actual situation of the 

project implementation. If the consistency of computerized optometry and lens insertion optometry 

was not much different from the gold standard test results, a more easier method should be 

selected as an alternative method. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 288 

Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) 

Drawing the ROC Curve 

In the process of drawing the ROC curve, 56 cases of valid data were used, and the result of the 

lens insertion refraction test was used as the standard for myopia. Non -myopia was defined as 0, 

and myopia was defined as 1. The value of the left and right eyes of the Kaleidos detection result, 

the data closest to the left side of the coordinate axis was used as variable data. Considering that 

the software for drawing the ROC curve does not recognize negative values, a value is added to 

all variable da ta to ensure that all variable data become positive values after conversion, and the 

conversion value was +4.5. Finally, when considering the best critical value, it needs to be 

converted again to get the real value. The ROC curve is as follows: 

Square Under the ROC Curve 

The square under the ROC curve was 0.930, and the standard error of the square was 0.036. 

The Kaleidos test results were significant for myopia (P=0.000<0.05), and the 95% CI of the curve 

> Variables: Kaleidos

Square 

Standar 

d error a Sig. b

95% CI 

Lower 

limit  Higher limit 

.930  .036  .000  .860  1.000   

> Variable: Statistics can be biased.
> a. nonparametric assumptions
> b. null hypothesis ：actual s quare = 0.5

ROC 

Sensitivity 

1-Specificity Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 289 

square was (0.86, 1.00), excluding 0.5 , the conclusion is consistent with the P value. 

Best Screening/Diagnostic Critical Value 

The ROC coordinates are as follows: 

## Coordinates of a curve 

## Test result variable:Kaleidos 

If Positive is less 

than or equal to a Sensitivity  1-Specificity 

-1.0000  .000  .000 

.1250  .021  .000 

.6250  .042  .000 

1.1250  .063  .000 

1.3750  .104  .000 

1.8750  .125  .000 

2.3750  .188  .000 

2.6250  .208  .000 

2.8750  .250  .000 

3.1250  .333  .000 

3.3750  .500  .000 

3.6250  .667  .000 

3.8750  .771  .000 

4.1250  .875  .250 

4.3750  .958  .500 

4.7500  .979  .625 

5.2500  1.000  .750 

5.6250  1.000  .875 

6.7500  1.000  1.000 

a. The minimum limit value is the minimum 

observed test value -1, and the maximum limit 

value is the maximum observed test value 

+1. All other limits are the average values of 

two adjacent observational tests. 

The Coordinate Information is Calculated by Y I: 

Test result variable:Kaleidos 

If positive is less than or equal to a Sensitivity  1-Specificity  YI 

-1 0 0 0

0.125  0.021  0 0.021 

0.625  0.042  0 0.042 

1.125  0.063  0 0.063 

1.375  0.104  0 0.104 

1.875  0.125  0 0.125 

2.375  0.188  0 0.188 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 290 

2.625  0.208  0 0.208 

2.875  0.25  0 0.25 

3.125  0.333  0 0.333 

3.375  0.5  0 0.5 

3.625  0.667  0 0.667 

3.875  0.771  0 0.771 

4.125  0.875  0.25  0.625 

4.375  0.958  0.5  0.458 

4.75  0.979  0.625  0.354 

5.25  1 0.75  0.25 

5.625  1 0.875  0.125 

6.75  1 1 0

It can be seen from the results that when the variable is 3.875, the YI is the largest, the 

corresponding sensitivity is 0.771, the specificity is 1, and the detection variable value of Kaleidos 

is 3.875. Considering that we converted the data before, the variable value at this time is -4.5, 

resulting in the actual best critical value of -0.625. The actual test result of Kaleidos is not a 

continuous variable. Based on the actual test result, the value -0.5, which is the closest value to 

-0.625, can be selec ted as the best critical value. The -0.5 here is consistent with the critical value 

of the golden standard for determining myopia ≤ -0.5D (≤ -0.5D is classified as myopia). 

Results 

total of 529 valid data were collected. Computerized optometry was selected as an alternative to 

the gold standard, and the Kaleidos test results were compared and analyzed by computerized 

optometry. The data are as follows: 

Table 4.5 Kaleidos Screening Method Data Collation 

Kaleidos  Computerized optometry  Total 

Myopia  Non -myopia 

Positive  260  112  372 

Negative  47  110  157 

Total  307  222  529 

Validity Evaluation 

Sensitivity %69 .84 %100 307 260 %100 ySensitivit ==+= FN TP TP Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 291 

Specificity 

YI 

LR 

Reliability Evaluation 

Kappa value 

According to the results of the gold standard alternative method analysis, computerized optometry 

as the gold standard, and combined all the data collected so far for comparative analysis. The 

valid data were as follows: 

Table 4.6 Computerized Optometry Test Result 

City  Computerized optometry test results 

Normal  Mild  Moderate  Severe  Total 

Zhangwu  106  84  7 1 198 

Xinmin  47  56  3 0 106 

Shenyang  3 90  14  3 110 

Zhuanghe  66  43  6 0 115 

Total  222  273  30  4 529 

The Kaleidos classification results were as follows ：

Table 4.7 Kaleidos Test Results 

City  Kaleidos test results 

Normal  Mild  Moderate  Severe  Total 

Zhangwu  64  129  5 0 198 

Xinmin  40  63  3 0 106 

Shenyang  3 83  21  3 110 

Zhuanghe  45  69  1 0 115 %55 .49 %100 222 110 %100 ySpecificit ==+= TN FP TN ( )

# 34 .01-%55 .49 %69 .84 1-ySpecificit ySensitivit =+=+=YI 67 .19.55% 4-1%69 .84 ySpecificit -1ySensitivit ====+ FP TP LR 31 .0%55 .49 %69 .48-1ySpecificit ySensitivit -1- ==== TN FN LR Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 292 

Total  152  344  30  3 529 

The Consistency Analysis Results were as Follows ：

Table 4.8 Consistency Analysis of the Test Results by Kaleidos and Computerized 

Optometry 

Kaleidos test results  Computerized optometry test results 

Normal  Mild  Moderate  Severe  Total 

Normal  110  38  4 0 152 

Mild  112  226  5 1 344 

Moderate  0 9 21  0 30 

Severe  0 0 0 3 3

Total  222  273  30  4 529 

The P A was 0.681 and the P E was 0.459, resulting in a calculated Kappa value of 0.41. The U test 

was performed on the Kappa value of the sample, and the calculated statistic u was 11.56, 

U0.01=2.58, P<0.01. It can be considered that the results of the insertion optometry and the 

res ults of the mydriasis test are consistent, and it is judged as moderate consistency, 95% CI was 

(0.34, 0.48). 

Data Collection Analysis 

The Kaleidos test results are used to analyze the detection of refractive errors in different regions. 

The data analysis is as follows: 

> Figure 1. 3 Detection of refractive errors in different regions

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 293 

The detection rates of refractive errors by region are as follows: 

Table 1.9 Detection Rates of Refractive Errors by Region 

City  Zhangwu  Xinmin  Shenyang  Zhuanghe 

Detection rates  67.7%  62.3%  97.3%  60.9% 

The detection rate of hyperopia by region is as follows: 

Table 1.10 Detection Rate of Hyperopia by Region 

City  Zhangwu  Xinmin  Shenyang  Zhuanghe 

Detection rates  12.1%  14.2%  2.7%  8.7% 

The detection rate of refractive error and hyperopia, except for the abnormal detection rate of 

Myopia Treatment Center of Shenyang He Eye Specialist Hospital, the detection rate in other 

areas is relatively stable: the detection rate of refractive error is about 65%, and the detection rate 

of hyperopia is about 10%. The reason for the abnormal detection ra te of Myopia Treatment 

Center of Shenyang He Eye Specialist Hospital is that most of the people who have a vision test 

detected by other ways, and there are different degrees of abnormal visual acuity, which has a 

selection bias. 

Discussion 

From the results of the detection rate of refractive errors and hyperopia, it can be seen that, except 

for the abnormal detection rate of Shenyang He Eye Specialist Hospital, the detection rates of 

other areas are relatively stable: the detection rates of refractive errors are all about 65%, the 

detection rates of hyperopia are about 10%. 

Like other countries, China is grappling with the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) lockdown 

and has prepared for work from home in every possible field. There is also no denying that our 

children will be staying at home for longer periods of time and that they will be taught their lessons 

in a virtual environment for a period of time in the future. A significant difficulty would be that 

children would be deprived of bo th appropriate and regular physical activities as well as the safe 

and productive classroom contact that is so critical to their physical and mental well -being. [28] In 

addition to the general implications on the health of the kid, it is crucial for eye ca re professionals 

to remember that children will be spending more time inside and participating in less outside 

activities, both of which are recognized risk factors for the beginning of myopia. Children will also 

spend an increasing amount of time with dig ital gadgets in the not too distant future. The influence 

of digital gadgets extends well beyond eye health, and it is now more vital than ever to raise public 

awareness of the potential harm that these devices might do to the developing visual apparatus 

of children and adolescents. There is a predicted increase in myopic refractive error, which will 

affect about 50 percent of the world's population by 2050. [29] If proper precautions are not taken 

during the home confinement period, the present lockdown ma y expedite this forecast even more. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 294 

The phrase quarantine myopia is beginning to make its way into debates and discussions in the 

field of optometry and vision care. There has been an increase in concern over limits on 

community eye health initiatives, as well as travel restrictions that make it more difficult to get eye 

care. However, now is a better time than ever to monitor children who are at risk for myopia as 

well as those who have already been diagnosed with myopia, particularly progressive myopia, 

and to take preventative measures. It is suggested by the outcomes of this present research that 

Kaleidos, because of its remote operating capability as well as its high sensitivity and specificity, 

might be utilized to monitor myopia in youngsters. Althou gh the ability to work remotely and 

hygienically is essential for monitoring myopia in the COVID -19 era, this proposed 

recommendation adheres to the fact that it is not only necessary but also beneficial to raise 

awareness among practitioners about the nee ds of myopic children, as well as the general public 

and all stakeholders [28] .

Summary of Implications for Further Work 

In summary, the prospects of using smart medical platforms for remote eye disease screening 

mode have been unanimously optimistic by researchers who believe that smart screening 

platforms can be competent for eye disease screening. Many researchers believe that this model 

will allow more people to enjoy safe, effective, convenient and inexpensive eye disease screening 

services for the general population and also can reduce the workload of medical workers and 

improve the quality and efficiency of their diagn osis and treatment. For medical institutions and 

medical systems, they can increase the scope of their service radiation and help medical 

resources go to the community to change the imbalance of medical resource distribution. The 

development of this techno logy is new and it is still being developed and improved. Although its 

model accuracy is very high, the stability still needs to be further tested in practice. However, in 

the face of the increasingly serious eye health problems and the foreseeable increas e number of 

patients with eye diseases worldwide. The medical and health system will inevitably be under 

greater pressure. The development and application of smart medicine will give us the new solution 

and its remarkable superiority has showed us that sma rt medical treatment will be the new 

direction of China's medical and health development. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, in present study, the refraction measured from Kaleidos a portable autorefractor 

was shown to have a strong ability to detect myopia compared to traditional Topcon autorefractor 

and cycloplegic refraction. The performance of Kaleidos in detecting individual refractive error 

was good, as expressed by ROC curves . These findings suggested that Kaleidos could be a very 

useful tool for large -scale population screening in Chinese population due to its portability and 

remote operational usability. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 295 

References 

Kvamstrom G, Jakobsson P, Lermerstrand G. Visual screening of Swedish children: Anophthal 

mological evaluation[J]. Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica , 2001, 79(3):240 -244. 

Powell C, Wedner S, Richardson S. Screening for correctable visual acuity deficits in school -

age children and adolescent s[J]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev , 2005(1):5020 -5023. 

Limburg H, Kansara H T, d'Souza S. Results of school eye screening of 5.4 million children in 

India - a five -year follow -up study[J]. Aeta Ophthalmologica Scandmavica , 2009, 

77(3):310 -314. 

汪芳润 . 视力标准 问题的讨论与建议叨 . 中国学校卫生 , 2000, 21(4):242 -243. 

Fangrun Wang. Discussion and suggestions on vision standards [J]. Chinese Journal of 

School Health , 2000, 21(4):242 -243. 

汪芳润 . 视力与屈光的关系 [J].  中国实用眼科杂志 , 2000, 18(10):579 -583 ．

Fangrun Wang. The relationship between v isual acuity and refraction [J]. Chinese 

Journal of Practical Ophthalmology , 2000, 18(10):579 -583. 

钱序 , 谭晖 , 元德云 . 上海市中小学生近视干预策略研究 (总报告 )[R].  上海市妇女儿童发展重点课题 

研究 :33 -34 ．

Xu Qian, Hui Tan, Deyun Yuan.  Research on myopia intervention strategies for primary 

and secondary school students in Shanghai (General Report) [R]. Research on Topic 

Projects of Women and Children's Development in Shanghai: 33 -34. 

Logan NS ，Gilmartin B ．School vision screening, ages 5 -16 years: the evidence -base for 

content,provision and efficacy[J]. Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics , 2004 ，

24(6):481 -492 ．

Cordormier M, Dramaix M. Screening for abnormal levels of hyperopia in children:a non -

cycloplegic method with a hand held refractor[J] ．Br J Ophthalmol , 2008, 82:1260 -1

264 ．

Hamilton J E. Vison anomai ies of school -childern[J]. Americall Journal of Optometry and 

Physiological Optica , 1974, 51(7):482 -486 ．

赵堪兴 . 早期发现与早期干预努力提高弱视的防治水平叨 [J].  中华眼科杂志 , 2002, 38(8):499 -

451 ．

Kanxing Zhao. Early detection and intervention to improve the prevention and treatment 

of amblyopia [J]. Chinese Journal of Ophthalmology , 2002, 38(8):499 -451. 

Dorothy S, E F. Prevalence ，incidence and progression of myopia of school children in Hong Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 296 

Kong[J] ．Investigative ophthalmology&visual science , 2004, 45(4):1071 -1075 ．

Luo X, Li B, Li T, et al.  Myopia induced by flickering light in guinea pig eyes is associated with 

increased rather than decreased dopamine release[J]. Mol Vis, 2017, 23:666 -679. 

Rosner M, Laor A, Be lkin M. Myopia and stature: findings in a population of 106, 926 males[J]. 

Eur J Ophthalmol , 2015, 5(1):1 -6. 

Kurtz D, Hyman L, Gwiazda J E, et al. Role of parental myopia in the progression of myopia and 

its interaction with treatment in COMET children [J]. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci , 2017, 

48(2):562 -570. 

Chen T C, Tsai T H, Shih Y F, et a1. Long -term evaluation of refractive status and optical 

components in eyes of children born prematurety[J]. Invest OphthalmoI Vis, Sci , 2010, 

51(12):6140 -6148 ．

Kurtz D, Hyman L, Gwiazda J E, et al. Role of parental myopia in the progression of myopia and 

its interaction with treatment in COMET children[J]. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci , 2007, 

48(2):562 -570. 

Pacella R, McLellan J, Grice K, et al.  Role of genetic fa ctors in the etiology of juvenile -onset 

myopia based on a longitudinal study of refractive error[J]. Optom Vis Sci , 1999, 

76(6):381 -386. 

周清怡 , 赵斐 , 周翔天 . 近视巩膜生物力学研究进展 [J].  科技导报 , 2018, 36(13):39 -43. 

Zhou QY, Zhao F, Zhou XT. Research progress in myopia scl era biomechanics [J]. 

Science Guide, 2018, 36(13):39 -43. 

Sandfeld L, Weihrauch H, Tubaek G. Analysis of the current preschool vision screening in 

Denmark[J]. Acta Ophthalmol , 2018. 

Tarczy -Hornoch K, Cotter S A, Borchert M, et al. Prevalence and causes of visual impairment in 

Asian and non -Hispanic white preschool children: Multi -ethnic Pediatric Eye Disease 

Study[J]. Ophthalmology , 2013, 120(6):1220 -1226. 

王慧娴 . 中国旅游政策的经济效应及空间分异研究 [D].  陕西师范大学 , 20 16. 

Huixian Wang. Research on the economic effects and spatial differentiation of China's 

tourism policy [D]. Shaanxi Normal University, 2016. 

刘益帆 , 贾智艳 , 刘平 . 青少年近视危险因素综述 [J].  国际眼科杂志 , 2016, 16(07):1276 -1278. 

Liu YF, Jia ZY, Liu P. A review of risk factors for myopia in adolescents [J]. International 

Journal of Ophthalmology , 2016, 16(07):1276 -1278. 

Ciuffreda K J, Lee M. Differential refractive susceptibility to sustained nearwork[J]. Ophthalmic 

Physiol Opt , 2002, 22(5):372 -379. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 297 

Wildsoet C, Wallman J. Choroidal and scleral mechanisms of compensation for spectacle 

lenses in chicks[J]. Vision Res , 1995, 35(9):1175 -1194. 

Lu F, Zhou X, Zhao H, et al. Axial myopia induced by a monocularly -deprived facemask in 

guinea pigs: A non -invasive and effective model[J]. Exp Eye Res, 2016, 82(4):628 -636 

Gwiazda J, Deng L, Manny R, et al. Seasonal variations in the progression of myop ia in children 

enrolled in the correction of myopia evaluation trial[J]. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci , 2014, 

55(2):752 -758. 

Fulk G W, Cyert L A, Parker D A. Seasonal variation in myopia progression and ocular 

elongation[J]. Optom Vis Sci , 2002, 79(1):46 -51. 

Wang G, Zhang Y, Zhao J, Zhang J, Jiang F. Mitigate the effects of home confinement on 

children during the COVID -19 outbreak. The Lancet [Internet]. Lancet Publishing Group ,

2020, 395:945 -7. 

Pellegrini M, Bernabei F, Scorcia V, Giannaccare G. May home confinement during the COVID -

19 outbreak worsen the global burden of myopia? Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and 

Experimental Ophthalmology 2020 258:9 [Internet]. Springer , 2020, 258:2069 -70. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 298 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 299 

# Inclusive Co -Curricular Educational Model 

# for Implementation of Sustainable Development 

# for Rural and Mountain Communities 

Baktybek Abdrisaev (Utah Valley University, Utah, United States), 

Rusty Butler (Russian Academy of Natural Sciences, United State s), 

Wendy Jyang (Utah China Friendship Improvement Sharing Hands Development 

and Cooperation, United States), and Teki Uday (AI for Rural, United States) 

Abstract 

Target 4.7 of the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development aims to ensure that 

all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable development, 

including through education for sustainable development. 

This paper dis cusses its implementation at Utah Valley University (UVU) through an inclusive co -

curricular student engaged learning (SEL) model, which provides an opportunity for students to 

advocate for sustainable mountain development (SMD) in Utah and elsewhere. SEL encourages 

students to solve real -world problems as a group, with a faculty member serving as a mentor. 

Utah International Mountain Forum UIMF), a coalition of student clubs at UVU, is an 

extracurricular part of the model: it involves students, especiall y nontraditional or adult learners, 

in SMD activities beyond a single semester. Adult students enhance or change their careers while 

taking care of families. To overcome adult students’ reluctance to engage in club activities, the 

model provides incentives , such as flexible activity schedules, integration of their experience into 

group efforts, and recognition at the United Nations level. Through the curricular programs, 

mentors build stronger ties with adult students and encourage them to join UIMF. 

Sin ce 2011, the model encourages students to contribute experiences, solicit funds, and gain 

recognition for SMD advocacy. Our assessment shows that students learn how to tie their own 

experiences to SMD, implement initiatives collaboratively, build partnersh ips on different levels, 

and then use accumulated knowledge for engagement in SMD activities beyond the semester. 

Keywords: mountain communities, adult students, student engaged learning 

Introduction 

Sustainable Mountain Development as Part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development 

On 25 September 2015, United Nations General Assembly adopted the 2030 Agenda for 

Sustainable Development (UN 2015), its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 300 

targets . The agenda represents the most comprehen sive roadmap for member states for 

eliminating poverty, reducing inequality, promoting gender equality and ensure protection of the 

environment, to name a few. 

Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) # 6 and SDG #15 contain three targets, which address the 

importance of worlds mountains for the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development (UN 2015): 

Target 6.6: “By 2030, protect and restore water related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, 

wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes” (UN 2015: 18/35); Target 15.1: “By 2030, ensure the 

conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland freshwater ecosystems and 

their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and drylands, in line with obligations 

under international agreements” (UN 201 5: 24/35); Target 15.4: “By 2030, ensure the 

conservation of mountain ecosystems, including their biodiversity, in order to enhance their 

capacity to provide benefits that are essential for sustainable development.” (UN 2015: 25/35) 

“Covering 27 per cent of the world’s surface, mountains are key ecosystems that provide humanity 

with essential goods and services such as water, food, biodiversity and energy. Mountains are 

home to about 1.1 billion people who are among the world’s poorest: half of rural moun tain 

dwellers face food insecurity (UNSG 2019:1/18). 

The importance of sustainable development in mountain regions for the first time was recognized 

during the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in 

1992. Chapter 1 3 of the Agenda 21, the plan for action endorsed at the UNCED was entitled 

“Managing Fragile Ecosystems: Sustainable Mountain Development (SMD).” (Price, Kohler, 

2013). 

As a next step in recognizing world mountains at the global level, the United Nation s declared 

2002 as the International Year of Mountains (IYM). The IYM under the motto “We are all mountain 

people” provided an opportunity to raise awareness across the world on the importance of 

mountain regions and challenges which they experience. As a result of the IYM, 78 countries 

established national committees or structures to promote SMD, special mountain laws were 

passed in several mountain countries. Eight major global meetings associated with the IYM were 

held to address the needs of mountain co mmunities, such as women, children, and indigenous 

people among others. (Price, 2004). 

As one of the outcomes of the IYM, the Mountain Partnership (MP) was established as “a vibrant 

voluntary alliance of governments and organizations committed to working together with the 

common goal of achieving sustainable mountain development around the w orld.“ (MP n.d. -a) The 

MP coordinates the SMD agenda globally through 423 members (as of 1 May 2021) , including 

intergovernmental organizations, states, such as France, Italy, Nepal, Peru, and Switzerland 

among them, non -governmental organizations (NGOs), companies, and academic institutions. 

(MP n.d. -b). The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO -UN) hosts a secretariat of 

the MP in its headquarters in Rome, Italy. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 301 

As a follow -up to IYM, the UNGA Resolution “International Year of Mountains (IYM), 2002” 

recommended interested institutions to : 1) Join the MP; 2) support, including financially, the 

programs resulting from the IYM; and 3) organize on 11 December, as UN I nternational Mountain 

Day (IMD), events at all levels to highlight the importance of SMD  (UN 2003) .

The most recent step in highlighting the importance of the SMD for the international community, 

on 8 December 2021, the United Nations General Assembly ado pted a resolution proclaiming 

2022 as International Year of Sustainable Mountain development. “…Despite the progress that 

has been made in promoting the sustainable development of mountain regions and the 

conservation of mountain ecosystems, including thei r biodiversity, the prevalence of poverty, food 

insecurity, social exclusion, environmental degradation and exposure to the risk of disasters is 

still increasing, particularly in developing countries, and access to safe and affordable drinking 

water and ba sic sanitation as well as to sustainable modern energy services continues to be 

limited.” It also invited “…all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, other 

international and regional organizations and other relevant stakeholders, inclu ding civil society, 

the private sector and academia, to observe the International Year, as appropriate, in order to 

increase awareness of the importance of sustainable mountain development and the conservation 

and sustainable use of mountain ecosystems.” ( UN 2021:2/2). 

Partnership Between the State of Utah and the Kyrgyz Republic with Focus on the SMD 

Advocacy and Building a Parliamentary Model of Governance in Kyrgyzstan 

Since 1999, the State of Utah and the Kyrgyz Republic built ties with each other by studying and 

sharing experiences of economic development as two mountain states, which are affected not 

only by traditional challenges from nature such as high altitude, harsh climate, environmental 

problems, but also the emerging ones like climate change and outmigration. As a driving force for 

their cooperation Utah Valley University (UVU) located in Orem, UT has partnered with the 

International University of Kyrgyzstan (IUK), located in Bishkek, the Kyrgyz Republic. (Abdrisaev 

et al 2020 -b) 

UVU is the largest public university in the state of Utah, enrolling over 40,000 primarily 

undergraduate students. It was founded in 1941 as a technical school to serve mainly local 

communities in mountainous Utah. UVU today under its dual mission “allows students t o continue 

within the same institution from Career and Technical Education (CTE) certificates and associate 

degrees to bachelor’s and master’s degrees” (UVU n.d.). Thirty percent of the UVU student body 

represent non -traditional or adult students. Eighty -one percent of UVU students work, seventeen 

percent require English remediation and seventeen percent support at least one child (Tuminez 

2020) . Adult students represent local rural and mountain communities. Adult students are 

designated as learners who exp erience social or educational disadvantages; have interests and 

values different from their traditional peers (Wyatt 2011). They represent 35 -40% of the student 

population in the U.S. and Europe (Hittepole 2015; Hauschildt 2015). 

IUK has 5,000 students. I t was founded in 1993 (IUK n.d). It was one of the active contributors to 

the IYM activities, starting from the hosting the international conference “Mountain Research –Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 302 

Challenges for the 21 st Century,” in Bishkek, the Kyrgyz Republic in 1996 during which a proposal 

was made that SMD should be the theme of one of the forthcoming years. IUK also contributed 

to the final event of the IYM, the Bishkek Global Mountain Summit which was held in the K yrgyz 

Republic during 29 October – 1 November 2002. (Price, 2004). 

IUK then studied the economic model in Utah which is considered as one of the best in the U.S. 

to do business, and how UVU contributes to it. UVU is the largest university in Utah, whic h

primarily serves local communities in mountainous Utah by combining both community college, 

as well as baccalaureate and master’s degrees for students. (Abdrisaev, et al 2020 -a). 

UVU, in turn, was able to learn about IUK’s experiences with the United Na tions (UN), its 

contribution to Kyrgyzstan’s co -sponsorship of the United Nations’ initiative to celebrate 2002 as 

the International Year of Mountains (IUM) and its involvement with the MP and FAO -UN. In 

addition, both academic institutions facilitated wi de -range exchanges between the State of Utah 

and the Kyrgyz Republic. 

Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic Mr. Askar Aitmatov visited State of Utah in 2003 

and 2004 and Dr. Danielle Butler was appointed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz 

Republic and served as the Honorary Consul of the Kyrgyz Republic in the State of Utah during 

2003 - 2011. 

As a highlight of the bilateral ties, Utah Governor Olene Walker led a delegation of the State of 

Utah during a visit to the Kyrgyz Repu blic in August 2003 for the celebration of the 2,200 th 

Anniversary of Kyrgyz Statehood. In reciprocity, the President of the Kyrgyz Republic Askar Akaev 

traveled to Salt Lake City to discuss further plans of the partnership with the State of Utah with a 

fo cus on SMD in September 2004. On the way back to the Kyrgyz Republic, he visited the United 

Nations headquarters to discuss the results of the visit to Utah with the Secretary General of the 

United Nations Kofi Annan. (OCAM 2020) 

In 2006, UVU joined the Mountain Partnership (MP) under the Food and Agriculture Organization 

of the UN (FAO -UN), the first North American university to do so. (MP n.d. -c). This allowed UVU 

jointly with IUK to promote especially the SMD agenda in the State of Utah, North America and 

globally, including in Kyrgyzstan. 

As a result, the State of Utah and UVU were visited by envoys of the Kyrgyz Republic accredited 

to the United States and United Nations such as: 1) The Ambassador of the Kyrgyz Republic to 

the United States and Can ada, Her Excellency (H.E.) Zamira Sydykova during March 8 th -10 th ,

2007. She participated at the international Conference “Women of the Mountains” co -hosted by 

UVU together with the Kyrgyz National Center for Development of Mountain Regions (WOMC 

2007); 2) The Ambassador of the Kyrgyz Republic to the United States and Canada, H.E. Zamira 

Sydykova during September 15 -18, 2007. VIP -guest during the visit met with Utah government 

leaders and UVU administrators and made a presentation to the students and facult y of UVU 

about the role of Kyrgyzstan in the Central Asian region; 3) The Permanent Representative of the 

Kyrgyz Republic to the United Nations, H.E. Talaibek Kydyrov, on March 21 -22, 2013 as a Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 303 

keynote speaker at the conference, titled “Climate Change an d Violence: How Heating the Planet 

Creates Conflict and Death.” In addition, VIP guest participated at the essays contest for Utah 

high school students on water issues; (UVU 2013 -a) 4) The Ambassador of the Kyrgyz Republic 

to the United States of America and Canada, H.E. Muktar Djumaliev, on 3 June 2013. 

Ambassador Djumaliev lectured on the topic of the political reforms in Kyrgyzstan. (UIMF 2013 -

a; UVU 2013 -b). 

Utah Legislators contributed to building a Parliamentary model of governance in Kyrgyzstan by 

hosting: 1) On February 3 rd -5th , 2007 the Speaker of the Jogorku Kenesh (Parliament) of the 

Kyrgyz Republic, H.E. Marat Sultanov, who visited State of Utah and UVU by an invitation from 

President of the Utah State Senate John Valentine. During the visit t he two men agreed to pursue 

a number of events directed to the strengthening of relations between legislators of Kyrgyzstan 

and Utah; 2) The delegation of the four members of the Kyrgyz Parliament from Ata -Meken party 

led by Omurbek Tekebaev, who discusse d strengthening bilateral ties aimed at deepening 

reforms in Kyrgyzstan, educational exchanges, and sustainable mountain development; 3) Mr. 

Kurmanbek Dyikanbayev member of the Kyrgyz Parliament from and Bishkek city’s court adviser, 

Sultangazy Kasymov dur ing March 4 -13, 2013. During the visit guests discussed the Kyrgyz 

parliamentary model of governance at the UVU Center for Constitutional Studies. (UIMF 2013 -b). 

In reciprocity, a joint delegation of representatives from the Rocky Mountain region states visited 

Kyrgyzstan on October 1 -5, 2007. The delegation was led by Utah State Senate President, John 

Valentine and included Montana Senate Majority Leader, Carol W illiams. The delegation met with 

Kyrgyz government officials, and representatives of several NGOs, among others. 

After joining the MP, UVU jointly with IUK decided to co -host under the MP umbrella the 

international Women of the Mountains Conferences (WOM C) as their major initiative to promote 

SMD in the State of Utah and North America. This project has implemented the UNGA (2003) 

recommendation to support, including financially, the programs resulting from the IYM. The first 

WOMC was held in Orem, UT in M arch 2007. (Rudaz 2007) As a forum to continue efforts of the 

2002 “Celebrating Mountain Women” a conference was held in Bhutan. Conference organizers 

raised the funds to host it elsewhere. WOMCs agenda concentrated on six issues such as: 1) 

Transmitting Family Values, Heritage & Culture; 2) health of Women & Children; 3) education of 

Women & Children; 4) economic Issues of Women & Children; 5) human Trafficking and 

Exploitation; and 6) leadership for Women. 

The first WOMC in 2007 provided an academic fo rum with involvement of officials from the UN, 

FAO -UN, the World Bank, United States (U.S.) Department of State, envoys, from four mountain 

states, accredited to the UN and U.S., scholars from almost all states of the Rocky Mountains 

region of North Americ a including four regional MP members as well as 17 mountain states 

worldwide. The Kyrgyz side was represented by its Ambassador to the United States and Canada 

in addition to the IUK President. The conference was highlighted in the UNSG (2007:9) as 

contrib uting to “…improvement of mountain women’s status globally;” and in the UNSG (2009:12) 

as a forum facilitating “… creation of a regional network on gender and SMD” .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 304 

Methodology 

Student Clubs as a Core for Inclusive Co -Curricular Engaged Learning Model for the SMD 

Advocacy 

Since 2011 SMD advocacy activities at UVU are pursued mainly as student -driven initiatives inline 

with  an Elective Community Engagement classification from the Carnegie Foundation for the 

Advancement of Teaching which UVU receiv ed in 2008 and in 2015. The classification has been 

the leading framework for institutional assessment and recognition of community engagement in 

U.S. higher education and student engaged learning (SEL) for the past 14 years (BU n.d.).  They 

also used pre viously implemented, by faculty, SMD -focused activities as guiding their priorities 

and providing templates for their future advocacy of SMD efforts. Continued partnership with 

faculty and students from the Kyrgyz Republic was also an essential part of the ir activities. 

Through SEL also known as experiential, service, or  problem -based learning  students can learn 

to exchange knowledge and resources with communities elsewhere. It provides for them in 

particular: Intellectual development; basic skills acq uisition; moral and ethical development; social 

and civic responsibility;  career preparation; multicultural understanding; and personal growth 

(Berger et al 2014). 

SEL is based on four  principles: 

a) Students are provided with problems to study; 

b) They st udy problems as a group; 

c) They have teachers as facilitators for self -learning; and 

d) They carry the responsibility for self -learning (Burch 2000). 

The SEL model was i mplemented through student clubs as an  extracurricular activity  existing at 

UVU campus. One of the reasons for that was the fact that SMD activities often last l onger than 

one semester and therefore are difficult to implement through academic programs.  (Abdrisaev 

and others 2020 -a). 

Student clubs allow for the implementation of four SEL principles. They are  important for student 

learning outside of the classroom, providing them opportunities to work interdependently, in 

groups, through mentoring experiences led by faculty (Foubert and Urbansk i 2006; Logan 2008). 

They also encourage students to raise funds due to the club requirements to self -fund activities. 

(Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

The developed -at -UVU SEL education model ensured inclusivity of student engagement in SMD 

advocacy by recruiting students across the campus because of a matching with the dual mission 

of the academic institution and professional interests of majority of them, and by incentivizing Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 305 

adult students to join their traditional peers in SMD activities . It was comprised from a student 

clubs coalition, as its core extracurricular part with support provided by academic programs .

(Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

Structure of the Inclusive Co -Curricular SEL Model 

The inclusive co -curricular SEL model is comprised from the: 

1)  Utah International Mountain Forum (UIMF), a coalition of student clubs at UVU as 

extracurricular core; and 

2)  Academic program providing support to UIMF  (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

As per advice of Wyatt (2011) to encourage involve ment of non -traditional students in activities, 

this model allows them to join at any time, any of the clubs of the coalition and contribute their 

own experiences while pursuing SMD activities (Timpson et al 2013) .

Extracurricular Part of the SEL Model 

While UVU (2019:6)  defines a club as  “A student group with a common interest or goal,” which 

matches with the first SEL principle about identifying a problem for students to learn, the main 

goal of the coalition is  (UIMF n.d:1),  “[R]aising awareness of mo untain  [including in the State of 

Utah]  sustainability topics;  ... bring the public into contact with international guests and foreign 

dignitaries; and ….bringing communities together to recognize their shared mountainous 

heritage.” 

The second principle of SEL was implemented based on UVU (2019:6) requirement that clubs 

have “… at least six members as enrolled UVU students ,… [and] a president who is a full -time 

UVU student.” The president of the Club/ UIMF facilitates , in the presence of the adv isor, weekly 

group meetings to d iscuss implementation of activities based on a task list, which provides a 

scaffolding for individual student learning  (Timpson et al 2013:34).  Adult students as mature and 

experienced individuals are able to contribute to projects based on their experiences/ interests in 

UIMF activities for SMD advocacy and facilitate a group learning. (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

The implementation of the third principle of SEL was  based on the UVU (2019:10) requirement 

that,“ A Club Mentor is someone who will support, offer advice, and give help when asked or 

needed....” As a result, a dult students could facilitate group learning and teach their peers skills 

to accomplish required assignments. Faculty members usually as sists clubs Pre sidents to tie 

activities with t he guiding lines of the MP . All group correspondences to implement SMD -related 

activities only are copied to the advisor as feedback about group learning experiences. 

President(s) of UIMF/clubs or project leader (s) coordinate students’ efforts to fulfill the fourth SEL 

principle by finishing the task list assignments. For a full implementation of the activity, the 

UIMF/club president, or the non -traditional student as an initiative leader with the advisors’ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 306 

counsel , ensures the submissions of: a) Essays by students about finished assignments to be 

posted at designed by the students’ UIMF web -site; b) Their own reports about how the activity 

benefits the MP with gaining a proper recognition from them.  (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

The UIMF/club president, or an adult student as the initiative leader, ensures the submissions of 

a report about the accomplished activity to the UVU club’s office to receive funds, as per 

requirement of  UVU (2019:6), that “ Registered student clubs are at a minimum funded by member 

dues and additional funding from the inter -club executive council.“ 

Curricular Part of the SEL Model 

Academic programs contribute to the developed model by allowing for faculty during classes to 

build ties with students -especially adult learners and then raise student interest in SMD advocacy. 

It is achieved by inviting UIMF members to speak before their peers and by providing  incentives 

for students’ involvement with clubs (Timpson et al 2013 ).  As a result, students  can gain extra -

credit points for becoming a member of the coalition; for writing and posting online reflective 

essays not only as contributors but also as observers of the SMD activities hosted by other UIMF 

members.  (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a) 

A three -credit course “Globalization and SMD,” is the only academic course related to the SMD 

agenda. It provides incentives, especially for adult students’ involvement in the UIMF activities 

the students as an enhancement of their educati on (Wyatt 2011). It is taught during spring 

semesters only. While the course curricula provide students an opportunity to learn theories and 

practices of SMD, it also teaches them practical skills to contribute to UIMF activities, and become 

club leaders, among other things. Each student also writes a research paper about different 

aspects of sustainable development in Utah or in mountain nations globally for the undergraduate 

student -run and reviewed journal “Youth and the Mountains” (YATM n.d.). 

Results 

UIMF Members Hosting the Chair of the Permanent Council of the Organization of 

American States (OAS) and Permanent Representative of Peru to OAS, His Excellency 

Harold Forsyth 

The hosting by UIMF members of the Chair of the Permanent Council of the Organization of 

American States (OAS) and Permanent Representative of Peru to OAS, His Excellency Harold 

Forsyth on 3 March 2022 at UVU provides an example of the developed SEL model ability to 

engage students in SMD advocacy. 

The visit of the dignitar y to UVU’s campus was organized by the UVU Office for Global 

Engagement. Ambassador Harold Forsyth lectured on the topic of "New Threats to Democracy in 

the Americas" before students largely from UVU National Security Studies program on Thursday, 

March 3 a t 10:00am in the Library Auditorium at UVU. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 307 

A meeting of the UIMF members took place after the main lecture of Ambassador Harold Forsyth 

during 11:30 am -12:15pm. It was organized based on the procedure when students first make 

presentations advocating for SMD and their personal contributions to it and then the guest reflects 

on issues addressed by them. As an established tradition with the UVU Office for Global 

Engagement, UIMF members use this approach in hosting envoys of foreign states accredited at 

the United States or the United Nations and other VIP -guests including from the Kyrgyz Republic, 

beginning in 2013 (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a). 

In their short presentations, about 3 -4 minutes long, students usually address three central points: 

1) The importance for the states represented by the visiting UVU dignitary to ensure that mountain 

communities will be in the focus of their governmental programs on sustainable development; 2) 

One of the ways to ensure sustainable development for mountain communities could be the 

implementation of SEL models in local universities and; 3) Inclusive involvement of students in 

those educational models and esp ecially non -traditional students which could help local 

communities learn how to sustain themselves through a group educational efforts and then to 

help others; and they need to learn how to tie those points to their own initiatives or projects. 

Dallas Karren, current President of the UIMF and a non -traditional student moderated the event 

in which UIMF members made presentations before Ambassador Harold Forsyth. Alitha 

Thompson, UIMF Vice -President, a non -traditional student and mother of 5 children spo ke about 

UIMF accomplishments in SMD advocacy since its founding in 2011 and presented the VIP guest 

a folder with copies of the official United Nations documents recognizing students from UVU for 

their contributions to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Deve lopment with focus on mountain 

communities; also, 2013, 2016, and 2019 reports of the UN Secretary -General on sustainable 

mountain development and written statements co -sponsored by the Russian Academy of Natural 

Science and the Utah China Friendship Impro vement Sharing Hands Development and 

Commerce, nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the United Nations 

Economic and Social Council. In addition, it included 2018 and 2019 congressional records with 

statements of US Congressman John Cur tis and US Congressman Ben McAdams. 

Six other UIMF students spoke about the essence of the SEL method at UVU with the special 

role of non -traditional students and how SEL allowed them to study and compare status and 

challenges faced by mountain communitie s in the State of Utah, as well as India, Pakistan, and 

Slovenia. They also informed the guest foreign dignitary about challenges with sustainable 

development for mountain communities in Peru due to climate change, and how the state of Utah 

addresses simil ar challenges by developing special programs assisting local communities and 

families both at the state and federal levels. As one of the students shared his research results 

about the important role which women -leaders play in the lives of mountain commun ities in 

Yemen and in the State of Wyoming in the United States, a second student presented the impact 

on the lives of mountain communities in Guatemala resulting from the power of drug cartels. 

While Ambassador Harold Forsyth had about 10 -15 minutes lef t to respond to students, he was 

visibly surprised by the meeting and the host of issues related to mountain communities raised 

by students. He admitted that in his capacity as a top envoy of the mountainous nation of Peru at Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 308 

the OAS he never paid attenti on to issues and challenges which face mountain people. As one of 

the outcomes, he promised to raised these issues with other envoys at the OAS who represent 

mountain states and to create a special caucus. 

On behalf of the UIMF members Dallas Karren presented to Ambassador Harold Forsyth a special 

gift. The meeting was recorded by one of the UIMF members. The UIMF president submitted a 

report to the UVU Clubs office to win $100 for future SMD advocacy activities. 

The task list prepared by Dallas Ka rren with the advice from the faculty mentor included 

assignments divided in four groups: secretariat; logistics, speakers, and media (UIMF 2022 -a). 

UIMF members selected assignments based on their preferences and skills three weeks before 

the VIP guest vi sit, and under the leadership of Dallas Karren they followed through on a weekly 

basis. During class on Sustainable Mountain Development 15 -20 minutes have been dedicated 

to the preparations for the visit under the leadership of Alitha Thompson. In additio n to presenters, 

five other UIMF members also contributed to preparations and hosting of the event. 

Posts about UIMF members hosting Ambassador Harold Forsyth contain a leading essay written 

by Dallas Karren, UIMF President; copies of official United Nati ons documents presented to a 

VIP -guest; statements of all students; a link to the video of the meeting; and a task list and student 

reflective essays. (UIMF 2022 -b) 

Student Evaluation and Recognition in the D eveloped SEL Model. 

As per Abdrisaev and others (2020), s ince 2011, a website ( Utah International Mountain Forum | 

Utah Valley University (uvu.edu) informs readers about UIMF activities with a focus on SMD 

advocacy in the State of Utah and elsewhere. By posting such information as copies of agendas, 

task lists, posters, brochures, links to media, student reflective essays , etc. the website provides; 

a) feedback and a measure of student learning; b) templates for future activities; c) references for 

student recognition; and d) institu tional memory of the activities. The website was designed and 

is maintained by students. 

More than 370 posts about SMD activities on the UIMF website  during  November 2011 – February 

2022 or 3.7 activities per month on average, demonstrate both a variety o f initiatives, experiences, 

as well as fundraising initiatives contributed to SMD advocacy by students, including non -

traditional learners, and a sustained interest from students for involvement in extracurricular 

activities with UIMF. Among m ore than 800 reflective essays posted on the website during that 

time about one third of them offer lessons learned by students to host and contribute in protocol, 

logistics, analysis, and to observe activities of their peers and raise their own and other 

communities’ awareness in SMD. (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a) 

Posts reflect student’s advocacy activities for SMD contributed through such UN experiential 

learning initiatives as (Datta 2014 ): Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 309 

1). The  UN Academic Impact (UNAI) , an initiative of the UN Department of Global 

Communications, which comprises more than 1300 academic institutions globally with focus to 

support the principles of the UN (UN n.d.) through scholarships and research. Since 2017, when 

UVU joined UNAI, the SEL model presents one of the main initiatives which university contributes 

to the impleme ntation of the UNAI mission. 

2).  Model United Nations (MUN). The MUN  involves students in UN activities by simulating UN 

bodies such as the Security Council, the General Assembly, Economic and Social Council 

(ECOSOC), etc. (Feldman 2016). Although MUN and the developed model are based on SEL, 

the latter initiative, in comparison with the former one,  engages students in implementing rather 

than simulating SMD elsewhere, including at the forums of the UN ECOSOC on sustainable 

development. Moreover, UIMF m embers advocated for SMD during the MUN conferences. 

3). Internships at the UN. Through the SEL  model students gained experiences and recognition 

from the MP for SMD advocacy, which allowed them both to apply and compete for internships at 

different ins titutions of the UN. After becoming interns, they continue to advocate for SMD at the 

UN and gain more recognition for their efforts. 

4). The UN International Mountain Day (IMD) observation. This educational activity was proposed 

by Abdrisaev and others (2020) to be added among the three mentioned above UN experiential 

learning initiatives. IMD as a UN activity and proper recognition for its observation is held mainly 

at university campuses. The IMD is affordable and beneficial especially for adult learners, many 

of whom are not able to visit the UN due to time or financial constraints. It could serve also as a 

template to develop similar models for other International Day observations established by the 

UN. 

More than 80 posts at the website present activities in the areas of political, educational and 

cultural exchanges between UIMF members with different institutions a nd individuals from the 

Kyrgyz Republic. 

Posts also reflect student fundraising efforts through parti cipation at club rushes, hosting tables 

at UVU campus, fundraising campaigns, and applying for grants. Since 2007, both UVU and UIMF 

members were able to raise about $250,000 in total for SMD advocacy. (Abdrisaev and others 

2020 -a). 

Posts on the UIMF website serve as references for news at MP media outlets about its 

accomplished SMD activities. S ince 2011, UVU and UIMF have been recognized 82 times (or 10 

times per year) in the MP and FAO -UN news websites and 57 times (or more than seven times 

yearly) in the monthly MP newsletter “Peak -to peak.” (Abdrisaev and others 2020 -a) 

Since 2015, UIMF was recognized in MPs annual reports on SMD , and as a highlight was featured 

twice in the United Nations Secretary Generals reports on SMD, the only student club coalition 

worldwide to receive such recognition ( FAO -UN 2016a; FAO -UN 2019; UNSG 2016; UNSG Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 310 

2019). Since 2016, the model and UIMF were highlighted by the UN ECOSOC (2016, 2017, 

2018). 

As a rule, recommendation letters provided for UIMF members’ professional advancement, 

include relevant links to UIMF, MP website and UN documents. 

Originality 

The developed inclusive co -curricular SEL model encourages both traditional and non -traditional 

students to advocate for SMD in the State of Utah, North America and worldwide. They learn new 

professional skills, gain networking opportunities and recognitio n from the United Nations for 

contributing their own experiences, initiatives, and financial resources to the SMD implementation. 

As a result, the model implements Target 4.7 of the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development 

(UN 2015) which states: “By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills 

needed to promote sustainable development, including, among others, through education for 

sustainable development and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality.…” (UN 

2015:17/35). The mo del does this by interaction with mountain targets 6.6; 15.1 and 15.4. UVU 

is the only  academic institution among the 450 MP members globally which uses SEL for SMD 

advocacy. 

Research Limitations/Implications 

The developed SEL model has engaged in an inclusive way traditional and non -traditional 

students in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with an 

emphasis on mountain communities. Non -traditional students as representatives of local 

communities today present more than t hirty percent of the student body in the United States, 

Europe, and the Western world. Considering that traditional and non -traditional students have 

different values and interests, it will be important to conduct further study about mitigating the 

impact of their differences and disagreements on the implementation of SMD activities through a 

group effort. In addition, further research needs to be done to study the impact of a wider role of 

academic programs in developing the SEL model in comparison with th e current approach when 

they serve as a supplement to the activities implemented through a student clubs coalition as its 

extracurricular core. 

Summary and Conclusion 

This paper studied experiences at Utah Valley University in advocating the SMD age nda in the 

State of Utah, North America and worldwide. It is achieved through an inclusive co -curricular SEL 

model: the model extracurricular core is the UIMF, a coalition of student clubs at UVU; the 

curricular part of the model provides support for the extracurricular component by recruiting more 

UIMF members. As an example of successful advocacy for SMD are the written analyses of 

student’s experiences in gaining professional skills by hosting the Chair of the Permanent Council 

of the Organization of Am erican States (OAS) and Permanent Representative of Peru to OAS, 

His Excellency Harold Forsyth. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 311 

As research demonstrates, the effectiveness of such a model are ensured by the following:  

> •

The use of previously faculty implemented SMD -focused activities as guiding student 

priorities and providing templates for their future advocacy of SMD efforts.  

> •

Continued partnership with faculty and students from the Kyrgyz Republic as an essential 

part of their learning activities and building professional ties.  

> •

Inclusiveness of the model by creating incentives for non -traditional students to join their 

traditional peers in efforts to gain new skills, connections, and recognition from the MP by 

con tributing own experiences, projects, and funds for the SMD advocacy.  

> •

The use of student clubs is effective extracurricular educational tools to implement SMD 

activities that go beyond a regular semester. In addition, the requirement that student 

clubs sh ould self -fund activities stimulate both traditional and non -traditional students to 

raise funds for their future SMD initiatives and advocacy campaign.  

> •

The club’s requirement for faculty to mentor, not to micromanage students enables the 

president of th e UIMF/clubs to take on maximum responsibilities for implementing SMD 

activities. Non -traditional students play an important role as project leaders due to their 

diverse experiences, knowledge, maturity and responsibility.  

> •

A database of comprehensive in formation about implemented SMD activities can help 

evaluate students' learning and contribution, as well as ensure institutional memory. 

The SEL model empowers both traditional and non -traditional students with professional skills 

and knowledge through g roup learning and implementation of the SMD agenda. It is especially 

important for non -traditional student as representatives of local and mountain communities. As a 

result, they are becoming full -fledged contributors to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Dev elopment and then contribute practically to the implementation of three mountain targets in 

their own communities. 

Acknowledgments 

The current research was supported by funding from the following institutions at UVU: Office of 

Engaged Learning; Office fo r Global Engagement; Office of Student Affairs; College of Humanities 

and Social Sciences, College of Science, Woodbury School of Business, and the History and 

Political Science Department. 

References 

Abdrisaev , B. et. All, 2020. “Sustainable Mountain Development Advocacy Through Student 

Engaged Learning by Observing International Mountain Day: The Case of Utah Valley Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 312 

University.” Mountain Research and Development 40, no 4: D31 -D38. 

https://doi.org/10.1659/M RD -JOURNAL -D-19 -00070.1. 

Abdrisaev, B, et all. 2020 “Sustainable Mountain Development Promotion Through Education.” 

Bulletin of the Russian Academy of Natural Sciences 2020, no. 2 (2020): 100 -105. 

https://raen.info/upload/redactorfiles/maket_vestnik_20 20_02.pdf.  [Абдрисаев, 

Бактыбек, Расти Батлер, Иваницкая Л. Владимировна, и Утямышев И. Рустамович. 

Вестник  Российской  академии  естественных  наук  2020, № 2 (2020):100 -105.] 

Berger R, et all. 2014. Leaders of Their Own Learning: Transforming Schools Through Student -

Engaged Assessment. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 

BU [Brown University] n.d. Carnegie Classification, CUEI: College & University Engagement. 

Brown University https://www.brown.edu/swearer/carnegie; accessed on 15 October 

202 0

Burch K. 2000. A primer on Problem -Based Learning for international relations course. 

International Studies Perspectives 1:31 -44. 

Datta R. 2014. Teaching the UN through experiential education. UN Chronicle 50(4):8 -12. 

https://www.un.org/en/chronicle /article/teaching -un -through -experiential -education; 

accessed on 10 March 2020. 

FAO -UN [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations]. 2016a. Our journey in 2015: 

Mountain Partnership Secretariat Annual Report. Food and Agriculture Organizati on of 

the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/3/a -i5490e.pdf /; accessed on 10 May 2019. 

FAO -UN [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations]. 2019. Mountain Partnership 

Secretariat Annual Report 2018. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

Nations. http://www.fao.org/3/ca5654en/ca5654en.pdf ; on 10 March 2020. 

Feldman R. 2016. Model UN. United Nations Association of the USA. 

http://www.unausa.org/global -classrooms -model -un/how -to -participate/getting -

started/model -un -glossary; acces sed on 10 March 2020. 

Foubert J, Urbanski L. 2006. Effects of involvement in clubs and organizations on the 

psychosocial development of first -year and senior college students. NASPA journal 

43(1):166 -182. 

Hauschildt K., Gwosć C., Netz , N. and Mishra, S. 2015. Social and Economic Conditions of 

Student Life in Europe. Synopsis of Indicators: Eurostudent V 2012 -2015. Germany, W. 

Bertelsmann Verlag. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 313 

Hittepole C, 2015 Nontraditional Students: Supporting Changing Student Populations A Gu ide 

for Chief Academic Officers & Chief Student Affairs Officers. National Association of 

Student Personnel Administrators (NASPA). 

https://www.naspa.org/images/uploads/main/Hittepole_NASPA_Memo.pdf; accessed on 

10 March 2020. 

IUK [International Unive rsity of Kyrgyzstan] n.d. International University of Kyrgyzstan. 

UNIPAGE. International University of Kyrgyzstan | Admission | Tuition | University 

(unipage.net) ; accessed on 10 May 2021. 

Logan W, Scarborough J. 2008. Connections through clubs: Collabo ration and coordination of a 

schoolwide program. Professional School Counseling 12(2):157 -161. 

MP [Mountain Partnership]. N.d. -a. Mountain Partnership Vision and Mission. Food and 

Agricuture Organization of the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/mountain -

partnership/about/our -vision -and -mission/en/ ; accessed on 10 March 2023. 

MP [Mountain Partner ship]. N.d -b. About Mountain Partnership. Food and Agriculture 

Organization of the United Nations. http://www.fao.org/mountain -partnership/en/ ;

accessed on 10 March 2022. 

MP [Mountain Partnership]. N.d -c. Utah Valley University (UVU) and Utah -Russia Ins titute. Food 

and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Mountain Partnership: Members 

detail (fao.org), accessed on 10 March 2022 

OCAM [OCA Magazine] 2020, Advocating for Mountain Communities Through Educational 

Programs,  ocamagazine.com ; ADVOCATING FOR MOUNTAIN COMMUNITIES 

THROUGH EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS - OCA MAGAZINE; oca#35 summer; 

accessed on 10 March 2022 

Pelletier S. 2010. Success for adult students. Washington, D.C.: Public Purpose. 

https://www.aascu.org/uploadedFiles/AASCU/Content/Root/MediaAndPublications/Publi 

cPurposeMagazines/Issue/10fall_adultstudents.pdf; accessed on 10 March 2020. 

Price M, 2004 . Introduction: Sustainable Mountain Development from RIO to Bishkek and 

beyond. In: Price M, Jansky L, and Iatsenia A., editors. Key Issues for Mountain Areas. 

United Nations University Press, p 3. 

Price M, Kohler T. 2013. Sustainable Mountain Developm ent. In: Price M, Byers A, Friend D, 

Kohler T, and Price L, editors. Mountain Geography: Physical and Human Dimension. 1 st 

ed. Berkley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, pp 333. 

Rudaz G, Krause A. 2007. Women of the Mountains: An Inte rnational Conference. 

Mountain Research and Development 27(2):178 -178. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 314 

Timpson W., Foley J., Kees N., Waite A. 2013. 147 Practical Tips for Using Experiential 

Learning. Madison, WI: Atwood Publishing. 

Tuminez A. 2020. Stringent completion measures do n’t tell the whole story at Utah universities. 

Deseret News. https://www.deseret.com/opinion/2020/4/19/21224282/uvu -education -

inclusivity -equality -growth -college -applications -graduation; accessed on 3 July 2020. 

UIMF [Utah International Mountain Forum]. 2013 -a. CIS Activities at Utah Valley University ;

Utahimf. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ABOUT (uvu.edu) ; accessed on 10 March 2022 

UIMF [Utah International Mountain Forum]. 2013 -b. Rocky Mountain -Central Asia exchange 

Peak to Peak – The Mountain Partnership Newsletter; Utahimf. peaktopeakapril2013.pdf 

(uvu.edu) ; accessed on 10 March 2022 

UIMF [Utah International Mountain Forum]. 2022 -a. Task list For Official Visit of the Chair of the 

Permanent Council of the Organiz ation of American States (OAS) and Permanent 

Representative of Peru to OAS, H.E. Harold Forsyth ; Utahimf. boas_task_list.pdf 

(uvu.edu) ; accessed on 10 March 2022 

UIMF [Utah International Mountain Forum]. 2022 -b. UIMF Discussed Mountain Targets with 

Ambassador Harold Forsyth Chair of the OAS and Permanent Representative of Peru to 

the OAS; Utahimf. UIMF Discussed Mountain Targets with Ambassador Harold Forsyth 

Chair of the OAS and Permanent Representative of Per u to the OAS | Utah International 

Mountain Forum | Utah Valley University (uvu.edu) accessed on 10 March 2022 

UIMF [Utah International Mountain Forum]. n.d. Welcome to Utahimf.org. Utahimf. 

http://uvu.edu/utahimf ; accessed on 10 March 2022. 

UN ECOSOC [United Nations Economic and Social Council]. 2016. E/2016/NGO/60. Written 

statement presented at the 2016 High level segment of ECOSOC. New York, NY, 24 

May. https://documents -dds -

ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N16/153/75/pdf/N1615375.pdf?OpenElement; accesse d on 

10 March 2022. 

UN ECOSOC [United Nations Economic and Social Council]. 2017. E/CN.6/2018/NGO/37. 

Written statement presented at the 62nd session of the Commission on the Status of 

Women. New York, NY, 7 December. https://documents -dds -

ny.un.org/d oc/UNDOC/GEN/N17/398/31/pdf/N1739831.pdf?OpenElement; accessed on 

10 March 2022. 

UN ECOSOC [United Nations Economic and Social Council]. 2018. E/CN.6/2019/NGO/64 

Written statement presented at the 63nd session of the Commission on the Status of 

Women, New York, NY, 19 November. https://documents -dds -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 315 

ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N17/398/31/pdf/N1739831.pdf?OpenElement; accessed on 

10 March 2022. 

UN [United Nations]. 2003. International Year of Mountains, 2002, Resolution 57/245 adopted 

by the General Ass embly on 30 January 2003. New York, NY. 

http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/mountain_partnership/docs/A_RES_57_245.p 

df; accessed on 10 March 2020. 

UN [United Nations], 2015. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda For Sustainable 

Development, P.17 /35, New York: UN Publishing. 

https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E; accessed on 

3 July, 2020 

UN [United Nations]. 2021. International Year of Sustainable Mountain Development, 2022. 

Resolution 76/129 adopted by the Genera l Assembly on 28 December 2021, New York, 

NY. A/RES/76/129 - E - A/RES/76/129 -Desktop (undocs.org) ; accessed on 10 February 

2022. 

UN [United Nations]. n.d. About UNAI | Academic Impact. United Nations Academic Impact. 

https://academicimpact.un.org/con tent/about -unai; accessed on 10 March 2022. 

UNSG [United Nations Secretary General]. 2007. Sustainable Mountain Development. Report 

62/292 released on 23 August 2007. New York, NY. https://undocs.org/A/62/292; 

accessed on 10 March 2020. 

UNSG [United Na tions Secretary General]. 2009. Sustainable Mountain Development. Report 

64/222 released on 3 August 2009. New York, NY. https://undocs.org/A/64/222; 

accessed on 10 March 2020. 

UNSG [United Nations Secretary General]. 2016. Sustainable Mountain Developm ent. Report 

71/256 released on 29 July 2016. New York, NY. https://undocs.org/A/71/256; accessed 

on 10 March 2020. 

UNSG [United Nations Secretary General]. 2019. Sustainable Mountain Development. Report 

74/209 released on 22 July 2019. New York, NY. https://undocs.org/a/74/209; accessed 

on 10 March 2020. 

UVU [Utah Valley University]. 2013 -a. Talaibek Kydyrov - Ambassador of Kyrgyzstan to the 

United Nations; UVU -The Office for Global Engagement; . Talaibek Kydyrov -

Ambassador of Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations | The Office for Global Engagement 

(uvu.ed u); accessed on 10 March 2022. 

UVU [Utah Valley University]. 2013 -b. Muktar Djumaliev - Ambassador of Kyrgystan to the US & 

Canada; UVU -The Office for Global Engagement; Muktar Djumaliev - Ambassador of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 316 

Kyrgystan to the US & Canada | The Office for Glo bal Engagement (uvu.edu); accessed 

on 10 March 2022. 

UVU [Utah Valley University]. 2019. Handbook of Procedures and Guidelines. UVU Clubs and 

Organizations. UVU. https://www.uvu.edu/clubs/docs/clubshandbookwebsite.pdf ;

accessed on 10 March 2022. 

UVU [ Utah Valley University]. n.d.b Vision 2030. UVU Vision 2030 | Utah Valley University 

(uvu.edu); accessed on 10 May 2021 .

WOMC [Women of the Mountains Conferences]. 2007. Biographies of the Participants of the 

International Conference “Women of the Moun tains” 

Womenofthemountains. 08 -08 -19 -Data -And -Bios -Womens -Conference -1

(womenofthemountains.org) ; accessed on 10 March 2022. 

Wyatt L. 2011. Non -Traditional Student Engagement: Increasing Adult Student Success and 

Retention. The Journal of Continuing Hi gher Education 59:10 -11. 

YATM [Youth and the Mountains] n.d. Youth and the Mountains Student Journal. Utah Valley 

University. https://www.uvu.edu/hps/docs/youth.mountains/youth.mts.vol.vi.pdf; 

accessed on 10 March 2022. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 317 

# Strengthening Civil Society Capacity for Education for 

# All In Republic of Benin: The Important Role 

# of Universities and Other Research Institutions 

Faïssou Amadou (Ministry of Labour and Civil Service, Benin) 

Abstract 

This report tends to track the Benin’s progress in the implementation of SDG 4, understanding 

what hinders its complete achievement in terms of capacity and to recognize best practices 

moving forwards. It recognizes the civil society organizations as good contributors and presents 

their needs to address the major challenges in education sector with just eight years left to the 

2030 deadline. It explores the kinds of support universities can quickly bring to civil society in 

terms of capacity, competence gap s filling and multi -stakeholder’s engagement in education area. 

It develops a formalized and concrete mechanism within which University researchers and 

teachers work in partnership with Civil Society Organizations to create knowledge that can 

produce urge nt and rapid solutions in education area to reach the 2030 target. 

The research calls for a necessary paradigm shift in the role played by universities and other 

education institutions in supporting Civil Society Organizations, particularly those operati ng in 

quality education, to make them fit to educational global development agenda. 

Keywords : Civil society performance, Education 2030 Agenda 

Introduction 

The Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development adopted by all United Nations Member States in 

2015 provides a share blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet. Seventeen 

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) recognize that ending poverty and other depr ivations 

must go hand -in hand with strategies that improve health and education, reduce inequality, and 

spur economic growth, all while tackling climate change and working to preserve our oceans and 

forests. 

The achievement of development results is high ly dependent upon the human and organizational 

capacities to effectively, efficiently, and accountably manage and implement the programmes and 

projects structured to deliver these results, more often in a particularly complex enabling 

environment. Countrie s and regions experience that reality differently. 

In republic of Benin, this reality does not spare education sphere. Instead of the Government 

commitment to provide universal free and quality education, efforts are hindered by lack of 

capacity. Civil so ciety still remains the best alternative for its contribution in the implementation of 

education policies. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 318 

However, in order to fulfil their roles, civil society organizations (CSOs) need to be strong and 

well -prepared with knowledge on technical topics, such as governance and organizational 

structure, resource mobilization, system of program management, human resource management, 

financial management, advocacy and communication. Universities can play a crucial role in 

upgrading civil society organization s. 

With just eight years left to the 2030 deadline ‘we must inject a sense of urgency. Achieving the 

2030 Agenda requires immediate and accelerated actions by countries along with collaborative 

partnerships among governments and stakeholders at all levels 2’, stated António GUTERRES, 

United Nations Secretary -General, in the 2018 Sustainable Development Goals Report. 

Our research, thus, explores the kinds of support universities can quickly bring to civil society in 

terms of capacity, competence gaps fill ing and multi -stakeholder’s engagement in education area. 

The following research questions need to be addressed :

- What kind of suitable knowledge do Civil Society Organizations need to address quality 

education challenge in their specific environment? 

- Are higher education institutions adaptive enough to address complex education 

challenges? 

- What are the current links between Civil Society Organizations and higher education 

institutions? 

The main objective of the research is to develop a formalized and concrete mechanism within 

which University researchers and teachers work in partnership with Civil Society Organizations to 

create knowledge that can produce urgent and rapid solutions in education area to reach the 2030 

target.  Particularly, the study ha s the following sub -objectives :

- To develop a method for rapid mapping of CSOs in education area; 

- To provide a comprehensive CSOs capacity assessment tool that fits to context; 

- To propose a pathway to foster the engagement of Universities in knowledge -based 

challenges faced by CSOs in education sphere. 

Purpose 

The fundamental purpose of the research is to develop cost -effective and time -bounded capacity 

development tools that enhance academic institutions’ engagement with civil society to promote 

the s ustainable development goal related to education.  

> 2The Sustainable Development Goals Report, 2018

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 319 

The goals in the research are to: 

- provide a mechanism for tracking the Republic of Benin progress in achieving the 

Sustainable Development Goal in education sphere; 

- highlight the quality and effective ness of civil society participation in the promotion of 

education for all; 

- develop a research and knowledge -based framework to enhance CSOs engagement in 

education 2030 Agenda. 

Design/Methodology/Approach 

To provide a general overview of where we stand in terms of progress made in post -2015 

education arena, there should be a strategic planning process to develop targets and benchmarks 

for the goal, as well as details on monitoring, evaluation and reporting systems that will be used 

to track progres s. Thus, our research draws from international best practices and from recent 

efforts to design post -2015 education frameworks. Preference has been given to a

comprehensive and systemic tool designed by Global Campaign for Education 3. That organization 

has set an overarching goal for education with three key objectives and eight specific targets. 

Each target has a set of indicators against which progress can be tracked. 

Findings 

Where We Stand in the Implementation of 2030 Education Agenda 

What is Education 2030 Agenda? 

This agenda comprises Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4 – “Ensure inclusive and equitable 

quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all” by 2030 – and the Education 

2030 framework for Action. 

Th is goal provides that all Members States must guarantee 12 years of free and equitable quality 

education for all by 2030 and allocate a minimum between 4% and 6% of their Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP), and a minimum between 15% and 20% of their total public budget for education. 

Developing countries equally committed to allocate 0.7% of their GDP to Official Development 

Assistance (ODA), reinforcing the support to education.   

> 3The Global Campaign for Education consists of a diverse and extensive group of stakeholders from around the
> world. Its members in more than 100 countries share a common vision and belief in the right to and the power of
> education.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 320 

Efforts Made by Republic of Benin 

The Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) 

The Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) defines inclusive education as a "process that 

aims to increase participation and reduce exclusion by effectively addressing the different needs 

of all learners. It addresses the individual educational and le arning needs of all marginalized and 

vulnerable children and young people : street children ; girls ; children from ethnic minority groups 

; children from financially disadvantaged families ; children from nomadic/refugee/displaced 

families ; children livi ng with HIV or AIDS ; and children with disabilities. Inclusive education aims 

to ensure that these children have equal rights and opportunities in education." 

The plan is based on the guidelines for inclusion established by the United Nations Educationa l, 

Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) (2005) : « [Inclusive education] involves changes 

and modifications in content, approaches, structures and strategies, with a common vision which 

covers all children of the appropriate age range and a convic tion that it is the responsibility of the 

regular system to educate all children." 

The Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) defines special education as all education 

and training activities for persons with physical, sensory or learning disabilit ies, or people 

experiencing difficulties with personal adaptation and social integration, in order to facilitate their 

adaptation and social integration. Benin still has special schools. These schools follow the 

Integration Programme for Out -of -School Mino rs with Learning Disabilities (PINS in French) to 

manage learning disabilities. 

The Education Sector Plan 2018 –2030 provides for strategic options for educating children with 

disabilities in a mainstream school environment. It also stipulates that specia l centres will only 

receive children with multiple disabilities. 

The Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) and the National Policy on the Protection and 

Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities plan to provide grants to facilities developing relevant 

educational initiatives for children with special needs, and to organize coaching sessions for 

centres and facilities with relevant inclusive educational initiatives. A draft Multi -Year Partnership 

Agreement (2018 –2021) supervised by the French Developmen t Agency also aims to build the 

country’s capacities to plan, implement and monitor inclusive education. Benin should also 

receive support to develop sectoral plans, strategies and policies for inclusive education. Finally, 

regarding the integration of chi ldren with special needs from remote areas, no targeted measures 

have been taken to address the territorial disparities that exist between departments and 

communes and, especially, between urban and rural areas. 

The Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) aims to strengthen girls' access to and 

retention in basic education by establishing measures to promote the recruitment and retention 

of female teachers in rural areas. It also seeks to exempt girls from paying secondary school fees. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 321 

In addition, i t aims to select texts on sexual harassment, the fight against child marriage, and 

other forms of violence, and to set up listening units for girls in schools. 

Currently, the Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) aims to implement a policy of 

targe ting interventions to educationally disadvantaged communes. This will include conducting 

research into the causes of low access to education in these areas and providing quality 

educational supplies and services in the 25 communes. 

Benin's education sect or is administered by three different ministries : the Ministry of Nursery and 

Primary Education ; the Ministry of Secondary Education and Technical and Vocational Training 

(which also manages the literacy subsector) ; and the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific 

Research. The National Education Council helps coordinate the entire national education system, 

ensures compliance with the broad educational guidelines (especially for inclusive education) and 

helps implement the framework act on national e ducation. It can provide opinions and formulate 

proposals on the pedagogy, curricula, organization and results of the education system and 

teacher training. 

The shift towards inclusive education requires teacher training. In the transition period while a ll 

teachers in mainstream schools are gradually being trained on educating children with special 

needs, the Post -2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) and the National Policy on the 

Protection and Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities plan to appoint tea chers with specialized 

skills in specialized centres. 

Education Performance Figures 

Benin does not have a national education monitoring report. However, the annual Education Joint 

Sector Review report can be used as a tool for monitoring education. In 2019, CBO -EPT produced 

a voluntary national report to monitor the implementation of Sust ainable Development Goal (SDG) 

4 during 2016 –2018. In addition, a study on the level of SDG 4 implementation in five communes 

in Benin was conducted in 2018. 

With the specific aim of ensuring equitable and inclusive basic education for children aged 3 to 

15 years, students aged 15 years and above, and students at the post -secondary level, the Post -

2015 Education Sector Plan (2018 –2030) identifies certain indicators, including : 

- the gender parity index based on the gross enrolment rate in general, second ary and 

technical education 

- the proportion of girls in the fields of agriculture, science and technology, and industrial 

science and technology 

- the proportion of children with disabilities enrolled at primary school Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 322 

- the dropout rate of persons with disabilities in special instit utions (from 2.2 per cent in 2016 

to 0 per cent between 2021 and 2030). 

In its Voluntary National Review of Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals 2018, 

the country has identified other indicators of inclusive education, including the parity index 

(rural/urban) of the gross enrolment rate in primary/secondary education. Finally, the Benin Data 

Portal presents some data on all levels of education, poverty, literacy and social inequalities. 

Benin has abolished school fees and is carrying out t he recommendations of its 2007 Educational 

Forum. In 2018, the net primary enrollment rate was 97 percent. Gross enrollment rate in 

secondary education has greatly increased in the last two decades, from 21.8 percent in 2000 to 

59 percent in 2016, 67.1 per cent in the case of males and 50.7 percent for females. Because of 

a rapid increase in the enrollment rate, the student/teacher ratio rose from 36:1 in 1990 to 53:1 in 

1997 but has dropped again in the last years to 39:1 (2018). In 2018, the gross enrollme nt ratio 

in tertiary education was 12.5%. 

The overall adult literacy rate is 42.4 percent (2018), significantly lower than in neighbors Togo 

(63.7%) and Nigeria (62%). Only 31.1% of women in Benin 15 years or older are literate, although 

this number incre ases to 51.9% for the 15 -24 years old (69.8% for men). 

The Human Rights Measurement Initiative (HRMI) finds that Benin is fulfilling only 77.6% of what 

it should be fulfilling for the right to education based on the country's level of income. HRMI breaks 

down the right to education by looking at the rights to both primary education and secondary 

education. While taking into consideration Benin's income level, the nation is achieving 96.5% of 

what should be possible based on its resources (income) for prima ry education but only 58.8% 

for secondary education. 

The Contribution of Civil Society 

For the purposes of this research, the term “civil society” is used to refer to organized groups or 

associations that “are separate from the state, enjoy some autonom y in relations from the state, 

and are formed voluntarily by members of society to protect or extend their interests, values or 

identities.” This is the definition employed by Manor, Robinson and White in their Ford Foundation 

study of civil society and go vernance. It draws on the sociological conceptualization of civil society 

as a realm situated between the state and other basic building blocks of society (individuals, 

families and firms) (Manor, Robinson & White 1999 ; Mercer 2002 ; Edwards 2004). 

A wid e range of civil society organizations might be expected to be active in education. In this 

research we thus focused primarily on formal civil society actors operating within the national 

educational policy arena : non -governmental organizations, parents’ associations, teachers’ 

unions, faith -based organizations, private provider groups, and networks or coalitions. We 

recognize that by doing so we may have excluded forms of civil society organization that are 

unique to African cultural contexts, or that are located at the local or community level (Hyden 2006 

; Mercer 2003 ; Lewis 2002). One of the recommendations from our study is for further research Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 323 

on the interface between formal civil society organizations in education and the local citizens, 

members an d communities they suppose to represent. 

Coalition béninoise des organisations pour l’éducation pour tous (the Beninese Coalition of 

Organizations for Education for All – CBO -EPT) provides tools for parents of pupils with 

disabilities. The Programme to Su pport the Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities (PAIPH) 

supports this group through awareness -raising and training activities. It is responsible for installing 

(portable) ramps and other modifications in schools. Other initiatives in favour of inclusive 

education carried out by CBO -EPT should also be noted. The organization organizes training for 

parents, teachers, inspection bodies, supervisors and school inspectors. 

Other initiatives implemented by NGOs to promote girls' education have also been introd uced, 

including exempting girls from school fees. The most effective measures have been reducing 

costs for families (particularly through free education) and sustained advocacy and awareness -

raising activities. 

Obviously, there is a need for harmonizatio n in an education goals framework. « Often the 

disharmony is a result of a reporting framework that often privileges some targets and indicators 

above others. A new post -2015 education framework should, at a minimum, bring the two 

frameworks together withi n a unified architecture buttressed by unified reporting mechanisms and 

processes. 

At the same time, a global goals framework should ensure that it is responsive to and reflects 

regional and national priorities and specificities. In this respect, it is possible to conceive of a 

global education agenda framed in such a way that there are common goals with some broad 

common targets, and which allow for regional and national modification and interpretation of 

targets and by implication indicators 4.

Table 1 below presents an overarching goal for education with three key objectives and eight 

specific targets. Each target has a set of indicative indicators against which progress can be 

tracked.    

> 4Education in the Post -2015 Development Agenda -DRAFT Synthesis Report of the Global Thematic Consultation
> on Education

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 324 

Overall Goal : By 2030, ensure equitable, free and inclusive quality education and 

lifelong learning for all 

Objective 1 : By 2030, the right of every child to complete a full cycle of continuous, 

free, quality early childhood, primary and secondary education is fulfil led. 

TARGETS  INDICATORS 

Target 1 : All children are enrolled 

in school by 2020, and completing 

a full cycle by 2030 

Number and percentage of children who are enrolled 

in early childhood education 

Number and percentage of children who have 

completed at least one year of free pre -primary 

education by 2020, and by 2025. 

Number and percentage of children who enrol in and 

complete a full cycle of free primary education 

Number and percentage of children completing free 

quality secondary educa tion 

Target 2 : By 2025, all children are 

taught by qualified teachers who 

have training in pedagogy, rights 

and gender sensitivity, in an 

accessible and safe environment 

Percentage of children taught by trained and 

qualified teachers, with clear and tran sparent 

national benchmarks for qualified teacher status 

which includes training in pedagogy, rights and 

gender sensitivity. 

Ratio of qualified teachers to pupils, disaggregated 

by location (i.e. rural -urban, sub -national, district). 

Number and percentage of educational 

environments that have accessible, inclusive, safe 

and adequate infrastructure and facilities for all 

students, and are free from violence and attack. 

Target 3 : By 2030, all children 

complete full cycle of inclusive 

quality and gender sensitive 

education with relevant learning 

achievements determined through 

multiple measures 

Percentage of schools with teaching and learning 

resources (i.e. textbooks) that are non -

discriminatory, and are available for all students from 

the beginning of the school year. 

Percentage of children in pre -primary and grades 1 

and 2 who are educated in their mother tongue. 

Percentage of children who demonstrate learning 

achievement in foundational competencies of 

literacy, numeracy, and glob al citizenship (human 

rights, sustainable development, peace, sexual and 

reproductive health and intercultural dialogue), 

according to national benchmarks that are relevant 

to the student. 

Objective 2 : By 2030, all young people and adults are literate and have the 

knowledge and skills to participate fully in society and the world of work. 

TARGETS  INDICATORS Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 325 

Target 4 : All young people (15 -24) 

are fully literate by 2025, and all 

adults (15+) fully literate by 2030 

Percentage of young people (15 -24) with full literacy 

by 2020 and 2025. 

Percentage of adults (15+) with full literacy by 2020, 

2025 and 2030. 

Percentage of youth and adults who have access to 

and complete second -chance education 

programmes (ensuring those who have missed out 

on education due to conflict, migration, gender, or 

other reasons, are able to gain an education). 

Target 5 : By 2030 th ere is an 

increase of at least 50% in the 

participation of people from 

disadvantaged groups in quality 

further education (technical and 

vocational education and training, 

and tertiary education), and a 

narrowing of the gap in 

participation rates between mo re 

and less advantaged groups. 

The percentage of people from different 

disadvantaged groups participating in further 

education by 2025 

Ratio of trained teachers per student (relevant to 

subject) 

Percentage of learning centres that are safe, 

accessible and have adequate infrastructure. 

Percentage of young people and adults with 

knowledge, skills and competences for the world of 

work and active global citizenship. 

Objective 3 : By 2030, there are adequate and sustainable financing and governance 

structures for education, that are transparent and participatory. 

TARGETS  INDICATORS 

Target 6 : Governments calculate 

and allocate adequate domestic 

finance to ensure equitable, free 

and inclusive quality education and 

lifelong learning for all, including by 

allocating at least 20% of national 

budgets to education of which at 

least half (10% of the budget) 

should be for basic education.1 

Percentage of the national budget allocated to 

ed ucation 

Percentage of the national budget allocated to basic 

education 

Development of a fully costed national education 

plan and a financing strategy 

Proportion of total education budget that is financed 

from domestic revenues (taxation, natural resource 

revenues, etc.) 

Target 7 : Donors and the 

international community provide 

increased, sustained and sufficient 

high -quality financing for education 

through overseas development 

assistance (ODA), including by 

allocating at least 10% of each 

donor’s ODA to basic education2 

and at least 4% of humanitarian aid 

to education. 

Percentage of ODA going to education 

Percentage of ODA going to basic education 

Percentage of humanitarian aid allocated to 

education 

Proportion of ODA for education that is harmonised 

behind national education sector plans (e.g. pooled 

fund, sectorwide approaches (SWAp), given through 

GPE, etc.) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 326 

Target 8 : Citizens, represented 

through formal civil society 

structures, are fully informe d of and 

engaged in the development and 

monitoring of education sector 

policies and programmes, at 

school, sub -national and national 

level 

Percentage of decision -making national and sub -

national education sector committees and working 

groups that fully inc lude civil society representatives 

and teachers’ representatives. 

Percentage of schools and learning centres with 

functional management committees that include 

teachers, facilitators, parents, students, and 

community and local CSO representatives. 

Publ ication of education budgets, plans, data, donor 

programmes and spending information for school, 

subnational and national levels, in all national 

languages, within one month of finalisation. 

TABLE 1 : An Education Goal for the Post -2015 Sustainable Deve lopment Framework 5

Many coalition members have limited technical capacity to analyze education policies and 

strategies. That’s why a referential tools has been proposed to serve as a guideline to Civil Society 

organizations’ capacity development activities (Table 2). 

That tool presents the targets identified in the education goal for the post -2015 sustainable 

development framework, as well as CSOs’ str ategies including advocacy, social mobilization, 

political and legal enforceability, development of knowledge and research, and communication. 

These areas of intervention are associated with a list of competences that define CSOs’ 

professionalism. The too l is supposed to be the starting point of capacity development activities 

in that it can serve for capacity assessment, implementation and evaluation. 

STRATEGIES 

BY TARGET  ADVOCACY 

SOCIAL 

MOBILIZATI 

ON 

POLITICAL 

AND 

LEGAL 

ENFORCEA 

BILITY 

DEVELOPM 

ENT OF 

KNO WLED 

GE AND 

RESEARCH 

COMMUNICA 

TION 

Target 1 : All 

children are 

enrolled in 

school by 2020, 

and completing 

a full cycle by 

2030. 

Dialogue with 

communities 

about education 

as the future 

Raising 

awareness 

about the 

importance of 

education. 

Defini ng 

mechanisms 

for 

engagement 

of CSOs and 

citizens 

Efforts to 

address the 

issues of 

Ensuring 

the 

constitution 

al right to 

Education. 

Commitmen 

t to the 

realization 

Conducting 

research on 

children 

enrollment 

constraints 

in specific 

areas. 

Communicati 

ng about 

equity of 

access to 

education. 

Sensitising 

communities 

to the    

> 5Equitable, inclusive and free : a collective vision for quality education beyond 2015 ; Global Campaign for Education.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 327 

Supporting 

innovative ways 

for communities 

to ensure that 

all children are 

able to access 

quality 

education 

within a 

framework of 

national 

education 

plans, in a way 

that links this to 

advocacy. 

retention and 

progression 

of 

Students. 

of human 

right to 

education. 

A political 

commitment 

to universal 

free primary 

education. 

Enhance 

their own 

participation 

in the 

developmen 

t and 

implementat 

ion of 

national 

education 

sector 

plans. 

Holding 

government 

s

accountable 

for their 

policy on 

gender. 

Holding 

government 

s and 

donors 

accountable 

to the ir 

commitment 

s and 

spending 

towards 

Education 

for All. 

Training and 

research on 

communicati 

on and other 

strategies. 

CSOs need 

to be able to 

operate and 

they need to 

be strong 

and well -

prepared 

with 

knowledge 

on technical 

topics 

Build 

demand for 

and 

strengthen 

country - and 

global -level 

capacities to 

collect, 

analyze, and 

use gender -

and age -

disaggregat 

ed data on 

education. 

It assists 

non -

government 

al 

organisation 

s and 

researchers 

to analyse 

budget 

policies and 

to improve 

importance of 

education 

budget work. 

Monitoring 

government 

expenditure 

on education 

and using 

findings to 

inform 

advocacy 

activities. 

Disseminating 

information in 

time to allow 

stakeholders 

to influence 

policy 

debates. 

Involving the 

media to 

maximise the 

visibility of 

research. 

Being able to 

generate data 

and evidence 

through data 

collection 

from 

communities 

and analysis, 

research and 

evaluation 

activities in 

their 

respective 

countries and 

Target 2 : By 

2025, all 

children are 

taught by 

qualified 

teachers who 

have training in 

pedagogy, 

rights and 

gender 

sensitivity, in an 

accessible and 

safe 

environment. 

Ability to 

appreciate the 

number of 

teachers 

recruited and 

trained 

Monitoring 

teaching and 

learning 

materials 

deliverence in a 

timely manner. 

Promoting 

curriculum 

development 

and the 

capacity and 

professional 

development 

of teachers 

and 

increased 

teacher 

recruitment 

and 

assignment in 

rural areas. 

Target 3 : By 

2030, all 

children 

complete full 

cycle of 

inclusive quality 

and gender 

sensitive 

education with 

relevant 

learning 

Examines 

budgets to 

assess whether 

they benefit 

men and 

women equally 

integration of a 

gender 

perspective into 

budget 

analysis. 

Prevent and 

address 

school -

related 

gender -based 

violence. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 328 

achievements 

determined 

through multiple 

measures. 

Ability to 

understand 

the budget’s 

legal and 

institutional 

framework, 

and timing 

of the 

budget 

cycle. 

Analysing 

the national 

budget and 

allocations 

to education 

in relation to 

education 

policies and 

plans. 

budget 

processes, 

systems and 

institutions. 

Research on 

the effects of 

budget 

policies on 

the poor. 

Analyses the 

allocation 

and use of 

public 

resources to 

understand 

the impact of 

budgets on 

the poor. 

Build the 

capacity of 

civil society 

organi sation 

s in budget 

work 

Develop 

budget 

training 

expertise 

that can be 

directed at 

increasing 

the 

analytical 

and 

advocacy 

at the regional 

and global 

level. 

Target 4 : All 

young people 

(15 -24) are fully 

literate by 2025, 

and all adults 

(15+) fully 

literate by 2030. 

Learning and 

empowerment 

across genders 

and age 

groups. 

Proactive 

approach to 

improve 

school -

readiness 

and school 

attainment is 

needed. 

Target 5 : By 

2030 there is an 

increase of at 

least 50% in the 

participation of 

people from 

disadvantaged 

groups in quality 

further 

education 

(technical and 

vocational 

education and 

training, and 

tertiary 

education), and 

a narrowing of 

the gap in 

participa tion 

rates between 

more and less 

advantaged 

groups. 

The inclusion of 

disabled people 

through 

physical, 

remedial and 

social support, 

and the 

provision of 

safe learning 

spaces for the 

larger 

community as a 

whole. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 329 

Target 6 :

Governments 

calculate and 

allocate 

adequate 

domestic 

finance to 

ensure 

equitable, free 

and inclusive 

quality 

education and 

lifelong learning 

for all, including 

by allocating at 

least 20% of 

national budgets 

to education of 

which at least 

half (10% of the 

budget) should 

be for basic 

education. 

Advocacy :

- towards the 

Government to 

meet the 

international 

benchmark of 

spending a total 

of 20% of 

national budget 

on education, 

focusing at 

least half of that 

to basic 

education  6;

- to demand 

adequate 

educati on 

financing ;

- to regulate 

exorbitant 

school fees 

charged by the 

private sector ;

- Raising 

strategic 

questions on 

education 

financing with 

the ministries of 

education and 

finance. 

Enabling local 

communities 

to monitor 

spending on 

education 

both at 

na tional and 

local levels. 

Using 

participatory 

methods to 

allow 

communities 

to monitor the 

use of 

education 

resources. 

Improving 

transparency 

and 

accountability 

in the use of 

resources for 

primary 

education. 

capacity of 

civil society 

organisation 

s and 

legislatures.    

> 6Fund the Future :An action plan for funding the Global Partnership for Education, FUND THE FUTURE, GLOBAL
> CAMPAIGN FOR EDUCATION.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 330 

Target 7 :

Donors and the 

international 

community 

provide 

increased, 

sustained and 

sufficient high -

quality financing 

for education 

through 

overseas 

development 

assistance 

(ODA), including 

by allocating at 

least 10% of 

each donor’s 

ODA to basic 

education and 

at least 4% of 

humanitarian 

aid to education. 

Advocating for 

increased 

resources to 

the education 

sector. 

Increasing 

degree of 

coordination 

among donors, 

and between 

donors and 

governments. 

-

Target 8 :

Citizens, 

represented 

through formal 

civil society 

structures, are 

fully informed of 

and engaged in 

the 

development 

and monitoring 

of education 

sector policies 

and 

programmes, at 

school, sub -

national and 

national level. 

Citizens’particip 

ation for the 

ri ght to 

education. 

civil society 

participation at 

decentralized 

levels of 

educational 

governance. 

Participation 

in design and 

implementatio 

n of national 

and local 

education 

plans 

Have closer 

contacts with 

communities, 

and they can 

be the bridge 

so that 

st udent, 

parent or 

teacher 

concerns 

about the 

quality of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 331 

education 

services 

reach policy 

makers. 

Have 

representatio 

n of the 

marginalised 

groups in 

their own 

organisations 

and can talk 

on their 

behalf. 

TABLE 2 : List of Competences for CSOs’ Professionalization. 

The Role of Universities in SDGs 

This sequence of the paper draws from Wanjiku. J. Thukia’s research on the role of universities 

in Sustainable Development Goals 7.

According to Mr Thukia, vocational training centers and research sectors are highly recognized in 

few SDGs. However, the universities’ boost is needed to achieve all of the SDGs (Bhowmik, 

2017). At a glance, the SDGs transverse a wide range of specific sectors namely : agriculture, 

health, gender equality, water and sanitation, energy, industry and innovation, infrastructure, etc., 

and under each area, higher education institutions make a huge contribution. Whether in teaching, 

research, community engagement or advisory services. The uniques functions and expertise of 

universities are very vital for overcoming the interconnected social, economic and environmental 

challenges which are covered by the SDGs agenda Bhowmik, (2017). Arguably the SDGs will not 

be achieved without these sectors. (Sel im et al.,2017) identifies the key roles of universities under 

four main categories as : 

• Universities can address challenges of SDGs by improvising new innovations, 

solutions, and knowledge to curb the negative implications. 

• Universities can formulate and evaluate result -based policies and establish 

monitoring mechanisms on progress.  

> 7Thukia, W.J. The role of universities in Sustainable Development Goals : The Erasmus program focus ; Masters
> Student, Department of Hospita lity and Tourism Management, School of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure Studies,
> Kenyatta University, jshikut@gmail.com.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 332 

• Since SDGs’ accomplishment require a ‘wholeness -orientation’, universities are in a 

better position to provide professional and personal skills, capabilities to create future 

leaders, decision -makers, innovators, entrepreneurs and citizens with knowledge 

and motivation to contribute. 

Universities hold a position of neutral and trusted stakeholders within society. They also have a 

key role in educating the public and other sectors on the SDGs and in advocating for the 

importance of the SDGs. Bhowmik, J. et al. (2017) resolves that the engagement of the 

universities towards the achievement of SDGs is broadly on the merits of research, education, 

operations and gove rnance and external leadership. His work looks deeply on each contribution 

and recommends steps towards accomplishing them. 

So Universities can contribute to tackle barriers towards the implementation of SDGs, critically 

that related to education by mitig ating any kind of constraints as well as specific needs and policy -

based difficulties. 

‘To contribute to the SDGs through education, universities can :

• Incorporate the SDG agenda and Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) principles 

into all undergr aduate and graduate courses and into graduate research training. 

• Offer executive education and capacity building courses for external stakeholders on SDGs 

and the knowledge needs to address them. 

• Promote both students and community volunteering activities that address the SDGs. 

• Develop exchange relationships with universities of developing countries and those that 

address training programs to address SDGs. 

The universities can contribute to research.  They : 

• Support the full spectrum of research approaches needed to address the SDGs including 

the interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research. 

• Advocate for national support and coordination of research on SDGs. 

• Support capacity building for developing countries to undertake the use of research on 

SDGs. 

• Encourage and support researchers to engage in global research community efforts to 

support SGDs (such as international assessments and syntheses of the current state of 

knowledge. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 333 

• Map how universities’ researches and resea rch strengths align with the SDGs and identify 

key researchers. 

• Arrange innovation challenges to address SDGs for researchers across the University and 

external stakeholders 8’. 

Research Limitations/Simplications 

The success of the SDG Agenda depends h eavily on efficient and robust monitoring of its 

progress. But one of the main difficulties faced in the framework of this research is the problem 

of access to informations, due to the lack of disaggregated data and timely, accurate and reliable 

standardiz ed data. This kind of situation did not facilitate an accurate progress tracking leading, 

to some biais in the research results, even if they are minor. 

The analysis and findings are subject to the limitations of the data used. 

Then, it is commonly stated that the sustainable development goals are integrated and inclusive. 

They were developed on the recognition that there are inherent synergies between all the goals; 

they are interconnected. Successfully addressing one issue will inadvertently also tackle others. 

So it was not possible to deal with the battery of interrelations of the chosen topic with all of the 

SDGs. 

Originality/Value of the Paper 

This paper examines the complexity of the debate about sustainable development goals, including 

the implementation of the 2030 education Agenda. While drawing from knowledge produced by 

high rank professionals and experts, it carries out new ideas that can drive social advancement. 

The research proposes simple frameworks to deal with the complex system of SDG 4 and foster 

future collaboration on this matter. 

It also provides strategic measures based, not on the traditional discourse, but rather on a short 

term consideration due to the close 2030 deadline.    

> 8Thukia, W.J. The role of universities in Sustainable Development Goals : The Erasmus program focus ; Masters
> Student, Department of Hospitality and Tourism Management, School of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure Studies,
> Kenyatta University, jshikut@gmail.com

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 334 

Conclusion 

This resear ch paper highlights the efforts made Republic of Benin in the implementation of 2030 

education Agenda. The country has the merit of showing leadership by drafting a Post -2015 

Education Sector Plan for the period 2018 -2030. The Plan provides strategic optio ns for education 

for all and constitutes a pathway to achieving the defined goals. 

Our research has also outlined a sort of disharmony between national and international 

frameworks which are normally supposed to set unified targets and indicators for moni toring and 

reporting purpose. To quote Mr Antonio GUTERRES, Secretary -General of the United Nations, 

‘‘without evidence of where we stand now, we cannot confidently chart our path forward in 

realizing the Sustainable Development Goals. To that end, this re port also reflects on the 

challenges faced in the collection, processing, analysis and dissemination of reliable, timely, 

accessible and sufficiently disaggregated data, and calls for better evidence -based 

policymaking’’. 

The civil society engagement is also noted in the implementation of the education sector plan. 

However, its efforts to deal with all the aspects of its mission are not well perceived due to lack of 

capacity and a real need of appropriate tools. To fill the gaps, education, research and innovation 

are essential, making Universities key contributors to achieving the goals. 

References 

Basic Education, Civil Society Participation and the New Aid Architecture: Lessons from Burkina 

Faso, Kenya, Mali and Tanzan ia by Karen Mundy, Principal Investigator with Suzanne 

Cherry, Megan Haggerty, Richard Maclure, and Malini Sivasubramaniam 2008; 

CIVIL SOCIETY ADVOCACY FOR THE HUMAN RIGHT TO EDUCATION: stories and lessons 

learned from Latin America and the Caribbean VO LUME 3, produced by Campaňa 

Americana, with the support of Global Campaign for Education and Global Partnership 

for education. 

Civil Society Engagement in Education Budgets : A report documenting Commonwealth 

Education Fund Experience, Global Campaign for Education, Save the Children, Oxfam, 

Actionaid. 

Education in the Post -2015 Development Agenda DRAFT Synthesis Report of the 

Global Thematic Consultation on Education; Prepared for UNICEF/UNESCO; Draft –

May 2013. 

Equitable, inclusive and free : a collective vision for quality education beyond 2015; Global 

Campaign for Education. 

The Sustainable Development Goals Report, 201 8; Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 335 

Thukia, W.J. The role of universities in Sustainable Development Goals : The Erasmus 

program focus ; Masters Student, Department of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 

School of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure Studies, Kenyatta University, 

jshiku t@gmail.com; 

Universities and Sustainable Development; Towards the Global Goals ; European University 

Association. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 336 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 337 

# A Stud y on Enhancing the E -Learning and 

# the 21 st Century Competence Skills Training 

# in Institutions of Higher Learning 

Joy Ayebare, Racheal Babirye, and Kenneth Wabuteya 

(Institute of Advanced Leadership, Uganda) 

Abstract 

A universal education system relies on several factors, but perhaps the most fundamental is 

access to education. The fundamental focus of the MDGs was expanding access to elementary 

education, and this theme continues in SDG4 in a slightly revised form. En rollment rates are the 

most fundamental indicator of educational opportunity. Uganda has listed basic enrolment as a 

national indicator, despite the fact that such metrics are not utilized for the global SDG4 objectives. 

“Uganda Bureau of statistics Uganda report 2020” This paper used both qualitative and 

quantitative methods of research. The qualitative method helped in the exploration of experiences 

and concepts of the subject matter in detail through literature review. The research revealed that 

some of the modes of instruction that are used in institutions are traditional, hybrid, simulation, e -

learning and handouts. The respondents revealed that there is a great need to inspire and create 

a positive mind -set of the students and lecturers to the new mode of teaching and learning in the 

different institutions so as to enhance their adaptability to the e -learning systems. The paper 

recommended that administrators of virtual schools are encouraged to engage in more extensive 

professional development. In addi tion, policymakers are urged to respect faculty independence 

and refrain from intervening too closely in the educational process. Institutional investment is 

critical to the development of e -learning. 

Key words: e-learning, Quality, High Education , Institutions, COVID 19, Competence, 

employment, technical and vocational skills 

Introduction 

The development of Uganda's education system is the focus of a lot of interest right now. 

Therefore, educational institutions are extensively using technology to give another alternative of 

course delivery to students. As a result, educational sectors need to guarantee that these 

technologies are used properly within the sector itself. One of the more recently develo ped and 

widely used technologies in education is known as collaborative eLearning. This technology plays 

a significant part in the rise in the number of students enrolling in universities across the world, 

most notably in Ugandan universities, because most institutions have begun providing education 

in the form of learning. 

In the communities, neighborhoods, and workplaces of the 21st century, having a grasp of the 

cultures of the globe and the capacity to communicate with people who come from a variety of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 338 

backgrounds are necessary abilities. Because students in online learning contexts have access 

to vastly larger networks of individuals, they are in a better position than students in traditional 

classroom settings to develop the aforementioned abilities. Students have a much easier time 

collaborating with people from all over the world and picking up knowledge from them, which leads 

to an increased understanding of the global character of communities in the 21st century. 

It is expected of institutions of higher education that they will evolve so that they can meet the 

requirements of society. Because of this, institutions of higher education take on the critical duty 

of cultivating qualified personnel, which are essential to the functioning of society and the 

economy. In this environment, it is expected of individuals that when they graduate from 

institutions of higher education, they will have skills appropriate for the 21st century. Several 

studies have been conducted in order to ascertain the degree to which people in Uganda possess 

the skills necessary for the 21st century. The competency views of prospective teachers with 

reference to 21 st Century abilities were investigated in the study that was carried out by Aygün et 

al. (2016). 

Purpose 

There is a consensus among institutions of higher learning that e -learning improves the standard 

of instruction, while few have provided concrete proof. While there is a lot of circumstantial 

evidence, such as student satisfaction surveys, it may not be enough to di spel the widespread 

skepticism that exists regarding the pedagogical benefits of online learning. It is in line with this 

that this project is envisioned towards enhancing e -Learning Laboratory facilities and promotion 

of the 21 st Century Competency Skills Trainings to institutions of higher learning in Kampala in 

order to achieve sustainable quality education in the country. 

Background Literature 

The possible impact of e -learning on universities' institutional futures is now being considered and 

negotiat ed. There are still significant hurdles in certain establishments and in particular nations. 

The lack of trust in the pedagogical value of e -learning and the lack of investment in training 

faculty and staff are two of the most difficult obstacles to overco me. Institutions are pondering 

reorganization in light of e -learning in terms of personnel, staff development, course design, and 

student assistance as they work to incorporate e -learning into the fabric of their operations and 

get adequate financing for i t. Institutions of higher learning everywhere have come to recognize 

the importance of hiring specialists in fields outside of academia, such as computer scientists, to 

complement their existing academic personnel (Elçiçek and Erdemci, 2021). Getting prese nt 

faculty members on board with and invested in e -learning development is another obstacle. It is 

generally agreed that "staff development" is crucial to the long -term success of online education 

at the university level. Institutions are attempting to fin d a balance between faculty members and 

"new" employees focused on the technological components of e -learning. For the time being at 

least, the commercialization and internationalization of e -learning take a back seat to the day -to -

day issues of implementi ng e -learning on college campuses. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 339 

Faculty members' reluctance to embrace e -learning may stem, in part, from their awareness of e -

limits learning's and the immaturity of the technologies now at their disposal. Inadequate literacy 

in either ICT in general or in e -learning programs, as well as a lack of time or willingness to carry 

out what is really an additional activity, because e -learning generally supplements rather than 

replaces classroom -based education (Wani, 2013). 

E-learning and the information sharing it entails may also clash with the professional culture of 

academia, which is predicated on independence and a compensation structure that is frequently 

centered on research. Intellectual property rights issues might potentially be problematic. Cle arly, 

additional e -learning advancements depend on establishing a community of e -learning adopters 

inside and across institutions, as well as on knowledge management methods generally 

pertaining to e -learning (Ndibalema, 2020). However, the real difficulti es lie in expanding effective 

trials and disseminating and institutionalizing best methods. 

Partnerships are an integral part of e -learning because they enable institutions to pool resources 

and learn from one another, which in turn improves educational q uality, market presence, and 

operational efficiency. Some organizations are already working on things like e-learning 

infrastructure, learning management systems and apps, the development of joint programs, 

collaborative marketing, research collaboration, the exchange of best practices, and the 

distribution of hardware and software expenses. However, problems can also arise from a 

relationship. Whether or whether third parties should be charged for access to e -learning 

resources is one such issue. One more aspect is how people feel about sending their e -learning 

projects overseas for completion. Institutions of higher education seldom give strategic 

consideration to making their course materials available to outside parties, and they view 

outsourcing as havi ng either little or no long -term benefit. There is room for improvement in how 

successfully partnerships and networking are utilized to disseminate information and best 

practices within certain industries. 

Methodology Used 

In this paper the researchers used both qualitative and quantitative methods of research. The 

qualitative method helped in the exploration of experiences and concepts of the subject matter in 

detail through literature review. On the other hand, the quantitative method helpe d the researcher 

get facts from the field through questionnaires and interviews that helped in making analysis 

thereby deducing a conclusion (Bryman, 2006). 

Originality/Value of the Paper 

The research presented in this paper is an original concept of the team members of Quality 

Education SDG4. the team followed all the ethical guidelines. In areas where information was 

obtained from already existing work, the researchers acknowledged the authors of the cited 

works. This paper specifically looks at SDG 4, quality education. It will be of great value to 

stakeholders as it will give an overview of what is taking place across the sector. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 340 

Findings /Discussion 

Our respondents were 100 youth, 57 females and 43 males and 5 instructors, 3 males and 2 

females f rom five different institutions of higher learning. 

The research was done on 100 students and 5 institutional heads from five different institutions 

and the results are presented in the paragraphs. The research involved use of both primary and 

secondary data collection methods. Data collection was done for 4 days and our sample size was 

105 (59 females 46 male) respondents in different categories as broken down below. 

All the students were below the age of (25) offering diploma and certificate courses. Five heads 

of higher educational institutions interview ed by the team. All institutional heads that were 

interviewed were between the age bracket of 41 to years to 58 years of age. 

The Number of Sisters or Brothers the Respondents Had 

Most of the respondents had between one to five siblings that were aged be tween 4 to 25 years 

pursuing different levels of education ranging from Primary to tertiary education where the majority 

of our respondents were studying. The research revealed that some of the modes of instruction 

that are used in institutions are traditi onal, hybrid, simulation, e -learning and handouts. The mode 

of instruction commonly used changed because of the effects of COVID 19 to the hybrid mode of 

learning whereby both physical and e -learning were adopted by various tertiary institutions. 

In addit ion, the respondents revealed that the challenges faced with the above mode of instruction 

are fewer contact hours as lecturers are distant and difficult to meet making it hard for students 

to interact with them. The internet network is an issue making it difficult to complete assignments 

and also the system slows down during examinations or tests. The data costs are high making it 

difficult to attend lectures sometimes. The e -learning platform has regular breakdowns due to 

# Respondents breakdown 

> Female students
> Male students
> female instructors
> male instructors

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 341 

traffic when student’s login. Fi nally, the traditional mode of instruction has been affected by 

COVID 19 and changing from traditional to digital learning is a challenge. 

Possible Solutions were Shared by the Respondents that can Curb the Challenges above 

which Included: 

The respondent s revealed that there is a great need to inspire and create a positive mind -set of 

the students and lecturers to the new mode of teaching and learning in the different institutions 

so as to enhance their adaptability to the e -learning systems. 

In addition, a greater percentage of the respondents noted that there is a need to identify and hire 

experts / technical staff to train and improve on the administrative support in a bid to help 

institutions get familiar with the new modes of instruction that they were going to use with the 

learners. It was observed that the internet connectivity was poor in most of the tertiary institutions 

and respondents proposed that the government should offer incentives to telecom companies so 

that the internet charges c an become more affordable for the ordinary users. There are several 

labs with systems that were broken down due to poor maintenance. Regular maintenance of the 

digital learning gadgets to avoid system breakdown was recommended by the majority 

respondents. Engagement of both instructors and learners in mind -set transformation Programs 

to strengthen the 21 st Century Competency Skills Training such as critical thinking, problem 

solving, and team building, among others. 

According to the Respondents, All the To ols Listed Below are Used in their Institutions 

Our respondents shared with our team the available tools used in teaching and they mentioned 

amongst them projectors, whiteboards, stationary, computers (desktops), internet servers, 

photocopiers and printer s. It was also observed that most of the tools mentioned above are 

available in the institutions but unfortunately, they are not cost friendly to the learners / students. 

It was noticed respondents face challenges in their mode of instruction; internet ch arges are 

expensive, low Internet speed, Inadequate computers (you find that 3 -4 students are sharing one 

computer and tools cost for example; projectors and printers. 

These are Some of the Remedies that were Shared by the Respondents to Improve the 

Quali ty of Education in the Community 

The institutions should make education more practical than theoretical i.e. carrying out fieldwork. 

In addition, promoting Mind -set changing programs to better the 21 st Century Competencies to all 

students so as to compete for global job opportunities. There is need to put in place an enabling 

environment for education so that both the students and the instructors get to see improvement 

and development as well as enforcing e -learning through rural electrification where peop le can 

charge their e -learning devices. Finally, there should be internet connectivity within institutions of 

higher learning to enable students access internet easily and awareness is key and should be 

done first on how to use the tools to create a new tr end of education and also investing in the 

various gadgets to make it more practical. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 342 

The Accessibility of the Internet is Moderate According to the Responses that were Gotten 

These are Some of the Remedies that were Given by the Respondents on How Best the 

Issue of Internet can be Addressed in the Community 

Zero rating the e -learning platforms e.g. zoom links embedded on the e -learning platform. 

According to most of the students that were interviewed, they do not get support from their 

institutions re garding internet access, most of the students belong to institutional clubs in their 

respective schools and in addition, some students are part of the debating club society, writers 

club, interact club, youth alive among others and these encouraged outreac hes to other 

institutions to help youth explore their talents further. In addition, expanding the worthy networks 

to remote areas and reducing the internet costs and having access to Wi -Fi and attaching minimal 

costs when getting to some systems like e -lea rning. 

The key leadership roles some of the respondents took up in their respective clubs were head 

researcher in the debate club responsible for collecting all data regarding a specific debate topic, 

Secretary of the writers Club which involved creative writing and thinking, in charge of Welfare in 

the Youth Alive Club that involved ensuring that all members in the club were fully catered for. 

Some of the challenges the respondents faced during their leadership were lack of effective 

cooperation with all members of the club, procrastination of club activities, and conflicting royalty 

amongst club members among others. 

These shortcomings were handled by having round table talks with all club members regarding 

what needs to be done and laying common strateg ic goals for the flourishment of the club, 

consulting teachers for guidance in situations that were out of hand. 

From the five institutions we visited, they all seemed to have the same challenges with the 

exception of one. The four had computer laboratory facilities but with: 

Limited access to internet connectivity due to high tariffs; incompetent computer instructo rs due 

to poor salary payment, and lack of moral / motivation from students and instructors to use ICT; 

theft caused by students removing components of computers during lessons; low student turn -up 

for training modules caused by inadequate computers in the classroom, poor and outdated / poor 

quality computer machines; poor 21 st Century Competence Skills Training to almost all students 

for secondary, and University students; poor strategies for future jobs attributed to lack of 

mentorship, guidance and couns eling to students; due to the fact that schools do not provide 

hands -on / technical skills training, and survival skills great number of youths fail to create jobs 

after school; and most students do not match career to Talent hence wrong and poor career 

se lection. 

One institution had a 50 -seater computer laboratory with only chairs and tables but without any 

one computer they seemed to be waiting for donors and grant fees. We observed most Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 343 

professionals in the community have jobs that do not match their qualificati ons, an issue that 

compromises standards of service delivery, this is attributed to mismatch of career and talent 

including lack of 21 st Century Competence skills training to students of previous academic years. 

This issue has led to many challenges in the job industry and robbed most scholars of quality 

services. There is need for trainings to both students and instructors to have basic skills of digital 

e-learning and 21 st Century Competence skills training. 

Research Limitations/Implications 

This resea rch had limitations, which included limited resources, which prompted us to use a 

limited scope of survey and other methods of data collection like zoom meetings, questionnaires, 

phone calls, WhatsApp calls and interviews. 

The team lacked previous researc h works on the 21 st Century Competencies skills training since 

this is a new trend. 

For reasons we did not have enough finances, high Internet rates also pivoted us to adapt the 

idea of making interview phone calls so as to record responses, poor network issues prompted 

the team to switch to personal interactions in a few institutions in order to collect some of the 

information that we captured and (finding study participants) some respondents/students were 

not fully engaged and responding to the questions that were asked. These challenges might have 

hindered getting the expected results of the study. 

Recommendations 

The following recommendations were made by the researchers after reviewing the information 

and the discussions: 

i. Administrators of virtual schools are encouraged to engage in more extensive professional 

development. There is an immediate need to provide effective professional training for 

administrators, which should focus on a progression from preservice training to leaders 

who can aid in th e training of their peers. It is also \recommended that criteria for essential 

performance qualities stated previously be developed with \accompanying research. 

Furthermore, the problems highlighted in this summary are seldom addressed in academic 

curricula, highlighting the need for change. 

ii. Uganda’s population growing fast at a rate of 3.3% by 2040 will require students to have 

E-Learning facilities and the 21 st Century Competence Skills training so that they have 

technologically savvy minds, to boost the escalating numbers of unemployment, reduce 

numbers of school dropouts in our communities, to lead to descent formal employment 

and to promote non -technical skil ls to the students. 

iii. Policymakers are urged to respect faculty independence and refrain from intervening too 

closely in the educational process. Institutional investment is critical to the development Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 344 

of e -learning. Above all else, policymakers and instit utions need to commit to a reasonable 

timeline for development. Then, perhaps, e -learning will be able to bring about a positive 

change in higher education. 

iv. The government should provide educators all throughout Uganda the training needed to 

effectively implement the e-learning system. As a field, educational research is 

consistently undervalued (Boeren 2016). Teachers, however, play a crucial role in the 

educational system. They implement education policy and make it easier for people of all 

ages to study . Teachers, from a structural and agency viewpoint, play a crucial role in 

connecting students to the larger society. To fulfill the SDGs' goal of making education 

available and accessible to everyone, teachers must first understand what this means. 

v. To ma ke it easier to report on both achievements and difficulties in achieving Sustainable 

Development Goal 4, the government ought to establish a mechanism for coordinating the 

tracking of all contributions made by various stakeholders, such as the private sec tor, 

CSOs, development partners, and community efforts, toward the achievement of SDG 4. 

vi. The public education system run by the government of Uganda suffers from severe 

funding shortages. In order to track and meet the goals of SDG4, it is necessary to invest 

significantly more resources in the construction of primary and secondary schools in 

islands and other difficult -to -reach areas, as well as in the recruitment and training of 

teachers, including providing incentives for and making accommodations for teacher 

deployment in these areas. 

vii. It is urgently necessary for the government to increase the availability of special education 

instructors and instructional materials in order to support inclusive education and to 

strengthen the capability of school administrators to properly administer and maintain 

special education facilities. SNE continues to place a significant amount of emphasis on 

specialized units and schools. 

Conclusion 

The system of education in Uganda has a structure of 7 years of Primary, 6 years of Secondary 

(divided into 4 years of Ordinary and 2 years of Advanced levels of edu cation), and 3 to 5 years 

of Post -Secondary Education. Despite the long journey of study, there are increasing numbers of 

unemployed women, men, and youth including an escalating number of school dropouts. 

Statistics show that 30% of the 70% of unemployed youth in Uganda are graduates. 400,000 

graduates are released annually into the job market to compete for approximately 9,000 available 

formal jobs. According to the UNICEF annual report 2019, Uganda, like many other African 

country, faces a major challeng e in the provision of quality and accessible basic education. This 

challenge has been escalated further by the COVID 19 pandemic as a result of the drastic 

transition from the traditional to digital mode of learning. This project seeks to promote the 

enhan cement of the digital learning lab facilities and promotion of the 21 st Century Competency 

skills training in tertiary Institutions in Kampala District to reduce the escalating unemployment Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 345 

rate and other related challenges. Learners and instructors from 5 tertiary institutions were 

interviewed through both virtual and physical interactions. Observation of highly inadequate and 

inefficient digital learning equipment was made which has hindere d the effectiveness in both 

learning and mode of instruction hence the need to recommend enhancement of e -learning 

facilities and promotion of the 21 st Century Competencies skills’ training to lead to decent formal 

employment and promotion of non -technical skills. 

Reference s

Anagün, Ş., Atalay, N., Kilic, Z., & Yasar, S. 2016.  The development of a 21st century skills and 

competences scale directed at teaching candidates: Validity and reliability study. 

Pamukkale Universitesi Egitim Fakultesi Dergisi -Pam ukkale University Journal Of 

Education , (40). 

Boeren, E. (2016). Lifelong learning participation in a changing policy context: An 

interdisciplinary theory . London: Palgrave -Macmillan. 

Bryman, A., 2006. Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: how is it done? 

Qualitative research , 6 (1), pp.97 -113. 

Elçiçek, M. and Erdemci, H., 2021. Investigation of 21st -century competencies and e -

learning readiness of higher education stude nts on the verge of digital 

transformation. Journal of Computer and Education Research , 9(17), pp.80 -101. 

Ndibalema, P., 2020. Unlocking the potential of ICT for transformative learning among youth: A 

path to 21st century competencies. Journal of Educat ional Technology and Online 

Learning , 3(3), pp.245 -271. 

Population Reference Bureau, 2011 , Uganda at the beginning of transition, PRB,10 

November 2021, https://www.prb.org/resources/uganda -at -the -beginning -of -a-

transition/ 

Rana, H. 2020. Education Syst em Profile: Education in Uganda, WENR, Retrieved on 28th 

June, 2022. Retrieved from : https://wenr.wes.org/2020/10/education -in -uganda 

UNICEF. 2020. UNICEF Uganda Annual Report: Education for every child, UNICEF,12 

November 2021 ,https://www.unicef.org/ug anda/what -we -do/education 

Wani, H.A., 2013. The relevance of e -learning in higher education. ATIKAN , 3(2). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 346 

Appendices 

Appendix I: Questionnaire 

Introduction 

Dear respondent, this is the Institute of Advanced Leadership -Uganda, we are conducting a study 

to evaluate the quality of education which is a component of the UN agenda 2030 which aims at 

ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting l ifelong learning opportunities 

for all. This study is to evaluate the current state of education in the community so as to provide 

a benchmark for education related interventions. We assure you confidentiality, your personal 

details will not be documented anywhere. Thank You. 

Consent 

I agree to be part of this study. 

Demographics Characteristics of Respondents 

Gender 

• Male 

• Female 

Age of Respondent 

Less than 18 18 - 25 26 - 30 31 -35 

36 - 40 41 - 50 51 and above 

Highest level of Education: 

1. Non -formal 

2. Primary 

3. Secondary 

4. Certificate (professional course) 

5. Diploma 

6. University 

YES  NO Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 347 

7. Post graduate 

How many school going persons are aged between? 

4-5

6-13 

14 -17 

18 -25 

26+ 

Which one is your school and what is your year of study? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… Knowledge, Attitude and Practices 

Education 

1. What mode of instruction is commonly used in institutions? 

• Traditional 

• Hybrid 

• Simulation 

• E learning 

• Handouts 

• Others( Specify)…………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

2.What challenges are faced in your institution with the mode of instructions used? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

…………………………… ………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 348 

3. How do you cope with the above challenges? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

Tools 

1.What are the available tools in y our institution of learning? 

• Projector 

• Whiteboard 

• Stationary 

• Computers 

• Internet 

• Photocopier 

• Printers 

• Others(specify) 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………… 

2. How accessible are the tools chosen above? 

(1 - highly inaccessible, 2 - inaccessible, 3 - neutral, 4 - accessible, 5 - highly accessible) 

TOOLS  1 2 3 4 5

Projector 

Whiteboard 

Stationary 

Computers 

Internet 

Photocopier 

Printers 

Others 

(specify) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 349 

3. Which of the above do you own? (List all that applies) 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

4.What challenges do you face with the accessibility of the tools? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………… ……………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

5.What can be done to improve the quality of education in your community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

6.How accessible is the Internet in you r community/institution? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

7.What do you think is the best method to address the challenges of Internet access in your 

community/Institution? 

………… …………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

8.Is there any support rendered regarding data in your institution/community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

…………………………………………………………………………… ………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 350 

Soft Life Skills 

1.Do you belong to any clubs and societies in your institution? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

2.List down the clubs you belong to in your institution 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… 

3.Do you play any leadership roles in those clubs? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

………………………… …………………………………… 

4.Share with us one challenging experience during your time of leadership and how you overcame 

it. 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………………………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 351 

# Instituting Dynamics and Practical Experiences 

# in K -12 Education in Underdeveloped Regions: 

# Redefinition, Augmentation, and Diversification of Teaching 

# Qualification to Promote Equitable Educational Access 

Jihong Cai (United States) 

Abstract 

Sustainable Development Goals 4.c calls for sustainably supplying abundant and sufficient 

qualified educators. However, longitudinal studies have shown that teacher attrition has become 

a central issue in maintaining and recruiting qualified and talented individuals to join the industr y. 

Many attributes contribute to the issue, while specific causes, such as the gaps in the support 

they need and the average payment teachers get, have lagged the sustainably delivering qualified 

teachers. Moreover, this issue causes more significant damag e considering the disproportional 

distribution of educational resources, disadvantaging the underrepresented and underprivileged 

communities. 

There are two routes to diminishing the effect and solving the problem: maintaining existing 

human resources and developing new sources to train and afford instructors. This paper focuses 

on the latter part of the solution and calls for the reconstruction of teaching qualification programs 

that many states and educational organizations have developed. In conjunction with Robert 

Sternberg’s Successful Intelligence Theory, this paper analyzes the educational implication of the 

modification from the perspectives of students’ motivation, practical and creative skills 

development, injecting real -world experiences in classr ooms, and creating an environment that 

enables students to have higher exposure to practical problems. This paper further discusses 

how the redefined teaching qualification promotes more equitable educational access taking into 

consideration of the local s ituation, and how such a model has expansive application around the 

globe. 

Keywords: Teaching qualification, professional education, educational access, and K-12 

education 

Introduction 

The 17 objectives in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) network, passed by the United 

National General Assembly in 2015, is a “blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future 

for all” (United Nations General Assembly, 2017). Goal 4 concentr ates on quality education, 

advocating equitable educational access, and promoting elimination in education. Goal 4 aims to 

“ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for 

all” (National Educational Foundati on, 2017). The Sustainable Development Goals 4.c. urges to 

“substantially increase the supply of qualified teachers” by 2030 (United Nations Department of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 352 

Economic and Social Affairs: Sustainable Development, 2022). Teachers’ education level is one 

of the essential indicators of their qualification in implying their career readiness (United Nations 

Statistics Division Development Data and Outreach Branch, 2022). Many institutes and 

governments recognize the significance of the goal and configure policies a nd budgets to improve 

their educational conditions, educational access, and educational quality. However, the 

development has an unbalanced reality in terms of regional differences, urban -rural distinctions, 

and continental discrepancies. 

The unbalanced n ature of educational resources has a strong regional character. Some states 

and regions have developed a systematic approach to recruiting educators, while others struggle 

to maintain the necessities. This issue is particularly prominent in less developed areas, such as 

underrepresented communities, where it is difficult to recruit qualified educators with the indicated 

requirements. It becomes more troubling and worrying when those institutes are less well -funded 

and supported. The school administrations n eed to tackle additional issues, such as infrastructural 

and financial problems, while maintaining the basic functionality of a school, such as ensuring 

students’ attendance and maintaining courses offered that meet the minimum requirements of the 

state le gislation, such as literature, sciences, and mathematics. This further aggregate the already 

severe educational issues, particularly hurting the existed lopsided representation of female and 

gender minorities, as well as racial minorities in the educationa l system (Paranjape, 2007; 

Anderson and London, 1985; Lawton, 1973; Rury and Akaba, 2014; Loeb, Kalogrides, and Horng, 

2010). 

Research Purpose 

Limitation of educational access is a direct consequence of lacking teacher resources, worsening 

the attendance rate, educational quality, and student accomplishment in those nations (Deming 

and Figlio, 2016; Townsend et al., 2012). To tackle such a problem, countries around the globe 

have developed programs and approaches to endorse teachers before penetrating the 

profession, particularly at the K -12 level. The credentials are granted with either degree in 

education, completion of the training program, or record on the certification test. Nevertheless, 

even with constant effort in amending these programs to grant t alented individuals into the 

educational industries maximally, teacher attrition is still a prominent issue troubling many states 

and their educational systems. 

Teacher attrition is one of the predominant motivations for the alternation and adjustments of the 

current certification programs (Zhang and Zeller, 2016). Specifically, this program is particularly 

harmful in less developed and underrepresented communities due to the scarcity in the net sum 

and uneven distribution of educational resources (Ingerso ll, 2004; Marilyn et al., 2011). It is more 

challenging for schools in those communities to attract newly qualified teachers already, and 

those schools are losing their current serving members. For example, in Illinois, U.S.A. alone, 

there are 4120.7 unfil led positions in its public -school education system, including 1703.6 

teaching positions, 1242.9 paraprofessional positions, and 974.4 supporting jobs. This data only 

counts the officially reported state -owned public schools, and all the unfilled education al positions 

state -wide will be significantly more significant than the statistics provided. Among these unfilled Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 353 

positions, concentrating only on Cook County, there are 2173.0 positions unfilled, and 702.9 of 

them are teaching positions (Illinois State B oard of Education, 2021). This further illustrates the 

seriousness of the lack of human resources in the education system and the unbalanced 

distribution of educational resources. 

In recent years during the pandemic, most elementary and secondary schools seek alternations 

to the traditional instructional structures, modifying their instructional methods from the traditional 

in -person instruction to either a hybrid structure or entirely online. Many professional development 

workshops and educational events are canceled due to health concerns. Consequences in 

educational resources and human resources are sources of concern. Though there has not been 

data supporting a significant change in teachers’ turnover rate, surveys decide that teachers are 

more stresse d during the pandemic due to the challenges in conducting teaching exercises 

(Theobald et al., 2020). There has been a 1% increase in both teachers’ turnover rate and 

teachers’ mobility rate in comparison to the pre -pandemic era, though it is within the ra te collected 

in the pre -pandemic years (Goldhaber and Theobald, 2022). It is worth noting that the full impact 

of the pandemic may not be fully illustrated. The long -term effect of the drastic change might not 

unravel until later in the decade, and longitu dinal research and studies are required to fully 

understand the impact of the pandemic caused on teacher attrition. 

Teachers’ Qualification: Criterion and Certifications 

To determine the jurisdiction of teaching qualifications, state governments, educati onal 

organizations, and higher educational institutes have developed their systems in filtering teaching 

qualifications and identity if one’s background is strong enough to instruct in public schools and 

other academies. For example, in the United Kingdom, particularly England, qualifies teacher 

status (QTS) is the government -recognized teaching qualification. There are several paths that 

one can take in order to be granted such qualification, including Postgraduate Certificate in 

Education (PGCE), Diploma in Education and Training (DET), School -Centered Initial Teacher 

Training (SCITT), and Graduate Teacher Program (GTP). Similar programs are adopted in other 

supernational organizations, states, provinces, and organizations, such as the United States and 

th e European Union. 

In addition to the state -recognized qualification, other professional qualifications are developed 

for special groups of teachers in particular subject areas, such as certificates of Teaching English 

as Foreign Language, Teaching English as Secondary Language, and Teaching English to 

Speakers of Other Languages. Furthermore, higher educational institutes and educational 

organizations usually offer professional development opportunities. These programs are usually 

designed for K -12 and hig her education teachers to enrich their theoretical knowledge in a 

particular subject while connecting to their practical experience of daily instruction. 

Degree programs in education are standard in most countries. There exist several levels of 

associate and academic degrees that higher education institutes offer. The most common 

academic degree in education includes bachelor’s degrees in education, master of sciences in 

education, master of arts in education, master of education, doctor of philosophy in e ducation, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 354 

and doctor of education. The specifics of the degrees vary from country to country and from 

college to college. Many graduate -level degrees usually concentrate on one particular aspect of 

education, such as educational psychology, education tech nologies, and educational leadership, 

and degrees focus on particular subjects of teaching and specific level of education. 

Redefinition of Teaching Qualification: A Relative Approach 

These programs may be effective in authorizing teaching lenience but not sustainability. 

According to a report issued by Regional Educational Laboratory Mid -Atlantic, 25% of teachers 

resigned from their school annually, 77% of teachers quit the profession within their first five years 

of entrance, and the turnover rate was t he highest among middle school teachers from 2010 to 

2016 (Dillon & Malick, 2020). In addition, research has captured a decreasing trend in the number 

of teaching candidates in comparison to a few decades ago. “Enrollment in teacher preparation 

remains nea r historic lows. Despite a 10% increase in teacher preparation enrollments between 

2013 –14 and 2014 –15, the number of teaching candidates enrolled in 2014 –15 was just one -

quarter of the number enrolled in 2001 –02” (Thomas and Hammond, 2016). This is not a 

coincidental discovery but a trend that has been observed during extended periods of studies. 

This issue has become especially serious in recent years when the accumulated effect of teacher 

attrition has become a national -wide issue in the United States. The issue has become a central 

topic of concern in recent years. On top of the lack of reserved qualified teachers and teaching 

candidates, the unfilled positions are disadvantaging the underprivileged populations because 

“these teachers were disproportion ately assigned to high -minority, high -poverty schools” (Darling -

Hammond, 2003). The more severe impact on the underrepresented makes it more challenging 

to ensure equitable educational access and quality education. This problem also aggregates the 

lack of racial minorities and female students in certain subjects in higher education, such as 

science, engineering, and mathematics. Without proper guidance and support from teachers, 

these subjects are difficult to approach due to the nature of the subjects and the concrete 

materials needed before entering more advanced studies. 

Many causes could attribute and contribute to the abovementioned phenomenon. Due to the 

complexity of the question, it is impossible to provide an exhausting list of reasons behind the 

scenes, and therefore, challenging to find efficacious solutions to such a problem. However, there 

are specific reasons that have been discussed in previous works, such as the gap between the 

expectations for teachers and the support they obtain and lo w payments (Rademacher and 

Eggers, 2017). In fact, in certain areas of the United States, public school, elementary, and 

secondary school teachers are paid 14.0% less than a decade before based on their inflation -

adjusted income (National Education Associa tion, 2021; National Education Association, 2020, 

National Education Association, 2018). 

Conducted by U.S. Census Bureau, the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic 

Supplements (CPS ASEC) found that “median household income was $67,521 in 20 20, and 

$69,560 in 2019, and median earnings of men is $61,417 and $50,982 for women who worked 

full -time” (Shrider et al., 2020; Irwin et al., 2021). A report on the Condition of Education 2021 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 355 

conducted by the Institute of Education Science under the U. S. Department of Education 

determined that the average income for public school teachers who has less than ten years of 

teaching experience is less than $50,000, which is remotely below the average. Only the 

instructors who have worked in a school for more than 20 years meet is above the median 

household income. 

This is a direct indication that schoolteachers are earning significantly less than their peers 

working in industries regardless of other dissatisfactions reported by both parties, which signifies 

that it is more challenging for teachers to support their families financially than an average salary 

person. Despite its undeniable contribution of the occupation to the world, many talented 

individuals quit their job due to financial considerations. It i s worth noting that this is only a limited 

analysis of this issue, and the data only refers to the situations in the United States. Other states 

and regions may have unique and distinct issues regarding human resources in education. 

The deep reasons teach ers quit their jobs are complicated and can be attributed to variegated 

causes. Studies on horizontal compactions or case studies on this topic could help elaborate on 

the explanation and discover the underlying justifications. These studies could be valua ble in 

solving the issue of sustaining talented individuals in the educational systems. Regardless of the 

causes, the significant percentage of teachers leaving their jobs or mobilizing between institutes 

is surprising, while significant indicators signify ing the inefficient utilization of educational 

resources in training and certifying individuals, where under a quarter of educational funding and 

other materials in human resource development are applied effectively to produce sustainable 

outcomes, notwith standing the progressive upsurge in the education funding in many countries. 

Due to the complexity of the issue, it is hard to develop an exhausted list of attributions for the 

issue, while it is certain that the current system of recruiting educators coul d be optimized and 

potentially reduce the administrative costs on the related issues. 

On the other hand, by setting up a systematic approach to training teachers in mostly lecture -

discussion settings or the professional qualification program, the system d eclines those who are 

not weaponed with the certifications. In particular, these programs reject a wide range of talented 

individuals with professional or industrial experience entering the field and inspire young citizens 

to pursue and explore the related subjects, primarily abstract and creative ones. This mainly refers 

to applied subjects, such as engineering, technologies, sciences, as well as performative and 

visual arts. Moreover, with industry and professional backgrounds, instructors can relate thei r

practical experience in the educational setting to set up real -world motivating cases where 

students can learn factual knowledge in addition to transferable skills and reasoning capabilities 

that they may apply in the future career and academic world. 

In addition, educational background alone does not comprehensively reflect one’s ability to deliver 

content for the pupils, especially taking practical and creative skills into the equation. For example, 

classically trained instructors might incorporate the educational theories they learned in the 

universities and training programs into their classrooms, and many of the techniques have 

pedagogical benefits. The method is instructional, but it might not reflect practical worlds where 

students can share and be motivated to investigate. Therefore, even though these materials might Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 356 

be educationally significant, failing to appeal to students may create deeper motivational problems 

that have long -term effects while failing to facilitate learning and encouraging in dividuals to 

become lifelong learners in the long run, which is one of the core aims for Goal 4. 

Therefore, a generalized inclusive definition of teaching qualifications is urgent for facilitating 

students’ learning experience in many levels of K -12 educa tion, where the goal is to cultivate 

students learning habits, introduce students to the general concepts in the subject, and facilitate 

the learning experience and motivation of the individuals in all grade levels, which inspire students 

to pursue a caree r or future education of the subject of their choice that they enjoy. This is 

especially important for junior and senior students who are preparing and deciding their post -

secondary path, bridging the gap between high school curricula and higher educationa l ones, as 

well as the problems one might face in their work. 

A relative approach is required for consideration to further increase the compatibility and 

accessibility of the redefined educational resources. The qualification of an educator should not 

be defined universally where a test or a degree sets the bar for every instructor through high -

stakes tests, regardless of the local situation. In the area where educational resources are 

adequate, the qualification could be more rigorous, whereas, in those r egions where only scared 

resources exist, the qualification should be more adaptive and flexible and meet the minimum 

number of local requirements. Therefore, such a framework allows and encourages a more 

accessible and equitable distribution of human reso urces in education and promotes teachers to 

support those impoverished areas with urgent educational demands. Of course, this argument 

does not suggest that the teacher training program is unnecessary. On the contrary, it encourages 

more talented individua ls to enter the industry and, therefore, could have a higher potential in 

pursuing higher training and education in the field, such as educational leadership, curriculum 

and instruction, educational technologies, and equity in education. 

Such modification also provides students with the practical meaning of individual subjects that 

they will potentially pursue as a major or minor in future education, promoting a more eager, 

hungry, and diverse student body and representation in transition to higher and pro fessional 

education, and consequently contributing to the academic world and industrial world in cultivation 

of educated scholars and well -trained skilled workers and innovators. This is particularly useful in 

fostering students’ learning in junior or seni or years when they are preparing for their future 

academic and careers and can be applied to facilitate students’ skills and interest development in 

general. Furthermore, by implementing and incorporating real -life problems in an instructional 

setting, stu dents can exercise their practical and creative skills, facilitating their success 

(Sternberg, 2016; Sternberg, 2018). 

Reconstructing Teaching Certification in K -12 Systems 

As students continue their K -12 education, students will be increasingly exposed to a diverse 

range of concepts in an enlarging set of subjects. Students face major choices when they 

approach their senior year of high school: whether to pursue further educ ation in higher education 

institutes to obtain a professional or academic degree on a specific subject or start their career Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 357 

directly after graduation. In many countries, especially those with twelve years of compulsory 

school attendance laws, this is the first time the students will be able to make a significant decision 

that may alter their future life path (National Education Association State Education Practices, 

2018). Students might have different considerations before reaching a conclusion, while 

re gardless of their decision, one needs to determine the focus of their next step in life, namely, 

career path or academic concentration. According to John Dewey’s pragmatist educational 

philosophy, which pinpoints personal experience as a primary factor for one to shape their 

reasons and decisions, the determination students will make by the end of their K -12 education 

will be heavily influenced by their learning experience and inspirations from their K -12 instructors 

and administrators (Backe, 1999). 

In ma ny cases, the comprehension of the general picture of a subject and their intuitive idea of 

preference is dependent on their experience in K -12 classrooms, particularly the ones in their 

junior and senior year of high school. More importantly, the K -12 yea rs are precisely the times 

when students gain their psychological maturity and develop a set of critical thinking and learning 

skills, in addition to the formation of their understanding of the world in general. Therefore, it is 

imperative for K -12 educato rs to be encouraging, inspiring, motivating, and inviting. 

Current K -12 education providers are initialized to be closely aligned with particular curricula, 

usually from state standards, Common Core State Standards Initiative, or educational 

organizations , such as A -level from Cambridge Assessment Group, Advanced Placement from 

College Broad, and IB curricula. The curriculum is established at the school district level, 

supervised by the board of education and superintendent, and executed by academic princi ples 

and instructors. The curricula usually have their corresponding standardized exam in assessing 

the educational result, and the syllabus is designed closely to assist students in passing and 

achieving excellency in those exams. Consequently, instructor s plan their lessons in close 

alignment with those syllabi and the exam criterion or the equivalent state -regulated high school 

graduation exams, such as HiSET, GED, and TASE (US HSE Credential) (ETS EiSET, 2022). 

Many educators who are qualified to teach according to the regulations do not have extensive 

industrial experience, nor do they have extensive experience in academia. It is not to deny their 

potential in delivering inspiring lessons. However, the qualification programs do not necessarily 

reflect the reality of teaching and learning in the classroom setting, where teachers have complete 

control over their classroom in accordance with the school curriculum following the required 

syllabi. Therefore, without practical exposure themselves, it distances what students learn from 

what is useful in a real -life setting. Educational scholars recognize the seriousness of lacking 

practical knowledge in the currently imposed curricula, and therefore, many pedagogical attempts 

are made to bridge the gap between s chool and real -life, providing practical means for students 

to comprehend the subject. However, it has shown that this is not a trivial task, and a more 

expansive set of works are required in closing the expectation and the reality. 

To tackle the fundamental issue in human resources, K -12 education should encourage more 

diverse intellectuals from various industrial and academic backgrounds, particularly in junior and 

senior years of high school, where students should be guided toward their future path, actuated Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 358 

to discover a range of subjects from multiple angles through practical means. Notably, even 

though the high school courses are divided with clear boundaries and attributes, interdisciplinarity 

should be encouraged and promoted for connecting the discrete knowledge chains into a network, 

empowering students to develop an in -depth, comprehensive, connected, and practical 

understanding of the concept and the subject. 

This is especially essential for more abstract subjects such as mathematics and sciences. Those 

subjects are not necessarily intuitive and, in many cases, hard to comprehend. Although these 

subjects are theoretically rigorous and abstract, they empower many real -life applications in 

economics, engineering, and manufact uring. Therefore, connecting theory to practice becomes 

essential for students to like, make sense of, and utilize the concepts in solving problems, 

concrete or abstract. Consequently, instructors can encourage more talented individuals, 

especially racial minorities and female students, to pursue further studies in the related areas. 

Why It Matters: An Educational Analysis through Successful Intelligence Theory 

Before the multiple intelligence theory was developed, several cognitive psychologists, such as 

Jean Piaget, believed in a singular g factor to categorize human intellectual capabilities, viewing 

it as a unified, indivisible, singular general ability (Piaget, 1952; Piaget, 1970). On the other hand, 

studies found that human performance is vastly diff erent when they approach different tasks 

(Lilienfeld et al., 2018). Leading scholars, such as Howard Gardner, captured this phenomenon 

and proposed another viewpoint in analyzing the essence of the same notion, arguing that a 

singular empirical function ca nnot capture all human cognitive capacities, which is later became 

known as the multiple intelligence theory (Gardner, 1975; Gardner, 1979; Gardner, 1982). 

Multiple intelligence theory refuses the notion of treating human intelligence and proposes that 

th ere are methods that can differentiate intelligence into branches that categorize certain aspects 

of human ability (Gardner, 1983). For example, Howard Gardner suggests an eight -branches 

framework under the notion of multiple intelligence theory, categoriz ing human intelligence into 

Musical -rhythmic and harmonic, visual -spatial, linguistic -verbal, logical -mathematical, bodily -

kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal, and naturalistic abilities (Lilinfeld et al., 2018). Following 

the multiple intelligence t heory frameworks, Robert Sternberg proposed a novel theory called the 

triarchic theory of intelligence, which catalogs human intelligence into three parts. 

The triarchic model of intelligence divides human intelligence into analytical, practical, and 

crea tive intelligences. Analytical intelligence refers to the abilities for one to reason, which is the 

abilities for one to excel in standardized tests and traditional intelligence quotient (IQ) tests 

(Hertzog, 2018). Practical intelligence is the ability of one to solve real -world problems, especially 

the ones in relation to human interaction. It is the ability for one to practice, implement, and 

execute (Sternberg, 2018). Creative intelligence is the ability of one “to create, invent, design, 

imagine, discov er, explore and innovate” (Sternberg, 2018; Sternberg, 2005). 

Sternberg believes the traditional IQ test fails to capture the essential skills that one needs to 

become successful and stresses the importance of the role practical and creative intelligence play Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 359 

in one’s academic and work performance (Sternberg, 1997; Grigorenko and Sternberg, 2016). 

The deeper reason is its failure to recognize the diverse nature of what intelligence is further than 

a unitary factor of consideration. The IQ tests also fail to examine skills in practical and creative 

domains, which is arguably more important than analytical skills, which is what those tests are 

concentrating on. 

Sternberg later supplemented his theory of triarchic intelligence by considering the human -

enviro nmental factors and expanding it into what is known as the successful intelligence theory. 

In addition to the triarchic theory, the successful theory emphasizes how one’s ability in adapting, 

modifying, and selecting the external environment can facilitate their success in the long run. The 

theory formalizes the three stages of environmental considerations: from adapting to the 

surroundings, making limited modifications, to selecting the optimal environment to work in 

(Sternberg, 1999; Sternberg, 2016; Ster nberg, 2018). 

Putting the abovementioned phenomenon into the perspective of multiple intelligence theory, 

particularly Sternberg’s triarchic theory of intelligence, the syllabi focus primarily on analytical 

skills and content -based instruction is lack of practical and creative exposure, which are the 

essential skills and determining factors of one’s success. By utilizing the background of instructors 

with academic or industrial experiences, teachers are able to provide more concrete examples 

with practical meanings that enable students to internalize the knowledge introduced in the 

classes into a practical setting and intrigue students’ curiosity and interests in the related subject. 

On top of the skills, these experiences can also assist students in practi cing environmental skills, 

including how to adapt themselves in applying the knowledge they have to diverse practical and 

working settings, how to modify their modalities to fit and maximize their performance throughout 

the work, and how to select the best environment that they can immerse in. 

Facilitating Instructors and Students and Promoting Equitable Educational Access 

Admittedly, talents from the industry do not necessarily have experience teaching in schools or 

working with students, particularly at the K -12 level, and therefore is, lack theoretical exposure to 

the related notions and ideas in education, which is usually introduced in the programs toward an 

education degree, teaching qualification training programs, and practicums in higher education al 

institutes or educational organizations. This is a realistic concern and one of the primary 

justifications for the existing policies and regulations. 

However, considering the expansive access to diverse educational content in various settings, 

includin g in -person workshops and online seminars, there are many approaches in which the 

talents could be educationally and psychologically prepared for the new occupation by introducing 

programs to facilitate teachers to master pedagogy, gain familiarity to the curriculum, practice 

design thinking, envisioning potential issues in education. Such programs include teaching 

preparation training, professional development workshop, and other supporting programs to best 

facilitate the success of the teachers and, there fore, the students. Specifically, professional 

development programs empowered by higher educational institutes are usually great sources in 

expanding the academic inventory of instructional theory and connecting to real -time practical Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 360 

teaching scenarios. In addition, teachers can sign up for the courses and workshops that fit their 

personal experience the most, such as online and hybrid learning programs, educational 

technologies, instructional designs, and equity in education. Finally, it is also a good w ay for 

instructors to connect with like -minded fellows who may face similar issues in instructions. 

The expansion in teaching qualifications by welcoming professionals with industry experience and 

academic experience without necessarily holding a degree i n education or teaching certification 

is an excellent recommendation to encourage more talented individuals to enter classrooms, 

share their knowledge and skills with their students, and inspire the younger generations. 

Embracing the new members in the edu cation team promotes more diverse perspectives in 

presenting the materials interactively and practically, encouraging meaningful and authentic 

learning, particularly in high school education. Inspiring students with real -world challenges under 

the project -based framework with edge -cutting problems in the industry correlates with the 

teaching materials could nurture all three aspects of intelligence according to Robert Sternberg’s 

intelligence theory. This paper will discuss the educational and social implic ations of such change 

in conjunction with Sternberg’s successful intelligence theory (Sternberg, 1999). This paper will 

analyze the significance and necessity of adopting such transformation in the globalized world. 

This paper will dissect the benefits and apply such theory in supporting the education of low 

socioeconomic communities and underrepresented communities. Finally, this paper will discuss 

why the all -embracing approach is necessary and suitable for further increasing the compatibility 

and accessi bility of the redefined teaching qualification. 

Conclusion 

Echoing the Sustainable Development Goals 4.c, focusing on providing equitable educational 

access through supplying qualified teachers in a sustainable way, this paper recognizes the 

significance of current issues in teacher attrition and challenges for schools, particularly public 

schools in underprivileged regions and communities to recruit adequate qualified teachers and 

sustaining their teacher resources. We analyzed a few essentia l reasons for the formation of such 

a phenomenon and proposed an extended definition of teaching qualification. The reconstruction 

of teaching qualifications not only provides schools more autonomy in designing a more suitable 

curriculum for their unique s tudent bodies but offers an inclusive framework for viewing what the 

qualification means. Following the augmented version of certification, institutes and instructors 

will encourage greater exposure to a bigger picture than what is constrained by the sylla bi and 

connect the real -world problems in the instructional materials. 

This paper provides a theoretical framework for the reconstruction and diversification of teaching 

qualifications with justifications from the viewpoint of multiple intelligence theory , students’ 

motivation, and online and hybrid learning environments. Under the framework of Sternberg’s 

successful theory of intelligence, such modification will adjust the focus of instruction more toward 

the practical and creative side of the spectrum, w hich is the determining factor of one’s success 

in academic and post -academic worlds. This will also cultivate students’ capabilities in adapting, 

modifying, and selecting the external environment, which is an essential skill and can support 

students’ succ ess in post -secondary education. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 361 

Future works on horizontal comparison with quasi -experimental designs can be effective in 

quantifying the significance of the proposal, and case studies concerning schools that adopt the 

modified interpretation of qualifi cation, concentrating more on the qualities of educators 

themselves, can be developed to qualitatively strengthen the scheme in defining the effects in a 

more narrative manner. 

References 

Anderson, K. L., & London, B. (1985), “Modernization, Elites, and the Distribution of Educational 

Resources in Thailand”, Social Forces , Vol. 63, No. 3 , pp. 775 –794. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/2578491 .

Backe, A. (1999), “Dewey and the Reflex Arc: The Limits of James’s Influence”, Transactions of 

the Charles S. Peirce Socie ty, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 312 –326. 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/40320763. 

Darling -Hammond, L. (2003), “Access to quality teaching: An analysis of inequality in 

California’s public schools”, Santa Clara Law Review, Vol. 43 , No. 4, pp. 1045 –1184. 

Deming, D. J ., & Figlio, D. (2016), “Accountability in US Education: Applying Lessons from K -12 

Experience to Higher Education”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives , Vol. 30, No. 3, 

pp. 33 –55. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43855700. 

Dillon, E. & Malick, S. (2020), “Te acher Turnover and Access to Effective Teachers in the 

School District of Philadelphia”, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional 

Assistance at IES. REL 2020 –037. U.S. Department of Education. 

https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/rel/regions/midatlantic/pd f/REL_2020037.pdf. 

ETS HiSET (2022), “What is a High School Equivalency (HSE) Credential?”, ETS HiSET. 

https://hiset.ets.org/what/. 

Gardner, H. (1975), “The Shattered Mind”, Knopf, New York, NY. 

Gardner, H. (1979), “Developmental Psychology After Piaget: An Approach in Terms of 

Symbolization”, Human Development, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 570 -580. 

https://www.jstor.org/stable/26764784 .

Gardner, H. (1982), “Art, Mind, and Brain”, Basic Books, New York, NY. 

Gardner, H. (1983), “Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences”, Basic Books, New 

York, NY. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 362 

Goldhaber, D., & Theobald, R. (2022), "Teacher Attrition and Mobility in the Pandemic", national 

Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research, Arlington, VA. 

https://calderce nter.org/sites/default/files/CALDER%20Policy%20Brief%2030 -0322.pdf. 

Grigorenko, E., & Sternberg, R. (2016), “Teaching for Successful Intelligence: To Increase 

Student Learning and Achievement”, Skyhorse Publishing, New York, NY. 

Hertzog, C. (2011), “Inte lligence in Adulthood”, in Sternberg, R. and Kaufman, S. (Ed.), The 

Cambridge Handbook of Intelligence, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY. 

Illinois State Board of Education (2021), “Educator Licensure Unfilled Positions 2021”, accessed 

Mar. 30, 202 2. https://www.isbe.net/unfilledpositions .

Ingersoll, R. M. (2004), “Why Do High -Poverty Schools Have Difficulty Staffing Their 

Classrooms with Qualified Teachers?”, Renewing Our Schools, Securing Our Future - A

National Task Force on Public Education; Jo int Initiative of the Center for American 

Progress and the Institute for America's Futures. 

Irwin, V., Zhang, J., Wang, X., Hein, S., Wang, K., Roberts, A., York, C., Barmer, A., Bullock 

Mann, F., Dilig, R., and Parker, S. (2021), “Report on the Conditio n of Education 2021”, 

Institute of Education Sciences (IES). https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2021/2021144.pdf. 

Lawton, S. B. (1973), “Distribution of Instructional Resources in Detroit”, The Journal of Negro 

Education , Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 134 –141. https://doi.org /10.2307/2967009. 

Lilienfeld, S., Lynn, S., and Namy, L. (2018), “Intelligence and IQ Testing, Psychology: From 

Inquiry to Understanding”, Pearson Education, New York, NY. 

Loeb, S., Kalogrides, D., & Horng, E. L. (2010), “Principal Preferences and the Un even 

Distribution of Principals Across Schools”, Educational Evaluation and Policy 

Analysis , Vol. 32 No. 2, pp. 205 –229. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40732418 .

Marilyn, C. S., Cannady, M., Mceachern, K. P., Piazza, P., Power, C., & Ryan, A (2011), 

“Teacher s’ Education, Teaching Practice, and Retention: A Cross -Genre Review of 

Recent Research”, Journal of Education, Vol. 191, No. 2, pp. 19 –31. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/002205741119100205 .

National Education Association (2017), “Compulsory school attendance laws, minimum and 

maximum age limits for required free education, by state: 2017”, National Education 

Association. https://sdg4education2030.org/the -goal. 

National Education Association State Education Practices (2018), “Compulsory school 

attendance laws, minimum and maximum age limits for required free education, by state: 

2017”, National Education Association. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 363 

https://nces.ed.gov/programs/statereform/tab5_1.asp. 

National Education As sociation (2018), "Rankings of the States 2017 and Estimates of School 

Statistics 2018", National Education Association Research. 

https://www.nea.org/sites/default/files/2020 -07/180413 -

Rankings_And_Estimates_Report_2018.pdf 

National Education Association (2020), "Rankings of the States 2019 and Estimates of School 

Statistics 2020", National Education Association Research. 

https://www.nea.org/sites/default/files/2020 -

10/2020%20Rankings%20and%20Estimates%20Report.pdf 

National Education Association (2021), “Estimated Average Annual salary of teachers in public 

elementary and secondary schools, by state: Selected years, 1969 -70 through 2020 -21”, 

New Education Association Research. 

https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d21/tables/dt21_211.60 .asp 

Paranjape, M. S. (2007), “Uneven Distribution of Education in Maharashtra: Rural -Urban, 

Gender and Caste Inequalities”, Economic and Political Weekly , Vol. 42, No. 3 , pp. 213 –

216. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4419159 .

Piaget, J. (1952), “Play, dreams and imitation in childhood”, W. W. Norton & Co. 

Piaget, J. (1970), “Science of Education and the Psychology of the Child”, Trans. D. Coltman. 

Orion. 

Rademacher, T., & Eggers, D. (2017), “I Quit”, In It Won’t Be Easy: An Exceedingly Honest (and 

Slightly Unprofessional) Love Letter to Teaching, University of Minnesota Press, pp. 

174 -180. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.ctt1n7qkqv.20. 

Rury, J. L., & Akaba, S. (2014), “The Geo -Spatial Distribution of Educational Attainment: 

Cultural Capital and Uneven Development in Metropolitan Kansas City, 1960 -1980”, 

Histoire & Mesure , Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 219 –248. http://www.jstor.org/stable/24566948 .

Shrider, E. A., Kollar, M., Chen, F., & Semega, J., (2020), "Income and Poverty in the United 

States: 2020”, United States Census Bureau. 

https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2021/demo/p60 -

273.pdf .

Sternberg, R. (2018), “Successful Intelligence in Theory, Research, and Practice”, in Sternberg, 

R. (Ed.), The Nature of Human Intelligence, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY. 

Sternberg, R. (2005), “Creativity or Creativities?”, International Journal of Human Computer 

Studies , Vol. 63, Issue 4 -5, pp. 370 -382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.04.003. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 364 

Sternberg, R. (1 997), “Successful Intelligence: How Practical and Creative Intelligence 

Determine Success in Life”, Plume, New York, NY. 

Sternberg, R. J. (1999), “The Theory of Successful Intelligence”, Review of General Psychology ,

Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 292 –316. https://do i.org/10.1037/1089 -2680.3.4.292. 

Theobald, R., Goldhaber, D., Naito, N., & Stein, M. (2020), "The Special Education Teacher 

Pipeline: Teacher Preparation, Workforce Entry, and Retention", National Center for 

Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Res earch (CALDER). 

https://caldercenter.org/publications/special -education -teacher -pipeline -teacher -

preparation -workforce -entry -and -retention .

Thomas, D. C., & Hammond, L. D. (2016), “Addressing California’s Growing Teacher Shortage 

2017 Update”, Learning Po licy Institute, California. 

https://learningpolicyinstitute.org/product/addressing -californias -growing -teacher -

shortage -2017 -update -report. 

Townsend, D., Filippini, A., Collins, P., & Biancarosa, G. (2012), “Evidence for the Importance of 

Academic Word Knowledge for the Academic Achievement of Diverse Middle School 

Students”, The Elementary School Journal , Vol. 112, No. 3, pp. 497 –518. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/663301. 

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs: Sustainable Development (2022), 

“Goal 4: Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and Promote Lifelong 

Learning Opportunities for All”, United Nations Department of Economic and Social 

Affairs. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal4. 

United Nations General Assembly (2017), “Re solution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 

July 2017”, United Nations. 

https://documents -dds -

ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N17/207/63/PDF/N1720763.pdf?OpenElement. 

United Nations Statistics Division Development Data and Outreach Branch (2022), “SDG 

Indicator s: Metadata Repository”, United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/?Text=&Goal=4. 

https://repository.upenn.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1505&context=gse_pubs .

Zhang, G., & Zeller, N. (2016), “A Longitudinal Inv estigation of the Relationship between 

Teacher Preparation and Teacher Retention”, Teacher Education Quarterly, Vol. 43, No. 

2, pp. 73 –92. http://www.jstor.org/stable/teaceducquar.43.2.73. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 365 

# Racial Diversity - A Secret of High -Performing School 

# Districts Across the United States 

Joyce Coffey and Melanie Mosqueda 

(Youth Research Vox, United States) 

Abstract 

The United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development clearly states that the aim of the 

Sustainable Development Goal 4 is to ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and 

promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. In the United States, one long -standing challenge 

for creating inclusive and equitable educational opport unities in public schools is the deep 

skepticism toward racial diversity. Although many studies tackle this issue from a socioeconomic 

perspective, our study aims to uncover the academic benefits of racial diversity to all students. 

Extracting data from th e Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA), which includes longitudinal 

data of state testing scores over a ten -year span, we conducted descriptive and independent -

samples t-tests to measure the differences in racial diversity between high - and low -performin g

school districts. The quantitative data analysis of 300 U.S. school districts showed that at any 

given socioeconomic level: high, low, or national -average, there is a significant difference in racial 

diversity between high - and low -performing school dist ricts. High -performing districts at all three 

socioeconomic levels are more racially diverse compared to low -performing districts. This reveals 

that contrary to the stereotype that more students of color mean lower academic performance, 

racial diversity of a student body translates to higher academic performance and standardized 

test scores. 

Keywords: quality education, racial segregation, school choice, academic performance, 

socioeconomic status, sustainable development goals 

Introduction 

In 2015, all UN Member States adopted the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and pledged full 

support to the attainment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In the 2016 Global 

Education Monitoring (GEM) Report, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, a nd Cultural 

Organization (UNESCO) explained explicitly the role of education to sustainable development: 

The SDGs, targets, and means of implementation are thought of as universal, indivisible, 

and interlinked. Each of the 17 goals has a set of targets. In each set, at least one target 

involves learning, training, educating or at the very least raising awareness of core 

sustainable development issues. Education has long been recognized as a critical factor 

in addressing environmental and sustainabilit y issues and ensuring human well -being. (p. 

9) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 366 

While quality education is critical to ensuring the attainment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development, nations, governments, institutions, and individual stakeholders have different 

opinions on what quality education should look like. Gough (2018) pointed out that in order to 

achieve Sustainable Development, global citizenship education – Target 4.7 of SDG 4 – must be 

given high priority. As stated in the 2016 GEM Report, education must teach people to think 

collectively and not individually: we have to work together for the planet. In the United States, 

however, one long -standing challenge in promoting global citizenship and creating inclusive and 

equitable educational opportunities in public schools is the deep skepticism toward racial diversity 

(Pine & Hilliard, 1990). Because school districts in more affluent communities tend to achieve 

higher test scores, they are often perceived as “high -quality” school districts. It is also evident that 

affluent communities consist of higher percentages of White population. The combination of the 

two factors led to a stagnant stereotype: the Whiter the school districts, the better they are. 

Consequently, school districts of less -White communities, and therefore consist of higher 

percentages of students of color, are seen as “bad” school districts. 

In this study, we aim to tackle the skepticism toward school racial diversity by providing insights 

into the relationship between racial composition and students’ acade mic performance in U.S. 

public school districts. To ensure that this study is focused on the relationship between racial 

diversity and academic performance and to avoid the influence of socioeconomic factors, we aim 

to draw comparisons between school distr icts that are at the same socioeconomic levels. In doing 

so, we ask the following research question: 

To what extent does racial diversity or the lack of it account for the substantial differences in 

students’ academic performance between school districts that are at the same socioeconomic 

level? 

Literature Review 

Racial Diversity in Public Schools 

What is it like Today? 

School racial diversity has been the center of stakeholders’ attention for generations. Following 

the Civil Rights movement in the 1950s to 1960s, the most significant declines in school racial 

segregation were observed in the late 1960s and early 1970s (R eardon & Owens, 2014). After 

the rolling back of desegregation court orders in the 1990s, Orfield et al. (2012) found that the 

levels of school racial segregation deepened. Despite much argument about the cause, 

researchers agree that U.S. public schools a re still highly racially and economically segregated 

today (Reardon et al., 2021a). School Choice programs, including magnet and charter schools, 

had little effect on racial diversity, and in some cases, increased racial segregation (Frankenberg 

& Lee, 200 3; Arcia, 2006; Blatt & Votruba -Drzal, 2021; Wang & Herman, 2017, Chapter 11, p. 

58). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 367 

Parents’ Inner Conflict 

After examining a number of empirical studies on the demographic characteristics of students and 

families who actively engage in school choice , Lacireno -Paquet (2008) concluded that parents’ 

primary stated motivation in selecting schools is perceived academic quality; the primary influence 

in terms of documented behavior, however, is peer composition in terms of race and class. White 

parents say that they want their children to attend racially diverse schools, but when it’s time to 

choose, they choose schools that are disproportionately White and higher income (Roda & Wells, 

2012). White parents tend to avoid schools with high minority concentrat ions (Lacireno -Paquet, 

2008). Billingham & Hunt (2016) also found in their experimental study that the proportion of Black 

students in a hypothetical school has a consistent and significant inverse association with the 

likelihood of White parents enrolling their children in that school. These higher levels of stereotype 

bias further inhibit school enrollment, particularly in schools with higher proportions of Black 

students (Billingham & Hunt, 2016). 

Racial Diversity vs. Academic Outcomes 

A Holistic Approach 

A large body of literature discusses the need for and the significance of closing the achievement 

gap or test -score gap between racial groups and socioeconomic levels; for example, Orfield et al. 

(2012), Debs (2016), Matheny et al. (2021 ), Reardon et al. (2021), and many more. Among the 

efforts, three research threads were found: (1) observation of the widening or stagnating 

achievement gap and the causes, (2) the extent to which the achievement gap is harmful to 

underrepresented and disa dvantaged students, families, and communities, (3) effective ways to 

close the achievement gap. All three threads address the issue from a holistic, or closing -the -gap 

viewpoint, i.e., how education or schooling as a whole can be improved. 

A Survival Mind set 

School choice programs are created to give parents more options for their children’s schooling. 

While research focuses on how to improve education as a whole, parents simply want the best 

for their own children. Roda & Wells (2013) found that many upp er -middle -class parents are 

bothered by the racial and socioeconomic segregation within and among schools, but they are 

simultaneously anxious and concerned that their children win the “race to the top” of a highly 

competitive and stratified system. The di sconnection between the holistic research approach and 

individuals’ survival mindset continues to drive parents away from real effort and contribution to 

racial diversity. 

Benefits Instead of Morals 

Instead of discussing the extent to which the exacerbat ed achievement gap is harmful to low -

income students and racial minorities, studies that present academic and social -emotional 

benefits of enrolling children in racially diverse schools are more likely to speak to parents. As the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 368 

study of Schneider et al. (2021) indicates, White students in racially integrated schools appear to 

have more positive experiences than White students in less diverse schools, while achieving at 

the same rates or higher as measured by standardized tests. This type of work marks an important 

step in making a research -based case to White and higher -income families about the benefits of 

racial diversity. As history indicates, the moral imperative is not enough (Schneider et al., 2021). 

In the current study, we join the effort to unc over the benefits of racial diversity to students’ 

academic performance measured by standardized test scores. 

Methods 

This is an original study using quantitative data collected from the Stanford Education Data 

Archive and National Center for Education Statistics databases. We applied a multistage sampling 

design incorporating stratified and cluster sampling methods to co mpile three data sets and six 

data groups. Then, we employed descriptive and independent -samples t-tests to conduct 

quantitative data analysis. 

Student Learning Rate and Socioeconomic Status Data 

To investigate the between -district differences in student s’ academic performance, we relied on 

the data provided by Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA). The SEDA longitudinal data 

consist of state testing scores from spring 2009 to spring 2018 in more than 13,000 public school 

districts across the United Stat es (Fahle et al., 2021). Despite many challenges came with state 

testing data, SEDA was able to place the proficiency thresholds on the same scale, estimate the 

mean test scores in each school, district, and county from the raw data and the threshold 

estim ates, scale the estimates so they are measured in terms of grade levels, and therefore create 

estimates of three parameters: average scores, student learning rates (SLR), and trends in 

average scores. Each of the parameters presents student performance in a unique way. We 

chose to use the SLR to measure school district academic performance, reasoning that it is the 

only parameter that reflects how much students improve from one year to the next. The SEDA 

database also provides the data of the average famili es’ socioeconomic status (SES) of school 

districts in the United States. SES is a broad measure calculated using income, educational 

attainment, and employment data of all families living in the community that is served by a school 

district. 

School Distri ct Racial Profiles 

School district demographics data were gathered from the database of the National Center for 

Education Statistics (NCES). The NCES is part of the Institute of Education Sciences. The NCES 

database provides data on school district characteristics via the Ed ucation Demographic and 

Geographic Estimates (EDGE) program. The EDGE program uses the U.S. Census Bureau’s 

American Community Survey, along with spatial data collected by NCES and the Census Bureau, 

to create indicators of demographic, social, and economi c conditions. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 369 

Of the abundance approaches to the measurement of racial diversity, we chose the simplistic 

majority -minority approach (Zhang, 2021). According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2021 report, 

60.1% of the U.S. population are White – majority, whil e Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, 

and others together make up less than 40% of the U.S. population – minority. In this study, we 

measured school districts’ racial diversity using the percentages of White population. Based on 

the simplistic majorit y-minority approach, a higher percentage of majority (White) population 

means that the district’s racial diversity is low, and a higher percentage of minority population 

means that district is measured higher in racial diversity. 

Sampling & Data Analysis 

Based on the SES values provided by SEDA, we first divided the 13,000 U.S. public school 

districts into three socioeconomic levels: high -SES, low -SES, and national -average -SES. Then, 

we compiled three data sets of a total of 600 school districts, 200 dist ricts from each SES 

category. The complete data of three data sets were ranked separately by SLR. In each data set, 

a high -SLR group and a low -SLR group were generated.  Each group consists of 50 districts (Table 

1). 

Then, we conducted descriptive and independent -samples t-tests to examine the differences in 

racial diversity between high - and low -performing groups at each SES level. The descriptive 

statistics consisted of the mean and standard deviation of percentages of White population in 

high - and lo w-performing groups at three SES levels. 

Results 

Data Set L 

Data Set L consists of 100 low -SES communities. These are the poorest school districts in the 

United States with a median household annual income of $30,625. Economically, there is little to 

no difference between the two groups in this data set. However, t he 50 districts of Group A Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 370 

achieved a 12% higher academic growth per year compared to the national average while the 

academic growth of Group B is 32% lower compared to the national average. 

Independent -samples t-tests were conducted to assess statistical difference in percentages of 

White population between high - and low -performing groups. In Data Set L, Group A had a lower 

percentage of White population ( M = 0.17, SD = 0.22) than Group B ( M = 0.32, SD = 0.24). A 

statistically significant diffe rence in racial diversity between Group A and Group B was found (p < 

.05). 

Data Set M 

Data Set M consists of 100 average -SES communities. These are average U.S. communities with 

a median household annual income of $53,008. Economically, there is little t o no difference 

between the two groups in this data set. However, the 50 districts of Group C achieved a 13% 

higher academic growth per year compared to the national average while the academic growth of 

Group D is 15% lower compared to the national average .

Independent -samples t-tests were conducted to assess statistical difference in percentages of 

White population between high - and low -performing groups. In Data Set M, Group C had a lower 

percentage of White population ( M = 0.76, SD = 0.27) than Group D (M = 0.84, SD = 0.16). A 

statistically significant difference in racial diversity between Group C and Group D was found (p 

< .05). 

Data Set H 

Data Set H consists of 100 high -SES communities. These are the richest school districts in the 

United States wi th a median household annual income of $123,387. Economically, there is little 

to no difference between the two groups in this data set. However, the 50 districts of Group E 

achieved a 28% higher academic growth per year compared to the national average wh ile the 

academic growth of Group F is 3% lower compared to the national average. 

Independent -samples t-tests were conducted to assess statistical difference in percentages of 

White population between high - and low -performing groups. In Data Set H, Group E had a lower 

percentage of White population ( M = 0.75, SD = 0.21) than Group F ( M = 0.83, SD = 0.12). A 

statistically significant difference in racial diversity between Group E and Group F was found (p < 

.05). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 371 

Table 2 below presents the t-tests results of all three independent data sets. 

Discussion 

Racial Diversity and Quality Education 

In the beginning of the study, we asked the research question: To what extent does racial diversity 

or the lack of it account for the substantial differences in students’ academic performance between 

school districts that are at the same socioeconomic level? The results of our descriptive 

independent samples t-tests found statistically significant differences (p < .05) in racial diversity 

between high - and low -performing groups at all three SES levels: high -, low -, and average -SES. 

These results show that high -performing groups are consistently associated with a more diverse 

population. The statistical significance and consistency across SES levels indicate that (1) racial 

diversity accounts for the substantial differences in students’ aca demic performance between 

school districts that are at the same socioeconomic level, and (2) school district racial diversity 

has a positive and significant impact on the learning outcomes of all students. 

The existing body of literature on the academic benefits of racial diversity measured by 

standardized test scores is rather small and the findings are mixed. For example, McNalley (2005) 

hypothesized that White, middle -class children would do as well academically in racially mixed 

schools as in all -White schools. Using elementary school children’s standardized test scores in 

reading and math, the study found no association between White, middle class children’s test 

scores and the percent minority students in their schools. Methodologically, these studies often 

employed regression analysis to determine if racial factors and students’ test scores are 

associated. Regression models are powerful statistical tools, but when used to find associations 

between racial factors and test scores, controlling other vari ables such as teaching practices, 

school culture, family socioeconomic status, and students’ social -emotional and cognitive 

development can be very challenging, if not impossible. Our study employed t-test analysis to 

determine if there are statistically s ignificant differences in racial diversity between high - and low -

performing school districts. This variation in research design offers a possible explanation for the 

differences between our results and those of previous studies. Besides methodological rea sons, 

historical factors could offer additional insights and explanations. Studies in the 1990s and early Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 372 

2000s largely aimed at providing research -based evidence to change White, middle class parents’ 

negative view on students of color. Instead of presenting the benefits of racial diversity, these 

studies strived to prove that racial diversity was harmless. D espite this limitation, these studies 

advanced the conversation about racial diversity in schools and helped reduce the stigma 

attached to students of color. Because of these studies, today’s researchers are able to ask bolder 

research questions and showca se a plethora of benefits of racial diversity. 

Horizontal and Vertical Comparisons of School District SLR 

Student Learning Rate or SLR is a parameter provided by Stanford Education Data Archive. It is 

calculated by comparing students’ average scores in o ne grade and year to those in the next 

grade and year. In other words, this parameter keeps track of grade -to -grade improvements in 

performance within each student cohort. The uniqueness of the parameter makes it a more 

accurate indicator of the education quality of schools and districts (Stanford Education Data 

Archive, 2021). 

Figure 1 below presents the Student Learning Rates (SLR) between high - and low -performing 

groups at three SES levels: low -SES (Data Set L), average -SES (Data Set M), and high -SES 

(D ata Set H). 

The data points, as shown in Figure 1, present a great amount of information that was previously 

hidden. First, a horizontal examination provides information on SES and its effects. Observing the 

SLR of three low -performing groups (Figure 1 , red data points), we can see that the average SLR 

of low -SES districts is -32% while the number of high -SES districts is -3%. Similarly, a comparison 

of the three high -performing groups (Figure 1, blue data points) shows that the high -SES districts’ 

aver age SLR is 28% while the national -average -SES districts’ average SLR is 13%, and the low -

SES districts’ average SLR is 12%. This visual presentation shows how the stratified economic Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 373 

system advances the wealthy and deserts the needy, and unfortunately, th e same effects are 

found in the education system. Although socioeconomic status is not the focus of our study, it is 

worth mentioning that our results confirm the findings of previous studies on SES and its great 

effects on students’ learning. 

A vertical examination reveals that although school districts within each given socioeconomic level 

had similar amounts of resources and faced similar challenges, the three high -performing groups 

(50 districts in each group) provided far greater learning opportunitie s to their students than the 

three low -performing groups (50 districts in each group) did. For example, in Data Set L, the 

students in the 50 high -performing school districts had a learning rate that is 12% above the 

national average, while those in the 50 low -performing school districts had a learning rate that is 

32% below the national average SLR. Because of the scope of the current descriptive study, we 

are unable to investigate further into the causality of what was presented through the vertical 

exami nation. However, we strongly encourage future researchers to conduct causal studies on 

this interesting, yet often overlooked phenomenon. 

Conclusion 

The 2016 GEM report by UNESCO recognized that the right kind of education can reduce 

discrimination, crim e, and help build stronger communities. Specifically, Target 4.7 of SDG 4 calls 

for global citizenship education, which can help learners to attain an individual, national, and 

global identity so they will be able to participate actively in solving interna tional problems such as 

opposition, war, global poverty, and environmental challenges (Farahani, 2014). Education has 

the potential to transform the planet, but first we must transform the education system (UNESCO, 

2016). In the United States, transforming the education system means promoting school racial 

diversity and amplifying the value of collective thinking and global citizenship – the very focus of 

Target 4.7 of SDG 4. School choice programs, which were created to provide equitable 

educational opport unities to all children, have been around in the United States for more than a 

half century. Unfortunately, so has choice -based school racial segregation, even when a growing 

number of parents say that they want their children to attend racially diverse sc hools (Roda & 

Wells, 2013). Besides legislative shortcomings, the lack of quantifiable and replicable evidence 

for the benefits of school racial diversity also plays a role. Utilizing quantitative data extracted 

from SEDA and NCES databases, our study foun d that high -performing school districts are 

consistently associated with a more diverse population, and this association is strong across all 

socioeconomic levels. These findings suggest that when choosing schools for their children, 

parents should put asi de their own preference for race, and seek schools and districts that are 

more racially diverse. As more and more studies indicate, school racial diversity offers great 

benefits to children’s learning and development. Meanwhile, our findings suggest that all 

stakeholders – students, parents, educators, researchers, and policymakers – should 

acknowledge that racial diversity is not charity. No one race is helping another or losing their 

advantage in achieving racial diversity. All children need a racially di verse learning environment 

to succeed. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 374 

Highlighted by the research aim, an area of significance of our study is that it is part of the effort 

to shift the conversation around racial diversity. The COVID -19 pandemic exposed the deep 

division in the socie ty around almost all issues, extending to social, economic, environmental 

dimensions, and beyond. Arguments around racial diversity often became about who the 

beneficiary should be, implying that only some can benefit from the advancement of racial 

diversi ty. Aimed at investigating the extent to which racial diversity is beneficial to all students, we 

were able to join forces in promoting unity through our research. Another area of significance of 

the study is that our research design minimized the influenc e of socioeconomic status on the 

analyses of the relationship between racial diversity and student learning outcome. Researchers 

have long recognized that racial and socioeconomic factors are closely intertwined, and it is 

difficult to separate the two whe n needed (Longstreth, 1978; Callenbach et.al., 1981; Clayton, 

2009). LaVeist (2005) stated that the problem of disentangling race and socioeconomic status is 

as much conceptual as it is methodological. By designing our study to investigate school districts 

within individual socioeconomic levels, we were able to collect focused data and produce more 

cogent findings. We hope our research design helps to shine a light on this challenge, and we 

hope future researchers continue to explore effective methods and c hart various paths for learning 

the benefits of racial diversity. 

There are some limitations of our study. Despite that SEDA – the database that made comparing 

longitudinal student test score data at a national level and across socioeconomic spectrum 

poss ible – consists of data of 13,000 U.S. school districts, we were only able to study 300 school 

districts. Also, the simplistic majority -minority method that we employed meant that individual 

groups of racial minorities, such as Black, Hispanic, Asian, Nati ve American, and others, did not 

have individual representations in our findings. Furthermore, the scope of our research is limited 

to academic benefits measured by standardized test scores. Therefore, we suggest that future 

researchers conduct studies on school racial diversity with larger samples, utilize methods to the 

measurement of racial diversity that allow individual representations for minority groups, and 

investigate benefits beyond standardized test scores. 

References 

Arcia , E. (2006). “Comparison of the Enrollment Percentages of Magnet and Non -Magnet 

Schools in a Large Urban School District”, Education Policy Analysis Archives, Vol. 14 

No. 33.  https:/ /doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v14n33.2006 

Billingham, C. M., & Hunt, M. O. (2016). “School Racial Composition and Parental Choice: New 

Evidence on the Preferences of White Parents in the United States”, Sociology of 

Education, Vol. 89 No. 2, pp. 99 -117. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038040716635718 

Blatt, L., & Votruba -Drzal, E. (2021). “District -Level School Choice and Racial/Ethnic Test Score 

Gaps”, American Educational Research Journal, Vol. 2 No. 16. 

https://doi.org/10.3102/000 2831221999405 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 375 

Callenbach, J. C., Sheehan, M. B., Abramson, S. J., & Hall, R. T. (1981). “Etiologic factors in 

rickets of very low -birth -weight infants”, The Journal of Pediatrics, Vol. 98 No. 5. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022 -3476(81)80852 -9

Clayton, J . K. (2011). “Changing Diversity in U.S. Schools: the Impact on Elementary Student 

Performance and Achievement”, Education Resources Information Center, EJ941922. 

https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ941922 

Debs, M. C. (2016). “Racial and Economic Diversity in U.S . Public Montessori Schools”, Journal 

of Montessori Research, Vol. 2 No. 2, pp. 15 -34. 

https:// doi.org/ 10.17161/jomr.v2i2.5848 

Farahani, M. F. (2014). ‘The role of global citizenship education in world peace and security”, 

WCES 2013: 5th world conference on educational sciences. Rome, Italy, 5 -8 February, 

2013. 

Frankenberg, E., & Lee, C. (2003 ). “Charter Schools and Race: A Lost Opportunity for 

Integrated Education”, Education Resources Information Center, ED478410. 

https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED478410.pdf 

Gough, A. (2018). ‘Sustainable Development and Global Citizenship Education: Challenging 

Imperatives’, In: I Davies et al (eds). The Palgrave Handbook of Global Citizenship and 

Education. Palgrave Macmillan, London. https://doi.org/10.1057/978 -1-137 -59733 -5_19 

Gullen, J. (2012). “Colorblind Education Reform: How Race -Neutral Policies Perpetuate 

Segregation and Why Voluntary Integration Should Be Put Back on the Reform Agenda”, 

The University of Pennsylvania Journal of Law & Social Change, Vol. 15 No. 2, pp . 251 -

283. https://scholarship.law.upenn.edu/jlasc/vol15/iss2/5 

Lacireno -Paquet, N. (2008). “Who Chooses Schools, and Why?”, The Great Lakes Center for 

Education Research & Practice. 

https://greatlakescenter.org/docs/Policy_Briefs/Lacireno -

Paquet_Who%20Ch ooses%20Schools.pdf 

LaVeist, T. A. (2005). “Disentangling race and socioeconomic status: A key to understanding 

health inequalities”, Journal of Urban Health, Vol. 82 No. 2, pp. 26 -34. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/jurban/jti061 

Longstreth, L. E. (1978). “Leve l I -Level II abilities as they affect performance of three races in 

the college classroom”, Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 70 No. 3, pp. 289 –297. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -0663.70.3.289 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 376 

Matheny, K. T. (2021). “Uneven Progress: Recent Trends in Academic Performance Among 

U.S. School Districts”, CEPA Working Paper. Retrieved from Stanford Center for 

Education Policy Analysis:  https://edopportunity.org/research/ 

McNalley, J. K. (2005). “We value diversity, but …: Academic achievement of white, middle -

class elementary students in segregated and integrated schools”, Doctoral dissertation, 

University of Iowa, Publication, No. 3172420. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. 

https://www.proquest.com/openview/a432cb7072343fd7caeea20ed9d55ff2/1?pq -

origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y 

Orfield, G., Kucsera, J., & Siegel -Hawley, G. (2012). “E Pluribus...Separation: Deepening 

Double Segregation for More Students”, Education Resources Information Center, 

ED535442. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED535442.pdf 

Pine, G. J., & Hilliard, A. G. (1990). Rx for racism: Imperatives for America’s schools 

(EJ405152). ERIC. 

https://www.spps.org/cms/lib010/MN01910 242/Centricity/Domain/125/pine_hilliard_rx_fo 

r_racism.pdf 

Reardon, S. F., & Owens, A. (2014). “60 Years After Brown: Trends and Consequences of 

School Segregation”, Annual Reviews of Psychology, Vol. 40, pp. 199 -218. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annure v-soc -071913 -043152 

Reardon, S.F., Weathers, E.S., Fahle, E.M., Jang, H., & Kalogrides, D. (2021a). “Is 

Separate Still Unequal? New Evidence on School Segregation and Racial Academic 

Achievement Gaps”, CEPA Working Paper No.19 -06. Retrieved from Stanford Center for 

Education Policy Analysis: http://cepa.stanford.edu/wp19 -06 

Reardon, S. F., Ho, A. D., Shear, B. R., Fahle, E. M., Kalogrides, D., Jang, H., & Chavez, B. 

(2021b). Stanford Education Data Archive (Version 4.1). Retrieved from 

http://purl.stanford.edu/db586ns4974. 

Roda, A., & Wells, A.S. (2013). “School Choice Policies and Racial Segregation: Where White 

Parents’ Good Intentions, Anxiety, and Privilege Collide”, Faculty Works: Education. Vol. 

119 No. 2. https:// doi.org/10.1086/668753 

Stanford Education Data Archive. (2021). Methods, Computing the Average Learning Rate. 

https://edopportunity.org/methods/ 

Schneider, J., Piazza, P., White, R. S., & Carey, A. (2021). “Student Experience 

Outcomes in Racially Integrated Schools: Looking Beyond Test Scores in Six Districts”, 

Education and Urban Society, April 2021. https://doi.org/10.1177/00131245211004569 

UNESCO (2016) GEM report: Education for people and planet. Available at: 

https://en.unesco.org/gem -report/infographics/2016 -gem -report -education -people -and -

planet -creating -sustainable -futures -all (Accessed: 25 May 2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 377 

Wang, J., & Herman, J. (2017). “Magnet Schools: History, Des cription, and Effects”, In Fox, R.A. 

& Buchanan, N.K., The Wiley Handbook of School Choice, Wiley Blackwell, pp. 58 -179. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119082361 

Zhang, Y. (2021). “ The Effect of Task -Relevant Diversity on Small Group Performance”, 

Doctoral dissertation, Fordham University, Publication No. 28714828. ProQuest 

Dissertations & Theses Global. https://www.proquest.com/docview/2595977849 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 378 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 379 

# Perspectives on Integrating the Local Context 

# for Environmental Literacy: An Exploratory Study 

# with Middle -School Teachers in India 

Girish Dalvi and Tanaya Vyas (Indian Institute of Technology, India) 

Abstract 

Environmental Education (EE) needs to stay pertinent to the needs of the community amidst the 

rapidly changing socio -technological landscape. There are several barriers to applying the 

theoretical concepts of EE into real life situations, and negotiating s uch complexities to support 

environmental literacy remains a challenge for school teachers. This study aims to explore 

teachers’ views and challenges towards contextualization of the curricular concepts to link theory 

with practice, and how their motivatio ns to address this gap affect their approaches towards 

contextualizing environmental topics for the students. The methodology includes the analysis of 

EE content in the national curriculum textbooks in India and corroborating the resultant findings 

through interviewing teachers (n=10) from middle -school grades in semi -urban government 

schools of Rajasthan, India. The discussion reflects upon the issues within current practices of 

contextualisation of environmental topics and the connections which get margin alized in the 

attempts to bridge the theory -practice gap. 

Keywords: Environmental education, India, teacher perception, local context, learner 

engagement, theory -practice gap 

Introduction 

There is growing acknowledgement towards the role of education i n addressing contemporary 

challenges. Efforts for mobilizing educational resources for a sustainable future have been 

internationally encouraged by the UN Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) 

(UNESCO, 2005a). The current study corresponds with the UN Sustainable Development Goal 4 

(SDG 4) of quality education, specifically Target 4.7 Education for Sustainable Development and 

Global Citizenship. Quality education can empower communities to achieve sustainable lifestyles 

through awareness and conscious transformation of knowledge into action. Environmental 

Education (EE) pedagogy forms a crucial part of ESD. EE encompasses integrated pedagogical 

approaches for, about and through the environment. Barriers towards achieving sustainable living 

pr actices, equitable access to natural resources, climate change awareness and allied issues are 

increasingly discussed as part of school EE curricula. Successful teaching -learning opportunities 

within EE rely on strategies for contextualisation of the curri cula. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 380 

Environmental Education in Formal Curriculum 

Environmental Education for Sustainability (EES) is “a learning process that increases people’s 

knowledge and awareness about the environment and its associated challenges, develops the 

necessary ski lls and expertise to address the challenges, and fosters attitudes, motivations, and 

commitments to make informed decisions and take responsible action” (Declaration of the Tbilisi 

Intergovernmental Conference on Environmental Education, 1978). Environment al Education 

works towards building environmental literacy. Globally several steps have been taken to improve 

EES teaching -learning resources, materials and practices. Efforts have been made to improve 

EE through inquiry experiences and skill development ( Steele et al., 2016). Yet there remains a 

gap between students' environmental beliefs and their willingness to take pro -environmental 

action (Kollmuss and Agyeman, 2002). 

In India, following the EES goals, one of the central concerns of the National Curriculum 

Framework (NCF) 2005 is to contextualise the curriculum to the learners’ world, through blurring 

the boundaries between the school and its natural and social environm ent (NCERT, 2005). In the 

middle -grade school curriculum, EE is incorporated through an infusion approach which means 

that EE topics are blended into the science and social -science subjects. 

Contextualizing the Curriculum 

Context based approaches are pr ocesses and methods which help students to make connections 

between curricular concepts and real -world applications (Yamauchi, 2003). When the students 

engage with the larger debates along with the facts, they are able to transfer their learning from 

one c ontext to another more effectively. Contextualized learning is important for environmental 

knowledge comprehension. When teachers relate textbook concepts to the local environment and 

students’ personal experiences, it enhances curricular knowledge acquisi tion (Taylor and Mulhall, 

2001). Contextual curriculum enhances community focused, learner focused and knowledge 

focused learning; incorporating local knowledge, language, and skills. While the multidisciplinary 

nature of EE promotes examination of context ual information (Song, 2012), there is limited 

research into analyzing the features of EE curricula from this perspective. 

Teacher Perception Studies Regarding Contextualisation for EE 

Previous studies have investigated teacher perceptions and practices of concepts such as issues 

within Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) (Anyolo et al., 2018), socio -scientific 

learning and environmental citizenship (Georgiou, 2021), environmental topics in science 

education (Ko and Lee, 2003) and so on. In India, there have been studies analysing 

environmental philosophies underlying teacher practices and narratives (Haydock and 

Srivastava, 2017); environmental awareness of middle -school teachers (Singh, 2012); among 

others. Although teachers’ role and knowledge i n facilitating environmental literacy among 

students is considered crucial, scholarly research on teacher perceptions and practices regarding 

contextualisation of the curricular content remain underexplored in India. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 381 

Rationale for the Study 

We situate t he current study with teachers in semi -urban government schools of Rajasthan, north -

western India. Land degradation, deforestation, water scarcity and depletion of common 

resources reflect the range of environmental issues prevalent in Rajasthan ( Gagné , 20 13). While 

several campaigns to promote environmental conservation have been active in the region, very 

few studies attempt systematic analysis into concerns around environmental education in the 

schools. Previous research with school and university studen ts in Rajasthan has highlighted 

students’ inability to comprehend the socio -ecological challenges associated with access to water 

(Chauhan, 2003), and lack of knowledge of and involvement in waste management practices 

(Arora and Agarwal, 2011). Such studie s indicate the need for investigating the EE pedagogy 

practices present within the school curricula. Teachers’ active engagement with curricular 

transformation has been acknowledged by researchers as an important catalyst in enabling 

students to connect cu rricular knowledge with life outside school (Batra, 2005). 

Through our study, we aim to analyse the curricular content for the opportunities it provides with 

respect to contextualisation , as well teacher perceptions of the socio -cultural, political, economic, 

and curricular contexts within which learning takes place. We present a detailed analysis of the 

textbook content from science textbooks of Class 6 (NCERT 2018, p. 155 -156) and 7 (NC ERT 

2018, p. 220 -230) published by the National Council of Educational Research and Training 

(NCERT), along with findings based on teachers’ interviews in the Discussion section of this 

paper. In order to understand how the curricular content gets translat ed into practice, w e propose 

the following questions to understand teacher perspectives on contextualizing the curriculum for 

environmental literacy in middle -school: 

What are teacher beliefs and perceived challenges towards contextualisation of environme ntal 

topics for enabling student learning and engagement? 

How do teachers facilitate connections between curricular and contextual knowledge in 

environmental topics? 

Research Methodology 

The data collection for the study involved ten semi -structured telephonic interviews, which lasted 

approximately 40 minutes each. Purposive sampling was utilised in this study to ensure that 

participants would be able to provide the information required to answer the research 

questions. The teachers from the Science and Social Science background were selected as the 

environmental topics are infused in these subjects in middle -grade school curricula. The 

interviews were conducted primarily in the Hindi lang uage. The nature of this qualitative study is 

exploratory and we do not intend to draw statistically significant conclusions from our findings. 

The sample consisted of seven female and three male teachers, out of which six teachers were 

Science teachers and four were Social Science teachers. Their teaching experience ranged 

between 12 to 31 yrs. The participation in the study was completely voluntary and prior consent Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 382 

was taken for recording interviews. Participants were asked questions on their views, e xperiences 

and methods regarding contextualising environmental topics from the curricula. However, 

conversations were often woven around and guided by what the principal -researcher interpreted 

to be significant to the interviewees while they responded. Thi s helped in revealing unintended 

categories and themes during data analysis. 

Reflexive Thematic Analysis or RTA (Braun and Clarke, 2019) was considered most appropriate 

in the context of our theoretical underpinnings for the study. The method of RTA sugg ests that 

data is collected and analysed in a way that respects the participants’ stories, while 

acknowledging researcher reflexivity when interpreting the data. Thematic Analysis involves 

finding repeated meanings across a data set, which is crucial to th e interpretation of phenomena. 

The analysis is recursive and iterative, and the phases of analysis include: familiarisation with the 

data, generating initial codes, generating themes, reviewing potential themes, defining and 

naming themes and producing the report. 

After each of the interviews was conducted, the researchers created a transcript of the interview. 

The teachers’ own accounts of their opinions and experiences have been expressed by the 

researchers as truly as possible, while also embracing the ir own interpretations as researchers. 

Themes from the data were produced by organizing codes around a central organizing concept 

interpreted from the data. 

The paradigmatic framework of interpretivism and constructivism (Schwandt, 1994) guided our 

study . These frameworks allowed us to incorporate a combination of both deductive and inductive 

analysis approaches. A primarily inductive approach was used in our study, as we conducted 

open coding of the data, giving importance to data -based meanings. However , deductive analysis 

was used to a certain extent to make sure that the data -based meanings and the themes we 

generate stay relevant to our research questions. While performing open -coding we gave equal 

importance to both semantic and latent level codes. W e intended to code the semantic meaning 

communicated by the participants, and the latent meanings that we interpreted as researchers. 

Findings 

Four major themes were identified (Fig.1 Thematic map): school context; framing the concepts 

within activities ; stepping beyond the classroom and; diversity of learner experiences and 

backgrounds. In the subsequent paragraphs, we detail each theme along with respective 

subthemes. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 383 

School Context 

This theme relates to the factors seen as important by the teachers to frame the concepts in 

enviro nmental education topics considering the place where teaching -learning occurs, and its 

relationship with the surrounding community. 

Interactions with the School Landscape 

Teachers’ ideas of building connections bet ween the students and their immediate surroundings 

seemed to be based on possibilities generated by the school infrastructure and landscape. 

‘There were only two dustbins in our school earlier. The children had gotten into the habit of 

dumping food wrapp ers and pencil shavings in between each other’s chairs so that teachers 

would not notice. We teach them to remember to put trash into dustbins, but it is difficult to make 

students put it into practice. Recently our school received more dustbins.’ 

With re ference to the textbook activity of inspecting drains in one’s locality or neighbourhood, the 

teachers mentioned using the school premises as it is safer and the teachers could ensure that 

the students performed the task under the teachers’ supervision. Th e teachers prepared an Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 384 

extended exercise wherein the students learnt about the water supply system by connecting with 

the school personnel. 

‘We cannot ask the students to trace the drains in their area to look for contaminants. This task 

would require a dult supervision. Instead, we ask them to observe how wastewater is generated 

in the school itself. We ask them to click photos or make drawings of the activities which result in 

wastewater.’ 

Teachers perceived gaps between the curricular objectives and the prevalent school culture. 

‘Our premises has huge trees of eucalyptus, bamboo and all sorts of ornamental plants. The 

school authority restricts children from walking in the garden. How wil l the child ever know the 

names and importance of indigenous plants?’ 

Explorations Beyond Formal Learning 

Self -directed learning was acknowledged as important as one teacher narrated about how a 

student started making informative videos about local birds with his neighbour and posted them 

online. The teacher was ‘very happy and encouraged other students to mak e similar videos in the 

school yard’. Instances of incidental learning and the role of non -academic activities for promoting 

it were appreciated by teachers. Academic pressures were seen as disrupting the scope for such 

opportunities though. 

‘There is a small break between the assembly time and the first class. During that time the 

students can either have some snacks, read the newspaper in the library, play in the grounds, or 

just take a short nap. But I have seen most students quite tense during this ti me, busy finishing 

their homework. How does one expect students to grow aware of their surroundings, and think 

besides the defined academic requirements?’ 

Teachers seemed to reflect upon the strengthening of teacher -student relationship through such 

exper iences. 

‘It was lunchtime and the students were playing in the school ground, when they noticed an injured 

squirrel. They called me and we brought the squirrel to the classroom. Children learn through 

such incidents. We made a feeder and a shelter for the squirrel, all of us together!’ 

School -community Relationship 

Teachers shared the need for involving parents of the students in the activities of the school. They 

felt that the role of parental support in the child’s learning was important for the child to bring their 

learning into practice. 

‘Parents of the students should also be involved in the tree plantation events at the school. But 

usually, the children gather and then we click some pictures and that’s it.’ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 385 

The teachers highlighted the school agenda behind organizing environmental awareness 

campaigns, and suggested extending such activities for wider community participation. 

‘Hosting a cleanliness drive in the school is not enough. It should extend to the s tudents’ home 

and the neighbourhood. But we just did a small event when the inspectors came for evaluation.’ 

Framing the Concepts within Activities 

Teachers’ preferences and methods for conducting the activities for environmental learning and 

awareness a re discussed under this theme. 

Teaching -learning Conceptions Regarding EE Pedagogy 

Teachers referred to socio -cultural practices related to sustainability and intergenerational sharing 

of knowledge in their descriptions of activities. Health and well -be ing were also perceived as a 

neglected aspect in the content of textbook activities. 

‘Our culture already teaches us to avoid wastage. I bring examples from our own culture and 

community practices. People in villages of Rajasthan keep a wide wok -like cont ainer below while 

taking a bath on a cot, so that all the dirty water gets collected in the container which can be later 

reused for other purposes. That is how our ancestors have taught us to conserve water in the 

desert.’ 

‘The problem of sanitation is acute in many rural areas. They dump waste in the open. The 

students see this everyday around them, so I ask them to make detailed projects on this issue. 

Such activities need to be promoted, rather than just making posters.’ 

Sense of Ownership 

Using found materials was considered as a typical activity in lessons on waste management. 

Teachers associated the ‘best -out -of -waste’ activity as a way to connect student learning with 

their home environment. When narrating instances of support ing student interest through hands -

on activities for environmental action, upcycling was considered as a more ‘convenient’ activity 

as compared to activities which demand more effort and patience such as composting, planting 

seeds and segregating waste. Th e activity also brought instant results, which the teachers saw 

as important for developing a sense of ownership in the students. 

‘We always conduct the Christmas tree decorations session. It is convenient, as children bring 

waste material from their hom e and they feel a sense of achievement after making something 

new from trash.’ 

‘We had a compost pit in the school once. But nobody takes care of it, nobody has the patience. 

The most loved activity is where students get creative like in best -out -of -waste . They enjoy owning 

the responsibility of collecting trash from their home and making something useful from it.’ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 386 

The craft activities were preferred as they were perceived as requiring minimal teacher 

involvement. It was assumed that the activity would in crease the students’ creative skills and their 

engagement in environmentally -responsible behaviour. 

‘Children can be left on their own with craft or art activities. I am able to complete my evaluations 

during that time. And the children develop good behav iour towards the environment by making 

new things out of old.’ 

Communicating Moral Values 

Valuing nature was seen as an important step in exploring and documenting the past and relating 

it to the present. Teachers emphasised the role of developing the w isdom to distinguish between 

right and wrong and applying it to nurturing the human -environment relationship. 

‘I ask my students to find out about the Khejri trees and how they were protected by the local 

communities. Children need to realize and value t he efforts put in by our ancestors in conserving 

them.’ 

‘I think it is important to talk about values. Just yesterday I saw some children get into a fight on 

the bus to school. I cite these examples to my students in class, and make them prepare a do’s 

an d don'ts chart. Cutting trees and hitting people should be on the same don’ts list. Planting trees 

and helping people should be on the same do’s list.’ 

Teachers spoke of instances wherein they became role models and wanted children to be inspired 

to see t hrough the issue of social stratification, by engaging in work which was seen as inferior. 

‘When I come to the class, I clean the desk and dust the shelves. One day the cleaning staff came 

on duty and saw the students dusting the class furniture. This sp arked a conversation between 

the students and the staff. Students spoke to the staff about their work, their life. Students need 

to understand that cleaning is not someone else’s job, it is not lowly.’ 

Sharing Multiple Perspectives 

Sharing various dimensions around popular places and events was considered relevant by the 

teachers in terms of exposing the lesser -known stories of environmental ‘damage’. 

‘I show contrasting images of the Udaipur lakes, those in which the local organizations can be 

see n cleaning the lakes and then those in which the huge lavish events can be seen catering to 

thousands of tourists. I also ask students to bring such photos from newspapers and make videos 

of their surroundings.’ 

‘When I teach concepts on pollution, I ask students to walk into the schoolyard and the lanes near 

our school and notice the types of pollution. The obvious answers they give are noise and smoke 

from cars. Then I remind them of Diwali, the festival time when firecrackers burst on the road. The Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 387 

dis cussion does not end there. I tell them about the condition of the workers who make those 

firecrackers. That is how students can link social aspects with ecological issues.’ 

There were instances where teachers used videos to include news of natural disast ers such as 

tsunamis, floods, and droughts while explaining about the water cycle. Collecting news reports on 

the issues was a popular activity given to students, especially to bring out an emotional response 

from the students, mostly that of ‘shock’. 

‘Ra jasthan experiences severe water scarcity. These days we have rainfall at random intervals, 

which is all due to the environmental disturbance. I show students the weather statistics and the 

destruction of crops, so they feel 

the shock.’ 

‘I recently captured photos of dead cows in our locality. The heaps of plastic waste in the garbage 

are the problem. The students made faces upon seeing the photos. But photos like these should 

be shown. I asked them to click pictures of plastic products i n their homes, and count them.’ 

Stepping Beyond the Classroom 

This theme corresponds with the teachers’ views on including the outdoors and engaging with the 

community. 

Indirect Inclusion of Environmental Issues 

Teachers tried to find ways to bring st udents closer to thinking about environmental issues while 

playing or going for site visits. 

‘We took our students to visit a solar panel project because the government has been making 

efforts to motivate children into taking up sustainable agriculture as a career. Through this tour 

we explained to them about environmental issues prevalent in their community.’ 

‘When students go out to play in the school grounds, I ask them to pick up the trash lying around. 

It becomes a kind of competition t o see who picks the most trash! This way they enjoy and don’t 

even realise that they have cleaned the ground. When they come back to class, I talk to them 

about the various types of waste present around us and its hazards.’ 

Purpose of Field Trips 

The tea chers acknowledge the value of field trips, but the purpose of such trips was not linked 

with academic goals. 

‘When we take students out on nature camps, we just want them to have a good time. We don’t 

get them to do any activities or put them under stre ss. The camp is a mandatory activity, so we 

have to do it. We can include learning -activities, but then that is another task to plan for.’ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 388 

The teachers preferred keeping the trips ‘stress -free’ for the students, and avoided putting in 

efforts to plan any activities to be included in such trips. Perceived barriers include time -crunch, 

excessive involvement with planning travel logistics and so on. 

‘Exploring the nearby zoo is a fun trip. It increases recall for children, they are able to recognise 

differen t species of animals, and observe them. They are happy as it is like a picnic for them. We 

have to put in our time to ensure the safety and transport arrangements. That itself is quite a lot.’ 

‘Trips are good and are part of the syllabus, but we mostly ta ke them to visit nearby forts only. 

We don’t do discussions or any such thinking task, we just do sightseeing.’ 

Planning for Community Engagement 

Teachers described arranging the community -engagement activities in the beginning of the 

lesson, irrespectiv e of the activity’s placement in the textbook chapter. They felt that it allowed 

students to explore prior knowledge through discussions with family members before diving into 

the textbook concepts. 

‘I tell my students to speak to their grandparents about how they lived without electricity. We then 

have a discussion in class the next day. All children may not have done the task, starting the 

lesson with such discussions can be helpful. This was an activity I thought of, based on another 

activity given in t he textbook exercises at the end of the lesson.’ 

‘I asked the students to collect packaging of products used by their family members, and discuss 

the types of materials used in the packaging. We did this exercise after watching a short film on 

waste. They can quickly relate the two together.’ 

Diverse Student Experiences and Backgrounds 

This theme relates to teacher perceptions of how student backgrounds, attitude and experiences 

affect the way they understand environmental concepts and develop pro -environmental 

competencies. 

Fragmented Narratives 

The students’ inability to relate the curricular knowledge with contextual knowledge was noticed 

by teachers, and the teachers felt that such situations led to misconceptions. 

‘A student asked me why people in his neighbourhood did not follow the habit of disposing 

garbage in the dustbin. I find it difficult to handle the differences between what needs to be taught 

and what the students actually notice in their surroundings.’ 

‘I ask students to grow a vegetable in their vicinity and take care of it without using pesticides. 

Those students wh ose parents are farmers, see that pesticides are being used in the field. So, 

they get confused. How can they apply their learnings in real life then?’ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 389 

Broad Range of Students 

Students from various socio -economic backgrounds possess contrasting experienc es and 

attitudes, which are perceived as affecting the students’ ability to learn and understand ideas 

around sustainable living. 

‘Students come from different backgrounds. Some of their parents are farmers, so they are close 

to nature. They even bring v egetables from their farms and share with their friends. The students 

who reside in more semi -urban areas are not very close to nature spaces. Students learn a lot 

from each other’s diverse experiences.’ 

‘Students from urban areas are more relaxed about u sing water and electricity, and need to be 

told about resource conservation. But students from rural areas are very conscious of wastage. 

The difficulty is that the same examples may not be appealing to everyone.’ 

‘Access to water is an issue in Rajasthan , especially in rural communities. Women walk long 

distances to fetch water. But these discussions are difficult for urban children to understand.’ 

Drawing from the Language of the Students 

Teachers regard language barriers as a key issue while teaching the environmental topics. They 

regard the use of poems, role -play and stories to ‘ease’ the students into the scientific aspects of 

the content. 

‘There are local poems in the Marwari language with reference to water, rain and seasons which 

I collect and keep in the library. When I read it out to the students and ask them to recite it, and 

then begin with the textbook lesson… that way they become comfortable with the lesson.’ 

‘Some students fr om rural communities do not understand some scientific terms in the textbook. 

So, they may not understand the concepts easily. In such cases, I have to ask them the local 

language terms, or draw pictures.’ 

‘I often ask my students to go out into the schoo l grounds and bring dry branches or leaves and 

make crowns out of them. Then they have to enact the tree and talk about its uses in any language 

they are comfortable in. This way it is easier for them to learn and express.’ 

Discussion 

The themes in our findings reflect the approaches regarded as important by teachers to 

contextualize EE for students. These approaches correspond with the focus areas of place, 

student, pedagogical practice, attention to diversity and disciplinary content; as identified in 

previous research (Fernandes et al., 2012). Teacher’s perceptions revealed that teachers view 

the process of contextualisation as having structural and affective aspects. As the bridge between Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 390 

the curriculum and the students, teachers se e themselves negotiating their ideas around EE 

pedagogy and the multiplicity resting within the narratives of the students’ lived realities. 

Place is believed to have strong cultural features, and curriculum design and teaching -learning 

methods need to t ake into account the daily routines, habits and social interactions that unfold in 

the school scenario ( Kemp, 2006). The community’s needs and the economic context are seen 

by teachers as essential while conceptualising the pedagogy for localisation. The m eaning of local 

knowledge needs to be seen through a dynamic lens, to allow the inclusion of characteristics of 

the place. 

The teacher responses prominently include the role of the school context, and activities that 

encourage beyond -classroom experience s in shaping the students’ connections with their home, 

neighbourhood and city. While teachers’ intent towards encouraging outdoor engagement is 

visible, their motivation to transform such opportunities into tools for contextualisat ion is lacking. 

Teacher’ s role in planning, implementing and reflection impacts the success of field trips in 

becoming effective educational tools ( Behrendt and Franklin, 2014). But training and support are 

crucial to empower teachers to learn methods for conducting such trips an d aligning the 

experiences to EE learning objectives. 

The textbooks suggest certain out -of -classroom activities, but offer minimal guidance towards 

their implementation. For example, exploring the sew age route in one’s locality. This activity and 

other s imilar ones are meant for students to understand wastewater management through 

physically exploring the localities. However, the textbook does not mention appropriate safety 

guidelines to consider during such tasks. The teachers while referring to this act ivity were found 

to be adapting it for the school campus instead of nearby localities. There is yet another textbook 

activity which prompts the students to interact with waste collectors or ‘rag -picking’ children and 

think of ways to help them ‘read and wr ite’. The activity is meant to promote socio -scientific inquiry 

among students. However, the lack of direction towards planning and facilitating direct 

experiences within outdoor spaces and social interactions with communities, may overshadow 

the opportuni ties for students and teachers to realise such an inquiry. Moreover, field trip goals 

are treated as detached from EE objectives, and such trips are perceived as an escape from the 

usual coursework and assignments. 

While the textbook content attempts to make the environmental topics more accessible and 

interactive through the questions and illustrated characters, the depth of the message seems to 

get compromised, and communication of ideas remains didactic and oversimplified. The teachers 

too seemed to b elieve that EE is ‘simple’ to teach in comparison to ‘heavier’ science subjects. 

Consequently, the framing of environmental and sustainability issues becomes skewed, 

succumbing to a fragmented narrative. With reference to their motivation towards the need to 

contextualize the content, the teachers seem to have tautological answers such as ‘the 

importance of the environment is significant to life’ and ‘we need to learn from the environment 

because it is everywhere and all -around us’. The teachers seem to be caught in the middle of 

having to adhere to the curricular content and wanting to discuss alternate examples and realities 

surrounding an environmental concept. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 391 

In order to develop equality within education processes, contextualised practices are seen as 

imperative. Research into contextualisation highlights the need to take care of student interest, 

nature, experience and background to support meaningful learning (Doyle, 2009). Opportunities 

for inclusion of diverse learner backgrounds could be created t hrough context -aware teaching -

learning methodologies (Kalbach and Forester, 2006). Still, teachers’ responses reflect that they 

are not able to devote much time towards discussions on issues that stem from the contrasts of 

everyday lives of students living in the rural and urban areas. Previous research indicates that 

focusing on local history, identity and value systems can help in developing contextualised 

learning situations (Goodson and Deakin Crick, 2009). Teachers attempt to highlight local 

histories, but mostly tend to touch upon common examples devoid of intricacies, and quickly skip 

to global environmental -crisis examples. 

Textbooks seem to contain minimum guidance towards planning of resources to conduct the 

activities, and this could prevent tran slation of knowledge into practice. For example, in the 

textbook, hands -on activities such as vermicomposting and paper recycling would require certain 

materials which may not be readily available. Also, the process of composting needs to be tracked 

across a month’s time and requires the school premises availability and suitable conditions for 

conducting such an activity. Hence these tasks are not completely student -led and their execution 

might differ according to the facilitation and resources provided. W e find that teachers also believe 

that composting may not be feasible in their schools, and the best -from -waste activity seems to 

be the preferred one instead. Use of words in the textbook such as ‘chicken mesh’ and ‘gunny 

bag’ may be obscure for learners, especially without the presence of any visual depiction. So, the 

application of the concept of compost would remain a challenge even if the concept is explained 

in great detail in the textbook. The teacher interviews also reflect the teachers’ practices t o make 

sure that language does not become a barrier for students’ learning. 

Teacher responses seem to indicate that their practice of contextualisation remains constrained 

within the didactic mould of instruction. Opportunities for incidental learning w hich means 

everyday learning that happens either incidentally or by seeking information individually (Marsick, 

2016) may not always be supported in the formal school scenario. Reasons for this may include 

the hidden curriculum in the form of restrictions i mposed by the school authorities and the design 

of school landscapes, as observed in the teacher interviews. Contrasting priorities of school 

authorities, teachers and curriculum developers are evident in these observations. 

In spite of the efforts made b y the curriculum developers and the teachers’ attempts at 

contextualising EE, critical thinking around issues seems minimal. The value and significance 

ascribed to a concept may push other facets of an issue to the periphery, thus making it difficult 

for s tudents to parse through the systemic linkages which connect the various elements of a 

complex phenomenon to the student’s personal experiences. For example, activities such as 

best -from -waste are chosen by teachers because they are feasible and associated with bringing 

a sense of personal agency and empowerment to the students. These activities however do not 

get extended into meaningful teacher -student interactions to uncover deeper questions around 

the notion of waste or the difference between upcycling and recycling and so on. Similarly, news 

reports were referred to for generating a sense of ‘shock’, rather than careful dissection of the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 392 

underlying issue. Consequently, students may not express their ideas, experiences, opinions, 

misconceptions, and que stions. In the absence of such opportunities, applying the knowledge in 

new contexts might become a challenge. 

Limitations 

The findings of the study are to be viewed amidst certain limitations. We may not know whether 

the teachers’ comments reflect their actual classroom practice and circumstances as the data for 

this study was drawn from telephonic interviews only. Also, we a re not aware how frequently 

certain pedagogical practices are used by the teachers and exactly what type of activity structure 

is being referred to by the teachers. Being an exploratory study, the sample size is limited. Class 

observation and in -person int eractions could not be conducted owing to Covid -19 pandemic 

restrictions. The teachers’ responses may also have been affected by the non -classroom location 

they might be present within while responding. Regardless, our study attempts to reveal the 

diversit y of teacher perspectives pertaining to local context integration for environmental literacy, 

particularly in the Indian region of Rajasthan where such studies have been scarce. 

Implications and Further Scope 

Our analysis reveals the preferences, challe nges and choices present in pedagogical practices 

of teachers and their relationship with the EE curriculum goals. These insights are relevant for 

curriculum developers and environmental education experts in understanding the deterrents and 

opportunities i n realising the EE objectives. The current study guides us into thinking about 

questions such as, who may be defining the context for EE, what comprises the context and how 

might the framing of it evolve over time? 

The findings from this study provide a base for exploring the design and delivery of EE modules. 

Fu rther research can analyse how teachers contextualise for specific environmental sustainability 

issues. Empirical studies can be planned to understand the role of school culture and its impact 

on student’s environmental interactions. Local issues and community values could be studied in 

relation to the curricular activities. 

Conclusion 

Current attempts to facilitate EE objectives present moments which enable connection of content 

knowledge to the students’ real -world context, but there are lesser opportunities that allow 

students to apply the content knowledge to a new real -world setting . Thus, the process of 

contextualisation ceases to be iterative, and instead becomes static disparate interludes. The 

plurality of contexts presents a web of interconnected subsystems which are difficult to permeate 

through in absence of flexibility from e stablished pedagogical frameworks. Consequently, the 

students’ experiences wind down to linear explorations rather than flourishing into active attempts 

to apply their learnings to new imaginations. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 393 

In preparation to explore the full potential of EE, th e curriculum material needs to allow students 

to immerse in the issues through critical questioning, develop solutions, support ideas and present 

their data while exploring the local context. To this end, the educators and curriculum designers 

must work to wards planning and assessing the accessibility of the knowledge components and 

the activities. A major challenge lies in re -shaping the school curriculum in order for it to include 

not only the content but also the teaching practices and informal instructi on; for the transmission 

of a holistic model of EE. 

The SDG 4 supports the role of education in advancing knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary 

for learners to develop the ability to make informed decisions. To strengthen the contribution of 

educatio n for accomplishing responsible citizenship in resolving local and global challenges, 

contextualised learning opportunities are vital. Contextualisation improves the relevance of 

education, thereby improving the quality of education. Hence, research on app roaches for 

contextualizing formal EE curricula across students’ home, community and school is required to 

systematically analyse efforts and monitor progress towards achievement of quality education for 

sustainable development. 

References 

Anyolo, E.O., Kärkkäinen, S. and Keinonen, T. (2018), “Implementing Education for Sustainable 

Development in Namibia: School Teachers’ Perceptions and Teaching Practices”, 

Journal of Teacher Education for Sustainability, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 64 -81. 

Arora, L. and Agarw al, S. (2011), “Knowledge, Attitude and Practices Regarding Waste 

Management in Selected Hostel Students of University of Rajasthan, Jaipur”, 

International Journal of Chemical, Environmental and Pharmaceutical Research, Vol. 2, 

pp. 40 -43. 

Batra, P. (2 005), “Voice and Agency of Teachers”, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 40 No. 

40, viewed 2 February 2022, <https://www.epw.in/journal/2005/40/special -articles/voice -

and -agency -teachers.html>. 

Behrendt, M. and Franklin, T. (2014), “A Review of Researc h on School Field Trips and Their 

Value in Education”, International Journal of Environmental and Science Education. Vol. 

9 No. 3, pp. 235 -245. 

Braun, V. and Clarke, V. (2019), “Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis”, Qualitative 

Research in Sport, Exercise and Health, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 589 -597, viewed 12 

November 2021, 

<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/2159676X.2019.1628806>. 

Chauhan, S. S. (2003), “Environmental education and water representation among high -school 

students: A Case Study of Rajasthan (Jaipur Area)”, Journal of Human Ecology, Vol. 14 

No. 2, pp. 113 -117. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 394 

Declaration of the Tbilisi Intergovernmental Conference on Environmental Education 1978, 

Environmental Conservation, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp.63 -64, viewed on 5 January 2022, 

<https://doi.org/10.1017/s0376892900005294>. 

Doyle, W. (2009), “Situated Practice: A Reflection on Person -Centered Classroom 

Management”, The ory Into Practice, Taylor and Francis, Vol. 48 No. 2, Taylor & Francis, 

Ltd., pp. 156 -59. 

Fernandes, P., Leite, C., Mouraz, A. and Figueiredo, C. (2012), “Curricular Contextualization: 

Tracking the Meanings of a Concept”, The Asia -Pacific Education Rese archer, Vol. 22 

No. 4, pp.417 -425. 

Gagné, K. (2013), “Gone with the Trees: Deciphering the Thar Desert’s Recurring Droughts”, 

Current Anthropology, Vol. 54 No. 4, pp.497 -509. 

Georgiou, Y., Hadjichambis, A.Ch. and Hadjichambi, D. (2021), “Teachers’ Perc eptions on 

Environmental Citizenship: A Systematic Review of the Literature”, Sustainability, Vol. 13 

No. 5, p.2622. 

Goodson, I. and Deakin Crick, R. (2009), “Curriculum as narration: tales from the children of the 

colonised”, The Curriculum Journal, V ol. 20 No. 3, pp. 225 -236. 

Haydock, K. and Srivastava, H. (2017), “Environmental philosophies underlying the teaching of 

environmental education: a case study in India”, Environmental Education Research, 

Vol. 25 No. 7, pp. 1038 -1065. 

Kalbach, L. and Fo rester, L. (2006), “The world and the world: A lesson in critical literacy and its 

impact on student achievement and self -esteem”, Curriculum and Teaching Dialogue, 

Vol. 8 No. 1 -2, pp. 69 -82. 

Kemp, A. (2006), “Engaging the environment: A case for a plac e-based curriculum”, Curriculum 

and Teaching Dialogue, Vol. 8 No. 1/2, pp. 125 -142. 

Ko, A. and Lee, J. (2003), “Teachers' perceptions of teaching environmental issues within the 

science curriculum: A Hong Kong perspective”, Journal of Science Education and 

Technology, Vol. 12. No. 10, pp. 187 -204. 

Kollmuss, A. and Agyeman, J. (2002), “Mind the Gap: Why Do People Act Environmentally and 

What Are the Barriers to pro -environmental behavior?”, Environmental Education 

Research, Vol. 8 No. 3, pp. 239 -260, viewed on 5 February 2022, 

<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/13504620220145401>. 

Marsick, V.J. (2016), “Informal and incidental learning in the workplace”, Taylor & Francis. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 395 

NCERT 2018, Science textbook for Class VI, NCERT, pp. 155 -156, view ed 30 December 2021, 

<https://ncert.nic.in/textbook.php?fesc1=16 -16>. 

NCERT 2018, Science textbook for Class VII, NCERT, pp. 220 -230, viewed 30 December 2021, 

<https://ncert.nic.in/textbook.php?gesc1=18 -18>. 

NCERT 2005, National Curricular Framework 2005, NCERT, New Delhi, viewed 2 January 

2022, <https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/nc -framework/nf2005 -english.pdf>. 

Sadler, T.D. and Zeidler, D.L. (2004), “Patterns of inf ormal reasoning in the context of 

socioscientific decision making”, Journal of Research in Science Teaching, Vol. 42 No. 

1, pp. 112 -138. 

Schwandt, T.A. (1994), “Constructivist, interpretivist approaches to human inquiry”, in NK 

Denzin & YS Lincoln (eds ), Handbook of Qualitative Research. SAGE Publishing, pp. 

118 -137. 

Singh, J. (2012), “Assessment of environmental awareness and attitude among the school 

teachers in Bareilly city”, International Journal of Innovative Research & Development, 

Vol. 1, pp . 486 -492. 

Song, Y.I.K. (2012), “Crossroads of public art, nature and environmental education”. 

Environmental Education Research, Vol. 18 No. 6, pp.797 -813, viewed on 7 February 

2022, <https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2012.670208>. 

Steele, A., Hives, L., Scott, J. and English, R.M. (2016), “Stories of learning: Inquiry -based 

pathways of discovery through environmental education”, Cogent Education, Vol. 3 No. 

1, p.1202546. 

Taylor, P. and Mulhall, A. (2001), “Linking learning enviro nments through agricultural experience 

— enhancing the learning process in rural primary schools”, International Journal of 

Educational Development, Vol. 21 No. 2, pp. 135 -148. 

UNESCO (2005a). United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Developme nt 2005 -

2014, Draft International Implementation Scheme. Paris. 

Yamauchi, L. (2003), “Making school relevant for at -risk students: The Wai’anae High School 

Hawaiian Studies Program”, Journal of Education for Students Placed At -risk, Vol. 8 No. 

4, pp. 3 79 -390. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 396 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 397 

# Culture and the Sustainable Development Goals: 

# An Outlook of Future Opportunities 

Kenna Lee Edler and Jonghwi Park (The United Nations University 

Institute for the Advance Study of Sustainability, Japan) 

Abstract 

The purpose of this integrative literature review paper is to examine, from an angle of 

sustainability, how culture can contribute to the localization and achievement of SDGs. 

Specifically, this paper is to 1) reflect on the synergies between culture, ESD, and people -bas ed 

Sustainable Development (SD), and 2) examine studies involving youths as the future potential 

for achieving the SDGs through culture. A varied range of literature was analysed to set up a 

method of inductive thinking, starting with specific examples and inferring towards 

generalizations. Drawn on studies from tangible and intangible heritages, the results identified 

two emerging thematic areas: 1) how culture presents future opportunities for achieving SD and 

provides a solid understanding on the synergi es between culture and ESD, and 2) how culture 

has aided the progression of SD through youth engagement. The implication of the present study 

is to uncover strong connections between culture and SDGs and inherited reasons why culture 

matters for SDGs. More importantly, the paper highlights culture is not “good to consider” but must 

be taken into consideration as an intrinsic domain of human existence in all efforts to achieve SD. 

Keywords: culture, cultural sustainability; Education for Sustainable Develop ment; SDG 18; youth 

empowerment; people -based Sustainable Development 

Introduction 

This integrative literature review paper is to explore through a lens of sustainability how culture, 

in its different expressions, is an essential provider of future oppor tunities for the success of 

Sustainable Development (SD). The purpose of this paper is to illustrate the question “Why culture 

matters in SD” by analysing the vitality of culture in achieving SD based on the current scholarly 

dialogue on culture, youth, an d Education for Sustainable Development (ESD). 

The term “culture” can be understood as the collective practices of a specific group of people, 

their history, literature, arts, and other practices (Mahfoodh and Alhashmi, 2020). For Murdock 

(1932), individu als carry culture, and no individual is free of culture as everyone is raised in a 

cultural environment. Murdock (1932) further observes that culture is not innate. The continuity of 

culture depends on individuals of every generation acquiring the culture anew from the previous 

generations. Hence, particular elements of culture depend on intergenerational teaching and 

learning. Lamsal and Pokhrel (2021) state that humans and culture are mutually interdependent, 

for “man is a cultural animal” (Lamsal & Pokhr el, 2021). Levin and Mamlok (2021) see culture as 

“a human creation”. It is inferable that all peoples are cultural beings because c ulture is intrinsic Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 398 

to human existence, it is blended with, and permeates every human experience. Yet despite these 

insight s, t he Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have marginal mentions on culture or 

culture -related terms with only four targets containing such terms. The terms “culture” and 

“heritage” are entirely absent in the most recent text of The Sustainable Development Goals 

Report 2021 (UN, 2021). In the literature on SDGs, culture is often referred to as a “driver”, 

“enabler” or “social glue”. However, various actors ascribe to culture a far stronger role than these 

terms. Culture’s contribution to the realization of the SDGs has not been sufficiently acknowledged 

(Hosagrahar, 2017). There are calls for culture to be named as a fourth pillar (Ruigrok, 2009; 

Dessein et al., 2015) or dimension for SD (besides the currently named social, economic an d

environmental pillars), or referring to culture as “SDG 18” (Voices of Culture, 2021; Poole, 2018). 

The British Council talks of culture as “The Missing Pillar” of the UN 2030 Agenda for SD (The 

British Council, 2020). 

Similarly, the movement of global cultural networks that produced the joint communique “The 

Future We Want includes Culture”, released in 2015 by the Global Campaign for Culture 

“#culture2015goal”, was revitalized as “#culture2030goal” (Culture 2030 Goal Campaign, 2019). 

Further efforts a re being made to relate SDGs more intrinsically with domains of culture. An 

example is the introduction by the UNESCO of a framework of twenty -two thematic indicators 

referring to culture, as a voluntary complement to the existing 2030 Agenda indicators 

(C ulture|2030 Indicators, 2020). The structured dialogue between representatives and 

organisations of the cultural sector and the European Union and the European Commission, 

Voices of Culture, is an additional case in point. These global voices evidently ind icate the need 

to acknowledge the importance of incorporating the cultural sector more strongly into SD. 

The aim of this paper is to review how culture matters for SDGs by exploring the opportunities 

offered by the synergies generated between culture and ESD and identifying how culture can 

empower next generations (i.e., youth) to achieve holistic SD. The scope of the integrative 

literature review includes scholarly and grey literature, and web searched documents mainly 

within the time frame 2015 – 2022, c oinciding with the SDG era. This paper seeks to answer the 

following research question: What are the concrete opportunities that the synergies between 

culture, ESD, and youth offer in achieving SDGs? In terms of objectives, this paper proposes to 

1) examin e the synergies between culture and ESD, and 2) examine studies involving youths as 

the future potential for achieving the SDGs through culture. 

In the following sections, it shall explain the methodology including the selection process and 

criteria of the integrative review. Findings are illustrated along with two thematic areas, namely 

culture and ESD, and culture and youth empowerment, providing reflections on the synergies 

between culture and ESD and future opportunities that these synergies hold tow ards achieving 

SD. Examples analysed in this paper include localizing SDGs efforts involving cultural domains 

as well as through youth engagement with tangible and intangible cultural heritage. The 

conclusion shall sum up the paper’s synthesis, the limitat ions of the review, and further questions 

to explore. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 399 

Methodology 

The present paper is an integrative literature review that aims at generating contemporary 

reflections on culture and SD. Torraco (2005) defines integrative literature review as “a form of 

research that reviews, critiques, and synthesizes representative literature on a topic in an 

integrated way such that new frameworks and perspectives on the topic are generated”. 

Integrative literature reviews address emerging topics and provide holisti c conceptualizations. 

Thus, preliminary conceptualizations are generated that offer new perspectives on the topic e.g., 

taxonomies and other conceptual classification of constructs (Torraco, 2005). For the present 

review, the focus will lie solely on the y outh as bearer of future sustainability issues (Johnson et 

al., 2021). The analysis shall complete a critical reading and review of a selection of literature on 

the chosen subject with the purpose of synthesizing findings. The sources of the literature 

sel ection are scholarly journal articles of peer -reviewed scientific articles from the academic 

databases of Scopus and JSTOR. For more current information on culture and sustainability and 

to broaden the search, the scholarly literature was complemented prim arily with grey literature 

and documents of international organisations, NGOs, and the online web data from projects such 

as Voices of Culture, reports from Culture 2030 Goal Campaign, and the online presence of 

university departments, research programmes or initiatives. This search was conducted online by 

web searches with the search engine Google. 

The literature review, in its function of setting a framework for defining the significance of the study 

(Creswell, 2014), contains inclusion and exclusion cri teria. To select the literature for analysis, 

some inclusion criteria were the presence of the keywords “culture”, “sustainable” or 

“sustainability”. In order to correlate present challenges of SDGs, their localization, and to provide 

an outlook into futur e opportunities, it is important to consider the present youth as representants 

of the future. As education is also closely related to youth and sustainability issues, literature 

concerning ESD was also considered. Therefore, as a second criterion for sele ction, the selected 

studies also include literature concerning “youth”, and “Education for Sustainable Development” 

(henceforth: ESD). The exclusion criteria narrowed down the results by limiting the documents 

taken into consideration to the years 2015 to the present year of 2022, to coincide with the SDG 

era. As a result of the inclusion and exclusion exercise, the total number of literatures reviewed 

for the current study is 53. The collected literature provided a starting point for the method of 

inductiv e thinking, beginning with specific examples and inferring towards generalized 

explanations ( Creswell, 2014) . Following the funnel method as proposed by Hofstee (2006), the 

literature is arranged thematically. 

Findings 

Culture and Education for Sustainable Development 

As stated earlier, the notion of culture in SDGs is marginal. Within the text of the SDGs: Global 

indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for 

Sustainable Development (UNDESA, 2022), a search for the word “culture” yielded a total of four 

matches (see Table 1). It appeared twice in Target 4.7, once in Target 8.9, and once in Target 12.b Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 400 

(see Table 1 for a detailed summary of results). A search for “heritage” yielded three matches, 

app earing all in SDG 11: once in Target 11.4, and twice in Indicator 11.4.1. The results show that 

culture is explicitly correlated to sustainable tourism in Targets 8.9 and 12.b, while Target 11.4 is 

mainly associated with tangible cultural heritage. Since t he present paper excludes the economic 

dimension from its scope, the discussion shall focus on the implication of the search results for 

SDG 11 and SDG 4, leaving aside SDG 8 and SDG 12. 

Table 1 SDG Text Containing “Culture” and “Heritage”  

> Source: UNDESA (2022)

Goal  Target  Indicator 

Goal 4. Ensure 

inclusive and 

equitable quality 

education and 

promote lifelong 

learning opportunities 

for all. 

4.7 By 2030, ensure that all learners 

acquire the knowledge and skills 

needed to promote sustainable 

developm ent, including, among others, 

through education for sustainable 

development and sustainable 

lifestyles, human rights, gender 

equality, promotion of a culture of 

peace and non -violence, global 

citizenship and appreciation of cultural 

diversity and of cultur e’s contribution to 

sustainable development. 

4.7.1 Extent to which (i) global 

citizenship education and (ii) 

education for sustainable 

development are 

mainstreamed in (a) national 

education policies; (b) 

curricula; (c) teacher 

education; and (d) student 

assessment. 

Goal 8. Promote 

sustained, inclusive 

and sustainable 

economic growth, full 

and productive 

employment and 

decent work for all. 

8.9 By 2030, devise and implement 

policies to promote sustainable tourism 

that creates jobs and promotes local 

culture and products. 

8.9.1 Tourism direct GDP as a 

proportion of total GDP and in 

growth rate. 

Goal 12. Ensure 

sustainable 

consumption and 

prod uction patterns. 

12.b Develop and implement tools to 

monitor sustainable development 

impacts for sustainable tourism that 

creates jobs and promotes local 

culture and products. 

12.b.1 Implementation of 

standard accounting tools to 

monitor the economic and 

environmental aspects of 

tourism sustainability. 

Goal 11. Make cities 

and human 

settlements inclusive, 

safe, resilient and 

sustainable. 

11.4 Strengthen efforts to protect and 

safeguard the world’s cultural and 

natural heritage. 

11.4.1 Total per capita 

expenditure on the 

preservation, protection and 

conservation of all cultural and 

natural heritage, by source of 

funding (public, private), t ype 

of heritage (cultural, natural) 

and level of government 

(national, regional, and 

local/municipal). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 401 

Possible direct ways of associating culture to SD would be linking culture with education, i.e., 

emphasizing cultural and artistic education, education for cultural diversity, and formal and 

informal heritage education. Heritage education correlates cultur e and education for achieving 

target 11.4 and presents a synergy that is perhaps not explicit as such within the official SDG text. 

Jagielska -Burduk et al. (2021) argue that protecting cultural heritage requires more than solely 

protection policies, admini strative apparatuses, laws, and legal instruments. Citizens also play a 

vital role in cultural heritage management, and the development and success of cultural heritage 

protection is determined by the relationship citizens have with their cultural heritage . For the 

successful protection of cultural heritage, the authors consider as vital the inclusion of citizens in 

cultural heritage management, and, for added success, the cultural heritage education of citizens 

(Jagielska -Burduk et al., 2021). Fontal and G ómez -Redondo (2016) echo this thought in their 

affirmation that heritage education guarantees the attribution of values to tangible and intangible 

cultural heritage by society. In this manner, heritage education ensures that a society accepts and 

acknowled ges the tangible and intangible heritage as its very own. This acceptance in turn 

assures the protection of tangible cultural heritage, or vitality of ICH, because the society will wish 

to take care of, enjoy, and transmit its accepted cultural heritage (F ontal and Gómez -Redondo, 

2016). 

As shown in Table 1, SDG 4 and target 4.7 provide an interesting point of departure for the present 

analysis of synergies between culture and SD. Here, within the general framework of education 

and lifelong learning of SDG 4, culture is associated with ESD and called upon, alongside other 

domains such as human rights and gender equality, to “ensure” that learners acquire the 

necessary knowledge and skills for SD. The text for target 4.7 is concise in its direct reference of 

SD towards promoting a “culture of peace and non -violence”. This is also the case as it details 

the target’s intent to appreciate “cultural diversity”. On the other hand, the last call of target 4.7 of 

“culture’s contribution to SD” is left vague, and ope n to interpretation. 

As mentioned earlier, culture is intrinsic to human existence and people are cultural beings. 

Therefore, if culture is to contribute to SD, then a spectrum of opportunities arises because the 

manifold and diverse experiences of human existence are recognized as valid and possible 

pathways to contribute to SD. It can be inferred that this recognition allows a tripartite relationship 

to form between culture -education and SD, and that SD becomes more people -based. 

This tripartite relationship of culture -education and SD has the potential to release more 

synergies. In spite of this, neither the 17 SDGs nor its associated global indicator framework of 

231 unique indicators (UNDESA, 2022) reflects these synergies exten sively and adequately. This 

expanded and more resourceful approach to understanding the synergies between culture -

education and a people -based SD has more recently been manifested with the selection of 

UNESCO’s suggested voluntary thematic indicators to me asure and monitor the contribution of 

culture to the SDGs (UNESCO, 2019). In the publication introducing twenty -two Culture|2030 

Indicators, the word “education” features 141 times. One of the four transversal thematic 

dimensions constituting its conceptua l framework is “Knowledge and Skills” (UNESCO, 2019). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 402 

This dimension includes a total of five indicators with an educational component: ESD, cultural 

knowledge, multilingual education, cultural and artistic education, and cultural training. Based on 

the document analysis above, it can be inferred that the introduction of the twenty -two 

Culture|2030 Indicators is a recent development that reveals a major shift towards acknowledging 

the synergies between culture -education and people -based SD. 

The absence of acknowledgement for the diverse contributions of culture for SDGs has also 

prompted scholars to advocate for the inclusion of culture in the discourse on ESD. For instance, 

the authors Batista & Andrade (2021) declare that for comprehending the challenges posed to the 

SDGs on different dimensions – economic, environmental, social, cultural – it is also necessary 

to understand the relationship between said dimensions. They assert the critical importance of 

biocultural diversity, and define the latter as the indivisible nexus and the existent synergies 

between linguistic, cultural, and biological diversity (Batista & Andrade, 2021). From their 

perspective of biocultural diversity, all species, languages and cultures are valued as heritages of 

humanity, and as such, the balanced use of environmental resources is encouraged (Batista & 

Andrade, 2021). They put forward the affirmation that ESD entails educating for biocultural 

diversity because “concerns associated with the social, environmental, and economic spheres 

are faced based on a personal, linguistic, cultural, and environmental history to consi der, respect, 

value, and to preserve” (Batista & Andrade, 2021). Poole (2018) reasons along the same lines, 

arguing that the dynamics between cultural heritage and SD are a gap of the SDGs that have 

remained unaddressed. Poole broadens the discourse by add ing the notion of biocultural 

heritage. For Poole (2018), biocultural heritage is the wealth of cultural memory and heritage, 

language, values, and ecological knowledge (local ecological knowledge (LEK) and traditional 

ecological knowledge (TEK)) carried by human culture and accumulated over time and 

generations. Poole (2018) proposes that the loss of biocultural heritage is an indirect driver of 

changes in the ecosystem leading to unsustainable practices (Poole, 2018). If cultural heritage 

containing LEK a nd TEK is lost, then so too is the tangible and intangible knowledge about 

environment, culture, and language that affects the well -being of all living creatures. Ultimately, 

this loss is a key driver of environmental crises and the subsequent creation of poverty (Poole, 

2018). 

This dialogue is central to the issue at hand – culture’s contribution to SDGs – and especially with 

regard to ESD. The above discussion affirms that individuals facing the current social, 

environmental, and economic sustainability issues are, after all, people with specific cultural and 

linguistic belongings, cultural beings that have a relationship with their surrounding environment. 

The implication here is that the general discourse of sustainability must not only acknowledge the 

condition of people as cultural beings, but more importantly, seek to understand and value cultural 

heritage as a condition to achieve sustainability. 

These extrapolations regarding culture and education indicate that it is imperative to incorporate 

a cu ltural dimension to the SDGs if SDGs are to attain a more holistic outlook. Indeed, the 

Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (henceforth: The 2003 

Convention) affirmed already at its inception in 2003 that s ustaining ICH is regarded as a 

“guarantee” of SD: “Considering the importance of [ICH] as a mainspring of cultural diversity and Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 403 

a guarantee of sustainable development” (The 2003 Convention, 2020). This notion is repeated 

in its Operational Directives (Chapter VI, “Safegu arding ICH and Sustainable Development at the 

National Level”), Article 170 as it states “State Parties shall endeavour … to recognize the 

importance and strengthen the role of [ICH] as a driver and guarantee of sustainable 

development” (The 2003 Conventio n, 2020). Instances of success are those in which culture 

observably bridges the gap between SDG policy, goals, and practice. In other words, culture is a 

means to achieve human development. For instance, interventions for health and well -being 

(SDG 3) are most effective or sometimes the only resource when they are designed with a cultural 

approach and are responsive to the local cultural context (Hosagrahar, 2017). Another example 

are the arts (theatre) as a tool for communicating HIV/AIDS public awareness campaigns in 

locations where cultural taboo subjects prevail (Ruigrok, 2009). 

It is inferred from the above that keeping the vitality of cultural intergenerational knowledge 

constant and shared over time, from one generation to the next, is of utmost imp ortance for a 

people -based SD. However, especially regarding ICH, intergenerational sharing of knowledge is 

inherently fragile because it depends on memory and continued practice (Melis and Chambers, 

2021). Moreover, safeguarding ICH requires human, econom ic, and material resources (Celi and 

Moore, 2015). These arguments establish the importance of undertaking conscious efforts in ESD 

to share cultural knowledge with future generations, which youths are a significant part of. For the 

youth to benefit from c ulture and to gain cultural empowerment, culture needs to be an integral 

part of ESD and SDGs. Therefore, the next section will focus more on the involvement of youth 

in the SDG discourse and their role in achieving them. 

Culture and Youth Empowerment 

As shown in Table 2, the word “youth” appears a total of nine times in the SDG texts (UNDESA, 

2022). Apart from SDG 4, youths are also mentioned in SDG 8 and SDG 13. They are related 

thus not only to education but also strongly to employment and decent work, and, on a lesser 

scale, to action to combat climate change. 

Table 2 SDG Text Containing “Youth" 

Goal  Target  Indicator 

Goal 4. Ensure 

inclusive and equitable 

quality education and 

promote lifelong 

learning opportunities 

for all. 

4.4 By 2030, substantially increase 

the number of youth and adults who 

have relevant skills, including 

technical and vocational skills, for 

employment, decent jobs and 

entrepreneurship. 

4.3.1 Participation rate of 

youth and adults in formal and 

non -formal education and 

training in the previous 12 

months, by sex. 

4.6 By 2030, ensure that all youth 

and a substantial proportion of 

adults, both men and women, 

4.4.1 Proportion of youth and 

adults with information and 

communicatio ns technology Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 404 

achieve literacy and numeracy.  (ICT) skills, by type of skill. 

Goal 8. Promote 

sustained, inclusive 

and sustainable 

economic growth, full 

and productive 

employment and 

decent work for all. 

8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the 

proportion of youth not in 

employment, education or training. 

8.6.1 Proportion of youth (aged 

15 –24 years) not in education, 

emp loyment or training. 

8.b By 2020, develop and 

operationalize a global strategy for 

youth employment and implement 

the Global Jobs Pact of the 

International Labour Organization. 

8.b.1 Existence of a developed 

and operationalized national 

strategy for yout h employment, 

as a distinct strategy or as part 

of a national employment 

strategy. 

Goal 13. Take urgent 

action to combat 

climate change and its 

impacts. 

13.b Promote mechanisms for 

raising capacity for effective climate 

change -related planning and 

management in least developed 

countries and small island 

developing States, including 

focusing on women, youth and local 

and marginalized communities. 

> Source : UNDESA (2022)

An outlook of future opportunities of culture and SD must focus on youth given the critical 

characteristics of this group. According to the United Nations, in 2018 the worldwide number of 

young people was 1.8 billion, with approximately 90% living in devel oping countries and 

representing a large segment of the population (UN, 2018). This youth generation will experience 

in one way or the other the ubiquitous process of globalization. Among many of its impacts, 

globalization is known to create alterations in cultural ecology and changes in cultural practices 

(Lopes, 2020; Guo, 2020; Rodil and Winschiers -Theophilus, 2016). In the discourse of some 

scholars, globalization presents a threat to local cultures because globalization terminates 

autochthone cultures, amalgamating and homogenizing different cultures into a hybrid multi -

culture (Guo, 2020; Mahfoodh and Alhashmi, 2020). In the view of others, globalization as a 

cultural wave poses a threat to individual cultures, endangering cultural heritage and diversi ty 

(Medina -Carrión et al., 2018) thus causing ethnophagy (Díaz Polanco, 2011). Ethnophagy 

dissipates Indigenous cultures because as a process it causes “a smooth transition to the 

dominant culture through which differences are erased over time” (Despagne, 2013). Whether 

globalization is understood as either a homogenizing, erasing, hybridizing effect or as 

ethnophagy, current developments give strong reason to predict that globalization will continue to 

impact local cultures. Consequently, current youth gen erations will continue to experience impacts 

in their cultural environment. The concept of youth empowerment is translated by the UNESCO 

as improved access to multilingual information and sources of knowledge, enhancing ICT skills, 

and facilitating youth w ith disabilities to access ICT training (UNESCO, 2014). Based on 

observations from literature on the present subject, this paper suggests that involving youths in 

projects founded on the tripartite relationship of culture -education and SD creates a form of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 405 

cultural empowerment for youths. This synergy presents the youth with a potential to achieve SD. 

A synthesis of the reviewed literature on studies involving culture, youths, and youth 

empowerment reveals that the levels of youth involvement in cultural heritage projects differs 

widely across different case studies and contexts. Observably, three patterns emerged from the 

reviewed literature: Youth as passive receptors of cultural heritage, youth as active participants in 

cultural heritage, and youth as l eaders of community heritages initiatives. 

Youth as Passive Receptors of Cultural Heritage 

The first category refers to projects designed for youths, but without the active co -design, 

leadership or decision -making of youths in the project. Five examples stand out from the literature 

review. 

Culture offers youth opportunities to become empowered by furthering and developing their skills 

in the arts. Receiving heritage education as part of formal education can raise the youth’s 

employability or their ability to become entrepreneurs. Examples are in Argentina, as the Teatro 

Argentino de La Plata in Buenos Aires offered vocational training to 610 unemployed adults and 

youths in performing arts skills (Hosagrahar, 2017). A similar example of cultural heritage 

combined with vocational training was the Syrian Stonemasonry Training Scheme, funded by the 

British Council and implemented in Northern Jordan. The beneficiaries were Syrian and Jordanian 

students, especially youths from the Syrian refugee community. The project’s objectives were to 

engage youth in cultural heritage by learning conservation and s tonemasonry skills, while also 

supporting the preservation of Syria’s war -damaged heritage. The project also sought to engage 

primary school aged children by offering them six one -day workshops. In the outcomes and 

results, the British Council listed that the project formed a cohort of tradition bearers, access to 

employment for marginalised groups, and enhanced cohesion between Jordanian hosts and 

Syrian refugees (The British Council, 2018). A further example is the project proposal put forward 

by Coscia & Rubino (2021) to introduce a social dimension to ongoing projects of built heritage 

by including NEETs (youths Not in Education, Employment, or Training) for generating a positive 

social impact. All three above -mentioned examples are similar in that they have measurable social 

outcomes and impacts. For example, in the case of redeveloping historical farmhouses in Italy 

with the social inclusion of NEETs, Coscia & Rubino (2021) suggest as indicators the percentage 

of youths in an employment six months after program end, the number of volunteers participating, 

and the levels of awareness of heritage . This suggestion would also be applicable to the first two 

listed projects of vocational training for youths in cultural heritage projects. 

The historical and e thnographic investigation by Lai (2020) examined the potential of u ṟumi 

mē ḷam, Tamil folk drumming, for engaging and empowering Tamil Hindu youths -at -risk by keeping 

them from engaging in criminal behaviour in Singapore. Following the music and youth 

empow erment discourse, the author examines how engaging with Tamil folk drumming presents 

an opportunity for the Tamil Hindu youths’ empowerment. The author concludes that 

empowerment is made possible because the youths receive training for learning the require d

instruments and songs to become ritual music specialists, and because they perform collectively, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 406 

and earn the respect of the Tamil Hindu community in Singapore by doing so. Moreover, the author 

points out that for the youths, participating in rituals for Tamil Folk Hindu deities is associated with 

certain spiritual beliefs. The youths believe their pe rformance confers them with blessings, that it 

can ease the granting of wishes, and that it invokes powers to eliminate harmful energies (Lai, 

2020). 

In Kim’s (2015) case study of the Tatebayashi Noodle Grand Prix festival in Japan it is mentioned 

that u niversity students and young people from local and regional middle and high schools 

voluntarily participated as helpers. After their first -hand experience of the festival, the study found 

that the youth volunteers had increased community pride and heighten ed sense of belonging. 

These studies show that the cultural sector is a source for acquiring skills for enhancing the 

employability of youths through education and training, that it provides a common ground to 

nurture social cohesion with the local communi ty, and that it can also be a source for spiritual well -

being. 

Youth as Active Participants in Cultural Heritage 

The second category involves projects where youths had an active, decisive role, and either co -

designed or partly led cultural projects. 

An example of youth as active participants in cultural heritage projects is a cross -generational 

activity consisting of learning and collecting memories, presenting how schoolchildren can support 

and interact with senior citizens to bridge the digital divid e (Dibeltulo et al., 2020). Taking cinema -

going memories as an element of Intangible Cultural Heritage (ICH), the project’s main aim was 

to foster digital cross -generational encounters between schoolchildren and senior citizens. 

Thereby, older generations would also by empowered by sharing the ownership of their cultural 

heritage while also engaging with ICT skills. The study utilized the online resource Historypin. 

Historypin is a web -based, user -generated archive of crowdsourced historical material. The s enior 

citizens were novice users of the online archive Historypin. Five senior citizens volunteers above 

the age of sixty -five years met with eighteen middle school students for the project. Youths took 

the key role of moderators and data collectors as the y helped the volunteers share their cinematic 

cultural heritage on Historypin. In small groups, the students carried out video -interviews on their 

smartphones and uploaded the content onto Historypin. Additionally, the students showed the 

senior volunteers further ICH material, eliciting more memories through visual triggers. The 

feedback of the students was that it was a “valuable project” (Dibeltulo et al., 2020). More 

importantly, the authors mention that post -pilot activities revealed a continued intere st of the 

students for the online platform and the project. After the project had ended, students interviewed 

their own senior family members about their cinema -going memories. Some students uploaded 

their family’s cinema -related photos on Historypin, enri ching further the community’s cinema -

going ICH. Within the framework of the present paper, these outcomes points to empowering 

youths in three ways: the youths became agents of their community by helping to preserve ICH 

as digital cultural heritage; they g ained insights into their own cultural heritage and community 

identity; and finally, they collaborated with older generations to support their accessibility and 

participation in digital environments. The study’s post -pilot observation has an important Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 407 

imp lication for the present synthesis: by being proactive and continuing the project on their own 

(taking the initiative to interview family members and do uploads), the youth showed that they had 

a willingness to collaborate with family members on a topic of shared interest. 

In a similar vein to Dibeltulo et al. (2020), Masucci et al., (2016) reviewed the outcomes and 

implementation of a university -community partnership, Building Information Technology Skills 

(BITS), involving high -school aged youths and designed to be culturally relevant . The youths were 

trained in geographic field methods in order to encourage civic engagement, to persevere in 

Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) disciplines, and to generate a digital archive 

of historic markers. The cultural dimension was introduced by focussing the youth -led and 

community -based geographic information system (GIS) on a set of historic markers of African 

American sites of interest in Philadelphia. The participants in this youth -led social action research 

initiative were local public high school students, students and faculty member s at Temple 

University, and community members. The authors concluded that the engagement of the youth 

was successful. Evidence for this assessment was the project outcome: the participating high 

school students developed digital maps by collecting geospati al information through fieldwork, by 

using information from archives on historic markers and digital mapping technologies. In doing 

so, they gained digital technology skills, they also carried out geographic fieldwork and data 

analysis, and they experience d map -making and critical thinking throughout the process. Youth 

empowerment was a goal in several ways: through the digital inclusion and content creation of 

under -represented cultural and economic histories of African American heritage of North 

Philadelp hia, by fostering STEM skills, by engaging with a university context, and by combining 

local cultural history and digital fieldwork. The authors note that various community stakeholders 

– teachers, parents, university course instructors – valued and used t he digital maps created by 

students. Here, once more, it is observable that the success of the project was in part due to the 

project’s cultural relevance, the digital mapping of African American historic markers, represented 

a shared interest of all stake holders involved and motivated their willingness to engage on issues 

of common interest. 

Youth as Leaders of Community Heritage Initiatives 

The third and final category identifies youths as co -designing or taking leadership in cultural 

projects. Three e xamples stand out from the literature review. 

First, a youth empowerment program for young Aboriginal women, aimed at gender equity in 

conservation through Aboriginal biocultural resource management in remote northern Australia 

(Daniels et al., 2022). In this three -year study, 60 participants aged between eighteen and thirty -

five years acquired and practiced leadership skills. The project involved an Aboriginal -led adaptive 

co -design approach, and a “learning by doing” approach. Pre and post -tests of plant and cross -

cultural animal knowledge were conducted to investigate learning gains. The results showed the 

significant learning gain in twenty species in three languages spoken by the Ngukurr Yangbala 

Rangers. Leadership was expressed e.g., through communit y engagement with the Ngukurr 

School. The project’s Ngukurr Yangbala Rangers conducted fauna surveys, delivered workshops 

for senior classes, and helped the senior school class complete a certificate in conservation and Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 408 

land management . Besides community engagement, the participants experienced leadership by 

one -on -one mentoring through local Elders and Rangers, presenting their work at conferences, 

and completing training on leadership and confidence building. An o utcome of the project was 

that the youth acquired employment and progressed into higher education programmes. The 

project also helped to link Aboriginal and non -Aboriginal knowledge as a concept of “two -way 

knowledge and skills” (Daniels et al., 2022). This represents a decisive empower ment approach 

because it is culturally inclusive as it acknowledges and integrates local levels of education into 

SD. 

Second, in the study of Kope & Arellano (2016), the authors applied the model of Critical Youth 

Empowerment (CYE) to explore Indigenous youth experiences in a Youth Leadership Program 

(YLP) for Indigenous resurgence in Whitefish River First Nation (WRFN), Ontario, Canada. The 

partici pants of WRFN in the YLP program belonged to two age groups, 9 – 13 and 14 – 18 -year -

olds. Using an experiental learning approach, each YLP program module aimed for the 

participating youth to plan and deliver a youth led -event (traditional games, outings, crafting, 

intergenerational sport tournaments). The youths developed the events and participated in all 

stages of their created events from fundraising to the implementation stage. Leadership and 

empowerment were enhanced as youth members became older, by being encouraged to use 

their acquired learning from YLP to apply it to decision -making situations in their community for 

improving power -sharing between them and adults. In their study of youths that participated in 

YLP, Kope and Arellano (2016) also iden tified a wide range of leadership qualities and 

empowerment of youths: in their capacity for improved critical reflection on their interpersonal 

lives; by empowering their community as they helped foster intergenerational relationships (e.g. 

using their le adership skills to plan and facilitate intergenerational events, giving back to the 

community by coaching and helping in sport tournaments); and by forging intercommunity 

friendships in youth symposiums. 

The authors point to one expected outcome that was not successful. In examining the youth’s 

capacity for engaging in critical self -reflection and socio -political processes of resurgence, the 

authors found that youths first had to recognize and overcome trauma. In observing the 

involvement of youth and thei r interest in participating in cultural ceremonies and intergenerational 

learning, one of the main findings of the authors is that culture and traditions were central for 

youth empowerment. The authors discuss that therefore, youth empowerment can only be 

complete if accompanied by practices to fortify cultural elements such as cultural identity, 

philosophy, Indigenous knowledge, values and spirituality. Thus, they conclude that for 

empowerment to be critical and effective for social change, it must rest on cultural and spiritual 

re -grounding instead of solely in terms of socio -political mobilization. 

Third, for a qualitative study of the cultural importance of forest products, Johnson et al., (2021) 

partnered with Alaska Native Tribes and engaged local yo uth programs in the research work for 

the heritage project. Sixteen members of the youth group Alaskan Youth Stewards (AYS) Program 

aged 14 to 21 years were provided with training on basic interviewing and research procedures. 

The youth cohort then posed r elevant community discussion questions for interviews, they 

contacted the interviewees, led discussions with community members, and recorded responses Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 409 

into the project’s data collection online app. Eight youth interns also carried out field activities wit h

culture bearers (carvers and weavers), and helped to set up a two -year seedling experiment. The 

youths led a total of 58 community discussions in 11 communities. 

The authors found that youth researchers engaged with their community by leading discussion s

with culture bearers, elders, non -government workers and government agency employees. The 

collected messages and reflections post -discussion revealed that the project experience inspired 

youth researchers to be more active stewards of their land and cult ure. The study also found that 

Alaska Native youth -led community discussions across Alaskan communities seemed to generate 

a more culturally relevant dialogue than with researches that were not directly linked with Alaska 

Tribes. Apart from the added benef it for the youths of gaining and sharing traditional ecological 

knowledge and ecosystem services, the youth engagement itself presented a “powerful 

communication link” between local communities and official land -management agencies. 

It is noteworthy that all three studies can be categorised as a youth -driven approach for 

decolonisation purposes. Engaging youths as leaders supports the argument that culture can help 

share communication because it is based on common values, an important aspect of SD. It can 

be concluded that the above -mentioned culturally integrated approaches of youth empowerment 

initiatives are multi -layered and interdisciplinary. They typically involve various stakeholders, 

interests, and disciplines. These observations extrapolated from the previous three examples 

have implications for the potential of youths in achieving SD that reach further than the examples 

presented in subsections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2. The potential of culturally empowered youths to achieve 

SD resides in that they can ful fil leadership roles and become a ‘nexus’ between generations and 

stakeholders within their social environment. As a ‘nexus’, the youth represent shared interests 

and values for their community. When the youth become an axis around which information 

revolv es, they are able to initiate dialogues in community between generations and between 

different stakeholders .

In the present paper, the review of studies on culture and youth empowerment has shown the 

potential of culture for SD beyond a simplistic and l imited relation of culture -education. Culture, 

as an intrinsic part of human existence and experience, can be leveraged in multiple ways to 

empower, educate, and preserve knowledge that is vital for sustainable ways of life. It can be 

concluded that youth involvement in cultural heritage projects also leads to cultural empowerment, 

as the youth, representing future generations, are empowered. However, most of the presented 

and reviewed studies do not make explicit mention of ESD or ground their studies in t heories of 

learning. The following subsection presents some recommendations for learning theories and 

pedagogy that can be coupled to holistic approaches of studies of culture, ESD, and people -

based SD. 

Discussion 

In section 3.2.1. youth as passive receptors of cultural heritage, the reviewed cases had instances 

of vocational training and musical training. In section 3.2.2. youth as active participants in cultural 

heritage, the reviewed cases involved youth in middl e school and high school and the examples Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 410 

were thus part of formal education. In the third section 3.2.3 youth as leaders of community 

heritage initiatives, one case has a “learning by doing” approach, one an experiential learning 

approach, and in a third example the youth engaged in research work without following a specific 

learning theory. In the reviewed cases, the youth involvement in cultural projects also represented 

instances of advancing SD. However, except for the study on forest products by John son et al., 

(2021), the learning they experienced was not explicitly related to ESD, nor measured or 

categorized as such. 

Firstly, directly correlating such studies with ESD and the SDGs would present an advancement 

because the scholarly landscape o n the SDGs would become more transparent and measurable. 

Secondly, grounding youth empowerment initiatives on established learning theories would 

provide ESD with a scientific foundation . Applying scientific knowledge on learning and teaching 

to culturally integrated educational approaches would have the added value that ESD projects 

would be scientifically informed in their project design and provide learning assessment, thus 

measuring learning results and means to measure project outcomes. 

For future out looks, a learning theory that can be applied is the collaborative learning approach 

rooted in Vygotsky’s social constructivism (1978). From a collaborative learning perspective, small 

groups of learners with varied performance levels work together, mediate d by cultural means and 

artifacts, and collaborate to create a product, find a solution to a problem, or complete a task (Laal 

and Ghodsi, 2012). This learning theory is fitting e.g., for communal learning of ICH elements 

when it involves a limited number of participants (e.g., community members of a village, culture 

bearers and youths) who must collaborate with the goal of teaching ICH knowledge to future 

culture inheritors, or to create a cultural product. Built on social interdependence theory (where 

the results of learners are affected by their own and others’ actions), some outcomes can be 

classified in terms of the quality of interpersonal relationships (Johnson and Johnson, 2009). Laal 

and Ghodsi point to further benefits of the collaborative learning approach as they conclude that 

typical outcomes of collaborative learning are higher achievements, more caring and committed 

relationships, social competence and self -esteem. One of the expected outcomes and main social 

benefits of collaborative learning is that it develops learning communities (Laal and Ghodsi, 2012). 

These social learning systems can further be analysed as communities of practice ( Wenger, 

2000 ). Creating communities of practice is not only a desirable outcome for sustaining social 

cohesi on of the community but also suitable for communities based on oral cultures. For instance, 

as Daniels et al. (2022) note, Aboriginal knowledge is largely taught orally (Daniels et al., 2022). 

Moreover, a community of practice approach has elements that wo uld enhance the design of 

culture -related ESD. These elements are: events that bring the community together; multiple 

forms of internal leadership to develop the community; a rich connectivity among its people; a 

membership that is significant but its numb er still allows participation; learning projects that fill 

gaps in community practice; and lastly, artifacts that remain useful as the community develops 

(Wenger, 2000). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 411 

As established earlier, culture can permeate all aspects of people’s lived experience. In this sense, 

not only the content that is the object of learning can be related to culture but also the very act of 

teaching itself contains cultural aspects. Therefor e, culture is also an aspect of pedagogy that can 

be taken into consideration, especially when the teaching is for ESD. Culturally relevant 

pedagogy , the theoretical model of Ladson -Billings (1995), takes into account the cultural patterns 

and backgrounds of teachers and learners, and the broad social and cultural context of students. 

It proposes teaching must meet three main criteria: support student learning, nurture cultural 

competence, and develop critical consciousness (Ladson -Billings, 1995). In this educational 

approach, teachers include the student’s culture as “official knowledge” and thereby help them 

assert and take pride in their cultural identity (Ladson -Billings, 1995). This pedagogy is an 

example of how culture -education and people -based SD is strongly interrelated: culturally 

integrated approaches can be applied not only on what is taught (cultural and artistic education, 

heritage education, ICH), but also how it is taught (culturally relevant pedagogy, communities of 

practice approach) depend ing on who is being taught (individuals with an intrinsic cultural 

experience). 

In sum, the tripartite relationship of culture -education and SD can be illustrated as in Figure 1. If 

local or regional youth - and ESD centred initiatives take a culture -based approach or are culturally 

informed, then synergies are created. These synergies in turn generate a major traction towards 

achieving results in SD. 

Figure 1. Visual Diagram of Synergies of Culture -education and Sustainable Development 

> Source: the authors

## Youth -

## and 

## education 

## centered 

## initiatives 

> Scope  limited to regional / local communities

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 412 

Conclusions 

This paper is focused on exploring the synergies between culture, SD, and youth. The paper 

presents an integrative literature review of selected studies that provides an overview of the 

interrelationship between culture -education and SD. 

The review reflects on how culture is underrepresented in the SDGs, and why this absence 

matters for SD. It further seeks to identify how the tripartite relationship of culture -education and 

SD can create synergies, empower youth and give youth the potential of achieving SD. 

The analysis provides strong evidence to support the argument that youths can be empowered 

through culture and possess a high potential for achieving SD. The reviewe d studies were 

classified according to the level of youth engagement. A major implication of this subsection is 

that culturally empowered youths in leadership roles are a potential for achieving SD because 

they become an information and support agent in th eir community. 

Additionally, the presented studies showed a recurrence of the element of collaboration and 

collective learning. Mutual engagement was present in the study on digital engagements of older 

adults with cinema -related ICH as a partnership acro ss generations between the young and 

elderly, promoting thus intergenerational dialogue through shared interests (Dibeltulo et al. 2020). 

In Masucci et al. (2016), a collaborative, cross -disciplinary project took place with amongst several 

community stakeh olders (e.g., neighbourhood and community organizations, families, youth) .

Collective learning also featured in the Aboriginal -led, co -designed and cross -cultural project 

Ngukurr Yangbala (Young People) Project in remote northern Australia (Daniels et al., 2022). It 

also included “two -way knowledge and skills”, linking the knowledge and science of Aboriginal 

and non -Aboriginal communities and presenting thus a kind of mutual engagement between 

cultural paradigms of knowledge. 

These observations lead firstl y to the conclusion that culturally integrated approaches in SD can 

provide a common ground of shared values and common interests that allow different 

stakeholders to collaborate and thus enhance SD. Secondly, the element of collective learning 

allows to d raw the conclusion that the collaborative learning approach and the communities of 

practice approach can be used as a framework of reference for designing and evaluating projects 

on culture and ESD. Since p edagogy can also be viewed through the lens of cul ture, ESD can 

also rely on culturally informed theories of teaching for culture -sensitive projects. Lastly, these 

arguments also lead to the conclusion that cultural approaches can be considered across all 17 

SDGs because people as cultural beings will exp erience SD through the lens of their cultural 

heritage. 

The strength of the reviewed literature is that scholarly texts provide a vast variety of contexts in 

which SD is being practiced with the help of culture and ESD. The present paper highlighted some 

examples containing studies of youth empowerment and refl ections on the synergies between 

culture -education and SD. In this way, this paper underscores the vitality of culture in achieving 

the SDGs , especially with the focus on youth and ESD. Future studies must look into how to take Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 413 

advantage of the synergies created when cultural approaches are considered in advancing 

people -based SD. The importance of these observations is immediate given the challenges 

present in post -pandemic outlooks. Estimates indicate that the economic impact of the Covid -19 

pandemic on education could cause approximately 24 million children and youth, from pre -primary 

to tertiary education, to drop out of school (Klaassen, 2021). The cultural sector offers resourceful 

opportunities to collaborate with stakeholders sharing common interest s to further youth 

empowerment outside of formal education. 

The limitation of this paper is its sole focus on educational aspects of culture and youth. Further 

studies are needed to explore other equally important yet understudied aspects of culture and 

SDGs, such as the informal economy of the cultural sector, the labour legislation, and lack of 

social protection of cultural workers and professionals. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors of this paper are grateful to the Grant for Global Sustainability (GGS) and the Ministry 

of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) of Japan for the funding and 

support of the present research. 

References 

Batista, B.F. & Andrade, A.I. (2021), “Educating for biocultural diversity and sustainable 

development in first years of schooling: an analysis of documents from the Portuguese 

educational system”, Frontiers in Education, vol. 6. DOI: 10.3389/feduc.2021.652196. 

British Council. (2018), Cultural Heritage for Inclusive G rowth. Available online: 

https://www.britishcouncil.org/sites/default/files/bc_chig_report_final.pdf (Accessed 8th 

January 2022). 

British Council. (2020), The Missing Pillar. Culture’s Contribution to the UN Sustainable 

Development Goals, British Council Report. Available online: 

https://www.britishcouncil.org/sites/default/files/the_missing_pillar.pdf (Accessed 8th 

January 2022). 

Celi, E.M. & Moore, R.E., Jr. (2015), “Safeguarding intangible cultural heritage through youth 

employment and public/private partnerships: multidisciplinary, comparative research for 

the digital transmission of Italian cultural heritage within Europeanization efforts toward 

safeguarding intangible cultural heritage from a social capital perspective”, 2015 Digital 

Heritage Intern ational Congress, Digital Heritage 2015, pp. 475. DOI: 

0.1109/DigitalHeritage.2015.7419555. 

Coscia, C. & Rubino, I. (2021), “Unlocking the social impact of built heritage projects: evaluation 

as catalyst of value?”, in Bisello, A., Vettorato, D., Haarstad , H., & Borsboom -van 

Beurden, J. (Eds.). Smart and Sustainable Planning for Cities and Regions. Green Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 414 

Energy and Technology. Springer, eBook. DOI: 10.1007/978 -3-030 -57332 -4_18. 

Creswell, J. W., (2014), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixe d Methods 

Approaches, (4 th ed.), Sage, Washington DC. 

Culture 2015 Goal Campaign. (2015), Final Communiqué: Culture in the SDG Outcome 

Document: Progress made but important steps remain ahead. Available online: 

https://agenda21culture.net/sites/default/fi les/files/pages/advocacy -page/4 -

presdg_outcomedoct_eng.pdf (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

Daniels, C. W., Russell, S., Ens, E. J. & Ngukurr Yangbala rangers. (2022), “Empowering young 

Aboriginal women to care for Country: Case study of the Ngukurr Yangbala rangers, 

remote northern Australia", Ecological Management and Restoration , vol. 23, no. S1, 

pp. 53 – 63. DOI: 10.1111/emr.12538. 

Despagne, C. (2013), “Indigenous education in Mexico: Indigenous students' voices”, Diaspora, 

Indigenous, and Minority Education, 7(2), pp.114 – 129. DOI: 

10.1080/15595692.2013.763789. 

Dessein, J., Soini, K., Fairclough, G., Horlings, L. (Eds.). (2015), C ulture in, for and as 

Sustainable Development. Conclusions from the COST Action IS1007 Investigating 

Cultural Sustainability. University of Jyväskylä, Finland. Available online: 

http://www.culturalsustainability.eu/conclusions.pdf (Accessed 18 th March 2022 ). 

Díaz -Polanco, H. (2011), “Diez tesis sobre identidad, diversidad y globalización”, Justicia y 

Diversidad en América Latina: Pueblos Indígenas ante la Globalización, pp.37 – 61. 

Available online: 

https://www.flacsoandes.edu.ec/web/imagesFTP/1265233447.Diez_Tesis_sobre_identi 

dad.pdf (Accessed 9 th January 2022). 

Dibeltulo, S., Culhane, S. & Gennari, D.T. (2020), “Bridging the digital divide: Older adults' 

engagement with online cinema heritage”, Dig ital Scholarship in the Humanities , vol. 

35, no. 4, pp. 797 – 811. DOI: 10.1093/LLC/FQZ079. 

Fontal, O., & Gómez -Redondo C. (2016), “A quarterly review of education. Heritage education 

and heritagization processes: SHEO methodology [sic] for educational pr ograms 

evaluation", Interchange, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 65 – 90. DOI:10.1007/s10780 -015 -9269 -z. 

García -Ceballos, S., Aso, B., Navarro -Neri, I. & Rivero, P. (2021), “Heritage sustainability in the 

training of future primary school teachers: commitment and fu ture practice”, Revista 

Interuniversitaria de Formacion del Profesorado, vol. 96, no. 35.3, pp. 87 – 108. DOI: 

10.47553/rifop.v96i35.3.91437. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 415 

Guo, Q. (2020), “Research on the ways to protect and inherit intangible cultural heritage in the 

information age”, Journal of Physics: Conference Series. DOI: 10.1088/1742 -

6596/1575/1/012169. 

Hofstee, E. (2006), Constructing a Good Dissertation: A Practical Guide to Finishing Masters, 

MBA or PhD on Schedule. EPE, Sandton, South Africa. 

Hosagrahar, J . (2017), “Culture at the heart of the SDGs”, The UNESCO Courier, April -June 

2017, No. 1, pp. 12 – 14. Available online: https://en.unesco.org/courier/april -june -

2017/culture -heart -sdgs (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

Ingram, C. (2011), “Echoing the environme nt in Kam Big Song”, Asian Studies Review, vol. 35, 

no. 4, pp. 439 – 455. DOI: 10.1080/10357823.2011.628008. 

Jagielska -Burduk, A., Pszczyński, M. & Stec, P. (2021), “Cultural heritage education in UNESCO 

cultural conventions”, Sustainability (Switzerland) , vol. 13, no. 6. DOI: 

10.3390/su13063548. 

Johnson, D.W. & Johnson, R.T. (2009), “An educational psychology success story: Social 

interdependence theory and cooperative learning”, Journal of Educational Researcher, 

38(5), pp. 365 – 379. 

Johnson, A., Clavijo, A.E., Hamar, G., Head, D. -A., Thoms, A., Price, W., Lapke, A., Crotteau, J., 

Cerveny, L.K., Wilmer, H., Petershoare, L., Cook, A. & Reid, S. (2021), “Wood products 

for cultural uses: Sustaining native resilience and vital lifeways in southeast Alaska, 

USA”, Forests, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1 – 26. DOI: 10.3390/f12010090. 

Kim, S. (2015), “Understanding the historical and geographical contexts of food festival tourism 

development: The case of the Tatebayashi Noodle Grand Prix in Japan”, Tourism 

Planning and Development, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 433 – 446. DOI: 

10.1080/21568316.20 15.1025991. 

Klaassen, L. (2021), “Universal access to education: We can do better”, Special Edition: A New 

Social Contract for Education, The UNESCO Courier, November 2021, UNESCO, Paris. 

Kope, J. & Arellano, A. (2016), “Resurgence and critical youth emp owerment in Whitefish River 

First Nation”, Leisure/ Loisir, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 395 – 421. DOI: 

10.1080/14927713.2016.1269293. 

Laal, M. and Ghodsi, S.M. (2012), “Benefits of collaborative learning”. Procedia - Social and 

Behavioral Sciences, 31, pp.486 – 490. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.12.091. 

Lai, J. (2020), “Uṟumi Mēḷam: a musical sanctuary for at -risk Tamil youth in Singapore”, 

Ethnomusicology Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 311 – 332. DOI: Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 416 

10.1080/17411912.2020.1869054. 

Lamsal, A., & Pokhrel, R. (2021), “Man, and culture interface”, International Journal of English 

Literature and Social Sciences, 6(2), pp. 308 – 312. DOI: 10.22161/ijels.62.45. 

Levin, I., & Mamlok, D. (2021), “Culture and society in the digital age”, Information, vol. 12(2), p. 

1 – 13. D OI: 10.3390/info12020068. 

Lopes, R.O. (2020), “The safeguarding of intangible cultural heritage in Brunei Darussalam: a 

case study”, International Journal of Intangible Heritage, 15, pp. 152 – 163. Available 

online: https://www.ijih.org/volumes/article/94 9 (Accessed 9 th January 2022). 

Mahfoodh, H. and Alhashmi, S. (2020), ‘Safeguarding intangible cultural heritage through 

UNESCO partnership’, 2020 2nd International Sustainability and Resilience 

Conference: Technology and Innovation in Building Designs, pp. 1 – 5. 

DOI: 10.1109/IEEECONF51154.2020.9319941. 

Masucci, M., Organ, D. & Wiig, A. (2016), “Libraries at the crossroads of the digital content 

divide: Pathways for information continuity in a youth -led geospatial technology 

program", Journal o f Map and Geography Libraries, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 295 – 317. DOI: 

10.1080/15420353.2016.1224795. 

Medina -Carrión, A., Arias -Espinoza, P., Robles -Bykbaev, V., Robles -Bykbaev, Y., Pesantez -

Aviles, F. & Ortega, J. (2018), “An interactive educational tool ba sed on augmented 

reality, mobile applications and comic strips to teach children the Cañari and Inca 

cultures in the Ecuadorian context”, Congreso Argentino de Ciencias de la Informatica 

y Desarrollos de Investigacion, CACIDI 2018. DOI: 10.1109/CACIDI.2018 .8584190. 

Melis, C. and Chambers, D. (2021), “The construction of intangible cultural heritage: A 

Foucauldian critique”, Annals of Tourism Research, 89, p.103206. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2021.103206. 

Murdock, G. P. (1932), “The science of culture”, American Anthropologist, vol. 34(2), pp. 200 –

215. DOI: 10.1525/aa.1932.34.2.02a00020. 

Palincsar, A.S. (1998), “Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning”, Annual 

Review of Psychology, 49 (1), pp. 345 – 375. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.345. 

Peraire, M., Valent, J., Pascual, J. (2014), Role of Culture in Achieving the Millennium 

Development Goals (MDGs), UCLG Culture Committee. Available online: 

https://www.agenda21culture.net/sites/def ault/files/files/documents/en/odm -eng.pdf 

(Accessed 18 th March 2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 417 

Poole, A. K. (2018), “Where is Goal 18? The need for biocultural heritage in the Sustainable 

Development Goals”, Environmental Values 27(1), 55 – 80. DOI: 10.3197/ 

096327118X15144698637522. 

Rodil, K. & Winschiers -Theophilus, H. (2016), “Indigenous storytelling in Namibia: Sketching 

concepts for digitization”, Proceedings - 2015 International Conference on Culture and 

Computing, Culture and Computing 2015, pp. 80. 

Ruigrok, I. (2009), “The missing dimensions of the Millennium Development Goals: Culture and 

local governments. Synthesis report”, in Pascual, J. (Ed.), Culture, Local Governments 

and Millennium Development Goals, United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG), 

Barcelona. 

Torraco, R. J. (2005), “Writing integrative literature reviews: Guidelines and examples”, Human 

Resource Development Review, 4(3), pp. 356 – 367. DOI: 

10.1177/1534484305278283. 

UNDESA. (2022), “SDG indicators: Global indicator framework for t he Sustainable Development 

Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, A/RES/71/313, 

Statistics Division. Available online: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators -list/ 

and PDF: 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/Globa l%20Indicator%20Framework%20after%20 

2021%20refinement_Eng.pdf (Accessed 27 th March 2022). 

UNESCO. (2003), Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. 2020 

edition. Paris: UNESCO. https://ich.unesco.org/doc/src/2003_Convention_Basi c_Texts -

_2020_version -EN.pdf (Accessed 24 th December 2021). 

UNESCO. (2013), The Hangzhou Declaration: Placing Culture at the Heart of Sustainable 

Development Policies. Available online: 

http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/culture -and -development/h angzhou -

congress/ (Accessed 19 th March 2022). 

UNESCO. (2014), UNESCO Operational Strategy on Youth 2014 -2021, UNESCO, Paris. 

UNESCO. (2019), Culture | 2030 Indicators, UNESCO, Paris.  Available online: 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000371562 (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

United Nations. (2018), #Youth2030. Working with and for Young People. United Nations Youth 

Strategy. Available online: https://www.un.org/youthenvoy/wp -

content/uploads/2018/09/18 -00080_UN -Youth -Strategy_Web.pdf (Accessed 18 th March 

2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 418 

United Nations. (2021), The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2021. Available online: 

https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2021/ (Accessed 27 th March 2022). 

United Nations. (2021), Youth2030: A Progress Report 2021. Available online: 

https://www.unyouth2030.com /progressreport (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG) Culture Committee. (2013), UNESCO Congress 

of Hangzhou. Culture: Key to Sustainable Development. Key Messages of UCLG. 

Available online: https://www.agenda21culture.ne t/sites/default/files/hangzhou_ -

_position_ -_eng.pdf (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

Voices of Culture. (2021), Culture and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals: 

Challenges and Opportunities, February 2021, Marcus, M. (Ed.), Goethe -Institut, 

Brusse ls. Available online: https://voicesofculture.eu/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/VoC -

Brainstorming -Report -Culture -and -SDGs.pdf (Accessed 18 th March 2022). 

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes .

Cambridge, MA. 

Wenger, E. (2000), “Communities of practice and social learning systems”, Organization, 7(2), 

225 – 246. DOI: 10.1177/135050840072002. 

Yildirim, E., Pascual, J., Llobet, M., Wyber, S., Fischer, S., Caballero, G., Coban, I. (2021), 

“Cultu re in the localization of the 2030 Agenda: An analysis of voluntary local reviews”, 

Culture 2030 Goal Campaign, Barcelona, Paris, Abidjan, Montreal, The Hague and 

Brussels. Available online: 

http://culture2030goal.net/wp -content/uploads/2022/01/af_culture2 030goal_2021.pdf 

(Accessed 18 th March 2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 419 

# Building Capacity and Awareness 

# for the UN Sustainable Development Goals Through 

# Project -Based and Community -Engaged Pedagogies 

Martina King and Tai Munro 

(MacEwan University, Canada) 

Abstract 

Purpose - The key sustainability competencies are fundamental to sustainability transformations. 

The purpose of this study is to investigate the effectiveness of project -based and community -

engaged pedagogies in sup porting student development of all key sustainability competencies. 

Additionally, the study examines whether the UN SDGs provide an appropriate framework to 

support engagement with the breadth of sustainability topics and increase awareness and support 

of the goals within the community. 

Design - This case study triangulates scaled self -assessment, performance observation, and 

regular course work in an undergraduate interdisciplinary sustainability course to gain insights 

into how all key sustainability com petencies can be developed through recommended 

pedagogies. 

Findings - Project -based and community -engaged pedagogies are supportive of key sustainability 

competencies development. The act of engaging with an interdisciplinary group towards achieving 

a com mon goal created effective learning opportunities for students. However, the project -based 

and community -engaged pedagogies cannot be completely separated from the context of the 

course. The use of the SDGs to guide community partner participation and proj ect development 

was effective in increasing awareness of the goals among students and community partners. 

Implications - These findings support the use of project -based and community -engaged 

pedagogies to facilitate student development of key sustainabili ty competencies. 

Originality - This study demonstrates that using the SDGs to guide community partner 

participation and project development is effective both in facilitating a wide range of projects from 

the identified areas of sustainability: environment , economic, social, and cultural, and in 

increasing awareness of the goals among students and community organizations. 

Keywords: sustainability competencies; sustainable development goals; community -engaged 

learning; project -based learning; pedagogies Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 420 

Purpose 

The world is facing multiple sustainability crises. The United Nations (UN) Sustainable 

Development Goals (SDGs) (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

(UNESCO), 2017) present a vision of a desired future. However, wit hout leaders who can 

successfully navigate the complex realities of current and future sustainability scenarios the world 

will be unsuccessful in achieving the SDGs. The literature offers both key sustainability 

competencies, identified as essential to lea ding transformative change (Redman and Wiek, 2021) 

and recommendations on pedagogies (Lozano et al. , 2017; Evans, 2019). By integrating the 

SDGs within a community -based teaching and learning context educators have the potential to 

create real -life, tangible learning opportunities to support the development of sustainability 

competencies and increased p articipation and support for the SDGs now and in the future. 

Education experiences contribute directly to Sustainable Development Goal 4, Quality Education, 

Education for sustainable development and global citizenship. This study leverages Target 4.7 to 

“ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustainable 

development” (United Nations, 2015, Goal 4) by examining both the pedagogy and the 

assessment of sustainability competencies. The goal is to educate the leaders, so th ey are 

prepared to act in this UN declared Decade of Action 2020 -2030 and throughout their lives. This 

study contributes to discussions of how to teach and how to assess sustainability education. It is 

essential that citizens can identify problems, solutio ns and actionable approaches that contribute 

to social, economic, environmental, and cultural sustainability. If these underlying competencies 

are lacking, citizens will not be able to identify and take the required actions to achieve the goals, 

that is wh y sustainability education matters. 

Key Sustainability Competencies 

Although sustainability is a recognized academic field and profession, and there are many 

sustainability programs established at universities around the world, consensus on program level 

learning objectives and the key sustainability competencies required to achieve those objectives 

has been a challenge (Sterling et al ., 2017; Trencher et al ., 2018; Brundiers et al., 2021). 

Brundiers et al . (2021) have attempted to address this lack of clarity and consensus by collecting 

feedback from 14 international susta inability experts on the Wiek et al. (2011) and Wiek et al .

(2016) developed competencies. Sustainability experts generally agreed with the existing 

competencies, but suggested refinements including additional competencies, specifying learning 

objectives, and recommending greater interconnectedness (Brundiers et al., 2021, p. 18). 

Redman and Wiek (2021) also found that the existing competencies framework was well accepted 

in the literature but required some renaming to support understanding and the addition of new 

competencies suggested by Brundiers et al . (2021). 

The competencies used in this study, were those put forward by Wiek et al. (2011), which are the 

most cited key sustainability competencies (Trencher et al ., 2018, p. 831; Brundiers et al ., 2021, 

p. 18). At the time of the development of this study, neither Brundiers et al . (2021) nor Redman Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 421 

and Wiek (2021) had published their studies recommending additional competencies. The 

competencies used within the context of the current study are in Table 1 .

Table 1: Definition for Each Key Competencies for Sustainability 

Competency  Description 

Systems -thinking  The ability to analyze complex systems, taking different 

domains – such as society, environment, economy, and 

culture – and scales – local to global – into account. 

Feedback loops, leverage points, and other systemic 

features are considered. 

Anticipatory (renamed Futures -

Thinking in Redman and Wiek, 

2021) 

The ability to think about the future both in terms of 

forecasting from current scenarios and in anticipating the 

future outcomes of sustainability action plans or strategies. 

Normative (renamed Values -

Thinking in Redman and Wiek, 

2021) 

The ability to map, apply, and negotiate sustainability 

values, principles, goals, and targets par ticularly in relation 

to current and/or future states of systems. 

Strategic  The ability to apply knowledge of complex systems to 

construct and test action plans for sustainability 

Interpersonal  The ability to collaborate and participate in meaningful 

ways to contribute to teams and work with diverse 

stakeholders 

With general agreement regarding key sustainability competencies, it is pertinent to identify the 

most appropriate pedagogical strategies for developing these competencies (O'Brien and Sarkis, 

2014; Wiek and Kay, 2015; Trencher et al ., 2016; Ortega -Sanchez et al ., 2018). Project/problem -

based learning, often with a community partner is frequently used (Evans, 2019, p. 5542) and 

recommended as an effective pedagogy for sustainability education (Cörvers et al ., 2016, p. 357). 

Trencher et al . (2018) found that practice -oriented sustainability masters programs which 

emphasize real -life problem solving and learning opportunities, often through projects with 

external partners “demonstrat[e d] higher success in building interpersonal, strategic and 

normative competencies” (Abstract). 

This perspective is supported by de Haan (2006, p. 22) who argues that competence -oriented 

education should focus on output, or what is learnt, versus a conven tional syllabus approach of 

focusing on input, or what is taught, to incorporate problem solving and real -world project -based 

approaches required by sustainability challenges. This corresponds to the idea of competence as 

the ability “to perform a task or an activity consistently over time and in different situations” (Green 

and Levy, no date, What do we mean by competence?, para. 3). Project -based, problem -based, 

and community -engaged learning address outputs because they are not focused on specific Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 422 

subje cts that students need to study, but on asking “what problem -solving strategies, concepts 

and abilities for social action they should have” (de Haan, 2006, p. 22). 

Finally, Lozano et al . (2017) found that problem/project -based learning and community serv ice 

learning (related to community -engaged learning) were covered the greatest number of different 

competencies. This aligns with Cörvers et al . (2016, p. 356) who also suggest that 

problem/project -based learning offer a broad opportunity to develop sustai nability competencies, 

particularly when engaged with “real -world sustainability issues”. 

Redman and Wiek (2021) argue that the competencies are fundamental to achieving the societal 

transformations that are required by the SDGs. Further, the values that underlie the SDGs are 

fundamental to the successful application of the competence within a sustainability context 

(Brundiers et al ., 2021). The SDGs are intended to address current real -world challenges. 

Therefore, using the SDGs as a framework for developing key sustainability competencies is 

appropriate. Identifying and applying effective pedagogical strateg ies for developing sustainability 

competencies is thus vital to achieving SDG 4. 

The UN SDGs require sustainability competencies as per UNESCO’s (2017) “Education for 

Sustainable Development Goals: Learning Objectives”. There is much written about how the 

SDGs can be incorporated into developing sustainability competencies, with Brundiers et al .

(2021 p. 20) being a recent example. There is no shortage of articles and case studies examining 

the use of project/problem -based thinking and learning to address the challenges that must be 

overcome to achieve the SDGs, some examples include, Lehmann et al. (2008 ), Yasin and 

Rhaman (2011 ), and Dobson and Tompkinson (2012). However, the authors were not able to find 

any case studies specifically discussing using the SDGs to guide and design project/problem -

based community -engaged learning. This case study built on the literature discussing the 

usefulness of project/problem -based community -engaged learning in teaching the SDGs, 

(Brundiers et al ., 2010; Konrad, et at ., 2021; Cörvers et al. , 2016), to inform the use of the SDGs 

in community partner selection, problem definition, and evaluation of the projects by students and 

their professor. 

Research Questions 

The primary research question for this study is: 

● In wha t ways does project -based, community -engaged learning contribute to the 

development of key sustainability competencies? 

An additional question asks: 

● In what ways does using the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals to frame 

community -engaged learn ing contribute to awareness of the goals among students and 

community partners? Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 423 

Design 

A case study methodology was used to investigate the use of project and community -based 

learning pedagogical strategies for developing sustainability competencies wit hin an 

undergraduate sustainability course. A case study is appropriate because the goal of the study is 

to examine the pedagogical strategies within the context of a real -world course (Yin, 2018, p. 15). 

The course context of the case includes using the U nited Nations Sustainable Development Goals 

to solicit and select community partners, as well as a framework for student reflection and 

instructor assessment. The structure of the course and the instructor herself cannot be separated 

from the use of specif ic pedagogical strategies. 

Specifically, the pedagogy used a type of experiential learning informed by constructionist theory, 

project -based, community -engaged learning. The definition of project -based, community -

engaged learning used in this study is lea rning by actively working with a community partner 

organization to provide tangible contributions towards addressing community partner needs. This 

definition was informed by Evans (2019, p. 5542) and Brassler and Dettmers (2017, p. 2), and 

aligns with the definition from the host university’s Careers & Experience office which provided 

support for identifying and recruiting community partners for the course (Careers and Experience, 

no date, “Community -engaged Learning”, para. 2). 

Course Overview 

The course in question is an intermediate level online, asynchronous course geared towards 

addressing sustainability challenges through project -based, community -engaged learning that ran 

in Fall 2021 at an undergraduate postsecondary institution in Alberta , Canada. Students are 

introduced to the idea of sustainability competencies early in the course. The instructor then 

connects different activities and resources back to these competencies throughout the semester. 

The course is interdisciplinary and ope n to all students regardless of program of study making it 

difficult to focus course content on a particular subject area. Thus, the focus is on the content -

independent key sustainability competencies as identified by Wiek et al. (2011). Sustainability 

cha llenges are complex and subject to change (Le Grange, 2011); therefore, focusing on 

competencies better serves course learning objectives such as being able to “evaluate goals, 

approaches, requirements, and tradeoffs for sustainability projects” (Primary A uthor, 2021, p. 2). 

All learners, regardless of background and field of interest, can develop skills that enable them to 

participate in and lead current and future sustainability projects. 

There is substantial evidence (Brundiers et al. , 2010; Barth, 201 5; Konrad, et al ., 2020) that 

pedagogies of project -based learning, which incorporates problem -based approaches, and 

community -engaged learning, are effective for learning sustainability competencies (Cörvers et 

al ., 2016, p. 357; Konrad, et al ., 2021, p. 537). All other course activities are designed to support 

the successful development of projects for community partners while facilitating student learning, 

experience, and engagement. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 424 

The SDGs take a multifaceted perspective on sustainability including social, economic, 

environment, and cultural components. Thus, framing the call for community partners around the 

SDGs ensured that all projects could be situated within the broad context of sustainability. 

Community partners were recruited through the Care er and Experiences Office at the institution. 

Potential partners responded to the posted call and submitted their desired topics/project area as 

well as identified applicable SDGs for their potential projects. The instructor and Career and 

Experiences staf f then vetted the projects to ensure they would meet the requirements for the 

course in terms of scope, topic area, and final product. Table 2 identifies the focus of the 

community partner organizations, the target SDG(s) identified by the organization, an d a brief 

description of the project. 

Table 2: Community Partners, Target SDGs, and Project Description 

Community Partner 

Focus Area 

Target SDG(s)  Project Description 

Municipal Airshed 

Monitoring and 

Education 

3. Good Health and Well -Being 

13. Climate Action 

17. Partnerships for the Goals 

Development of social media 

campaign connecting air quality to the 

SDGs 

Rural Airshed 

Monitoring and 

Education 

3. Good Health and Well -Being 

17. Partnerships for the Goals 

Development of educational brochure 

connecting air quality to the SDGs 

Anti -Racism 

Education in Rural 

Area 

10. Reduced Inequalities 

16. Peace, Justice and Strong 

Institutions 

17. Partnerships for the Goals 

Development of community resource 

kit to promote discussion of and 

engagement with an ti -racist practices 

Agricultural 

Research 

Organization 

2. Zero Hunger 

3. Good Health and Well -Being 

12. Responsible Consumption and 

Production 

13. Climate Action 

15. Life on Land 

Research report on agricultural 

practices to improve soil carbon 

sequestration 

Adult Literacy 

Organization 

1. No Poverty 

4. Quality Education 

8. Decent Work and Economic 

Growth 

10. Reduced Inequalities 

Promotional video connecting 

employment and business outcomes 

to increased adult literacy 

Municipal 

Organization 

Focu sed on Large -

Scale Events 

12. Responsible Consumption and 

Production 

17. Partnerships for the Goals 

Research report on integrating social 

justice considerations into 

procurement policies 

12. Responsible Consumption and 

Production 

Research report on improving waste 

diversion rates from large -scale events 

Another significant characteristic of the course is the use of specifications grading for assessment. 

This is a form of mastery grading and is, therefore, better suited to the assessment of 

competencies (Nilson, 2014). Rather than students earning partial points on assessments, all 

assessments are graded as complete/revisions needed. This ensures that all students who earn Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 425 

a passing grad e in the course have reached base levels of competency (Nilson, 2014). This 

contributes to the real -life connections provided by the community -engaged learning by replicating 

professional work requirements. As a result, it is likely that more students were able to improve 

their competencies than may have occurred in a traditionally graded course. Indeed, this has been 

examined in an introductory sustainability course and shown to be the case (Wasnieski, et al .

2021). 

Consent and Anonymity 

Students enrolled in the sustainability course were asked to consent to participate in the research. 

Consent information was collected by the co -investigator and was not shared with the primary 

author and course instructor until after the appeals period fo llowing the submission of the final 

grades in the course. 

Data Collection 

In their review of the sustainability competencies assessment literature Redman et al. (2021) 

identify eight dominant approaches. They recommend combining assessment tools “to add ress 

the shortcomings of any particular assessment tool” (Redman et al. , 2021, p. 127). This 

triangulation of multiple sources of evidence is also described by Yin (2018) as a fundamental 

feature of case study research. As a result, this study used a mixed -method approach drawing on 

three areas of data collection: scaled self -assessment, performance observation, and regular 

course work (Redman et al. , 2021). Data collection occurred throughout the Fall 2021 semester. 

Scaled self -assessment 

Scaled self -as sessment asks students to reflect on their own skills, ability, and knowledge, and 

rank themselves on a Likert scale. This is a common method for assessing sustainability 

competencies (Redman et al. , 2021). The survey instrument in this study was adapted f rom 

Molderez and Fonseca (2018) who used the tool following participation in a service -learning 

project and real -world experience. The tool was adapted by rewording items to allow for a pre -

and post -test condition to address a limitation identified by Mol derez and Fonseca (2018). One 

item was removed as it was not applicable to the current case. The questionnaire is based on the 

competencies identified by Wiek et al. (2011) with each competency represented by multiple 

statements. For each statement, studen ts rated their agreement on a five -point Likert scale rating. 

Students also had the option of selecting 0 for “no experience.” 

Performance Observation 

The engagement of community partners in the course provided the opportunity to include 

performance obse rvation in this project. This was limited because the community partners were 

not necessarily familiar with sustainability competencies and covering this concept is beyond the 

scope of this study. However, as professionals working in fields that are relate d to the United 

Nations Sustainable Development Goals, they are familiar with the skills and attributes that Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 426 

contribute to their work. Thus, partners were asked generally if they noticed skills, activities, or 

competencies that are relevant to sustainable development. This data is not specific to individual 

students. 

Regular Course Work 

Regular course work is the least used method in assessing sustainability competencies (Redman 

et al. , 2020). This may be a result of course work that typically focuses on learning outcomes 

rather than competencies. The use of specifications grading in the current course, as well as the 

development of final projects for community partners, facilitates a focus on outputs in this course. 

Therefore, the regular course work is well positioned to provide evidence of competence. 

Analysis 

R (version 4.1.2) was used for the statistical analysis of the self -assessments. Each of the five 

competencies was analyzed individually and combined. Prior to the model fitting process, 

descrip tive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median and interquartile range of scores before 

and after taking the course) were computed. A series of Wilcoxon signed -rank non -parametric 

tests were conducted to assess whether there was a significant improvemen t in the median 

competencies. Due to a low sample size, individual items from the questionnaire were not 

analyzed separately. 

In both qualitative and case study research, it is generally recommended that the researcher 

begins qualitative data analysis whi le still collecting data (Merriam and Tisdell, 2016; Yin, 2018). 

Informal analysis of student work was done throughout the period of data collection to adapt the 

course to the needs of the students. This led the researchers towards the development of initi al 

codes apparent in student work. These codes were then formalized and sorted into categories 

and then associated with the most applicable competency following the completion of the course. 

This final process was based on the material from students who ha d consented to participate in 

the research only; however, the original codes were all represented within this sample. The 

formation of categories followed an inductive process as described by Merriam and Tisdell (2016). 

Dedoose (version XXXX) was used to s upport the coding and analysis of qualitative data. 

Findings and Discussion 

Demographics 

Participants were students enrolled in an intermediate course on sustainability challenges at an 

undergraduate university. Twenty -eight students consented to have their course work included 

as part of this research study. Base demographic data was collected. Most students in the course 

used she/her pronouns. A complete breakdown is found in Figure 1. 

Students were enrolled in several different programs while t aking this elective course. Figure 2 

shows the breakdown by degree. Bachelor of Commerce is the highest number. The Other Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 427 

category includes Bachelor of Science in Nursing, Bachelor of Design, Open Studies, and 

Certificate of Achievement in Sustainability. 

Due to an administrative error, the prerequisite course was missed for the 2021/2022 year. As a 

result, some students did not have the prerequisite. This data is shown in Figure 3. 

> Figure 1. Student Pronouns
> Figure 2. Student Program of Study

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 428 

> Figure 3. Prerequisite Course Completed

Developing Sustainability Competencies 

This research presents the case study regarding the role of project -based and community -

engaged learning in developing sustainability competencies. In addition, the impact of using the 

United Nations Sustainable Development Goals as the framework for engag ing the community 

partners on student and partner understanding and capacity to act on the goals was investigated. 

The sustainability competencies were based on Wiek et al . (2011). Redman and Wiek (2021) 

state that “the key competencies are not compiled as a list to select from” (p. 5). This matched 

the experience of the instructor in the course. While there were certain activities, resources, or 

projects that leaned towards specific competencies, it is difficult to tease all the different elements 

apart, nor should this be the goal. In what follows, the sustainability competencies, the 

opportunities to develop these competencies, and the evidence of that development, are 

separated, but the authors acknowledge that this is done to support readability and u nderstanding 

rather than to represent the reality. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 429 

Pre and Post Self -Assessment of Sustainability Competencies 

Twenty of the twenty -eight students completed both the pre and post self -assessment. The mean 

overall score of all 20 students increased from 104.6 (SD = 16.3) before to 118.1 (SD =16.4) after 

taking the course. As summarized in Table 3, the median scores for each of the five 

competencies also increased from before to after the course. Wilcoxon signed -rank tests 

demonstrated stati stically significant improvements for all competencies based on a standard p -

value of 0.05: interpersonal (W = 118, p = .0005) systems thinking (W = 173.5, p = .0055), 

anticipatory thinking (W = 168, p = .00171), normative thinking (W= 153, p = .00015), an d strategic 

thinking (W = 57, p = .01561) and overall scores (W = 163.5, p = .00037). 

Table 3. Comparison of Self -assessment Scores Before and After Taking the Sustainability 

Course 

Pre 

M ± SD 

Post 

M ± SD 

Pre 

Mdn ± IQR 

Post 

Mdn ± IQR 

W P-value 

Competencies 

Interpersonal  25.7 ±2.74  27.9 ±2.22  25.5 ±4.0  28.0 ±4.0  118  0.00050*** 

Systems 

thinking 

30.7 ±6.22  35.9 ±3.84  31.5 ±9.5  37.0 ±4.25  173.5  0.00550** 

Anticipatory 

thinking 

18.5 ± 3.52  21.4 ±3.39  18.5 ±5.25  21.5 ±6.0  168  0.00171** 

Normative 

thinking 

6.50 ± 2.40  9.00 ±0.86  7.0 ±2.5  9.0 ±2.0  153  0.00015*** 

Strategic 

thinking 

8.65 ±1.23  9.30 ±0.92  8.5 ±2.0  10.0 ±2.0  57  0.01561* 

Overall  104.6 ±16.3  118.1 ±16.4  107.5 ±22.3  123.0 ±23.8  163.5  0.00037*** 

> Note. M = mean, SD = standard deviation Mdn = median, IQR = Interquartile Range, W = Wilcoxon signed -rank test
> statistic. Significance cut -offs: * p <.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001

Self -assessment in this course was not simply a tool to measure competency devel opment on 

behalf of the researchers. Self -assessment was included within the framework of the course to 

support what has been referred to as sustainable assessment (Boud and Soler, 2016). Within the 

context of sustainable assessment, assessment is viewed a s one more tool that contributes to 

preparing students to be life -long learners after they leave formal education (Boud and Falchikov, 

2007). Redman and Wiek (2021) critique the overreliance on self -assessment of competence 

based on questions of validity o f self -assessments. However, self -assessment was framed to Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 430 

students within the context of self -reflection to enable future learning and growth (Tamir, 1999). 

This was evident in student work. For example, Participant 14 stated: 

The sustainability compete ncies really helped when it came to self -awareness within a group. 

Understanding my own strengths and weaknesses before beginning the project gave me a layout 

of my best qualities, I know I can contribute, and my worst ones that I can develop. 

One student even recognized their own challenges with self -assessment: 

Learning and developing sustainability competencies are a good reminder of how many factors 

can contribute to the success of a project. Self -assessment is not something that I’m good at, but 

it i s valuable to take stock of personal strengths and areas for improvement. It’s a good reminder 

that if we don’t recognize our weaknesses, we can’t improve them. (Participant 23) 

The pre -self -assessment also contributed to helping students think about the breadth of 

sustainability challenges. As Participant 21 stated: 

I believe the competencies in the surveys helped me consider what is involved in approaching 

sustainability from a social perspective. This helped me to consider where I am at regarding these 

competencies, and what I have yet to work on. 

Upon reflection, I can see how the community partner projects helped to develop my skills in these 

competencies and solidify skills that I already had, such as leadership, communication skills, and 

thinking holistically about how our project can affect sus tainability. 

Thus, while we should be cautious in drawing conclusions based solely on the use of self -

assessment, it is an important tool in sustainability education. It can support learners in becoming 

life -long learners who can adapt and grow in the fa ce of changing sustainability challenges. This 

is summed up by Participant 3: 

It gives us an overall understanding of where we are right now and how competent we are for 

certain projects. It helps us develop our weaknesses and also gives us awareness of what are 

our strengths so we understand what role we can take in the future sustainability projects and 

also how to overcome certain challenges. 

Community -Engaged Learning and Sustainability Competencies 

Redman and Wiek (2021) argu e that all competencies need to be addressed and developed 

together for students to become “change agents” (p. 5). The quantitative results indicate that this 

has occurred within the context of the course in this study, as all competencies show significant 

improvement in the self -assessment. However, a key feature of this study is the triangulation of 

the self -assessment with the course work of the students, as examined by the instructor. 

Therefore, the self -assessed competencies will be discussed in relati on to the course and 

specifically the community partner projects in the following sections. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 431 

Interpersonal 

One of the characteristics of the present course is the diversity of the students: the course is an 

elective open to students from all faculties, as well as open studies students (those not registered 

in a program). As a result, the course offers an opportunity to work with more diverse teams than 

is offered in a discipline specific course. The community partner project forms the basis of the 

collabor ation among students in the course. In other words, the team comes together to achieve 

a common goal based on their common interest in sustainability rather than their focus on earning 

a specific credential. This collaborative and interdisciplinary approac h to advancing sustainability 

is fundamental to the demonstration of interpersonal competence (Redman and Wiek, 2021). 

Two items of coursework were analyzed by the instructor to identify the development of 

interpersonal competence: group statements about collaborative work and individual summary 

statements regarding a round table activity. In the round table activity students presented their 

community partner projects with peers from different projects and collected feedback from and 

provided feedback to each other. Table 4 highlights examples of evidence that students 

developed interpersonal competence. 

Students were asked to identify what they learned that they believed would have the biggest 

impact on their future decisions and options. Interpersonal w as mentioned by 11 of 28 students, 

second only to systems thinking in terms of frequency. This growth was also reflected in the self -

assessment data (W=118, p<0.00050). Students commented that they learned to look at diversity 

and disagreement as positives that can contribute to a more sustainable future. For example, 

participant 14 stated: 

I've learnt that when people disagree, they do so because of their past situations, upbrings (sic), 

and everything that shaped them into the person they are today. Inst ead of turning it into a battle 

of who agrees and who disagrees, perhaps we should make a plan for a better future for everyone, 

and have everyone's voices heard so we can use every perspective and every angle to help us 

achieve our goals. 

This statement illustrates how the student was able to approach disagreement as an opportunity 

rather than a challenge, which demonstrates interpersonal competence. Further, they indicated 

that this was an area of growth. This is in -line with what Konrad, et al. , (2021) found about the 

value of project -based learning for developing interpersonal competence. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 432 

Table 4. Student Examples and Instructor Analysis of Statements Indicating Development 

of Interpersonal Competence 

Participant/ 

Group 

Example  Instructor Analysis 

Soil Carbon 

sequestration 

in Agriculture 

Group statement about working 

collaboratively to create an 

interdisciplinary systems map: 

“each of our disciplines came 

together to bring ideas that may 

have been overlooked initially. 

We were a ble to discuss 

concepts and get a deeper 

understanding of the 

interconnections between 

elements. We cooperated to 

refine our map and disregard 

sections that we agreed did not 

contribute relevant details to 

our project.” 

Students demonstrated key skills for 

interpersonal competence such as 

“fostering self -efficacy for the self and 

others” (Evans, 2019, p. 5534). This is 

demonstrated by acknowledging that 

each person brought important ideas to 

the group and through discussion 

everyone deepened their understan ding 

of the issues related to the challenge they 

were addressing 

Participant 12  Round table summary: student 

reflected on the importance of 

thinking about who the 

audience is for their project and 

how that shapes what and how 

they write their report. 

Student demonstrates awareness of the 

diversity of stakeholders in their project. 

Th e organization was looking for technical 

information that they could use to provide 

support to their stakeholders. As a result, 

the student reflected that the organization 

itself was the stakeholder that they 

needed to focus on, but that the other 

stakehol ders should not be forgotten. 

Participant 1  Round table summary: student 

described their thought process 

in re -evaluating the social 

media posts they had created 

for their organization. They 

discussed working on finding 

the balance between providing 

infor mation, encouraging 

viewers to want to learn more, 

and engaging people with the 

posts. 

Student demonstrates growing awareness 

of different potential audiences or 

stakeholders and working on providing 

options for people to engage at different 

levels. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 433 

Systems Thinking 

Systems thinking was the most frequently identified learning that students thought would impact 

their future with 13 of 28 students mentioning it. However, systems thinking, while significant 

(W=173.5, p < 0.00550), was slightly lower tha n some of the other competencies with regards to 

the improvement throughout the course. The most likely explanation for this is that the 20 students 

who had completed the prerequisite course had all been exposed to systems thinking previously. 

Therefore, t hey likely had greater familiarity and comfort with the statements during the pre -self -

assessment. This was not analyzed due to the small sample size. 

Overall, the students stated that learning about interconnections and the importance of including 

other perspectives, which also touches on interpersonal competence, was something that greatly 

influenced their outlook. For example, Participant 10 stated: 

I think that one of the biggest contributions of learning and developing sustainability competencies 

is my ability to now look at the bigger picture when taking on future sustainability projects and 

challenges. But when I say bigger picture, I mean the system I am working on as a whole, not just 

the end product I would want to get to, but how things are conn ected (like in systems mapping), 

and how each individual element in a project can have a specific effect on something else, 

whether that be an environmental effect or a societal or cultural effect. 

Students create and submit systems maps individually base d on the challenge their community 

partner was aiming to address (e.g., adult literacy, racism in rural environments, carbon 

sequestration through agricultural practices). If required, students completed revisions on their 

individual maps based on feedback and resubmitted. This ensured that students reached a base 

level of competency with both systems mapping and systems thinking in general. A sample 

student map is pictured in Figure 4. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 434  

> Figure 4. Sample Individual Systems Map Examining Racism in a Rural Environment (Student 2)

The systems map assignment requires students to identify and describe feedback loops, leverage 

points, and the system’s purpose. Students often struggle with feedback loops because the loops 

challenge the linear thinking that they are used to. Students are generally able to identify a causal 

relationship between elements, x leads to y leads to z. But they have trouble identifying how z 

impacts x. For example, student 15 initially described “the more reusable products, the better the 

environment” as a reinfo rcing feedback loop. The student identified the loop as reinforcing 

because both elements changed in the same direction. 

The purpose is also challenging for students. Many students start thinking about the purpose of 

the system as the purpose for the org anization, often summarizing the organization’s mission 

statement as the purpose. 

However, because the maps are based on a particular issue from an organization, observations 

of the organization enable students to better understand the system and systems mapping. For 

example, instructor guidance provided to the student regarding the feedback loop above 

encouraged them to think about how having a cleaner event space could influence event 

organizers’ waste policies regarding reusable products. As a result, the student was able to revise 

their understanding about how the context, the environment, could influence policy regarding 

event materials 

Similarly in identifying the purpose of the system, feedback encouraged reflection regarding what 

created a need f or the organization. Therefore, students started to realize that the reason the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 435 

organizations existed was because the system was leading to circumstances that nobody wanted 

such as illiteracy, poverty, or climate change (Meadows, 2008, p. 15). 

Example sta tements demonstrating systems competence are shown in Table 5. 

Table 5. Student Examples and Instructor Analysis of Statements Indicating Development 

of Systems Thinking Competence 

Participant  Example  Instructor Analysis 

1 Leverage Point: Alberta capital residences 

are directly affected by air quality. They also 

are able to influence policy and decision 

making by voting in policy makers with goals 

to create better air quality. Can put pressure 

on governments and NGO’s to fun d more 

research therefore educating more people 

Student demonstrates 

awareness that leverage points 

need to be able to impact large 

sections of a system in order to 

be effective 

2 Purpose: The perpetuation of racial inequality 

in … communities 

Student demonstrates 

awareness that systems can 

manifest purposes that are 

unintended by human actors in 

the system 

13  Feedback loop: If investments (by individuals, 

the government or the industry) increase, the 

economy is going to grow. As a 

consequence, more funds are available to 

individuals, the government and the industry, 

to invest more, which intensifies economic 

growth, leading to even more funds available 

to invest 

Student demonstrates 

awareness that a feedback loop 

must feedback, it i s not a linear 

relationship 

Following the completion of the individual systems map, students collaborated with their group 

members for their community partner project to develop a unified systems map. Figure 5 is an 

example team map. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 436  

> Figure 5. Team Constructed Systems Map Examining Racism in a Rural Environment

The numbers on the map describe the specific interconnections between the elements. Sample 

interconnections include: 

1. Social media - displays/hosts - racial behaviours 

7. Information al resources - improve - EDI educational Workshops 

10. EDI educational workshops - bring awareness to - Mental Health Adversities 

Comparing the individual and team maps revealed improved understanding of the examined 

system. This occurred through the inclusion of additional perspectives, increased awareness of 

individual biases, and negotiation of what to include in the team map. These factors were 

described by students in all seven teams. For example, Student 28 stated: 

Throughout the course, I disco vered that connecting with others in the course contributed to 

meaningful learning…I learned more about the different interdisciplinary approaches, elements, 

and ideas related to the issue or problem faced by [the organization]; this contributed to my 

deve lopment and learning process greatly… Because the group was diverse and knowledgeable 

in our own areas, it helped me to envision sustainability from many different lenses overall. 

Another common statement was the need to understand the logic or rationale behind individual 

choices before they could agree on a common map. This corresponds to research regarding the 

impact of peer learning. In peer learning, students share knowledge, id eas, and experience in a Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 437 

non -hierarchical relationship (Boud, 2001). Peer learning within the project groups cannot be 

separated from the impacts of project -based and community -engaged learning in the current 

study. The process of working together support ed groups in defining the boundaries of the 

system, which is described by Evans (2019, p. 5533) as a key skill for systems competence. 

From the instructor’s perspective, having students negotiate the systems map demonstrates both 

interpersonal and systems thinking competence. Successful groups explain the assumptions 

underlying their individual maps and then negotiate the group map. While students often start 

their individual maps by identifying the elements (the circles in the two examples above), they fi nd 

this process doesn’t work when moving to the collaborative map because they realize how many 

assumptions and decisions underlie their elements that they were not aware of at the time of 

construction. Through this process, the students develop many of th e systems related 

knowledges and skills that Evans (2019, p. 5533) identified including “understanding issues of 

scale and complexity”, “understanding that systems are constructs and that different people may 

delineate and describe systems differently”, an d reflexivity. Similarly, Wiek et al . (2011, p. 207) 

state that systems thinking competence includes “comprehending, empirically verifying, and 

articulating [system] structure, key components, and dynamics”. Further, within interpersonal 

competence student s developed effective group discussion techniques, conveyed insights, and 

practiced active and deep listening (Evans, 2019). This was done to engage in problem solving 

as they developed a common systems map. 

Anticipatory 

Anticipatory competence is the mo st difficult competency to tie specifically to the community 

engaged learning opportunity in the course, although it was significant for the course overall 

(W=168, p < 0.00171). All students who mentioned anticipatory thinking as their most important 

takea way (five of 28 students) referred to the reading “Other worlds are possible” (Weston, 2012). 

This chapter introduces requirements for sustainability that encourage anticipatory thinking, 

including believing that changing the system is possible (pp. 13 -17) , that new scales are required 

to measure good done rather than harm not done (pp. 17 -21), and that sustainability, must be 

celebrated (pp. 24 -28). As in all case study research, the contextual conditions of the case can’t 

be separated (Yin, 2018). Therefo re, it is possible that this reading, rather than the project -based, 

community -engaged learning, was the largest contributor to anticipatory competence amongst 

students. This will require further research to investigate. 

The restrictions of a semester -bas ed course potentially hindered the development of anticipatory 

thinking within the community -engaged learning projects. Community partners were asked to 

identify potential projects for students as part of their initial submission of interest. As a result, the 

students were less engaged in anticipating or envisioning future states. However, the process of 

brainstorming different ideas for their projects and weighing the challenges and opportunities of 

each option before proposing the final direction for the project is evidence of anticipatory thinking. 

Therefore, while the projects themselves may not be clearly connected to the development of 

anticipatory thinking, students did acknowledge this process through statements such as the 

following from participant 10. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 438 

Another way that developing sustainability competencies contributes to my future ability to take 

on sustainability projects is that I am able to work with a group to collectively create a sustainable 

vision for a project. By doing so, I know now how to work together to look at many different options 

to figure out which one is more sustainable. I can look at these different opinions and ideas from 

people and help to critically think about a direction to go. 

Normative 

Normative competence was not ment ioned by any of the students as a key takeaway from the 

course and yet it showed a high level of significance in the self -assessment (W=153, p < 0.00015). 

Both statements in the self -assessment directly connect to the course pedagogies: “I am able to 

compa re and contrast several alternatives for a project” and “I am able to collectively create and 

craft sustainability visions for a project”. It is possible that this latter statement was reflected in the 

impact of interpersonal skills that many students did comment on, while the former may have 

been connected to anticipatory thinking by students. This again illustrates the difficulty of 

disentangling the different competencies (Redman and Wiek, 2021). 

The process engaging with the normative competence withi n the context of the community -

engaged learning projects was two -fold: First, the students, through the process of systems 

mapping identified, reconciled, and negotiated their individual perspectives on the current system. 

Second, they negotiated with the community partner to take the values, principles, goals, and 

targets of the partner and their stakeholders or participants into account. For example, industry 

stakeholders within the air quality monitoring organizations had to be considered during project 

development. For example, one of the Twitter posts the group developed focused on SDG 8: 

Decent Work and Economic Growth. In the thread they describe how air quality impacts many 

factors like well -being and agriculture that will impact economic growth (Alb erta Capital Airshed, 

2021). 

The group working with an anti -racism organization in a rural context included text that 

demonstrated normative competence throughout their project. For example, at the start of one 

activity in the anti -racism activity kit th ey developed, they stated “There are no wrong answers in 

this game. It is about exploration and keeping an open mind. Some of the questions might feel 

uncomfortable, but they are there to encourage learning.” This illustrates awareness of the current 

state of these discussions, but still encourages the importance of having the discussion. 

Strategic 

Strategic competence had the lowest significance of the five competencies. Two statements were 

attributed to this competence: “I am able to learn new skills and connect them to my professional 

goals/plans” and “I am able to see real world situations and re lationships”. Although we did not 

analyze these two items separately due to the small sample size, the difference in the pre and 

post assessment means for these two items is quite variable. For the former item, the mean on 

the pre -assessment was 4.5, while the post assessment was 4.65. The latter statement had a 

larger change in mean from 4.15 (pre) to 4.65 (post). This may be explained because the students Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 439 

are likely pursuing undergraduate education with the goal of learning new skills and connecting 

them to their professional goals and plans (Nadelson et al. , 2013). As a result, this experience 

was not unique to this course. 

Several of the projects were specifically targeting strategic competence in that they provided 

guidance and research on how the co mmunity partner organizations could move towards greater 

sustainability. For example, one group conducted a literature review for an agricultural 

organization on strategies and practices to increase rates of soil carbon storage. They also 

included a cost -benefit analysis to support farmers in incorporating sustainable practices. Another 

group examined and created a guidebook for an organization looking to improve waste diversion 

rates at large scale events. They broke their recommendations down into immedia te, ongoing, 

and long -term categories to facilitate both immediate action and future goal setting. These 

examples illustrate that students demonstrated strategic competence within their projects. 

Community Partner Feedback on Competency 

The partners were not introduced to the five key sustainability competencies. As a result, the 

community partners who provided feedback (two of six accounting for three projects) provided 

general feedback relating to what sustainability related skills, act ivities, or competencies they 

witnessed. Both partners that provided feedback mentioned research and communication, in 

addition collaboration and planning were mentioned once each. These skills all fall within what 

Redman and Wiek (2021) identify as genera l and professional competencies because they are 

used in many different fields. In other words, they do not apply to sustainability more than other 

areas. However, with the small sample size, it is difficult to draw conclusions regarding these 

observations .

Community Partner Projects and the SDGs 

Sustainability encompasses multiple domains including economics, environment, social justice, 

and cultural vitality. However, it is often viewed through a much narrower lens (Fisher and 

McAdams, 2015). The SDGs, when taken together, illustrate the broad requirements of 

sustainability (Leal Filho et al. , 2019). The instructor, with support from the Careers and 

Experience office at the host institution, used the UN Sustainable Development Goals to convey 

the broader understanding of sustainability to potential community partners. While all community 

partner projects were related to at least one SDG, the integration of the SDGs ranged from direct 

to indirect as shown in Table 6. 

Table 6. Project Descriptions and SDG Connections 

Project Description  Connection to SDGs 

Social media posts (Twitter and Instagram) 

highlighting the relationship between 

different SDGs and air quality 

Direct: focused on educating organization 

followers on both air quality and the SDGs. 

Covered multiple SDGs Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 440 

Brochure highlighting the relationship 

between different SDGs and air quality 

Direct: focused on educating organization 

followers on both air quality and the SDGs. 

Covered multiple SDGs 

Anti -racism kit including activities and 

resou rces to support anti -racism education 

and ongoing engagement within rural 

communities that are predominantly white 

Indirect: The SDGs are not mentioned within 

the project; however, students considered the 

following goals: SDG 4: Quality Education; SDG 

10: Reduced Inequalities; and SDG 17: 

Partnership for the Goals. 

Video for community employers about the 

benefits of adult literacy programs in 

supporting worker engagement, 

productivity, and skills building 

Indirect: focus is on how access to adult literacy 

programs improves equal access to SDG 4: 

Quality Education. The project also indirectly 

impacts SDG 8: Decent work and economic 

growth and SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities. 

Research report on agricultural methods to 

increase carbon sequestration in soils 

Di rect: carbon sequestration and agricultural 

practices are essential to multiple SDGs: Goal 

2: Zero hunger; Goal 3: Good health and well -

being; Goal 12: Responsible consumption and 

production; Goal 13: Climate action; and Goal 

15: Life on land. 

Research re port on waste management at 

major events: Strategies to increase waste 

diversion 

Direct: specific strategies for waste reduction 

target Goal 12: Responsible consumption and 

production. 

Research report on best practices in social 

procurement policies 

Direct: social procurement practices are 

connected to SDG 12: Responsible 

consumption and production and indirectly to 

SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth and 

SDG 13: Climate change. 

At first, the SDGs were identified as a kind of shorthand to engage the breadth of community 

partners that the course required. However, it turned out to have a more significant impact. One 

of the community partners that provided feedback indicated that the project made their 

contribution to the goals more overt and concrete. Given that there is still limited awareness of 

the SDGs (United Nations Secretary -General, 2019), this demonstrates that community -engaged 

learning projects have the potential to contribute to awareness and possibly action on the goals. 

Simi larly, the second organization, which supervised two different projects, indicated that the 

projects contributed to not just their awareness of student groups to support their own 

engagement with the SDGs through research, but they also identified that the organization itself 

can become a resource for their community in increasing engagement in the SDGs. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 441 

Additionally, two student projects focused on public awareness through communication of the 

relationship between the SDGs and air quality. While not qui te the same approach, Manolis and 

Manoli (2021) found that awareness of the SDGs increased when student groups researched 

ecological projects that related to the SDGs and presented them within the capital city of the 

region at a sustainability related even t. 

The shaping of the call around the SDGs did support the engagement of a range of potential 

projects across all four domains of sustainability. However, additional research is required to 

determine the extent of the impact of the call on the community p artners’ future engagement with 

the SDGs. 

Limitations 

A case study approach is used when it is not possible to separate the goal of the study from the 

contextual factors of the case. This limits the generalizability of the research. However, the results 

support the use of project -based and community -based lea rning opportunities to contribute to the 

development of sustainability competencies. Small sample sizes also impact the generalizability 

of the research. However, as an exploratory case, this study supports future use and investigation 

of the SDGs as a fra mework for engaging community partners with sustainability education. It 

also supports the role of community -engaged learning to support increased engagement with the 

SDGs among community organizations. Finally, the inclusion of the three emerging competen cies 

suggested in Brundiers et al . 2021 is an important element that needs to be investigated to 

determine the applicability of the pedagogical approaches used here in supporting development. 

Implications 

The results of the pre and post self -assessment c ombined with the instructor assessment in this 

case study generally supports the effectiveness of project -based, community -engaged 

pedagogical approaches to developing sustainability competencies. However, our results 

comparing student self -assessment of t heir learning on the different competencies, shows some 

variance from past findings. Trencher et al . (2018) report that all programs they looked at were 

less effective at developing anticipatory competence vs. other key sustainability competences, 

while pr actice -oriented programs were better at developing normative, strategic, and 

interpersonal competencies (p. 839 -840). In this study, we also found that normative and 

interpersonal competencies were well developed but anticipatory or future -thinking compete nce 

was reported as being more substantially developed compared to strategic competence. 

Discussion of the results of self -assessment of anticipatory competence points to the contributions 

of a course reading. This provides some support for augmenting or balancing hands -on 

project/problem based and community -engaged learning with other forms of academic learning. 

Given the lack of awareness generally of the SDGs (UN Secretary -General, 2019) and the 

common narrow understanding of sustainability (Fisher and McAdams, 2015), we have 

demonstrated that using the SDGs to frame project -based, community -engaged learning can Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 442 

contribute to greater awareness of the SDGs and the values that they encapsulate for students 

and community partners. 

This case study adds to the literature around preparing students to be sustainability practitioners 

vs. researchers (Trencher et al ., 2018). The professional sustainability environment is likely as 

important to creating change as education that creates change makers. Cörvers et al . (2016, p. 

352) found that sustainability professionals at the time were mainly focused on “climate change 

and energy issues”. This professional focus has likely broadened and changed, so their views of 

important skills may have as well. Including sust ainability professional’s perspectives in analysis 

of future case studies in academia will also contribute information relevant to the implementation 

competency suggested by Brundiers et al . (2021, p. 21). 

One future focus of research could be to reconn ect with past students who have developed 

sustainability competencies through formal learning opportunities and assess how the 

competencies have contributed to their professional work. This would support the call made by 

Redman and Wiek (2021, p. 8) to tes t the sustainability competency framework “in real -world 

problem -solving settings”. 

Originality 

This case study represents a unique context of an interdisciplinary undergraduate course on 

sustainability that incorporates a diverse mix of teaching, learni ng, and assessment pedagogies. 

Konrad et al . (2021, p. 536) identify a need for studies investigating the many influences on 

students in their learning, including their learning processes. In this case, the pedagogy and the 

assessment strategy were part of the student’s learning process. 

This study incorporates the SDGs not just as content to be learned by students, or in connection 

with the key sustainability competencies, but as a tool for selecting and educating community 

partners. This approach or inf ormation reporting on the effect of using this approach with 

community partners has not been found by the authors to be well represented in the literature on 

sustainability education. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 443 

References 

Alberta Capital Airshed [@YEGAirshed]. (2021), #SDG 8, D ecent Work & Economic Growth, 

promotes sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive 

employment and decent [Tweet]. Twitter. 

https://twitter.com/yegairshed/status/1464322357032488961 

Barth, M. (2015), What are we striving for? Learning objectives and educational goals”, 

Implementing sustainability in higher education: Learning in an age of transformation, 1st 

Ed. Routledge New York, pp. 55 -69. 

Boud , D. (2001), “Making the move to peer learning”, in Boud, D., Cohen, R. and Sampson, J. 

(Eds.), Peer Learning in Higher Education: Learning From and With Each Other, Kogan 

Page (now Routledge), London, pp. 1 –20. 

Boud, D., and Falchikov, N. (eds.) (2007), Rethinking Assessment in Higher Education: 

Learning for the Longer Term, Routledge, London. 

Boud , D. and Soler, R. (2016), “Sustainable assessment revisited”, Assessment & Evaluation in 

Higher Education, Vol. 41 No. 3, pp. 400 –413, 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2015.1018133 

Brassler M. and Dettmers J. (2017), “How to enhance interdisciplinary competence —

interdisciplinary problem -based learning versus interdisciplinary project -based learning”, 

Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem -Based Learning, Vol. 1 1, No. 2, pp. 1 –15, https 

://doi.org/10.7771/1541 -5015.1686 

Brundiers, K., Wiek, A., and Redman, C.L. (2010), "Real ‑world learning opportunities in 

sustainability: from classroom into the real world", International Journal of Sustainability 

in Higher Ed ucation, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 308 –324, 

https://doi.org/10.1108/14676371011077540 

Brundiers, K., Barth, M., Cebrián, G., Cohen, M., Diaz, L., Doucette -Remington, S ., Dripps, W., 

Habron, G., Harré, N., Jarchow, M., Losch, K., Michel, J., Mochizuiki, Y., Rieckmann, M., 

Parnell, R., Walker, P., and Zint, M. (2021), “Key competencies in sustainability in higher 

education —toward an agreed -upon reference framework”, Susta inability Science, Vol. 

16, pp. 13 –29,  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625 -020 -00838 -2

Careers and Experience. (no date), Experiential Learning. [online] Available at host institution 

website [Accessed 31 Mar. 2022]. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 444 

Cörvers, R., Wiek, A., de Kraker, J., Lang, D. J., & Martens, P. (2016), “Problem -based and 

project -based learning for sustainable development”, in Heinrichs, H., Martens, P., 

Michelsen, G., and Wie k, A. (Eds), Sustainability Science: An Introduction, Springer 

Nature, Switzerland, pp. 349 –358,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -94 -017 -7242 -6_29 

de Haan, G. (2006),” The BLK ‘21’ programme in Germany: A ‘Gestaltungskompetenz’ -based 

model for education for sustainable development”, Environmental Education Research, 

Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 19 –32,  https://doi. org/10.1080/13504620500526362 

Dobson, H., E. and Tomkinson, C. B. (2012), “Creating sustainable development change agents 

through problem -based learning: Designing appropriate student PBL projects”, 

International Journ al of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 263 –278, 

https://doi.org/10.1108/14676371211242571 

Evans, T. L. (2019), “Competencies and pedagogies for sustainability education: A roadmap for 

sustainability studies program development in colleges and universities”, Sustainability, 

Vol. 11 No. 19, 5526 –5562,  https://doi.org/10.3390/su11195526 

Fisher, P. B. and McAdams, E. (2015), “Gaps in sustainability education: The impact of higher 

education coursework on perceptions of sustainability”, International Journal of 

Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 407 –423, 

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE -08 -2013 -0106 

Green, D. and Levy, C. (no date), eCampusOntario Open Competency Toolkit available at 

https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/competencytoolkit  under a Creative Commons 

Attribution -ShareAlike 4.0 International License, full terms at 

https://creativecom mons.org/licenses/by -sa/4.0/. 

Konrad, T., Wiek, A., and Barth, M. (2020), “Embracing conflicts for interpersonal competence 

development in project -based sustainability courses”, International Journal of 

Sustainability in Higher Education , Vol. 21 No. 1, pp. 76 –96, 

https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE -06 -2019 -0190 

Konrad, T., Wiek, A., and Barth, M. (2021). “Learning Processes for Interpersonal Competence 

Developme nt in Project -Based Sustainability Courses -- Insights from a Comparative 

International Study.” International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 22 

No. 3, pp. 535 –560. 

Le Grange, L. L. L. (2011), “Sustainability and higher education: From aborescent to rhizomatic 

thinking”, Educational Philosophy and Theory, Vol. 43 No. 7, pp. 742 –754, 

https://doi.org/10.111/j.1469 -5812.2008.00503.x 

Leal F ilho, W., Tripathi, S. K., Andrade Guerra, J. B. S. O. D., Giné -Garriga, R., Orlovic Lovren, 

V., and Willats, J. (2019), “Using the sustainable development goals towards a better Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 445 

understanding of sustainability challenges”, International Journal of Sustainable 

Development & World Ecology, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 179 –190, 

https://doi.org/ 10.1080/13504509.2018.1505674 

Lehmann, M., Christensen, P., Du, X., an d Thrane, M. (2008), “Problem -oriented and project -

based learning (POPBL) as an innovative learning strategy for sustainable development 

in engineering education”, European Journal of Engineering Education, Vol. 33 No. 3, 

pp. 283 –295,  https://doi.org/10.1080/03043790802088566 

Lozano, R., Merrill, M., Sammalisto, K., Ceulemans, K., & Lozano, F. (2017), “Connecting 

Competences and Pedagogical Approaches for Sustain able Development in Higher 

Education: A Literature Review and Framework Proposal”, Sustainability, Vol. 9 No. 10, 

1889 –1904,  https://doi.org/10.3390/su9101889 

Manolis, E. N . and Manoli, E. N. (2021), “Raising awareness of the sustainable development 

goals through ecological projects in higher education”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 

Vol. 279 pp. 1 –12.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123614 

Meadows, D. H. (2008), Thinking in systems: A primer (Wright, D. Ed.), Chelsea Green 

Publishing, White River Junction, VT. 

Merriam, S. B. and Tisdell, E. J. (2016 ), Qualitative Research: A guide to design and 

implementation (4th ed). Jossey -Bass: A Wiley Brand, San Francisco, CA. 

Molderez, I., & Fonseca, E. (2018), “The efficacy of real -world experiences and service learning 

for fostering competences for sustainab le development in higher education”, Journal of 

Cleaner Production, Vol. 172, pp. 4397 –4410, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.04.062 

Nadelson, L. S., Semmelroth, C., Martinez, G., Featherstone, M., Fuhriman, C. A., and Sell, A. 

(2013), “Why did they come here? - The influences and expectations of first -year 

students’ college experience”, Higher Education Studies, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 50 –62, 

http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/hes.v3n1p50 

Nilson, L. (2014), Specifications grading: Restoring rigor, motivating students, and saving faculty 

time, Stylus, Sterling, VA. 

O’Brien, W. and Sarkis, J. (2014), “The potential of community -based sustainability projects for 

deep learning initiatives”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 62 No. 1, pp. 48 –61, 

https://doi.org/10.101 6/j.jclepro.2013.07.001 

Ortega -Sánchez, M., Moñino, A., Bergillos, R. J., Magaña, P., Clavero, M., Díez -Minguito, M., 

and Baquerizo , A. (2018), “Confronting learning challenges in the field of maritime and 

coastal engineering: Towards an educational methodology for sustainable development”, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 446 

Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 171 No. 10, pp. 733 –742, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.049 

Primary Author. (2021), ‘SUST 301 Course Outline”, Course Materials, pp. 1 -11. 

Redman, A. and Wiek , A. (2021), “Competencies for advancing transformations towards 

sustainability”, Frontiers in Education, Vol. 6, pp. 1 –11, 

https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2021.785163 

Redman, A., Wiek, A., & Barth, M. (2021), “Current practice of assessing students’ sustainability 

competencies: A review of tools”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 117 –135, 

https:/ /doi.org/10.1007/s11625 -020 -00855 -1

Sterling, S., Glasser, H., Rieckmann, M. and Warwick, P. (2017), “More than scaling up: a 

critical and practical inquiry into operationalizing sustainability competencies”, In 

Corcora n, P.B., Weakland, J.P. and Wals, A.E.J. (eds.), Envisioning Futures for 

Environmental and Sustainability Education, Wagenigen Academic Publishers, 

Netherlands, pp. 153 –168, 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/307167591_'More_Than_Scaling_Up'_A_Critic 

al_and_Practical_Inquiry_Into_Operationalising_Sustainability_Competencies 

Tamir, P. (1999), “Self -assessment: the use of self -report knowledge and opportunity to learn 

inventories”, International Journal of Science Education, Vol. 21 No. 4, pp. 401 –411, 

https://doi.org/10.1080/095006999290624 

Trencher, G., Rosenberg Daneri, D., McCormick, K., Terada, T., Petersen, J., Yarime, M., and 

Kiss, B. (2016), “The role of students in the co -creation of transformationa l knowledge 

and sustainability experiments: Experiences from Sweden, Japan and the USA”, in Leal 

Filho, W. and Brandli, L. (eds.) Engaging stakeholders in education for sustainable 

development at university level. World Sustainability Series. Springer Inte rnational 

Publishing, pp. 191 –215, https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -26734 -0_13 

Trencher, G., Vincent, S., Bahr, K., Kudo, S., Markham, K. and Yamanaka, Y. (2018), 

“Evaluating core competencies development in sustainability and environmental 

master’s prog rams: An empirical analysis”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 181, pp. 

829 –841,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.164 

United Nations Secretary -General. (2019), “Progress towards the sustainable development 

goals: Report of the secretary -general”, ID E/2019/68, pp. 1 –39, 

ht tps://digitallibrary.un.org/record/3810131 , [Accessed 23 Mar. 2022] 

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2017), “Education for 

sustainable development goals: Learning objectives”, UNESCO, Pa ris, France, 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002474/27444e.pdf  , [Accessed 22 Mar. 2022] Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 447 

United Nations. (2015), “Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable Development” 

Sustainable Development Goals, [online],  https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda , [Accessed 2 

Mar. 2022] 

Wasniewski, E., Munro, T., & Tandon, T. (2021), “Exploring online specifications grading: An 

undergraduate course case study”, EdMedia+ Innovate Learning, Association for the 

Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE), Conference Proceedings, July 6, 

Waynesville, NC, pp. 179 –184,  https://www.learntechlib.org/p/219655 .

Weston, A. (2012), “Other worlds are possible in mobilizing the green imagination: An exuberant 

manifesto”, New Society Publis hers, Gabriola Island, BC, pp. 13 –28. 

Wiek, A., Bernstein, M.J., Foley, R.W., Cohen, M., Forrest, N., Kuzdas, C., Kay, B. and Keeler, 

L.W. (2016), “Operationalising competencies in higher education for sustainable 

development”, in Barth, M. Michelsen, G. Rieckmann, M. and Thomas I. (Eds), 

Routledge Handbook of Higher Education for Sustainable Development, Routledge, 

Abingdon, pp. 239 –260. 

Wiek, A. and Kay, B. (2015), “Learning while transforming: solution -oriented learning for urban 

sustainability in pho enix, Arizona”, Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Vol. 

16, pp. 29 –36, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.cosust.2015.07.001 

Wiek, A., Withycombe, L., and Redman, C. L. (2011), “Key competencies in sustainability: A 

reference framework for academic program development”, Sustainability Science, Vol. 6, 

No. 2, pp.203 –218,  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625 -011 -0132 -6

Yasin, R. M., & Rahman, S. (2011), “Problem oriented project based learning (POPBL) in 

promoting education for sustainable development”, Procedia - Social and Behavioral 

Sciences, Vol. 15, pp. 289 –293, https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.sbspro.2011.03.088 

Yin, R. K. (2018), Case study research and applications: Design and methods (6th ed), Sage 

Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 448 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 449 

# The Effect of Different Instructional Methods 

# and Beliefs Towards Mental Computatio ns 

Eunmi Joung (Utah Valley University, Utah, United States) 

Abstract 

The purpose of this research are threefold: 1) to compare the outcomes of preservice teachers’ 

mental computation performance of whole numbers, integers, and rational numbers, using the 

three different instructional approaches (i.e., direct teaching, open approach, and control group), 

2) to identify which operations showed a marked difference on the Mental Computation Test 

(MCT) performance for each group, and 3) to measure the changes in positivity or negativity of 

belief towards learning written and menta l computations after an intervention. PTs in the K -8

Teacher Education Program participated in this study. A mixed research method is used for this 

study. Specifically, a quasi -experimental design is employed using a pre -and post -MCT that 

consists of 69 it ems in relation to whole numbers, integers, and rational numbers (i.e., fractions, 

decimals, and percents). A one -way analysis of covariance is used to reveal if there is a 

statistically significant difference in post -MCT scores. In addition, the Mathemati cs Attitudes 

Survey (MAS) is designed to analyze preservice teachers’ positivity or negativity of belief 

regarding their mental computation and written computation learning. This study aims to 

contribute to the existing body of research that provides usefu l insights for mathematics educators 

on how to effectively apply instructional approaches to promote diverse students’ mathematics 

knowledge of mental computations and to provide useful information as a measure of current 

preservice teachers’ mental comput ation ability and beliefs on mental computation. 

Keywords: Mental computations, direct teaching, open approach, preservice teachers, attitudes 

towards learning mental computations 

Introduction 

Today, more studies pay attention to the success using menta l computation and try to determine 

its influences on students’ achievement in and out of school (Yang & Huang, 2014); however, the 

main focus of mathematical computation in the primary school has been placed on written pencil 

and paper algorithms. Since ma ny classroom teachers have been educated in ways that focus 

on the rote memorization of basic facts, and the development of procedures for completion of 

traditional written algorithms, their teaching strategies are accordingly influenced by their previous 

learning experiences. Although these teachers can see benefits for using mental computation 

strategies in their classrooms, their lack of related knowledge has led to a lack of confidence and 

teaching skills (Hartnett, 2007). It is even more doubtful how e ffectively the preservice teachers 

use the strategies they have developed. To succeed in learning and in teaching mental 

computation to students, it is important for preservice teachers to be prepared to teach effectively 

prior to classroom teaching. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 450 

Ther e are two growing different instructions: direct teaching and developing students’ own 

strategies (Hartnett, 2007; Varao & Farran, 2007). Even though the direct teaching instruction 

originally came from a behavioristic approach, many researchers agree that the direct teaching 

should be involved in students’ conceptual understanding along with their procedural skills (Reys, 

Reys, Nohda, & Emori, 1995; McIntosh, Nohda, Reys, and Reys, 1995). The second approach, 

developing students’ own strategies, comes from a constructivist view (Becker & Epstein, 2007; 

Hartnett, 2007; Becker & Shimada, 1997). Teachers can create this environment by encouraging 

students to solve problems in a variety of ways (Becker & Epstein, 2007; Hartnett, 2007). Using 

the open approach with constructivist instructional benefits to deepen students’ mathematics 

understanding and content knowledge. Open approach problems are those for which there are 

multiple correct answers or ways of solving the problems. The results of the open approach 

showed that students have an opportunity to be more actively involved in lessons, to deepen their 

mathematics learning, and to enjoy their experiences in problem -solving (Becker & Epstein, 

2007). 

With respect to teaching practice, Jong and Hodges (2015) in vestigated the attitudes towards 

mathematics among preservice elementary teachers in relation to their experiences with K -12 

learners of mathematics and experiences in a teacher education program. The result showed that 

developing positive attitudes was an important aspect of teacher education as attitudes influence 

the instructional practices preservice teachers use with students. 

Thus, this study is closely connected to the Sustainable Development Goal 4 (SDG 4), Target 

4.1, by 2030, ensure that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and quality primary and 

secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes . This means that mental 

computation skills can be used as an essential key concept for developing both preservice 

teache rs and their future students’ mathematics proficiency and understanding. 

Purpose and Research Questions 

The purpose of the current study is twofold. The first part of the study seeks to compare the 

outcomes of preservice teachers’ performance in mental c omputation of whole numbers, 

integers, and rational numbers using the three different instructional approaches (i.e., direct 

teaching, open approach, and control group) and to identify which operations showed a marked 

difference on the Mental Computation Test (MCT) performance for each group. The second part 

measures the changes in positivity or negativity of belief towards learning written and mental 

computations after an intervention using the two approaches (i.e., the direct teaching approach 

and the op en approach). The specific research questions that guided this study were as follows: 

1. Are there any significant differences in mental computation performance between the 

experimental groups (i.e., Direct Teaching and Open Approach ) and the control group 

before and after instruction? 

2. Which mathematical operations showed a marked difference in improvement of pre - and 

post -MCT performance among the three instructional approaches? Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 451 

3. How do the preservice teachers’ mathematical beliefs towards written and mental 

computation change after the intervention? 

Methodology 

This study used a quasi -experimental, non -equivalent control group design. The convenient 

sampling design was used. 

Participants 

The population is a group of preservice teachers enrolled in a K -8 teacher education program at 

a mid -sized, four -year, state university in the USA. The convenient sampling design was used for 

this study. The sample size was 50 preservice teachers before the intervention and 40 after the 

intervention. Ten students were dropped out during the semester. Three classes were used for 

this study: two classes experimental groups enrolled in Course A, and one control group. Course 

A is the first required class, which provides an overview of a real number system, operations on 

whole numbers, arithmetical skills using mathematical activitie s and mathematical thinking, and 

problems solving skills. In terms of mathematics attitudinal surveys (MAS), 27 of the 50 

participants received the intervention. 20 participants from the control group did not take part in 

the post -MAS because no interventi on was provided for them. 3 participants were dropped during 

the intervention. 

Test Instrument 

The researcher designed and constructed the Mental Computation Test (MCT) to determine 

whether there were significant changes in preservice teachers ’ mental co mputation performance. 

A pilot study was conducted in the previous semester. After the piloting of the instrument, we 

identified weaknesses in the structure of the MCT and revised the test. The MCT included 69 

problems in relation to whole numbers, integer s, and rational numbers (i.e. fractions, decimals, 

and percents). The MCT was administered using PowerPoint slides. The questions were 

displayed one at a time on PPT slides for about 30 seconds. Each item of the MCT was assigned 

one point for a correct an swer and no point for an incorrect answer or no response. The reliability 

of the MCT items was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha coefficient (α = 0.96). Three 

mathematics educators ascertained the content validity of the test. 

The researcher designed the Mathematics Attitudes Survey (MAS). The content and face validity 

of MAS was reviewed by three mathematics educators and pilot tested. The necessary items for 

each operation were modified, deleted or added. Descriptive statistics were utilized to analyze 

the results. The Likert -type scale consisted of 30 items and clustered by the following two 

categories: preservice teachers’ perception about mental and written computation (16) and PTS’ 

perception of instruction between written and mental computation (14) . Two types of statements 

were included in a parallel way – each statement was accompanied by a parallel statement. 

Cronbach’s alpha test was calculated to check the internal consistency reliability (30 items:  α=

0.83). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 452 

Procedure for Intervention 

For the first session, the pre -MCT and pre -MAS were administrated. The researcher carried out 

the intervention sessions (i.e., 11 sessions over 8 weeks) for the whole numbers, integers, and 

rational numbers during the semester. As for the first session, the parti cipants completed pre -

MAS. After that, in the two experimental groups, the MC strategies that were more focused on 

conceptual understanding were respectively implemented using the following two instructional 

methods: the direct teaching and the open approa ch. As for the direct teaching, the researcher 

introduced and demonstrated several MC strategies in the lessons using more flexible deductive 

strategies such as compensation (e.g., 20 × 199 = 20 × (200 – 1) = 20 × 200 – 20 × 1 = 4,000 –

20 = 3,980), dividi ng using factors (e.g., 70 ÷ 14 = (70 ÷ 7) ÷ 2 = 5), number facts (e.g., 9% × 450 

= 10% of 450 – 1% of 450 = 45 – 4.5 = 40.5), and so on. For the open approach group, an open -

ended problem was first presented progressing from easy to more complicated. The participants 

were asked to find solutions in many ways using their own natural thinking abilities. Then, selected 

PTs shared or explained how they solved their problems on the board for the whole class to see. 

Then we discussed what solutions were the most appropriate for a given problem. No intervention 

is provided for the control group. In the last session, preservice teachers were given both post -

MCT and post -MAS. 

Analyzing Data 

To examine differences in mental computation performance between the three groups before and 

after instruction , and to examine a marked difference for each operation with different groups, a 

one -way ANOVA was conducted to determine whether there was a significant difference in the 

mean pre -MCT scores. An Analysis of Covari ance (ANCOVA) was conducted on post -MCT 

performance, with the type of instruction (i.e. direct teaching, open approach, and Control) and 

pre -MCT scores as covariates to control for pre -MCT score differences among the groups. 

Descriptive and inferential sta tistics were used to analyze the results of the Mathematics Attitude 

Survey (MAS). 

Findings 

Differences Between Pre -and Post -Mental Computation Test Performance 

With respect to inferential statistics, a one -way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted 

for this study. Levene’s test and normality checks were carried out and the assumptions of 

normality and homogeneity of variance were met. The result of the Lev ene’s test showed the 

variances are not unequal, F (2, 38) = 0.207, p = 0.814. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 453 

Table 1 

Overall descriptive statistics comparison between experimental groups and the control group on 

the pre -and post -mental computation test. 

TEST  Direct Teaching  Open Approach  Control 

N M SD  N M SD  N M SD 

Pre -MCT  14  27.86  14.57  16  32.38  16.05  20  35.80  14.21 

Post -MCT  11  40.08  14.00  15  44.60  18.82  14  34.21  14.44 

Improvement  11  9.50  5.58  15  11.87  6.85  14  -3.27  7.62 

Table 2 summarizes the one -way ANCOVA result for the post -MCT by instructional condition and 

pre -MCT scores. There was a statistically significant difference F (2, 37) = 17.52, p < .05, at the 

.05 level, in post -MCT scores between the different instruction al groups, when adjusted for pre -

MCT scores. Accordingly, both the observed and adjusted means showed that although the open 

approach group performed better than the direct teaching group, the means of both groups have 

increased with a similar amount (i.e. , M= 9.5 vs M= 11.87) since the PTs in the open approach 

group started off higher. The PTs in the control group performed the worst. 

Table 2 

ANCOVA results and descriptive statistics for post -MCT. 

Type of 

Groups  Mathematics Scores 

Observed 

Mean 

Adjusted 

Mean  SD  n

Direct 

Teaching  40.08  42.79  14.00  12 

Open 

Approach  44.60  45.29  18.81  15 

Control  34.21  31.16  13.50  14 

Source  SS  df  MS  F

Pre -MCT  7825.58  1 7825.58  174.50* 

Instruction  1570.92  2 785.46  17.52* 

Error  1659.29  37  44.85   

> Note. R 2= .84, Adj. R 2= .83, adjustments based on Pre -MCT mean = 39.75. Homogeneity of regression tested and
> not significant: F = 1.40, p>.05. Pre -MCT regression coefficient = 0.88*. * p < .05

As indicated by Table 3, multiple comparisons showed that th ere was a significant difference 

between the direct teaching and control groups (p < 0.05) and the open approach and control (p 

< 0.05) groups. However, these two groups did not significantly differ on their post -MCT scores. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 454 

Table 3 

Multiple comparisons and mean differences in post -MCT scores by instruction type controlling for 

pre -MCT scores. 

Comparison  Mean 

Difference 

Standard Error of 

Difference 

Bonferroni Adjusted 

(95% CI) 

Direct teaching vs. 

Open approach 

-2.49  2.60  -9.01, 4.02 

Direct teaching vs. 

control 

11.64*  2.67  4.94, 18.33 

Open approach 

vs. control 

14.13*  2.51  7.85, 20.41  

> Note . Comparisons based upon ANCOVA adjusted means controlling for Pre -MCT mean scores of 39.75. * p <.05,
> where p -values are adjusted using the Bonferroni method.

Operations that Showed a Marked Difference 

Table 4 summarizes the comparison of three different groups with different instructions for each 

operation between pre -and post -MCT scores. There were significant differences between pre -

and post -MCT performance among the three groups in solving multiplication, fraction, and 

decimal operations. More specifically, the one -way ANCOVA for mental multiplication 

performance was significant, F (2, 23) = 8.48, p = .002,  ηp2 = 0.43. The effect size ( ηp2) = 0.43 is 

quite large. The pairwise comparisons indicated that there was a significant difference between 

the open approach and control groups (p = 0.006). Additionally, the ANCOVA for decimals, F (2, 

26) = 5.88, p = .008,  ηp2 = 0.31 showed a significant result and large effect size. The pairwise 

comparisons showed that there were significant differences between the direct teaching and 

control groups (p = 0.026) and between the open approach and control groups (p = 0.023). A 

significant difference between the experimental groups was not present for the pairwise 

comparisons. 

Table 4 

Comparison of type of instruction for the operation between pre -and post -MCT scores.                        

> Operation #of
> item
> Test
> (%)
> Direct Teaching Open Approach Control Fηp2p
> MSD MSD MSD
> Subtractions 5Pre 61.60 29.59 65.20 20.07 76.00 12.94 2.57 .32 .235

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 455                                                                                            

> Post 80.00 19.22 73.40 8.17 65.60 26.71
> Multiplications 9Pre 15.00 19.40 18.78 21.27 23.89 21.33 8.48
> *
> .43 .002
> Post 38.89 25.97 39.33 17.44 22.11 13.68
> Integers 2Pre 36.00 9.90 56.50 9.19 42.50 10.61 .80 .44 .556
> Post 45.50 17.68 63.00 14.14 46.50 14.85
> Fractions 8Pre 28.63 14.43 45.50 20.07 41.88 15.80 4.66
> *
> .32 .022
> Post 46.75 17.38 65.75 14.00 39.25 19.03
> Decimals 10 Pre 48.00 23.36 56.30 25.11 57.00 19.18 5.88
> *
> .31 .008
> Post 67.50 18.63 76.80 13.05 52.90 22.42
> Percents 6Pre 26.00 24.62 28.33 32.10 35.00 28.28 .98 .40 .401
> Post 32.00 27.66 45.50 20.71 32.00 24.24
> Note .ηp2= Partial Eta -Squared. * p < .05

Mean Changes in Attitudes towards Mental and Written Computations 

Changes in the mean score of attitudes can be examined visually as indicated by Table 5. As for 

the pre -MAS, the minimum score was 71, with a maximum score of 129, out of a possible 150, 

indicating a rather wide range of attitudes at the beginning of the c ourse. The mean pre -MAS 

score was 103.24 (SD =10.11). On the post -MAS, the minimum score was 70 and the maximum 

score was 115, indicating a narrower range of attitudes at the end of the course. The mean score 

for the post -MAS was 104.85 (SD = 9.29). Althou gh the total standard deviation between mental 

and computation showed not much difference, the difference towards written computation 

between pre -and post -MAS showed a wide range of scores on attitudes. It could be interpreted 

that preservice teachers’ att itudes towards written computations were changed. 

Table 5 

Descriptive Data for Differences towards Mental and Written Computations. 

Minimum 

Raw Score 

Maximum 

Raw Score 

Mean*  Standard* 

Deviation 

N

Pre -MAS  Total  71  129  103.24  10.11  30 

Mental  32  71  54.78  6.84 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 456 

Written  32  60  48.46  5.44 

Post -MAS  Total  70  115  104.85  9.29  27 

Mental  33  74  58.70  8.70 

Written  20  56  46.15  9.17 

> Note. MAS: Mathematics Attitudinal Survey, * Rounded to nearest hundredth

Tables 6 and 7 show the mean score changes of the two experimental groups. The positive 

changes are mostly related to written computation. The greatest positive mean change between 

pre and post was 0.44: “I believe WC is more useful in real life situations.” This was followed with: 

“I have spent more time in school doing written computation than mental computation.” (Mean 

Changes (MC) = 0.40); and “I am confident with learning and teaching written computation (MC 

= 0.39). The negative changes were mostly connected to the mental computa tion. There were 

two negative changes that were greater than 0.25. First, “I believe MC is more useful in real life 

situations” decreased with a mean change of 0.34 between the pre and post surveys. Second, 

with a negative mean change of 0.33 was: “Mental computation should be taught during the school 

years.” 

Table 6 

Mean Changes in belief towards Mental and Written Computations. 

Pre -MAS  Post -MAS  Mean 

Change 

N Mea 

n

SD  N Mea 

n

SD 

1. I have learned WC strategies during my 

school years. 

3

0

3.93  0.7 

4

2

7

3.93  0.92  -0.01 

2. I have learned MC strategies during my 

school years. 

3

0

3.50  0.8 

6

2

7

3.41  1.05  -0.09 

3. I have spent more time in school doing 

WC than MC. 

3

0

3.90  0.9 

6

2

7

4.30  0.78  0.40 

4. I have spent more time in school doing 

MC than WC. 

3

0

2.13  0.9 

0

2

7

2.15  0.82  0.31 

5. I feel comfortable and safe when using 

WC. 

3

0

3.83  1.1 

2

2

7

4.15  0.86  0.31 

6. I feel comfortable and safe when using 

MC. 

3

0

2.77  0.9 

7

2

7

2.74  0.98  -0.03 

7. I am confident with learning and 

teaching WC. 

3

0

3.87  0.9 

4

2

7

4.26  0.71  0.39 

8. I am confident with learning and 

teaching MC. 

3

0

2.87  1.0 

4

2

7

3.04  1.13  0.17 

*9. I have used WC more than MC.  3

0

4.03  0.8 

9

2

7

4.33  0.78  0.30 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 457 

10. I have used MC more than WC.  3

0

2.07  0.7 

8

2

7

2.11  0.97  0.04 

11. I believe WC is more useful in real life 

situations. 

3

0

2.93  0.9 

1

2

7

3.37  1.11  0.44 

12. I believe MC is more useful in real life 

situations. 

3

0

3.57  0.8 

2

2

7

3.22  0.89  -0.34 

13. WC should be taught during the 

school years. 

3

0

4.10  0.7 

1

2

7

4.26  0.71  0.16 

14. MC should be taught during the 

school years. 

3

0

4.03  0.7 

2

2

7

3.70  1.10  -0.33 

15. WC is easy to learn and solves 

problem quickly. 

3

0

3.73  0.8 

7

2

7

3.93  0.73  0.19 

16. MC is easy to learn and solves 

problems quickly. 

3

0

3.30  0.7 

9

2

7

3.15  1.20  -0.15 

> Note. WC: Written Computation; MC: Mental Computation

There were also negative and positive changes between the pre - and post - surveys on instruction 

in mental and written computations as shown in Table 7. The positive changes were mostly found 

in written computation: “Written computation should be introduced first when teaching 

mathematics” (MC = 0.34). There were also positive increases indicating that “I think I will use 

WC more when I teach students (MC = 0.32)”. Also, survey results showed that “students who 

are highly skilled in WC develop problem -solving skills (MC = 0.25).” The surveys’ negative 

changes most ly related to the MC. The greatest negative change in means between pre and post 

was - 0.21: “Students can be successful mathematics learners by teaching only MC.” This was 

followed with: “I think I will use MC more when I teach students” (MC = -0.11) and “Mental 

computation should be introduced first when teaching mathematics” (MC = -0.10). 

Table 7 

Mean Changes in Instruction towards Mental and Written Computation. 

Pre -MAS  Post -MAS  Mean 

Change N Mean  SD  N Mean  SD 

17. I think I will use WC more when I teach 

students. 

30  3.53  0.82  27  3.85  0.91  0.32 

18. I think I will use MC more when I teach 

students. 

30  2.97  0.85  27  2.85  1.06  -0.11 

*19. Students can be successful 

mathematics learners by teaching only 

WC. 

30  2.48  0.78  27  2.70  1.10  0.22 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 458 

20. Students can be successful 

mathematics learners by teaching only 

MC. 

30  2.43  0.73  27  2.22  0.75  -0.21 

21. WC should be introduced first when 

teaching mathematics. 

30  3.73  0.91  27  4.07  0.87  0.34 

22. MC should be introduced first when 

teaching mathematics. 

30  2.80  1.00  27  2.70  1.17  -0.10 

*23. Teaching WC can build students’ 

mathematical procedural knowledge and 

understanding. 

30  4.00  0.53  27  4.22  0.42  0.22 

24. Teaching MC can build students’ 

mathematics procedural knowledge and 

understanding. 

30  3.70  0.84  27  3.70  0.91  0.00 

25. WC should be taught to learn 

advanced mathematics. 

30  3.73  0.83  27  3.96  0.90  0.23 

26. MC should be taught to learn advanced 

mathematics. 

30  3.40  0.89  27  3.33  1.00  -0.07 

27. Students can develop their natural 

thinking ability through learning WC. 

30  3.73  0.74  27  3.81  0.74  0.08 

28. Students can develop their natural 

thinking ability through learning MC. 

30  3.83  0.59  27  3.78  0.89  -0.06 

29. Students who are highly skilled in WC 

develop problem solving skills. 

30  3.60  0.77  27  3.85  0.77  0.25 

30. Students who are highly skilled in MC 

develop problem solving skills. 

30  3.60  0.77  27  3.74  0.66  0.14  

> Note. WC: Written Computation; MC: Mental Computation

Research Limitations and Implications 

The major findings of this study as explicit partial answers to the three research questions are 

briefly summarized as follows. When examining preservice teachers’ differences in mental 

computation performance between the experimental groups and the contro l group, experimental 

groups (i.e., open approach and direct teaching) performed better than the control group. The 

level of improvement in the post -MCT scores of the direct and open approach groups was not 

significantly different. When comparing the perfo rmance of experimental groups, the open 

approach group performed better than the direct teaching group. However, this study found that 

direct teaching instruction involving students’ conceptual understanding may be equally effective 

in improving preservice teachers’ performance of MCT as the open approach. 

There were significant differences between pre -and post -MCT performance among the three 

groups in computing whole number multiplication, operations with fractions, and decimal 

operations (See Table 4). Specifically, studies found that learning fractions and decimals are 

difficult for students to master (Bailey et al., 2012; Hiebert and Wearne, 1985; Lortie -Forgues el Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 459 

al., 2015; Siegler et al., 2011). It is important results because mental computation us ing direct 

teaching or open approach can build students’ ability to compute fraction and decimal operations. 

As for the mean changes in preservice teachers’ beliefs towards mental and written computation, 

there were negative and positive changes. The posi tive changes mostly related to written 

computation, while the negative changes were mostly connected to mental computation. Similar 

results of the pre -and post -MAS on instruction regarding mental and written computation were 

found. The positive changes wer e mostly related to written computation, while negative changes 

were mostly connected to mental computation. Interestingly, this study revealed that before the 

intervention, participants were well -aware of the importance of learning mental computation and 

they believe that both written and mental computations should be taught during the school years; 

however, after intervention, the levels of beliefs towards learning mental computation was 

decreased and participants put more emphasis on using written comput ation. This may be due to 

their lack of mental computation skills, so this leads to relying more heavily on written computation 

because it is still more familiar to them. 

Five implications for future study are as follows. First, more empirical stud ies comparing the effect 

of direct teaching and open approach instructions are needed. Several studies (Becker and 

Epstein, 2007; Kwon et al., 2006; Lin et al., 2013) found that open approach instruction results in 

significant learning gains in comparison to traditional instruction; however, for this study, the 

results of the open approach group performance did not show any significant increases in MCT 

performance compared to the direct teaching group. This is an interesting finding because during 

the inter vention, the researcher observed PTs’ active participation and a variety of solution 

methods that cultivate students’ flexibility and creativity. A possible explanation for these results 

may be the lack of adequate time and test anxiety. 

Second, Kirschner et al. (2006) assert that direct instruction is needed for low -achieving student s

and unguided instruction (i.e., open approach) is effective for more able learners. The findings of 

this study would be different if the researchers conducted this study bas ed on students’ different 

levels of achievements. Further studies, which take these variables into account, need to be 

undertaken. 

Third, it will be necessary for researchers to conduct power analyses to determine minimum 

sample sizes for studies. Three o perations that indicated non -significant results (See Table 4) 

showed larger effect size (i.e., subtraction ( ηp2 = 0.32), integers ( ηp2 = 0.44), and percents ( ηp2 

= 0.40)) although non -significant results were shown. Thus, it could be interpreted that non -

significant results may be due to lack of power rather than lack of effect. 

Fourth, the findings of this study confirmed that preservice teachers were more likely to use written 

computation than mental computation when solving mathematics problems and reve aled that they 

did not predict their success of future mental computation teaching due to a lack of mental 

computation knowledge and confidence. To have students consistently practice mental 

computation in their K -12 mathematics classrooms or to use mental computation skills in their 

real -life situation, it is imperative for mathematics educators and other mathematics stakeholders Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 460 

to include mental computation in the U.S. K-12 mathematics curriculum, specifically, the 

mathematical content standards. 

Last, mental computation is currently used in every culture by students (e.g., Reys et al., 1995, 

Yang and Huang, 2014), but few studies comparing preservice teachers’ attitudes and beliefs on 

mental computation have been done across cultures. Therefore, a cros s-cultural study of mental 

computation knowledge employed by the preservice teachers would be a productive implication 

for further study. 

Limitations and Recommendations 

The current research has several limitations. First, this study used a quasi -experimental, 

nonequivalent control group design. It is difficult to generalize the findings of the study because 

of the small sample size and a convenience sampling. Second, it is difficult to control for threats 

to internal and external validity of the study. Only 50 PTs in the pre -MCT and 40 PTs in the post -

MCT participated in this study. Mortality or attrition is one of the potential threats to the internal 

validity of the study. Treatment diffusion (i.e. different treatment groups communicate wit h and 

learn from each other) is one of the potential threats to the external validity of the study. Third, 

only eleven intervention sessions were provided including test sessions and those were not 

enough time to practice mental computation strategies usin g multiple solution methods. Lastly, 

the validity of instruments such as pre -and post - MAS may not represent the actual construct 

because the researcher created the instrument. The evidence of instrumental validity was not 

thoroughly examined except for th e content validity examined by three mathematics experts. 

Originality/Value of the Paper 

There is a lack of research comparing how these two alternative instructional approaches (i.e., 

direct teaching vs. open approach) impact the ability of preservice t eachers’ mental computation 

learning of whole numbers, integers, and rational number. Thus, this study aims to contribute to 

the existing body of research that provides useful insights for mathematics educators on how to 

effectively apply instructional app roaches to them to be able to do mental computations and to 

identity students’ in -depth insights on attitudes towards mental and written computations. Also, 

preservice teachers’ mathematics attitudes and beliefs towards written and mental computations 

have not been adequately studied and reported. Thus, this study may help mathematics 

educators in this regard. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 461 

Conclusion 

To succeed in learning and in teaching mental computation to students, it is important for 

preservice teachers to be prepared to teac h effectively prior to classroom teaching. Teachers’ 

beliefs in mathematics teaching and learning may play a vital role in students’ understanding of 

mental computation . The findings of this research will contribute to the research base that is 

related to preservice teachers’ knowledge of mental computation. In other words, if the mental 

computation is an ability student should develop and improve, it should be analyzed what 

classroom instruction works best to encourage preservice teachers’ mental computati on ability. 

Viewing mental computation as higher -order thinking requires preservice teachers to learn their 

instructional techniques. Also, mathematics educators in preservice, inservice, and professional 

developmental programs may apply mental computation s that work best for different learners. 

Finally, the findings of this study may provide useful information to mathematics teacher educators 

and educational policy makers, which may enhance existing teacher preparation programs and 

preservice teachers’ att itudes toward mathematics teaching and learning. Therefore, this 

research help math educators ensure that by 2030, all girls and boys complete free, equitable, 

and quality primary and secondary education leading to relevant and effective learning outcomes ,

as indicated in Sustainable Development Goal 4 (SDG 4), Target 4.1. 

References 

Bailey, D. H., Hoard, M. K., Nugent, L., and Geary, D. C. (2012). “Competence with fractions 

predicts gains in mathematics achievement”, Journal of Experimental Child Psych ology, 

Vol.113, pp. 447 – 455. 

Becker, J. P. and Epstein, J. (2007). “The 'Open Approach' to Teaching School Mathematics”, 

Journal of the Korea Society of Mathematical Education Series D , Vol.10 No. 3, pp. 151 -

167. 

Becker, J. P. and Shimada, S. (1997) . The Open -Ended Approach: A New Proposal for 

Teaching Mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Hartnett, J. E. (2007). “Categorisation of mental computation strategies to support teaching and 

to encourage classroom dialogue ”, In Watson, Jane and Beswick, Kim, Eds. 

Proceedings 30th annual conference of the Mathematics Education Research Group of 

Australasia -Mathematics: Essential Research, Essential Practice, Hobart, Tasmania, pp. 

345 -352. 

Hiebert, J. and Wearne, D. (1985). “A model of students' decimal computation procedures”, 

Cognition and Instruction , Vol. 2 No.3 -4, pp. 175 -205. 

Jong, C. and Hodges, T. E. (2015). Assessing Attitudes toward Mathematics across Teacher 

Education Contexts. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education , Vol.18 No. 5, pp. 407 -

425. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 462 

Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J., and Clark, R.E. (2006). “Why minimal guidance during instruction 

does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist discovery, problem -based, 

experiential, and inquiry -based teaching”, Educational Psychologist , Vol. 41 No. 2, pp. 

75 -86. 

Kwon, O, Park, J, and Park, J. (2006). “Cultivating divergent thinking in mathematics through an 

open -ended approach”, Asia Pacific Education Review , Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 51 –61. 

Lin, C. Y., Becker, J., Ko, Y. Y., and Byun, M. R. (2013). “Enhancing pre -servi ce teachers’ 

fraction knowledge through open approach instruction”, Journal of Mathematical 

Behavior , Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 309 -330. 

Lortie -Forgues, H., Tian, J., and Siegler, R. S. (2015). “Review: Why is learning fraction and 

decimal arithmetic so diffi cult? Developmental Review , Vol. 38, pp. 201 -221. 

McIntosh, A., Nohda, N., Reys, B. J., and Reys, R. E. (1995). “Mental computation performance 

in Australia, Japan and the United States”, Educational Studies in Mathematics , Vol 29 

No. 3, pp. 237 -258. 

Reys, R., Reys, B., Nohda, N., and Emori, H. (1995). “Mental computation performance and 

strategy use of Japanese students in grades 2, 4, 6, and 8”, Journal for Research in 

Mathematics Education , Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 304 -326. 

Siegler, R. S., Thompson, C. A., and Schneider, M. (2011). An integrated theory of whole 

number and fractions development. Cognitive Psychology , Vol. 62, pp. 273 –296. 

Varol, F. and Farran, D. (2007). Elementary school students’ mental computation 

proficiencies. Early Childhood Ed ucation Journal , Vol 35 No 1, pp. 89 -94. 

Yang, D. and Huang, K. (2014). An Intervention study on mental computation for second 

graders in Taiwan. Journal of Educational Research , Vol. 107 No 1, pp.3 -15. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 463 

# The First Phase of Development of Health Learning 

# Package by Applying Technology -Based 

# with Autonomous Learning Approach to Enhance 

# Covid -19 Literacy and Health Behaviors as Lifelong Learning Skills 

Rungrawee Samawathdana (Chulalongkorn University, Thailand) 

Abstract 

This paper demonstrated the first phase of Development of Health Learning Package by Applying 

Technology -Based with Autonomous Learning Approach to Enhance Covid -19 Literacy and 

Health Behaviors as Lifelong Learning Skills. Qualitative method was organized. Guideline 

questions for semi -structured interview as a research instrument were developed using content 

validate to constructed component of the Health Learning Package (HeL -pack). This paper 

presented the finding in part of the component including (1) the stated concept of Covid -19 

literacy, (2) the manual for HeL -Pack including guidelines to practice autonomous learning, 

application of using technology, (3) pre -test for Health literacy (HL) and Health beh avior (HB), (4) 

learning activities, (5) learning materials and (6) post - test for HL and HB. 

Keywords: Health Learning Package; Health literacy; Health behavior; technological and 

autonomous learning approaches 

Purpose and the Background 

A huge number of COVID -19 cases have been increasingly surging due to the lack of efficient 

preventable or curable means. The lancet (2020) states that “there is numerous information 

toward covid -19, but there is also complex, contradictory, and false information.” To contain this 

deadly disease, health literacy (HL) and health behavior (HB) toward covid -19 must be seriously 

educated to people.  Consequently, effective educational approaches are needed to counteract 

the damaging effects of the infodemic, a massive amount of widely and rapidly circulating 

information about during COVID -19 crisis. This is as well as to increase empathy towards 

population groups at risk of stigmatization. To solve the problems, not only should public health 

or the social measures have respon sibilities to slow or stop the spread of COVID -19 but health 

educators must also attentively cooperate on this globally catastrophic challenge. Producing 

learning pathway to educated young people is one of the best ways to prevent Coronavirus 

disease (COV ID -19), a communicable disease caused by the SARS -CoV -2 virus. 

According to World Health Organization (2022) namely WHO states that the best way to prevent 

and slow down transmission is to be well informed about the disease and how the virus spreads. 

Pro tect yourself and others from infection should be concerned. Consider from the WHO weekly 

report during the end of March 2022, the number of new cases dropped again with a 14% 

decrease as compared to the middle of March. Many countries expect to declare t he disease Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 464 

endemic, like many European countries, to promote tourism and economic recovery. However, 

the number of new weekly deaths has grown by 43%, this COVID -19 still called “Deadly Disease”. 

That means the individual prevention should be educated an d introduce for people to live with 

COVID -19 in our “Sustaining the Next Normal Living”. 

The purpose of this paper aimed to demonstrate the first phase of the development of Health 

Learning Package using Technology -based with Autonomous Learning Approac h to enhance 

Covid -19 Literacy and health behaviors (HB) as lifelong learning skills (LLS) for year three 

undergraduate students studying in Health and Physical Education. The four -year preservice 

teacher education program in Thailand is required student t o internship as a teacher training in a 

primary, secondary, or a high school for a semester (about 20 weeks or five month) by the 

Teachers Council. This Health Learning Package (HeL -pack) could benefit the Health Education 

Preservice Teachers to develop C ovid -19 Literacy and HB as well as LLS. It is very important for 

Health education teacher to have those skills especially, the preservice teachers who would teach 

their students at school during their internship. 

This HeL -pack is an innovative health edu cation learning package that developing by applying 

technological and autonomous learning approaches. Technological learning is one of our new 

21st century skills. Learners should be trained to use multimedia and digital tools (Scott & Cynthia, 

2015; Facer , 2011; Facer & Sandford, 2010; Stehle and Peters -Burton, 2019). Moreover, the 

autonomous learning approach is the concept for lifelong learning and is not only using online 

skills but also onsite skills that could be practical. The main characteristics of autonomous learning 

are self -reports, diaries, evaluation sheets and persuasive communications as a means of altering 

learners’ beliefs and attitudes (Benson ,2013). Those characteristics are needed to be practiced 

and trained before and during the proces s of learning with the teacher as a facilitator. This way 

students will not be isolated and must learn by themselves. The two approaches will be integrated 

to become new learning and teaching methods for the future educational system. These 

characteristics will promote learners as producers instead of transformers. According to Scott, 

Cynthia (2015), the new generation of digital tools is allowing students to become generators of 

content instead of passive consumers of knowledge, indicating a preference for active 

approaches to learning. The treatment will be developed as a smart learning package using 

research -based information. This HeL -pack also provides students to develop HL and LLS. 

According to  Health People (2020); Chanuantong (2021). Hanemann & Rob inson (2022) LLS 

extend the foundation for learning and working as the skills support  students  thinking, self -

management, and social interaction, empowering the pursuit of education and vocation goals. 

Lifelong learning needs not only literacy but also hea lth literacy (HL) because people’s wellbeing 

depending on being healthy and being healthy needs HL to access qualified health care 

information. The benefit of HeL -pack is a tool of learning that responsible consumption, and 

production (SDG 12 target 12.8) as all students and people can access health care information 

from at anytime and anywhere. It is also can promote lifelong learning prospects for all in the 

sustainable development goal 4 (SDG4). HeL -pack also helps them develop their awareness into 

healt h behaviors as well as students could apply HL for updating new information all the time of 

the ages. Therefore, this study can be considered as a Lifelong learning, sustainable 

development, and lifestyles in harmony with nature living. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 465 

Approach 

Hea lth education learning package (HeL -pack) is an innovative tool that integrates between 

technological and autonomous learning approaches. The two approaches can be applied as a 

new learning and teaching methods for the future educational system. These char acteristics can 

promote lifelong learners as producers instead of transformers. According to Frey (2007); and 

Scott, Cynthia (2015), the new generation of digital tools is allowing learners to become 

generators of content instead of passive consumers of kn owledge, indicating a preference for 

active approaches to learning. The treatment will be developed as a smart learning package using 

Technology and Autonomous learning approaches. The study aims to develop a learning package 

called HeL -Pack to enhance HL based on Covid -19 and HB. 

Learning Package 

Quebec Ministry of Education (2022) states that preschool, elementary and secondary education, 

teaching and learning must correspond to basic materials, which include teaching and learning 

task as well as learni ng packages. Learning package could be use as teaching material in 

classrooms or can be adapted as self -learning packages or Home -based learning material, 

depending on teacher designing and set the purpose of the lesson. The definition of learning 

package shall be analyzed from as a set of learning and teaching instrument to enhance learning 

ability which can be the course(s) and study programs and or related materials for learner support, 

tuition. (Ekapote, Usa, and Vijittra, 2021; Quebec Ministry of Educ ation, 2022) The component of 

a learning package consists of learning tools, including a printed textbook (content), students and 

a printed or electronic teacher’s guide, and evaluation activities. It may also include other 

electronic elements as learning and instruction VDO clips. The learning package is designed 

particularly for teaching and learning, and is considered a support, facilitation, and reference 

means. It intends to develop students’ social perspectives and promote community values. It 

should promote learning experiences and present suggestions for developing cross -curricular 

competencies. The textbook and the teacher’s guide should cover the complete program including 

learning outcome, content, learning activities, and assessment for a subject , or several subjects 

in the case of cross -curricular learning (Cassarino, 2003; Quebec Ministry of Education, 2022). 

The development of learning packages considers learners’ needs and wants to design learning 

tasks, activities, and assessment that relate to the learning objectives as well as consider the 

cognitive processing of information among others (Cassarino, 2003). Additionally, to support 

learning, the development of the packages require that must be a shift from content -transfer to 

allows learners to reflect on their learning as well as to allows them to cooperate with each other 

(Singh et al, 2009; UNESCO, 2020). The recruiting criteria a learning package should be 

considered to ensuring the effectiveness for learners. Ministry of Education Quebec, 2022 

suggests that the effective learning packages should; 1) be able to solve the learner’s problem, 

2) be directed to the solution of a health problem of major importance for the people, 3) make 

good a deficiency in the existing teaching system or in ex isting educational tools 4) not needlessly 

be superimposed on another package dealing with the same problem, 5) allow for the possibility 

of prompt updating when required, and 6)be more effective and economical than any other 

educational tool serving the s ame purpose. Moreover, the evaluation criteria of the leaning Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 466 

package concerns with pedagogical aspects. The teaching and learning materials should be 

coherent with the requirements of the objective of the learning outcomes, learning process, and 

evaluati on. Consequently, a learning package should include guidelines, application or media 

device, pre -test, learning process, learning materials and post - test 

Technology -Learning approach can be used for managing learning process anywhere and at any 

time. This approach is very suitable in this Covid -19 spreading as can manage the leaning online 

from home. In addition, and mainly due to the learning curves introd uced by technological skills 

development as sustainable learning tools. This can be considered as the advantages for 

teachers to promote learning to learn and learning how to use as well as practicing how to apply 

technology as the means of learning to lea rners to skillful for future skills. The Technology -

Learning approach is included online learning, blended learning, flipped learning, hybrid learning, 

flexible learning, open learning, and distance education. These terms are often applied 

correspondently, but there may considerably differences in sense or key term of concept. For this 

study, the term “Technology -Learning approach” is defined as flexible learning as the Health 

Learning Package (HeL -Pack) developing for teacher to use as media while teaching in both 

onsite and online class as well as this HeL -pack can be used for flipped class or learner self -

learning package. Additional significantly, these styles of learning media, can be considered to 

some extent and increasingly getting on superior impact and in some situations develop into 

mainstream themselves. As teachers grow into more familiar, frequently use with more confident 

as well as have better skills for online teaching and learning new technologies, these will bring 

more innovative instructio nal methods developing far and wild al all the time. Surrounded by the 

educational field, teachers are adopting, learning, and integrating new technological tools and 

utilizing them within their teaching practice to promote their learners to meet learning goals. 

Technology Learning approach focused on creating curricula and materials more extensively 

available using technology, as posting class materials online via many pathways such as 

YouTube, Line, Zoom, Google classroom, Blackboard, and more. However, l earner must be 

trained, prepared with orientation to be able to use technology as tools of learning. 

Autonomous learning has been a widespread concept in education field primary used in language 

learning the past decades, and it has been considered in r elation to lifelong learning skills (Mun 

Shin Cheong, 2022). It has transformed old practices into new style of learning and applied to 

use for many contents subject learning approach. Learners currently need to use three main types 

of autonomous learning skills: 1) general learning or study skills, such as researching, making 

choices and decisions about one's learning; 2) language learning skills or abilities for different 

focuses, such as independent writing and revision skills, extensive reading; and 3) technology 

user skills , such as computer literacy skills, database management skills, website development 

skills, digital literacy skills, project management skills, and media literacy skills. Holec (1981) 

suggested autonomous learning means that the abi lity to be responsible for their own learning, 

by determining learning objectives and learning content, selecting learning methods, self -

observing and self -assessing learning outcomes. In addition, Education Endowment Foundation, 

(2018) encourages teachers to develop their pupils' understanding of themselves as learners 

through awareness of their strengths and areas for development. As mentioned previously 

reflective practice supports the learners in identifying their future learning goals. Research Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 467 

perspe ctive also constructed the learning strategies as Roque, et al., (2020) examined the 

learning of future health professionals is fundamental to the training of competent professionals. 

In this study, it was aimed to clarify the correlation between academic objectives and learning 

strategies in learners registered from the first to the sixth semester in seven areas of the Faculty 

of Health Sciences of the National University of Chimborazo. A correlational design was used to 

investigate via questionnaires for evaluation of academic outcome and strategies for autonomous 

learning strategies were employed. The findings indicated that the types of academic objectives 

and autonomous learning strategies had a homogeneous form in most of the seven specialties 

studied. The correlation between autonomous work strategies and the types of academic outcome 

of the learners in the sample was largely low or non -existent and direct. This study demonstrated 

that autonomous learning can be applied in health education or health sc ience and in any other 

field, and the finding also suggested that to promote autonomous learning instructors or teachers 

need to be concerned with preparing student to learn how to learn when becoming an autonomous 

learning. This learning approach is very important for future skills of learning as a lifelong learner 

(McLoughlin and Lee, 2010). Especially in this Covid -19 situation, the online learning make 

learner to be self -directed person. To improve learners to assume superior self -control over their 

own learning it is critical to support them to become aware of and recognize the approaches that 

they already employ or could potentially use (James and Garrett, 1991). At any rate, particular 

learners differ in their learning patterns, interests, requirement s, and motivation, and develop 

changing levels of autonomy through their lives (Richard, 2022; McLoughlin and Lee, 2010). 

Principles of Autonomous Learning include readiness, exercise, effect, primacy, recency, 

intensity, and freedom. Readiness implies a d egree of willingness and eagerness of an individual 

to learn something new. Exercise states that those things most often repeated are best 

remembered (Omaggio, 1978). The Autonomous Learning Principles and Process should be 

concerned with be the insights i nto the learners’ learning styles and strategies; take an active 

approach to the learning task for practice; willing to take risks, i.e., to communicate in the target 

language at all costs; be good guessers; attend to pattern and also to content; develop t he target 

learning target into a separate reference system and are willing to revise and reject hypotheses 

and rules that do not apply; and have a tolerant and outgoing approach to the learning objectives. 

Moreover, Richards (2022) suggested five principle s for achieving autonomous learning: 1) active 

involvement in student learning; 2) providing options and resources; 3) offering choices and 

decision -making opportunities; 4) supporting learners; and 5) encouraging reflection. 

Candy (1991) states that aut onomous learners can be describes that “autonomous learner should 

be trained to be methodical/disciplined, logical/analytical, reflective/self -aware, motivated/curious, 

flexible, interdependent/inter -personally competent, responsible/persistent, venturesom e

/creative, creative/have positive self - concept, independent/self -sufficient, skilled in seeking/ 

retrieving information, knowledgeable about/ skilled in learning, able to develop/ use evaluation 

criteria, Technology can play a big role in increasing the effectiveness of autonomous learning, 

especially in connecting, collaborating, and constructing learning” 

Covid -19 Literacy and Health Behaviors, this study focused on Health literacy and Health 

Behavior toward Covid -19. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 468 

Covid -19 disease has increas ed the quantity of health information existing on online social 

network which created online information more complicated than they should be. The accurate 

information is very important for people to access and apply to understand the decease to prevent 

th emselves and their community. Therefore, health literacy needs to be promoted. 

Covid -HL Network (2021) state that “Health literacy is the ability to find, understand, appraise, 

and apply health information, is therefore more important than ever for peopl e in order to navigate 

these information environments and use health information to inform their behavior” 

Healthy People (2020) provides the new Health literacy that the ability to use health information 

rather than only understand it, ability to make “well -informed” decisions rather than “appropriate” 

ones, the ability to have responsibility to address health literacy and it should be incorporate a 

public health perspective. The primary well -known research, Nutbeam, (2000) and Schulz and 

Nakamoto (2005) suggested three component of health literacy; 1) functional health literacy 

described as basic reading and w riting skills to understand and use health information, 2) 

interactive health literacy as advanced cognitive thinking skills to recruited with health -care 

service and to interpret; and 3) apply information to changing circumstances and as critical health 

literacy as advanced cognitive skills to analyze information to apply in daily life living. 

Interestingly, Chanuantong (2021) has synthesized by saying that: 

“health literacy is still unclear. The conceptualized knowledge as the core of health literacy 

by describing health literacy as a “knowledge -based competency for health promoting 

behaviors. However, if we consider the Ottawa Charter, there is no knowledge component 

but there is a personal skill component, therefore it is possible to translate ‘kno wledge’ 

into ‘information’ in the Health Literacy Approach. This argument needs more research 

support. What is most acceptable and agreed upon among professionals who conduct 

health literacy and public health literacy is the multicomponent or contextual component 

and the health outcome component. Therefore, in measuring the success of the program 

or policy, we need to measure the number of health literate people on the positive change 

of their health status rather than the level of knowledge change” 

Consequently, Health information is key for people to be able to develop their understanding of 

health literacy toward covid -19 applying from the recommendations from international 

organization and many researchers related to health care to do to protect themselves and others. 

It is of extreme value that information creators and providers deliver information in the aspect of 

easy -to -find, easy -to -access, easy -to -understand, and easy -to -use health information. As well as 

health literacy should be concerned what the health status of the people rather than knowing 

information toward health care and prevention for wellness life. 

Health Behavior Toward Covid -19 

Health behavior is connected to heath knowledge, attitudes, and practices that simultaneously 

cont ribute to influence the actions toward health. Health behavior is very important issue as it can 

directly affecting humans’ life living with wellbeing or not. To maintain, accomplish, or improve Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 469 

better life as well as avoid disease. Health behavior refle cts the health -related attitudes of an 

individual (Hildt -Ciupińska, Pawłowska -Cyprysiak K., 2020). Health behavior can be promoted 

though health education as education aim to change learners’ behavior, knowledge, attitude, and 

practice. This study develop ed the content related to Covid -19 for the HeL -pack by applying the 

Classification of Health Care Functions which include cause and effect, symptom, prevention, 

curative care, and rehabilitation suggested by OECD/Eurostat/World Health Organization (2017). 

The learning activities in HeL -pack were also follow the suggesting designed by UNICEF Thailand 

(2020). In which teachers can apply or integrate the learning goals related to Covid -19 or can be 

able adapt the teachings and learnings about other transmitt able diseases such as the hand, foot, 

mouth disease or influenza viruses. 

Methodology 

This qualitative research was conducted using semi -structured in -depth interview from 15 

purposive samplings of 3 groups of 5 each, health educators, learners, and public health experts. 

This is a part of a research and development (R&D) study in Thailand context. This paper 

demonstrates the first part that consists of 2 steps. First, a needs analysis using Structural 

Equation Modeling (SEM) were conducted to determine what the learning package should include 

as the components. Second, the completed HeL -packwas analyzed using content analysis and 

qualified by 5 experts who have at least 10 years’ experience in teaching both theories and 

practices, examined the HeL -packincluding content validity and determine index of item objective 

congruence (IOC ≥ 0.5) 

Results 

The outcome of the study includes HeL -packKits, modules, soft/hard copies, AV materials, Test 

Protocols. The package's components are as following. 

1) The stated concept of Covid -19 literacy includes cause and effect, symptom, 

prevention, cur ative care, and rehabilitation and the content must be concerned with learners 

age, level of learning, or learners’ background knowledge or health status. 

2) the manual for HeL -Pack including guidelines to practice autonomous learning, 

application of us ing technology. Teachers or instructors must introduce how to practice 

autonomous learning by teach learner how to process and applying Autonomous Learning. 

a. Setting goals: Learners achieve by producing a list of goals to know where to start 

the learning p rocedure. 

b. Recognizing learning styles: students learn in different way, and, with autonomous 

learning, students can determine which learning style suits them best. 

c. Setting focus on improvement: Instead of focusing on grades, students underline 

learning objectives to establish success targets. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 470 

d. Support: Whether in a distance learning classroom or blended learning — with a 

mix of online and onsite instruction — learners need assistance to continue 

attentive and develop their cognitive skills. 

3) Pre -test for HL and HB 

a. The HL test consists of four mail elements; what are the finding related to 

Covid -19 information? how to access the Covid -19 information, the 

accuracy of understand toward Covid -19, and where, when, and how to 

use health informa tion toward Covid -19 

b. The HB test consists of three mail elements, which are knowledge, attitude, 

and practice. 

4) Learning activities suggests to included online learning, blended learning, flipped 

learning, which is flexible learning. Learning materials can be posted online via many ways such 

as YouTube, Line, Zoom, Google classroom, Blackboard, but learner must be trained, prepared 

with orientation to be able to use technology as tools of learning at the beginning of process. 

5) Learning materials must encourage interactions between learners and teachers, grow 

interchange and cooperation, and inspire active learning, provide feedback, emphasize time on 

task, communicate high expectation and should respect diversity of talent and learning in learners. 

Th e teaching and learning resources can be visuals aids, vdo clips, posters, flashcards, 

presentations, printed hard copy, textbooks, infographics, and application for learning via game, 

and or simulation. 

6) Post - test for HL and HB can be used the same as post -test or using  parallel  tests if the 

learning process take less than 6 weeks as the learners may still remember the preset. 

The result from experts shows that HeL -packwas qualified with IOC= 0.9 (Index of Consistency) 

and with suggestion to impleme nt in different context of learners for further studies. 

Originality/Value of the Paper 

Through the developed HeL -pack, this program could: 

1) Enhance the health literacy of participants on the different aspects of COVID19. 

2) Improve participants’ levels of health behavior - knowledge, attitudes, and practices -

towards the control and prevention of COVID -19. 

3) Promote lifelong skills in autonomous and technology -based learning approaches. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 471 

4) Strengthen capabilities of health and physical educators as program planners and 

implementors. 

5) Develop sustainability among collaborators in implementing medium and long -term 

activities in the control and prevention of COVID10. 

6) Promote cultural awareness in developing and implementing technology -ba sed health -

related initiatives among nations. 

Conclusion 

This Health Learning Package (HeL -pack) has synthesized based on Technology -Based with 

autonomous learning concept which aimed to enhancing health literacy (HL) and health behaviors 

(HB) for learne rs and people who can access to internet. The Hel -pack provides materials and 

guidelines for instructors and autonomous learners which qualified by experts in education. The 

beneficials of this pack are not only promoting HL and HB, but also lifelong lear ning skills. 

Moreover, lifelong learning has been identified as key to the success of sustainable development 

goal 4 (SDG4) and SDG 12 target 12.8, and quality education in the 2030 Agenda agreed by the 

United Nations member states since 2015. 

Reference s

Benson, P. (2013). Teaching and researching: Autonomy in language learning.  Retrieved 

October, 2021. from. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315833767 .

Betts, G. (2016, March). “The autonomous learning model for high school programming.” 

Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://www.nagc.org/sites/default/files/ALM_Insider_March2016.pdf 

Candy, P. (1991). Self -direction for lifelong learning: A comprehensive guide to theory and 

practice.  San Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass Publishers. 

Cassarino , C. (2003). “Instructional Design Principles for an eLearning Environment: Acall for 

definitions in the field.” The Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 4(4), 455 – 461. 

Retrieved March 7, 2021, from . 

https://www.proquest.com/openview/81a68ddc79678 1119d059706c5a5eee1/1?pqorig 

site=gscholar&cbl=29705 

Chanuantong T. (2021). “Knowledge and Health Literacy.” Thai Journal of Public Health, 

51(1), January -April 2021. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://www.ph.mahidol.ac.th/thjph/journal/51_1/1 -Editor ial.pdf. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 472 

COVID -HL Network (2021). Health literacy in times of COVID -19. Retrieved March 7, 2021, 

from https://covid -hl.eu/. 

Ekapote S., Usa P., and Vijittra V., (2021). “The Development of Learning Activity Package on 

Atom and Properties of Elemen ts for Mathayomsuksa 4 Based on Inquiry Cycle (5E) 

Model and Cooperative Learning.” Journal of Curriculum and Instruction Sakon Nakhon 

Rajabhat University. Volume 12 No.33 January -April 2020 p. 27 -38. Retrieved March 7, 

2021, from https://jci.snru.ac.th/Ar ticleView?ArticleID=805 

Facer, K. (2011). Learning futures: Education, Technology and Social Change. New York, 

Routledge. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://teknologipendidikankritis.files.wordpress.com/2011/11/ebooksclub -

org__learning_futures__education__technology_and_social_change.pdf 

Facer, K. and Sandford, R. (2010). “The next 25 years? Future scenarios and future 

directions for education and te chnology.” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26, pp. 

74 -93. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/229458939_The_next_25_years_Future_scena 

rios_and_future_directions_for_education_and_technology. 

Frey, T. (2007). The future of education: a study of future trends and predictions. Retrieved 

March 7, 2021, from http://www.iiz -dvv.de/index.php?article_id= 1484& clang=1 

Hanemann, U., Robinson, C. (2022). Rethinking literacy from a lifelong learning perspec tive 

in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals and the International Conference 

on Adult Education.  Int Rev Educ 68, 233 –258 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11159 -022 -

09949 -7

Healthy People (2020) . Rationale and Process for New Health Literacy Definitions. Retrieved 

March 7, 2021, from https://www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/learn/index.html 

Hildt -Ciupińska K, Pawłowska -Cyprysiak K. (2020). “Positive Health Behaviors and Their 

Determinants Among Men Active on the Labor Market in Poland.” American Journal of 

Men’s Health. January 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

doi:10.1177/1557988319899236 

https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1557988319899236 

HOLEC, H. (1981). Autonomy in Foreign Langua ge Learning.  Oxford: OUP, 1981. 

Jack C. Richards 2022. Autonomous Learner. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://www.professorjackrichards.com/autonomous -learner/ 

James, C. and Garrett, P. (eds.). Language Awareness in the Classroom.  1991: 198 -212). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 473 

Klamma, R., Cao, Y. and Spaniol , M. (2007). Watching the blogosphere: knowledge sharing 

in Web 2.0. Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media. 

Retrieved March 7, 2021 from http://www.icwsm.org/ papers/2 --Klamma -Cao -

Spaniol.pdf 

McLoughlin, C. and Lee, M.J. (2010). “Personalised and Self -Regulated Learning in the Web 

2.0 Era: International Exemplar of Innovative Pedagogy Using Social Software.” 

Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26, 28 -43. Retrieved March 7, 2021, 

from https://ajet.org.au/i ndex.php/AJET/article/view/1100/355. 

Montree Wongsaphan. (2012). “Development of Teacher’s Self Learning Package Titled 

“Students’ Thinking Skill Assessment,”. European Journal of Social Sciences. ISSN 

1450 -2267 Vol.31 No.4 (2012), pp. 472 -480. Retrieve d March 7, 2021, from 

http://www.ires.or.th/wp -content/uploads/2015/08/Development -of -Teacher.pdf. 

Mun Shin Cheong (2022). Autonomous Learning as a Sustainable Approach to Learning. 

Retrieved March 7, 2021, from https://munshing.com/education/autonomous -learning -

as -a-sustainable -approach -to -learning 

Naglaa Fathy Mahmoud. (2015). “The Effect of Self - Learning Package Versu s Lecture 

Method on Students' Intended Learning Outcomes.” World Journal of Nursing Sciences 1 

(3): 89 -99, 2015. ISSN 2222 -1352. © IDOSI Publications, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 

2021, from DOI: 10.5829/idosi.wjns.2015.89.99 http://www.idosi.org/wjns/1(3)1 5/8.pdf. 

Nawasanan, Wongprasit. (2018). “The holistic health promotion model among migrant 

workers for the prevention of emerging infectious diseases based on Public Health 

personnel perspectives in Sakeaw Province.” Journal of Boromarajonani College o f

Nursing, Surin, 8(1) p.27 -44. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from https://he01.tci -

thaijo.org/index.php/bcnsurin/article/view/166936/120493. 

Nutbeam, D. (2000) Health Literacy as a Public Health Goal: A Challenge for Contemporary 

Health Education and Communication Strategies into the 21st Century. Health Promotion 

International, 15, 259 -267. Retrieved May 17, 2021, from 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapro/15.3.259 

OECD/Eurostat/World Health Organization (2017), “Classification of Health Care Functions 

(ICHA -HC)”, in A System of Health Accounts 2011: Revised edition, OECD Publishing, 

Paris.  Retrieved March 17, 2021, from DOI: https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264270985 -7-

en 

Omaggio, A. (1978). Successful language le arners: What do we know about 

them? ERIC / CLL News Bulletin, May, 2 -3. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 474 

Phnom, Kleechaya. (2018). MOE e -service .  Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://www.moe.go.th/ 

Quebec Ministry of Education 2022. Québec Education Program. Retrieved March 7, 2021, 

from http://www1.education.gouv.qc.ca/bamd/doc/Liste_primaire_ang_new.pdf 

Roque Herrera, Yosbanys, María L. Zalagaz Sánchez, Pedro Valdivia -Moral, José -Antonio 

Marín -Marín, and Santiago Alonso García.  2020. "Active Methodologies in the Training of 

Future Health Professionals: Academic Goals and Autonomous Learning Strategies." 

Sustainability 12, no. 4: 1485. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://doi.org/10.3390/su120414 85 

Scott, Cynthia. (2015). The Futures of learning 1: Why must learning content and methods 

change in the 21st century?  Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000234807 

Singh, S., Kagalwala , M., Parker -Thornburg, J. et al.  Singh et al. reply. Nature 457, E7 

(2009). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07785 

Sørensen, K., Van den Broucke, S., Fullam, J. et al.  (2012) . Health literacy and public health: 

A systematic review and integration of definitions and models.  BMC Public Health 12, 80. 

Retrieved March 7, 2021, from. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2458 -12 -80 .

Stehle and Peters -Burton. (2019). International Journal of STEM Education (2019) 6:39 

Retrieved March 7, 2021, from https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594 -019 -0192 -1

Thaiger. (2020). Why are Thailand’s Covid -19 numbers so low?. Retrieved from 

http://www.https://thethaiger.com/news/national/why -are -thailands -covid -19 -numbers -so -

low 

The Digital Teacher (n.d.). Tips – Using digital tools to develop learner autonomy. Cambridge 

Assessment English. Retrieved March 07, 2021, from 

htt ps://thedigitalteacher.com/training/using -digital -tools -to -develop -learner -autonomy -tips 

The lancet (2020). “COVID -19: health literacy is an underestimated problem.” The Lancet 

journals, Public health, 5( 5), E249 -E250, MAY 01, 2020 Retrieved March 7, 20 21, from 

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468 -2667(20)30086 -4

UNESCO (2020). Ensuring effective distance learning during COVID -19 disruption Guidance 

for teachers. The Global Education 2030 Agenda. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from 

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ ark:/48223/pf0000375116. 

UNICEF Thailand (2020). Teacher manual for learning management to promote Covid -19 

learning activities. Retrieved March 7, 2021, from Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 475 

https://www.unicef.org/thailand/reports/teachers -manual -organize -learning -activities -

covid -19 

Williams GC, Deci EL. (1998). The importance of supporting autonomy in medical education. 

Ann Intern Med. Aug 15;129(4):303 -8. doi: 10.7326/0003 -4819 -129 -4-199808150 -00007. 

PMID: 9729184. 

World Health Organization. (1998). Educational Handbook for Health Personnel (, 392 p.). 

Self -learning packages. Retrieved March 27, 2021 http://www.nzdl.org/cgi -

bin/library?e=d -00000 -00 ---off -0fnl2%2e2 --00 -0----0-10 -0---0---0direct -10 ---4-------0-1l --

11 -gu-50 ---20 -preferences ---10 -0-1-00 -0-0-11 ----0-0-

&a=d&c=fnl2.2&cl=CL2.6&d=HASH697745957cdde88b6af1c8.13.10. 

World Health Organization. (2020). Coronavirus disease (COVID -19).  Retrieved March 15, 

2021 https://covid19.who.int/ .

World Health Organization. (2022). Advice for the public: Coronavirus disease (COVID -19). 

Retrieved March 7, 2021 from https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel -

coronavirus -2019/advice -for -public Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 476 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 477 

# The Power of Educating Women and Ending Generational 

# Poverty: A Comparative Study of Women 

# in Ghana and Liberia 

Lauren Taylor (Utah Valley University, Utah, United States) 

Abstract 

The movement of female empowerment throughout the world is not only aff ecting the livelihood 

of the individual, but the livelihood of entire nations. One of the most prominent forces of 

empowerment is education. When a woman is offered the opportunity to learn, whether formally 

or informally, she increases the capacity of her community to force its way out of oppression and 

raise the living conditions of her neighbors. There is a current struggle for education which is very 

present in West African countries. This struggle is especially apparent when considering female 

educatio n rates in relation to the most developed countries in the world. This poses an immediate 

need to incentivize parents within these countries to send their daughters to school and finish 

their formal education. By addressing this struggle through incentive programs, we can see a 

greater access for young girls and a change in the cultural behaviors and values that surround 

this form of gender equality. This study delves into the why behind education affecting poverty, 

specifically targeting the ways that wome n allocate resources back into home communities and 

improve the experience of all members of society. All information will support the conclusion that 

as female education rates increase, poverty rates will decrease. 

Keywords: Female Empowerment, Poverty, Educating Women, Formal Education, West Africa, 

Incentive Programs, Generational Poverty 

Introduction 

In accordance with target 4.5 of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, eliminating 

all discrimination in education is a goal that all shoul d promote and protect. Barriers to the overall 

quality of education for adolescent girls limit the capacity for communities to address other issues 

such as health and wellbeing (SDG 3) and no poverty (SDG 1) (United Nations, n.d.). Due to 

education’s deep connection to other goals for the United Nations, educating women should be 

at the forefront of goals for developing countries. 

Education is a human right. Unfortunately, education equality is not present in a large portion of 

the world, specifically in Africa. Many factors are preventing young girls from attaining adequate 

levels of schooling. Levels of formal and informal education vary throughout Africa, but the trend 

is the same; young girls are at a major disadvantage in their ability to rise above a nd leave 

inequality behind. 

Beyond education being a human right, there are reasons that educating women leads to the 

empowerment of societies and the standard of living increasing. According to the United Nations Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 478 

Human Development Index, knowledge is p art of the influencing dimensions. Knowledge funnels 

into the Education Index which combines mean years of schooling and expected years of 

schooling. These rates affect the level of development that a country is experiencing, and 

development affects povert y. The connection is thus created between levels of education 

amongst women and poverty. 

To accurately discuss how education rates among girls in Africa affects the poverty statistics 

within a country, this study will compare African countries Ghana and Liberia. This comparison 

will consider many factors such as legal barriers, cultural acceptance, per capita GDP, and a 

comparison between female and male education rates, in order to display the trends that connect 

education to poverty. Both countries are located in West Africa and are affected by similar climate 

and demographic factors. This comparison thus focuses on laws and cultural barriers that are 

present in each country separately to understand the vast difference in female education rates in 

each country. 

Types of Formal and Informal Education in Africa 

Formal education is the main focus of this research; however, it is important to explain what 

parameters this includes and what other types of education are available for women. Formal 

educatio n is structured education in a typical classroom setting. Most governments require formal 

education up until the 9 th grade. Formal education also extends out of primary ages into secondary 

and post -secondary school. 

Informal education differs in its stru cture and experience. It is known for its spontaneity and hands 

on experience. Informal education is not perfectly defined other than being considered any 

learning that occurs outside the natural structure of a classroom and its curriculum. Some 

common for ms of informal education in Africa include: 

• Song and Dance 

• Oral Traditions about History 

• Market Experience 

• Apprentice Work within Families 

• Spending Quality Time with Elder Members of Society 

Informal learning has unlimited benefits, but it is not as easily created or monitored as formal 

education. Governments in Africa can have more direct impact on the quality and accessibility of 

formal education than that of informal. Consequently, our rese arch will focus on the impact that Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 479 

formal education has on African communities with the understanding that informal practices are 

also a necessity to the success of a country. 

Who are the Stakeholders and What Power do they Hold 

The children in Liberia and Ghana, both male and female are the primary stakeholders, yet have 

the least power concerning policy changes. The government of each country, and the parents of 

the children are the next most important stakeholders each with increased levels of power and 

control over the outcomes of a child’s education. Under the law, parents have responsibility of a 

child until age 18. Once this age of maturity is reached, that authority is handed over to the 

individual. When examining formal education, the majority o f the time spent in these settings 

occurs before the child turns 18. For that reason, parents are of great importance in this situation 

as they hold much power of the child’s ability to attend school and access materials. 

The government and government bo dies hold the most power as far as changing conditions is 

concerned. Policy changes and precedents are of major importance in examining how conditions 

may be improved in the future. 

The last group of stakeholders are third parties such as international non -governmental 

organizations and donors. The funding of incentive programs and scholarships is of vital 

importance and these groups offer an opportunity for added economic support. 

All stakeholders are of great importance to the future of this issue. Eve ry party must be actively 

fighting for the rights of female education because all parties will benefit. Throughout this research 

we will acknowledge barriers to education that occur for all stakeholder groups involved. We will 

also identify ways in which e ach party can benefit from this pursuit for increased levels of female 

education, as every party will benefit from the decrease in poverty rates. In order to address such 

an urgent issue, every single group must understand their role and their power to rem edy the 

concern. 

Understanding the Experience of Women Receiving Education within Ghana 

Primary education rates amongst girls and boys in Ghana differs minorly. Enrollment rates given 

by the World Health Organization show 84 percent for males and 82 per cent for females (World 

Health Organization, 2015). These numbers show more disparity when considering the income 

of the households that these children are coming from. Within high -income households 93 percent 

of boys and 87 percent of girls complete prima ry school. In comparison, within low -income families 

only 41 percent of boys and 46 percent of girls complete primary school in Ghana. (Clinton 

Foundation, 2015). To broaden the scope of education rates to include women and men (outside 

of the normal forma l education ages) in the poorest households, the percentage of women with 

no education was 73.4 percent whereas the rates for men with no education were 54.7 percent 

(UN Women, 2016). These numbers show a larger difference in education rates comparing men 

and women than do the primary education rates of girls and boys. Two important questions are 

thus formed: Would the rate of educated women in the household have affected the chances of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 480 

income to increase? And do these numbers show that generational povert y has stemmed from 

the previous generation not receiving formal education? 

Transitioning away from education rates and statistics in Ghana, we now consider the barriers 

that impede girls’ access to education. Legal barriers are not at play here as the law in Ghana 

states that Primary Education is free and compulsory. This covers education starting at 

kindergarten and going through to junior high (typically 9 th grade). The government has also tried 

implementing a tuition -free enrollment for high school students that would help lower 

socioeconomic areas to still send children to school (US Department of State, 2019 ). If girls are 

legally protected to pursue their education, then we must consider other barriers that are 

preventing girls from attending prima ry school. Cultural views and values must play a part, which 

is true when understanding the focus of rural families on educating male children before their 

female children. A reason for this may stem from the outdated view that a man’s ability to access 

we alth and properly use it is more than a woman’s. Another reason may be that women are 

supposed to marry into a family that has already educated their son. While primary education may 

be stated in the law as equal and fair, that does not mean it is proving this in practice. 

Another barrier that threatens girls in Ghana is rape and sexual assault. A study taken in Ghana 

found that perpetrators of rape were schoolboys in about 14 percent of cases against girls (Plan 

International, 2013). The physical and em otional threat that young girls face from their experience 

inside a school is affecting the likelihood of their desire to attend. In order to see positive change 

in the value of female education in Ghana there also needs to be a desire on the girl’s part t o

continue schooling. The rape of girls also poses another threat when pregnancy occurs. The 

likelihood of a girl returning to school after giving birth to a child is diminished when there is no 

financial support, and the family is already living in povert y. The duty is then given to the young 

mother to stay at home and work or find other ways to provide for the child and the rest of the 

family. 

Economic Situation Present in Ghana 

To create an accurate comparison between Ghana and Liberia now we consider the economic 

situation present in the country. Ghana’s GDP in 2020 was $68.532 billion. This amount has 

steadily increased throughout the last 20 years and only seen minor dips that have been tied to 

health epidemics (World Bank Group, 2022). 

Recent data trends show the decrease of poverty rates in the country. From 2011 to 2016 the 

poverty rate of $1.90 per person per day decreased by 34.1 percent to 13.3 percent (World Bank 

Group , 2019). Ghana’s poverty rates are below the mean poverty rate of Sub -Saharan Africa 

making them a leader in the region. Lastly, the per capita GDP of the country to further break 

down how the wealth is displayed in 2020 was $2,205.529 (World Bank Group, 2 022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 481 

The Reality of Getting an Education as a Woman in Ghana 

Analyzing the data supporting our thesis that the rates amongst female education lower poverty 

rates only goes so far to explain the complexity of the issue. We have already discussed some of 

the barriers that may have contributed to this situation, but a true analysis must inspect the reality 

and the urgency of the issue. The nuanced complexity of such low education rates can be 

explained in no better way than by asking for the experience o f someone who has lived through 

the situation. For this paper we were able to interview an amazing individual who has exemplified 

the positive qualities that are required to rise above the injustice and continue her education 

beyond just primary school lev els. Her identity will remain anonymous but let her experience be 

heard. 

Subject A who we will call Lisa (name changed for privacy), grew up in Adenta, located in the 

Greater Accra Region of Ghana. Lisa’s family was made up of biological and step sibling s all 

being raised together by her mother. Her father worked as a public transport driver and her mother 

a trader. Her mother’s job took her across the border frequently to collect and buy materials and 

products to sell back home. Due to both of her parent s being employed and working throughout 

the day, Lisa started attending school at a very young age. She officially started Class 1 

(equivalent to kindergarten in the United States) at the age of 6 and finished her primary education 

there at the local publi c primary school. While attending primary school Lisa vividly remembers 

having to bring her own school desk to class every day and then bring it home at the end of the 

day. That has now changed, and desks are already provided in the classroom. This is one 

example of how we have seen some positive progress. Lisa then continued on to her secondary 

education and once graduating decided to continue her schooling at the tertiary level. Getting into 

a university program at the local university was not simple for Lisa. In order to be accepted into 

the program that she had chosen she was required to write an application paper and then be 

selected by the school. Due to her hard work and dedication, she was accepted. 

When asked about her proudest moments in her educ ation, Lisa responded that her dedication 

to always maintaining a grade average of above B+ was something that brought her great pride. 

There were many sacrifices that she made while attending University and seeing her grades made 

difficulties such as miss ing meals not feel quite as harsh. 

Delving deeper into the complexity and the “why” behind these statistics we followed up our 

interview by asking Lisa if she ever felt at a disadvantage in school purely because of her gender. 

There was an immediate repl y of yes, and many stories to back this up. This first story that she 

shared was one of great significance - when she had her first menstruation as a teenager. Without 

quality sanitary products or medication to handle some of the harsh pain that comes for some 

women during menstruation, the women in her town had to miss school almost every month. 

Watching her brother leave to go to school was very difficult for her, not only because she was 

missing out on the learning that she so loved but also because of t he shame and embarrassment 

that was often associated with a woman’s period. The experience of women in education has 

changed throughout her own lifetime especially when looking at things through the perspective of 

her own mother’s experience. Lisa’s mother dropped out of school in Class 3 (equivalent to 1st Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 482 

grade) in order to sell items to make money to continue sending her brothers to school. This 

progress was not instantaneous and still does not address all of the problems that surround the 

topic. In fact, Lisa remembers that when school began the very first person to receiv e their books 

were the boys. If the family could afford more, then the girls could have their own required 

material. If the family could not afford said materials, then that child was not able to perform 

correctly in the classroom. 

Lisa was always very p assionate about sports. She connected with mostly boys at school because 

they seemed to share this love more than most of her female friends. It was always very difficult 

for Lisa when it was time for PE class. The boys were the ones who were allowed to st and up and 

play sports together, and the girls were expected to sit down and cheer on the boys. Physical 

Education is of great importance to children and a way to use their bodies for movement while 

also learning valuable lessons and skills. School girls w ere deprived of this opportunity and the 

gender inequality seemed to continue. 

Another example of inequality in the classroom occurred simply because of the view that the boys’ 

opinions were superior than the girls - if a question was asked by a teacher a nd both girls and 

boys raised their hands, the boys would be chosen. If there was a chance that a girl was finally 

picked, and she answered the question correct, then the entire class would applaud as if she had 

done something extraordinary and unlike what she was supposed to. The act of applauding an 

answer should have been a sign of pride but instead it was another way to minimize the capability 

of the girls in the classroom. 

Where does this value of male education above female reside? Is it purely a co nceptual idea that 

men are superior or is it a notion that men have more earning capacity than women? Lisa explains 

that most of the problem comes from this internalized misogyny that has led these native groups 

to see men as more worthy of respect in soci ety. A second reason is because of this idea of 

carrying on the family name. Girls are raised to marry and become the wife of another man of 

whom they take his name. The boys of the family will continue to grow up and keep the family’s 

legacy and so the fa mily should be more invested in his success. This view of gender roles plays 

a huge part in why education is not equal, and how could the inequality that is present in society 

be so easily changed inside a classroom unless there is outside influence? These cultural values 

continue to place a huge barrier on fixing the imbalance. 

One of the most important beliefs that Lisa speaks on is her value of her own daughter’s 

education. In fact, throughout conversing with Lisa her body language and tone of voice was 

never so enthusiastic or passionate as when she spoke about how important i t was for her 

daughter to get her education. Through self -reflection of her own experience in education, Lisa 

could see how vital her knowledge had been in the family’s ability to remove itself from poverty. 

Though she was having to give up much to send he r daughter to a quality private school, there 

are sacrifices that she will continue to make knowing that her daughter’s education will be the 

greatest asset she can take into her future. Lisa understands the necessity that finishing education 

in her countr y is. If her children are to not return to poverty, then they must have an education to 

support their professional endeavors. Having her own education completed at such a high level Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 483 

is a way that Lisa is able to help provide for her family, and also feel empowered in her own worth 

as a woman. She can see the correlation between education and poverty in her own life 

experience. 

As already mentioned, the rates of education and poverty are only a glance at the importance of 

educating women. Is not the examp le of this mother’s desire for her child to finish her education 

proof enough that education holds power? Not only are we trying to quantify the connection of 

present poverty rates, but we are also trying to see a connection that explains generational 

pove rty and the perpetuation of impoverished communities. The lived experience of Lisa points 

to the intimate connection that women feel with their own empowerment. Women teaching each 

other the things that have helped them in their struggle to find power in s ociety. A mother helping 

a daughter navigate her way through society and showing her how she can use her voice. All 

ways that empowerment is being explored in these communities. 

Lisa raises an important idea that has not been the major focus of this thes is but could point to a 

direction that we could go as we continue forward. The main focus of this paper has been 

researching the rates of formal education and their connection to poverty, but not necessarily the 

level that this should encompass. When asked about what possible changes she would want for 

the future of Ghana’s education for women, Lisa contends that free education should extend 

outside of primary school and all the way to the tertiary level. If women have the ability to continue 

their educatio n to such a high level, then parents cannot argue that there is not as much reason 

to value their daughter’s education as much as their son’s. Preventing the economic barrier that 

impedes on girls’ ability to receive their education is one of the fastest w ays to see positive change 

and growth in both Ghana and Liberia. 

Experiences and Barriers that Face Women and Young Girls from Receiving Education in 

Liberia 

The law in Liberia is the same as Ghana; Primary education is free and compulsory. Societal 

bar riers and practices may show the biggest difference. 

1. There is no legislation on sexual harassment in education (The World Bank, 2018). 

2. An increasing number of girls are dropping out due to pregnancy ( United Nations Human 

Rights Treaty Bodies, 2018). 

3. Fees are required for senior education levels (grade 10 -12) (US Department of State, 

2017). 

While education is compulsory in Liberia, there is no real data to suggest that this is enforceable. 

Many girls are having to stay home and help provide for their family by selling items on the street 

or working in markets. When a family is only able to send one child to school it seems that this Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 484 

preference is almost always given to the boys. These practices are directly affecting the ability of 

girls to complete their primary education and continue forward to other secondary levels. 

Next, we compare the number of girls and boys finishing their primary education in both high - and 

low -income families. Only 8 percent of girls and 17 percent of boys in low income homes complete 

their primary education, and 59 percent girls and 64 percent boys in high income households 

(Clinton Foundation, 2015 ). These numbers are already significantly lower than those shown in 

Ghana. The next subject would be to also conside r those within the home who may have already 

passed standard primary education ages, particularly, those who are in the poorest households. 

In Liberia 73.2 percent of women in the poorest homes do not have any education, 20.5 percent 

have primary education , and the rest have secondary and tertiary levels of education. Men in 

these poor households, however, are significantly more likely to still receive primary or secondary 

education. In comparison to women, men with no education accounted for 36.2 percent ( UN 

Women, 2016). 

Economic Situation in Liberia 

Now we analyze the economic situation present in Liberia to further understand the connection 

between poverty rates and female education. The GDP in Liberia as of 2019 was $3.32 billion. 

The country has also seen a steady increase in GDP over the last 20 years (World Bank Group, 

2022). In 2016 Liberia’s poverty rates were recorded at 44.4 percent. This is according to the 

headcount ratio standard that calculates poverty at $1.90 a day per person. In compariso n to 

Ghana, roughly 31.1 percent more of the population of Liberia is living in poverty. Liberia’s rates 

sit well above the international standards and classify Liberia as a very impoverished country. 

Much of Liberia’s present economic situation can be att ributed to the aftermath of the first civil 

war in Liberia that lasted from 1989 until 1996. A resurgence of war and violence came about 

later and lasted until approximately 2003. The consequences of this war included many families 

being displaced and left with incredible hardships. In recent years, Liberia was also damaged by 

the Ebola outbreak. (Liberian Economic Group, 2019). 

By comparison, Liberia is in a much worse economic condition than Ghana. Education rates suffer 

as a result of poor conditions. In fact, the country has one of the world’s highest levels of children 

ages 6 -14 years old who are not in class (Unicef, n.d.). Education rates continue to be a critical 

indication of a country’s stability in its economy and standard of living. As shown in the data 

collected on these two countries, that unfortunate truth of unsatisfactory education rates proves 

even worse for the life of a young girl. 

Comparing Data from Liberia and Ghana to Find a Connection between Education Rates 

and Poverty 

Now a deeper understanding may be formed when considering the question asked when 

analyzing education rates in Ghana: Would the rates of women with education have changed the 

amount of those living in poverty? The amount of people living in the poorest conditions is lower 

in Ghana than in Liberia, yet the percentage of men in these homes with no education is greater Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 485 

in Ghana. Consequently , the percent of men with education did not have a direct effect on the 

amount of those living in poverty. While many of the connections in this paper are theoretical, 

they are founded on conclusions made from data. A theory that we consider is that the nu mber of 

families living in the poorest conditions is more directly tied to the female in the household’s 

education status than that of the man. Thus, calculating the probability of a family living in poverty 

is tied to the education level that the woman re ceived. 

Understanding why the Educational Success of Women in the Home Leads to the End of 

Generational Poverty 

The central goal of this study was to find a connection between female empowerment, education, 

and poverty. Now that a connection has been es tablished, we must consider, why? Why does 

educating women lead to lower rates of poverty? Is it simply because more jobs are created? 

Even so, what is stopping her from leaving the home environment and escaping to better living 

conditions elsewhere? Thus, we now analyze the how women affect their communities and where 

they choose to spend their money. 

It is estimated that countries sustain more than $1 billion in losses for inadequately educating 

girls. Women are more likely to remain in their communitie s and effectively trickle down their 

economic success to their children (stopping generational poverty) and give back to their 

community. The most important effect of educating women has been stopping generational 

poverty. Women spend more money on food an d education for their children and education is a 

proven way to stop poverty (McCartney, 2018). The woman’s ability to focus her own success as 

a way of empowering her own children creates a positive cycle to combat the negative cycle of 

generational pover ty. Lisa’s own passion for her daughter’s education is the perfect illustration of 

this powerful exchange at work. Halting poverty rates in the present is of huge importance, but 

long -term intervention of generational poverty is of equal importance. Educat ing women serves 

both purposes. 

Changing Cultural Opinions and Translating Values to Needs 

There is an argument to be made that poverty is not a result of education inequality and instead 

that education inequality only exists because of poverty. Many young girls are having to stay 

home and take care of elderly family members, help make small amo unts of money, or trade work 

for food. These endeavors take them out of school only because they do not have the financial 

security to stay in class. Regardless, of which resulted from the other, both poverty and education 

inequality exist in Africa. It is harmful to suggest that these education rates will only be improved 

once the poverty rates decrease. The correlation has already been created between the two and 

education rates appear easier to target. Therefore, the values of these African countries in terms 

of female education must be translated into needs. If there is no longer “just a desire” to educate 

women and instead a need, pressure will be put on external forces, such as the government, to 

support and incentivize. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 486 

Historical societies have c reated precedent for the view of women and feminine roles in society. 

As seen in research of Ghana, families are more likely to only send their sons to school than only 

their daughters. Misogyny exists within individuals as well as within education systems . The 

expansion of female political representation, and the effects of globalization are slowly changing 

the values and needs of societies, but they are not addressing larger systemic issues quickly 

enough in rural and urban areas of Africa. Education need s to be a basic human right, and gender 

equality must also. With that in mind, how can we attack the barriers that are preventing these 

human rights? 

First, we attack the attitudes. This means more representation of women in power and therefore 

a precede nt of increased instances of women in the highest levels of government and the private 

sector. If young girls can have tangible examples of their capability to achieve greatness as a 

result of their education, we have accomplished one of the most empowerin g feats. Not only are 

we then changing the attitudes of the child, but the attitudes of the parents seeing how their 

daughters have the same financial earning potential as their sons. 

Next, we make school conditions safer. Sexual assault and rape are two words that should never 

be associated with school. If current precedent is in favor of teachers and school boys getting 

away with exploitation, then new precedent must be set. Harsher sentencing for sexual violences 

occurring in schools is one answer. A c hild should not have to fear physical harm while in the 

pursuit of education. 

Incentive Programs for Economic Relief 

The last, and seemingly most pressing barrier stopping girls from finishing their education is 

economic distress/poverty. Third party as sistance may be the quickest way to address limits and 

financial struggles. USAID alongside other donors and international NGOs have already made 

strides in supporting education and access for girls (Miller -Grandvaux, 2004). The international 

community is in agreement that quality education is a goal that can be achieved if resources and 

infrastructures are offered. In order to accomplish these goals; agreements also need to be made 

with third parties and government systems. This is where we suggest incenti ve programs and 

scholarship opportunities that are both funded by third party and government. These incentive 

programs would be focused on aid for struggling families and the scholarships would be given 

under the criteria of academic success. If the main r eason that girls are not attending school is 

because they are having to remain at home and make money, then their participation in school 

should offer them that same financial protection. Quotas for school days attended can be created 

for the girls and rat ions given if those required days are attended, incentivizing the parents to 

send their daughters to school. 

Once the attendance issues are addressed then the quality and success of education will be aided 

in scholarships. Academic success should be rewa rded with financial rewards for the family to 

motivate children and parents. Addressing the issues of getting girls to school is only the first step. 

The quality of the education itself must be the next. No child should have to encounter the same 

demoraliz ing instances of inequality as Lisa did when the boys were the only ones called on in Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 487 

class. If poverty rates and standard of living are of such high value in society then we must 

acknowledge the role that education plays in shaping the outcomes. Quality education should be 

synonymous with equality of education. If girls are not given the same rights to their schooling as 

boys, then quality education has not been accomplished. 

Societies that have refined education systems have better economic conditions. These conditions 

are most likely sustaining the ability to offer quality care to students. Ghana and Liberia are not 

given the same privileges. There needs to be a way that educ ation is valued before these 

conditions are present so that they too can be sustained and perpetuated when better financial 

conditions become present. 

Just as the home countries themselves must translate their value of female education to a need, 

so must third parties. The international community must be in support of a push to incentivize 

parents and correct the low attendance and graduation rates in these West African schools. The 

urgency of eradicating such poor living conditions and high rates of pove rty must transcend any 

cultural barriers. Creating a solution to correcting these rates is no longer just a desire but a 

necessity. 

At the heart of any third party intervention must be the desire to create quality education standards 

and gender equality within the classroom. By promoting a sense of equality within the classroom 

it is very likely that the experience of fairness will transcend the classroom setting into the homes. 

Regulating behaviors and values occurring inside the walls of children’s home s is difficult to 

create. However, in a professional classroom setting under the policies on curriculum and conduct 

such regulation can be achieved. Creating a safe environment for young girls to study and propel 

themselves and their families out of povert y is achievable when resources are allocated towards 

the education system. 

Conclusion 

The data from the analysis has indicated that as education rates of women increase the negative 

cycle of generational poverty is decreased. Addressing the issue with a short -term mindset is not 

invalid as there is an urgent need to stop the present rates of poverty and education inequality in 

both Ghana and Liberia. A long -term perspective is also needed to combat generational poverty. 

A mother’s determination to offer her child quality education and use her own successes as a way 

of financing that education will stop generational effects of poverty in her home. 

The human desire to learn and be empowered must be supported by governments and 

international committees. As mentioned previously, formal and informal education is vital to the 

development of a country. The eagerness of these bodies’ involvement in formal education rates 

may open up other channels and opportunities for informal learning. These two modes supporte d

by one another can combat many of the lasting effects of war, health crises, and poverty that are 

so present in Liberia and Ghana. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 488 

Finding a connection between rates of education and poverty was not difficult when looking at the 

data trends of both co untries, nor was it difficult to see in the experiences shared by Lisa. She is 

a living reminder of all that can be accomplished through hard work, but what needs to change 

so that what was once hard can be made easier. Her story is one of power but also o ne of 

exposure to injustice. She accomplished more than what was expected of her and now she 

desires the same for her own children. Her value of education is now tied with strength and 

success and that is the way that she wants her children to value their own learning. She has seen 

how education gives her and those around her the power to create a better life for themselves 

and their families. 

In order to create these opportunities for education a priority must be placed on economic 

intervention so that p roper funding can be contributed to families who are seeking to educate their 

children and especially their daughters. As rates of girls dropping out of school to work remain 

high the empowerment and equality of the sexes will remain low. Giving girls the access to quality 

education and providing them with examples of success will strengthen their own desire to find 

power within themselves. 

The power of educating women and ending generational poverty enhances the need of countries 

to improve their educati on systems. Education is a common theme in all Sustainable 

Development Goals as knowledge promotes safety and equity. As seen through the research in 

this paper, educating women will directly impact a community’s ability to free itself from the 

bondage of poverty and address other obstacles mentioned in the SDG targets. Equality in 

education must be a primary concern as the women who are not receiving their needed education 

may become more exposed to other direct and indirect gender -based violence and unabl e to 

further assist in the future of peace and prosperity for the planet. 

As we continue to move forward and develop as a global community, we cannot leave behind the 

communities whose children are in desperate need of education. The right that is so adm irably 

given to women around the world is not equally presented in every country. This right to education 

is not only congruent with a desire for quality education but it is a right that pushes for the 

opportunity to reach gender equality throughout the wo rld. 

References 

Clinton Foundation (2015), “The Full Participation Project: No Ceilings”, No Ceilings. 

http://www.noceilings.org/report/report.pdf 

Liberian Economic Group (2019), “Liberia’s Economic Problems: Longstanding and Widespread 

Poverty, Unbe arably High Foreign Exchange Rate”, The Perspective. 

https://www.theperspective.org/2019/1103201904.php 

Lisa (2022, March 29), Personal Communication Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 489 

Miller -Grandvaux , Y. (2004), “USAID and Community Schools in Africa: The Vision, the 

Strategy, the Reality”, USAID. 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnadb992.pdf#:~:text=USAID%20supports%20over%205 

000%20community -

managed%20schools%20through%20its,achievement%20and%20reach%2 0out%20to% 

20remote%2C%20disadvantaged%20populations 

McCartney, J. (2018), “Four Ways Educating Women Reduces Poverty”, The Borgen Project. 

https://borgenproject.org/educating -women -reduces -poverty 

Plan International (2013), “So, What About Boys?”, Because I am a Girl, The State of the 

World’s Girls 2011. http://www.planusa.org/becauseiamagirl/docs/BIAAG -Report -

2011.pdf 

The World Bank (2018), “Women, Business and the Law 2018 (5 th Edition)”, World Bank Group. 

https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/999211524236982958 -

0050022018/original/WBLKeyFindingsWebFINAL2.pdf 

Unicef (n.d.), “Basic Education”, Unicef.org. https://www.unicef.org/liberia/basic -education 

United Nations (n.d.), “Sustainable Develop ment Goals: Quality Education”, UN.org. 

https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/education/ 

United Nations Human Rights Treaty Bodies (2018), “Concluding Observations on the 

Combined Seventh and Eighth Periodic Reports of Liberia”, Treaty Body Database. 

https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/Download.aspx?symbolno=C 

EDAW%2fC%2fLBR%2fCO%2f7 -8&Lang=en 

UN Women (2016), “Progress of the World’s Women”, UN Women. 

https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital -library/progress -of -the -worlds -women 

US Department of State (2017), “Liberia 2017 Human Rights Report”, State.gov. 

https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/2019/01/Liberia.pdf 

US Department of State (2019), “Ghana 2017 Human Rights Report”, State.gov. 

https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/ 2019/01/Ghana.pdf 

WomanStats (n.d.), “View Data”, The WomanStats Project. 

https://www.womanstats.org/new/view/ 

World Health Organization (2015), “World Health Statistics 2015”, World Health Organization. 

http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/ 170250/9789240694439_eng.pdf;jsessio 

nid=6653D1DF8DB92BD3CD7A77ED533BCA48?sequence=1 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 490 

World Bank Group (2019), “Poverty and Equity Brief: Sub -Saharan Africa: Ghana”, World Bank 

Group. https://databank.worldbank.org/data/download/poverty/33EF03BB -9722 -4AE2 -

ABC7 -AA2972D68AFE/Archives -2019/Global_POVEQ_GHA.pdf 

World Bank Group (2022), “Gha na Data”, The World Bank. 

https://data.worldbank.org/country/GH 

World Bank Group (2022), “Liberia Data”, The World Bank. 

https://data.worldbank.org/country/Liberia Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 491 

# Who Gets to Choose? A Global Perspective 

# on Gender, Work -Life Balance, and Choice 

# in the Post -Pandemic Workplace 

Cristen Dalessandro and Daniel Patterson 

(O.C. Tanner Institute, United States) 

Abstract 

Post -2020, there is evidence of persistent gende r inequities both at work and at home, which 

research has shown can limit women’s work choices. Thus, it is urgent that we investigate gender 

differences in domestic responsibilities among working parents and the potential impact of these 

differences on wo rk choice. Using an original dataset with employees who have internet access 

in select countries in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia (N=3,147), we conducted 

logistic regression analysis to explore whether employees felt they had a choice in w here they do 

their work. In addition to gender, we considered how childcare responsibilities, housework 

responsibility, self -identified “minority” status, education, workspace model (hybrid, remote, in -

office or on -site), and country influenced employee pe rceptions of choice. Notably, in addition to 

significant differences between countries, education, and according to “minority” status, we found 

that men (OR: 1.23; 95%CI 1.04 -1.47) and those stating that a partner was responsible for all or 

most of the hou sework (OR: 1.45; 95%CI 1.06 -1.98) and childcare (OR: 2.72; 95%CI 1.95 -3.78) 

reported feeling they had more choice regarding where they work. Additional chi -square analyses 

found significant gender differences in the distribution of housework and childcare responsibilities. 

These results suggest that working women still shoulder more of the childcare and housework 

responsibilities globally, and this unequal distribution of responsibility could have an impact on 

women’s perceptions of their choices when it c omes to work. 

Keywords: Gender, Work, Work -Life Balance, Working Parents, Gender Inequality, Work Choice 

Introduction 

Global feminist scholarship has established the importance of gender for experiences with paid 

work (Baxter & Wright, 2000; Bobbitt -Zeh er, 2011; Leidner, 1991; Miller et al., 1991; Misra et al., 

2021; Murray, 2000) . For instance, research has repeatedly shown that persistent gender 

expectations task women with balancing paid work and childcare —pressure that men typically do 

not experien ce (Hays, 1996; Hochschild, 2003) . Across the world, gender norms have 

consistently impacted women’s career choices and trajectories for more than thirty years, to the 

extent that some scholars have pondered whether many women actually have career “choices” 

in the same manner as men (Blair -Loy, 2005; Glass, 1988; Kan et al., 2022; Massey et al., 1995) .

For example, several studies have found that women’s choices can be constrained since women 

often feel compelled to make certain decisions due to gender expectations (Blair -Loy, 2005; Corby 

& Stanworth, 2009; Williams, 1991) . Particularly given emerging evidence that the pandemic has Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 492 

made the task of balancing work and family increasingly difficult for women despite burgeoning 

remote and h ybrid work opportunities (Collins et al., 2021; Dunatchik et al., 2021; Mooi -Reci & 

Risman, 2021; Russell & Frachtenberg, 2021) , investigating gender differences in perceptions of 

choice at work —and additional factors that relate to perceptions of choice —could reveal insight 

into which issues are currently impacting women when it comes to work choices. Removing any 

extant barriers could be key to fostering greater equity. 

Thus, we use data from original surveys with employees across the world (N=3,147) a nd a 

feminist theoretical lens to explore gender differences in employee perceptions of choice in where 

they do their work post -2020 as well as how employees’ current childcare responsibilities, 

housework responsibilities, workspace (hybrid, on -site/in -off ice, or entirely remote work), self -

identified “minority” status, education, and country might matter for perceptions of choice. Using 

logistic regression, we found that partner responsibility for childcare and housework predicts 

increased perceptions of c hoice, while the inability to work remotely at least part of the time and 

lower education levels predicted diminished feelings of choice. We also found significant 

differences among countries, which suggests the need for more cross -country comparisons of 

this issue. Further, using chi -square tests, we found significant differences between women and 

men concerning self -reported responsibilities for housework and childcare. Our findings suggest 

that gender inequities in work choice are persistent in the post -2020 workplace. While not a 

complete solution, we propose that taking steps to equalize gendered responsibilities at home 

and at work will seemingly help equalize feelings of choice at work, and thus, support gender 

equity. 

Background 

Gender Discrimination and Stereotyping Pre - and Post -2020 

Although there is evidence of exacerbating inequities among workers based on race, class, and 

gender lines since the beginning of the COVID -19 pandemic ( Mooi -Reci & Risman, 2021 ), 

feminist researchers hav e a long history of capturing evidence of gender inequity at work. This 

scholarship helps provide insight into how gendered ideas that exist at the structural level continue 

to matter for individual women’s work choices. For instance, gender stereotyping and 

discrimination in the workplace are two such elements that can ultimately impact individual choice. 

First, gender discrimination continues to play a significant role in shaping outcomes for women in 

the workplace (S. Fiske, 1998; B. F. Reskin, 1988; Ri dgeway & Correll, 2004; Ridgeway & 

England, 2007) . Over the last thirty years, studies have continued to find evidence of 

discriminatory practices at every stage of the employee life cycle, from hiring practices and job 

classifications (Acker, 1990; Gold in & Rouse, 2000; Gorman, 2005) to wage disparities, 

promotions, and authority lines (Meitzen, 1986; Olson & Becker, 1983; B. Reskin & McBrier, 

2000) . Yet despite the increased attention paid by scholars and practitioners over the past three 

decades, d iscrimination continues to be a barrier to gender equity at work (England, 2006; 

Gorman, 2005) .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 493 

How can we explain continued discrimination despite repeated calls for addressing this issue? 

There is broad consensus among scholars that cultural beliefs about gender are foundational to 

discrimination in the workplace, and that the persistence of these beliefs helps fuel continued 

inequality (S. T. Fiske et al., 2002; Ridgeway & England, 2007) . In general, these gender 

essentialist beliefs advance depic tions of men and women that support the idea that women and 

men are fundamentally different kinds of people —and thus, will have different outcomes as 

workers. These efforts at categorization subsequently facilitate gender stereotyping, which leads 

to discr imination in many workplace contexts (Ridgeway & England, 2007). 

Regarding stereotypes, there are two types (descriptive and prescriptive) that can help explain 

the link between gender stereotyping and workplace discrimination and inequality (Berger et al., 

1972; Burgess & Borgida, 1999) . Descriptive stereotypes are s hared beliefs about traits and 

abilities that men and women possess. For example, one descriptive stereotype is the idea that 

men have agentic qualities associated with leadership, such as competence and assertiveness. 

Conversely, women are assumed to poss ess communal qualities associated with helping and 

nurturing, such as warmth and empathy. Discrimination based on descriptive stereotypes results 

when one gender is perceived as unfit to perform tasks associated with qualities believed inherent 

to the oppo site sex (Eagly & Karau, 2002) . In this context, men are seen as naturally suited for 

agentic occupations such as a lawyer or doctor, while women are believed more suited for 

nurturing occupations such as a nurse or counselor. 

If descriptive stereotype s derive from cultural beliefs about what men and women can do, 

prescriptive stereotypes arise from cultural beliefs about what men and women should do. Like 

their descriptive counterpart, prescriptive stereotypes align with the agentic -communal dichotomy. 

However, prescriptive stereotypes are fundamentally normative, and thus prone to greater social -

cultural disapproval and sanction for those who violate them (Burgess & Borgida, 1999) . While 

studies suggest that men who display attributes counter to pres criptive norms (less assertive, 

more empathetic) risk minor forms of professional disapproval (Connell, 1995) , women who 

violate their prescriptive stereotyping (particularly in the workplace) face penalties on numerous 

levels (Rudman, 1998) . When a wo man succeeds in a masculine role, she signals competence 

but can violate prescriptive gender norms. In this context, the assumption is that her possession 

of successful agentic qualities also reflects a deficit of stereotypically feminine communal 

qualitie s. The resulting double -bind places her in an unwinnable situation: she can be seen as 

competent but not likeable, or she can be viewed as likeable but not competent. Consequently, 

assertive women in high -status roles are frequently viewed as hostile, cold , or aloof, negative 

attributions that move organizations to penalize successful women when it comes to rewards such 

as salary, opportunity, and hiring (Heilman, 2001) . By contrast, men are not penalized for 

behaving in assertive, agentic ways (Rudman, 1 998) .

Unfortunately, gender stereotypes and discrimination continue to be problems in workplaces 

across the world despite calls for more awareness of these issues. For instance, since 2020, 

scholars have clearly captured global patterns of work inequal ity by demonstrating that women 

(and especially women of color) have faced rising levels of stress and job precarity that likely 

relates to how valuable employers view them in economically unstable times ( Mooi -Reci & Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 494 

Risman, 2021 ). This treatment adds ins ult to injury, as due in no small part to gender stereotypes, 

working women have historically also shouldered much of the day -to -day responsibilities 

associated with home life as well. 

Gender and Balancing Work and Family Pre - and Post -2020 

The rootedness of the idea that women are caregivers first and employees second can be seen 

in research on the “second shift” (Hochschild, 2003) . Developed in the late 80s, Hochschild 

argued that the advancement of gender equality in the U.S. economy had stalled due to what she 

coined as the “second shift” —the unpaid work of childcare and housework after already 

completing a “first shift” of paid work in the workplace. In Hochschild’s research, the “second shift” 

was overwhelmingly taken on by women, and more recent research has found evidence that the 

gendered aspect to the “second shift” continues today on a global scale (Dunatchik et al., 2021; 

Women in the Workplace , 2020) .

Nearly three decades later, the scholarly consensus is that the move towards gender equality in 

the workplace remains fundamentally stalled (Blair -Loy et al., 2015; Hochschild, 2003) . Despite 

notable advances for women in education and income, many of the challenges originally identified 

by Hochschild remain unreformed: there co ntinues to be a lack of gender balance in housework 

and caregiver work, and organizations remain overwhelming structured around the construct of 

an ideal worker who is always available and committed to work. As one scholar summarized, 

“women still face few er opportunities for work involvement, pay, and public life while men spend 

less time with their children” (Blair -Loy et al., 2015) . Even institutional features that outwardly 

appear to promote or even advocate for women employees ultimately formalize ma le privilege in 

the workplace and reinforce hierarchical orders of status inequality (Ridgeway & Correll, 2004) .

For instance, policies that exclusively support maternity or caregiver leave for women (without 

providing equal policies for caregivers of an y gender) risk reinforcing stereotypes that 

predominantly associate women with communal qualities of nurturing (in addition to the idea that 

men don’t need caregiver leave). The unintended consequence of aligning organizational policy 

with a descriptive st ereotype that paints women as family caregivers first and as workers second, 

suggesting that their role as potential mothers or caregivers makes them less invested as 

employees (Bobbitt -Zeher, 2011) .

While pre -pandemic assessments of gender equality in the workplace are troubling, one question 

remains unanswered: does this view of women’s experience in the workplace apply to the current 

work environment characterized by radical changes in schedule and location flexibility? 

Unfortunately, according to mo st current research, the answer is yes (Dunatchik et al., 2021; 

Global Gender Gap Report , 2021; Women in the Workplace , 2021; Mooi -Reci & Risman, 2021) .

Despite the widespread acceptance of flexible remote and hybrid work models, as well as new 

technolog y designed to streamline collaborative work across multiple locations, women continue 

to experience significant stress and exhaustion in addition to magnified domestic responsibilities 

(Collins et al., 2021; Women in the Workplace , 2020; Women in the Workp lace , 2021) .

Additionally, women continue to experience persistent gaps in the corporate pipeline, with 

promotions at initial steps towards management being both inconsistent and inequitable Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 495 

(Dunatchik et al., 2021; Women in the Workplace , 2021) . Women leaders are increasingly taking 

on additional responsibilities, both in supporting their teams and advancing diversity, equity, and 

inclusion (DE&I) initiatives, yet relatively few are being recognized for their contributions. Overall, 

today’s ongo ing gender discrimination and lack of support —both domestically and institutionally —

echoes the unfavorable experiences of previous generations (Women in the Workplace , 2021) .

Collectively, the picture that emerges from the literature highlights the ways compounding gender 

pressures constrain the choices women have about their work. Even before entering the 

workplace, gender beliefs about abilities and limitations bias both individual and institutional 

expectations that, in turn, define (or limit) the pro fessional opportunities that are made available 

for women. Once inside the workplace, those who choose to push beyond the constraints of 

gender stereotypes sometimes pay for their professional success with the interpersonal hostility 

and disapproval that c omes with choices that violate prescriptive norms (Heilman, 2001) . In 

addition to externally imposed constraints on choice, women are also forced to wrestle with the 

self -limiting internalization of gender bias (Foschi, 2000; Ridgeway & Correll, 2004) . Gender -

biased self -perceptions of ability (which are rooted in structural ideas about gender) can 

discourage an individual from making decisions that would otherwise advance their professional 

standing. In terms of amplifying personal and professional nee d fulfillment, even recently 

expanded options for hybrid and remote work models are something of a false -choice for women. 

The ability to capitalize on the flexibility and opportunity these work models afford is frequently 

compromised by childcare and hous ework responsibilities that continue to disproportionally fall to 

women (Dunatchik et al., 2021) . Whether at home or in the office, complex layers of gender 

discrimination continue to negatively impact how women perceive choice and opportunity at work. 

Methods 

The survey data used in our analyses were gathered in the fall of 2021 as part of a monthly survey 

project carried out by the authors’ institution. To qualify for the survey, participants had to be 

working at organizations with at least 500 employ ees in one of the following countries: the United 

States (n=858), the United Kingdom (n=605), Canada (n=472), India (n=795), and Brazil (n=417). 

We targeted English -speaking participants in these countries since our survey only fielded in 

English. We used Alchemer software to build the survey and Lucid marketplace to screen and 

administer the survey. Lucid is a sample aggregator that enables direct -to -respondent sampling 

through its marketplace platform, reaching potential respondents via a number of panel providers 

(Coppock & McClellan, 2019) . The panel providers compensate respondents for their time in the 

form of cash or reward cards and redeemable points. Payment for this survey ranged from $1.25 

to $1.85 USD per respondent, depending on the country (a djusted for cost -of -living and to attract 

respondent interest). Our survey is comprised of a convenience sample and is thus not 

representative of all workers in the sampled nations. For instance, participants had to have 

internet access and be English -spea king to take the survey, which limited our sample somewhat. 

However, our sample is large enough to generate meaningful results. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 496 

Survey and Instrumentation 

After we posted a survey to the Lucid platform, panel providers contacted potential participants 

who were then taken to a screener for our survey that included a consent form. Respondents 

were informed that they could exit the survey at any time. Opting ou t of the survey did not hurt 

participants’ quality scores with panel providers. Surveys then asked participants a series of 

questions related to their experiences in the workplace, including their experiences with diversity, 

equity, and inclusion at work a s well as demographics. Our survey also asked about their domestic 

responsibilities (housework and childcare) outside of work. 

Analytic Strategy 

We used StataMP 17 to generate both chi -square tests and our logistic regression model. Our 

dependent varia ble in both analyses was participant self -reports regarding whether they felt they 

had a choice in where they do their work. While the “choice” in where one does their work can be 

somewhat limiting depending on the field, emerging research demonstrates tha t more educated 

workers and “knowledge” workers (or, those whose jobs require they work with information) are 

more likely to have choice in where they work, typically due to the feasibility of conducting 

knowledge work remotely (Auginbaugh & Rothstein, 202 2) . Indeed, our survey skews toward a 

more educated sample (87% of participants have at least a high school diploma or equivalent). 

Thus, it is suitable to explore perceptions of choice. 

In addition to education, gender, and workspace (remote, hybrid, o r in -office workers) we explored 

how self -identified minority status and housework and childcare responsibilities might matter for 

perceptions of choice since previous and recent work has suggested that they may (Auginbaugh 

& Rothstein, 2022; Blair -Loy, 20 05; Glass, 1988) . We also compared across countries due to a 

lack of research using international samples to investigate this particular issue. Lastly, we 

conducted chi -square analyses comparing housework and childcare responsibilities across 

gender, sin ce gender inequalities are our main focus in this paper. 

Findings 

According to the logistic regression test, all independent variables demonstrated statistical 

significance in some respect. Full results of the test are available in Table 1. The pseudo -R2 of 

our model was 0.2269, which indicates good fit. Consistent with our expectations, we found that 

men were more likely to express optimism around work choice. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we also 

found that those working in hybrid or remote environments also expressed greater optimism 

around choice. Interestingly, we found that minority -identified workers also expressed significantly 

more optimism around choice. Lastly, we found that compared to the United States, those in India 

and Brazil were significantly m ore likely to express optimism, whereas those in Canada were 

significantly less likely to express optimism around choice. 

At the same time, when it came to housework, we found that compared to those respondents who 

reported that they were mostly responsib le for housework, those who attested to living in a Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 497 

household where partners were mostly responsible for housework were more likely to express 

optimism around choice. Interestingly, compared to respondents with no children, those with 

children were all mor e optimistic around work choice. However, those reporting partner 

responsibility for childcare were the most optimistic (see Table 1). Exploring these patterns 

further, additional chi -square analyses found statistically significant differences according to 

gender when it came to both housework and childcare. Men were significantly more likely to report 

that their partners had responsibility for both the housework and the childcare, whereas women 

were significantly more likely to report that they were respon sible for both in their households. 

These results are reported in Table 2. 

Discussion and Conclusion 

In this paper, given past research into the impact of gender on work choices (see (Blair -Loy, 

2005) , we sought to explore gender differences in employee perceptions of choice in where they 

work. In addition to differences in childcare and housework responsibilities, by including in our 

models an international sample of key employee characteristics histor ically associated with 

gender inequities at work, we contribute to the growing body of literature in global gender equity 

in the workplace (Hideg & Krstic, 2021). While some of our results echo the gender challenges 

highlighted in previous studies, our f indings also provide some compelling insights that can be 

used to inform future research and practices in workplace gender equity post -2020. 

With respect to the gender gap in domestic work, we found little evidence that the division of labor 

between men a nd women has become more equitable. Men are consistently more likely to 

express optimism around work choice, as are those individuals whose partners are responsible 

for household labor. Unfortunately, our study found that when it comes to household labor, women 

continue to bear primary responsibility for childcare and housework. One aspect of the domestic 

dynamic that merits future exploration is our finding that respondents with children felt more 

optimistic around work choice. While this might suggest a p ositive impact on perspective from the 

additional support children might potentially bring to household tasks, more research would be 

necessary to account for this increase in optimism. 

Perhaps unsurprisingly, we also found that those working in remote a nd hybrid environments 

were more likely to express optimism about work choice. Although our study did not specifically 

test whether individuals were given the option to choose their work location, the post -Covid 

implementation of hybrid and remote work sch edules has largely been in response to employee -

driven expectations of greater flexibility and choice (Future Forum Pulse , 2021). As such, these 

work location options could be broadly construed as the result of employee work choice, although 

further rese arch would be required to confirm this observation. 

Lastly, we found that minority -identified workers expressed significantly more optimism around 

choice in where they work compared to their non -minority counterparts. While compelling on its 

own, this fi nding signals some potentially interesting areas for additional exploration. Current 

research finds that the desire for flexibility in work location —specifically remote —is strongest 

among underrepresented groups (Future Forum Pulse , 2021) . That minority employees in our Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 498 

study are expressing optimism about choice in where they work suggests a potentially positive 

move in diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts. However, the desire of underrepresented workers 

to overwhelmingly move to remote work environments should also raise ques tions about potential 

inclusivity, bias, or discrimination issues that might be informing the shift away from the office. 

Additional qualitative research could provide more nuanced insight into the complexity of this 

particular finding. 

Our research is not without limitations. First, since our sample is one of convenience, we cannot 

generalize our results to all workers in the countries that we sampled. Our research is also limited 

in that our survey was administered electronically, so an y potential participants would need 

access to technology and an internet connection in order to participate. Yet despite our 

limitations, our research provides insight into gender differences in perceptions of choice at work. 

While hybrid and remote work opportunities hold out the possibility for greater flexibility and work -

life balance, continued gender inequity in the division of domestic responsibilities 

disproportionately impacts women and how they perceive their work choices. As such, 

organizations s hould question whether their policies facilitate gender -equitable practices or are 

they complicit in perpetuating gender stereotypes that spill over into the home. We should also 

continue to question how gender stereotyping in the workplace impacts not onl y women’s choice 

in where they work, but also the opportunities they have for professional advancement, growth, 

and contribution. 

Table 1: Logistic Regression Results Comparing Demographics and Perceptions of Choice 

at Work 

Characteristics  Odds Ratio  95% Confidence Interval 

Gender 

Women (ref.) 

Men  1.23 † 1.04 -1.47 

Workspace 

On -site (ref.) 

Hybrid  4.98**  3.97 -6.26 

Remote  4.58**  3.79 -5.54 

Housework 

Respondent Responsible (ref.) 

Shared Responsibility  0.82  0.65 -1.02 

Partner Responsible  1.45 † 1.06 -1.98 

Childcare 

No Children (ref.) 

Respondent Responsible  2.20**  1.73 -2.81 

Shared Responsibility  1.73**  1.38 -2.18 

Partner Responsible  2.72**  1.95 -3.78 

Minority Status Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 499 

No (ref.) 

Yes  1.45**  1.19 -1.76 

Education 

College Graduate (ref.) 

Post -Graduate Degree  1.19  0.96 -1.48 

Some College or Trade School  0.57**  0.44 -0.72 

High School or Less  0.51**  0.38 -0.67 

Country 

United States (ref.) 

Canada  0.72 † 0.56 -0.93 

India  2.67**  2.05 -3.49 

United Kingdom  0.93  0.73 -1.18 

Brazil  1.62*  1.23 -2.13 

> † p<0.05
> * p<0.01
> ** p<0.001

Table 2: Chi -Square Tests Comparing Gender against Childcare and Housework 

Responsibility 

Women n(%)  Men n(%)  χ2 

Housework 

Respondent 

Responsibility  798 (69)  455 (36)  (2)=157.1465** 

Shared Responsibility  645 (49)  664 (51) 

Partner Responsibility  193 (33)  392 (67) 

Childcare 

No Children  658 (59)  452 (41)  (3)=186.0021** 

Respondent 

Responsibility  400 (66)  205 (34) 

Shared Responsibility  434 (46)  507 (54) 

Partner Responsibility  144 (29)  347 (71) 

> † p<0.05
> * p<0.01
> ** p<0.001

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 500 

References 

Acker, J. (1990). Hierarchies, jobs, and bodies: A theory of gendered organizations. Gender & 

Society , 4, 139 –158. 

Auginbaugh, A., & Rothstein, D. S. (2022). How did employment change during the COVID -19 

pandemic? Evidence from a new BLS survey suppleme nt .

Baxter, J., & Wright, E. O. (2000). The Glass Ceiling Hypothesis: A Comparative Study of the 

United States, Sweden, and Australia .

Berger, J., Cohen, B. P., & Zelditch Jr., M. (1972). Status characteristics and social interaction. 

American Sociolog ical Review , 37 , 241 –255. 

Blair -Loy, M. (2005). Competing Devotions: Career and Family among Women Executives .

Harvard University Press. 

Blair -Loy, M., Hochschild, A., Pugh, A. J., Williams, J. C., & Hartmann, H. (2015). Stability and 

transformation in gender, work, and family: insights from the second shift for the next 

quarter century. Community, Work and Family , 18 (4), 435 –454. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/13668803.2015.1080664 

Bobbitt -Zeher, D. (2011). Gender discrimination at work: Connecting gender stereotypes, 

institutional policies, and gender composition of workplace. Gender and Society , 25 (6), 

764 –786. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243211424741 

Burgess, D., & Borgida, E. (1999). Who women are, who women should be: Descriptive and 

prescriptive stereotyping in gender discrimination. Psychology, Public Policy and Law , 5,

665 –692. 

Collins, C., Ruppanner, L., Christin Landivar, L., & Scarborough, W. J. (2021). The Gendered 

Consequences of a Weak Infrastructure of Care: School Reopening Plans and Parents’ 

Employment During the COVID -19 Pandemic. Gender and Society , 35 (2), 180 –193. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/08912432211001300 

Connell, R. W. (1995). Masculinities . University of California Press. 

Co ppock, A., & McClellan, O. A. (2019). Validating the demographic, political, psychological, 

and experimental results obtained from a new source of online survey respondents. 

Research and Politics , 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/2053168018822174 

Corby, S. , & Stanworth, C. (2009). A Price Worth Paying? Equal Opportunities International ,

28 (2), 162 –178. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 501 

Dunatchik, A., Gerson, K., Glass, J., Jacobs, J. A., & Stritzel, H. (2021). Gender, Parenting, and 

The Rise of Remote Work During the Pandemic: Implicati ons for Domestic Inequality in 

the United States. Gender and Society , 35 (2), 194 –205. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/08912432211001301 

Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (2002). Role congruity theory of prejudice toward female leaders. 

Psychological Review , 109 , 573 –598. 

England, P. (2006). Toward gender equality: Progress and bottlenecks. In F. D. Blau, M. C. 

Brinton, & D. B. Grusky (Eds.), The Declining Significance of Gender? Russell Sage 

Foundation. 

Fiske, S. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimina tion. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. 

Lindsey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 357 –411). 

McGraw -Hill. 

Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., Glick, P., & Xu, J. (2002). A model of (often mixed) stereotype 

content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived status and 

competence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 82 , 878 –902. 

Foschi, M. (2000). Double standards for competence: Theory and research. Annual Review of 

Sociology , 26 , 21 –42. 

Future Forum Pu lse . (2021). futureforum.com/pulse -survey 

Glass, J. (1988). Job Quits and Job Changes: The Effects of Young Women’s Work Conditions 

and Family Factors. Gender & Society , 2(2), 228 –240. 

Global Gender Gap Report . (2021). http://reports.weforum.org/global -

Goldin, C., & Rouse, C. (2000). Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of “blind” auditions on 

female musicians. The American Economic Review , 90 (4), 715 –741. 

Gorman, E. H. (2005). Gender stereotypes, same -gender preferences, and organizational 

variation in the hiring of women: Evidence from law firms. American Sociological Review ,

70 (4), 702 –728. 

Hays, S. (1996). The Cultural Contradictions of Motherhood . Ya le University Press. 

Heilman, M. E. (2001). Description and prescription: How gender stereotypes prevent women’s 

ascent up the organizational ladder. Journal of Social Issues , 57 , 657 –674. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 502 

Hideg, I., & Krstic, A. (2021). The quest for workplace gender equality in the 21st century: 

Where do we stand and how can we continue to make strides? Canadian Journal of 

Behavioural Science , 53 (2), 106 –113. https://doi.org/10.1037/cbs0000222 

Hochschild, A. (2003). The second shift: Working parents and the revolution at home . Viking. 

Kan, M. -Y., Zhou, M., Kolpashnikova, K., Hertog, E., Yoda, S., & Jun, J. (2022). Revisiting the 

Gender Revolution: Time on Paid Work, Domestic Work, and Total Work in East Asian 

and Western Societies 1985 –2016. Gender & Socie ty , 089124322210796. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/08912432221079664 

Leidner, R. (1991). Serving Hamburgers and Selling Insurance: Gender, Work, and Identity in 

Interactive Service Jobs. Gender & Society , 5(2), 154 –177. 

Massey, G., Hahn, K., & Sekulic, D. (1 995). Women, Men, and the “Second Shift” in Socialist 

Yugoslavia. Gender & Society , 9(3), 359 –379. 

Meitzen, M. E. (1986). Differences in male and female job -quitting behavior. Journal of Labor 

Economics , 4(2), 151 –167. 

Miller, M. L., Moen, P., & Dempst er -McClain, D. (1991). Motherhood, Multiple Roles, and 

Maternal Well -being: Women of the 1950s. Gender & Society , 5(4), 565 –582. 

Misra, J., Kuvaeva, A., O’meara, K., Culpepper, D. K., & Jaeger, A. (2021). Gendered and 

Racialized Perceptions of Faculty W orkloads. Gender & Society , 35 (3), 358 –394. 

Mooi -Reci, I., & Risman, B. J. (2021). The Gendered Impacts of COVID -19: Lessons and 

Reflections. In Gender and Society (Vol. 35, Issue 2, pp. 161 –167). SAGE Publications 

Inc. https://doi.org/10.1177/089124322 11001305 

Murray, S. B. (2000). Getting Paid in Smiles: The Gendering of Child Care Work. Symbolic 

Interaction , 23 (2), 135 –160. https://doi.org/10.1525/si.2000.23.2.135 

Olson, C. A., & Becker, B. E. (1983). Sex discrimination in the promotion process. Industrial and 

Labor Relations Review , 36 (4), 624 –641. 

Reskin, B. F. (1988). Bringing the men back in: Sex differentiation and the devaluation of 

women’s work. Gender & S ociety , 2, 58 –81. 

Reskin, B., & McBrier, D. B. (2000). Why not ascription? Organizations’ employment of male 

and female managers. American Sociological Review , 65 , 210 –233. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 503 

Ridgeway, C. L., & Correll, S. J. (2004). Unpacking the gender system a theoret ical perspective 

on gender beliefs and social relations. In Gender and Society (Vol. 18, Issue 4, pp. 510 –

531). https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243204265269 

Ridgeway, C. L., & England, P. (2007). Sex discrimination in the workplace (F. J. Crosby, M. S. 

Stockdale, & S. A. Ropp, Eds.). Blackwell Publishing. 

Rudman, L. A. (1998). Self -promotion as a risk factor for women: The costs and benefits of 

counter stereotypical impression management. Journal of Personality and Social 

Psychology , 74 , 629 –645. 

Rus sell, A., & Frachtenberg, E. (2021). Worlds Apart: Technology, Remote Work, and Equity. 

Computer , 54 (7), 46 –56. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2021.3074121 

Williams, J. C. (1991). Gender Wars: Selfless Women in the Republic of Choice. In L. Rev .

http://repo sitory.uchastings.edu/faculty_scholarshiphttp://repository.uchastings.edu/facult 

y_scholarship/825 

Women in the Workplace . (2020). McKinsey & Company. https://leanin.org/women -in -the -

workplace -report -2020/introduction 

Women in the Workplace . (2021). McK insey & Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/featured -

insights/diversity -and -inclusion/women -in -the -workplace Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 504 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 505 

# Can Performance and Representation Improve 

# Public Perceptions of Police Legitimacy in Pursuing 

# Domestic Violence Cases? 

Kimberly Madsen (Indiana University, United States) 

Abstract 

This paper explores how including women on police forces may improve outcomes for women 

and increase public perception of police legitimacy when addressing domestic violence. The 

theory of representative bureaucracy suggests that bureaucracies will be more responsive to the 

public and may garner additional legitimacy when they reflect the demographics of those t hey 

serve (Mosher 1968). This paper examines female representation in Kosovo, a country that has 

experienced ethnic conflict and gender violence and employs an experimental survey to 

understand how women rate police officers responding to domestic violence in the areas of trust, 

seriousness in carrying out investigations, and fairness. In the scenario where a respondent had 

little information about the policies of a force and could only see the demographic makeup of 

police, representation became an importan t influence for women on how they rated legitimacy of 

police in all areas. In the scenario where a policy was enacted that would benefit victims of 

domestic violence, performance mattered to both men and women for all three dimensions of 

legitimacy, wherea s information on whether a man or woman enacted the policy had little impact. 

Implications of these findings are that if citizens know little about their police forces, representation 

becomes increasingly important. But even a less representative force can gain legitimacy by 

enacting effective policies that benefit less represented groups. 

Keywords: gender, domestic violence, post -conflict, representation, policing 

Gender equality is the fifth UN Sustainable Development Goal and includes ending all forms of 

discrimination and violence against women and girls in public and private settings (UN Women, 

2022). Global research on 39 countries shows that having female police officers on a force is 

positively correlated with reports of sexual violence, and male a nd female victims report a 

preference for reporting to female officers (UN Women 2011). Studies suggest that female officers 

improve the quality of policing, increase rates of reporting and arrest for domestic violence, 

support affected citizens, help prev ent escalation of domestic violence, and lead to declines in 

intimate partner homicide and rates of repeated abuse (Miller and Segal 2014; Meier and 

Nicholson -Crotty 2006; Andrews and Miller 2013; Jordan 2001; Sun 2007). 

These findings point to a role of looking at domestic violence from a representative bureaucracy 

lens; bureaucracies may be more responsive to publics and garner additional legitimacy when 

they reflect the demographics of those they serve (Mosher 1968 and Krislov 1974). Passive 

representa tion, where the bureaucracy looks more like those they serve, can extend legitimacy 

to a public organization through a more symbolic role (Selden 1997) and may help communities Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 506 

feel enfranchised when they see a bureaucrat who looks like them (Riccucci and Saidel 1997; 

Selden 1997; Thielemann and Stewart 1996, as referenced in Meier and Nicholson -Crotty 2006). 

Active representation, where representatives press for the interests of those they serve (Mosher, 

1968), may increase public perceptions of legitimac y where bureaucrats share and act on values 

held by those they represent. Both passive and active representation are important to 

understanding legitimacy because while passive representation is a necessary but insufficient 

condition for active representat ion, each on its own may lead to different ends: passive 

representation may achieve demographic or symbolic representation as an end goal whereas 

active representation focuses on policy outcomes and implementation undertaken by those doing 

the representing (Meier and Nicholson -Crotty, 2006). This study addresses the need to examine 

representation in varied contexts by examining the role of passive and active gender 

representation in Kosovo, a country in the Balkans that has experienced gender -based violence 

during conflict. Its political context is interesting in that Kosovo is a young country established on 

ideals of gender representation in political, bureaucratic, societal, and cultural contexts 

(Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo, 2008). This context allows for a better understanding of 

how more equitable gender representation affects perceptions of legitimacy in post -conflict areas. 

This chapter employs an experimental survey based on the work of Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and 

Lavena (2014) to understand how women and men living in post -conflict areas rate legitimacy of 

police officers in the areas of trust, seriousness in carrying out investigations, and fairness when 

there is passive and active representation. Respondents were asked to rate each of thes e

dimensions of legitimacy for police forces with varying levels of gender representation and 

performance. In passive scenarios, female respondents rated units with higher female 

representation as more legitimate along each of the dimensions of legitimacy; for men, ratings 

only increased for how fair police are in carrying out investigations. Both men and women rated 

police units as more legitimate in the areas of how seriously they pursued investigations and how 

trustworthy they were while performance was not correlated with legitimacy in either group. In the 

active representation scenario, having a female in charge of a policy change was not correlated 

with higher ratings of police legitimacy among men or women, but higher performance was 

significant in al l areas of legitimacy for both men and women. 

Theoretical Framework 

Representative bureaucracy is concerned with the proportional representation of populations in 

bureaucratic agencies, as well as with the impacts that representation has on policy making and 

implementation (Meier and Nicholson -Crotty 2006). Mosher (1968, 12) defines passive 

representation as “concern[ing] the source of origin of individuals and the degree to which, 

collectively, they mirror the society” and active as representation where the bureaucrat presses 

for the interests of those individuals whose interests they represent. The theory suggests that 

bureaucracies will be more responsive to publics and more accountable when they reflect the 

demographics of those they serve (Denhardt an d deLeon 1995; Mosher 1968; Krislov 1974; 

Krislov and Rosenbloom 1981; Meier 1975; Selden 1997; Meier and Stewart 1992; Theobold and 

Haider -Markel 2008; Sowa and Selden 2003). Krislov (1974) suggested that the notion of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 507 

representation implies additional l egitimacy as the smaller stands for and encapsulates the larger 

body represented. 

Legitimacy and Values 

One mechanism of representative bureaucracy discussed in the literature is the role of 

representation in relation to legitimacy (see Riccucci, Van Ry zin, and Lavena, 2014; Peters, 

Maravic, and Schroter, 2015; Gravier, 2013; Theobald and Haider -Markel, 2009). Researchers 

have found evidence that passive representation influences citizen perceptions of performance, 

trustworthiness, fairness, and legitima cy of police (Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Lavena, 2014; 

Theobald and Haider -Markel, 2009; Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Jackson 2018). Additionally, 

decisions that benefit the public can serve to legitimize the actions of government bureaucracies 

(Selden, 1997). 

Citizen perceptions of legitimacy are increasingly important for countries that have undergone 

shifts in governance, borders, and ethnic conflict. The trust and confidence necessary to build 

community are broken down in societies that have been consumed by violence where neighbors 

prey on neighbors (Brinkerhoff, 2007). In areas where conflicts have occurred along ethnic and 

religious lines, these characteristics become particularly salient in future interactions with the 

state. Esman (1999, 365) emphasizes that the legitimacy of government in post -conflict areas is 

conditioned on seeing fellow ethnics wielding power at political levels and in state bureaucracies, 

being able to compete for and attain those positions, and providing “sympathetic hearing” and 

pr otection of allocation of services and provision of benefits. 

Literature in the social sciences on legitimacy includes several conceptualizations of legitimacy: 

legitimacy as capturing beliefs that government power is exercised fairly in the interest of the 

whole nation (Levi and Sacks, 2009; Cromartie, 2018); as car rying out procedures correctly and 

fairly (Levi, Sacks, and Taylor 2009; Koppell, 2008; Scholte and Tallberg, 2018; Hurd, 2007; 

Tallberg and Zurn, 2019; Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Lavena 2014); as justness measured through 

evaluations of appropriateness (Kno x, 2016); as actions undertaken by government being seen 

as trustworthy (Parsons, 1960; Levi, Sacks, and Talyor 2009; Suchman 1995; Riccucci, Van 

Ryzin, and Lavena 2014); and as based on calculated self -interests of constituents of whether 

the organization ’s activities will benefit their group (Suchman, 1995). These underlying 

components of legitimacy can serve as proxies to understand legitimacy as a whole. Each 

concept highlights the importance of individual perceptions in evaluating legitimacy of the 

bur eaucracy and indicates that public perceptions of legitimacy will be informed by personal 

values that have been formed within and shared across social groups. If bureaucrats mirror the 

demographic characteristics of those they serve, they are more likely t o encompass their values 

and make decisions to benefit those they serve (Meier and Nigro 1976). When these values are 

espoused and applied to decision making, they may influence public perceptions of how 

procedures are carried out, how appropriate resultin g actions are, and how fair and trustworthy 

bureaucrats are. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 508 

Legitimacy based on the actions of the bureaucracy can be divided into two types: performance 

legitimacy and procedural legitimacy. From the perspective of performance legitimacy, legitimacy 

is derived from government performance and effectiveness. Thus, states possess performance 

legitimacy in the eyes of citizens when they improve living standards in addition to filling state 

functions (Francois and Sud, 2006). It is related to collective gai ns, distributive justice, favorable 

outcomes, and fairness (Scholte and Tallberg, 2018; Hurd, 2007). Procedural legitimacy, on the 

other hand, embodies efficiency, expertise, impartiality, participation, accountability, problem 

solving, and correct procedu re (Tallberg and Zurn, 2017; Scholte and Tallberg, 2018; Hurd, 2007). 

The emphasis on performance and procedural legitimacy justifies looking not only at citizen 

perceptions of legitimacy, but also at actions the state undertakes that may alter those 

perce ptions. 

The final aspect of legitimacy examined here is how legitimacy relates to values held by 

individuals. The foundation of legitimacy is based on justness and evaluations of appropriateness 

(Knox, 2016). These evaluations that lead to legitimacy have been described as “a generalized 

perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within 

some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions” (Suchman, 1995, pg. 

574). Citizen perceptions of legitimacy then will be informed by personal values that have been 

formed within and shared across their social groups. Thus, criteria for determining legitimacy will 

be based on values citizens hold. 

Gender, Policing, and Representative Bureaucracy 

Several researchers in representative bureaucracy have written about the importance of values 

and beliefs accounting for positive effects of representation. Background experiences and 

personal attitudes of civil servants are a key determinant of decision making, and partiality, shared 

values, beliefs, and empathic understanding are connected to representativeness; these shared 

values and beliefs lead to substantive results as minority bureaucrats articulate the interests of 

their group during decision -maki ng processes (Van Riper, 1958; Lim 2006). Meier and Nicholson -

Crotty (2006, 850) highlight that representative bureaucracy “assumes that shared experiences 

or values, which may not be shared across gender or race divisions, fundamentally affect the 

decisions made by and the actions take n by the bureaucrat.” Active representation could affect 

perceptions of legitimacy based on citizen perceptions that the bureaucracy is acting on their 

behalf and pressing for their interests. Because the reflections of one’s own values is inherent to 

legi timacy, a potential mechanism for building legitimacy is likely through representation as 

residents interact with bureaucracies when interfacing with the government. 

Researchers have looked at both gender and policing extensively with the representative 

bureaucracy literature (Meier and Nicholson -Crotty, 2006; Keiser et al. 2002; Riccuci, Van Ryzin, 

and Lavena, 2014; Andrews and Miller, 2013). Keiser et al. (2002) discussed three types of issues 

where gender representation is likely to occur: (1) policies that benefit women as a class; (2) 

policies that through the political process have been defined as gendered and may therefore be 

more salient to women; and (3) instances where gender fundamentally changes the relationship 

with the client. In the area of policing, the importance of female representation has been shown Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 509 

in the US and England. Gender representation on police forces influences perceived job 

performance, trustworthiness, and fairness; greater numbers of women on police forces leads to 

higher r ates of reporting rape and processing rape cases; and female police chief constables are 

associated with higher arrest rates for domestic violence though an increase in female police 

officers is only significant when they are able to carry out front -line p olice work (Riccucci, Van 

Ryzin, and Lavena, 2014; Andrews and Miller, 2013; Schuck, 2018; Nicholson -Crotty et al. 2018). 

Meier and Nicholson -Crotty (2006) suggest four theoretical reasons a police force with more 

female officers may lead to better outco mes in issues affecting women: (1) a woman who sees 

more women on a force could assume sexual assault is taken more seriously; (2) a woman will 

be more likely to have a female officer as first point of contact; (3) female officers may sensitize 

their male colleagues; and (4) a female officer could share a set of values with female residents 

because of common gender -related experiences. Note that only the final reason directly depends 

on the actions of an officer representing her group; the others involve ot hers’ perceptions (either 

the perception of those reporting or of male officers after interacting with female officers). As such, 

the authors note that in two of these mechanisms, there does not need to be contact between a 

citizen and a female officer for representation to occur: (1) female clients may observe more 

women patrolling in their city, and (2) female officers may share a set of values with other women. 

Because the gender of police officers should be more salient to those who are usually 

underr epresented, women may care more about female representation on police forces than their 

male counterparts, which would lead them to rate officers as being more legitimate along the three 

dimensions discussed above. This leads to the following hypotheses: 

H1: Women will rate units with higher levels of gender representation as more legitimate 

H2: Women’s ratings of bureaucrat’s legitimacy will increase further when a female bureaucrat 

is seen actively pursuing the interests of their group 

Representation may not be the only factor in citizen’s evaluations of bureaucratic legitimacy. 

Literature on representative bureaucracy implies that representation improves performance, 

whether directly or indirectly, through impact on bureaucrat’s decisions or citizen p erceptions 

(Andrews et al., 2016). However, representation is likely not the only factor influencing good 

performance. Research on police performance indicates that factors like psychological and 

physiological stress responses and training in a variety of methods impact police performance 

positively or negatively (Andersen and Gustafsberg, 2016; Arnetz, Arble, Backman, Lynch, & 

Lublin, 2013; Arnetz, Nevedal, Lumley, Backman, & Lublin, 2009). As such, performance itself 

can influence perceptions of legitimac y outside of performance gains that are driven by 

representation. This leads to the following hypothesis: 

H3: Women will rate units with higher levels of performance as more legitimate when controlling 

for levels of representation Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 510 

Research has explored whether there is an interaction effect between representation and 

performance. Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Lavena (2014) explore whether citizens more positively 

evaluate an agency when there is both high representation and high performance and find that 

whil e both matter separately, there does not seem to be an interaction between representation 

and performance in their context. Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Jackson (2018) find that the interaction 

between representation and performance is not significant for blac k respondents, though it is for 

white respondents. These studies indicate that performance and representation are significant 

separately, but that the interaction of the two is not consistent across groups. 

Kosovo Context: Domestic Violence 

From its inception as a nation, leaders of Kosovo have identified gender representation as a value 

and tool for more effective government. The 2008 constitution and subsequent civil service laws 

recognize the need for equal opportunities for men and women (Constitution of the Republic of 

Kosovo, 2008; Law on Civil Service, 2010). Increasing gender representation on police forces is 

a prominent area of focus for improving the civil service in Kosovo and has been an aim of the 

Organization for Security and Co operation in Europe (OSCE), which has supported the 

Association of Women in the Kosovo Police since 2004 (OSCE, 2019). A 2018 campaign featured 

female KP officers, retired American Chief of Police, and the U.S. Embassy’s Department of 

Justice police suppor t program (ICITAP) encouraging women to join the police force (U.S. 

Embassy Pristina, 2018). However, in 2017 women remained underrepresented and made up 

only 14% of the 8,820 Kosovo Police, including constituting 11% of uniformed officers (Farnsworth 

et a l., 2018). In 2019, out of the 430 KP officers hired to go to basic training, 30.9% were female; 

additionally, a 2019 mandate required 30% of participants at trainings to be female (Jones 2020). 

Responding to domestic violence has been another focus of t he Kosovo Police. Progress in the 

legal framework for addressing domestic violence was made in 2018, when the Criminal Code 

was revised to define and treat domestic violence separate from other offenses; in 2019, 650 

more cases were reported than in 2017 ( UN Women 2019). Failing to comply with a civil court 

judgment on domestic violence is considered a criminal and prosecutable offense, though 

prosecution is rare (US Department of State, 2019). 

Police data in Kosovo indicate 94% of gender -based violence is perpetrated by men, and 62% of 

Kosovars have experienced domestic violence (68% of women and 56% of men) ( ibid. ). In 2017, 

of the 1,125 cases of reported domestic violence, 76% of the victims were women ( ibid. ). Police 

are often the first to respond to do mestic violence calls, and while 73.6% of Kosovars say they 

would turn to the police to assist with domestic violence, many do not trust officers to follow 

through with investigations (UN Women 2017). Female police are actively working to change the 

cultur e of normalizing and dismissing domestic violence cases ( ibid. ). In a training for Kosovo 

Police, Jane Townsley, founder of Force International, retired UK senior police officer, and 

experienced gender specialist in the field of policing and security, emph asized the importance of 

domestic violence units, trust and confidence in police, gender -responsive policing, and effective 

policies. She noted that “effective police response is a major contributing factor to the reputation 

of Kosovo Police” (UN Women 201 8). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 511 

Despite institutionalized values of representation, sexual violence is still a concerning issue in 

Kosovo. Research conducted by Human Rights Watch found that rape and other forms of sexual 

violence were used as “weapons of war and instruments of syst ematic ethnic cleansing” during 

the conflict with Serbia (Human Rights Watch, 2000). Much of this violence occurred as police 

officers joined military groups in carrying out actions against the general population. 

Unfortunately, sexual violence has not bee n limited to the conflict. Recent statistics reported by 

the Kosovo Women’s Network indicate that more than two -thirds of women have been victims of 

domestic violence, and women’s rights groups in Kosovo report that workplace sexual 

harassment and abuse of ten go unreported for fear of dismissal or retaliation (US Department of 

State, 2019). A high -profile domestic violence case in 2018 that resulted in the murder of the 

perpetrator’s wife and nine -year -old daughter sparked public protests, as the victims’ r elatives 

claimed they contacted Kosovo Police (KP) multiple times to request assistance, including 

reporting a death threat four hours before the murder. The murderer was later found guilty and 

sentenced to 24 years in prison (US Department of State, 2019) . In February 2019, Kosovo 

women protested outside Kosovo Police Headquarters in Pristina after a teenager reported to 

police that she had been raped by a teacher; she was then assaulted by the Kosovo Police Officer 

to whom she reported and was forced to h ave an abortion (Surk, 2019). The Kosovo Police 

Inspectorate reported that 11 police officers were accused of domestic violence in 2019 and nine 

in 2020 (Ahmeti 2021). 

The focus on institution -building, increasing the number of women on the police force, and 

continued salience of sexual violence in Kosovo, make this an appropriate area to research 

whether increased numbers of women on police forces, women in positions of authority to make 

policy choices, and enhanced performance lead to increased perceptio ns of legitimacy. 

Data 

The data for this chapter come from an experimental survey administered in Kosovo in September 

2019. Participants rated trust, fairness, and performance of Kosovo Police in both a passive 

representation and active representation sc enario involving domestic violence. In the passive 

scenario participants were randomly assigned a ratio of male to female police officers of either 

9:1 or 5:5 for a police force that receives calls reporting domestic violence, conducts 

investigations, and makes determinations for which actions should be taken. Participants were 

also randomly assigned a police performance measure of 70% or 30% arrests and were told that 

arrests reduce the number of victims seriously injured or killed due to domestic violence . These 

numbers were chosen to indicate low and high representation and poorer and higher performance 

and are based on a similar experiment from Ricucci, Van Ryzin, and Lavena (2014); the 

researchers chose these values based on several cognitive pretests f ound to be salient on both 

gender and performance factors. After reading the scenarios, respondents were asked to rate 

how seriously police pursue an investigation, how much of the time citizens can trust police in the 

scenario to do what is right, and how fair they would say police are likely to be in handling domestic 

violence cases. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 512 

For the active scenario, the same participants were then randomly assigned to a scenario where 

either a male or female had been promoted to oversee the handling of domestic violence cases. 

They were told the officer implemented a new system where victims of domestic violence meet 

with officers of their own gender to report the crime, and it is now mandatory to arrest perpetrators 

of domestic violence. They were then randomiz ed into a group where domestic violence 

decreased by either 80 or 20 percent and told victims reported they feel more comfortable 

reporting domestic violence crimes to police. These thresholds are also based on research by 

Riccucci, Van Ryzin, and Lavena ( 2014). Respondents were again asked to rate how seriously 

police pursue an investigation, how much of the time citizens can trust police in the scenario to 

do what is right, and how fair they would say police are likely to be in handling domestic violence 

cases. 

Because respondents were first assigned to passive and then to the active scenario, there should 

not be any influence from the active scenario on the passive; however, respondents could have 

been influenced by the passive scenario when answering q uestions about the active scenario. To 

ensure this was not the case, ratings of how seriously police pursue investigations, trust, and 

fairness in the active scenario were regressed on assignment to both passive representation and 

performance. Neither pass ive assignment variable was significant, indicating that exposure to the 

passive scenario did not influence ratings in the active scenario. 

Randomization in each scenario meant all participants were assigned to one of four possible 

groups for both the pa ssive and active scenarios, as shown in figures one and two. 

Figure 1: Domestic Violence Randomization (Passive) 

Group 1: Low Representation, Low 

Performance   

> (N=87)
> Kosovo Police in Qytet /Grad receive calls
> reporting domestic violence, conduct
> investigations of these crimes, and make
> determinations as to what actions should be
> taken. The officers assigned to this city
> include 9 men and 1 woman.
> According to a recent assessment, the
> police in Qytet/Grad made a mandatory
> arrest of the batterer in 30% of cases .
> Evidence shows that making such arrests
> reduces the number of victims seriously
> injured or killed as a result of domestic
> violence.

Group 2: Low Representation, High 

Performance    

> (N= 112)
> Kosovo Police in Qytet/Grad receive calls
> reporting domestic violence, conduct
> investigations of these crimes, and make
> determinations as to what actions should be
> taken. The officers assigned to this city include
> 9 men and 1 woman.
> According to a rec ent assessment, the police in
> Qytet/Grad made a mandatory arrest of the
> batterer in 70% of cases. Evidence shows that
> making such arrests reduces the number of
> victims seriously injured or killed as a result of
> domestic violence.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 513 

Figure 2: Domestic Violence Randomization (Active) 

Group 3: High Represe ntation, Low 

Performance 

(N=125) 

Kosovo Police in Qytet/Grad receive calls 

reporting domestic violence, conduct 

investigations of these crimes, and make 

determinations as to what actions should be 

taken. The officers assigned to this city 

include 5 men and 5 women .

According to a recent assessment, the police 

in Qytet/Grad made a mandatory arrest of 

the batterer in 30% of cases . Evidence 

shows that making such arrests reduces the 

number of victims seriously injured or killed 

as a result of domestic violence .

Group 4: High Representation, High 

Performance 

(N=120) 

Kosovo Police in Qytet/Grad receive calls 

reporting domestic violence, conduct 

investigations of these crimes, and make 

determinations as to what actions should be 

taken. The officers assigned to this city include 

5 men and 5 women .

According to a recent assessment, the police in 

Qytet/Grad made a mandatory arrest of the 

batterer in 70% of cases. Evidence shows that 

making such arrests reduces the number of 

victims seriously injured or killed as a result of 

domestic violence. 

Group 1: Low Representation, Low 

Performance 

(N=132) 

Recently in Qytet/Grad, a male officer was 

promoted to oversee handling of domestic 

violence cases. This officer implemented a 

new system where victims of domestic 

violence meet with officers of their own 

gender to report the crime, and it is now 

mandatory to arrest perpetrators of dom estic 

violence. 

Rates of domestic violence have decreased 

by 20% in the city, with victims saying they 

feel more comfortable reporting domestic 

violence crimes to police. 

Group 2: Low Representation, High 

Performance 

(N=111) 

Recently in Qytet/Grad, a ma le officer was 

promoted to oversee handling of domestic 

violence cases. This officer implemented a 

new system where victims of domestic 

violence meet with officers of their own 

gender to report the crime, and it is now 

mandatory to arrest perpetrators of 

domestic violence. 

Rates of domestic violence have decreased 

by 80% in the city, with victims saying they 

feel more comfortable reporting domestic 

violence crimes to police. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 514 

The survey was given to a representative sample of all ethn ic communities and equal numbers of 

men and women from the 38 major municipalities in Kosovo ages 18 and up (N=490). Weighting 

was introduced to the sample by multiplying the minorities by a factor of 2.41 for every one 

Albanian. 9 This ensured 50 Serbian respondents and 50 respondents from other minorities. 

Responses were weighted accordingly in all analyses. The sampling method used is a multi -

staged random probability method (typical of surveys in Kosovo). Stage one accounts for the 

appropriate rural/urban divide (45% urban/55% rural) of the country. Stage two refers to selecting 

households using a random -house technique. This consists of an assigned starting point in a 

given direction. In urban areas, the selected household is ea ch third house/address on the left -

hand side of the street. In block -of -flats the selected household is every third apartment, counting 

from the top floor in each entrance. In rural areas, the selected household is every third inhabitable 

dwelling on both sides of the interviewer's route. Stage three selects one member of the 

household using the nearest birthday technique. Stage four accounts for substitution of a 

respondent after two attempts (one initial visit and one call back). 

Table 1 below shows the descriptive statistics for assignment to the passive representation 

domestic violence scenario while Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for the active representation 

domestic violence scenario. Approximately 52% of all respondents are female, 89% are Al banian, 

and 5% are Serb (before weighting, this was 61% Albanian and 18% Serb). 10  The average 

monthly income is 648 Euros and the average age is 36. All models control for gender (female=1; 

male=0), age (a continuous variable), marital status (married=1; e lse 0), ethnicity (defined as 

Serb, Albanian, and other), administrative district (7 dummy variables indicating district the 

respondent resides in), education (a categorical variable with six categories where 6 th -9th grade   

> 9Analyses were conducted without weighting and found similar results.
> 10 Kosovo statistics show 92.9% of the population are Alban ian, and 1.5% are Serb. However, these
> estimates may under -represent Serb and some other ethnic minorities because they are based on the
> 2011 Kosovo national census, which excluded northern Kosovo (a largely Serb -inhabited region) and was
> partially boycott ed by Serb and Romani communities in southern Kosovo (CIA, 2020).

Group 3: High Representation, Low 

Performance     

> (N=112)
> Recently in Qytet /Grad, a female officer was
> promoted to oversee handling of domestic
> violence cases. This officer implemented a
> new system where victims of domestic
> violence meet with officers of their own gender
> to report the crime, and it is now mandatory to
> arrest perp etrators of domestic violence.
> Rates of domestic violence have decreased
> by 20% in the city, with victims saying they
> feel more comfortable reporting domestic
> violence crimes to police.

Group 4: High Representation, High 

Performance      

> (N=135)
> Recently in Qytet/Grad, a female officer
> was promoted to oversee handling of
> domestic violence cases. This officer
> implemented a new system where victims
> of domestic violence meet with officers of
> their own gender to report the crime, and it
> is now mandatory to arres t perpetrators of
> domestic violence.
> Rates of domestic violence have decreased
> by 80% in the city, with victims saying they
> feel more comfortable reporting domestic
> violence crimes to police.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 515 

is the lowest category and doctorate is the highest), and monthly income (ranging from less than 

400 Euros/month to over 1000 Euros/month). 

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Passive Scenario by Group 

Variable 

Low 

Rep/Low 

Perf 

Low 

Rep/High 

Perf 

High 

Rep/Low 

Perf 

High 

Rep/High 

Perf 

Total  Total 

Percentage 

# of 

Respondents  95  123  136  136  490  100% 

Gender 

Female  52  54  72  77  255  52% 

Male  43  69  64  59  235  48% 

Ethnicity 

Serb  3 7 9 7 26  5% 

Albanian  88  112  117  118  435  89% 

Other  4 4 10  11  29  6% 

Age 

Under 20  14  12  8 9 43  9% 

20 -24  20  34  21  30  105  21% 

25 -34  23  29  41  32  125  26% 

35 -44  12  19  26  28  85  17% 

45 -54  9 10  23  19  61  12% 

55 -59  10  6 10  10  36  7% 

60 -64  3 4 6 4 17  3% 

65 -74  0 6 1 4 11  2% 

75 -84  3 1 0 0 4 1% 

Education 

6th -9th  5 9 13  15  42.47  9% 

10th -13th  30  33  34  29  126  26% 

Associates  12  25  17  19  73  15% 

Bachelors  32  46  48  54  180  37% 

Masters  15  9 22  19  65  13% 

PhD/MD  0 0 2 0 2 0% 

Marital 

Single/Divorced  48  51  59  69  227  46% 

Married  47  72  77  67  263  54% Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 516 

Monthly Income (Euros) 

<400  21  29  35  36  121  25% 

400 -700  40  45  52  45  182  37% 

700 -1000  20  20  28  39  107  22% 

>1000  13  28  22  17  80  16% 

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics for Active Scenario by Group 

Variable 

Low 

Rep/Low 

Perf 

Low 

Rep/High 

Perf 

High 

Rep/Low 

Perf 

High 

Rep/High 

Perf 

Total  Total 

Percentage 

# of 

Respondents  132  111  112  135  490  100% 

Gender 

Female  79  52  62  63  256  52% 

Male  53  59  50  72  234  48% 

Ethnicity 

Serb  7 6 8 6 27  6% 

Albanian  118  100  97  121  436  89% 

Other  8 6 6 9 29  6% 

Age 

Under 20  14  7 13  11  45  9% 

20 -24  29  26  26  26  107  22% 

25 -34  34  33  31  28  126  26% 

35 -44  21  21  18  24  84  17% 

45 -54  12  14  13  22  61  12% 

55 -59  13  5 7 10  35  7% 

60 -64  6 2 1 8 17  3% 

65 -74  4 2 3 3 12  2% 

75 -84  0 1 0 3 4 1% 

Education 

6th -9th  10  9 6 16  41  8% 

10th -13th  35  25  24  42  126  26% 

Associates  22  21  17  14  74  15% 

Bachelors  53  39  45  43  180  37% 

Masters  12  17  19  18  66  13% 

PhD/MD  0 0 1 1 2 0% Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 517 

Marital 

Single/Divorced  75  51  59  62  247  50% 

Married  57  60  53  73  243  50% 

Monthly Income (Euros) 

<400  34  28  29  30  121  25% 

400 -700  42  49  37  55  183  37% 

700 -1000  34  24  20  27  105  21% 

>1000  22  11  26  23  82  17% 

Balance tests were carried out using a t -test to ensure randomization occurred. For the passive 

representation scenario, respondents were first randomized into a representative or non -

representative group. No characteristics were significant except for age . For the assignment to 

high or low performance for the passive scenario, t -tests were not significant except for marital 

status. For the active scenario, all characteristics were not significant for the random assignment 

to higher and lower representation . For the performance assignment for the active scenario, only 

gender was significant. Non -significant results of the t -test indicate that proper randomization 

occurred (see Appendix A). 

The dependent variables in this study capture components of procedu ral legitimacy: 1) how 

seriously police pursue investigations, 2) how often they can be trusted to do the right thing, and 

3) how fair police are in handling investigations. Seriousness in pursuing investigations is strongly 

correlated with trusting police to do the right thing (both passive and active scenarios r=0.8), and 

fairness in handling investigations is moderately correlated with both seriousness and trust 

(passive: r=0.5 for both; active: r=0.7 for both) (see Appendix A Tables 5 and 6 for correlat ion 

tables). These correlations indicate overlap in the concepts being measured and represent a 

potential weakness in the current study. Each of the dependent variables are rated using a five -

point Likert scale. The main explanatory variables of interest a re the two assignment groups 

respondents were randomly assigned to: how representative the police force is of the population 

and high or low police performance. Additional controls include respondent age, gender, marital 

status, municipality, and education .

All analyses below report coefficients of linear regressions. Ordinal logits were also performed as 

a robustness check and the same variables were found to be significant in both models. All models 

were run with interactions between the two assignment vari ables, and the interactions were not 

significant in any models. These interactions were dropped in subsequent analyses. 

Findings 

Hypothesis one stated that women will rate units with higher levels of gender representation as 

more legitimate. As reported in Table 3 below, women who were assigned to the more 

representative group were more likely to give police higher ratings for how seriously they carried 

out investigations (p<0.05), how much they trusted police to do the right thing (p<0.05), and how Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 518 

fai r they were in handling investigations (p<0.001). The same assignment is not significant among 

male respondent for how seriously police pursue investigations and trusting police to do the right 

thing (p=0.24 and 0.22 respectively). However, being assigned to a more representative police 

force is correlated with men having higher perceptions that police handled investigations more 

fairly (p<0.10). 

Table 3. Effects of a More Representative Police Force on Perceptions of Legitimacy 

Passive 

Coeff 

St 

Error 

P-

Value  R2 N

Seriously Pursue 

Investigation 

Females  0.329  0.164  0.046  0.179  246 

Males  0.248  0.169  0.143  0.173  244 

Trust Police to Do the Right 

Thing 

Females  0.307  0.151  0.043  0.171  246 

Males  0.227  0.166  0.172  0.138  244 

Fairness in Handling 

Investigations 

Females  0.634  0.170  0.000  0.167  246 

Males  0.487  0.182  0.008  0.140  244 

This suggests that, for women, a more representative police force increases perceptions in all 

three aspects of legitimacy while it only impacts men’s perceptions in the area of fairness. Men 

may see women as being more fair, but this does not translate in to perceptions that the work on 

the case (carrying out the investigation and trusting that they will do the right thing) will be 

impacted. Notably, the coefficients for fairness are higher for men and women than the other two 

aspects of legitimacy. Since t rust and seriousness are more closely correlated, it is consistent 

with men reacting similarly to these measures. 

Hypothesis two states that women will rate units with higher levels of gender representation as 

more legitimate when bureaucrats actively pu rsue the interests of their group. In this experiment, 

this means women should rate units with a female officer overseeing domestic violence efforts as 

more legitimate. However, Table 4 below shows that neither men nor women being assigned to 

a group where a woman is promoted to lead domestic violence efforts is consistently correlated 

with increases in ratings of police officers. The only exception is for females in their ratings of 

trusting police to do the right thing (p<.10 in both cases). The scenario only differed between 

whether a woman or man put an effective policy in place. Regardless of gender, the outcome was Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 519 

the same. This may point to the importance of how effective the policy was rather than the gender 

of the officer establishing the policy a nd is addressed in hypothesis three below. 

Table 4. Effects of a Female Enacting a Policy on Perceptions of Legitimacy 

Active 

Coeff  St Error  P-Value  R2 N

Seriously Pursue 

Investigation 

Females  0.192  0.169  0.258  0.268  246 

Males  0.238  0.167  0.154  0.182  244 

Trust Police to Do the Right 

Thing 

Females  0.257  0.154  0.096  0.278  246 

Males  0.120  0.165  0.471  0.149  244 

Fairness in Handling 

Investigations 

Females  0.054319  0.169589  0.749  0.1651  246 

Males  0.184835  0.152254  0.226  0.1513  244 

Finally, hypothesis three states that women will rate units with higher levels of performance as 

more legitimate. Table 5 below shows that being assigned to a group with higher performance is 

significantly and positively correlated with perceptions of seri ousness in pursuing investigations 

and trusting police to do the right thing in the scenario where respondents only know the 

demographic makeup of police but no policy is discussed (the passive representation scenario) 

(p<0.001). It is not significant for perceptions of fairness in handling investigations for either men 

or women. This again shows a consistency in correlation between seriousness and trust. 

Table 5. Effects of Higher Performance on Perceptions of Legitimacy 

Passive  Active 

Coeff 

St 

Error 

P-

Value  R2 N Coeff 

St 

Error 

P-

Valu 

e R2 N

Seriously 

Pursue 

Investigation 

Females  0.839  0.164  0.000  0.179  246  1.124 

0.16 

7 0.000 

0.26 

8

24 

6

Males  0.776  0.171  0.000  0.173  244  0.668 

0.16 

4 0.000 

0.18 

2

24 

4Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 520 

Trust Police to 

Do the Right 

Thing 

Females  0.747  0.158  0.000  0.171  246  1.059 

0.15 

2 0.000 

0.27 

8

24 

6

Males  0.658  0.167  0.000  0.138  244  0.570 

0.16 

9 0.001 

0.14 

9

24 

4

Fairness in 

Handling 

Investigations 

Females  0.223  0.174  0.202  0.167  246  0.824  0.17 

2 0.000 

0.16 

5

24 

6

Males  0.257  0.170  0.132  0.140  244  0.277  0.16 

1 0.086  0.15 

1

24 

4

Interestingly, performance matters for men and women in the case where a policy is put into place 

to improve handling of domestic violence cases in all areas of legitimacy (note: p<0.001 for all 

except males in their perception of fairness in handling investigations, which is significant at the 

p<0.10 level). This indicates that performance is more important than gender of the officer 

establishing the policy, and that an effective policy at leads to increased performance is tied to 

increased perceptions of all types of police legitimacy. 

Research Implications and Limitations 

This study contributes to the literature on representative bureaucracy by highlighting the different 

roles representation and performance play in how respondents rate the legitimacy of police in 

passive and active representation scenarios in a post -conflic t setting. Findings are similar to those 

in other countries: the representation of women is correlated with higher ratings of legitimacy for 

women. In the passive representation scenario, where a respondent had little information about 

the policies of a fo rce and could only see the demographic makeup of police, representation 

became an important influence on legitimacy for women in each of the dimensions of procedural 

legitimacy. Increasing the number of women on a force increased their ratings of how serio usly 

police pursue investigations, how much they trusted them to do the right thing, and how fair police 

are in handling investigations. In contrast, knowing the demographic makeup of the force only 

influenced men’s perceptions that cases would be handled fairly but did not significantly impact 

their perceptions of how well the case would be carried out in terms of seriously pursuing an 

investigation and being trusted to do the right thing. This suggests that both men and women 

associate women with fairness , but that it is shared values and lived experience of women that 

influence ratings of seriousness and trust, as theorized by existing literature. 

Interestingly, performance was significantly correlated with higher ratings for men in the areas of 

legitim acy where representation did not influence them; namely, men rated seriousness in 

pursuing an investigation and trusting police to do the right thing when there was higher Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 521 

performance but not higher representation, and performance was not significant for men in rating 

how fair police are, though representation was significant to this rating of fairness. For men in 

scenarios where only demographic information is known and no policy positions have been 

stated, representation and performance seem to be marked ly separate, perhaps suggesting 

distinct associations with the various aspects of legitimacy, with seriousness and trust on the one 

hand and fairness on the other. Literature on leadership indicates that fairness is seen as a more 

stereotypically female tr ait and that may be playing out in evaluations here (Bruckmüller and 

Branscombe, 2010). This is affirmed by higher correlations between seriousness and trust and 

lower correlations of those concepts with fairness. Because fairness seems to be markedly 

fema le, it is unsurprising that both men and women think increasing female representation on the 

force would increase fairness of that force’s response to domestic violence. Seriousness in 

carrying out an investigation and trusting police to do the right thing may be seen as tied to 

outcomes of an investigation, whereas fairness may be seen as more intrinsically related to how 

women treat other women. 

Local context may also play into these findings. One study found that respondents felt a need for 

improved in ter -institutional cooperation. One respondent said, “Institutions don’t know their 

obligations, they send victims from one institution to another and re -victimize them in this way 

because they have to tell their story over and over again” (Kosovo Women’s N etwork 2015, p. 

315 .). Perhaps even if police are seen as being fair, there is a perception that a case will still not 

come to the “right” conclusions, harming perceptions of trustworthiness and how serious police 

pursue investigations. There may be little hope for a positive outcome if coordination between 

institutions does not occur. Further research is warranted. 

Turning to the active representation scenario, where a policy was enacted that would benefit 

victims of domestic violence, performance mattere d to both men and women for all three 

dimensions of legitimacy, whereas information on whether a man or woman enacted the policy 

had little impact. Respondents seem to care more about the potential outcome of a policy being 

in place than they do about who is responsible for making the change. This could point to the 

importance of representation when there is little information on how a force carries out their 

responsibilities and the only information available to evaluate the force on is whether women are 

present. However, when an effective policy is put into place, and this is known, respondents can 

rely on that information to rate officers. Implications of this finding are that if citizens know little 

about their police forces, representation becomes impor tant. But even a less representative force 

can gain legitimacy by enacting good policies that benefit less represented groups. 

Passive representation may be a means of allowing the under -represented to feel enfranchised, 

while active representation seeks to put into place policies that benefit under -represented groups. 

More research should be carried out on how passive and active representation may differ in their 

end goals and what influences those perceptions, and on how dimensions of legitimacy differ from 

one another, including whether some aspects of legitimacy are more inherently gendered. Further 

research on intensity of doses and threshold effects could also be beneficial to understanding 

representation, performance, and interactions between the tw o. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 522 

Conclusion 

While representative bureaucracy has been studied in a variety of policy areas in the US, little 

research has been done on citizen perceptions of legitimacy in post -conflict areas. This article 

used an experimental survey to understand ho w respondents react to more or less representative 

police forces and higher and lower performance. In passive scenarios, female respondents rated 

units with higher female representation as more legitimate along each of the dimensions of 

legitimacy; for men , ratings only increased for how fair police are in carrying out investigations. 

Both men and women rated police units as more legitimate in the areas of how seriously they 

pursued investigations and how trustworthy they were, while performance was not cor related with 

legitimacy in either group. These findings may support other research that victims of domestic 

violence will benefit from female police officers. Studies that suggest better outcomes, higher 

reporting, and more outreach to women are confirmed here by perceptions that female officers 

can be trusted to do the right thing, will handle cases fairly, and be serious in carrying out 

investigations. More research should be done in other post -conflict areas and in Kosovo to better 

understand how represe ntation and performance influence the various dimensions of legitimacy 

to understand their potential and differing uses as tools for building legitimacy. 

Appendix A 

Table I. Balance Test for Representation in Passive DV 

Scenario 

Group 1

Mean 

Group 2

Mean 

T-

value 

P-

Value 

Age (Continuous)  35  37.81  -2.09  0.04 

Age  3.46  3.81  -2.13  0.03 

Gender (male=1)  0.53  0.48  1.21  0.23 

Marital Status  1.56  1.60  -0.92  0.36 

Ethnicity  2.63  3.05  -1.81  0.07 

Education  3.10  3.01  0.79  0.43 

Monthly Income  2.14  2.12  0.29  0.77 

Municipality  20.07  19.20  0.85  0.39 

Citizenship (y/n)  0.97  0.98  -0.97  0.33 

Ethnicity (three 

groups)  1.50  1.72  -3.03  0.00 

Serb (y/n)  0.19  0.20  -0.47  0.64 

Albanian (y/n)  0.66  0.54  2.69  0.01 

Table II. Balance Test for Performance in Passive DV 

Scenario 

Group 1

Mean 

Group 2

Mean 

T-

value 

P-

Value 

Age (Continuous)  37.14  36.03  0.82  0.41 

Age  3.71  3.60  0.67  0.50 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 523 

Gender (male=1)  0.49  0.51  -0.31  0.76 

Marital Status  1.64  1.54  2.03  0.04 

Ethnicity  2.83  2.88  -0.23  0.82 

Education  3.14  2.97  1.53  0.13 

Monthly Income  2.16  2.11  0.54  0.59 

Municipality  18.90  20.20  -1.28  0.20 

Citizenship (y/n)  0.98  0.97  0.39  0.70 

Ethnicity (three 

groups  1.62  1.63  -0.11  0.91 

Serb (y/n)  0.19  0.20  -0.41  0.68 

Albanian (y/n)  0.60  0.59  0.26  0.79 

Table III. Balance Test for Representation in Active DV Scenario 

Group 1

Mean 

Group 2

Mean  T-value  P-Value 

Age (Continuous)  36.3012  36.79249  -0.36566  0.714776 

Age  3.630522  3.667984  -0.22948  0.818587 

Gender (male=1)  0.496032  0.505976  -0.2226  0.823941 

Marital Status  1.593074  1.575  0.363602  0.716319 

Ethnicity  2.869048  2.849802  0.083955  0.933126 

Education  3.04065  3.056  -0.13341  0.893921 

Monthly Income  2.114173  2.145669  -0.35379  0.723643 

Municipality  19.33071  19.85433  -0.51258  0.608467 

Citizenship (y/n)  0.971193  0.979675  -0.60508  0.545406 

Ethnicity (three 

groups  1.606299  1.637795  -0.43603  0.663004 

Serb (y/n)  0.188976  0.204724  -0.44554  0.656117 

Albanian (y/n)  0.602362  0.57874  0.540455  0.589121 

Table IV. Balance Test for Representation in Active DV Scenario 

Group 1

Mean 

Group 2

Mean  T-value  P-Value 

Age (Continuous)  35.688  37.40278  -1.27823  0.201763 

Age  3.544  3.753968  -1.28831  0.198234 

Gender (male=1)  0.456  0.545455  -2.01029  0.044936 

Marital Status  1.536481  1.630252  -1.89365  0.058886 

Ethnicity  2.984064  2.73622  1.082418  0.279585 

Education  3.146341  2.952  1.694011  0.090894 

Monthly Income  2.170635  2.089844  0.908115  0.36425 

Municipality  20.0754  19.11719  0.938551  0.348409 

Citizenship (y/n)  0.979339  0.97166  0.547779  0.584095 

Ethnicity (three 

groups  1.638889  1.605469  0.462659  0.643808 

Serb (y/n)  0.218254  0.175781  1.203083  0.229507 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 524 

Albanian (y/n)  0.571429  0.609375  -0.86856  0.385502 

Table V. Correlations 

Gender ( Passive) 

Serious  Trust  Fair 

Serious  1

Trust  0.8004  1

0

Fair  0.5140  0.5411  1

0 0

Gender (Active) 

Serious  Trust  Fair 

Serious  1

Trust  0.8393  1

0

Fair  0.6580  0.6651  1

0 0

References 

Ahemeti , A. (2021, April 6). In Kosovo, System Failing to Protect Domestic Abuse Victims. 

Balkan Insight. Accessed from https://balkaninsight.com/2021/04/06/in -kosovo -system -

failing -to -protect -domestic -abuse -victims/. 

Andrews, R., Groeneveld, S., Meier, K. J., & Schröter, E. (2016, June). Representative 

bureaucracy and public service performance: Where, why and how does 

representativeness work. In PMRA Public Management Research Conference (Vol. 22). 

Aarhus Universit y. 

Andersen, J. P., & Gustafsberg, H. (2016). A training method to improve police use of force 

decision making: a randomized controlled trial. Sage Open, 6(2). 

Andrews, R., & Johnston Miller, K. (2013). Representative bureaucracy, gender, and policing: 

The case of domestic violence arrests in England. Public Administration, 91(4), 998 -

1014. 

Arnetz, B. B., Arble, E., Backman, L., Lynch, A., & Lublin, A. (2013). Assessment of a 

prevention program for work -related stress among urban police officers. International 

Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health, 86, 79 -88. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 525 

Arnetz, B. B., Nevedal, D. C., Lumley, M. A., Backman, L., & Lublin, A. (2009). Trauma 

resilience training for police: Psychophysiological and performance effects. Journal of 

Police and Criminal Psychology, 24, 1 -9. 

Brinkerhoff, D. W. (Ed.). (2007). Governance in post -conflict societies: Rebuilding fragile 

states . Routledge. 

Bruckmüller, S., & Branscombe, N. R. (2010). The glass cliff: When and why women are 

selected as leaders in crisis contexts. British Journal of Social Psychology, 49(3), 433 -

451. 

Carlson, M. J., Harris, S. D., & Holden, G. W. (1999). Protective orders and domestic violence: 

Risk factors for re -abuse. Journal of Family Violence, 14(2), 205 -226. 

CIA World Factbook (2020). Europe: Kosovo. 

Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo. (2008). Accessed from 

http://www.kushtetutakosoves.info/repository/docs/Constitution.o f.the.Republic.of.Kosov 

o.pdf 

Cromartie, A. (2018). Legitimacy. In Political concepts. Manchester University Press. 

Dee, T. S. (2005). Expense preference and student achievement in school districts. Eastern 

Economic Journal, 31(1), 23 -44. 

Esman, M. J. (1999). Public administration and conflict management in plural societies: the case 

for representative bureaucracy. Public Administration & Development, 19(4), 353. 

Farnsworth, N., Morina, D., Ryan, D., Rrahmani, G., Robinson -Conlon, V., and Banjska, I. 

(2018). Kosovo Gender Analysis. Kosovo Women’s Network. European Union 4 Kosovo. 

Retrieved from https://womensnetwork.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/womens -

network.pdf. 

Francois, M. and I. Sud (2006) ‘Promoting Stability and Development in Fragile and Failed 

States’, Development Policy Review 24(2): 141 –60. 

Futures Without Violence. (n.d.). Mandatory Reporting of Domestic Violence to Law 

Enforcement by Health Care Providers: A Guide for Advocates Working to Respond to 

or Amend Reporting Laws Related to Domestic Violence. 

Gracia, E. Unreported cases of dom estic violence against women: towards an epidemiology of 

social silence, tolerance, and inhibition. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health 

2004; 58:536 -537. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 526 

Gap Institute. (2015). Reforming Public Administration in Kosovo. Accessed from 

http://w ww.institutigap.org/documents/99892_Reforming%20%20Public%20Administrati 

on%20in%20Kosovo.pdf on April 12, 2018. 

Gilbert, Kimutai. (2019, October 17). Countries That Recognize Kosovo. Retrieved from 

https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/which -countries -reco gnize -kosovo -as -a-country.html 

Gravier, M. (2013). Challenging or enhancing the EU’s legitimacy? The evolution of 

representative bureaucracy in the Commission’s staff policies. Journal of Public 

Administration Research and Theory, 23(4), 817 -838. 

Harris , E. (2008, Feb 17). Q & A: The State of Kosovo. NPR. Retrieved from 

https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=19148459. 

Haxhiaj, S. (2018). Has the UN’s Kosovo Mission Become Obsolete? Balkan Transitional 

Justice. Balkan Insight. (Dec 18, 2018). Accessed from 

https://balkaninsight.com/2018/12/18/has -the -un -s-kosovo -mission -become -obsolete -12 -

17 -2018/ on April 17, 2019. 

Hindera, J. J. (1993a). Representative bureaucracy: Imprimis evidence of active representation 

in the EEOC district offic es. Social Science Quarterly, 74(2), 95 -108. 

Hindera, J. J. (1993b). Representative bureaucracy: Further evidence of active representation in 

the EEOC district offices. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 3(3), 

415 -429. 

Holt, V. L., Kernic, M. A., Lumley, T., Wolf, M. E., & Rivara, F. P. (2002). Civil protection orders 

and risk of subsequent police -reported violence. JAMA, 288(5), 589 -594. 

Hong, S. (2016). Representative bureaucracy, organizational integrity, and citizen coproduction: 

Does an increase in police ethnic representativeness reduce crime?. Journal of Policy 

Analysis and Management, 35(1), 11 -33. 

Hurd, I. (2007). Breaking and m aking norms: American revisionism and crises of legitimacy. 

International Politics, 44(2 -3), 194 -213. 

The Independent International Commission on Kosovo. (2000). The Kosovo Report: Conflict, 

International Response, Lessons Learned. Oxford University Pre ss. Accessed from 

https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/6D26FF88119644CFC1256989005 

CD392 -thekosovoreport.pdf on April 11, 2018. 

International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Judgement List. 

icty.org. Archived fr om the original on 1 March 2014. See 

https://web.archive.org/web/20100827083654/http://www.icty.org/x/cases/limaj/cis/en/cis Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 527 

_limaj_al_en.pdf and 

https://web.archive.org/web/20140301030130/http://www.icty.org/sid/10095 accessed 

April 11, 2018. 

Jones, J. ( 2020). Women in the Kosovo Police. International Criminal Investigative Training 

Assistance Program. Accessed from chrome -

extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/viewer.html? 

pdfurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.justice.gov%2Fcriminal -

icitap%2Ffile%2F1307176%2 Fdownload&clen=5872236&chunk=true&pdffilename=icita 

p-women -in -kosovo -police.pdf. 

Jordan, Jan (2001). “Worlds Apart? Women, Rape and the Police Reporting Process,” British 

Journal of Criminology, 41(4): 679 –706. 

Keiser, L. R., Wilkins, V. M., Meier, K. J., & Holland, C. A. (2002). Lipstick and logarithms: 

Gender, institutional context, and representative bureaucracy. American political science 

review, 553 -564. 

Kešetović, Ž. M. (2013). Serbian police: Troubled transition from police force to police service. 

In Handbook on policing in Central and Eastern Europe (pp. 217 -238). Springer, New 

York, NY. 

Knox, C. C. (2016). Public administrators’ use of social media platforms: Overcoming the 

legitimacy dilemma?. Administration & Society, 48(4), 477 -496. 

Koppell, J. G. (2008). Global governance organizations: Legitimacy and authority in 

conflict. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory , 18 (2), 177 -203. 

Kosovo Women’s Network (2015). No More Excuses: An Analysis of Attitudes, Incidence, and 

Institutional Responses to Domestic Violence in Kosovo, Pg. 65. Available from 

https://womensnetwork.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/10/20151124105025622.pdf. 

Accessed Oct 9, 2020. 

Landau, D. M. (2017). The quest for legitimacy in independent Kosovo: the un fulfilled promise of 

diversity and minority rights. Nationalities Papers, 45(3), 442 -463. 

Law on the Civil Service of the Republic of Kosovo, No. 03/L -149. (2010). Retrieved from 

http://zpd -

rks.org/upload/en/legislation/laws/LAW%20ON%20THE%20CIVIL%20SER VICE.pdf 

Levi, M., & Sacks, A. (2009). Legitimating beliefs: Sources and indicators. Regulation & 

Governance, 3(4), 311 -333. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 528 

Levi, M., Sacks, A., & Tyler, T. (2009). Conceptualizing legitimacy, measuring legitimating 

beliefs. American Behavioral Sci entist, 53(3), 354 -375. 

Lim, H. H. (2006). Representative bureaucracy: Rethinking substantive effects and active 

representation. Public administration review, 66(2), 193 -204. 

Meier, Kenneth J. (1993). "Representative Bureaucracy: A Theoretical and Empir ical 

Exposition." In James Perry, ed. Research in Public Administration, vol. 2. San 

Francisco: Jossey -Bass, 1 -36. 

Meier, K. J., & Hawes, D. P. (2009). Ethnic conflict in France: a case for representative 

bureaucracy?. The American Review of Public Administration, 39(3), 269 -285. 

Meier, K. J., & Nicholson ‑Crotty, J. (2006). Gender, representative bureaucracy, and law 

enforcement: The case of sexual assault. Public Administration Review, 66(6), 850 -860. 

Meier, K. J., & Nigro, L. G. (1976). Representative bureaucracy and policy preferences: A study 

in the attitudes of federal executives. Public Administration Review, 36(4), 458 -469. 

Meier, K. J. & Stewart, J. (1992). The impact of representative bureaucracies: Educational 

systems and public policies. American Review of Public Administration 22:157 –71. 

Me ier, K. J., Wrinkle, R. D., & Polinard, J. L. (1999). Representative bureaucracy and 

distributional equity: Addressing the hard question. The Journal of Politics, 61(4), 1025 -

1039. 

Mosher, F.C. (1968). Democracy and the public service. Oxford, England: Oxford University 

Press. 

Mertus, J. (1999). Kosovo: How myths and truths started a war . Univ of California Press. 

Miller, Amalia R. and Carmit Segal (2012). “Does Temporary Affirmative Action Produce 

Persistent Effects? A Study of Black and Female Empl oyment in Law Enforcement,” 

Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(4): 1107 –1125. 

Murdoch, Z., Connolly, S., & Kassim, H. (2018). Administrative legitimacy and the democratic 

deficit of the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy, 25(3), 389 -408. 

National Democratic Institute (2019 March). Kosovo Public Opinion Survey. National 

Democratic Institute. Accessed from 

https://www.ndi.org/sites/default/files/NDI%20Kosovo%20Public%20Opinion%20Poll%2 

02019.pdf. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 529 

The New York Times. April 1987. https://www.nytimes.com/1987/04/25/world/yugoslavia -police -

and -10000 -clash -during -a-protest -over -ethnic -

bias.html?mtrref=www.google.com&gwh=A993CC45DC49AB9438EAA23DB28F9E78&g 

wt=pay 

Nicholson -Crotty, J., Grissom, J. A., & N icholson -Crotty, S. (2011). Bureaucratic representation, 

distributional equity, and democratic values in the administration of public programs. The 

Journal of Politics, 73(2), 582 -596. 

Nicholson -Crotty, Sean, Jill Nicholson -Crotty, and Sergio Fernandez. 2017. Will more black 

cops matter? Officer race and police -involved homicides of black citizens. Public 

Administration Review 77: 206 –16. 

Norris, M. (2008, February 18). Former Yugosla via 101: The Balkans Breakup. NPR. Retrieved 

from https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=19148459. 

OSCE Mission in Kosovo (2013). The Implementation of Civil Service Legislation in Kosovo. 

Accessed from https://www.osce.org/kosovo/99606? download=true on April 10, 2018. 

OSCE Mission in Kosovo (2019, March 11). Strong Women on the Rise in Kosovo Police. 

Retrieved from https://www.osce.org/mission -in -kosovo/413726 

Parsons, T. 1960. Structure and process in modern societies. Glencoe, IL: F ree Press. 

Peters, B. G., von Maravić, P., & Schröter, E. (Eds.). (2015). Politics of representative 

bureaucracy: Power, legitimacy and performance. Edward Elgar Publishing. 

Percy, N., Silber, L., Macqueen, A., Mitchell, P., Ellis, R., Brian Lapping Ass ociates., British 

Broadcasting Corporation., ... Studio Canal+. (1995). The death of Yugoslavia. London: 

BBC. 

Peterson, John. (2012). New Demography Figures in Kosovo are Significant for Minorities. 

European Centre for Minority Issues. Accessed from 

http://www.infoecmi.eu/index.php/new -demography -figures -in -kosovo -are -significant -for -

minorities/ on April 13, 2018. 

Pitts, D. W. (2007). Representative bureaucracy, ethnicity, and public schools: Exami ning the 

link between representation and performance. Administration & Society, 39(4), 497 -526. 

Radio Gorazdevac. (2020, January 31). Returnee Safety: Interethnic Incidents or Crimes 

Against Property. Retrieved from https://kossev.info/returnee -safety -interethnic -

incidents -or -crimes -against -property/ Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 530 

Riccucci, N. M., Van Ryzin, G. G., & Jackson, K. (2018).  Representative bureaucracy, race, and 

policing: A survey experiment. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 

28(4), 506 -518. 

Riccu cci, N. M., & Van Ryzin, G. G. (2017). Representative bureaucracy: A lever to enhance 

social equity, coproduction, and democracy. Public Administration Review, 77(1), 21 -30. 

Riccucci, N. M., Van Ryzin, G. G., & Lavena, C. F. (2014). Representative bureau cracy in 

policing: Does it increase perceived legitimacy?. Journal of public administration 

research and theory, 24(3), 537 -551. 

Rogel, C. (2003). Kosovo: Where it all began. International Journal of Politics, Culture, and 

Society , 17 (1), 167 -182. 

Rutherford, A. (2016). The effect of top -management team heterogeneity on performance in 

institutions of higher education. Public Performance & Management Review, 40(1), 119 -

144. 

Scholte, J. A., & Tallberg, J. (2018). Theorizing the Institutio nal Sources of Global Governance 

Legitimacy. Legitimacy in Global Governance: Sources, Processes, and Consequences, 

56 -74. 

Schuck, A. M. (2018). Women in policing and the response to rape: Representative bureaucracy 

and organizational change. Feminist Criminology, 13(3), 237 -259. 

Selden, S. C. (1997). Representative bureaucracy: Examining the linkage between passive and 

active representation in the Farmers Home Administration. The American Review of 

Public Administration, 27(1), 22 -42. 

Scott, W. R. 1977. Effectiveness of organizational effectiveness studies. In P. S. Goodman & 

J. M. Pennings (Eds.), New perspectives on organizational effectiveness: 63 -95. San 

Francisco: Jossey -Bass. 

Scott, W. R., & Meyer, J. W. 1991. The organization of societal sectors. In W. W. Powell & 

P. J. DiMaggio (Eds.), The new institutionalism in organizational analysis: 108 -140. 

Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Sharp, E. B. (2014). Minority representation and order maintenance policing: Toward a 

contingent vie w. Social Science Quarterly, 95(4), 1155 -1171. 

Sowa, J. E., & Selden, S. C. (2003). Administrative discretion and active representation: An 

expansion of the theory of representative bureaucracy. Public Administration Review, 

63(6), 700 -710. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 531 

Suchman, M ark C. 1995. Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. Academy 

of Management Review 20:571 –610. 

Sun, Ivan. (2007). Policing Domestic Violence: Does Officer Gender Matter?. Journal of 

Criminal Justice. 35. 581 -595. 10.1016/j.jcrimjus. 2007.09.004. 

Tallberg, J., & Zürn, M. (2019). The legitimacy and legitimation of international organizations: 

Introduction and framework. 

Theobald, N. A., & Haider -Markel, D. P. (2008). Race, bureaucracy, and symbolic 

representation: Interactions between citizens and police. Journal of Public Administration 

Research and Theory, 19(2), 409 -426. 

Thompson, F. J. (1976). Minority groups in pu blic bureaucracies: Are passive and active 

representation linked?. Administration & Society, 8(2), 201 -226. 

UNMIK Fact Sheet (2019). United Nations Peacekeeping. Accessed from 

https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/mission/unmik on April 17, 2019. 

UNMIK Media Reports (2019, December 23. Afternoon Edition. Retrieved from 

https://media.unmikonline.org/?m=20191223. 

UNMIK Media Reports (2019, December 24). Afternoon Edition. Retrieved from 

https://media.unmikonline.org/?p=106970. 

UNMIK Media Repor ts (2020, February 3). Afternoon Edition. Retrieved from 

https://media.unmikonline.org/?m=20200203. 

UN Resolution (1999). UN Security Council Resolution 1244. Accessed from 

https://undocs.org/S/RES/1244 on April 11, 2018. 

UN Women (2011). Progress of the World’s Women. Accessed from 

https://www.unwomen.org/ -

/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2011/progressoftheworlds 

women -2011 -en.pdf?la=en&vs=2835 on Oct 9, 2020. 

UN Women (2017). Bringing Women on Equal Footing with men in K osovo Police. Feb. 24, 

2017. Accessed from https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2017/2/feature -

bringing -women -on -equal -footing -with -men -in -kosovo -police on Oct 9, 2020. 

UN Women (2018). Domestic violence units of Kosovo police train in effective resp onse to 

violence against women. July 2, 2018. Accessed from 

https://eca.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2018/07/domestic -violence -units -of -kosovo -

police -train -in -effective -response -to -violence -against -women. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 532 

UN Women (2019). Recognizing domestic violence a s a criminal offence, a big step towards 

justice for women in Kosovo. June 8, 2020. Accessed from 

https://eca.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2020/6/recognizing -domestic -violence -as -a-

criminal -offence -a-big -step -towards -justice -for -women -in -kosovo. 

US Agen cy for International Development (2005) Fragile States Strategy. 

http://www.usaid.gov/policy/2005_fragile_states_strategy.pdf .

US Department of Justice. 2018. ICITAP: Europe and Eurasia. 

https://www.justice.gov/criminal - icitap/europe -and -eurasia. Accessed 4/9/2019. 

US Department of Justice. 2009. Practical Implications for Current Domestic Violence 

Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors and Judges. Accessed from: chrome -

extension: //efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/viewer.html?pdfurl=https%3A%2F%2Fww 

w.ojp.gov%2Fpdffiles1%2Fnij%2F225722.pdf&clen=1511011&chunk=true 

US Embassy Pristina (2018). Video. Retrieved from 

https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=2433797766646364. 

US State Department. 1997. Country Report for Human Rights Practices of 1997 . Washington, 

D.C., US Government Printing Office. 

Van Riper, Paul. 1958 History of the United States Civil Service. New Yor k: Harper and Row. 

Vannier, A. (2019, April 20). SERBIA, KOSOVO AND ALBANIA: BETWEEN UNIONS AND 

DISUNIONS. The New Federalist. Retrieved from 

https://www.thenewfederalist.eu/serbia -kosovo -and -albania -between -unions -and -

disunions?lang=fr. 

Weizman, J. (20 19, Dec. 17). Belgrade Appoints Serb Officials in Northern Kosovo. Balkan 

Insight. Accessed from https://balkaninsight -

com.proxyiub.uits.iu.edu/2019/12/17/belgrade -appoints -serb -officials -in -northern -

kosovo/. 

Wilkins, V. M. (2007). Exploring the causal story: Gender, active representation, and 

bureaucratic priorities. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 17(1), 77 -

94. 

Wilkins, V. M., & Keiser, L. R. (2006). Linking passive and active representation by gender: The 

case of child suppo rt agencies. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 

16(1), 87 -102. 

Wilkins, V. M., & Williams, B. N. (2008). Black or blue: Racial profiling and representative 

bureaucracy. Public Administration Review, 68(4), 654 -664. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 533 

# Gender Disparities in Educational Attainments: 

# Does Gender Gaps Matter? 

Balram Rao (India) and Kunal Rao (Indian Institute of Technology, India) 

Abstract 

In today's globally competitive environment, educational attainment plays an important role from 

empowerment of the communities to sustain the higher growth. However, in a society as deeply 

stratified as India, disparities in education within social groups can be observed through various 

distributions, such as religion, caste, and gender, among others . In this paper, we empirically 

examine educational enrolment functions and conditions of enrolment within marginalized groups. 

The mixed methodology is used for collecting empirical data through extensive field work carried 

out in western districts of Ind ia’s most populated province known as ‘Uttar Pradesh’. Further, the 

gender difference in educational attainment is decomposed within social groups to understand the 

individual factors most responsible for the differential treatment. The findings describe t hat within 

disadvantaged groups, a consistent feature is widespread gender disparity in educational 

attainment for uncleaned occupational scheduled caste girls. Apart from economic factors, the 

analysis describes that the treatment of sons and daughters by parents is a potential explanation 

of the gender gap in education in India. Therefore, the persistent of such gender based 

discrimination in household expenditure on education has caused lot of challenges not only to 

achieve in educational att ainment for girls in one of the largest pro vi nce of world 2nd most 

populous country but also in mit igating the widening of glo bal gender gaps in way to achieve the 

sustainable development goals (SDGs). 

Keywords: Educational attainments, Gender Gaps, Decomposition Analysis, SDGs, India 

Introduction 

In 2015, the UN adapted seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that all countries 

including India pledged to reach by 2030. In development context, the importance of early school 

education has been recognized as a fundamental human value that virtually contributes to the 

success of every single development goal. Better early school educational attainments not only 

help in containing the poverty and inequality but also helps in better nurturing, access to quality 

higher education, health, employability skills and protection etc. In this context, India, a country of 

world’s youngest population where millions of youth continue to join labour force every year in 

coming decades, their access to early school and educational achievements hold the key to meet 

demographic dividend and inclusive cum sustainable goals. Looking an urgency to enhance 

human capital to contain both poverty and inequality, this empirical piece of re search paper is an 

attempt to critically examine the gender and social equality in children continuing education from 

poor households currently engaged in unclean occupation in urban areas of India’s most populist 

state of Uttar Pradesh. The research focus es on a 360 degree perspective of the complex socio -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 534 

economic - polity environment to not only look at employability but also youth and gender specific 

employment aspirations, requirements and interest that are neither in education, employment and 

training (NEET). Thus the paper illustrates some of the key problems and related gaps to remove 

bottleneck for youths, especially girls and boys from poor, marginalized and vulnerable section 

of the society in access to quality education, employability and future employment. Most 

importantly, the analysis of the paper emphasizes on urgent attentions of the policy makers and 

implementers to focus on four core challenges (4E) of education, equality, employability, and 

employment that is decent and more productive especially in the most populous state of Uttar 

Pradesh if the country has to reap the demographic dividend. 

Tracking both policies and outcomes is essential in order to analyse and determine the relative 

effectiveness of different approaches, t hereby providing policymakers with the tools to plan and 

allocate resources to make optimal choices while ensuring equal access and opportunity for all 

youth irrespective of their caste, class, gender and religion etc. such interventions will help in 

achie ving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs,2015). 

Some Facts about the Universe of the Study    

> Source: www.google.co.in/ Uttar Pradesh

The province of Uttar Pradesh is not only one of the most populous states in India but the region 

is also the  most populous country subdivision in the world.  Uttar Pradesh, with a total area of 

243,290 square kilometers (93,935 sq mi), is Indi a’s fourth -largest state in terms of land area and 

is roughly of same size as United Kingdom. The literacy rate in the state has gone up in recent 

years and yet continues to remain at about 70 per cent which is below the national average of 74 

per cent. It s population forms 16.50 per cent of India's total population in 2011 (GOI/Census, 

2011). Over the years, there has been a continuous migration of people from rural and semi -

urban areas to towns and cities and thus the number of class I cities and class II cities have 

increased. In Uttar Pradesh, two cities were selected for the study; these are Ghaziabad City 

(Class I) and Mathura City (Class II). Both the cities are also part of National Capital Region (NCR) 

mega urban agglomeration. 

Significance of education can be drawn in at least five important proportions, that is, its intrinsic 

importance, its personal role, its social role, its process role, and its empowerment role; and 

United Nations Development Project (UNDP) includes educati onal capability among the utmost 

important dimensions of human development. In India, where educational access has 

conventionally been confined to upper castes, the spread of education among socially 

disadvantaged groups have substantial implications for t heir economic progress. Therefore, 

improved education can have vital concerns for the plans and implementation of development Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 535 

strategies and their impact on the poor. Educational level (from primary to higher level) is crucial 

indicator for knowing the educational attainment of people. As per 2011 census, the literacy 

rate is 69.7 per cent which is a 23.80 percentage point rise over the previous rate of 56.3 per 

cent in 2001. Nevertheless, the gap between male literacy rates 79.2 per cent and female literacy 

rate 59.3 per cent is very high in Uttar Pradesh. 

Methodology and Universe of Study 

The study areas for the purpose of household mapping were selected after taking an overview of 

all areas in Ghaziabad city and in Mathura city, and discussions with different stakeholders. 

Relevant primary and secondary in -hand information was also gathered about selected 

settlements before mapping the households. The first step involved in household mapping was 

based on primary and secondary informat ion gathered from various sources including 

government departments, literature studies conducted in the city, and information available from 

other stakeholders in both cities. The second step involved assessment of the socio -economic 

condition of the settl ements, specifically the issue of education among the communities within the 

settlements. There is a huge gap of basic physical and social infrastructure in the slums and which 

requires immediate attention at policy and programme level (Table:1). The third step involved 

assessment of socio -economic condition of settlements, specifically issue of education among 

communities within settlements. Characteristics of settlements and community were noted; and 

the relevant informations were captured. 

Table 1: Settlement Details                                                                                                                   

> Settlement Ward
> No
> Households Population BPL
> Population
> Mohan Nagar 24 360 2875 315 Ambedkar nagar has 6slum
> Ambedkar 12 435 3775 400 pockets with 12300 total
> Nagar population, having 55.28% SC
> population.
> Sadar 13 130 1147 93 Antapada has 7slum pockets with
> Baadpura 35 78 620 63 12150 total population, having
> Antapada 18 235 1850 212 53.99% SC population.
> Rani ki Mandi 6205 1840 188 Rani ki Mandi has 3slum pockets
> with 5720 total population, having
> 51.57% SC population
> Naya Nagla 11 398 3590 362 Naya Nagla, Jhingurpura,
> Jhingurpura 11 484 3875 402 Bahadurpura, Khatik Basti has 4
> Bahadurpura 11 420 3380 357 slum pockets with 12650 total
> population, having 77.87% SC
> population
> Baadpura has 3 slum pockets with
> 2860 total population, having
> Manoharpura 3500 4620 515
> 50.70% SC population
> Manoharpura –has 3slum
> pockets, with 13450 total

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 536      

> population, having 48.77% SC
> population.The major Nala of
> Mathura, Masani Nala, falls in this
> zone along with Gopalpura. The
> population of this zone including the
> floating population of 13900 comes
> as 140257.

During the first phase, household mapping survey conducted in four areas/zones of each city. 

The mapping survey was mainly aimed at identifying the complete listing of households engaged 

in “Unclean” occupation; as well as the children who belong to school/college going age -group of 

4-21 years, along with their present status of education. It is found that majority of the settlement 

dwellers derive their livelihood as working labor in government or non -government sector), self -

employed, domestic helpers, etc. 

Household mapping was done in context of the clean and “Unclean” occupa tion/caste 

communities and were identified from the socio -economic background which would serve as a 

basis for making an assessment of exclusion, for final data collection. 

Selected Settlements 

Considering the existing setting of the cities, the selected settlements in both Ghaziabad City and 

Mathura City were divided into four areas/zones respectively, on the basis of existence of 

scheduled caste population predominantly (Table: 2). Settlements were identified in each of the 

four urban areas in both places, having a mixed population of 250 -500 households while ensuring 

that each settlement comprises of households (irrespective of any specific caste community) 

presently engaged in “Unclean” occupations as well as those households whose members 

(grand -parents, parents, siblings, spouse, or children) had remained engaged in “Unclean” works 

either in the recent past within last five years, or last five to ten years or even before last ten years. 

An equal proportion of 250 households were selected from all the four areas both in Ghaziabad 

City and in Mathura City. In total, 1000 households were surveyed from each of these two selected 

cities, thus making a total of 2000 households, as total households listed for mapping for the 

research study. 

Table 2: Settlements (Zone -Wise) and No of Households in Two Cities                    

> City Zone No of Households Total
> Ghaziabad City Vijay Nagar
> Bus Stand Area
> Kavi Nagar
> Mohan Nagar
> 250
> 250
> 250
> 250
> 1000
> Mathura City Baadh -pura 250 1000
> Khateek Mohalla 45
> Gopal -pura 116

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 537             

> Manohar -pura 37
> Anta Pada 52
> Rani Mandi 192
> Ambedkar Nagar 58
> Bahadur -pura 107
> Naya Nagla 79
> Jhingur -pura 64
> Total 2000

Coverage of Households 

Table 3 shows, social group classification in terms of major caste categories reflecting that out of 

a total 2000 surveyed households in two cities, there are a highest of 67 % households belonging 

to scheduled caste category, than 20.2 % of OBC category, 8.2 % of general caste category, and 

households 4.6 % of Muslim cat egory. City -wise classification of these major four caste categories 

reflected the similar trend in both the cities (Ghaziabad and Mathura). It is further observed that 

out of a total of 1339 SC households surveyed, a higher percentage of nearly 80 % house holds 

are in Ghaziabad City than 54.6 % households in Mathura City belong to SC category. A higher 

proportion of almost one -third surveyed households were from OBC category in Mathura City, 

than 11.4 % households in Ghaziabad City; and a similar higher of nearly 7 %) households were 

from Muslim category in Mathura City, than just 2 % households in Ghaziabad City. 

Table 3: City -wise Major Caste Categories of Households                                              

> Caste Category Ghaziabad City Mathura City Total
> No Per cent No Per cent No Per cent
> SCs 793 79.3% 546 54.6% 1339 67.0%
> OBCs 115 11.4% 291 29.1% 406 20.2%
> General Castes 72 7.2% 92 9.2% 164 8.2%
> Muslims 20 2.1% 71 7.1% 91 4.6%
> Total 1000 100% 1000 100% 2000 100%

Status of cities in terms of caste -wise distribution of the surveyed SC, OBC, General and Muslim 

households reveals that among SCs (793), there were maximum number of Valmikis, followed by 

Jatav, Kori, Pasi, other SCs (including Dhobi, Gond, Kaitwar; Kanchi; Kandere; Kharwar; 

Puraniyan; Sahasi ; Satnami, and Vanshkar) Khatik; Chamar and Koli; among OBCs including 

Barai, Bhurji, Chauhan, Chipi, Darji,Dhivar, Goswami, Gujar, Jaat, Jogi, Julaha, Kahar, Katariya, 

Kurmi, Kushwaha, Mali; Mallaha, Patel,Rajbhar, and Teli, followed by Ahir, Prajapati/Ku mhar, 

Gadariya and Kashyap, Sonar, Lohar/Panchal, Lodha/Lodhi and Saini; among Muslims including 

Saifis, Shaikh, Maniyar, Abbasi, Kabadi and one other; and among general castes including 

Kshatriyas, Brahmin, Baniyas, Jaiswal and Tyagi, Bhumihar, Sisodia an d Tomar out of total 1000 

surveyed households in Ghaziabad City. While in Mathura City out of 1000 surveyed households, 

among SCs (546 households), there were maximum number of Valmikis, followed by Jatava, 

other SCs (including Arya, Barwar, Dhangar, Dhobi,Jadon, and Maahor, Kori, Raigad, Koli, 

Khatik, and Chamar; among OBCs, maximum number of Gadariya, followed by other OBCs Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 538 

(including Baghel, Banjara, Barai, Chauhan, Jaat, Jogi,Kewat, Kushwaha, Maurya, Meena, Nai, 

Nat,Ruhela,and Sidhi), Prajapati/Ku mhar, Ahir, Saini, Kashyap, Sonar, and Lodha/Lodhi; among 

Muslims including Abbasi, Dhobi, Farukhi, Kuraisi, Lohar, Maniyar, Mansoori, Pathan, Rangrez, 

Saifi, Shaikh, and others; and among general castes, included Baniya, Brahmin, Kayastha, 

Kshatriya, Punjabi and Valai. 

Household Engagement and City Location 

Household engagement in clean occupation and in “Unclean” occupation (Table 4) reveals that 

out of 2000 households surveyed in Uttar Pradesh, a higher of 55 % (1098 households) were 

reported to be engaged in “Unclean” occupation, in an aggregate manner, either presently or in 

the recent or remote past – as members of previous generation, present generation, or future 

generation within the surveyed households. This aggregate situation reported the similar trend in 

the Ghaziabad City (546 households) and in Mathura City (552 households). 

City -wise data in terms of present engagement in “Unclean” occupation, showed that a higher 

percentage of 52.4 % households in Ghaziabad City (out of 1000 households) than 31.1 %

households in Mathura City (out of 1000 households). While the family history of engagement in 

“Unclean” occupation shows that a higher per cent of 24.1 % (241 households) surveyed in 

Mathur a City stated about their engagement in the past also, but in Ghaziabad City only 2.2 %

(22 households) stated about their involvement in “Unclean” works only in the past, by their 

household members. Thus, occupational mobility is higher in Mathura city. I t can be noted that 

less than half of the total surveyed 2000 households were those “never involved into “Unclean” 

occupation”. This trend was noted the same for Ghaziabad City (45.4 %) and for Mathura City 

(44.8 %). 

Table 4: City -wise Household Engagement in “Unclean” Occupation                                            

> Ghaziabad City Mathura City Total
> No %No %No %
> Currently Engaged in “Unclean” 524 52.4 311 31.1 835 41.8
> occupation
> Currently Not Engaged in “Unclean” 22 2.2 241 24.1 263 13.2
> occupation
> Never Engaged in “Unclean” occupati 454 45.4 448 44.8 902 45.1
> Total 1000 100.0 1000 100.0 2000 100.0

Caste and Association with “Unclean” Occupation 

Caste -wise distribution of household engagement in "unclean" occupation (Table 5), analysis 

says that out of 2000 surveyed households, 835 (41.8 %) were found currently engaged in 

“Unclean” occupation – of which maximum (817) households were from SC category (including 

Valmiki, Pasi, Khatik, Jatav, Raigad and others), followed by OBC category (14 households) 

(including Prajapati/Kumhar, Kashyap, Gadariya, Ahir, Dhobi, and others), and four Muslim 

households. A total of 263 (13.2 %) surveyed households were those who were presently not Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 539 

engaged in any kind of “Unclean” occupation, and had given up s uch works – of which maximum 

(146 households) were from SC category (including Valmiki, Pasi, Jatav, Raigad, and others), 

followed by OBC category (116) (including Prajapati/Kumhar, Gadariya, Ahir and others), and 

one Muslim household. 

A total of 902 (45.1 %) surveyed households , the data shows that they were never engaged into 

“Unclean” occupations; of which, settlement -wise, these were 172 households from Mohan Nagar 

that is, north -zone, 132 households from Vajay Nagar that is, south -zone, 107 households from 

Kavi Nagar that is, east -zone and 43 households from central -zone, that is Bus -Stand Area in 

Ghaziabad City; while 140 households were from Baadhpura and 15 households from Khateek 

Mohalla (that is, south -eas t zone), 15 households from Manoharpura, 52 households from 

Gopalpura, 10 households from Antapada (that is, central -zone), 91 households were from Rani 

Mandi, 22 households from Ambedkar Nagar (that is, north -zone), and 32 households from 

Bahadurpura, 31 households from Naya Nagla, 40 households from Jhingurpura (that is, south -

zone) in Mathura City. Of those 902 households, highest of 376 households belonged to SC 

category (including – Valmiki, Pasi, Khatik, Koli, Kori, Jatav and others). 

Thus, on an overall basis, out of 2000 surveyed households, as high as 41.8% (835 households) 

are still engaged i nto “Unclean” occupation, involving mainly SCs (97.8 %, 817 households). 

Similar trend was observed in Ghaziabad City (with proportion of 99%, 519 SC households) and 

in Mathura City (with proportion of 95.8%, 298 SC households) – presently involved into “U nclean” 

occupation. And only 13.2 % (263 households ) have given up “Unclean” occupation, involving 

mainly SCs (146 households, 55.5 %) and OBCs (116 households, 44.1%), with all households 

from SC category in Ghaziabad City and with 48% to 52% from OBC and SC category in Mathura 

City and just one Muslim household from Mathura City itself. 

Table 5: Caste -Wise Household Engagement in “Unclean” Occupation in 

Ghaziabad & Mathura                                                             

> Hous eh old
> Caste
> Ghaziabad City Mathura City Total
> Engagement Categories No Percent No Percent No Percent
> Currently Engaged SCs 519 99.0% 298 95.8% 817 97.8%
> OBCs 2.4% 12 3.9% 14 1.7%
> Muslims 3.6% 1.3% 4.5%
> Total 524 100.0% 311 100.0% 835 100.0%
> Currently Not Engaged SCs 22 100.0% 124 51.5% 146 55.5%
> OBCs 116 48.1% 116 44.1%
> Muslims 1.4% 1.4%
> Total 22 100.0% 241 100.0% 263 100.0%

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 540 

Figure: 1: Percentage of Household Engaged in Unclean Occupation in Two Cities 

Among 22 households in Ghaziabad City, 21 households had withdrawn from engaging into 

“Unclean” occupation during last 5 -10 years ago (maximum from Vijay Nagar, minimum from 

Mohan Nagar), one household from Vijay Nagar before last 10 years; and among 241 households 

in Mathura City, 125 households had withdrawn ten years ago – maximum from Bahadurpura and 

Gopalpura, minimum from Rani Mandi; 85 households had withdrawn during last 5 -10 years –

maximum from Ambedkar Nagar and Baadhpura, minimum from Antapada and Jhingurpura; 31 

households had withdrawn during last 5 years – maximu m from Baadhpura and one household 

from Ambedkar Nagar (Figure: 1; Figure: 2). 

Figure: 2: Households Presently Not Engaged into “Unclean” Occupations in Two Cities 

Gender of Children and their Education Categories 

Overall the educational status of children (4 -21 years age group) of total 4637 children from 2000 

surveyed households was analysed from three main viewpoints, that is, the status of school going 

children who still continue education; status of dropout children who have discontinued education, 

and children who never attended any educational institution. Figure: 4 shows that, out of 2000 

surveyed households, a high 76.6% (3551 children) were found ‘Continuing education’ category, 

followed by 16.3% (756 ch ildren) were the ‘drop -outs’, 6.8% (313 households) had ‘never 

attended’ any schooling or education, and just 0.4% (17 children) were reported to have Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 541 

‘completed’ their education. A dropout has been considered as any student who is enrolled and 

leaves sch ool for any reason before graduation or completion of a program of studies without 

transferring to another elementary, secondary, or any level of education. A completed education 

has been considered the years of completed education referring to the number of academic years 

a child completes in a formal educational program provided by elementary and secondary schools, 

universities, colleges or other formal post -secondary institutions. 

Figure 4: Educational Status of Children 

These 4637 selected children, were classified into four categories, that is, those who were 

undergoing education, those who were enrolled but were the drop -outs from their education or 

had discontinued from their educational institution, those who had completed their schooling or 

college level of education, and those who never enrolled, attempted or attended schools for their 

educat ion. Age -wise, only those children below 4 years, were recorded who were enrolled and 

entered into schooling; while only those children above 21 years of age were recorded whose 

educational status was into ‘Continuing education’ category. 

Figure 5 shows that overall, out of 4637 children, a higher of 51 % (2380) children from Mathura 

City, than 49% (2257) children from Ghaziabad City recorded for the purpose of study. City -wise 

analysis of the educational status of children shows the same order, tha t in Mathura City, out of 

2380 children, proportionately a higher of 79.9% (1902 children) had Continuing education status, 

followed by 12.6% (300 children) with drop -out status, 7.1% (168 children) with never attended 

status and just 0.4% (10 children) had completed educational status. While, in Ghaziabad City, 

out of 2257 children, proportionately, a highest of 73.1% (1649 children) had Continuing education 

status, followed by 20.2% (456 children) with drop -out status, 6.4% (145 children) with never -

attended status and just 0.3% (7 children) had completed their education. Thus, educational 

status -wise, the data reveals that in terms of ‘Continuing education’ (3551 children), Mathura City 

(53.6%, 1902 children) has performed better than Ghaziabad City (46.4%, 1649 children), in terms 

of ‘drop -out’ status (756 children), Ghaziabad City (60.3%, 456 children) had more reported cases 

than in Mathura City (39.7%, 300 children). Interestingly, in terms of ‘never attended’ (313 

children) status, also, Mathura City (53.7%, 168 children) was at a higher level than in Ghaziabad 

City (46.3%, 145 children).  

> 3551
> 17
> (0.4%)
> 756 313
> Completed

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 542 

Figure 5: City -wise Educational Status of Surveyed Children 

Household Level of Occupational Engagement of Surveyed Children 

Table 6 analyses educational status of 4637 surveyed children on the basis of occupational 

engagement, it was noted that households of 43.8% (2031 children) are presently engaged in 

“Unclean” occupation, interestingly the households of an equal of 43.6% (2022 children) were 

those never engaged in “Unclean” occupation; while households of 12% (584 children) were 

those who have given -up “Unclean” occupation, and they are presently not engaged in any kind 

of “Unclean” work, as a means of their livelihood. 

Among the 17 children who had ‘completed’ their education, proportionately, maximum number 

of children (52.9%) were from those households who were never engaged in “Unclean” 

occupation, followed by 29.4% whose households had given up the “Un clean” occupation and a 

least 17.6% were from those households still engaged in “Unclean” occupation. 

Among the 313 children who had ‘never attended’ any educational institution, proportionally, 

maximum number of children (63.3%) were from those households still engaged in “Unclean” 

occupation, 30 % belonged to those households who were never engaged into “Unclean” 

occupation, and interestingly the figures were noted to be minimum at 6.7% belonging to those 

households who had given up the “Unclean ” occupation as a means of their livelihood. 

Among the 756 children who reported to have ‘dropped -out’ as their educational status, 

proportionally, maximum number of children (67.2%) belong to those households who are 

presently engaged into “Unclean” occupation, than 28.3% who belong to those households who 

were never engaged in “Unclean” work, and 4.5% households who have given up the “Unclean” 

work as their livelihood option. 

Among the 3551 children with ‘Continuing education’ proportionally, maximum number of children 

(48%) belong to those households who were never engaged into “Unclean” occupation, than Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 543 

37.2% who are presently engaged into “Unclean” occupation, and 14.8% whose households have 

given up the “Unclean” work as t heir livelihood option. 

Specifically, among 2031 children belonging to those households presently engaged in “Unclean” 

occupation, reflected a maximum of 65.1% children having ‘Continuing education’ status, 

followed by 25% children having ‘drop -out’ status, 9.7% children as ‘never -attended’ status, and 

just negligible, three children who were found ‘completed’ their education. 

Table 6: Educational Status and Household Occupational Engagement of Surveyed 

Children                                                      

> Education Status
> Com pleted Continuing
> education
> Dropout Never
> attended
> School
> Total
> No %No %No %No %No %
> Presently
> Associated with
> “Unclean” Works
> 317.6% 1322 37.2% 508 67.2% 198 63.3% 2031 43.8%
> Presently Not
> Associated with
> “Unclean” Works
> 529.4% 524 14.8% 34 4.5% 21 6.7% 584 12.6%
> Never Associated
> with “Unclean”
> Works
> 952.9% 1705 48.0% 214 28.3% 94 30.0% 2022 43.6%
> Total 17 100.0% 3551 100.0% 756 100.0% 313 100.0% 4637 100.0%

Class Level of Educational Status of Children 

Table 7 reveals an overall analysis of educational status of children served on the basis of their 

educational levels, that is, upto mid -primary level (including pre -primary, primary, middle -primary), 

upto under -graduation level (including secondary, that is, ninth and tenth standard; higher 

secondary, that is, eleventh and twelfth standard; under -graduation), upto post -graduation level 

(including graduation and post -graduation). Of the total 4637 children, 4324 children recorded 

were those who had complete d their education, those who are still in their Continuing education 

stage and those who had enrolled in an educational institution but were the drop -outs. Out of 

4324 total enrolled children, a highest of 71.2 % (3077 children) were upto the middle -primary 

level, followed by 26.6% (1149 children) were upto under -graduation level, and just 2.3% (98 

children) were upto post -graduation level. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 544 

Table 7: Class -wise Educational Status of Total Children                                                                          

> Educational
> Level of children
> Completed Continuing Dropout Total
> education
> Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent Number Percent
> Pre -Primary 475 13.4% 40.5% 479 11.1%
> Primary 1395 39.3% 365 48.3% 1760 40.7%
> Middle Primary 620 17.5% 218 28.8% 838 19.4%
> Secondary 463 13.0% 125 16.5% 588 13.6%
> HigherSecondary 360 10.1% 39 5.2% 399 9.2%
> Under -graduation 159 4.5% 30.4% 162 3.7%
> Graduation 15 88.2% 67 1.9% 10.1% 83 1.9%
> Post -graduation 211.8% 12 0.3% 10.1% 15 0.3%
> Total 17 100.0% 3551 100.0% 756 100.0% 4324 100.0%

Further, it was noted that, of the 3077 children enrolled upto middle -primary level, a higher of 

80.9% (2490 children) were those still Continuing education and 19.1% (587 children) had 

dropped -out from their education. With regard to education upto under -graduation level of 

education of 1149 children, a higher of 85.5% (982 children) were those, still Continuing education 

and 14.5 % (167 children) had dropped -out from their education. And, with regard to education 

upto post -graduation level of 98 children, a higher of 80.7% (79 children) were of the Continuing 

education status, just 2% (2 children) had a status of drop -out, and 17.3% (17 children) were those 

who had completed their education. 

In terms of ‘Continuing education status’, the data shows that, it was higher at the level ‘upto 

middle - primary’ (70%), followed by ‘upto under -graduation’ level (28%) and just 2% at the level 

‘upto post - graduation’, in terms of ‘drop -out’ status the data shows that this too was higher at 

the level ‘uptomiddle -primary’ (78%), and then ‘upto under -graduation’ level (22%), while the 

drop -out status was negligible, at the level when reaching ‘upto post -graduation’ stage. 

Caste Category and Educational Status of Children 

Further analysis of caste -category -wise educational status of the total 4637 sample children out 

of 2000 surveyed households in Uttar Pradesh, was based on major social groups or caste 

categories, that are, scheduled castes (SCs) (3123 children – of castes – Valmiki, Jatav, Kori, 

other SCs, Pasi, Raigad, Koli, Khatik), other backward castes (OBCs) (936 children – of castes –

other OBCs, Gadariya, Ahir, Prajapati/Kumhar, Kashyap, Saini, Sonar, Lodha/Lodhi, 

Lohar/Panchal), general castes (329 children) and Muslims (249 children). The educational 

status of 3123 SC -children shows a major proportion of 72.7% (2270 children, of castes – Valmiki, 

Jatav, Kori, other SCs, Pasi, Koli, Raigad, Khatik) in ‘Continuing education status’ followed by 

19.4% (605 children, of castes – Valmiki, Jatav, Kori, Pasi, other SCs, Raig ad, Khatik, Koli) in 

‘drop -out’ status, 7.6% (236 children, of castes – Valmiki, Jatav, Raigad, other SCs, Khatik,Kori, 

Koli) in ‘never -attended’ status and just 0.4% (12 children, of castes – Valmiki, Jatav, Kori, other 

SCs) of ‘completed’ status of education (Table 9). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 545 

Table 9: Caste -Category -wise Educational Status of Surveyed Children in Uttar Pradesh                                                                

> Education Status
> SCs OBCs General Muslims Total
> Castes
> No %No %No %No %No %
> Completed 12 0.4% 40.4% 00.0% 10.4% 17 0.4%
> Continuing
> education
> 2270 72.7% 821 87.7% 291 88.4% 169 67.9% 3551 76.6%
> Dropout 605 19.4% 79 8.4% 35 10.6% 37 14.9% 756 16.3%
> Never attended
> School
> 236 7.6% 32 3.4% 30.9% 42 16.9% 313 6.8%
> Total 3123 100.0% 936 100.0% 329 100.0% 249 100.0% 4637 100.0%

Thus, the proportion of children with ‘Continuing education’ status was highest among the general 

caste category and OBC -children, than the SC category and Muslim category children. Also, in 

addition to the situation, it was noted that the proportion of children who ‘never -attended’ 

educational institution was lowest among the general caste category, and highest among the 

Muslim children, followed by SC -children and OBC -children. With regard to the ‘drop -out’ status, 

the proportion of children in this category was noted to be highest among SC -children and Muslim -

children, than the children belonging to general castes and OBC -category.While , an equal 

proportion of children who ‘completed’ their education was noted among SCs, OBCs, and Muslim 

categories. 

“Unclean” Occupation and Educational Status of Children 

Table 10 shows city -wise distribution of educational status of 2031 children’s household presently 

engaged in “Unclean” occupation, shows Ghaziabad City, 60% having its higher involvement than 

Mathura City, 40% children. However, an analysis of the different states of educational status 

among the two selected cities, refle cted somewhat nearly same range of proportions at 

‘Continuing education’ status (Ghaziabad City, 63.6%; Mathura City, 67.4%), followed by ‘drop -

out’ status (Ghaziabad City, 27.4%; Mathura City, 21.4%), ‘never -attended’ status (Ghaziabad 

City, 8.9%; Mathura City, 11.1%), and ‘completed’ status (Ghaziabad City, 0.2%; Mathura City, 

0.1%). 

Table 10: Educational Status of Children from Households Engaged in “Unclean” 

Occupation                                                 

> Educational Status Ghazi abad City Mathura City Total
> No. Per cent No Per cent No Per cent
> Completed 20.2% 10.1% 30.1%
> Continuing education 780 63.6% 542 67.4% 1322 65.1%
> Dropout 336 27.4% 172 21.4% 508 25.0%
> Never attended School 109 8.9% 89 11.1% 198 9.7%
> Total 1227 100.0% 804 100.0% 2031 100.0%

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 546 

Social, Economic, Cultural Causes that Promote Education of Children 

The effects of socio -economic, cultural and infrastructural aspects on educational enrolment of 

children showed that most of the disparity in educational participation was due to factors at the 

household level. Of the household -level factors, socio -economic resources are the most 

important. If the parents have education, or if they are not very poor, the likelihood of children 

being in educational institution is considerably increased. Household economic status is mainly 

significant in urban settlements where, probability of children being in school is higher. Parental 

education is important in these urban settlement areas, having a literate household head also 

increases the p robability of children being in school. Mothers with some knowledge are thus better 

able, or motivated, to get their daughters into school. Of the other socio -economic factors, 

motivation of the mother showed a positive effect. In the selected cities, the decision of parents to 

send their children to school is influenced by supply -side factors to some extent, that included 

school characteristics, if there are more or better primary schools, educational participation of 

girls is increased, and if the distanc e to the nearest school is longer both girls and boys are less 

in school. 

−Mother’s motivation towards children’s education 

−Studying through self -employment 

−Realising the importance of education 

−No gender difference at home 

−Good peer interaction and motivation within school and college environment 

−Local residential environment, housing conditions and clean work association in the 

settlement conducive to education 

Social, Economic, Cultural causes that Hinder Education of Children 

The several social, economic, cultural and physical factors that combine to hold back education 

among marginalized communities in the selected settlements are taken together, in the forms of 

qualitative case studies, focused group discussions, pe rsonal interviews at the levels of parents 

and students. There are even the added impediments of cultural beliefs that prevent many from 

enrolling or completing school. Sometimes there are social or cultural factors that hold back 

education among children. Discrimination is one of these. There are several factors hindering or 

leading to failure of education of children. They range from those, which are due to 

irresponsiveness of parents, teachers, social environment of education in school or colleg e, poor 

quality of education, low motivation, lack of commitment and weak supervision rendered by the 

parents at home, and discriminatory practices among others. 

−Experiences of Discrimination, Caste Abuse, Un -touchability Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 547 

−Parents still engaged in Uncle an Works 

−Engaged in unclean work in the past 

−Poverty and present engagement in unclean works 

−Early marriage and became parents at an early age 

−Religious norms influencing education 

−Lack of motivation 

−Addiction to liquor consumption and gambling 

−Mothers’ concern that both caste factor and poverty are unfavorable towards children’s education 

These are factors that influence education of children and examines exhaustively from domains 

of disadvantaged backgrounds to estimate the extent of socio -economic, family, 

individual and contextual causes on educational performance. Briefly, it supports the notion 

that the social, cultural and the economic components of the socio -economic status equation 

has divergent influences on children's educational outcome. 

Impact of Discrimination and Exclusion of Children 

The effects and consequences of discrimination and exclusion of children among marginalized 

communities in the selected settlements are taken together, in the forms of qualitative case 

studies, focused group discussions, personal interviews at the levels of parents and students. 

Impacts include loneliness, possible exclusion, demoralization, and marginalization, si tuations 

where self -esteem and self -confidence have the potential to be harmed. Discrimination against 

any child regardless of their needs can make them feel isolated and different to other children. 

The potential areas for the impact of discrimination inc luded physical, emotional, social and 

intellectual. The manifested signs included attempting suicide, physical abuse, loss of self worth, 

lack of friends, social exclusion, disinterested to learn, etc. 

−The Caste Struggle and Education Challenge 

−Victim of Un -touchability 

−Lack of interest towards education, cigarette smoking and liquor consumption result in dropouts 

−Problem of low attendance and absenteeism 

−Issue of being irregular and not punctual 

−Continued engagement in unclean works Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 548 

−Punishment after caste conflict in classroom ended up in manual scavenging 

−Discrimination by teacher in school, violence due to caste conflict 

The interaction analyses with respect to the cultural factors revealed mixed results, suggesting 

that caste and gender still play an important role in India and that for getting all children 

into school, policies aimed at strengthening the position of women and the lower castes remain 

very significant. It is important to note the efforts being made through various policies and 

programmes in order to reduce social gaps and also gap in education. More importantly, only 

years of schooling is not same as of learning. The more worrying is that even the progress made 

so far on standardized tests such as OECD, if nothing changes, like many developing countries, 

it will also be a long road for India as well (WDR,2018) 

Major Suggestions to Evolve a Comprehensive Educational Policy 

The present analytical study on discrimination and exclusion in education in the realm of 

household background of presently engaged in unclean occupation or given up unclean 

occupation, has acquainted with the actual state of affairs in Uttar Pradesh. This study has dealt 

with undertakings in schools, in consideration with indicator -wise social contextuality and 

education status in terms of continuing education, dropping out from educational institution, and 

never attending any educat ional institution. The study has highlighted prevailing or probable 

discriminatory practices in the educational institution. The most evident occurrences of 

discrimination have come to notice in areas as teacher and student relations, and among the 

student s peer group, wherein caste based discrimination and gender differences continues. 

Future policy for educational development in Uttar Pradesh should pay consideration to the 

resulting concerns, as mentioned below: 

−Attainment of aim of universalization of primary education requires creation of additional 

proficiencies by introducing new secondary schools and institutions of higher learning vital to 

manage the increasing outflows from the lower levels. 

− Together with growth in physical infrastructure and other facilities, quality of education needs to 

be strengthened. Quality has to be the guarantee of education in future and Uttar Pradesh that 

remains regressive in quality education will be too weak to become equal with the forward stat es 

in virtually every single respect. The push consequently will have to be on quality improvement 

along with quantitative development. 

− Among the selected sample it was noted that there are households where number of children 

are more than two. The big family size becomes an impediment for the children to enjoy private 

space for their work as well as for studies within the home. Further due to high dependency ratio, 

it is very not easy for the care takers or parents to fulfill the necessary demands o f children 

towards their studies. Further increase in population of poor section directly imbalances the 

demand and supply cycle of labour and market. The easy availability of large number of labourer Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 549 

leads to low dignity of labour. In India where laboure rs are mainly from dalit community further 

draws attention to the position of this community into lower level and results in losing of their 

bargaining power. Therefore, to break this vicious circle of poverty and dependency the state and 

central governmen t need to adopt a strict policy of one or two child policy as adopted in some 

states of India. Strict government policy of family planning could be the most valuable way to deal 

with this problem. 

− Reducing the gender gap in education and justifying the educational disadvantages of the 

scheduled castes and other backward classes will need to be taken care of more effectively with 

a view to promote their educational development in particular and the integrated social 

development in general. 

− Exceptional consideration has to be paid to children of the marginalized sections like manual 

scavengers, dhobis, sweepers, migrants, and other unclean workers, etc. and valmiki children. 

− Consideration will have to be fixated on promotion of primary education in the lagging districts 

and slum pockets of cities. 

− Even with the universalisation of primary education Uttar Pradesh will remain oppressed with 

a large mass of illiterate parents for a long time to come. Special programmes are thus desired 

for promoting literacy and functional skills for such parents, and other illiterate young community 

men and women. Audio and visual techniques can be efficiently developed for this purpose. 

− Financing pattern and grants in aid criteria for improvement in quality of school education and 

university education of all types, mainly in government aided educational institutions need to be 

restructured so that they compete in the changed scenario of inter -state and international 

competition with success. 

− Technical education needs to be promoted to meet the emerging challenges and to provide 

employment opportunities to the youth. 

− Funding of education has to be considerably upgraded to improve the quality of infr astructure 

and education. Neglect of higher education will be damaging to the benefits of the state and the 

country in the long run. 

− System of education in Uttar Pradesh is progressively moving from state controlled and state 

financed to privately managed and privately funded system. Yet, the state still has a key part to 

play. Rise in fee structure in future is inevitable so is likely to have “user charging education 

system”. So for making the government subsidized system of education to fee charging one, a 

political consent will be needed. Though, together with making the system more fee charging, 

provision will have to be made for free -ships to poor students from all social categories so as not 

to deprive them of education along -with fac ility of educational loans. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 550 

− Involvement of local communities and parents’ associations will be accommodating in keeping 

absenteeism among teachers and increase the quality of education being delivered in the schools. 

− There needs to be due recognition of space for dalit culture, ideology and icons in the schools. 

In such scenarios a student from scheduled caste community finds extremely difficult to develop 

empathy with the school system. Hence, the school syllabus norm ally should take notice of dalit 

literature and issues related to caste, exclusion and discriminations in its curriculum. 

− A majority of children study till 14 years of age in Uttar Pradesh. As the age increases, there is 

a drop in the number of children who continue with their education in both selected cities. The 

data also reveals that very few children continue to study till secondary level of education. Dropout 

figures are lower at 10 -14 years. A majority of children study till 14 years of age. As the age 

increases the dropouts keep increasing. Very few continue to study as age advances. A majority 

of children never attended any educational institution as the age advanced and seemed to lose 

interest in their studies. There is no apparent gender difference in ‘never attended’ amongst 

households currently engaged into unclean occupation particularly upto 10 -14 years age group 

and 18 -21 years age group in Ghaziabad city; and upto 10 -14 years age group in Mathura city. 

Large numbers of children go to government schools, followed by high percentage of children 

going to private unaided schools. The percentage of children who continue to go to local 

body schools is dismal. Private unaided schools are gaining prominence in Uttar Pradesh. Female 

children are reported to go mainly to government schools; while male children usually go to 

private schools. Major proportion of dropout children were reported from households involved into 

unclean occupation. Gender difference was observed in dropouts amongst currently engaged in 

unclean occupation, where males was higher than females irrespective of school type. Private 

unaided schools are gaining prominence to some extent in Ghaziabad more than Ma thura. 

Large numbers of children go to government schools. Dropout cases in local body schools are 

also noted. Further, this has raised a range of issues relating to female well -being being erased 

from the policy map. Girls disappear from formal education policy agenda past the age of 14, at 

a critical age when aspirations can be channeled into opportunities. 

The study reveals that there is no apparent gender discrimination in continuing education amongst 

currently engaged in unclean occupation. Although higher of male children do go to English 

medium institution, yet Hindi is the most preferred medium compared to English for both females 

and males. Higher percentage of 46.1 % female children goes to Hindi medium educational 

institutions in Mathur a city. Hindi was the most preferred medium among the dropout children in 

Uttar Pradesh. Male dropout children were observed to be going to Hindi medium educational 

institutions. 

The urban poverty is the most prevailing factor that forces many from tradit ionally clean 

occupation to take up unclean work, as evident from case of Ahir, Gadariya in Mathura, and 

Kashyap in Ghaziabad. The status of continuing education for boys is higher amongst Valmikis 

in Ghaziabad; and is lower for boys in Mathura. The urban poverty is the overriding factor that 

forces many from traditionally clean occupation to take up unclean work, as evident from case of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 551 

Kumhar and Ahir in Mathura. The dropout for boys is higher amongst Valmikis, Khatik, and Raigad. 

The situation of never attended is higher amongst Scheduled Castes Valmikis, and nil amongst 

Kashyap, Gadariya, Ahir caste communities. 

The status of continuing education is high when household heads are educated or literate. 

Parents’ illiteracy was not too much a factor leading to dropout. The situation of never attending 

any educational institution drops when the households’ heads have higher education. 

Thus, study indicates that the education status of children associated with unclean occupation 

has improved to some extent because of Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 

Act, which provides for free and compulsory education to all children aged 6 to 14 which is 

anchored in principles of equity and non -discrimination. However the education completion has 

not gone much at higher levels due to the fact that dropout is high at secondary and primary level. 

The reason of poor educational achievements is household related social and economic; poverty, 

low literacy of parents, intra -household and community settings and living conditions. 

Nevertheless discrimination and exclusion happens to be the main issue for their educational 

backwardness in terms of access to school, school type, infrastructure, provisions and facilities in 

school, inclusive behavior and attitude of authorities in the institution, teachers and peer groups. 

These result in students’ participation, withholding, attainment, and completion of education. The 

disparity along caste lines is evident in the educationa l process. Poverty is a factor for dropout 

situation in Uttar Pradesh. The dropout declines as the income of the household increases in both 

cities. Highest degree of never attended any educational institution is among children from those 

households below poverty line. The situation of ‘never attended’ drops as the income of the 

household increases. 

In Mathura city, which is much smaller than Ghaziabad city lacks growth dynamism. The the well -

being index even among the low income households seems to have a positive association with 

city size and it tends to vary with the nature of the city, that tends to suggest that even when 

consumption poverty is high, many other facilities which are available in the cities contribute to the 

wel l-being of the population. However, it is noted that even in the so -called dynamic cities the 

percentage of slum households located in the bottom size classes is not negligible either, 

suggesting that growth alone cannot eradicate poverty. Availability of more demand -induced 

employment opportunities in the big city, in terms of several socio -economic development 

indicators verified that it tends to improve with a rise in city size. Economic globalization has not 

reduced the intra -urban growt h differentials. The agglomeration economies continue to exist 

because the new forces in the present context of economic globalization have emerged to 

substitute the forces which explained their prevalence way back have been on the decline. This 

is, howeve r, not to deny the considerable overlaps that may exist between informal sector 

employment, poverty, and slums in the big city. Since the big city is more productive in terms of 

a wide range of socio -economic indicators the low income households in the big city is likely to 

be better -off in big city relative to their counterparts in small urban settlements. 

Micro evidence suggests that big city tends to improve the wellbeing of the population even among 

the low income households. The percentage of slum households at the bottom size classes is Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 552 

much larger in the stagnant and small urban settlements compared to the large and relatively 

dynamic ones. However, several of the sample households even in big city are located in the 

bottom size classes. For them to experience an upward mobility the urban employment 

programmes are pertinent. Most of the urban specific programmes in India largely emphasize the 

importance of basic amenities to the urban poor and infrastructure nee d of the cities. However, 

improvement in educational support can have long lasting effect on poverty. 

Conclusions 

The empirical drawn data analysis shows that the urban poverty is the overriding factor that forces 

many youth from traditionally marginalization section of the communities to dropout and shift from 

clean occupation to unclean work. The findings describe that the status of continuing education 

is high when household heads are educated or literate. However, it also indic ates that parents’ 

illiteracy was not too much a factor leading to dropout, but to some extent, education status of 

children associated with unclean occupation has improved because of affirmative actions (AAs), 

especially Right To Education Act (RTE, 2009) , which is anchored in principles of equity and non -

discrimination. Further, the education completion has not gone much at higher levels due to 

the fact that dropout is high at both primary and secondary levels. Most children get education 

till primary level. Gender difference was observed in dropouts amongst households currently 

engaged in unclean occupation, where the male children were higher in proportion than female 

children. However, there is a neglect of female post -primary education in th e stated region of Uttar 

Pradesh. This is something in contrast to both human capital and inclusive theory, where ‘gender’ 

perspective is more important, and female education have been crucial discourses of education 

policy, ensuing girls’ education and women empowerment as a tool of equality cum inclusive 

development and sustainable progress. Further, discrimination and exclusion on the basis of 

caste and gender happens to be the main issue for their educational backwardness in terms of 

acc ess to school, school type, infrastructure, provisions and facilities in school, inclusive 

behaviour and attitude of authorities in the institution, teachers and peer groups. Further, the 

deeper social analysis shows that disparity along caste lines is sti ll evident in the educational 

process across regions. It also shows the continuity in withdrawal of education among Scheduled 

Castes and the consequential social inequities attributed to historical and cumulative polity - socio 

economic deprivation suffered by them for centuries. 

This study has sufficiently found that one of the main causes of magnitude of never enrolled and 

presently out of school children, and high rate of school dropout is chronic poverty which forces 

children at an early stage of their developmental lives to look for livelihood preference to augment 

household income in Uttar Pradesh. While poverty remains leading factor for educational 

withdrawal, the quality of education, is also one of the prominent causes. It is beyond doubt tha t

there has been a significant growth in the number of schools in the country since independence. 

It’s similar to recent all India education survey also highlighted SC habitations have fewer primary 

schools than those of the higher castes. Therefore, the s chools need to reach out to scheduled 

caste communities and reinforce school -community relations. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 553 

The percentage of males and females generally decreases with the increase in the level of 

education. In the case of male it increases at the level of primary and middle level education while 

in case of females it only increases at primary level. In all remaining levels of education it 

consistently decreases. Gender gap also widens with the increase in level of education. Hi ghest 

gender gap exists at the level of middle and secondary level of education. 

This clearly shows that reason of poor educational achievements is household related social and 

economic; poverty, low literacy of parents, intra -household and community settings and living 

conditions. Nevertheless discrimination and exclusion happens to be the main issue for their 

educational backwardness in terms of access to school, school type, infrastructure, provisions 

and facilities in school, inclusive be havior and attitude of authorities in the institution, teachers 

and peer groups. This results in students’ participation, withholding, attainment, and completion 

of education. The outcome shows that disparity along caste lines is evident in the educational 

process. It is important for concerned districts and state officials to note the effectiveness of the 

efforts being made through various policies and programs in order to reduce social gaps by 

enhancing human capital more inclusively. This necessitates drawing an urgent attention and 

intervention for the policy makers to ensure the social justice and empowerment via educational 

attainment of the children, especially girls from poor, vulnerable and marginalized communities at 

large. 

References 

Government of India (GOI). (2009) Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 

2009. Available at: 

https://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/The%20Right%20of%20Children%20to%20Fr 

ee%20and%20Comp ulsory%20Education%20Act,%202009.pdf  (Accessed: 5 October 

2021). 

World Economic Forum.(2021) Global Gender Gap Report 2021. Available at 

https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf (Accessed: 17 September 2021) 

Government of India(GOI). (2011) CENSUS OF INDIA 2011. Available at: 

https://censusindia.gov.in/2011Census/pes/Pesreport.pdf (Accessed: 23 September 

2021). 

Government of Indi a (GOI). (2020) National Education Policy 2020. Available at: 

https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/NEP_Final_English_0.pdf (Ac 

cessed: 10 October 2021) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 554 

National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT). (2021) Annual Status of 

Education Report (Rural) 2020 Wave 1. Available at: 

https://img.asercentre.org/docs/ASER%202021/ASER%202020%20wave%201%20 -

%20v2/aser2020wave1report_feb1.pdf  (Accessed: 29 September 2021) 

GOI (2018).  http://mhrd.gov.in/hi/rte 

GOI /Census (2011).Census Data retrieved from the  http://censusindia.gov.in/2011 -prov -

results/ data_files...) 

http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/814101517840592525/pdf/123152 -

REVISED - PUBLIC -MARCH14 -IDU -March -2018 -with -cover -page.pdf 

https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs 

ILO (2005).Global employment trends for youth, Geneva, ILO. NCE US/GOI (2009). Data 

retrieved from mospi.nic.in. 

Rao, Balram & S.P. Singh (2014). “Marginal Workers in MGNREGS and Challenges of 

Inclusiveness: A Case of UP” published in Delhi University conference 

proceedings on 

Challenges of Development: Re -Visiting to Inclusiveness. Delhi: A.K.Publications. 

ISBN No.: 978 -93 -83334 -51 -3

Rao, Balram & Sinha, B. (2012). Social Exclusion in Context of Globalisation. 18th IEPA 

conference Proceeding held at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Roorkee (available 

online at ipeain.org) pp.318 -329 

Rao, Balram (2012). Gender Discrimination, Social Exclusion and Development‟ at 

ECONference 2012 organized by Department of Economic a t Burdwan University, 

Burdwan (West Bengal), India (28 -29 March 2012) 

Rao, Balram (2012). Migration and Urbanization —Exclusionary and Inclusionary process at 

National Seminar on Demographic Transition and Inclusive development Organized by 

Internationa l Institute of Population Sciences, Mumbai in Collaboration with Indian 

Statistical Institute, Kolkatta, at ISI Complex Kolkatta (15 -17 Mar15 -17, 2012). 

Rao, Balram Sinha & Archana (2018). Social Discrimination in Educational Attainments in Urban 

Location in UP (forth -coming) Statistics of Uttar Pradesh"  www. up.gov.in . Government of 

Uttar Pradesh (Retrieved on12 April, 2018). 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (20 15) Sustainable Development Goals. 

Available NITI Aayog. (2021) SDG India Index & Dashboard, 2020 -21. Available at: 

https://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/corporate/brochure/SDGs_Booklet_Web 

_En.pdf  (Accessed:10 October 2021). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 555 

https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/SDG_3.0_Final_04.03.2021_Web_Spread s.pd 

f (A ccessed: 12 September 2021) 

World Development Report (2018). http://www.ncaer.org/event_details.php?EID=218 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 556 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 557 

# Differential Impact of School Closure 

# on Adolescent Girls during Covid 19 Pandemic: 

# A Study of Slum Dwellers in Delhi 

Antra Singh (Interweave Ventures LLP, India) 

Abstract 

Covid -19 impacted all fragments of society across the world but its impact seems to discriminate 

between poor and ric h, old and young, male and female. These intersectional vulnerabilities paint 

a complex web of inter -connections that impact various segments based on determinants like 

age, gender, income status and others. The genesis of the paper lies in the wake of lim ited 

research on the social impact of Covid -19 and its consequences on young individuals, especially 

adolescent girls. This period is crucial for young girls as they undergo numerous transitions 

related to physical, mental and gendered expectations and dec isions. The paper seeks to 

understand the factors these adolescent girls are exposed to due to the closure of schools from 

the lens of a consortium of NGOs working towards the empowerment of girls. The exploratory 

research was conducted using a mixed appro ach where response was collected from 100 

adolescent girls to understand the problems faced by them during pandemic and in -depth 

interviews of 24 adolescent girls were carried to understand the exposure, sensitivity and adaptive 

capacity for vulnerability mapping and henceforth suggesting the measures required to mitigate 

the impact of school closure on adolescent girls during Covid 19 pandemic. The paper addresses 

the prime concern of Goal 5 of SDG which deals with achieving gender equality and empowering 

girls and women at a time when these girls are pulled back to domestic obligations due to school 

closure which is impacting their holistic development and if not addressed instantly might leave 

its effect for over a generation. 

Keywords: School Closure; Differential Impact; Vulnerability mapping; Adolescent Girls; Covid 19; 

Pandemic; NGO; Government; Policy 

Introduction 

Adolescent girls in India accounts to a massive neglected population comprising 113 million being 

systematically denied the advantages of autonomy, economic opportunity and mobility in 

comparison to their counterparts. Research indicates that adolescent girls are vulnerable in parts 

of India as 50% of all adolescent girls are married before the age of 18, 95% drop out of school 

and 50% ar e exposed to domestic violence (Dasra Report, 2021). 1 in every 3 married girls in the 

age group 15 -19 years experienced violence at hands of their husbands. 1 in every 5 girls of 15 -

19 years experienced forced sex before marriage and 2 in every 5 girls wh o were commercially 

sexually exploited were minors (IIPS, 2006 -07; NFHS -3, 2005 -06; India Country Report, 2008). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 558 

School closure in India impacted 320 million children enrolled from pre -primary to tertiary levels 

of education. Out of these, about 158 million are female students (UNESCO, 2020). Children 

studying in government schools were disproportionately affected with more than 80% students 

not having access to educational resources (Oxfam India Status Report, 2020). It adversely 

impacted the childre n coming from the marginalized section of society (poor, unemployed, migrant 

workers, malnutrition, living in slums and coming from families who lost their source of livelihood 

and income) and forced many children to discontinue their study even post resto ration of 

normality 11 . Moreover, it led to unprecedented disruption to education system having ravaging 

impact on girls’ education exposed to limited access to online education, forced to discontinue 

education when the primary members lost their jobs, unc onsented early marriage, forced 

pregnancy and sexual exploitation leave many adolescent girls at the risk of discontinuing school 

post reopening of schools. These girls especially from the marginalized section of the society face 

the risk of being whisked away from studies to active participation in domestic chores of the 

household or provide helping hand in earning. 

Government policies have systematically considered adolescent girls, mostly as a subset of 

women or children group, thus widening a gap for e ffective policies that address the needs of 

adolescent girls. 

School System Functioning in India 

In India, the school system has four levels: lower primary (age 6 to 10 years), upper primary (age 

11 to 12 years), high school (13 to 15 years) and higher secondary (17 to 18 years). Students are 

required to learn a common curriculum according to the boar d and students have to learn two 

languages (namely Hindi and English). Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) is the most 

popular board and follows textbook written and published by National Council of Educational 

Research and Training (NCERT) and man y private schools use different text books and follow 

different teaching schedules. Second most popular board is the Indian Certificate of Secondary 

Education (ICSE). Both these boards conduct their own examinations at the end of 10 years of 

schooling and again at the end of 12 years of schooling. Each state in India has its own 

department of education and runs its own school system, text books and evaluation system and 

its curriculum and evaluation comes under the preview of State Council of Education Rese arch 

and Training (SCERT) (Kumar, 2011). There are different category of schools like public/ 

government schools, private schools, international schools, national open schools and special -

needs school. 

Indian education system has made significant progress ensuring educational opportunities to all 

segments of society under the aegis of Right to Education Act, 2009, which entails free and 

compulsory schooling for children from ages 6 to 14 years. 13.46 million children were out of 

school in 2006 which reduce d to 6.1 million in 2014 (SRI -IMRB Surveys, 2009 and 2014). There 

has been an improvement but the question arises will this improvement continue? As the situation  

> 11 https://thewire.in/rights/COVID -19 -crisis -will -push -millions -of -vulnerable -children -into -child -labour

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 559 

of pandemic is portraying different figure with economic distress, especially with individua ls from 

marginalized section of society is projected to discontinue sending their children to school. 

Adolescent Girls in India: A Potential for Future of India 

India is ambitiously nearing to reach the aim of ensuring inclusive and equitable quality ed ucation 

for all and Gender Equality by 2030 under Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4 and 5. 

Progressing in terms of universalizing primary education as visible in the enrolment and 

completion rate of girls there is a significant drop -out rate of adolesce nt girls at secondary 

education level reaching 19.8% as compared to drop -out rate in primary education being 6.3%. 

(Sonawane, 2020). The Constitution of India conveys a powerful mandate for equality of women 

in its Preamble, Fundamental Rights and also Dir ective Principles of State Policy. India is also a 

signatory to a number of UN Conventions, like Convention on Elimination of all Forms of 

Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), Beijing Platform for Action and Convention on Rights 

of the Child where the nat ion’s commitment to protect and empower its women and girls is evident. 

India has been striving to dispel discrimination against women in all forms. Laws against sex 

selective abortion, child marriage and sexual harassment at workplace are being implemente d. 

However, discrimination against women in India remains a deep -seated issue despite various 

policy and legislative reforms being undertaken at all levels. However, initiatives are being taken 

to prevent gender disparities at every stage, right from the time the fetus is placed in the womb of 

a mother to education, marriage to labour market posing significant barriers for the future of girls. 

Through committed implementation of government incentives/ schemes like Beti Bachao, Beti 

Padhao, awareness campa igns in the states, focus is on changing the mindset of people towards 

girl child. Implementation of SDG 5 will go a long way in making India gender equal. Though the 

discourse on gender justice and empowerment is rampant in our country, SDG 5 can help in 

bringing a gendered approach to the policies, schemes and laws of the country. India is expected 

to gain from its demographic dividend in the coming years and women are an integral part of this 

developmental process if India wants to tap its full potentia l. It is only through empowering the 

women in all forms that women will transcend beyond the constraints they presently face. It is 

essential to focus on these aspects if India wants to achieve SDG Goals by 2030. 

Adolescent girls in the age group of 10 -19 years constitute a significant 22.8% (232 million) of 

India’s population (UNFPA, 2003) . They face discrimination from their male counterparts on 

mobility, education attainment, say in decision making, nutritious meals, employment and 

marriage which impact s their physical and mental developments. Especially at this crucial stage 

of their life when they are transiting from childhood to maturity. During this phase they need 

physical, mental and emotional support from their siblings, friends, parents, family, neighbourhood 

and society. It is considered a critical stage for adolescent girls especially coming from the 

marginalised section of society as at this transition phase either they continue with secondary 

education, get married or enter into labour market. This decision is seldom the girl’s choice but 

mostly dominated by economic factors, family decisions, societal and cultural factors. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 560 

Impact of Covid 19 Pandemic on Adolescent Girls 

COVID -19 pandemic left millions of students at the risk of not returning back to school due to 

financial distress, help in household chores, childcare support, early and forced marriage, 

unintended pregnancy. It is estimate that about 24 million students ( from pre -primary to tertiary 

education) will be at risk of not returning to education institutions in 2020, including care centres, 

schools, universities or other training institutions, of which 10.9 million are in primary and 

secondary levels. 11.2 millio n are girls and young women, with 5.2 million of them being primary 

and secondary school students (UNESCO, 2020). Table 1 provides an estimate of student 

dropouts by 2020 growth projections (growth projections are weighted by the student’s cohort of 

each c ountry and are weighted by Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 

Table 1. Estimates of Students Drop Outs by 2020 Growth Projections 

Particulars  Growth Projections 

2020 

Number of drop -outs (in 

millions of students) 

MPO -March  -0.8  1.9 

WEO -April  -2.3  4.1 

MPO -May  -3.4  6.8 

> (Source: World Bank, Research Paper Series, 2020)

The figures above indicate that with every fall in the growth projections will lead to household 

income shocks and an increase in the drop outs. It is now even more worrisome as Covid 19 

pandemic and induced lockdown has increased the gender gap in education posing more 

challenges for adolescent girls in continuing online education during economic hardships faced 

by their family. The economic impact of Covid 19 will increase the risk of e arly dropout as girls 

are more vulnerable to child labour, child marriage, violence and sexual abuse (UNESCO, 2020). 

Increased rates of poverty, household responsibilities, child labour, teenage pregnancy may 

prevent as many as 20 million secondary school -aged girls around the world from ever returning 

to the classroom (Malala Fund, 2020). Alongwith the prevailing norms this interruption in learning 

had a greater impact on girls than boys and disproportionately affected adolescent girls belonging 

to margina lised section of society and from families that lost their livelihood during the pandemic 

(RTE forum, 2020) 

Thus, it is impertinent to include adolescent girls in policy making as it will be insightful to invest 

in this segment to build a strong economic base (Judith, 2007), promoting gender equality, 

reducing health issues (maternal mortality, infant mortality and HIV), eliminating child marriage 

and help in reversing intergenerational poverty. 

Both, the lack of access to schools and economic hardships due to COVID -19 puts girls at a 

higher risk of gender -based violence and forced child marriage. In the wake of these problems 

the study proposes to understand the impact of school closure on girls and to understand the role 

of stakeholders in addressing gendered differential in the wake of third wave. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 561 

Objective of the Study 

The objectives of the study are as fol lows: 

(i) To understand the impact of school closure on adolescent girls amid Covid -19 pandemic. 

(ii) To explore the role of stakeholders in addressing the issues raised by marginalized section of 

the society 

(iii) To explore the measures required to mitigate the impact of Covid 19 on adolescent girls’ 

education 

Based on the research objectives the research questions are designed as follows: 

a. What is the impact of school closure on adolescent girls amid Covid -19 pandemic? 

b. Are the st akeholders/ policy makers ready to absorb the effects of the upcoming third wave? 

c. What are the measures required to mitigate the impact of Covid 19 on adolescent girls’ 

education? 

The study was designed around the following critical areas of enquiry: (i) Social, demographic 

and economic profile of adolescent girls (ii) The impacts of the pandemic and school closure on 

the education and lives of adolescent girls between the age -group of 10 -18 years, including how 

they spend their time in absence of scho ols and the status of access to and use of technology for 

learning (iii) The kind of support the household received from governments and civil society, 

especially in the context of income and livelihood losses and compensation for the loss of learning 

due to school -closure. 

The sample of the study is collected from adolescent girls enrolled in a Centre of Excellence run 

by an NGO Protsahan India in Uttam Nagar, New Delhi. Population of the study constituted 416 

adolescent girls belonging to the age 10 -18 years from marginalized background. Primary data in 

the form of survey was conducted and response were collected by 100 adolescent girls through 

questionnaire to access their vulnerability on parameters of exposure and vulnerability mapping 

was developed f rom in -depth interviews and observations of 24 adolescent girls studying in the 

same center. In -depth interviews were conducted to understand their sensitivity and adaptive 

capacity used as parameters for vulnerability mapping. This field level empirical s tudy was 

undertaken to from November 2021 till February 2022 when the schools in Delhi were in the 

transition of resuming physical classes. In -depth interview was conducted and questionnaire was 

also floated covering details about their education, age, dea th due to covid -19 pandemic, family 

members’ profile and access to ration and Aadhar card. 

Protsahan India Foundation is a non -profit organization established in 2010. They work against 

any form of child abuse and for the betterment of at -risk adolescent girls in the underserved Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 562 

communities of India. The slum neighborhoods where Protsahan is currently working, 

adolescence or hitting puberty is considered to be the age for getting the girls married irrespective 

of the fact that neither their mind, nor body are developed to handle such responsibilities and their 

consequences. They aren’t even considered worthy of an education. Girls in this underserved 

community, as others, face all forms of child abuse on a daily basis. Some come from families 

where they go to sleep after witnessing domestic violence and alcohol abuse every night; some 

have 7 -10 members living in the same room, as a result of which they have grown up in distorted 

environments which have left them with a warped sense of boundary, experiencing direct scenes 

of extreme intimacy or violence between parents; some have been sexually abused by one of 

their family members; and some are trying to get away with the constant pressure of becoming a 

child bride. There is no understanding of menstrual hygi ene, reproductive health or nutrition. As 

a result, they are at high risk of early pregnancies, sexually transmitted diseases, stunted physical 

growth, and overall hampered health and development. 

Vulnerability Mapping of Adolescent Girls: Risk, Sensitivi ty and Adaptive Capacity 

Vulnerability of adolescent girls are assessed based on their poor and economic living conditions, 

government (both central and state) aid/linkages and medical aid. Vulnerability is commonly 

associated with poor economic and nutritional status, but many ot her overlapping social vectors 

such as quality of housing and public services, occupation, gender, disability, marital status, age, 

stigmatized and debilitating ailments and many other aspects are not recognized (National Urban 

Health Mission, 2017). 

Vuln erability is a multidimensional process affected by social, political, and economic forces 

interacting from local to international scales (Bohle, Downing, & Watts, 1994; Ribot, 1995). 

Vulnerability is a function of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capac ity (Engle, 2011; Smit and 

Wandel, 2006). Many factors influence vulnerability, four broad spectrums: access to resources, 

governance, culture and knowledge have been considered in the past to understand the social 

aspect of vulnerability. Together they pr ovide a comprehensive, interdisciplinary social science 

framework for analyzing and understanding uneven vulnerability across social difference. So, 

vulnerability mapping entails mapping of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity indicators 

where great er the exposure or sensitivity of a system means greater the vulnerability (Esterhuyse 

et al.,2017). The study has been conducted on the basis of the framework proposed by Thomas 

et al in 2018, though it was used in climate study the vectors can be applied to other disciplinary 

studies as well. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 563 

Fig. 1. Vulnerability Assessment: Framework 

> (Source: Engle, 2011; Thomas et al. 2018)

Vulnerability is a function of exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity so it can be stated as 

Vulnerability = function (exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity). Exposure (external 

characteristic) is the risk of being allowed or forced to experience something and in the context of 

the study it poses the risk adolescent girls are of discontinuing formal school education. 

She is exposed to risks from various peripherals stated in fig. 2 starting with own parents, siblings, 

extended family, neighborhood, friends, society and culture. During adolescent , as the girl 

undergoes transition and experience changes in appearance, though process she either isolates 

herself and keep her interactions with people she is comfortable like parents, siblings and friends 

or she explores her surroundings and periphery o f her interactions expands beyond personal 

relationships. Mostly the decisions related to her studies, marriage and future are taken by her 

immediate family taking into considerations societal norms. 

# Vulnerability 

# Exposure 

# Sensitivity 

# Adaptive 

# capacity Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 564 

Fig. 2 Periphery in Exposure of Adolescent Girls 

> (Source: Self Compiled by the author)

Sensitivity (internal characteristic) is the degree to which these adolescent girls are affected by 

the exposure to risk of discontinuing their formal school education. For the purpose of this study 

sensitivity is studied on a scale of 1 -5 where 1 is least sensitive, 2 is less sensitive, 3 is moderate 

sensitive, 4 is more sensitive and 5 is most sensitive. When a girl is ranked 1 based on the in -

depth interview it means she is not affected by and face challenges at ease and if a girl is ranked 

5 it means sh e is very sensitive to the new environment/ change and it is having an impact on 

both her mental and physical well -being. The scope of study was limited to understanding the 

intensity of impact on sensitivity on the scale and not in profound depth but it c an be considered 

in future to cover this aspect in detail. 

Adaptive capacity is the ability of these adolescent girls to develop resilience and adjust to the 

changing situation. Physical changes along with exposure to situations of discontinuing studies, 

early marriage, enter the labour market and others might have a deep impact on the girl 

undergoing it. These sudden changes might traumatize her and have a deep impact on her 

present and future. These impacts are based on factors like income level of fami ly, support of 

family, education level of family, support of NGOs and government. 

High vulnerability situation is when adaptive capacity is low, relative to exposure and sensitivity. 

Contrarily, if the adaptive capacity is high it helps in reducing the e ffects of exposure and 

sensitivity, and in turn reduces vulnerability. (Thomas et al., 2018) 

> Culture
> Society
> Neighbourhood/ Friends
> Family
> Parents
> Exposure

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 565 

Interview schedule was prepared and used during the mapping process and the adolescent girls 

belonging to marginalized sections were dealt in very subtle manner and it took time to collect 

data from these girls. Initially, the data was collected based on questionnaire and during data 

collection the response of these girls were recorded and to understand the exposure and 

sensitivity towards vulnerability interview s at length were conducted. The team focused to 

understand the reasons of these adolescent girls for discontinuing education during the Covid -19 

pandemic and access their willingness and ascertain the problems faced by both the girl 

respondents and their f amily. Vulnerability was classified in three categories as stated in Table 2. 

Table 2. Vulnerability Indexing 

Vulnerability Index  Score  Condition 

Vulnerability  1 If any One condition is met 

High Vulnerability  2 If any Two conditions are met 

Extremely High 

Vulnerability 

3 If Three or more conditions are met 

> (Source: Self compiled with Protsahan India team)

Above stated vulnerability index was calculated based on the score (1 -3) where the respondent 

is marked vulnerable if any one condition stated in Table 3 is met, the respondent will be marked 

as highly vulnerable if any two conditions stated in the below t able are met and if a respondent 

scores 3 it means she is extremely vulnerable if three or more stated conditions are met. 

Table 3 states the conditions to access vulnerability index of the respondents 

Conditions to access vulnerability index  Status 

Family Income (for a family of 5)  <Rs 10,000 per month 

Basic Documentation (Aadhar card, PAN 

card, Labour card, E -shram card and Ration 

Card) 

Not available 

Basic Healthcare  Not able to access 

Basic education for the children  Not able to access 

Linkages to government schemes 

(Aaganwadi, Laadli Scheme and any other 

government scheme) 

Not able to access 

> (Source: Self compiled with Protsahan India team)

These conditions were compiled based on the spectrums like access to resources, governance, 

culture and knowledge have been considered in the past to understand the social aspect of 

vulnerability. Thus, conditions to access vulnerability index were develop ed based on 

respondents demographic profile like family income, basic documentation (Aadhar card, PAN 

card, Labour card, E -shram card and ration card), basic healthcare, basic education for the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 566 

children, beneficiary of any government scheme (like aanganwa di, laadli scheme or any other 

government schemes). 

Demographic Profile of Respondents 

63% adolescent girls belonged to the age category of 10 to 15 years and 37% were in the age 

category 15 to 19 years. Majority constituting 54% respondents hailed from Bihar followed by 27% 

from Uttar Pradesh, 15% from Rajasthan and merely 5% from other states. 

85% of the respondents belonged to a family of 5 and more members, 13% were family of 4 and 

remaining 2% belonged to a family of three and less. Wher eas the earning members of the family 

were solely 1 in case of 58% respondents, 30% cases had 2 earning members in their family, 9% 

had 3 earning members and 3% respondents had 4 and more earning members in their family. 

Such large families with few earnin g members tend to detrimentally impact the nutritional and 

educational outcome of children (Kugler et al, 2017). 

Fig. 3. Primary occupation of parents 

> (Source: Self compiled based on primary data)

Only 52% respondents’ fathers were in employment (mo stly informal sector working in 

construction sites, sweeper, rickshaw drivers and rag pickers) remaining 28% were unemployed 

and 20% were beggars. 48% respondent’s mothers were employed as domestic helpers and daily 

wage laborer, followed by 32% who were h ousewives and 20% were beggars. It reflects the 

vulnerable position of these adolescent girls, especially at this time of pandemic when economic 

activities were allowed only in essential services and other arenas were restricted or suspended. 

Further inves tigating into data stated the vulnerable condition of these adolescent girls in terms 

of monthly earnings as stated in Table 4 reflecting that 75% adolescent girls don’t have access to   

> 52
> 28
> 20
> 48
> 32
> 20
> LABOURER UNEMPLOYED BEGGARS

# Primary Occupation of Parents of 

# adolescent girls  

> Father Mother

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 567 

resources with majority coming from households where monthly earning i s less than Rs 8000 per 

month prior to Covid 19 pandemic and during the pandemic approximately 75% respondents 

either parent lost their job. 

Table 4. Family income of respondents 

Particulars (per month)  Responses 

Less than Rs 5,000  31 

Rs 5,001 to Rs 8,000  44 

Rs 8,001 to Rs 10,000  16 

More than Rs 10,001  8

> (Source: Self compiled based on primary data)

These situations could likely have bearing on continued schooling of these girls during resource 

deprivation exacerbating their vulnerability (Jha and Jhingran, 2006 and Usaini, M. et al, 2015). 

Migration is also an area of concern and especially during th is period when statistics obtained 

from studies also suggested that almost only 4% of the total population of the migrants received 

rations that were allotted by the government, and 29% did not receive rations despite having 

ration cards (Farooqui and Pand ey, 2020). Almost 90% of the migrants either faced loss of pay 

or a reduction in their salary (Shahare, 2020). International Labour Organization (ILO) estimated 

a decline of 22.6% in the wages of migrant workers post lockdown (Gothoskar, 2021). A survey 

co nducted across 179 districts in India from May 30, 2020 to July 16, 2020 found that around 35% 

of the migrants went without any meal the whole day (Pandit, 2020). Migration poses major 

challenges for education systems in normal circumstances (GEMR, 2019) s o it can be projected 

with reverse migration it would have been difficult for students (especially adolescent girls with 

burden of sharing household chores) to continue their studies in challenging times when either or 

both parents were struggling to retai n their job. 13% respondents broke down when they informed 

they lost their father’s life to Covid -19 and it was either their mother who were currently working 

to support the family or elder sibling (brother or sister), if any. 

79% respondents reported ha ving inadequate food to feed the dependent members of the 

families. School -going children, who were at home during lockdown did not had access to mid -

day meals indicating higher incidences of hunger and malnutrition. Adolescent girls faced 

discrimination i n nutritious meals being provided of inferior quality from their male counterparts in 

normal times and when struck with pandemic their nutrition was neglected. Majority girls felt the 

discrimination happening with them in terms of nutritious food and they showed the desire to join 

school, one reason being the mid -day meals provided to them. In the case of the school -going 

girls, this only gets heightened given the nutritional discrimination they face. 12 It tends to have an 

impact on these growing girls and many accepted the discrimination and were satisfied seeing 

their brothers being fed nutritious meals and they being deprived. This is not a good sign as if 

these girls are accepting this discrimination, it won’t take much time for them to think it to be  

> 12 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4167551/)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 568 

normal and follow it in future with their children as well. It will definitely have a repercussion on 

the upcoming generation as well. 

Despite central -government funded schemes and included Jan -Dhan Yojana, Pradhan Mantri 

Ujjwala Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Gar ib Kalyan Yojana, Building and Construction workers welfare 

fund and PM Kisan Samman Nidhi and others. These respondents were not enrolled in any of the 

schemes and they were only partially aware of the schemes run by government. 

80% respondents lived as a tenant and only 20% owned the home they were presently living or 

lived with a close relative/ acquaintance. Merely 48% had access to toilet with proper waste 

disposal reflecting these girls did not even have a safe and hygienic toilet which is a necessi ty 

especially when these girls are in menstruation phase exposing them to diseases and exploitation. 

88% respondents had access to mohalla clinic for primary healthcare and 12% still didn’t had 

access to primary healthcare. Of which, 77% respondents had ac cess to life saving immunizations 

and 23% did not had access to these immunizations. 

Findings and Observation 

It was observed that majority of adolescent girls who were associated with Protsahan India even 

for less than a year experienced change in term s of confidence, ambition, resilience and sense 

of independence. Protsahan India worked at ground level and filled the void that remained despite 

the presence of central and state government. Prime Minister Narendra Modi called on Non -

Government Organizati ons (NGOs) to help the government by providing basic necessities to the 

underprivileged and continue supporting vulnerable populations. 

In their almost a decade of work, the outcomes of their programs have been incomparable. All of 

the girls enrolled at their Centre of Excellence (CoE), who have appeared for their board exams, 

have cleared with excellent scores, some scoring as high as 80 -90% in most subjects. 88% of the 

girls that they currently work with have not only been able to receive higher education, but have 

also shown an improvement in their annual school scores. 

During lockdown the work done at the grass root level by Protsahan India team was commendable 

they provided rations to more than 26700 households in Delhi slums, provided resources at their 

centres to be accessed by the adolescent girls when their schools were closed and they did not 

had access to resources to continue their online classes, provided counselling to adolescent girls 

and their families. They also rais ed alarm through their reports of heightened cases of violence 

against children and adolescent girls and tried to reach out to girls and their families in times od 

distress and provide them with essential resources. During lockdown the team distributed sim ple 

relief kit consisting of need based customized assortment of 10 kg flour, 10 kg rice, 4 kg pulses, 

2 kg potatoes, 2 kg onions, salt, sugar, essential spices, tea, biscuits and sanitary napkins. 

Protsahan India Foundation has developed their model of w ork as the HEART principle (Healing, 

Education, Art based Life Skills, Recovery and Technology) that is based in the premise of 

working through the power of empathy, creativity, life skills, and active listening. Their focus is on 

healing the broken childh oods using the creative power of various art forms like painting, cinema, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 569 

design, film making, dance, music, photography and meditation and helping the girls with their 

education through an integrated after school program. 

Having a model of work as the H EART principle based on trauma informed compassionate care, 

Protsahan India Foundation aims at addressing the adolescent girl framework for achieving their 

ultimate goal of fighting child abuse and healing and empowering girls. They want their girls to 

thr ive, learn, have access to clean environments, and be protected from violence and exploitation. 

Vulnerability Mapping 

Exposure 

53% respondents were engaged in earning activity like begging, child labour and sex work prior 

to enrolment in Protsahan and 47% were not enrolled in any earning activity. 20% respondents 

shared that they have risk of child marriage and remaining 80% respondents didn’t feel the risk 

of child marriage. 

Mere 46% respondents received 3 nutritive meals a day at home and 54% did not receive these 

3 nutritive meals. 72% respondents experienced domestic violence at home and only 28% did not 

experience domestic violence at home. 59% respondents were at high risk of sexual abuse and 

remaining 41% were exposed to moderate, low and no r isk of sexual abuse. 64% respondents 

were of the view that they did not get ample time to study and only 36% got ample time to study. 

Sensitivity 

It was interesting to notice that initially majority of girls didn’t notice that they were sensitive to the 

discrimination they were facing but after the interactive sessions these girls opened and, in the 

discussions, almost all showed dissatisfaction towards the discrimination they had to face. They 

were keen to return back to formal schools but being aware of the resource constraints and the 

problems faced by their families they were ready to follow their parents decision. It was also 

observed that many girls developed a negative attitude and reluctance for participation in any 

group activity. 

Adaptive Capac ity 

In the given timeline and resource crunch it was not feasible to reach out to all the girls supported 

by Protsahan India team but we tried to understand how the team is reaching out to these girls 

and improving the adaptive capacity so that these girl s continue their education. 

2442 adolescent girls and their families identified in the group of vulnerable to highly vulnerable 

category were supported by Protsahan during Covid -19 (2020 and 2021) in West Delhi. Of these 

902 girls fall in the category of extremely high vulnerability and 238 comprising 26.4% adolescent 

girls were supported by Protsahan and were enrolled in their GEC and 73.3% girls were supported 

by the team despite they not enrolled in their GEC stated in fig. 4. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 570 

Fig. 4. Adolescent Girls Supported by Protsahan India Team during Covid 19 Lockdown 

> (Source: Self compiled with the data shared by Protsahan India)

The support extended to vulnerable adolescent girls by Protshan India during and after lockdown 

are as follows: 

(i) Nutri tion and healthcare support - Ration rich in protein content 

(ii) Linking the unlinked with government schemes (either Central or State) 

(iii) mainstreaming the marginalized girls with access to digital divides 

(iv) Academic and life support skills to g irls (counselling to girls exposed to violence) 

(v) Scholarship for vulnerable girls 

(vi) Enrolment in STEM courses 

(vii) Cowin registration and vaccination drives in slums 

(viii) Fellowship program for employability enhancement of younger girls 

Protsahan India Foundation follows a “Trauma -Informed Compassionate Classroom” model that 

includes Creating A Safe Space For Socio -Emotional Development, Building A Sense of Trust 

and Empathy, Establishing Predictability and Academic Rigor, Offering Choice Based Creative    

> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> 1200
> GEC 01 GEC 02 GEC 03 GEC 04
> Adolescent girls supported during Covid 19

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 571 

Arts Options, and Steering the Child Towards Socio -Economic Stability. It deals with at -risk 

adolescent girls who are (have been) dealing with various levels and types of trauma and 

therefore adopted its current trauma -informed care approach in order to ‘heal’ them. The 

organization believes in a “Theory of Change” that rests on three pillars: 

Empathy - It involves delivering emotional and psychological support, complemented wit h support 

in formal school education, enables young adolescents’ girls to be empowered to take charge of 

their own lives. 

Creativity - Creativity of art, theater, dance, music, film -making, and photography not only 

provides healing for the childhoods brok en by abuse, but also ensures improved long term 

learning outcomes in formal school education, and a better quality of life through higher self -

confidence for young adolescent girls. 

Life Skills - Life Skills training needs an ongoing systematic approach towards imparting soft skills 

and entrepreneurial skills that have a direct impact on the life of an at -risk young adolescent girl. 

It is essential to ensure that the girls understand the importance of their voice and their thoughts 

in everyday life situat ions. Life skills training includes personal safety education (good touch bad 

touch and training against child sexual abuse), critical and creative thinking, everyday problem 

solving and decision making, effective communication and social skills, interpers onal 

relationships, coping with emotions and stress, self -awareness and self -worth, greater 

participation in governance, entrepreneurship development, leadership building and social 

enhancement, ease of accessing digital services, awareness of rights and e ntitlements, financial 

inclusion, mentorship and career counselling. 

Proposed Framework to Help Vulnerable Adolescent Girls 

Based on the observations and data collected during the study a framework stated in fig. 5 was 

proposed to address the issue of gendered differential impact of school closure on adolescent 

girls. The framework constitutes major steps to access vulnerability of these girls in terms of 

exposure to risks by the internal surroundings (their parents, friends and family) and external 

sur roundings (neighbors, society and culture), sensitivity (high or low) and adaptive capacity 

measures to be taken together by the stakeholders (their family, NGOs, institutions, society and 

government) to help these girls in overcoming the barriers in joini ng back the school. With the 

help of NGOs working with adolescent girls’ government can include inputs collected by them, 

understand and incorporate measures to provide equal rights to these girls and not let them drop 

school in the dearth of resources and societal norms. If timely action is taken then we can together 

bring these girls back to school, improve the drop rate of girls in secondary education, empowering 

these girls and achieve SDG Goals by 2030. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 572 

Fig. 5. Proposed Framework 

> (Source: Self compiled based on the outcome of the study)

Conclusion 

The existing societal norms, structural barriers of caste and stigma towards adolescent girls’ 

education poses a threat of reversing the visible gains made in terms of gender parity in education 

and empowerment. The gendered impact of the pandemic on educa tion of adolescent girls (in 

terms of high -risk exposure and limited means) can have a deep -rooted impact on the coming 

generations if this concern is not addressed comprehensively. This discourse can be addressed 

to a great extent if corrective measures a re timely responded by understanding the root cause of 

the problems faced by adolescent girls and their families and responding to their specific needs 

and ensuring its inclusion in the policies framed by government. We have to reach the SDG goals 

in the s tipulated time period and it will only be achieved by filling the void and adopting an effective 

framework to help marginalized families in distress, especially on economic front in order to 

prevent child marriage, children entering the labour market and d iscontinuing the school. 

The study identified various challenges faced by the girls in their adolescent at the wake of the 

pandemic, when they are out of school. These challenges are infrastructural barriers, gender -

based discrimination, exposure to abuse s, child marriage and sexual exploitation within and 

outside their home. The study suggests towards the long -term impact on these adolescent girls. 

School closure is not only impacting the girls currently but also highlights that if corrective 

measures are not put into practice, it would surely have an impact on the entire generation. The 

study also covers the measures adopted by government to address this issue; however, it states 

that not much is done for this vulnerable group and also leaves few question s to be answered by 

the stakeholders: Are we prepared to help the adolescent girls join back the school? What 

remedies are we providing to these girls belonging to marginalized section? What measures are 

being taken by the stakeholders to help this entire generation overcome the problems related to 

school closure?           

> •Immediate
> surroundings
> •External
> surroundings
> Exposure •High
> •Low
> Sensitivity
> •NGOs
> •Family
> •Institutions
> •Government
> •Society
> Adaptive
> capacity
> Back to school
> Gender equality
> Empowerment
> of girls
> Achieve SDG
> Goal by 2030
> Outcome

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 573 

So, the question still remains the same that despite the aids provided by the government and 

individuals, such sensitive issue needs to be highlighted and timely corrective measures needs 

to be taken seriously to get these girls back to school or it will definitely have an impact on the 

entire generation. A holistic approach needs to be taken by the stakeholders to ensure 

educational equity and inclusive environments to fill the void for these vu lnerable girls. 

Acknowledgement 

This study would not have been possible without the support of Protsahan India and its staff 

members working with adolescent girls and their families. 

References 

Bohle, H. Downing, T. and Watts, M. (1994). Climate change and social vulnerability: Toward a 

sociology and geography of food insecurity, Global Environmental Change, Vol 4, no. 1, 

pg. 37 -48 

Bruce, J. (2007), Reaching the Girls Left Behind: Targeting Adolescent Programming for Equity, 

Social Inclusion, Health , and Poverty Alleviation. Prepared for: Financing Gender 

Equality: A Commonwealth Perspective, Commonwealth Women’s Affairs Ministers’ 

Meeting, Uganda, June 2007 

Dasra Report, (2021) https://www.dasra.org/resource/india -philanthropy -report -2021 

Engel, N.L. (2011) Adaptive capacity and its assessment, Global Environmental Change, Vol. 

21, pg 647 -656 

Esterhuyse et al., (2017), Vulnerability mapping as a tool to manage the environmental impacts 

of oil and gas extraction. R. Soc. open sci. Vol. 4, pg.2 -18. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171044 

Farooqui, M and Pandey, S (2020). Social Security for Informal Workers in India, Research 

Brief, Centre for Policy and Research, 

https://scholar.google.co.in/scholar_url?url=https://accountabilityindia.in/wp -

content/uploads/2020/11/Brief_SocialSecurity_InformalWorkers_21Nov2020.pdf&hl=en& 

sa=X&ei=zWFYYsqwO5aM6rQPlISayA8&scisig=AAGBfm0Bf9R1AJMDWaCOnyIyyXSB 

EXsd6A&oi=scholarr 

GEMR, (2019) https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000265866 

Gothoskar, S (2021), NITI Aayog’s proposal to cut food subsidies will worsen India’s rising 

hunger problem. The Wire 

IIPS, (2006 -07) https://www.iipsindia.ac.in/sites/default/files/India_Report.p df Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 574 

India Country Report, (2008) 

https://www.unodc.org/pdf/india/publications/India%20Country%20Report.pdf 

Jha, J. and Jhingran, D. (2006) Elementary education for the poorest and other deprived 

groups, Manohar Publishers and Distributors, 1 st edition 

Kumar, V. S. (2011) The Education System in India https://www.gnu.org/education/edu -

systemindia.en.html#:~:text=The%20school%20system%20in%20India,and%20higher% 

20secondary%20into%20two 

National Urban Health Mission, (2017) 

https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/NUHM/Guidelines_and_tools_for_vulnerability_mapping.p 

df 

NFHS -3, (2005 -06) https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/frind3/frind3 -vol1andvol2.pdf 

Oxfam India Status Report, (2020) www.oxfamindia.org 

Pandit, A (2020) 1 in 4 migrants went home on foot during lockdown: Survey. The Times of 

India 

Ribot, J (1995) The causal structure of vulnerability: Its application to climate impact analysis, 

Geo Journal, Vol 35, no. 2, pg. 119 -122 

RTE Forum, (2020), Building back better: Gender -res ponsive strategies to address the impact 

of COVID -19 on girls’ education 

Shahare, B (2020) Covid -19 lockdown and fate of migrant labours in Delhi. J Adv Res Humanit 

Soc Sci. Vol.7, no.1, pg. 9 –13 

Smit, B and Wandel, J (2006) Adaptation, Adaptive Capacity and Vulnerability. Global 

Environmental Change, 16, pg. 282 -292. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.03.008 

Sonawane, S, (2020), The Gendered Impact of Covid 19 on School Education 

https ://www.cbgaindia.org/blog/gendered -impact -covid -19 -school -education/ ). 

Thomas et al., (2018) Explaining differential vulnerability to climate change: A social science 

review, Wires Climate Change, pg. 1 -18 

The Economic Survey (2016 –2017) www.indiabudget .gov.in 

UNESCO (2020) How many students are at risk of not returning to school? UNESCO COVID -19 

Education Response Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 575 

UNFPA (2003) Adolescents in India, A Profile, UNFPA for UN systems in India, pg. 21 -22 

Usaini, M. et al, (2015) Influence of School Envi ronment on Academic performance of 

secondary school students in Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia, The American Journal of 

Innovative Research and Applied Sciences, Vol 1, no. 6, pg. 203 -221 

World Bank (2020) Stimulating the potential impacts of COVID -19 Schoo l closures on Schooling 

and Learning Outcomes, Policy Research Working Paper, 9284 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 576 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 577 

# Diarrheal Diseases and Evaluation of 

# Inhabitants’ Knowledge, Attitude and Practices 

# regarding Water Safety, Sanitation and Hygiene 

# in Cholera Endemic Localities of Douala, Cameroon 

Jane -Francis TatahKihla Akoachere, Roy Lyonga Mbua, and Engome Regina Wotany 

(University of Buea, Cameroon) 

Abstract 

Purpose: In Cameroon, about 3.8 million people lack access to safe water and sanitation facilities. 

Frequent outbreaks of diarrhea diseases, particularly cholera, a diarrhea disease caused by Vibrio 

cholerae , occur in Douala due to inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH). This has 

qualified the city of Douala as a cholera -endemic area. Recent outbreaks in Douala have 

increased in size.and occur towards the end of the dry season. This study determined the 

prevalence of diarrhea and evaluated inhabitants’ kno wledge, attitude and practices (KAP) 

regarding WASH in cholera endemic localities of Douala. 

Design/methodology/approac h: A community -based cross -sectional survey was conducted 

between July and September 2017 in three health districts: New Bell, Nylon and Deido, to 

evaluate inhabitants’ KAP, and diarrhea prevalence. A retrospective hospital -based study was 

conducted to determine diarrhea prevalence from 2011 -2015. The Chi Square and multivariate 

regression were used to analyze data. 

Findings: Prevalenc e of diarrhea in community -based study (17.9%) was higher than 11.1% in 

the retrospective study. Overall, good KAP (mean score of ≥ 50% for knowledge and attitude and 

≥ median score for practices) was observed respectively in 38%, 66% and 80% of respondent s. 

Participants with good knowledge (p=0.066), good attitude (p=0.011 ) and good practices (p=0.084) on 

WASH were less likely to have diarrhea than those with poor knowledge, poor attitude and poor 

practices. However, a significant association was observ ed only for good attitude. 

Originality/Value of the paper : This study has identified gaps in KAP and show that there is an 

urgent need for interventions to enhance behavioral change to prevent WASH -related diseases 

and promote health. Data generated cou ld be used to monitor Cameroon’s progress towards the 

attainment of SDG 3, SDG 6 and SDG11. The research team intends to collaborate with the 

Douala Municipality and public health authorities to ensure improvement in WASH and behavioral 

change. 

Keywords: Diarrhea; Knowledge, Attitude and Practices; Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, Douala, 

Cameroon Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 578 

Purpose 

Diarrhea disease is a global public health problem. It is a threat to health security and a 

developmental challenge. Global estimates show that in 2016, diarrhea was the eighth leading 

cause of death claiming over 1.6 million lives, the fifth leading cause of death among children 

under 5 years and the third cause of disability -adjusted life years (DALYs) ( Global Burden of 

Disease (GBD) 2016 Diarrhea Disease Collaborators, 2018). Diarrhea was the second leading 

cause of mortality and the leading cause of malnutrition in children under 5 years old in 2017 

(WHO, 2017a). The highest burden of diarrhea occurs in low -and middle -income countries ( GBD 

2016 Diarrhea Disease Collaborators, 2018; UNICEF, 2016), where it disproportionately affects 

individuals in the low socioeconomic index group. The highest burden occurs in children 5 years 

and below (Manetu et al., 2021; UNICEF, 2021), accounting for 63% of the global burden due to 

diarrhea (Zhang et al., 2016). Although global statistics show a significant decline in mortality due 

to diarrhea, from 1.2 million to 526,000 between 2000 and 2015 ( GBD 2016 Diarrhea Disease 

Collaborators, 2018; UNICEF, 2016), mo rbidity and mortality due to diarrhea are still a serious 

concern in low - and middle -income countries ( GBD 2016 Diarrhea Disease Collaborators, 2018), 

particularly in sub -Saharan Africa and south Asia, where there is lack of resources and inadequate 

infra structure for diarrhea disease management. In Africa, the burden due to diarrheal disease 

remains high; there were about 30 million cases of severe diarrhea and 330, 000 deaths in African 

in 2015 (Reiner et al., 2018). 

The occurrence of diarrhea and as sociated deaths have been linked to lack of clean water, 

inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene ( GBD 2016 Collaborators, 2018; Soboksa et al., 2021; 

Getahun et al., 2021). Diarrhea diseases caused by unsafe drinking water and poor sanitation 

were identifie d as the top two leading risk factors resulting in mortality globally for individuals aged 

five years and under in 2017 (GBD 2017 Collaborators, 2018). About 88% of diarrheal associated 

deaths are attributable to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation and ins ufficient hygiene (CDC, 

2020). In addition, water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) have been linked to the spread of 

neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), adverse health outcomes such as stunting, wasting and 

underweight, and social outcomes (WHO, 2017b, WHO, 2021; Pickering et al., 2015; Cumming 

and Cairncross, 2016; Mbuya and Humphery, 2016; Mills and Cumming, 2017), hence 

constituting a developmental challenge as it affects the progress towards the attainment of other 

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Multi -country studies by Fuller et al. (2015) and Esrey 

et al. (1996) have reported larger impacts on health following concurrent improvement of water 

and sanitation compared to improvements on water or sanitation alone. Despite the enormous 

data underscori ng the importance of WASH in mitigating the occurrence of diarrhea diseases as 

well as other waterborne diseases, access to WASH is still a problem in some parts of the world. 

Global statistics demonstrate an overall increase in access to improved water an d sanitation in 

low -middle income countries (LMICs) between 2000 -2017, but this improvement is still very 

insignificant in sub -Saharan Africa where access is concentrated mainly in urban areas than in 

rural areas (Local Burden of Disease WASH Collaborators , 2020). 

Safe water and sanitation, which contribute to appropriate hygiene, are fundamental determinants 

of individual and social health and well -being (Bolatova et al., 2021) as they are of paramount Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 579 

importance in the prevention of waterborne diseases including diarrhea. Knowledge, attitudes, 

and practices (KAP) is one of the corner stones in the fight against a disease as it permits the 

identification of misconceptions which when addressed will contribute to disease prevention and 

control. Lack of kno wledge, attitude and practices (KAP) is one of the major contributors to the 

transmission of infectious diseases (Dreilbelbis et al., 2013). Thus, even if appropriate WASH 

facilities are provided and there is poor compliance due to inadequate KAP, diarrhea disease will 

continue to occur. This is because access to WASH alone without adequate compliance is 

ineffective in mitigating health problems associated to unsafe water and poor sanitation and 

hygiene (Barnard et al., 2013). Thus, since an adequate KAP wi th regards to WASH are of 

paramount importance in the prevention of diarrhea diseases, it is necessary to evaluate KAP on 

WASH to identify gaps which must be addressed so as to achieve a sustainable and effective 

implementation of WASH programs in communit ies. 

Cameroon, a central African country located in the Gulf of Guinea, bordered by  Nigeria  to the 

west and north;  Chad  to the northeast; the  Central African Republic  to the east; and  Equatorial 

Guinea , Gabon  and the  Republic of the Congo  to the south, has, over th e years, r eceived support 

on WASH from its partners (Reach Initiative, 2019; Manah, 2014; OCHA, 2022). Even with this, 

access to WASH is still a challenge particularly in the rural parts of the country and urban slums. 

According to the United Nations SDG Goal #6: Cl ean Water and Sanitation snapshot, 79% of the 

population of Cameroon used safely managed drinking water services, 60% used improved 

sanitation with 6% practicing open defecation, while 36% had a hand -washing facility with soap 

available (UN, 2020). This sh ows that although there is progress in safe water, sanitation and 

hygiene are still a problem. Frequent outbreaks of cholera occurring in Cameroon indicates that 

inadequate access to WASH is a public health concern. Recent cholera outbreaks in various part s

of Cameroon have been related to poor sanitation (WHO, 2021). The National Health 

Development Plan (NHDP) of Cameroon for 2016 -2020 (MoH, 2016) recognizes low access to 

potable water, poor hygiene practices and waste management as key health determinants in 

Cameroon. Studies conducted in various parts of the country have reported a high prevalence of 

waterborne diseases ( Lontuo -Fogang et al., 2021; Gorham et al., 2017; Djaouda et al., 2020 )

showing that there is an urgent need to address WASH in Cameroon. 

Douala, a coastal town and the Economic capital of Cameroon has experienced a rapid, 

unplanned and unmanaged urbanization due to an influx of rural dwellers in search for 

employment opportunities. In addition, the socio -political crisis in s ome parts of the country that 

started in 2016 has forced people to flee to Douala (and other cities) for safety, further swelling 

the population. This has placed a heavy burden on the limited WASH infrastructures in Douala. 

Hence, Douala continues to expe rience outbreaks of waterborne diseases, particularly cholera 

despite the WASH interventions carried out. The effectiveness of WASH in diarrhea disease 

reduction depends on the provision of WASH infrastructure and compliance of individuals. This 

was observ ed in a collaborative study in Bamuso Health District between the University of Buea 

and Plan International, Cameroon (Akoachere, 2015). The present study was therefore aimed at 

evaluating the prevalence of diarrheal diseases and its association with inhab itants’ KAP 

regarding WASH in three cholera endemic localities of Douala, Cameroon, in a bid to identify 

interventions needed to prevent diarrhea and promote health in these localities. Furthermore, the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 580 

findings of this study may contribute to efforts to monitor Cameroon’s progress towards the 

achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG #6 and #3: Good 

Health and Well -being. 

Design/Methodology/Approach 

Study Area and Design 

This study was carried out in three health districts in Douala, Cameroon: New Bell, Nylon and 

Deido. Douala is the economic capital of Cameroon and the county’s main port. This coastal city 

lies between Latitude 4°2’N to 5°4’ N and Longitude 9° 9’ E to 11°5’ E and has an estimated 

population of over 3.9 mill ion inhabitants (World Population Review, 2022) with an annual growth 

rate of 3.51%. Douala has an average annual rainfall of 3174 mm and average annual 

temperature of 26.9 oC (Climate -Data.org). It has an equatorial climate of two seasons: the dry 

season w hich runs from November to April, with January and February being the hottest months, 

and the rainy season which lasts from May to October (Climate -Data.org). The months of July, 

August and September have the highest rainfall in Douala. The city has poor d rainage due to 

poorly constructed drainage system which often get blocked as a result of arbitrary refuse 

dumping, and causes flooding after heavy rains. Douala lacks a sewage system and sewage 

treatment facilities hence untreated sewage is discharged ind iscriminately into the environment 

(The New Humanitarian, 2004). The three health districts which are the focus of this study: New 

Bell, Nylon and Deido were purposively selected because they are cholera hotspots in Douala 

(Ateudjieu et al., 2019). 

This was a quantitative community -based cross -sectional study conducted between July and 

September 2017, and a retrospective hospital -based cross -sectional study, involving a review of 

patients’ records for diarrheal cases from 2011 -2015, in one major heal th facility in each of the 

three health districts. This study was conducted in the Department of Microbiology and 

Parasitology, University of Buea, in partnership with the Littoral Regional Delegation of Public 

Health. 

Sample Size Determination 

The sampl e size was calculated using the formula for estimation of single proportion (Berhe et 

al., 2020). An anticipated population proportion of 0.5 (50%) was used since the population 

proportion was unknown. Absolute precision (i.e. margin of sampling error) tol erated was set at 

5%, at 95% confidence interval, using the formula: 

n = Z21-α/2 [P (1 -P)]/d 2

Where 

n = sample size, P = Population proportion = 50% (0.5), q = 1 – p (1 -P) = 1 - 0.5 = 0.5 

d2= margin of sampling error tolerated at 95% confidence interval = 5%. Hence, n = (1.96) 2 x 0.5 

(1 -0.5)/ (5) 2, n = 368.00. Adjusting for non -compliance rate ( Maumita and Pranita, 2016) of 30% ,Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 581 

noncompliance = 30/100 x 368.00 = 110.40. Thus, the adjusted sample size = 368.00 + 110.40 = 

478.40. Working sample s ize ≈ 480 subjects. Accounting for a design effect of 1.5, gave 1.5 x 

480 = 720 subjects as minimum sample size. 

Sampling Technique 

In the community -based study, three health districts in Douala: Nylon, New Bell and Deido were 

purposively selected based on their history of cholera outbreak. In the district of Deido, Bepanda 

health area was selected purposively because of its high cholera attack rate during cholera 

outbreaks. In Nylon and New Bell, simple random sampling was used to select participating 

health areas. Four out of ten health areas in New Bell (Camp Yabassi, Youpwe, Kassalafarm and 

Nkololoun) and three out of seven health areas in Nylon (Tergal, Oyack, and Madagasca I) were 

selected. In Bepanda health area, 3 out of six quarters (Bepanda TS F Cacoa Barry, Bepanda 

TSF and Bepanda Voirie) were selected. 

Those included in the community -based study were household heads, male or female adult adults 

responsible for the organization and care of the household (or a representative ≥ 21 years when 

ho usehold head was absent), who granted consent and has been living in the study site for more 

than one year. For the retrospective study, all patients who sought care in the selected health 

facilities, had diarrhea as diagnosed by a clinician and were resid ing in study health districts were 

recruited. 

Data Collection 

Data was collected using a pre -tested structured questionnaire and an on -the -spot observation 

checklist. The structured questionnaire was prepared in English and translated to French, as 

Frenc h is the most widely used language in Douala. The questionnaire was adapted from relevant 

literature (Pachori, 2016; Shriya et al.,2014; Sah et al ., 2015; Rima et al., 2017). It consisted of 

five sections: Section A captured information on the socio -demographic characteristics of 

participants; Section B, knowledge on WASH; Section C, attitudes towards WASH; Section D, 

practices on WASH, while section E had questions on diarrhea o ccurrence. Occurrence of 

diarrhea was defined as having loose or watery stool at least three times in 24 hours period one 

month prior to the survey, as reported by the respondent. The questionnaire included several 

close ended questions which helped to eva luate participants’ knowledge, attitude and practices 

on WASH. An observational checklist was also used to evaluate WASH facilities, compound 

cleanliness, excreta and refuse disposal. Three research assistants were recruited and trained to 

assist in data c ollection. The training was on the objectives of the study, content of the 

questionnaire, approaches to be used during data collection and how to double check filled 

questionnaires. 

In the retrospective study, data on diarrhea was obtained by reviewing p atients’ hospital records 

for diarrhea as diagnosed by a physician in selected health care facilities in the study site. Data 

of patients who sought health care from 2011 -2015 was collected using a data capture form. The 

socio -demographic characteristics of the patients were also recorded. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 582 

Data Entry and Analysis 

Data was entered into Microsoft Excel and Epidata version 7 and analyzed using the statistical 

software SPSS version 20. Descriptive statistics were employed to analyze participants’ KAP on 

WASH . The Chi square test was used to analyze the association between diarrhea occurrence, 

socio -demographic factors and KAP of respondents. Multiple logistic regression analysis was 

us ed to investigate the association between good KAP and socio -demographic factors and an 

association between KAP and diarrhea occurrence. P-values less than 0.05 were considered 

significant. 

To evaluate KAP on WASH, respondents, were required to provide e ither “yes”/“no” responses 

or to select a response from options provided. Each correct response on knowledge, attitude and 

practices was assigned a score of one (1) and an incorrect response was assigned a score of 

zero (0). For those questions in which pa rticipants had to select a response from options provided, 

a score of one (1) was assigned to a correct response and zero (0) to an incorrect response. A 

composite score was calculated for knowledge and attitude, and respondents ranked into two 

categories based on the mean value: good knowledge and good attitude for those who scored 

above the mean (50 -100%), and poor knowledge and poor attitude for those who scored below 

the mean (<50%). With regards to practices on WASH, since data was not normally distrib uted, 

the median was used as the cut -off point. Those who scored less than median scores were 

classified as having poor practices on WASH while those that scored equal -to or more than 

median scores were classified as having good practices. 

Ethical Consid erations 

Ethical approval of the study was obtained from the Faculty of Health Sciences Institutional 

Review Board of the University of Buea (Ref. 2017/027/UB/SG/IRB/FHS). Administrative 

approval was obtained from the Regional Delegation of Public Health for Littoral Region (Ref. 

1551/AAR/MINSANTE/DRSPL/BCASS) and from the District Medical Officers of the respective 

study districts. Verbal pe rmission to work in the selected communities was obtained from the 

Quarter Heads of those areas. The purpose of the study was explained to the participants. 

Participation was voluntary. Participants indicated their willingness to participate by signing an 

informed consent form. 

Findings 

Socio -demographic Characteristics of Retrospective Study Participants 

A total of 7,884 patients’ records were reviewed. This comprised 3,037(38.5%) from Despansaire 

Catholique Barcelone in Nylon health district, 2,315 (29.4%) from CMA Nkololoun in New Bell 

health district and 2,532 (32.1%) from CMA Bepanda in Deido health district. The majority of 

participants were female (57.8%), 1 -5 years old (18.6%) and consulted in the year 2013 (26% )

(Table 1). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 583 

Table 1 Socio -demographic Characteristics of  Retrospective Study 

Indicator  Categories  n (%) 

Health facility (Health 

Area) 

CMA Nkololoun  (New Bell ) 2315  29.4 

CMA Bepanda (Deido)  2532  32.1 

Despansaire Catholique Barcelone 

(Nylon)  3037  38.5 

Gender  Female  4558  57.8 

Male  3326  42.2 

Health areas 

Bepanda  2532  32.1 

Camp yabassi  295  3.7 

Kassalafam  362  4.6 

KM5  256  3.2 

Madagasca1  251  3.2 

Makae  73  .9 

New bell bamileke  745  9.4 

Ngangue  42  0.5 

Nkolmitag  34  0.4 

Nkololoun  474  6.0 

Nkongmondo  27  0.3 

Oyack  1597  20.3 

Tergal  1203  15.3 

Youpwe  6 0.1 

Age categorized 

<1Years  147  1.9 

1-5 1463  18.6 

6-10  672  8.5 

11 -15  474  6.0 

16 -20  628  8.0 

21 -25  914  11.6 

26 -30  852  10.8 

31 -35  558  7.1 

36 -40  397  5.0 

41 -45  302  3.8 

46 -50  262  3.3 

50+  1215  15.4 

Occupation of the 

Patients 

Business  974  12.4 

Civil Servant  143  1.8 

Informal sector  862  10.9 

Student  1626  20.6 

Retired  212  2.7 

Infants  1042  13.2 

Housewife  1540  19.5 

Pupil  1137  14.4 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 584 

Indicator  Categories  n (%) 

None  336  4.3 

Farmer  12  0.2 

Year of consultation 

2011  1175  14.9 

2012  1387  17.6 

2013  2051  26.0 

2014  1793  22.7 

2015  1478  18.7 

Total  N=7884  100 

> N=Total number of participants; n=number of participants per category; %=percentage

Socio -demographic Characteristics of Community Participants 

A total of 738 household heads participated in this study. The majority were female (66.7%), age 

21 -30 years (47.3%), had attained secondary education (52.3%) and were from New Bell (49.1%). 

Ove r half of the participants lived in rented houses (51.5%) of size 1 -3 rooms (76.6%) and the 

majority had a household size of 4 -6 persons (44.4%) (Table 2). 

Table 2: Socio -demographic Characteristics of Participants (N=738) from Various 

Communities 

Indicator  Categories  n (%) 

Health District 

Deido  196  26.6 

New Bell  362  49.1 

Nylon  180  24.4 

Quarters 

Bepand TSFCacao Barry  59  7.9 

Bepanda TSF  57  7.7 

Bepanda voirie  80  10.3 

Camp yabassi  70  9.5 

Kassalafarm/KM5  131  17.8 

Madagasca 1  60  8.1 

Nkololoun  22  3.0 

Oyack  56  7.6 

Tergal  64  8.7 

Youpwe  139  18.8 

Age 

21 -30 years  349  47.3 

31 -40 years  188  25.5 

41 -50 years  88  12.0 

>50 years  113  15.3 

Gender  Female  492  66.7 

Male  246  33.3 

1-3 187  25.3 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 585 

Household size 

categorized 

4-6 328  44.4 

7+  223  30.2 

Is the house 

owned or rent 

Owned  345  46.7 

Rented  380  51.5 

Rent free  11  1.5 

Other(specify)  2 .3 

How many 

rooms are in 

your house 

1-3 565  76.6 

4-6 163  22.5 

7+  7 0.9 

Highest level of 

education 

None  66  8.9 

Primary  184  24.9 

Secondary  386  52.3 

Tertiary  84  11.4 

Don’t know  18  2.4 

Occupation of 

the participant 

Business  320  43.4 

Civil servant  64  8.7 

Informal sector  43  5.8 

Farmer  9 1.2 

Student  60  8.1 

Not working  242  32.8 

Religion of the 

participants 

Christian  626  84.8 

Muslim  103  14.0 

Ancestority/Traditional religion  9 1.2 

Marital status of 

participants 

Married  433  58.7 

Single  273  37.0 

Divorced/widow  32  4.3  

> N=Total number of participants; n=number of participants per category; %=percentage

Knowledge of Participants on WASH and Diarrhea Prevention 

Over two -thirds of participants did know that diarrhea can be prevented by drinking potable water 

(72.2%), defecating in a toilet (84.6%) and by cooking foo d hygienically (70.1%). However, more 

than three -quarters of them were aware of hand washing as a method of diarrhea prevention 

(76.4%) though only 67.8% reported using soap to wash hands (Table 3). Overall, only 38.3% of 

participants had good knowledge (had a mean knowledge score of ≥ 50%) on WASH in diarrhea 

prevention (Fig. 1). Analyzing the socio -demographic factors independently associated with good 

knowledge revealed health district of residence that was significantly associated with good 

knowledg e. Respondents from Bepanda (Deido Health district) and New Bell were 7.16 and 3.89 

times, respectively more likely to have good knowledge on WASH compared to those from Nylon. 

Household size was associated with good knowledge though this was not significa nt (Table 4). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 586 

Table 3: Knowledge of Participants on WASH and Diarrhea Prevention 

Health District 

Parameter Response Deido n (%) New Bell n (%) Nylon n (%) Total 

n(%) 

Can diarrhea be prevented Yes 52 (26.5) 04 (28.7) 49 (27) 205 (27.8) 

by drinking treated water? No 144(73.5) 258 (71.3) 131(73) 533 (72.2) 

Diarrhea can be prevented by Yes 28 (14.3) 64 (17.7) 22(12) 

114 (15.4) 

defecating in the toilet No 168(85.7) 298 (82.3) 158 (88) 624 (84.6) 

Proper handwashing is a Yes 144 (73.5) 287 (79.3) 133(73.9) 564 (76.4) 

method to prevent diarrhea No 52 (26.5) 75 (20.7) 47 (26.1) 174 ( 23.6) 

Diarrhea can be prevented by Yes 127 (64.8) 253 (69.9) 120 (66.7) 500 

(67.8) 

using soap to wash hands No 69 (35.2) 109 (30.1) 60 (33.3) 

238 (32.3) 

Cooking food hygienically is Yes 73 (37) 100 (27.6) 48 (26.7) 221 (29.9) 

important in preventing diarrhea No 123 (63) 262 (72.4) 132 (73.3) 517 (70.1) 

> Fig. 1: Level of knowledge of participants of WASH and diarrhea prevention

38% 

62%  

> Good Poor

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 587 

Table 4: Factors Independently Associated with Good Knowledge 

Variable  Categories  AOR  Sig. 

95% CI 

Lower  Upper 

Health district 

Bepanda (Deido HD)  7.16  0.000  4.3  11.8 

New Bell  3.89  0.000  2.4  6.2 

Nylon  1

Gender 

Female  0.86  0.357  0.61  1.19 

Male  1

Household size 

> 10  1.68  0.141  0.84  3.34 

1_3  1.52  0.072  0.96  2.40 

4_6  1.30  0.212  0.86  1.95 

7_10  1

Religion 

Christian  0.36  0.171  0.08  1.56 

Muslim  0.27  0.096  0.06  1.26 

Traditional  1 

> HD: Health District; AOR: Adjusted Odds Ration; CI: Confidence interval; sig: significance

Attitude of Participants on WASH 

Most of respondents (80.9%) considered their drinking water as safe. Those who regarded their 

drinking water as unsafe complained of its taste or smell (48. 9%), microbial pollution (27%), the 

fact that it made them ill (24.1%) and also, its colour (6%). Littering the environment with rubbish 

was considered a big problem in the study area by the majority of participants (72.1%) with most 

of these being respon dents from New Bell (77.6%). This causes blockage of the drainage system, 

which results in flooding after heavy rains and consequently, contamination of water sources, 

resulting in outbreaks of diarrhea disease. Over three -quarters of respondents (76.6%) 

considered littering the environment with rubbish as a crime (Table 5). Overall, 66% of 

respondents had a good attitude on WASH (Fig. 2). 

Table 5: Attitude of Participants on WASH 

Health District______ 

Parameter Response Deido New Bell Nylon Total 

n (%) n(%) n(%) n (%) 

How do you consider A big problem 36 (69.4) 268 (74.0) 130 (72.0) 534 (72.4) 

water shortage? Not a problem 60 (30.6) 94 (26.0) 50 (28.0) 204 (27.6) 

Do you th ink your Yes 146 (74.5) 304 (84.0) 147 (82.0) 597 (80.9) 

water is safe drinking? No 50 (25.5) 58 (16.0) 33 (18.0) 137 (18.6) 

If No, why? It ’s appearance 45 (90) 46 (85.2) 29 (87.9) 120 (87.6) 

Bugs/w orms/bacteria 18(36) 14 (25.9) 5(15.2) 37 (27) 

Chemical/pesticide 11 (22.0) 8 (14.8) 6 (18.2) 25 (18.2) 

Too much chlorine 13 (26) 8 (14.8) 2 (6.1) 23 (16.8) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 588 

Tastes or smells bad 21 (42) 27 (50) 19 (57.6) 67 (48.9 )

Makes me ill 12 (24) 14 (25.9) 7 (21.2) 33 (24.1) 

How do you consider A big problem 124 (63.3) 281 (77.6) 126 (70) 532 (72.1) 

your environment Not a problem 72 (36.7) 81 (22.4) 54 (30) 206 (27.9) 

littered with rubbish? 

Do you consider Yes 112 (18.6) 263 (43.7) 86 (14.3) 461 (76.6) 

polluting the No 35 (5.8) 46 (7.6) 60 (10) 141 (23.4) 

environment a crime?  

> n=number of participants per category; %=percentage
> Fig. 2: Attitude of respondents to WASH

Being a student (AOR= 0.53, CI 0.30 -0.93, p=0.026) or civil servant (AOR=0.56, CI0.32 -0.96, 

p=0.036) was 0.53 times, and 0.56 times respectively less likely to have good attitude to WASH 

and this was statistically significa nt (Table 6). 

Table 6: Factors Independently Associated with Good Attitude 

Variable  Categories  Sig.  AOR 

95% CI 

Lower  Upper 

Household size 

7_10  0.421  0.74  0.36  1.54 

4_6  0.167  0.61  0.31  1.23 

1_3  0.105  0.55  0.27  1.13 

>10  . 1 . .

Occupation  Unemployed  0.747  0.94  0.66  1.35 

# 66% 

# 34% 

# Good Poor Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 589 

Students  0.026  0.53  0.30  0.93 

Farmer  0.524  1.68  0.34  8.26 

Informal sector  0.495  1.29  0.62  2.67 

Civil service  0.036  0.56  0.32  0.96 

Business  . 1 . . 

> AOR: Adjusted Odds Ration; CI: Confidence interval; sig: significance

Participants’ Practices on WASH 

The majority of participants obtained drinking water from a public tap (42%). Other major sources 

of water reported were rainwater (37%), well water (32%), tap inside the house (29.1%) and 

priv ate tap in yard (25.6%) (Table 7). Overall, 97% of participants took less than 30 minutes to 

get water and return home, with the majority (41.1%) taking 5 -10 minutes. Only 23% of 

participants sometimes did not have access to tap water for 24 hours. However , only 38.3% 

treated drinking water at home, mainly by filtration (89%). Most respondents stored drinking water 

in a container (90.4%) with 98.1% ensuring that container was closed. 

Proper hand washing was a common practice in study communities as 99.1% of respondents 

reported washing their hands with soap though regular hand washing was practiced by 77% of 

respondents. With regards to critical periods for hand washing, all participants (100%) washed 

hands before eating, 78.6% washed hands after using the toilet, 65.7% washed hands before 

handling food while only 34.2% washed hands after changing diapers. Hand washing facilities 

were found in 33.1% of homes of which only 32.7% had soap (Table 7). Refuse was disposed 

mainly into vats (86.7%) which were sub sequently emptied by the waste disposal company. 

However, a few respondents disposed refuse in a river (4.1%) or burnt it (3.3%). The environment 

of 72.1% of the houses was clean as it was not littered with refuse (Table 7). 

With regards to sanitatio n practices, respondents used mainly pit latrine (59.3%) to dispose 

human waste. Half of them (50.5%) shared these facilities. Feces was observed in the 

environment of 7.9% of houses, though only 0.8% reported open defecation. 68.4% reported 

cleaning the t oilet daily, while 30.2% cleaned after one week (Table 7). Overall, 80% of 

participants had good practices on WASH (Fig.3). 

Table 7: Participants’ Practices on WASH 

Health District 

Total 

n (%) 

Deido 

n(%) 

New Bell 

n(%) 

Nylon 

n(%) 

What are the sources of water for drinking 

and domestic use 

Tap inside house  62 (31.6)  99 (27.3)  54 (30)  215 (29.1) 

Private tap in the yard  61 (31.1)  94 (26 )  34 (19)  189 (25.6) 

Public or shared standpipe  76 (39)  151(41.7)  83 (46.1)  310 (42) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 590 

Neighbor’s tap  20 (10.2)  57 (15.7)  29 (16.1)  106 (14.4) 

Purchased bottled water  30 (15.3)  58 (16)  34 (19)  122 (16.5) 

Rainwater collection  60 (30.6)  139(38.4)  74 (41.1)  273 (37) 

Boreholes  10 (5.1)  10 (3)  12 (7)  32 (4.3) 

Well water collection  56 (28.6)  113(31.2)  67 (37.2)  236 (32) 

How long does it take for you to fetch water 

and back home? 

< 5 minutes  108(14.6)  198(26.8)  108(14.6)  241 (32.7) 

5-10 minutes  36 (4.9)  56 (7.6)  38 (5.1)  303 (41.1) 

10 -30 minutes  48 (6.5)  92 (12.5)  32 (4.3)  172 (23.3) 

> 30 minutes  4 (0.5)  16 (2.2)  2 (0.3)  22 (3) 

Do you have access to tap water for all 24 

hours of the day? 

Yes  159(81.1)  269 (76)  134(74.4)  562 (77) 

No  37 (18.9)  85 (24)  46 (25. 6)  168 (23) 

Do you normally treat your drinking water at 

home? 

Yes  195(99.5)  87 (24.0)  1 (0.6)  283 (38.3) 

No  1 (0.5)  275(76.0)  179(99.4)  455 (61.7) 

If yes, how do you normally treat it? 

Boil  45 (23.1)  20 (23.0)  0 (0.0)  65 (23.0) 

Filter  169 (87)  82 (94.3)  1 (100)  252 (89.0) 

Add chlorine  53 (27.2)  20 (23.0)  0 (0.0)  73 (25.8) 

Do you normally keep drinking water in a 

drinking water container? 

Yes  180(91.8)  322 (89)  165(91.7)  667 (90.4) 

No  16 (8.2)  40 (11)  15 (8.3)  71 (9.6) 

If yes, in what sort of container do you store 

your drinking water 

Closed container  179(99.4)  314(97.5)  160 (97)  654 (98.1) 

Opened container  1 (0.6)  8 (2.5)  5 (3)  13 (1.9) 

Do you use soap to wash your hands? 

Yes  196 (100)  358(98.9)  177(98.3)  731 (99.1) 

No  0 (0.0)  4 (1.1)  3 (1.7)  7 (0.9) 

If Yes, how often do you wash your hands? 

Always  148(75.5)  281(78.5)  134(75.7)  563(77) 

Sometimes  48(24.5)  77(21.5)  43(24.3)  168(23) 

When do you wash your hands? 

Before eating  196(26.6)  362(49.1)  180(24.4)  738 (100) 

After using the toilet  163(22.1)  276(37.4)  141(19.1)  580 (78.6) 

Before handling food  119(16.2)  242(32.8)  123(16.7)  484 (65.7) 

After changing the baby’s diaper  65 (8.8)  111 (15)  76 (10.3)  252 (34.2) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 591 

Hand washing facilities present 

Yes  84(11.4)  136(18.4)  24 (3.3)  244 (33.1) 

No  112 

(15.2) 

226 

(30.6) 

156 

(21.1) 

494 (66.9) 

Soap available 

Yes  79 (10.7)  141(19.1)  21 (2.9)  241 (32.7) 

No  117(15.9)  221 (30)  159(21.5)  497 (67.3) 

How do you dispose your domestic waste? 

Into a vat and then Collected by disposal 

company 

172(87.6)  289(79.8)  149(82.8)  640(86.7) 

Burn  6(3.1)  13 (3.6)  5 (2.8)  24 (3.3) 

Bury  0 (0)  0 (0)  2 (0.3)  2 (0.3) 

Dispose in a river  6 (3.1)  16 (4.4)  8 (4.4)  30 (4.1) 

Household environment clean 

Yes  146(19.8)  236 (32)  150(20.3)  532 (72.1) 

No  50 (6.8)  126(17.1)  30 (4.1)  206 (27.9) 

How do you dispose of human waste? 

Flush Toilet  79(40.3)  114(31.5)  85(47.2)  78(37.7) 

Pit Latrine  112(57.1)  235(64.9)  91(50.6)  438(59.3) 

Both  5(2.6)  9(2.5)  2(1.1)  16(2.2) 

Open defecation  0(0)  4(1.1)  2(1.1)  6(0.8) 

Human or animal feces around the house 

Yes  18 (2.4)  35 (4.7)  5 (0.7)  58 (7.9) 

No  178 (24)  327(44.3)  175(23.7)  680 (92.1) 

Do you share your toilet/latrine with 

neighbour? 

Yes  96(49)  201(55.5)  76(42.2)  73(50.5) 

No  100(51.0)  161(44.5)  104(57.8)  365(49.5) 

How often do you clean and disinfect your 

latrines/toilet? 

Daily  143(73)  240(66.3)  122(67.8)  505(68.4) 

After one week  52(26.5)  117(32.3)  54(30)  223(30.2) 

When it is dirty  1(0.5)  5(1.4)  4(2.2)  10(1.4) 

> n=number of participants per category; %=percentage

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 592 

> Fig: Level of Practices of participants on WASH

With regards to factors associated to good WASH practices, participants residing in New Bell 

(p=0.027, AOR=0.57, 95% CI: 0.35 -0.94) were 0.57 times significantly less like to have good 

practices compared to those from Nylon. Those house owners were 2.17 times s ignificantly more 

likely to have good practices on WASH (p=0.000, AOR=2.17, 95% CI: 1.42 -3.31)(Table 8). 

Table 8: Factors Independently Associated with Good Practice 

Variable  Categories  Sig.  AOR 

95% CI 

Lower  Upper 

Community 

Bepanda  0.396  0.78  0.45  1.38 

New Bell  0.027  0.57  0.35  0.94 

Nylon  1

Household size 

> 10  0.094  0.52  0.24  1.12 

1_3  0.288  1.37  0.76  2.47 

4_6  0.793  0.94  0.57  1.53 

7_10  1

House owner 

Yes  0.000  2.17  1.42  3.31 

No  1

Religion 

Christian  0.287  2.20  0.52  9.42 

Muslim  0.204  2.68  0.59  12.27 

Others  1

Marital status 

Married  0.118  2.02  0.84  4.87 

Single  0.264  1.65  0.68  4.01 

Divorce/widow  . 1 . .

> AOR: Adjusted Odds Ratio; CI: Confidence interval; sig: significance

# Good 

# 80% 

# Poor 

# 20% Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 593 

Prevalence of Diarrhea based on Household Survey 

Diarrhea was reported by 129 of respondents giving a prevalence of 17.5%. T he highest 

prevalence (34.1%, 44) was in children 1 to 5 years, followed by those < l year old (14.7%, 19). 

The difference with respect to age group was significan t ( χ2= 738, P= 0.00). Diarrhea prevalence 

was highest (23.3%, 52) in household with more than 7 persons (23.3%) and lowest in households 

with 1 -3 persons (11.8%). The difference was significant ( χ2=9.620, p=0.008). The highest 

prevalence of diarrhea (19.2%, 74) was observed in participants with secondary education and 

the lowest (10.7%, 9) among those with tertiary education. Participants from New Bell District 

reported highest prevalence (22.4%, 81). There was no significant difference in diarrhea 

prevalence based on level of education (P>0.05), but the difference with respect to health district 

(χ2= 14.487, p=0.001), household size ( χ2= 9.620,p=0.008) and age ( χ2= 73.8, p=0.000) was 

significant. 

Table 9: Prevalence of Diarrhea in Study Communities 

Predictor  Categories 

Diarrhea? 

Yes 

n/N (%)  χ2 -test 

Age groups 

Less than 1 year  19/129 (14.7) 

χ2= 738.000 

P=0.000 

1-5 years  44/129 (34.1) 

6-10 years  9/129 (7.0) 

11 -15 years  7/129 (5.4) 

16 -20 years  7/129 (5.4) 

21 -25 years  12/129 (9.4) 

26 -30 years  10/129 (7.6) 

31 -35 years  3/129 (2.3) 

36 -40 years  1/129 (0.9) 

41 -45 years  5/129 (3.9) 

46 -50 years  3/129 (2.3) 

>50 years  9/129 (7.0) 

Household size 

categorizes 

1-3 22/187 (11.8)  χ2= 9.620 

P=0.008 

4-6 55/328 (16.8) 

7+  52/223 (23.3) 

The level of education 

None and primary  46/268 (17.2)  χ2= 3.449 

P= 0.178 

Secondary  74/386 (19.2) 

Tertiary  9/84 (10.7) 

Health Districts 

Deido  19/196 (9.7)  χ2= 14.487 

P= 0.001 

New Bell  81/362 (22.4) 

Nylon  29/180 (16.1) 

> N=Total number of participants; n=number of participants per category; %=percentage

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 594 

Association between Knowledge, Attitude and Practices of WASH and Occurrence of 

Diarrhea in the Community 

Multiple regression analysis of the association between participants’ level of KAP with the 

occurrence of diarrhea indicates that the odds of participants with good attitude developing 

diarrhea was 0.6 times significantly less th an those with poor attitudes (p=0.011, AOR=0.600, 

95% CI: 0.404 -0.891). Participants with good knowledge (p=0.066, AOR=0.682, 9% CI: 0.454 -

1.025) and good practices (p=0.084, AOR=0.666, 95% CI:0.420 -1.056) were less likely to have 

diarrhea compared to tho se with poor knowledge and poor practices but the associations were 

not significant (Table 10). 

Table 11: Association between Knowledge, Practice, Attitude of WASH and Diarrhoea 

Occurrence 

Variable Categories Sig. AOR 95% CI 

Lower Upper 

Knowledge Good 0.066 0.682 0.454 1.025 

Poor 1 ____________________ 

Attitude Good 0.011 0.600 0.404 0.891 

Poor 

_____1_______________________________ 

Practice Good 0.084 0.666 0.420 

1.056 

Poor 

1_____________________________ 

> AOR: Adjusted Odds Ratio; CI: Confidence Interval; Sig: Significance

Prevalence of Diarrhea based on the Retrospective Study 

Overall, the prevalence of diarrhea based on the retrospective study was 11.1%. The prevalence 

wa s significantly higher in male (13.0%) than in female ( χ2=23.889, p=0.000 ) (Table 12), and 

highest in CMA Nkololoun in New Bell health district (13.5%) ( χ2 = 57.617, p=0.000 ). With regards 

to age, the prevalence was highest in children < 1 year old (23.1%) followed by those 1 -5 years 

old (16.1%) ( χ2= 95.710, p=0.000 ). More cases were recorded in 2011 (14.1%) ( χ2=23.432, 

p=0.000 ). 

Table 12: Prevalence of Diarrhea based on the Retrospective Study 

Predictor  Categories 

Diarrhea?  Chi -square (χ2 -

test) 

Yes 

n/N (%)  P-values 

Gender of  Male  χ2= 23.889 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 595 

the patient  436/3326 (13.0)  P=0.000 

Female  438/4558 (9.6%) 

Total  874/7884 (11.1%) 

Health 

facility 

CMA Nkololoun  (New 

Bell)  312/2315 (13.5%) 

χ2=57.617 

P=0.000 

CMA Bepanda (Deido)  328/2532 (13.0%) 

Despansaire Catholique 

Barcelone (Nylon)  234/3037 (7.7%) 

Occupation 

of the 

patients 

Business  98/974 (10.1%) 

χ2= 100.141 

P=0.000 

Civil Servant  11/143 (7.7%) 

Informal sector  78/862 (9.0%) 

Student  166/1626 (10.2%) 

Retired  22/212 (10.4%) 

Child  201/1042 (19.3%) 

Housewife  122/1540 (7.9%) 

Pupils  145/1137 (12.8%) 

None  29/336 (8.6%) 

Farmer  2/12 (16.7%) 

Age 

Categorized 

<1  34/147 (23.1%) 

χ2= 95.710 

P=0.000 

1-5 235/1463 (16.1%) 

6-10  100/672 (14.9%) 

11 -15  49/474 (10.3%) 

16 -20  50/628 (8.0%) 

21 -25  85/914 (9.3%) 

26 -30  76/852 (8.9%) 

31 -35  54/558 (9.7%) 

36 -40  39/397 (9.8%) 

41 -45  29/302 (9.6%) 

46 -50  20/262 (7.6%) 

50+  103/1215 (8.5%) 

Year 

2011  166/1175 (14.1%) 

χ2=23.432 

P=0.000 

2012  178/1387 (12.8%) 

2013  208/2051 (10.1%) 

2014  167/1793 (9.3%) 

2015  155/1478 (10.5%) 

Research Implications/Limitations 

This was a cross -sectional community -based study that investigated the prevalence of diarrhea 

disease and evaluated the KAP of participants on WASH, and their association to diarrhea in 

three cholera endemic localities: Deido, New Bell and Nylon in Douala, Cameroon. In addition, a 

retrospective hospital -based study was also conducted to understand the trend of occurrence of 

diarrhea in these localities over a period of five years, from 2011 to 2015. The prevalence of Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 596 

reported diarrhea in the community was 17.5% as against 11.1% in the retrospective study. This 

shows that more cases of diarrhea were managed in the community than in health facilities. The 

study site has witnessed several outbreaks of cholera. During these outbreaks, community 

members were edu cated on first aid management of mild cases. The higher prevalence of 

diarrhea in the community than in the retrospective study could be that they were mild and could 

be managed at home, while severe cases sought medical care. Also, some patients might hav e

presented in other health facilities not included in our study resulting in an underestimation of 

diarrhea in the hospital - based study. The highest prevalence of diarrhea was observed in 2011. 

This coincided with the period when there was an outbreak of cholera in Douala and other parts 

of Cameroon (UNOCHA, 2015). There was a general decline from 2011 to 2015. The prevalence 

of diarrhea in the community -based study is similar to 17.6% reported in children in Ethiopia 

(Getahun et al., 2021), but higher th an 10.77% reported in the general population in Southeastern 

Nigeria (Ugochukwu et al., 2020). This study focused on cholera endemic localities where there 

is a likelihood of a high prevalence of other diarrhea diseases. In addition, participants reported 

diarrhea within a period of one month while in the study of Ugochukwu et al. (2020) diarrhea 

reported was two weeks prior to the study, explaining the large difference. The prevalence of 

diarrhea was significantly highest in household with more than 7 pers ons (23.3%) compared to 

those with a household size of 1 -3 person (11.8%), highlighting the contribution of overcrowding 

in diarrhea spread. Children <5 years had the highest prevalence of diarrhea in both the 

community -based study and the retrospective st udy, confirming reports on the high vulnerability 

of this age group to diarrhea (Manetau et al., 2021; UNICEF, 2021). Recurrent diarrhea in children 

affects growth, cognitive development and also causes malnutrition (Pickering et al., 2015; 

Cumming and Cai rncross, 2016). Thus, there is a need to fight against diarrhea in the study 

community. 

With regards to participants’ knowledge on WASH and diarrhea prevention, participants were 

more knowledgeable on hand hygiene and diarrhea prevention as the majority o f them knew 

diarrhea can be prevented by proper hand washing. They were not knowledgeable on diarrhea 

prevention by drinking treated water (72.2%), defecating in the toilet (84.6%) and cooking food 

hygienically (70.1%). This reflects their practices, as on ly 38.3% treated drinking water and 0.8% 

practiced open defecation though feces were observed around the houses of 7.9% of respondents 

showing that respondents were not sincere on their response to open defecation. 

The high level of awareness of hand hyg iene in diarrhea disease prevention could be due to the 

numerous sensitization campaigns during cholera outbreaks. Overall, only 38% of participants 

had good knowledge on WASH (Fig. 1). This is lower than 42.2% with good knowledge on WASH 

in Tigray region , Ethiopia (Berhe et al., 2020). The overall low level of knowledge on diarrhea 

prevention in our study is surprising because during cholera outbreaks in these localities, 

interventions have been conducted to educate inhabitants on prevention measures. Our findings 

underscore the need for frequent sensitization campaigns on diarrhea prevention in study sites. 

Of the factors analyzed for association with good knowledge, only health district of residence had 

a significant association, as the odds of having good knowledge among participants from 

Bepanda (Deido health district) and New Bell were 7.16 times (p=0.000, AOR=7.16, 95% CI: 4.3 -

11.8 ) and 3.89 times (p=0.00, AOR= 3.89, 95% CI: 2.4 -6.2), respectively more likely to have good Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 597 

knowledge compared to tho se from Nylon (Table 6). Participants with good knowledge were 0.682 

times less likely to have diarrhea compared to those with poor knowledge though this association 

was not significant (p= 0.066, AOR=0.682, 95% CI: 0.454 -1.025). 

With regards to attitude on WASH, the majority of participants considered water shortage a 

problem, regarded their drinking water as safe, considered littering of the environment as a 

problem and a crime. Arbitrary refuse dumping causes the blocking of the drainage system and 

thi s results in flooding, particularly after heavy rainfall. Flooding contaminates water sources and 

causes diarrhea diseases. Among those who perceived the quality of water as unsafe, over three -

quarters mentioned its appearance while almost half (48.9%) co mplained of its taste or smell. 

Good attitude on WASH was observed in about two -thirds (66%) of study participants. This is 

higher than 48.5% reported in northern Ethiopia (Berhe et al., 2020), but less than 73.6% in 

Northwest Ethiopia (Abera et al., 2018) . The odds of having a student (p=0.026, AOR=0.53, 95% 

CI:0.30 -0.93) and civil servant (p=0.036, AOR=0.56, 95% CI: 0.32 -0.96) having good attitude was 

0.53 times and 0.56 times, respectively significantly less than in business men. Participants with 

good a ttitude (p=0.011, AOR=0.600, 95% CI: 0.404 -0.891) were 0.600 times less likely to have 

diarrhea compared to those with poor attitude and the difference was significant. This is because 

poor attitude may influence practices, increasing the risk of infection .

Concerning the practices of participants on WASH, the majority of participants obtained drinking 

water from improved sources, while up to 32% obtained drinking water from wells. Previous 

reports from our study site (Akoachere et al., 2013a; 2013b) sho wed that the water quality of most 

wells is poor. In addition, toxigenic V. cholerae was isolated from some wells (Akoachere et al., 

2014). Thus, participants obtaining drinking water from wells are at risk of cholera and other 

diarrhea diseases particular ly as treatment of drinking water was practiced by few of them 

(38.3%). Treatment of drinking water was mainly by filtration (89%) among those who reported 

treating water, similar to the report of Berhe et al. (2020). This is a low -cost, convenient method 

of water treatment. However, we did not find out from participants whether they changed the filter 

as required to ensure its efficiency. Only 29.1% had tap inside the house. Most participants 

obtained water from public standpipes and from taps in the yard. Such a practice increases the 

risk of contamination when the water is transported home. Notwithstanding, our findings showed 

that participants had good access to water as the majority of them took less than 10 minutes to 

obtain water and back. To ensure a vailability of water during periods when the tap was not 

running, participants stored water (90.4%) in closed containers (98.1%). This is a good practice 

as it ensures hygiene and prevents contamination. 

Almost all participants (99.1%) reported washing ha nds with soap, though regular hand washing 

was practiced by only 77% participants. Regular hand washing using soap is a good practice, 

which must be encouraged as this is important not only in the prevention of diarrhea but also 

several infectious diseases . Hand washing facilities were found in only 33.1% of homes and of 

these, soap was found in only 32.7%. This is lower than the national rate of 36% of households 

with hand washing facilities with soap (UN, 2020). Based on this observation, respondents migh t

not have been sincere in some of their responses to hand hygiene practices. Notwithstanding, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 598 

participants were aware of the critical times to wash hands except hand washing after changing 

diapers (34.2%). 

Participants had good basic sanitation practic es. 86.7% disposed refuse in vats which are 

subsequently emptied by the waste disposal company. This prevents littering of the environment 

which may block drainage ditches resulting in flooding and may also serve as breeding sites for 

mosquitos. Participan ts used mainly pit latrines for human waste disposal. This is because it is 

cheap and only 0.8% of respondents reported open defecation, though feces was observed in the 

surroundings of 7.9% of homes, which is evident of open defecation. This is higher tha n the 

national open defecation rate of 6% (UN, 2020). To prevent contamination of food and water, the 

practice of open defecation should be discouraged. Sharing of toilet with other households was 

reported by half of the respondents. Ugochokwu et al. (2020 ) reported sharing of toilet facilities 

as a risk factor for diarrhea disease. This is because when these facilities are shared, users never 

ensure proper hygiene. Most participants (68.4%) reported cleaning the toilets daily. Overall, 

good practices on W ASH were observed in 80% of respondents. This is higher than 48.5% 

reported among rural residents in Ethiopia (Berhe et al., 2020). This indicates a higher quality and 

coverage of community health services in this study area. In this study, the odds of ha ving good 

practices in WASH were 0.57 times significantly less in New Bell than in Nylon (p=0.027, 

AOR=0.57, 95% CI, 0.35 -0.94). This association was significant and may confirm the significantly 

high prevalence of diarrhea in New Bell observed in the comm unity -based study and in the 

hospital -based study. This was further confirmed in the multivariate analysis which revealed that 

participants with good practices were o.666 times less likely to have diarrhea compared to those 

with poor practices (p=0.084, AO R=0.666, 95% CI:= 0.420 -1.056) though the association was not 

significant. 

The limitations of this study were reporting bias that would have resulted in participants providing 

answers that did not represent their real practices and recall bias for some va riables. The 

retrospective study involved only one all health care facility of the numerous health care facilities 

in each health district, thus the reported diarrhea prevalence might be an underestimation. This 

study was a quantitative study and issues t hat can be addressed through qualitative study to 

better understand WASH in study area were not addressed. 

The study has revealed a high diarrhea prevalence in study areas and also shows that overall, 

only 38% of participants had good knowledge of diarrh ea prevention. Participants with good 

attitude towards WASH were significantly less likely to have diarrhea while those with good 

knowledge and good practices were less likely to have diarrhea though the association was not 

significant. This study has also identified gaps in WASH that need to be addressed to prevent the 

occurrence of diarrhea disease and suggest frequent WASH education to improve respondents’ 

knowledge of diarrhea disease prevention and promote good attitude and practices towards 

WASH. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 599 

Originality/Value of Paper 

Findings of this study may contribute to efforts to monitor Cameroon’s progress towards the 

achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, particularly SDG #6: Clean Water and 

Sanitation, Goal #3: Health and Well -being and also Goal #11: Creating Inclusive and Sustainable 

Cities. Our findings show that there is an urgent need for interventions on WASH in the study 

areas; continuous health education on the prevention and control of water borne diseases to 

further enhance a change in behavior and reduce the occurrence of gastrointestinal diseases. 

The research team intends to collaborate with the Douala Municipality and public health 

authorities to ensure improvement in WASH and behavioral change of inhabitants of study 

loc alities. 

Acknowledgements 

We are thankful to the University of Buea for funding our participation at the WIM Conference. 

We are grateful to Professors Roland N. Ndip, Mvondo Awono Jean Pierre, Egbe Andrew, 

Asongalem Emmanuel Acha and Aaron Tening, for their valuable suggestions and Professor 

Samuel N. Ayonghe for coordina ting University of Buea’s preparations for the WIM conference. 

We acknowledge Professor Nicolas Tendongfor for his assistance in data analysis and Drs . Roy 

Lyonga Mbua And Engome Regina Wotany for their input. 

References 

Abera, B., Mulu, W.,Yizengwa, E., Hailu, T. and Kibret, M. (2018), “Water safety, sanitation and 

hygiene related knowledge, attitudes and practices among household residents in peri -

urban areas in Northwest Ethiopia”,The European Journal of Health Development, Vol. 

32, No. 3, pp.1 -7

Akoa chere, JF.T.K., Omam, LA. and Massalla, T.N. (2013a), “Assessment of the relationship 

between bacteriological quality of dug -wells, hygiene behaviour and well characteristics in 

two cholera endemic localities in Douala, Cameroon”, BMC Public Health, Vol. 13, Article 

No. 692. 

Akoachere, JF.T.K. and Mbuntcha, C.K.P. (2014), “Water sources as reservoirs of Vibrio 

cholerae O1 and non -O1 strains in Bepanda, Douala (Cameroon): relationship between 

isolation and physico -chemical factors”, BMC Infectious Diseases , Vol. 14, Article No. 

421. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2334 -14 -421 

Akoachere, J.F., Masalla, T.N. and Njom, H.A. (2013b), Multi -drug resistant toxigenic Vibrio 

cholerae O1 is persistent in water sources in New Bell -Douala, Cameroon. BMC 

Infectious Dise ases, Vol. 13, Article No.366. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2334 -13 -366 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 600 

Akoachere, J -F. (2015), “Final Evaluation of the Kosmos Watsan Project in the Bamuso Council 

Mainland area, Ndian Divsion”, A report submitted to Plan International, Cameroon. 

December 2015. 

Ateudjieu, J., Yakum, M.N., Goura, A.P., Nafack, S.S., Chebe, N. A., Azakoh, J.N., 

Chukuwchindun, B.A., Bayiha, E.J., Kangmo, C., Tachegno, G.V.B. and Bissek, A.Z.K. 

(2019), “ Health facility preparedness for cholera outbreak response in four cholera -prone 

districts in Cameroon: a cross sectional study, BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 19, 

Article No.458. 

Barnard, S., Routray, P., Majorin, F., Peletz, R., Boisson, S., Sinha, A, and Clasen, T. (2013), 

“Impact of Indian Total Sanitation Campaign on Latrine Coverage and Use: A Cross -

Sectional Study in Orissa Three Years following Programme Implementation”, PLoS ONE, 

Vol. 8, No. 8, pp. e71438. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone .0071438 

Berhe, A.A., Arega, A.D., Abreha, A.A., Aregay, A.B. Gebretsadik, A.W., Negash, D.Z., 

Gebreegziabher, E.g., Demoz, K.G. Fenta, K.A. and Mamo, N.B. (2020), “Knowledge, 

Attitude, and Practices on Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene among Rural Resident s in 

Tigray Region, Northern Ethiopia”, Journal of Environmental and Public Health, Vol. 2020, 

Article ID 5460168. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/5460168 

Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC). (2020), “ Disease Threats and Global WASH 

Killers: Cho lera, Typhoid, and Other Waterborne Infections’, 

https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/global/WASH.html, Date Accessed: 15 -02 -2022 

CLimate -Data.org. “Climate Douala Cameroon”, .https://en.climate -

data.org/africa/cameroon/littoral/douala -890444/ Date Accessed: 2 0-02 -2022 

Bolatova, Z., Tussupova, K., Toleubekov, B., Sukhanberdiyev, K., Sharapatova, K. and 

Stafström , M. (2021), “Challenges of Access to WASH in Schools in Low - and Middle -

Income Countries: Case Study from Rural Central Kazakhstan”. International Journal of 

Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 18, No.18, Article No. 9652. doi: 

10.3390/ijerph18 189652 

Cumming, O. and Cairncross, S. (2016), “ Can water, sanitation and hygiene help eliminate 

stunting? Current evidence and policy implications”, Maternal and Child Nutrition, Vol.12, 

pp: 91 -105. 

Djaouda, M., Wadoude, Z., Liang, S. and Nola, M. (2020), “Scarcity of potable water and 

sanitation facilities in the cholera endemic region of northern Cameroon”, International 

Journal of Infectious Diseases, Vol. 101, No.1, p: 310 

Dreibelbis, R., Winch, P.J., Leontsini, E., Hulland K.R.S., Ram, P.K. Un icomb, L. and Luby, 

S.P. (2013), “The Integrated Behavioural Model for Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene: a 

systematic review of behavioural models and a framework for designing and evaluating Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 601 

behaviour change interventions in infrastructure -restricted setti ngs”, BMC Public Health ,

Vol. 13, Article No. 1015. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2458 -13 -1015 

Esrey, S.A. (1996), “Water, waste, and well -being: A multi -country study. American Journal of 

Epidemiology, Vol. 143, No. 6, pp.608 -23 

Fuller, J.A., Westphal, J.A., Kenney, B. and Eisenberg, J.N.S. (2015), “The joint effects of water 

and sanitation on diarrheal disease: A multi -country analysis of the Demographic and 

Health Surveys”, Tropical Medicine and International Health, Vol. 20, No . 3 p. 284 -292. 

Doi10.1111/tmi.12441 

Getahun, W. and Adane, M. (2021), “Prevalence of acute diarrhea and water, sanitation, and 

hygiene (WASH) associated factors among children under five in Woldia Town, Amhara 

Region, northeastern Ethiopia”, BMC Pediatri cs, Vol. 21, Article No.227. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887 -021 -02668 -2.

Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 2016 Diarrhea Disease Collaborators. (2018), “ Estimates of 

the global, regional, and national morbidity, mortality, and aetiologies of diarrhoea in 195 

countries: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2016.”, Lancet 

Infectious Diseases, Vol. 18, No. 11, p.1211 – 28 

Global Burden of Disease 2017 Risk Factor Collaborators. (2018), “Global, regional, and 

national comparative risk assessment of 84 behavioural, environmental and occupational, 

and metabolic risks or clusters of risks for 195 countries and territories, 1990 -2017: a 

systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.” Lancet (London, 

England) Vol. 392, p. 1923 -1994. doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(18)32225 -6. 

Gorham, T.J., Yoo, J., Garabed, R., Mouhaman, A. and Lee, J. (2017), “Water Access, 

Sanitation, and Hygiene Conditions and Health Outcomes among Two Settlement Types 

in Rural Far North Cameroon”. International Journal of Environmental Research and 

Public Health, Vol. 14, No. 4, Article No.441. doi:10.3390/ijerph14040441 

Local Burden of Disease WaSH Collaborators. (2020), “Mapping geographical inequalities in 

access to drinking water and sanitation facilities in low -income and middle -income 

countries, 2000 -17”, Lancet Global Health, Vol. 8, No.9, Article No.:e1162 -e1185. doi: 

10.1016/S2214 -109X (20)3 0278 -3. PMID: 32827479; PMCID: PMC7443708. 

Lontuo -Fogang, R., Payne V.K., Ntangmo, T.H., Mounchili, S. Saturine M.M., Manjuh B.R., 

Aboubakar N.N. and Bamou, R. (2021), “ rends of potential waterborne diseases at 

different health facilities in Bamboutos Division, West Region, Cameroon: a retrospective 

appraisal of routine data from 2013 to 2017”, Journal of Water Health, Vol.19, No.4, p. 

616 –628. doi: https://doi.org/10.2166/wh. 2021.027 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 602 

Manah, V. (2014). WASH Campaign Cameroon Inhabitants of Tinto Council Area Benefit from 

Improved Hygiene and Sanitation Schemes through CLTS. 

https://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/files/ 

CLTS_Cameroon. pdf. Date accessed:1402 -2022. 

Manetu, W., M’masi, S. and Recha, C. (2021), “Diarrhea Disease among Children under 5 

Years of Age: A Global Systematic Review, Open Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 11, p. 

207 -221. doi: 10.4236/ojepi.2021.113018 .

Maumita, D. and Pranita, T. (2016), “Water Sanitation Hygiene & Hand Washing Practices 

among Mothers of Under 5 Children Attending Tertiary Care Hospital In Kolkata, India”, 

Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences, Vol. 15, No. 7, p. 54 -59. 

Mbuya, M.N.N., Humphrey, J.H . (2016), Preventing environmental enteric dysfunction through 

improved water, sanitation and hygiene: an opportunity for stunting reduction in 

developing countries. Maternal and Child Nutrition, Vol. 12, p.106 -120. 

Mills, J.E. and Cu mming, O. (2016), “T he impact of water, sanitation and hygiene on key health 

and social outcomes: review of evidence”, 

https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2017 -

07/WASHEvidencePaper_HighRes_01.23.17_0.pdf Date Accessed:10 -02 -2022. 

Ministry of Publi c Health (2016), “National Health Development Plan 2016 -2020”, 

https://www.minsante.cm/site/sites/default/files/National%20Health%20Development% 

20Plan%202016 -2020.Cameroon.pdf. Date accessed: 2 -02 -2022. 

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Cameroon. (2022), “Humanitarian 

Response: Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. 

https://reports.unocha.org/en/country/cameroon/card/2AUMPwvuJT/. Date Accessed: 

12 th February 2022. 

Pachori , R. (2016), “Drinking water and sanitation: household survey for knowledge and practice 

in rural area, Magudanchavadi, Salem district, India”. International Journal of 

Community Medicine and Public Health, Vol.3, No. 7, p.1820 -1828. 

Pickering, A.J., Djeb bari, H, Lopez, C., Coulibaly, M., Alzua, M.L. (2015), “Effect of a 

community -led sanitation intervention on child diarrhoea and child growth in rural Mali: 

a cluster -randomised controlled trial”. Lancet Global Health, Vol. 3, p. e701 -e711 

Reach Initiative (2019), “ Cameroon: Water, sanitation and hygiene needs assessment 

(December 2018)”, https://reliefweb.int/report/cameroon/cameroon -water -

sanitation -and -hygiene -needs -assessment -december -2018 Date Accessed: 9 th 

February 2022. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 603 

Robert C. Reiner, R.C, Graetz, N., Casey, D.C., Troeger C., Garcia, G.M., Mosser, J.F., 

Deshpande, A., Swartz, S.J., Ray, S.E., Blacker, B.F., Rao, C.P., Osgood -

Zimmerman, A., Burstein, R., Pigott, D.M., Davis, I.M., Letourneau, I.D., Earl, E., Ross, 

J.M. Khalil, I.A., F arag, T.H., Brady, O.J., Kraemer, M.U.G., Smith, D.L., Bhatt, S., 

Weiss, D.J., Gething, P.W., Kassebaum, N.J., Mokdad, A.H. , Murray, C.J.L. and Hay, 

S.I. (2018), “Variation in Childhood Diarrheal Morbidity and Mortality in Africa, 2000 -

2015:, The New Eng land Journal of Medicine, Vol. 379, p.1128 -1138 

Rima, K. S., Prem, K. S., Jitendra, K. S., Sudip, C. and Sanjeev, K. S. (2017). Assessment of 

the Knowledge, Attitude and Practice Regarding Water, Sanitation and Hygiene amon g

Mothers of Under -five Children in Rural Households of Saptari District, Nepal. 

American Journal of Public Health Research, Vol. 5, No. 5 , p.163 -169 

Sah, R.B., Bhattarai, S., Baral , D.D. and Pokharel, P. K. (2015), “Knowledge and Practice 

towards hygiene and sanitation amongst residents of Dhankuta Municipality” Health 

Renaissance, Vol. 12, No.,1 , p. 44 -48 .

Shriya, S. A. and Sheth , M. K. (2014), “Maternal knowledge and practices towards sanitation 

and their relationships with occurrence of diarrhoea in children”. International Journal of 

Public Health Science (IJPHS), Vol. 3, No.3, p. 206 -212. 

Soboksa, N.E. (2021), “Associations b etween improved water supply and sanitation usage and 

childhood diarrhea in Ethiopia: An analysis od the 2016 Demographic and Health 

Survey. Environmental Health Insights” Vol. 15, p.1 -10. 

The New Humanitarian (2004)”, Poor sanitation causes cholera outb reak in Douala:, 

https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/news/2004/02/24/poor -sanitation -causes -cholera -

outbreak -

douala#:~:text=More%20than%20500%20cases%20of,disease%2C%20according%20to 

%20government%20statistics. 

Ugochukwu, U.N., Onyeka, U., Chinemerem, D.O. , Izuchukwu, F.O., Murphy -Okpala, N. and 

Chuka, A. (2020), “Water, sanitation and hygiene risk factors associated with diarrhea 

morbidity in a rural community of Enugu, South East Nigeria”. PanAfrican Medical 

Journal, Vol. 37, No. 115, .10.11604/pamj.2020. 37.115.17735 

United Nations .(2020), “SDG6 snapshot in Cameroon”, https://www.sdg6data.org/country -or -

area/Cameroon#anchor_6.1.1 Date Accessed: 16 -02 -2022 

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) (2016), “One is too many: Ending child deaths from 

pneumonia and diarrhea”. file:///C:/Users/user/Downloads/UNICEF -Pneumonia -

Diarrhoea -report2016 -web -version_final.pdf Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 604 

UNICEF. (2021) . “Diarrhea”. https://data.unicef.org/topic/child -health/diarrhoeal -disease/. Date 

Accessed: 16 -02 -2022. 

WHO. (2017a),”Di arrhea Disease”. https://www.who.int/news -room/fact -sheets/detail/diarrhoeal -

disease Date Accessed: 19 -02 -2022 

World Health Organization. (2017b). “Water, sanitation and hygiene to combat neglected 

tropical diseases: initial lessons from project implementation”. World Health 

Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/255563. Date Accessed: 19 -02 -2022 

World Health Organization. (2021) , ”Ending the neglect to attain the sustainable development 

goals: a global strategy on water, sanitati on and hygiene to combat neglected tropical 

diseases, 2021 –2030”. World Health 

Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/340240. Date Accessed: 05 -02 -2022 

World Population Review. (2022), “Douala Population 2022”. 

https://worldpopulationreview. com/world -cities/douala -population Date Accessed: 20 -02 -

2022 

Zhang, S.X., Zhou, Y.M., Xu, W., Tian, L.G., Chen, J.X., Chen, S.H. (2016), “Impact of co -

infections with enteric pathogens on children suffering from acute diarrhoea in southwest 

China”, Infect ious Diseases of Poverty, Vol.5, No. 1, p.64. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 605 

# STARS -c, A Google Earth Engine Tool to Evaluate 

# Long -Term Water Quality Trends Globally 

Anna Cardall, Kaylee Tanner, and Gustavious Williams 

(Brigham Young University, Utah, United States) 

Abstract 

We present the SpatioTemporal Analysis of Remotely Sensed chl -a tool (STARS -c) tool, based 

on Google Earth Engine (GEE) and Landsat data. STARS -c characterizes water quality trends 

for any water body globally. STARS -c allows a user to outline a water body, select a time range, 

and apply a general or user -provided mod el to estimate chlorophyl -a (chl -a) concentrations. 

STARS -c generates maps of chl -a concentrations and provides chl -a concentrations over time. 

Historically, remote sensing data use required significant computational resources because of the 

data size. STA RS -c leverages GEE which performs computations remotely and requires only a 

web browser. STARS -c can help manage water resources in a sustainable manner. 

This paper primarily addresses UN Sustainability Goal 6: Clean Water and Sanitation, and Goals 

11, 13 , and 14: Sustainable Cities and Communities, Responsible Consumption and Production, 

Climate Action, and Life Below Water, respectively. STARS -c provides a long -term time history 

of water quality, including spatially distributed concentration maps which c an be used to better 

manage water resources and waste water treatment (G6), provide input to help design and plan 

sustainable cities by identifying impacted water bodies and trends (G11), help locate water and 

waste water treatment plants and evaluate was te water treatment effectiveness over the last 40 

years (G13), provide data on long -term trends to help characterize and evaluate climate impacts 

and potential mitigation strategies (G13), and identify both sustainable and impacted water bodies 

to help add ress issues in life below water (G14). 

Key words: chlorophyl concentration, water quality trends, remote sensing 

Purpose 

Eutrophication of Freshwater Systems 

Eutrophication of surface waterbodies, which is defined as the excessive growth of algae an d

other organisms due to high nutrient levels in the water column (Khan and Ansari, 2005) , is a 

prevalent, serious, and growing problem around the world. The effects of eutrophication, which 

include the growth of cyanotoxin -producing Harmf ul Algal Blooms (HABs) (Anderson et al., 2002) ,

cause extensive environmental damage (Christoffersen, 1996, Paerl and Otten, 2013) in addition 

to economic losses in the form of increased dr inking water treatment costs, spending on recovery 

of threatened and endangered species, diminished recreational use, and decreased value of 

waterfront real estate (Dodds et al., 2009) . Eutrophication -related HABs also cause adverse Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 606 

health effects for humans who are exposed or drink the water containing the toxins (Falconer, 

1999, Chorus and Welker, 2021) . It is known that human activiti es contribute to eutrophication of 

surface waters by influencing the loading of growth -limiting nutrients to aquatic systems (Caraco, 

1995) and that increases in human population density and land use alterations are associated 

with eutrophication of nearby waterbodies (Smith, 2003) .

Eutrophication of waterbodies due to human activity is predicted to continue to increase (B ennett 

et al., 2001, Paerl and Huisman, 2009) , so there is great need for tools that will help water 

managers evaluate strategies for preventing and remediating eutrophication. Some success at 

preventing and remediating eutrophication has been achieved through methods such as 

controlling sources of nutrient pollution and conducting biological restoration efforts (Zhang et al., 

2020, Stuart, 2001) ; however, in order to predict the success of these strategies, which are often 

costly and difficult to implement, water managers must understand the nature and cause of the 

eutrophication (Carpenter et al., 1999) . Examining historical data can provide significant insight 

into this question, but very few lakes and reservoirs around the world have any kin d of historical 

water sampling data, let alone the comprehensive dataset that would be required to effectively 

analyze spatial and temporal trends in water quality. 

Water Quality Analysis using Remotely -sensed Data 

Using remotely -sensed data addresses the lack of historical and spatially comprehensive water 

sampling data —researchers have successfully used satellite data to examine water quality since 

the early 1970’s (Strong, 1974, Klemas, 2012, Richardson, 1996, Stumpf, 2001) . The NASA 

Landsat satellite series, which has been generating useful data since 1984, collect multispectral 

images which can be used to evaluate plant growth, water quality, and other parameters (Brezonik 

et al., 2005, Hansen et al., 2015, Strong, 1974) . Landsat images can be used to calculate 

estimates of chlorophyll -a (chl -a), a plant pigment often used as an index for algal biomass (Shi 

et al., 2019) . Despite the ecological differences in freshwater systems around the world , they 

respond in similar ways to excess nutrient availability in the water column —specifically, with a 

marked increase in algal biomass and similar changes in species composition (Smith, 2003) .

Because of this, measuring changes in algal biomass (using chl -a as an index) is an effective 

method of studying trends in eutrophication for lakes and reservoirs anywhere in the world. Until 

recently, such analyses using remotely -sensed data were difficult and time consuming due t o the 

large amount of data and the processing required to get the data in a usable form. The release of 

the Google Earth Engine (GEE) platform greatly simplified the work of retrieving, processing, and 

analyzing remotely sensed data, and makes it possible to analyze satellite data with just a web 

browser (Hansen, 2015) .

STARS -c: A Tool for Analyzing Algal Blooms with Landsat Data 

Building off of prior research using GEE to conduct analyses of algal bloom trends with Landsat 

data (Hansen et al., 2013) (Hansen et al., 2015) (Tate, 2019) (Cardall et al., 2021) , we developed 

the SpatioTemporal Analysis of Remotely Sensed chl -a tool (STARS -c) to further simplify the 

process of conducting a remote sen sing study and make it possible for anyone with an internet Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 607 

connection to outline any water body, select a time range, and use either a general or user -

provided model to estimate chl -a concentrations for that water body from 1984 to the present. 

STARS -c c an generate stand -alone maps of chl -a concentrations for selected dates and provide 

data on long -term time series of chl -a concentrations. It excludes “low quality” pixels, such as 

pixels with clouds or dry land, from the analysis. Data generated with STAR S-c characterize the 

spatial and temporal patterns in algal biomass of the selected water body and help water 

managers evaluate the success of current and proposed strategies for preventing and mitigating 

eutrophication by helping to identify nutrient sour ces, regions most impacted by nutrient inflows, 

and other conditions affecting the water body. 

Methods 

Google Colabatory and Earth Engine 

Google Colabatory (Colab) is a service provided by Google Research 

(https://colab.research.google.com/). It allows developers and users to write and use python code 

in a web browser. Colab requires no configuration of the user’s computers, provides access to 

GPUs free of charge, and allows easy sharing of any developed code. Colab uses a “notebook” 

concept that includ es both code and text cells to provide additional context for the code. GEE is 

integrated into Colab and, for most GEE computational requirements, the data and the code 

execute on Google servers and GPU units. This is important because of the large size an d

intensive computation needs of remoting sensing data. For long -term analysis, such as that 

provided by STARS -c, datasets cover over 40 years and can use anywhere between 100s of 

gigabytes to more than a terabyte of data. This processing occurs on GEE ser vers, accessed 

using Colab notebook. GEE resources can be accessed with python code outside of a Colab 

notebook, but the notebook framework provides a browser -based tool that can be used by water 

managers and researchers with limited access to advanced com puter resources. 

STARS -c requires several python libraries. When a Colab notebook such as STARS -c is opened, 

it creates a new virtual environment on the Google servers. We install the required libraries on 

this environment in the first few cells of the notebook. 

To access GEE computational resources and data, a STARS -c user m ust have a Google Earth 

Engine account, and before STARS -c can be run, the notebook the user must authorize the 

notebook for their account. A notebook cell starts the authorization process, then provides a link 

for the STARS -c user to authorize the noteboo k to use their GEE account. Once the required 

libraries are downloaded and the account authorized, STARS -c is ready for use. 

Selecting a Water Body 

The first tasks in STARS -c requires the user to select a waterbody for analysis. STARS -c displays 

a global map where the user can zoom to a waterbody. The user then uses the drawing tools 

(shown on the left side of Figure 1 to draw a rectangle or other polygon around the waterbody. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 608 

This area will be used for all the subsequent analysis. The analysis will incl ude any waterbodies 

included in the outline. 

Error! Reference source not found. shows an example where a user has selected Lake Taihu, in 

China, using a rectangular area. As shown by the map, this rectangle includes several small water 

bodies in the areas near Taihu Lake, these will be included in subsequent analysis. A user can 

draw a closed polygon to select a more detailed area of interest. In this w ay, the user can exclude 

surrounding wetlands from analysis or select a smaller area of the lake to analyze separately from 

the lake as a whole. 

After a user has created the geometry to select a waterbody, the notebook cell after the map 

(Figure 1 ) create s a variable that contains this geometry to define the area for all subsequent 

processing. If a user wants to analyze a different area or refine the geometry, they should re -run 

the cell that generates the map, re -draw the polygon, then run the cell that o btains the geometry.   

> Figure 14 . A cell showing the cell that displays a map, the cell displaying the map, the geometry created to select a
> water body, and the subsequent notebook cell that loads this geometry into a variable to define the processing area.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 609 

Satellite Data 

STARS -c uses Level -2, Collection 2, Tier 1 data from Landsat satellites 5, 7, 8, and 9. The user 

may modify the code to use different satellite data, but it is recommended to use this data. The 

Landsat satellites, designed to monitor ecological conditions on the earth’s surface, have a 16 -

day return period, 30 -meter spatial resolution, a combined range of 38 years (1984 -present), and 

spectral bands specifically designed for vegetation studies, making them ideal for developing 

detailed time histories of alga l concentrations in waterbodies (Brezonik et al., 2005) (Masek et al., 

2006) (USGS, 2016) . Landsat Level -2 data include surface reflectance images, which are 

corrected for various sensor and atmospheric effects to best represent the spectral data that are 

reflected fro m the earth surface ( https://www.usgs.gov/landsat -missions/landsat -collection -2-

level -2-science -products ). Level -2 data also contains pixel quality information and surface 

temperature data. STARS -c does not currently use surface temperature data, but we ho pe to 

include surface temperature summary statistics as an export in the future. Collection 2 images 

are the product of a second reprocessing effort of Landsat data and contain numerous 

advantages over Collection 1 data ( https://www.usgs.gov/landsat -missio ns/landsat -collection -2). 

For this application, notable improvements include consistent quality assessment bands, 

improved radiometric calibration, and improved surface reflectance and surface temperature 

products. Tier 1 images are the highest -quality pro ducts from the available data. Landsat Level -

2, Collection 2, Tier 1 images are readily available through Google Earth Engine. 

STARS -c collects every image that contains the user -specified water body available from the 

Landsat archive, as shown in 

Figure 15 Error! Reference source not found. . 

> Figure 15 . Collecting each image containing the waterbody into an image collection for each satellite (Landsats 5, 7,
> 8 and 9).

Data Preparation 

STARS -c performs three operations to prepare the data for evaluation of chl -a concentration: 

applying the appropriate scaling factor to the bands, renaming the bands, and combining the 

resulting image collections into a single collection. 

Figure 16  shows the code used to apply the scaling factors specified by the USGS as a function. 

It also shows the code used by STARS -c to apply or map this function over the different Landsat 

image collections. The scaling factors used for Collection 1 data are dif ferent from Collection 2 

data; if the user wishes to use Collection 1 data, they will need to modify the code to apply the 

correct scaling factors. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 610  

> Figure 16 . Applying the USGS -specifed scaling factors to the bands in the image . Note that optical bands and
> thermal bands have different scaling factors and offsets.

Renaming the bands is not necessary, but it both simplifies computations and makes the code, 

especially model expressions, more readable. If the bands were not renamed, we would need 

different function expressions for each Landsat mission; by renaming the bands, a single 

expression can be used for all the Landsat missions. 

Figure 17  shows the function that renames the bands along with the GEE code the appl ies (i.e., 

“maps”) the function over each image collection. Landsat 5 and 7 data have different band 

designations from Landsat 8 and 9, so different functions are used.   

> Figure 17 .Renaming the bands STARS -c uses in analysis. A different function is used for Landsats 5 and 7 than
> Landsats 8 and 9, because they have different band designations.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 611 

Merging each satellite collection into a single image collection is also not strictly necessary, but it 

also simplifies computation. STARS -c data exports include the name of the satellite for each 

image in case it is needed. The code that merges the collections is shown in 

Figure 18 . 

> Figure 18 . Code to merge image collections.

Image Processing 

Land Masking 

STARS -c estimates the chl -a for water pixels only. We accomplish this by first trimming the image 

to the boundaries of the user -drawn polygon for the water body, as shown in 

Figure 19 .  

> Figure 19 . Trimming the image to the polygon drawn for the water body. All pixels inside this polygon will be
> evaluated for the presence of water and pixel quality, and chl -aconcentration will be estiamted for each pixel.

STARS -c then applies a water mask using a user -specified water index. Three water indices to 

choose from are available in a dropdown menu, as shown in 

Figure 20 : the Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI), the Modified Normalized Difference 

Water Index (MNDWI), Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI).   

> Figure 20 .Drop -down menu to select a water index. Information about these indices is provided in a markdown cell
> to assist the user in selecting an index.

The user may also modify the code to specify their own water index of choice. The user must 

specify a threshol d value to distinguish land from water. Users should modify this threshold using 

the visual feedback STARS -c provides to find a number that accurately represent water areas for 

the waterbody of interest. The water masks are sensitive to water color, turbid ity, and other issues, 

and each water body generally requires some trial and error to select the correct threshold value. 

Once these parameters have been specified, STARS -c will construct a water mask, as shown in 

Error! Reference source not found. . Error! Reference source not found. shows the polygon -Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 612 

trimmed RGB image of Lake Taihu (left), the mask that the code creates for this image (middle), 

and the resulting land -masked image (right).    

> Figure 21 . Masking pixels that contain land. The code gives each pixel a water index ba sed on the prodived model
> and masks any pixels that are not withing a specified threshold.
> Figure 22 . Land masking an image of Lake Taihu. The left panel shows the real -color image, the middle panel shows
> the land mask (with red indicating expelled land pixels),and the right panel shows the land -masked real -color image.

Quality Masking 

STARS -c eliminates pixels containing clouds and cloud shadows from analysis by applying a 

cloud mask to each image. The cloud mask uses the pixel quality assessment band available in 

all Level 2 data. Use of this band requires bitwise operation, as shown in 

Figure 23 . For Collection 2 data, bit 3 of the quality band indicates the presence of a cloud and 

bit 4 indicates the presence of a cloud shadow. We use bit 9 to set our “cloud confidence” to high 

to en sure bad pixels are masked. 

Figure 24  shows a land -masked RGB image of Taihu Lake (left), the cloud mask that the code 

creates for this image (middle), and the resulting quality -masked image (right). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 613    

> Figure 23 . Masking low -quality pixels, including those with clouds and cloud shadows. The code can be read to say:
> if bits 3 and 9 are set, i.e., there are clouds and confidence in there being clouds is high, or if bit 4 is set, i.e., there is
> a cloud shadow, then mask the pixel.
> Figure 24 . Quality masking an image of Lake Taihu which contains some clouds and cloud shadows. The left panel
> sh ows the real -color image, the middle panel shows the cloud mask (with the red portion inidicating the expelled
> pixels), and the right panel shows the masked real -color image.

Chl -a Concentration Computation 

At this stage, the images are ready to be analy zed for chl -a. STARS -c presents seven chl -a

models from the literature in a drop -down menu that can be selected by the user, as shown in 

Figure 25 . This drop -down menu is accompanied by a description of each of the models, as well 

as the model. 

The models presented by STARS -c were developed for specific water bodies with their own algal 

growth limitations and other unique properties. We strongly recommended using or developing a 

chl -a model for the waterbody being analyzed using in -situ data, if possible. If such a model is 

available, the user can modify the code to use this model. This modification is relatively simple, 

as users can use the existing models as examples of how to add a new model (or replace an 

existing model). In many cases, the site -specific model will use the form of one of the provided 

models and only the coefficients w ill need to be changed. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 614     

> Figure 25 .Dropdown menu to select a chl -amodel. Information about these indices is provided in a markdown cell to
> assist the user in selecting an index.

Error! Reference source not found. shows the code which applies the model selected for analysis. 

This code shows the names of the Landsat bands that are used in the model definition. We 

renamed the Landsat bands to common terms because this allows a single model expression to 

work across t he different Landsat missions, which use different band designations. 

.   

> Figure 26 .Applying the specified chl -amodel to the image. All pixels determined to be water and free of clouds and
> cloud shadows will be evaluated for chl -a.

Metadata 

For analysis of long -term chl -a trends, it is useful to retain metadata from the original satellite 

data. STARS -c retains an d exports the date of the satellite image in two different formats, 

“MM/dd/yyyy”, and “MMM dd yyyy hh:mm:ss”, this are included in columns titled “Date” and 

“Date2” in the exported .csv file, respectively. In addition, STARS -c retains and exports the 

sate llite name (e.g., Landsat5 or Landsat8) as a column in the exported .csv file. These data can 

help analysis completed outside STARS -c using the exported data. 

Summary Statistics 

STARS -c computes and can export statistical parameters for the waterbody selected for analysis. 

This is done for each image in the collection that contains data --some images contain no data 

due to complete cloud cover or other issues. The statistics are fo r the selected waterbody and 

only include pixels with viable data but will include any water pixels in the defined geometry, even 

if they are not part of the main waterbody. Pixels are not included in the statistics if they are Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 615 

masked; for example, pixels can be masked because they contain land or clouds or are poor 

quality. The number of pixels included as data for each image is also computed and exported. 

The number can change for each image, as each image can contain a different number of useful 

pixels because of clouds or changing water levels that expose or cover shoreline. 

STARS -c computes the count (number of pixels used in the analysis for that image or time step), 

median, mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, skew, and the 5 th , 10 th , 25 th , 5 0th , 75 Th ,

90 th , and 95 th , percentiles. The 50 th percentile is the same as the median, so it is reported twice. 

STARS -c computes these data for each image in the collection. When STARS -c exports the data, 

the two date formats and the satellite which collected the image are also added as columns in the 

.csv file. 

Visualization 

STARS -c provides a set of cells to visualize the computed chl -a concentrations as spatial images, 

and for various masks and other information used in the computation. In addition to an interactive 

map cell where users can toggle various layers on -and -off, change color ranges, and modify other 

display characteristics, this cell provides links to images of the various masks and the final chl -a

concentration image. These links open the images in individual browser tabs where the imag e

can be viewed, copied, or downloaded. 

Exports 

STARS -c can export the long -term time series data to a .csv file on the user’s Google Drive. The 

.csv files will be placed in a folder titled “STARS -c_Output”. STARS -c exports the data using an 

asynchronou s background process. Depending on the size of the area and the number of images 

in the collection, this can take some time --it usually completes in about 30 minutes to an hour, 

though often sooner. STARS -c is not able to show the status of these exports. However, if the 

user logs into the GEE code editor (which only supports JavaScript), there is a “task” tab which 

the user can use to determine the status of the export. 

The relatively short time required to compute and export these statistics shows the po wer of using 

the GEE servers for processing. This process analyzes over 1,000 images for most areas, 

computes multiple statistics using each pixel in the image, and exports the resulting data. The 

data are in a format that users, managers, and researchers are familiar with: a .csv file with dates 

and values in sequence. These data can then be used for further analysis. 

Findings 

STARS -c Output Examples 

The following examples demonstrate the basic use of STARS -c in generating visualizations of 

chl -a on a waterbody and analyzing time series data. For the time series plots, the median chl -a

measurement for the whole lake in each image was used; and data points above a chl -aWhy It Matters Vol. 1 | 616 

concentration of 300 μg/L were excluded because they are likely bad values that the masks failed 

to exclude and make graphs unreadable. When analyzing data, STARS -c users should pick their 

own outlier exclusion thresholds based on the data generated and general knowledge of typical 

algae concentrations in the waterbody of interest. These examples focus on turbid lakes because 

the high -turbidity model included in STARS -c has been well -studied. 

Lake Taihu 

Lake Taihu is a large, turbid, very shallow lake in the Jiangsu province in China. It is an important 

water resource for the area, but has attracted concern due to intense eutrophication caused by 

aquaculture in the eastern part of the lake, urban pollutants, and other human -caused nutrient 

loading. 

Figure 27  shows an image from August of 2016 masked and visualized with STARS -c. From 

these images, it’s clear that on that particular day algal blooms were most intense on the 

northwest side of the lak e, with lower concentrations towards the middle.     

> Figure 27 .The polygon -cut real -color image (left), land -and quality -masked image, and chl -aimage of Lake Taihu in
> August 2016.

Figure 28  is an example of the type of visualization that can be created with the data exported by 

STARS -c. The plot shows the median chl -a concentration in every image of Lake Taihu collected Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 617 

by Lands at over the ~40 -year period analyzed. The data are sparser at the beginning of the series 

because there was only one satellite collecting data —Landsat 5 —but as successive missions 

were launched and old satellites remained operational, the density of the da ta points increased, 

leading to more frequent data for later years.  

> Figure 28 . Time series history of median chl -a in Lake Taihu from 1985 to 2022

Malheur Lake 

Malheur Lake is another large, shallow lake with high -turbidity water located in eastern Oregon, 

United States. It has also faced challenges associated with eutrophication and high nutrient loads, 

and in the Landsat image from August 2013 visualized in 

Figure 29 , it is clear that algae biomass in the lake can be quite large.     

> Figure 29 .The polygon -cut RGB image (left), land -and quality -masked image, and chl -aimage of Malheur Lake in
> August 2013.

The time series plot for Malheur Lake, shown in 

Figure 30 , shows that the algae concentrations are highly variable but follow a distinct seasonal 

trend with higher concentrations in the summer, which is to be expected. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 618   

> Figure 30 .A time -series plot of the average chl -a concentration for Malheur Lake over the nearly 40 -year period of
> Landsat data.

Utah Lake 

Utah Lake, in the northern part of Utah, United States, shares many characteristics with Taihu 

Lake and Malheur lake, and is also the subject of much concern over eutrophication. We have 

conducted remote -sensing and other types of research on this lake prior to the development 

STARS -c, and with this background knowledge of the lake’s ecology and hydrology, the 

visualizations an d time series data generated with STARS -c become much more meaningful and 

useful. For example, we know that the bay on the east side of the lake (Provo Bay) is very shallow 

and typically has lower -turbidity water than the rest of the lake. In an image from July of 1986, 

shown in 

Figure 31 , algal concentrations in Provo Bay are higher than much of the lake, so this combined 

with the likelihood of that w ater being clearer has interesting implications for our understanding of 

what factors contribute to algal growth in Utah Lake. In addition, we know that the eastern shore 

of the lake is significantly more developed than the western shore, so we can examine spatial 

distributions of chl -a within that context to provide further insights into how shoreline development 

might impact algal blooms. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 619     

> Figure 31 .The polygon -cut image (left), land -and quality -masked image, and chl -aimage of Utah Lake in July 1986.
> Grey swirls are regions with high suspended sediemnts, the darker green color correlates with higher chl -a
> concentrations.

Figure 32  shows the time series plot of chl -a concentrations on Utah Lake. In this case also, prior 

knowledge of the lake allows us to analyze the data more rigorously. For example, we can 

examine how past and current river delta restoration projects on Utah Lake tributaries may have 

impacted algal concentrations in the lake at the outlet of those tributaries, or determine to what 

extent algal concentrations correlate with th e dramatic population growth on the eastern shore 

that has occurred over the last 40 years.   

> Figure 32 .A time -series plot of the average chl -a concentration for Utah Lake over the nearly 40 -year period of
> Landsat data.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 620 

Deer Creek Reservoir 

This example was included to show how STARS -c handles a waterbody with clear water and 

typically low concentrations of algae. Deer Creek Reservoir, in the northern part of Utah, United 

States, is very deep and clear, with much lower temperatures than the o ther three lakes; though 

in recent years the Utah State Department of Water Quality has observed harmful algal blooms 

and there is some concern over the ecological health of the reservoir. 

Figure 33  is a visualization of a Landsat image from July of 1986 and shows that concentrations 

of algae in Deer Creek on that day were extremely low . The model used to calculate chl -a

concentrations for this reservoir was the Clear Whole Season model included in STARS -c, which 

was developed specifically for Deer Creek using water sampling data, so this model provides 

more accurates result for this lak e than the Turbid Whole Season model used for the other three 

lakes would.    

> Figure 33 . The polygon -cut RGB image (left), land -and quality -masked image, and chl -aimage of Deer Creek in July
> 1986. There is a small cloud and cloud shadow in the northern part of the image that results in the area being
> masked. Chl -a concentrations in Deer Creek are significantly lower than Utah Lake, which is approximately 25 km
> down stream.

Figure 34 , the time series visualization of median chl -a data on Deer Creek Reservoir, looks quite 

different from the time series of the more turbid, eutrophic lakes. In this case, it appears that algal 

concentrations in Deer Creek are typically very low, with the occasional large spike in 

concentration repre senting a large bloom. From this graph, it appears that there could be a trend Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 621 

of increasing frequency for these blooms, however, this may be due to the higher frequency of 

data in late years, which is the result of more satellites collecting data.   

> Figure 34 .A time -series plot of the average chl -a concentration for Deer Creek reservoir over the nearly 40 -year
> period of Landsat data.

Research Limitations 

While STARS -c outputs data as chl -a concentrations, these measurements may not be highly 

accurate for an y given water body due to the limitations inherent in remote sensing. The data can 

still be useful, though, because the change in concentrations between images or over the long -

term should be relatively accurate, and therefore can be used effectively to an alyze spatial and 

temporal trends. To obtain accurate concentrations, the user would need to use in -situ data from 

the water body to fit a chl -a model specific to that lake or reservoir. While STARS -c provides a 

long -term history of chl -a concentrations, i t is important to understand the dynamics and 

processes of the specific waterbody of interest. For example, if there is a large nutrient source, 

such as a waste -water treatment plant, the integrated statistics would not necessarily show that 

impact. Indivi dual images could show some impact, depending on the size and circulation patterns 

of the lake, but would not include the long -term trend. Users can place smaller geometric regions 

around a lake, isolating various areas, and generate the long -term statisti cs for that area. These 

segments can then be used to compare different regions of the lake or to compare a small area 

to the larger lake as a whole in order to provide better insight into spatial variation. 

Originality and STARS -c Value 

STARS -c allows w ater managers and researchers to visualize, evaluate, and analyze long -term 

trends in chl -a concentrations in waterbodies across globe. It runs in a browser and uses cloud 

resources, meaning that STARS -c is not resource constrained and requires minimal 

com putational infrastructure. Access to STARS -c is available upon request. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 622 

References 

Anderson, D. M., Glibert, P. M. & Burkholder, J. M. 2002. Harmful algal blooms and 

eutrophication: Nutrient sources, composition, and consequences. Estuaries, 25 , 704 -

726. 

Bennett, E. M., Carpenter, S. R. & Caraco, N. F. 2001. Human Impact on Erodable Phosphorus 

and Eutrophication: A Global Perspective: Increasing accumulation of phosphorus in soil 

threatens rivers, lakes, and coastal oceans with eutrophication. BioScience, 51 , 227 -

234. 

Brezonik, P., Menken, K. D. & Bauer, M. 2005. Landsat -based Remote Sensing of Lake Water 

Quality Characteristics, Including Chlorophyll and Colored Dissolved Organic Matter 

(CDOM). Lake and Reservoir Management, 21 , 373 -382. 

Caraco, N. F. 19 95. Influence of human populations on phosphorus transfers to aquatic 

systems: a regional scale study using large rivers. Scope -Scientific Committee On 

Problems Of The Environment International Council Of Scientific Unions, 54 , 235 -244. 

Cardall, A., Tanne r, K. B. & Williams, G. P. 2021. Google Earth Engine Tools for Long -Term 

Spatiotemporal Monitoring of Chlorophyll -a Concentrations. BYU ScholarsArchive, 7, 4. 

Carpenter, S. R., Ludwig, D. & Brock, W. A. 1999. Management OF Euthrophication For Lakes 

Subjec t To Potentially Irreversible Change. Ecological Applications, 9, 751 -771. 

Chorus, I. & Welker, M. 2021. Toxic cyanobacteria in water: a guide to their public health 

consequences, monitoring and management , Taylor & Francis. 

Christoffersen, K. 1996. Ecol ogical implications of cyanobacterial toxins in aquatic food webs. 

Phycologia, 35 , 42 -50. 

Dodds, W. K., Bouska, W. W., Eitzmann, J. L., Pilger, T. J., Pitts, K. L., Riley, A. J., Schloesser, 

J. T. & Thornbrugh, D. J. 2009. Eutrophication of U.S. Freshwate rs: Analysis of Potential 

Economic Damages. Environmental Science & Technology, 43 , 12 -19. 

Falconer, I. R. 1999. An Overview of problems caused by toxic blue –green algae 

(cyanobacteria) in drinking and recreational water. Environmental Toxicology, 14 , 5-12. 

Hansen, C. 2015. Google Earth Engine as a Platform for Making Remote Sensing of Water 

Resources a Reality for Monitoring Inland Waters .

Hansen, C., Swain, N., Munson, K., Adjei, Z., Williams, G. P. & Miller, W. 2013. Development of 

Sub -Seasonal Remote Sensing Chlorophyll -A Detection Models. American Journal of 

Plant Sciences, 04 , 21 -26. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 623 

Hansen, C. H., Williams, G. P., Adjei, Z., Barlow, A., Nelson, E. J. & Miller, A. W. 2015. 

Reservoir water quality monitoring using remote sensing with seasonal models: case 

study of five central -Utah reservoirs. Lake and Reservoir Management, 31 , 225 -240. 

Khan, F. A. & Ansari, A. A. 2005. Eutrophication: An ecological vision. The Botanical Review, 

71 , 449 -482. 

Klemas, V. 2012. Remote sensing of algal blooms: an overview with case studies. Journal of 

Coastal Research, 28 , 34 -43. 

Masek, J. G., Vermote, E. F., Saleous, N. E., Wolfe, R., Hall, F. G., Huemmrich, K. F., Feng, G., 

Kutler, J. & Teng -Kui, L. 2006. A Landsat surface reflectance dataset for North America, 

1990 -2000. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, 3, 68 -72. 

Paerl, H. W. & Huisman, J. 2 009.  Climate change: a catalyst for global expansion of harmful 

cyanobacterial blooms. Environmental Microbiology Reports, 1, 27 -37. 

Paerl, H. W. & Otten, T. G. 2013. Harmful Cyanobacterial Blooms: Causes, Consequences, and 

Controls. Microbial Ecology, 65 , 995 -1010. 

Richardson, L. L. 1996. Remote sensing of algal bloom dynamics. BioScience, 46 , 492 -501. 

Shi, K., Zhang, Y., Qin, B. & Zhou, B. 2019. Remote sensing of cyanobacterial blooms in inland 

waters: present knowledge and future challenges. Science B ulletin, 64 , 1540 -1556. 

Smith, V. H. 2003. Eutrophication of freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems a global 

problem. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 10 , 126 -139. 

Strong, A. E. 1974. Remote sensing of algal blooms by aircraft and satellit e in Lake Erie and 

Utah Lake. Remote Sensing of Environment, 3, 99 -107. 

Stuart, A. L. 2001. Life after death in lake erie: nutrient controls drive fish species richness, 

rehabilitation. Ecological applications, v. 11 , pp. 731 -746 -2001 v.11 no.3. 

Stumpf, R. P. 2001. Applications of satellite ocean color sensors for monitoring and predicting 

harmful algal blooms. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment: An International Journal, 

7, 1363 -1368. 

Tate, R. S. 2019. Landsat Col lections Reveal Long -Term Algal Bloom Hot Spots of Utah Lake. 

Usgs 2016. Landsat —Earth observation satellites. Fact Sheet. Version 1.0: Originally posted 

November 25, 2015; Version 1.1: August 22, 2016; Version 1.2: April 8, 2020 ed. 

Reston, VA. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 624 

Zhang, Y., Luo, P. P., Zhao, S. F., Kang, S. X., Wang, P. B., Zhou, M. M. & Lyu, J. 2020. 

Control and remediation methods for eutrophic lakes in the past 30 years. WATER 

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 81 , 1099 -1113. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 625 

# The Study of Clean Water and Sanitation in Bunyenye 

# and Bunyaka Villages in Luwero District SDG 6 

Aaron Kasule, Rebecca Nakato, and Philip Nsubuga 

(Institute of Advanced Leadership, Uganda) 

Abstract 

Water scarcity affects over 40 percent of the people in the world. Although 2.1 billion people have 

improved water sanitation since 1990, dwindling drinking water supplies are affecting every 

continent. In Uganda, safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2 030 requires investing in 

adequate infrastructure, providing sanitation facilities, encouraging hygiene, as well as protecting 

and restoring water -related ecosystems. Uganda has experienced two decades of economic 

growth, and there were also other factors leading to large population movement from rural to 

urban. However, the reversal of the trend of urban to rural migration occurred due to the 

coronavirus (COVID 19) and the lock down resulted in large numbers of people returning to 

villages which led to inc reased population figures and hiking the rates of poor sanitation and water 

pollution. Luwero District has an average per -capita consumption of 14 liters per a person per a 

day which is below the Ministry of Health recommended consumption of 20 liters per a person per 

a day . This paper explores perceptions and recommendations of the community on the challenges 

faced concerning water and sanitation and their solutions. The study objectives were to find out 

the number of water collection points, the distance to these water sources, status of these water 

points, adequacy of the water and remedies to the challenges. The study results showed that 

there were inadequate and poorly maintained water points in this community. We recommend a 

concerted effort of communi ty awareness and sensitization to maintain and improve the available 

water points and full Government intervention in the water and sanitation issues under SDG 6. 

Keywords: Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, Water Points, Health and Wellbeing, COVID 19 

Introdu ction 

Access to safe water, sanitation and hygiene, and water resource management are critical for 

human health, environmental sustainability, and economic growth. In acknowledgement of this, 

the General Assembly supported Sustainable Development Goal 6, guaranteeing the sustainable 

consumption and production patterns management of water and sanitation for everyone, as part 

of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Six targets and nine important indicators 

comprise Goal 6, with drinking water, sanit ation, and hygiene taking center stage. This paper 

looks at Goal 6 and how it can be implemented around the world. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 626 

Purpose 

The project aims at addressing the issue of enhancing community awareness through 

sanitization, improving and maintaining the quality of existing water sources, as outlined under 

SDG 6 Clean Water and Sanitation. This issue is important because it will hel p to empower 

communities on managing and maintaining water points, improving water harvesting and 

collection points, empowering community on water purification methods as well as promoting the 

Implementation of IWRM (Integrated Water Resources Management). 

Background Literature 

For several decades, water specialists have talked about a "global water crisis," as have 

politicians and the general public in the last five to ten years. What exactly is this crisis? Is the 

world about to run out of water? Is th ere a lack of investment in making water accessible to 

people? Large investment in utilization of water resources occurred over the twentieth century 

(Kurian et al., 2019). Although the world's population quadrupled in the previous century, water 

use4 incr eased sixfold. The governments of the United States and Australia, for example, built 

5,000 cubic meters of water storage facilities for each of its residents. The majority of this 

infrastructure is intended to generate hydroelectricity and irrigate farmla nd, while some are 

intended to regulate floods and store water for residential water supply in urban areas. More 

money has been put into water distribution infrastructures, treatment facilities, sewage, and waste 

water treatment ( Tortajada & Biswas, 2018). 

Many people characterize "the water crisis" as a lack of access to clean and inexpensive water 

for over a billion people, as well as a lack of access to reliable and cheap sanitation for about half 

of the world's population. As a result, impoverished peo ple suffer from diarrhoeal infections, which 

kill around two million people each year, the majority of them are children under the age of five 

(Komarulzaman, Smits, & de Jong, 2017). Others see the situation as impoverished and hungry 

people in rural regio ns lacking access to water to cultivate food and support their livelihoods. 

Three -quarters of the world's 1.2 billion impoverished and 800 million malnourished people reside 

in rural regions, with subsistence agriculture serving as their major source of fo od and income. 

There is definitely enough water in the globe for residential use, industry, and even food 

production; yet, these water resources are spread quite unevenly, and there are big, heavily 

inhabited areas with either poor water supplies or water dropping very unevenly throughout the 

year (Boretti and Rosa, 2019). 

Methodology Used 

The research paper used both qualitative and quantitative methods of research. Qualitative 

research was got from review of books, journals, papers et c while the quant itative method used 

several zoom meetings, phone calls, face to face interactions, focused group discussions, 

interviews and questionnaires. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 627 

Originality/ Value of the Paper 

The project paper has never been authored by any other person and it is an authentic work of the 

project team of (Sustainable Development Goal 6 Clean Water and Sanitation). In addition, the 

paper follows ethics of research and all the information collecte d from the field will only be used 

for the purpose of the research. 

Findings/Discussion 

The study was carried out in Bunyenye and Bunyaka villages in Luwero District. The team was 

focused on reaching out to the community to generate relevant informatio n about the water and 

sanitation situation. 

Figure 1. The Number of Respondents that were able to Answer the Questions were: 

Ratios per Village per Gender: 

Bunyenye (female 26, Male 24) and Bunyaka (female 29, Male 21) 

> Females
> 55%
> Males
> 45%

# Ratio breakdown of the respondents 

# according to sex in Bunyenye and Bunyaka 

# communities.  

> Females Males

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 628 

Figure 2. The 55 Females were as Follows: 

From the above graph it is clear that majority of the women that took part in this research were 

between 36 and 50 years old. The means that most of the elderly women are the one that take 

part on the search for water for their families. 

Figure 3. The 45 Males were as Follows: 

Majority of men that took part in the study were between 26 -30, an age bracket mostly comprising 

those that are not married and would be looking for water on their own unlike their counterparts 

who ar e married and have left that duty to their wives. 

The number of people living per household in the mentioned communities are 5 to 18 members 

these include; father, mother, children, grandchildren, grandparents, uncles, and aunties.               

> 555510 10 510
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Below 18 18-25 26-30 31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50 Above 50

# Ratios showing the total number of 

# female respondents in Bunyenye and 

# Bunyaka communities.       

> Series 1
> 10 15 10 10
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Below 18 26-30 41-45 Above 50

# Ratios showing the total number of male 

# respondents in Bunyenye and Bunyaka 

# communities. 

> Series 1

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 629 

Household Income 

The Average Income of the Household :

The respondents were not receptive to this question. They found it difficult to disclose their 

financial statuses. 42%of the respondents were welcoming to the question were mainly 

subsistence farmers. 

Availability of Water Sources 

The period the respon dents have been in these communities includes; 48 people have been 

residents of these communities for 40 years, 22 people between 20 -30 years and 30 between 10 -

20 years. The available water points for both Bunyenye and Bunyaka villages are; boreholes, 

shal low wells, harvested rain water, springs, and dug wells. These are the available water points 

that are used for all domestic activities. Most of them are access to the villages. 

We also discovered that the main point of drinking water that people use in t hese communities 

are bore holes, which serve 60% of the village populations. 

Distance to Water Points 

The residents explained that they move about 1 -2 kilometers to get to these water collection 

points. We managed to see the water points and to our obser vation, we discovered that; The 

distance to the water point is approximately one kilometer or even more depending on where the 

person is coming from which the farthest is 6 kilometers away. The distance to the water point 

makes it difficult for families to have water all the time in their homes. Families that have only the 

elderly people find it hard to move from home to the water point. 

Water adequacy in these communities; have adequate water during the rainy season, however 

during the dry season, these w ater points don’t have water at all. The water levels tend to go 

down and it becomes difficult to get access to water, yet the communities depended on these 

water points. The breakdown of bore holes also makes it difficult to always have adequate water. 

Ab out 12% have piped water that is bought from the few people that have piped water is very 

expensive. The rain harvested water is unreliable because it happens between Febraury and April 

and sometimes in August. Due to lack of water in the home, poor sanita tion becomes an issue 

where by most domestic activities cannot be carried out like mopping of housing, washing clothes, 

cooking, etc. 

Water Movement from Source 

Means of water transportation from the water points (water collection points) to homes; water is 

commonly fetched and transported by the young children of 8 -12 years and women to their 

homes. They carry the jerrycans of water on their heads to their homes, a few families that have 

bicycles help make it easy for them to transport the water. The use of children to fetch water 

affects their education as they have to come from school go to fetch water and run back to school Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 630 

during lunch break and in most cases, they end up going back to school. In addition, this also 

affects their security as they are young and move long distances in search of water. 

Quality of Water 

The quality of water in the water points; responses from the communities indicated that these 

water points are not clean and do not have the best water for drinking. However, they are al l they 

have. People and animals use the same water points and animals tend to put dung in the water 

points making the water not safe for home use. Brick makers next to the water points make it dirty 

and most time use the water excessively and the water poi nts run dry and the authority have 

policy in place to deal with such people. 

The residents informed us that they do try to maintain the available water points by draining, 

rubbish picking, fencing with sticks or wood and slashing the bushes around water points that is 

organized by the local leaders (LC1). 

The communities shared some of the methods that are used to purify water that is got from the 

water points, these include boiling and filtering. 

Challenges at the Water Source 

Some of the challenges faced while using these water sources include; the wat er points are known 

for accidents as young children below 18 years are at risk of drowning in the wells. In addition, 

long distance to the water points makes it difficult for all homes to have adequate water. It was 

also revealed that dirty, unsafe water w hich may contribute to the spread of diseases like diarrhea 

and typhoid. Among the challenges is harassment of most girls and women by men. There is high 

maintenance fees for the bore holes and piped water and the brick makers that share the same 

water poi nts making it dirty. It was also revealed that the floods from the running water during the 

rainy season make the water points dirty. Finally, dug wells don’t have enough water as they tend 

to dry up during the dry seasons due to the many people that use t hem. 

Possible Solutions to the Challenges 

Led by the government there should be fencing off the water collection points to prevent accidents. 

Establishment of new water collection points. Carry out water purification for the available water 

points. Creat e rules, laws and protective strategies for the water points that protect both girls and 

women from being harassed, including raped. To re -channel the floods from the running water 

that enters the wells. Filtering and boiling of the unsafe water and finall y, slash around the water 

points. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 631 

Responses from the Community Leaders 

These are some of the Responses we Collected from the Community Leaders of Both 

Bunyenye and Bunyaka Villages 

We managed to interview five community. From our observation, these leaders have been in 

these communities for at least 5 years. They were eligible to give the accurate information needed 

on the status of water and sanitation in these communities. 

Some of the challenges that the leaders and the community members face with water in these 

communities include; limited water sources in the village, poor water quality, long distance to 

water points, inadequate water storage facilities, pollution of the w ater sources and poor 

maintenance of water points. 

Some of the solutions that were generated from the community leaders include; 

Building new water points, community sensitization on how to maintain water points, Community 

sensitization on water storage , improving the drainage system, draining the polluted water points, 

fencing of the water points (however, the community members don’t have the funds to perform 

this activity), mending broken boreholes (they don’t have the funds) and government involvement 

in the water and sanitation issues in the community through providing expertise to mend and build 

boreholes. 

Research Limitations/Implications 

Research constraints included; minimum resources while carrying out the survey which 

backlogged the community fieldwork hence opting for virtual means of communication which 

supported our research, lack of full community participation as a result of lack of enough publicity 

and awareness. This made it difficult to penetrate to certain households and even some of those 

that we reached out to, were hesitant to providing us with enough information. The COVID 19 

pandemic was a huge set back to our research as well as the imposed curfew time could not 

enable us to reach out to some of the communities hence mak ing our respondents inaccessible. 

Recommendations 

After looking at the research presented in this paper and findings of the study the following 

recommendations were proposed; 

i. Improving and maintaining the quality of the water points in Bunyaka and Buny enye 

villages in Luwero district, requires the need to enhance community awareness through 

sensitization, improving and maintaining the quality of the water points, improve water 

harvesting, collection points and storage facilities, empower community on wa ter 

purification methods, and to promote the Implementation of IWRM (Integrated Water 

Resources Management) under SDG 6. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 632 

ii. Improve sanitation by installing toilets and sanitation facilities that flush into a sewer or a 

secure enclosure. 

iii. Education can help to promote excellent hygiene practices. Hand washing with soap and 

water can cut diarrhea cases by up to 35%. 

iv. Install rainwater collection and storage devices to gather and store rainwater for drinking 

or refilling subterranean aquifers. Create wells to obtain groundwater from aquifers 

underneath. 

v. To make drinking water safe, provide household water -treatment capabilities via filters, 

sun disinfection, or flocculants. 

vi. We advise using individual filter straws. With the exception of salt water, these practical 

small -scale solutions enable people to drink water from almost any source. Utilizing a very 

small medium that traps debris and germs inside its pores, the device creates clean, 

drinking water by circulating water through it. Up to 99 percent of g erms and other 

impurities in water are eliminated by the personal filter straws. 

vii. To enhance water quality, promote low -cost options such as chlorine pills or plastic bottles 

that may be exposed to sunshine. 

viii. Rainwater collection is essential. Humans have been collecting rainwater from surfaces 

where it falls and storing it as a result for hundreds of years. It is an efficient technique to 

lessen dependency on other water sources and to offer water in isolated rural locations 

that might not have access to r egular water supply. 

ix. Finally, the government or other partners, such as NGOs, should supply smart irrigation 

controls to farmers in these two communities. This technology helps irrigation system 

owners set an effective water schedule to maintain healthy plants and remotely operate 

their systems using smart devices, improving irrigation system water usage efficiency. It 

allows for the conservation of the scarce water resources and is especially helpful in 

locations where there is a water shortage. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, being able to prevent exposure to a variety of illnesses requires access to clean 

water and sanitary facilities. Millions of people perish each year from illnesses brought on by poor 

water quality, sanitation, and hygiene. This paper has revealed that there are inadequate and 

poorly maintained water points in these community. Amongst its recommendations the study 

recommends that the government engagement in the water and sanitation issues under SDG 6 

as well as a combined effort of community awareness and enlightenment to maintain and enhance 

the existing water points. Access to clean water and sanitation as well as sustainable Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 633 

management of water resources are crucial for maximizing economic output and yielding large 

returns on current investments in health and education. 

Reference 

Boretti, A., & Rosa, L. (2019). Reassessing the projections of the world water development 

report. NPJ Clean Water , 2(1), 1 -6. 

Komarulzaman , A., Smits, J., & de Jong, E. (2017). Clean water, sanitation and diarrhoea in 

Indonesia: Effects of household and community factors. Global public health , 12 (9), 

1141 -1155. 

Kurian, M., Scott, C., Reddy, V. R., Alabaster, G., Nardocci, A., Portney, K., ... & Hannibal, 

B. (2019). One swallow does not make a summer: Siloes, trade -offs and synergies in 

the water -energy -food nexus. frontiers in Environmental Science , 7, 32. 

Ritchie, H., & Roser, M. (2021). Clean water and sanitation. Our World in Data .

https://ourworldindata.org/water -access?module=inline&pgtype=article 

Tortajada, C., & Biswas, A. K. (2018).  Achieving universal access to clean water and sanitation 

in an era of water scarcity: strengthening contributions from academia. Current opinion 

in environmental sustainability , 34 , 21 -25. 

United Nations Development Program,2021, Uganda ,United Nations Development 

Programme, viewed 15 November 2021, 

https://www.ug.undp.org/content/uganda/en/home/sustainable -development -

goals/goal -6-clean -water -an d-sanitation .

United Nations Development Program,2021, UNDP seoul policy center for knowledge 

exchange through SDG partnerships , United Nations Development Programme viewed 

15 November 2021, 

https://www1.undp.org/content/seoul_policy_center/en/home/sustainable - development -

goals/goal -6-clean -water -and -sanitation .

Water.org,2021, Uganda’s water and sanitation crisis ,Water.org,viewed 15 November 2021, 

https://water.org/our -impact/where -we -

wor k/uganda/#:~:text=Uganda%20has%20experienced%20two%20decades,informal 

%20settlements%20around%20urban%20centers.&text=Further%2C%20due%20to% 

20disparities%20in,access%20water%20from%20water%20vendors .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 634 

Appendices 

Appendix I: Questionaire 

Consent 

I agree to be part of this study. 

• Yes………. 

• No……… 

Demographics 

1). The gender of the head of the household: 

• Male……… 

• Female……… 

2). Age of Respondent 

• Less than 18……… 

• 18 - 25……… 

• 26 - 30……… 

• 31 -35……… 

• 36 - 40……… 

• 41 - 50……… 

• 51 and above……… 

3). Number of persons in the household. 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 635 

4). Average income of the households (in the last two months) 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

5). How long have you lived in this community? (years) 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

Knowledge, Attitude and Practices (Water) 

1). What are the available water sources in this community? 

• Boreholes……… 

• Shallow wells……… 

• Piped water……… 

• Harvested water……… 

• Pumped water……… 

• All the above……… 

• Others……… 

2). Of the above, where does your household mainly draw water from? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

3). What is your main source of water for drinking? 

• Boreholes……… 

• Shallow wells……… 

• Piped water……… 

• Harvested water……… 

• Pumped water……… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 636 

• All the above……… 

• Others……… 

4). How far is the water source from your home in kilometers? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

5). Do the water source s always have adequate water? 

• Yes……… 

• No……… 

6). What are the means of water transportation to your homes? 

• Bicycle 

• Car 

• Carrying on the head 

7). What is the quality of the water sources in this community? 

• Always Clean 

• Sometimes clean 

• Not clean 

8). Do you maintain these water points? 

• Yes 

• No 

9). How do you maintain these water sources? 

• Draining Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 637 

• Fencing 

• Rubbish picking 

• Slashing the bush 

• All the above 

10). What are the possible methods you use to purify the water? 

• Boiling 

• Sieving 

• Water purifiers 

11). What challenges do you face while using these water sources? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

12). What are the possible solutions you have to these challenges? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………… ……………… 

13). How do you store water from the water source? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

Sanitation 

1). What facilities for fecal disposal do you use in your household? 

• Open space 

• Latrine 

• The bush 

• Others(specify) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 638 

2). Do you have a latrine? 

• Yes 

• No 

3). How do you dispose waste in your household? 

• Use of a dustbins 

• Burning 

• Burying 

• Recycling 

• Used at the farm 

• Others(specify) 

4). What challenges do you face in maintaining sanitation and cleanliness? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

5). What suggestions do you have in solving the above challenges? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

> NOTE 2: The following questions were posed to the community lea ders of both Bunyenye and Bunyaka villages.

1). Do you hold any leadership position in your community? 

• Yes 

• No 

2). What is your leadership position in this community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 639 

3). How long have you lived in this community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

4). What are some of the challenges that you face in this community? 

………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

5). What are some of the challenges the community faces concerning water? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

6). As a leader, what are some of the solutions that you have come up with to help the people in 

this community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

7). How has the government been helpful concerning these challenges? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… 

8). What other engagements have you had with other org anizations concerning the situation of 

water and sanitation in this community? 

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 

……………………………… Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 640 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 641 

# Achieving Sustainable Development Goal 6 in India: 

# Transforming Lives through Localization 

Siddharth Singh (India) 

Abstract 

In 2015, 63.3% of Indian rural households and 19.7% of urban households did not have access 

to improved sanitation measures. World Bank has noted the severity and urgency of the situation 

by observing that more than 520 million people in India were defecat ing in the open. The adoption 

of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) aligned with the Indian national development agenda 

concerning improved water and sanitation measures proved remarkably successful in the 

previous years. India has established an SDG loc alized model for adopting, implementing, and 

monitoring SDGs at national, sub -national, and local levels. SDG 6 deals with ensuring availability 

and sustainable management of water resources and sanitation for everyone has been translated 

into multiple gov ernmental policies in India. The Indian government, under its flagship program, 

Jal Jeevan Mission (National Water Mission) is committed to providing safe drinking water through 

individual household tap connections by 2024 to all households in rural India. Likewise, another 

prominent scheme of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (Clean India Mission) demonstrated success by 

providing access to toilet facilities in the rural households and achieving the target of Open 

Defecation Free (ODF) in all the districts. With the h elp of a series of social welfare schemes and 

their continuous monitoring at all levels, India is making significant progress in achieving SDG 6. 

For these reasons, the Indian Goal 6 experiences become crucial for other countries and provide 

numerous learn ing opportunities for them. 

Keywords: India, Localization, SDGs, Sanitation, Sustainability, Water 

Introduction 

India is the second -most populous country in the world with a population of approximately 1.39 

billion. Considering its large and increasing population, India has always witnessed huge water 

demand in multiple sectors, including domestic, agriculture, energy, and industries (Soumya et 

al., 2020).However, this massive water demand becomes critical in the light of India’s limited 

water resources and plenty water scarce regions. Agricultural fields of the northern India majorly 

rely upon Himalayan river system. However, as the water flow decreases downstream, it causes 

water scarcity in the plains (Soumya et al., 2020).Similarly, the irrigation sec tor is largely 

dependent upon groundwater however its excessive and unsustainable extraction has led to 

significant depletion in its levels. 

Among all, inadequate sanitation measures poses one of the massive threats to the availability of 

clean and safe water resources. Data suggest that around 2 billion people worldwide are drinking 

water from the sources contaminated by the fecal matter (Soumya et al., 2020). In the absence Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 642 

of proper toilet facilities, the practice of defecating out in open and public spaces prevails both in 

urban and rural areas. India alone accounts for 57% of the global population defecating in open. 

According to the 2011 census data, national sanitation coverage was 46.9%, while rural sanitation 

coverage was restricted up to 30.7%. This figure continues to shrink even further when we look 

specifically into the coverage data of backward and tribal communities (Sujith, 2016). 

Before 2014, around 568 million people in India were facing the indignity of defecating in open 

and public sp aces due to lack of access to toilets (UNICEF). Such practices were more prevalent 

among the poorest citizen who could not afford household water connections and toilets. 

Moreover, people believed it to be impure and unhygienic to construct toilets inside houses. As 

per 2013 -14 rapid survey on children, 22% of the Indian schools lacked toilet facilities for girl 

students. Likewise, around 54% of the preschools had no toilet and water arrangements on their 

premises (UNICEF). Half of the population does not h ave an access to safely managed drinking 

water. In 2015, 63.3% of Indian rural households and 19.7% of urban households did not have 

access to improved sanitation measures. High quantities of harmful chemicals like arsenic and 

fluoride could also be found in 1.96 million dwellings. 

The practice of open defecation is detrimental for the health and well -being of the local population 

and the environment. The absence of adequate water and sanitation facilities and care for 

personal hygiene are threat to serio us illness and water -borne diseases. Inappropriate human 

waste disposal tend to increase the risks of diseases, including cholera, typhoid, dysentery, 

hepatitis A, polio and other infectious diseases. India witnessed 100,000 diarrheal deaths among 

children below five years of age. It also causes significant impact on the women’s health and often 

leads to violence against women. Women who are forced to move out of their house to find private 

spaces for defecation are more prone to physical and sexual abuse ( Mahrukh et al., 2019). UN 

Human Rights Council has noted that more than health and crimes, open defecation is also linked 

with the infringement of dignity of an individual and is a human rights issue (HRC, 2009). In an 

environmental law case, the Supreme C ourt of India has observed that the failure of the 

municipalities in providing public conveniences forces slum -dwellers to defecate in open places 

and thus crucial for human dignity (Municipal Council, Ratlam v. Shri Vardhichand and Others, 

[1980]). 

Aft er the adoption of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) clubbed with Indian domestic 

policies on water sanitation and hygiene (WASH) the overall situation has drastically improved 

and appeared promising for the future (Sarkar and Bharat, 2021). UNICEF note s one of the 

ambitious Indian program, Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), that progressed the country towards 

achieving SDG 6.2. It resulted in the construction of over 100 million household toilets in 630,000 

villages, with an aim to provide access to sanitatio n to all. It helped in reducing total number of 

days of illness, preventing soil and water contamination and creation of around 7.5 million jobs 

under the scheme (UNICEF, 2018; UNICEF, 2019). Likewise, range of efforts and collaboration 

from central level to the grass -root level has played a significant role in the betterment of the 

previous situation. The paper attempts to trace the journey of SDG 6 (water and sanitation) since 

its adoption to the present -day implementation. After introducing the issue in the first part, the 

second part describes the status of right to water and sanitation existing in India before 2015. In Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 643 

the third part, the paper explores the relationship between India and Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs). The fourth part illustrates the localization of SDGs as practiced in India for 

achieving the Agenda 2030. The paper further discusses SDG 6 in the Indian context and point 

out the progress and lessons from the fifth part. Lastly, it ends by commenting upon the efficiency 

of Indian p ractices and its role towards achieving SDG 6. 

India before 2105 

Securing water and sanitation demand has remained India’s priority since its independence in 

1947. India has established massive infrastructure and institutional arrangements to fulfill its 

goals. Construction of dams and irrigation canals helped the count ry to meet its water uses as 

well as to generate hydro -electricity. They further allowed India to overcome geographical 

challenges like controlling floods and providing water in water -scarce regions (Soumya, 2020). In 

its efforts to progressively achieve t he full realization of international legal provisions, India 

became party to multiple environmental and human rights treaties that promotes rights concerning 

water and sanitation to its citizen. Considering its large population, continuous and uneven water 

needs, India moved forward in the direction of fulfilling water and sanitation requirements. In this 

context, the reports suggest that Indian actions for the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 

have effectively addressed the issue of water (UN, 2015). 

Th ough the Indian Constitution does not expressly refer to water or sanitation rights, however, 

article 262 that deals with the resolution of state river water disputes specifies water rights as 

riparian rights (NHRC, 2021). India has enacted several laws re lating to water pollution, water 

supply and water resources management, including Indian Easements Act, 1882, Water 

(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.It 

also adopted National Water Policy in 1987 an d revised it in 2002 and 2012 to ensure effective 

management and supply of water resources. Notably, these legal documents did not focus on the 

rights aspects of water and sanitation. Likewise, there exists no statute dealing with sanitation or 

right to sa nitation however issues concerning sanitation and dignified life were expressed in 

various domestic legal texts. 

The Indian judiciary has played an active role in interpreting right to access to clean and pollution -

free water within a broader head of the right to life under article 21 (Subhash Kumar v. State of 

Bihar, [1991]; Vellore Citizen’s Welfare Forum v. Union of India, [1996]; State of Karnataka v. 

State of Andhra Pradesh, [2000]).Similarly, the apex court recognized sanitation as an essential 

part of enjoying right to life with human dignity (Virendra Gaur v. State of Haryana, [1995]; L. K. 

Koolwal v. State of Haryana, [1988]). Further, it is established that state is responsible to provide 

clean drinking water to its citizen (M. C. Mehta v. Kamal N ath, [1997]; P. R. Subhash Chandran 

v. Government of Andhra Pradesh & others, [2001]). Likewise, it is basic duty of municipalities to 

provide drainage system in working conditions to sufficiently meet the needs of the people. 

(Municipal Council, Ratlam v. Vardichand, [1980]). Moreover, the courts have even highlighted 

the rights of the sanitation workers (Delhi Jal Board v. National Campaign for Dignity and Rights 

of Sewerage and Allied Workers and others, [2011]) and stress for the monetary compensation 

in case of sewer deaths (Safai Karamchari Andolan v. Union of India, [2014]). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 644 

India and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 

By the end of 2015, lack of access to clean drinking water and inadequate sanitation measures 

posed significant challenges to the well -being of Indian population. Its impact was largely felt by 

different vulnerable groups, including women, children, elderly, and the poor. Though water 

related MDGs demonstrated success within the Indian context, the primary challenge before the 

post -2015 framework involved the elimination of inequalities within the supply and access levels 

of water and sanitation services. Moreover, MDG target 7c that ensures sustainable access to 

safe drinking water and basic sanitation does not refer to the water qua lity. The term ‘safe drinking 

water’ is primarily employed in context with an improved source of water, for instances, piped 

water and not water quality. For this reason, despite emphasizing on ‘safe drinking water’, 41.5% 

water samples from urban househol ds and 60% water samples from rural households were found 

to be contaminated (Mira et al., 2014). 

The adoption of 2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) immensely aided the existing 

national water and health policies of India. The motto of SDGs, “Lea ving No One Behind” is 

mirrored in the India’s national developmental agenda of ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka 

Vishwas, Sabka Prayas’ (Collective Support, Inclusive Growth, Collective Trust, and Collective 

Efforts). India has introduced many social welfa re schemes and programs that are related to 

several SDGs. For instance, in 2018 the Indian government launched the world’s largest health 

protection scheme, namely Ayushman Bharat -Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY) that 

provides annual health protect ion of approximately US$ 7,100 to 500 million citizens. This 

initiative aims to overcome expensive health expenditures for poor population and reduce 

inequality. India is aiming to eliminate tuberculosis by 2025 that is five years ahead of the global 

targe t of 2030. Another welfare scheme, Poshan Abhiyan (National Nutrition Mission) launched 

by the government aims to eliminate malnutrition by 2022. The program further considers the 

linkages between nutrition and other aspects relating to water, sanitation, hygiene, poverty. 

Similarly, India has often stressed upon the need for securing climate justice and aims to eliminate 

single -use plastic by 2022. 

India is committed to implement the SDGs through nationally defined parameters drawn in 

accordance with nati onal priorities and needs. For this purpose, NITI (National Institution for 

Transforming India) Aayog, an apex public policy think tank of Government of India, has mapped 

out existing domestic central and centrally sponsored schemes and their concerned min istry or 

department against each target of SDGs (NITI Aayog, 2018). For instance, the SDG Target 6.1 

seeks to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water by 2030. 

The NITI Aayog has associated Target 6.1 along with the 2009 launched National Rural Drinking 

Water Program (NRDWP) that aims to provide safe and adequate water for drinking, cooking and 

other domestic needs to every rural person on a sustainable basis. The Department of Drinking 

Water and Sanitation and Ministry o f Women and Child Development is entrusted to achieve the 

scheme objectives and ultimately, Target 6.1. Similarly, Target 6.2 requires achieving access to 

adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special 

attenti on to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations. To achieve Target 

6.2, the Aayog has referred to its existing Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural) , Swachh Bharat Mission Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 645 

(Urban) and the Mission for Protection and Empowerment of Women. Simu ltaneously, it has 

ensured the responsibility of the governing departments, including Department of Drinking Water 

and Sanitation, Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Women 

and Child Development and Panchayati Raj to achie ve these targets. 

India is a Union of States comprising federal structure with a strong center. The Indian Constitution 

has demarcated the functional subject matters of both center and state governments under 

Schedule VII in the form of three lists - Unio n List, State List, and Concurrent List. Further, there 

exists a three -tier local governance system at the sub -state level. Along with the efforts made by 

the central government, SDGs are being achieved with the continuous support of sub -national 

governmen ts. Considering the federal governance structure of India, the 28 Indian States and 8 

Union Territories (UTs) account for majority of the roles and functions in this direction. These state 

and local governments look after the planning, execution and monito ring phases of the SDGs. 

They work at the grass -root levels by directly engaging with the local communities to fulfill the 

Indian commitments for the 2030 Agenda. This arrangement makes the sub -national 

governments a key player in the fulfillment of SDGs. 

Since the Indian States and Union Territories differ in terms of population, geographical features, 

natural resources, and education and health standards, therefore the sub -national governments 

have to undertake special care particular needs and demands of the local citizen while 

implementing the global SDGs. It led the local governments to pursue the localization of SDGs 

resulting in effective results from across the country (NITI Aayog, 2019). 

Localization of SDGs 

‘Localizing’ could be understood as the ‘process of recognizing sub -national contexts in the 

achievement of the 2030 Agenda, from the setting of goals and targets, to determining the means 

of implementation and using indicators to measure and monitor progr ess, in addition to raising 

awareness through advocacy’ (NITI Aayog, 2019). It aims to identify the approaches of the local 

and sub -national governments to realize SDGs through the bottom up actions and to ascertain 

the role of SDGs in devising a framework for the local development policy. Localization of the 

SDGs is the responsibility of all the three -tiers of Indian government. 

The First Phase 

The India experience of localizing the SDGs can be divided into three on -going phases that often 

occurs togethe r (NITI Aayog, 2019). The first phase discusses about identifying institutions and 

assigning specific mandates in relation to SDGs. Based on the three -tier governance structure, 

the allocation has been done at three levels – Central, State, and District. M ajor institutions 

existing at the central level include NITI Aayog (successor to the erstwhile Planning Commission), 

Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation (MoSPI), Central/Federal Ministries, and 

Comptroller and Audit General of India. NITI Aay og is responsible to ensure coordination between 

the Ministries and the State governments and to monitor the progress of the Goals. MoSPI was 

designated to realize the formulation of the National Indicator Framework (NIF) essential to track Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 646 

updates in SDG s. Similarly, to discuss the roles of Ministries, SDGs and their targets have been 

linked with the domestic welfare schemes and the concerned Ministry or Department is required 

to ensure its fulfillment. Lastly, the Comptroller and Audit General of India i s the apex audit body 

and it is mandated to conduct audit on the preparedness to achieve the SDGs. In addition, the 

Finance Commission of India, National training institutions, and the Legislature has demonstrated 

their specific role with respect to the 20 30 Agenda (NITI Aayog, 2019). 

At the State level, the Office of the Chief Secretary of the State has been assigned the duty to 

guide and oversee the matters concerning SDGs. The Chief Secretary is the top official of the 

State administration who also acts as a chief advisor to the Chief Minister of the State and 

Secretary to the State’s cabinet. Line departments are mandated to prepare, implement, and 

monitor programs for the realization of SDGs. Further, the Planning Department and Directorate 

of Economic s and Statistics are also involved to look after the SDGs implementation and collect 

crucial data for this purpose (NITI Aayog, 2019). 

The Indian government structure goes further deeper to the sub -state or district level. There exist 

a three -tier rural local self -governance system comprising – Panchayat at the village level, Urban 

Local Bodies at the block level, and the District adminis tration at the District level. The elected 

representatives of all these sub -state bodies are responsible to fulfill the obligations concerning 

SDGs at the level. In this manner, the institutions have been identified till the lowest administration 

level and further included in task of accomplishing SDGs. 

The Second Phase 

The second phase of SDGs localization emphasizes raising awareness and advocating for SDG 

implementation. Awareness is crucial for bringing behavioral changes among the participating 

actors. It ensures effective implementation of policies and creates ownership of SDGs among 

different stakeholders. For this purpose, the NITI Aayog being the primary body for co -ordination 

actively worked to sensitize the stakeholders towards SDGs. 

The In dian Government took several initiatives to increase interests and commitment of all the 

partners on SDGs. Firstly , the NITI Aayog created a shared understanding among the Central 

and State level governments to increase their sincerity and dedication towar ds achieving SDGs. 

For this purpose, it organized national and regional consultations on each SDG except Goal 17. 

It invited the Ministry departments, State governments, external experts, CSOs and the United 

Nations to the national consultation. Along with these consultations, it also organized National 

Workshop on Building Capacity for Localizing SDGs. Secondly , the NITI Aayog played an active 

role in mapping every SDGs and their targets with a centrally sponsored scheme and dedicated 

Ministry to follow a ‘whole -of -government’ approach. In this way, the Aayog entrusted 

responsibility of achieving specific target with a particular Ministry and ultimately leaving no target 

unaddressed. Thirdly , as a torchbearer of SDGs sensitization, NITI Aayog came up with d esigning 

SDG India Index Baseline Report Dashboard in 2018. It was a composite Index having 62 

indicators across 14 SDGs that listed and ranked the progress of every State and Union Territory 

on SDGs. It was an attempt to establish an advocacy and benchmar k tool and to increase the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 647 

spirit of competition among stakeholders and motivate them for improvements. Lastly , the Ministry 

of Statistics and Program Implementation (MoSPI) was entrusted with a job to develop National 

Indicator Framework (NIF) to monitor SDGs. For this purpose, the MoSPI created nationally -

relevant indicators and circulated them among various stakeholders for their observations 

followed by public consultation. Consequently, through this participatory process, a National 

Indicator Framewor k was developed with 306 indicators based on the remarks of Ministries, 

States, and concerned UN and other bodies. It is a crucial tool to track the progress of SDGs at 

the national level and further to guide policy makers and executives toward SDGs implem entation 

(NITI Aayog, 2019). 

The Third Phase 

Considering the geographical, socio -economic, cultural, demographic diversities among the 

States, they play a crucial role in the localizing of SDGs. The third phase addresses many 

initiatives aiming to streng then the implementation of SDGs by developing upon their localization. 

First , it includes that after the mapping and designating Ministries for specific targets, the line 

Ministries identified strategies to align their plans with specific goals and monitor them. For 

instance, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj advised local government to employ SDGs within their 

governance plans (village development plans). Second , the SDGs should be understood and 

realized in local contexts. The national level consultations an d discussion on SDGs clarified its 

thematic details and allowed the sub -national governments to open regional consultations for 

more detailed analysis on the implementation of targets at sub -national levels. It allowed them to 

conduct workshops local gover nment officials, rural communities, civil society organizations and 

others. Third , the governments should advance indicators and metrics and institute monitoring 

mechanisms to keep a track of policy direction and implementation progress. On the basis of 

in clusive consultations, the MoSPI established NIF that acts as a data sources for implementation 

of SDGs. Similarly, States are advised to draft State -specific indicators to track their actions. 

Fourth , the State and UT governments should establish their ow n policy and strategy framework 

to SDGs. Due to the critical role of States in achieving SDGs, the NITI Aayog developed State 

level Vision documents and SDG Action Plans relating to SDGs. Further, it encouraged the States 

to identify a nodal department to co -ordinate at the State level and map existing government 

schemes with the SDGs. The mapping process is also helpful in ascertaining any gaps in the 

existing policy framework so that they can be adjusted with other required action plans. Moreover, 

the Aay og stresses State’s to develop capacity development initiatives and budget planning and 

allocation for SDGs. 

States have actively taken part in organizing implementation system for SDGs. 31 States and 

UTs have defined their nodal agency for coordination, generally being the Department of Planning 

in many cases. Some of them have even defined nodal structures to be followed within various 

departments. While 23 States and UTs have prepared the Vision document, the others are 

working on its development. Most of them have followed ‘whole -of -government’ approach and 

working on aligning budget to State specific SDG target. Further, similar to NITI Aayog at the 

central level, States are also undertaking periodic reviews on the implementation mechanisms by 

concerne d State Departments and sub -national governments. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 648 

After 2015, in the first four years, the Centre, State and District level governments have 

emphasized primarily upon developing roadmaps and monitoring mechanism towards SDGs. 

Gradually, they are on the m ove to make SDGs as the core developmental framework where all 

the planning and policy making should address its targets. The early lessons deriving out of the 

localization of SDGs are promising. They provide unique opportunity to strengthen the Indian 

fed eral structure and commit social justice to the rural, deprived and marginalized segment of the 

society (NITI Aayog, 2019). 

Sustainable Development Goal 6 in India 

Sustainable Development Goal 6 aims to ensure availability and sustainable management of 

water and sanitation for all. It is determined to secure safe, affordable and accessible drinking 

water, sanitation facilities and hygiene for every person by 2030. The goal is focused upon 

reducing water pollution, increasing water -use efficiency, and prom oting participation of local 

communities in improving water quality. 

Goal 6 consists of eight targets dedicated to improved instances of water and sanitation 

measures. It includes universal and equitable access to safe drinking water (6.1); access to 

equ itable and adequate sanitation, ending open defecation, and promoting women and girl 

hygiene (6.2); improving water quality with recycling and safe reuse and minimizing water 

contamination (6.3); increasing water -use efficiency and addressing water scarcit y through 

sustainable withdrawals (6.4); implementing integrated water resource management at all levels 

(6.5); expanding international cooperation and capacity -building support (6.a); strengthening the 

participation of local communities in water and sanit ation management (6.b)(UNGA, 2015). All 

these targets are expected to be secured before 2030, except Target 6.6 that seeks to protect 

and restore water -related ecosystem by 2020. 

India has recently released SDG India Index 3.0 that measures its progress on SDGs. As per the 

Index, eight national level indicators have been identified that address five out of the eight SDG 

6 targets (NITI Aayog, 2021). These indicators were selected b ased on the data available at the 

sub -national levels and that can ensure comparability among the States and UTs. With the help 

of these indicators, the performance of all the Indian States and UTs has been recorded and 

ranked through SDG Index Score. As p er this Score, the Indian States of Goa and the UT of 

Lakshadweep scored the highest 100, where the score of other States ranged between 54 and 

96 and the score of the UTs ranged between 61 and 99 (NITI Aayog, 2021). 

These indicators present a highly pro mising picture of Indian achievements on SDG 6. According 

to the Index, Indian States have constructed 100% Individual toilets in rural households. 

Moreover, in 2020, it verified all the Districts of India as Open Defecation Free (ODF). With 

reference to a ccess to safe and adequate drinking water, 51.36% of the rural population has 

become the beneficiary of PWS and 97.44% of the rural population has access to improved water 

source of drinking water. In comparison to 2013 -14 reports when 22% of the Indian sc hools lacked 

toilet facilities for girl students, today 95% of the schools have a separate toilet facility for girls. 

The target is to cover all the schools in the country. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 649 

An independent survey conducted by UNICEF finds that households in ODF villages ha ve 

accumulated the benefits of 50000 Indian rupees. It further highlights the benefits of SBM as 

reduced medical expenditures, time saved from illness, lowering in mortality rates and increase 

in the property value with the construction of toilets (UNICEF, 2018). Likewise, in another study, 

UNICEF founds that ODF villages have more access to contamination -free soil and food 

(UNICEF, 2019). 

Similarly, presently 88.4% of high polluting industries comply with waste -water treatment as per 

Central Pollution Con trol Board (CPCB) norms. North -Eastern States of India including Manipur, 

Nagaland, and Tripura has accomplished this target. The target is to ensure that all the industries 

comply with the wastewater treatment norms. With regards to the groundwater withdr awal, a 

stage of 70% or less is treated as safe. India stands at an overall groundwater withdrawal of 63%. 

However, States like Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, and Rajasthan pose a challenge where the 

groundwater extraction is significantly high. They have an extr action percentage of more than 100 

indicating that their annual groundwater consumption is more than the extractable ground water 

resources. Other large and densely populated States like Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 

Himachal Pradesh also range between 70% and 100%. It is desirable that the figures in these 

States should be reduced below 70%. Adding to it, presently, 17.24% of the Blocks are considered 

as over -exploited and the target is to reduce this figure to 0. 

Effective Welfare Policies on Water and Sanitation in India 

Among the other SDGs, India made notable success in the field of water and sanitation. The 

scenario changed drastically between the years 2016 to 2019. With the help of two of its major 

schemes, India could achieve SDGs ahead of 20 30. The Indian government, under its flagship 

program, Jal Jeevan Mission, is committed to providing safe drinking water through individual 

household tap connections by 2024 to all households in rural India. This scheme significantly 

covers the Indian SDG Target 6.1 dedicated to providing access to safe and reliable drinking 

water source for everyone. Likewise, the other prominent scheme of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 

(Clean India Mission) demonstrated success by providing access to toilet facilities in the rural 

households and achieving the target of Open Defecation Free (ODF) in all the districts. This 

scheme has been further divided into two parts as Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) and Swachh 

Bharat Mission (Urban) dedicated to improve sanitation and hygiene in the rural and urban 

localities respectively. It aims to accomplish SDG Target 6.2 through constructing toilets and 

waste management. It is pertinent to understand these schemes and how they brought changes 

to the lives of the poor and marginalized people. 

Jal Jeevan Mission (National Water Mission) 

The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation is the nodal body under the Ministry of Jal 

Shakti (Ministry of Water Power) to manage drinking water and sanitation related issues in rural 

India. Launched in 20 09, the National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) was restructured 

as a prominent scheme of 2019, Jal Jeevan Mission (National Water Mission) that aims to provide 

Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) to every household by 2024. The Mission Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 650 

facil itates the collective goal of Har Ghar Jal (Providing Water to every household). It is committed 

to ensure in -village water supply infrastructure, reliable and sustainable water source, transfer of 

water, technological intervention for water treatment, gre y water management, and capacity 

building of various stakeholders. The scheme undertakes community approach to water and aims 

to make water everyone’s priority. It ensures awareness, education, and communication among 

the masses (Ministry of Jal Shakti). 

At the start of the Mission, only 17% of the rural household had access to tap water supply. Over 

the last 2.5 years when the spread of COVID -19 disease followed by the restrictions and lockdown 

caused due to it imposed huge challenge, yet the Government m ade speedy efforts to increase 

the coverage of the people under the scheme. Consequently, 43.4% of the total rural household 

are having piped water supply to their homes at present. It is provided that in total 1,18,812 

villages and 81 districts have 100% tap water connections. By providing assured tap water supply 

to all rural households till 2024, India will achieve its commitments under SDG -6 much before 

2030 (Ministry of Jal Shakti, 2021). 

Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (Clean India Mission) 

‘Swachh Bharat Abh iyan’ (Clean India Mission) is a flagship scheme of the Government of India 

dedicated to improve sanitation. The Prime Minister of India launched the scheme on the birth 

anniversary of great leader Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi on October 2, 2014. The scheme was 

mandated as a nation -wide campaign for the elimination of open -defecation through construction 

of house -hold and community -hold toilets, mass scale behavioral changes, and establishing 

monitoring mechanisms for toilet construction. 

On October 2, 2019, all the Indian villages, Gram Panchayats, Districts, States, and Union 

Territories declared themselves as “open -defecation free” (ODF) with the construction of 100 

million toilets in rural parts of the country. The Mission has now entered into its second phase, 

that is, ODF -Plus, to ensure the continuity of ODF behaviors and safe solid and liquid waste 

management facilities for all without leaving anyone behind. 

Both the schemes launched by the Government of India are tremendously improving the needs 

of t he people for safe and accessible water and sanitation. With each passing day, they are 

achieving new heights and taking India closer to achieve its Goal 6 before 2030. These 

government initiatives have remarkably uplifted the lifestyle, health and social challenges of the 

rural people residing in Indian villages. The Swachh Bharat initiative not only helped in improving 

sanitation practices, however also led positive impacts on the environment. It addressed another 

burning issue of garbage disposal. Moreo ver, it has brought respect to the individuals involved in 

cleaning and waste management processes (PBNS, 2022). 

State Participation and Good Practices 

Along with the Central Government schemes, States and sub -national governments are the key 

agents to implement these goals on ground. One of the features of SBA was that it provided Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 651 

autonomy and flexibility to the State government to implement these schem es as per their 

suitability. For instance, the Chhattisgarh State, decided to pursue community -based approach 

instead of subsidy -driven approach for implementing Swachh Bharat Mission , allowing local 

communities to take charge on field for the construction of toilets and promote sanitation 

measures. Notably, the Government of India has incentivizes the toilet building by providing Rs. 

12000 (157 USD) to every household for its construction. It transfers the incentive amount to the 

Panchayat, that is the loc al village government, to further provide it to the beneficiaries. Here the 

local government has the flexibility on the preferred strategy of incentive allocation. They may 

allocate the entire amount to the poor household, half amount to the middle -income household, 

while no amount to the rich and efficient families. Highlighting this flexibility, the CEO of Raigarh 

Zila Parishad, a district -level officer in Chhattisgarh State, mentioned that they have created a 

district -level team to scale up sanitation ca mpaign and when it creates the demand for building 

toilets, the officials encourage communities to construct toilets using own money and resources. 

This approach brings a sense of responsibility and ownership among the natives resulting in 

higher usage of toilets. Once the village is declared as ODF, only then the officials transfer the 

subsidy amount to the local population. Additionally, the State included another condition that the 

amount should be provided for using the toilets and not constructing it. For this purpose, after the 

construction of the toilets the communities should use them. There will be inspection by the State 

and District level teams in the three months, followed by another inspection from the State level 

team in six months. Only then t he incentive amount can be provided to the beneficiary household. 

In this manner, the State and District authorities have replaced the criteria of incentive amount 

from toilet construction to the actual use of the toilets. Through this change, they not onl y

established a monitoring mechanism however also attempted to change behavior of the people 

by including toilets usage in their habit. 

These schemes have not only ended the practice of ODF but also empowered local and 

marginalized people. One of the fema le residents from Tipakhol, one of the first villages in 

Chhattisgarh State to be declared as ODF, described that they constructed their toilets 

themselves using their own money and locally available resources like bamboo and stones 

(Somya, 2016). Importan tly, before the scheme women did not participates in the village -level 

meetings, however the situation has changed since now they are playing active role in the village 

development. Due to these approaches, the local people themselves became the brand 

amba ssador to spread awareness and self -capable to help toilet construction in the adjacent 

villages. The State further adopted strategies like restraining those who do not have toilets in their 

household to contest election. Also, it restricts such people fro m availing any benefits from the 

government. 

The innovative practices adopted in the Chhattisgarh State highlight their sincerity and 

commitments towards achieving ODF status and adequate sanitation and hygiene. First of all, 

they placed people as a cent ral to their action plan. The State had a concept of ‘Navratna’ 

meaning nine gems, indicating nine prominent people from the community leading the sanitation 

movement. In addition, India has Gram Sabha (a general assembly of all the people from village) 

in every village as a democratic setup at the lowest level. These Gram Sabha have constituted 

vigilance committees composed of women and children, known as ‘ Swachhta Commandoes ’Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 652 

(Cleanliness Commandoes). The function of these Commandoes is to look around du ring morning 

and evening time that the ODF practices are being followed by the communities. They also 

maintain a file known as ‘ Swachhta Panji’ (Cleanliness Register) to record the discussions on 

cleanliness by the Gram Panchayat (Village Council). Chhatti sgarh is among the most backward 

States of India having 85% of its population practicing open defecation. However, their 

commitment and implementation strategies are praiseworthy and inspiring for other States and 

countries. 

Likewise, States have demonst rated several effective practices towards securing water for its 

population. Considering the Indian state of Gujarat that is primarily consists of water scarce 

regions have demonstrated remarkable outcomes towards achieving Target 6.1. Several 

strategies h ave satisfied the needs of the local population and provided them water supplies. 

Inter -basin water transfer from the river Narmada project waters to the deprived regions of 

Gujarat, including Kutch, Saurashtra and North Gujarat have proved significant. Sh ifting water 

supply from ground water based to surface water based is yet another strategic move to help the 

local population. For providing improved sources of water and PWS, a network of pipelines has 

been laid along the State that ensures double securit y of these water sources. Lastly, the 

involvement of local population and community participation by constituting Pani Samitis (Village 

Water and Sanitation Committees) work as local public water utilities and further achieve Target 

6.b. These committees b eing composed of 50% men and 50% women acts as change agents 

who bring drinking water security in their villages. Touching upon the notion of equity, 

inclusiveness and mutual trust, these welfare policies have open avenues for long -term 

engagements with th e local population. 

Conclusions 

Being the second -most populated country, India balances its huge water demand with limited 

resources. It sets an inspiring example for water and sanitation management through a catena of 

judicial decisions on the subject -matter and public participation on grass -root level. Independent 

studies notes that government plans and policies have contributed to an increased quality of life 

of the population. Amid prevailing economic and environmental stress, India remained committed 

to the spirit of leaving no one behind by improving safe drinking water and access to toilet facilities, 

particularly for women and rural communities. In this context, the research paper highlights Indian 

experiences of securing SDG 6 and outline crucial lessons from its implemented poli cies. The 

Indian localization approach demonstrates an impressive strategic model on SDGs. Application 

of the Indian SDG localized model secures enormous water demands, improves infrastructure, 

creates opportunities, and strengthens democratic ties. Furthe r, the adoption of two of its 

prominent schemes, Jal Jeevan Mission and Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has significantly fulfilled the 

water and sanitation related needs of local communities. Provided that a large population belongs 

to poor and under -developed regi on, Indian experiences on achieving SDGs will play a substantial 

role in setting examples for other countries. Moreover, it suggests inclusive and structured water 

management policies beneficial for applying SDG 6 in other parts of the world. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 653 

Reference s

Basu, S. (2013), “South Asian countries give sanitation charter to SAARC”, Down To Earth, 22 

March 2013, Available at https://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/south -asian -countries -

give -sanitation -charter -to -saarc -40675 (accessed February 26, 2022). 

Bhowm ick, S. Ghosh, N. and Saha, R. (2020), “Tracking India’s Progress in Clean Water and 

Sanitation: A Sub -National Analysis”, Observer Research Foundation Occasional Paper, 

No. 250, pp. 5 -55. 

Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (2002), General Comment No. 15 – The 

Right to Water, UN Doc. E/C.12/2002/11, adopted in 29th Session, 11 -29 November 

2002, Available at 

https://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/water/docs/CESCR_GC_15.pdf (a ccessed 

February 20, 2022). 

Delhi Jal Board v. National Campaign for Dignity and Rights of Sewerage and Allied Workers 

and Others , (2011) 8 SCC 568, Supreme Court of India. 

HRC (2009). Human Rights Council Resolution – Promotion and Protection of All H uman 

Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, including the Right to 

Development , UN Doc. A/HRC/12/24, 1 July 2009, Available at https://documents -dds -

ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G09/144/37/PDF/G0914437.pdf?OpenElement (accessed 

Fe bruary 20, 2022). 

HRC (2011). Human Rights Council Resolution – The Human Right to safe drinking water and 

sanitation, UN Doc. A/HRC/RES/18/1, 12 October 2011, Available at https://documents -

dds -ny.un.org/doc/RESOLUTION/GEN/G11/165/89/PDF/G1116589.pdf?O penElement 

(accessed February 25, 2022). 

Johri, M. Chandra, D. Subramanian, S.V. Sylvestre, M. Pahwa, S. (2014), “MDG 7c for safe 

drinking water in India: an illusive achievement”, Vol. 383 No. 9926, pp. 1379, 19 April 

2014, Available at https://www.t helancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140 -

6736(14)60673 -5/fulltext (accessed March 5, 2022). 

Koonan, S. (2016), “Right to Sanitation in India: Nature and Scope”, in Joy, K.J. and Bhagat S. 

(Eds.), Right to Sanitation in India: Nature, Scope and Voic es from the Margins, Forum 

for Policy Dialogue on Water Conflicts in India, Pune,pp. 1 -14, Available 

athttps://www.ielrc.org/content/a1608.pdf (accessed February 12, 2022). 

L.K. Koolwal v. State of Haryana , High Court of Rajasthan, AIR 1988 Raj. 2, Raja sthan High 

Court 

M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath , (1997) 1 SCC 388, Supreme Court of India Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 654 

Municipal Council, Ratlam v. Vardhichand , Supreme Court, AIR 1980 SC 1622, Supreme Court 

of India. 

Ministry of Jal Shakti, “About DDWS”, Available at https://jalshakti -ddws.gov.in/ (accessed 

March 18, 2022). 

Ministry of Jal Shakti, (2021), “Two years of Jal Jeevan Mission”, Government of India, Ministry 

of Jal Shakti, Department of Drinking Water & S anitation, National Jal Jeevan Mission, 

Available at https://jalshakti -ddws.gov.in/sites/default/files/two -years -of -jal -jeevan -

mission_1.pdf (accessed March 25, 2022). 

NHRC, (2021), “Right to Water”, National Human Rights Commission, Available at 

https ://nhrc.nic.in/sites/default/files/Right%20to%20water.pdf (accessed March 1, 2022). 

NITI Aayog (2018), “Sustainable Development Goals India: Mapping of Central Sector Schemes 

and Ministries of Government of India”, File No. F -20019/PA -SDGs/2017 -DMEO -Part 1, 

Available at https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2019 -01/SDGMapping -Document -

NITI_0.pdf (accessed March 5, 2022). 

NITI Aayog (2019), “Localising SDGs Early Lessons from India 2019” Available at 

https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/202 0-07/LSDGs_July_8_Web.pdf (accessed 

March 10, 2022). 

NITI Aayog (2021), “SDG India Index & Dashboard 2020 -21: Partnerships in the Decade of 

Action” Government of India, NITI Aayog, Available at 

https://www.niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/SDG_3.0_Final _04.03.2021_Web_Spreads.pd 

f (accessed March 18, 2022). 

PBNS (2022), “Swachh Bharat Abhiyan: Assessing the impact”, News on AIR, 18 January 2022, 

Available at https://newsonair.com/2022/01/18/swachh -bharat -abhiyan -assessing -the -

impact/ (accessed March 3 0, 2022). 

P. R. Subhash Chandran v Government of Andhra Pradesh & Others , 2001 (5) ALD 771, 

Andhra High Court 

Safai Karmachari Andolan v. Union of India , 2014(4) SCALE 165, Supreme Court of India. 

Sarkar, S. K. and Bharat, Girija K. (2021), “Achieving Sustainable Development Goals in water 

and sanitation sectors in India”, Journal of Water, Sanitation & Hygiene for Development, 

Vol. 11 Issue 5, Avaiable at 

https://iwaponline.com/washdev/article/11/5/693/82996/Achieving -Sustainable -

Development -Goals -in -water (August 5, 2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 655 

Saleem, M. Burdett, T. and Heaslip, V. (2019), “Health and social impacts of open defecation on 

women: a systematic review”, BMC Public Health, Vol. 19 No. 158, Available at 

https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/ 10.1186/s12889 -019 -6423 -z

(accessed February 15, 2022). 

Sethuraman, S. (2016), “Swachh Bharat in Action: Communities Drive the Sanitation Revolution 

in Chhattisgarh” Swarajya, 16 January 2016, Available at 

https://swarajyamag.com/books/swachh -bharat -in -action -communities -drive -the -

sanitation -revolution -in -chhattisgarh (accessed March 30, 2022). 

State of Karnataka v State of Andhra Pradesh , (2000) 9 SCC 572, Supreme Court of India 

Subhash Kumar v. State of Bihar , AIR 1991 SC 420, Supreme Court of India 

UN (2010). UN General Assembly Resolution – The human right to water and sanitation, UN 

Doc. A/RES/64/292,3 August 2010, Available at https://documents -dds -

ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N09/479/35/PDF/N0947935.pdf?OpenElement (accessed 

February 22, 202 2). 

UN (2015), “The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015”, Available at 

https://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2015_MDG_Report/pdf/MDG%202015%20rev%20( 

July%201).pdf (accessed February 26, 2022). 

UNGA (2015), UN General Assembly Resolution - Transformin g Our World: the 2030 Agenda 

for Sustainable Development, UN Doc. A/RES/70/1, 21 October 2015, Available at 

https://www.refworld.org/docid/57b6e3e44.html (accessed March 15, 2022). 

UNICEF (2018), “The Financial and Economic Impact of Swachh Bharat Missi on in India”, 

Available at https://www.unicef.org/india/media/1206/file/Financial -and -Economic -

Impacts.pdf (accessed August 7, 2022). 

UNICEF (2019), “UNICEF Report on the Environmental impact of the Swachh Bharat Mission 

on water, soil and food”, Av ailable at https://jalshakti -

ddws.gov.in/sites/default/files/UNICEF_environments_study.pdf (accessed August 7, 

2022). 

UNICEF, “Strengthening sustainable WASH programming”, Available at 

https://www.unicef.org/india/what -we -do/water -sanitation -hygiene (a ccessed February 

12, 2022). 

Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum v. Union of India , AIR 1996 SC 2715, Supreme Court of India 

Virender Gaur v. State of Haryana , Supreme Court of India, (1995)2 SCC 577, Supreme Court 

of India Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 656 

WHO (2018), Millennium Developme nt Goals (MDGs), Available at https://www.who.int/news -

room/fact -sheets/detail/millennium -development -goals -(mdgs) (accessed February 25, 

2022). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 657 

# Renewable Energy for Rural Electrification 

# of Sub -Saharan Africa: Why It Matters (SDG7) 

Louis Musong Katche, Emmanuel Tanyi, and Pierre Tsafack 

(University of Buea, Cameroon) 

Abstract 

For over five decades, electricity grids in many Sub -Saharan African countries have been limited 

to urban areas, leaving the rural communities with no electricity. This is why it matters to have a 

paradigm shift from centralized urban grids to standalone m icro -grids powered by renewable 

resources from rural localities. This paper describes an approach to designing such standalone 

systems. The approach, which is based on the concept of Renewable Energy Map, has been 

applied to the South -West Region of Camero on. The Map, which identifies the locations of 

Renewable Resources and quantifies the electricity generation potential of each resource, has 

been used to design a Rural Electrification Master Plan for 480 villages of the South -West Region. 

As part of the M aster Plan, 54 Renewable Power Generators have been designed. These include 

18 Biomass Generators powered by Empty -Palm -Fruit Bunches, 16 Run -of -River Mini -Hydro 

Power Generators driven by fast flowing streams and rivers, 8 Waterfall -driven Mini -Hydro Powe r

Generators and 12 standalone Solar Generators. The project is the fruit of a partnership between 

the University of Buea and the thirty -one Councils (Local Governments) of the South -West Region 

of Cameroon. 

Keywords: Renewable Energy Map; Rural Electrifi cation Master Plan; Empty Palm Fruit Bunches; 

Run -of -river Scheme 

Introduction 

95% of people with no access to electricity live in Sub -Saharan Africa and Asia, and 80% of these 

energy -deprived people live in the rural areas (IEA, 2017). For these rural i nhabitants, the 

Sustainable Development Goal Number 7 , which requires all citizens of the world to have access 

to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy, remains an unattainable luxury. According to 2014 

World Bank Statistics, rural access to electric ity is as low as 0.4% in the Democratic Republic of 

Congo, 3.09% in Central African Republic and 4.53% in Chad. This is why it matters to develop 

a sustainable rural electrification strategy for Sub -Saharan Africa. 

Rural communities, which are the most a ffected by poverty, in the economic sense, are further 

affected by Energy Poverty, in the context of access to energy. According to the 2021 Energy 

Progress Report, about 759 million people in the world still lack access to electricity and only 46% 

of the population in Sub -Saharan Africa has access to electrical energy (IEA et al.,2017). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 658 

While technology and industrialization are growing at a fast pace, the means of providing clean 

electrical energy to the world’s population, at a relatively low cost, rem ains a challenging task 

(Rehman,2021). 

If the problem of rural electrification is not addressed, the African Union Agenda 2063 vision of a 

prosperous Africa in which citizens drive their own development will remain a hollow dream. The 

African Union has lo ng recognized the fact that Agenda 2063 cannot be achieved without 

developments in Science, Technology and Innovation. This is why the STISA -2024 (Science, 

Technology and Innovation Strategy for Africa) was designed. STISA -2024 has five priory areas 

(Clust ers ), one of which is Energy. This is why it matters to solve the problem of rural electrification 

in Sub -Saharan Africa, to make a contribution to the realization of both Agenda 2063 and STISA -

2024. 

The project reported in this paper is based on the use of a Renewable Energy Map in developing 

a sustainable rural electrification master plan for four hundred and eighty (480) villages in thirty -

one Councils (Local Governments) of the South -West region of Cameroon. The project provides 

a model which can be le veraged and replicated in other Sub -Saharan African countries, especially 

countries of the Equatorial Rain Forest which are endowed with renewable resources similar to 

those in Cameroon. 

The replication of this rural electrification model in many Sub -Saha ran African countries will 

impact several Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), since SDG7 is the epicenter of the 

system of SDGs. Energy impacts every economic or developmental activity. The Sustainable 

Development Goal Number 7 is at the epicenter of all Sustainable Development Goals, since it 

impacts many other SDGs. This dependence of other SDGs on energy is illustrated in figure 1. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 659 

> Figure 1: Energy as the epicenter of Sustainable Development Goals

Energy directly or indirectly facilitates the attainment of at least 8 other Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs), including SDG 1, to end poverty, SDG 3, to ensure healthy lives and promote well -

being; SDG 4, access to quality education; SDG 8, to promote sustained, inclusive and 

sust ainable economic growth; SDG 9, to build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and 

sustainable industrialization and foster innovation; SDG 13, to combat climate change; SDG 15, 

to protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystem s, sustainably manage 

forests, combat desertification and halt biodiversity loss. 

The availability of electricity to both rural and urban populations provides a lever to poverty 

alleviation, improves the well -being of the population, facilitates inclusive economic growth 

through the creation of enterprises, facilitates industrialization and fosters innovation. It also 

combats climate change by reducing the pressure on forest exploitation to provide firewood for 

rural populations, combats desertification an d halts biodiversity loss which is a consequence of 

the depletion of forests resulting in the loss of the natural habitat of wildlife. Energy impacts most 

of the Sustainable Development Goals. This is why it matters to solve the problem of rural 

electrific ation in Sub -Saharan Africa. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 660 

The authors’ research shows that absence of electricity is the epicenter of the underdevelopment 

matrix of Sub -Saharan Africa, as illustrated in figure 2. The lack of electricity is deadweight on the 

development of Sub -Saharan Africa. The replication of this model of rural electrification in other 

countries of the region will remove this deadweight and reverse the phenomena highlighted in 

figure 2. 

> Figure 2: Lack of Energy and the Underdevelopment Matrix of Sub -Saharan Africa (From the Author’s Research and
> Analysis)

Why It Matters 

The national grids in many Sub -Saharan African countries distribute electricity from hydro -electric 

power stations. In Cameroon, for example, there are three hydro -electric stations: Edea, 

Songloulou and Lagdo. Edea and Songloulou supply the more populous southern part of the 

country while Lagdo supplies the north. This dependence on hydro -electric stations built many 

decades ago is the same in many countries. 

The electricity grids s upplied by these hydro -electric stations are limited to urban centers for two 

main reasons: 

• The power output of the hydro -electric stations is not sufficient to meet the needs of the 

urban and rural populations 

• The rural areas cover wide geographical are as and huge power losses would be incurred 

if the grids were extended to these localities Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 661 

These two factors have been the greatest impediment to the expansion of the national grids to 

the rural areas. For over five decades, many Sub -Saharan African count ries have not overcome 

the problem of grid limitation. One solution is to build more hydro -electric stations but very few 

new stations have been built. The situation is further compounded by demographic factors such 

as the rapid population increase, both i n the urban and rural areas. 

It is now clear that the paradigm of centralized electricity distribution from hydro -electric power 

stations does not provide a solution to the problem of rural electrification. This approach to 

electricity distribution has no t solved the problem of rural electrification for over five decades and 

from all indications, it will not solve the problem even in the next five decades. 

This is why it matters to have a paradigm shift to decentralized standalone micro -grids powered 

by r enewable resources from many localities. 

Methodology 

A four -step methodology is used in the project: 

• Development of the Renewable Energy Map of the South -West Region 

• Design of a Power Generation Schedule for 480 villages which lack electricity in the region 

• Design of Power Generators to supply the villages 

• Development of Partnerships for Project Consolidation, Implementation and Replication 

Development of the Renewable Energy Map of the South -West Region of Cameroon 

The concept of Renewable Energy Map is used to identify the locations of renewable resources 

in a specified geographical area and to quantify the electricity generation potential and 

sustainability of each of the resources. 

The potential of Rene wable Energy in providing electricity to all inhabitants of rural communities 

has long been recognized by many researchers (Rehman, 2021) but the slow pace of tapping this 

great potential is due to the absence of strategies which address sustainability of resources, high 

initial cost and resource mobilization. The concept of Renewable Energy Map is a model of 

sustainability modeling and a tool for the design of low -cost electrification systems. 

The application of the concept to the South -West Region of Cam eroon revealed an abundance 

of four types of renewable resources: 

• Biomass from Empty Palm Fruit Bunches: Palm oil is produced on a massive scale by two 

big Agro -Industries located in the South -West Region of Cameroon: Cameroon 

Development Corporation ( C.D .C .) and PAMOL. The Empty Palm Fruit Bunches, which Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 662 

are residue from palm oil production, are mainly dumped as organic waste. In addition to 

these two agro -industries, thousands of small -scale farmers also produce palm oil and 

dump tons of Empty Palm Frui t Bunches. 

• Fast Flowing Streams and Rivers: The South -West Region is endowed with 16 fast flowing 

streams and rivers with great hydro potential. 

• Waterfalls: The region also has 8 waterfalls with significant hydraulic head. 

• Solar Energy: There is an abundance of solar energy everywhere in the region, but this 

resource is assigned the lowest priority in the Rural Electrification Master Plan because of 

the high cost of community -scale solar systems, compared to other options. Solar Energy 

is used only i n villages which do not have any of the other resources (Empty Palm Fruit 

Bunches, Fast Flowing streams or rivers, Waterfalls). 

Power Generation Schedule for 480 Villages 

From the analysis of the data provided by the Renewable Energy Map, a total of 54 p ower 

generators are required to supply 480 villages which are without electricity in the region. These 

include 18 Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch Biomass generators, 16 run -of -river mini -hydro power 

generators driven by fast flowing streams or rivers, 8 Mini -hydro power generators driven by 

waterfalls and 12 standalone solar power generators. The allocation of these generators to the 

villages is shown in table 1. 

The data used in constructing the Renewable Energy Map was collected by a team of Engineers 

from the Fa culty of Engineering and Technology of the University of Buea. The data acquisition 

process was facilitated by Project Liaison Officers from the 31 Councils (Local Governments) of 

the South -West Region of Cameroon. The Project Liaison Officers were designa ted by the Mayors 

of the Councils (1 per Council). The Liaison Officers selected Local Guides from the communities 

to show the team of Engineers the locations of renewable resources such as waterfalls, dumps 

of empty -palm -fruit bunches, fast -flowing stream s and rivers. 

The Engineers then measured the Hydraulic Heads of the waterfalls and Flow rates of the fast -

flowing streams and rivers, in order to determine their mini -hydro potentials. From the dumps of 

empty -palm -fruit bunches in each location, the Engi neers estimated monthly averages of this 

resource in order to quantify the electricity generation potential and sustainability. The Engineers 

also carried out energy audits of the villages to determine the number of villages which can be 

supplied from each of the power generators. 

The information in table 1 is a synthesis of the data collected by the team of Engineers. The study 

shows that twelve villages are not located near fast -flowing streams or rivers and do not produce 

palm oil. The only sustainable resource for the 12 villages is solar energy. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 663 

Table 1: Power Generation Schedule for the Villages 

No.  Type of Generator  Number of 

Generators 

Number of 

Villages 

1 Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch Biomass  18  206 

2 Run -of -river Mini -hydro driven by 

fast flowing streams or rivers 

16  172 

3 Waterfall -driven Mini -hydro  8 90 

4 Solar  12  12 

Total  54  480 

Design of Power Generators to Supply the Villages 

The objective is to design power generators to facilitate the construction of 54 turn -key power 

stations. Apart from the solar stations which are autonomous systems in each of the 12 villages, 

each of the other generators is designed to supply a group of villages. 

Design of the Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch Biomass Generators 

Each of the 18 biomass power generators was designed to incorporate 3 subsystems: 

• Pelletizer 

• Power Generator 

• Micro -grid 

Design of the Pelletizers 

Pelletization reduces the Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch biomass to pellets which are suitable for 

combustion in the power generation. 

After the collection of the Empty Palm Fruit Bunches, unwanted impurities are manually removed 

and the sizes of the bunches are reduced to fa cilitate drying. The drying is done to reduce the 

moisture content. After the drying process, the pellets are then produced using the pelletization 

machine. Because of the heat involved during this process, they are cooled and then stored for 

usage. These final pellets are the fuel which is fed to the generator. 

Cameroon is endowed with a huge potential of palm biomass. The country produces an estimated 

300,000 tons/year (Rosalien Jezeer and Nick Pasiecznik, 2019). 

Palm trees are rich in biomass and prod uce seven different types of biomass products (Onoja et 

al., 2018). Only one of these biomass products, the Empty Palm Fruit Bunches ( EPFB ), is used Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 664 

in this project. The EPFB accounts for about 23% of the weight of fresh cones of palm nuts. The 

fresh cone s and residual Empty Palm Fruit Bunches are shown in figure 3. 

> Figure 3: Oil Palm Cones and Residual Empty Palm Fruit Bunches

Pelletization reduces the Empty Palm Fruit Bunches into pellets which are suitable for combustion 

in the power generator. Fig ure 4 shows the pelletization process and figure 5 shows the Pellets. 

> Figure 4: EPFB Pellet Making Process

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 665  

> Figure 5: EPFB Pellets

Design of the Power Generators 

Conversion of large quantities of pelletized Empty Palm Fruit Bunches to electricity is done by 

combustion of the pellets in a furnace, to generate high -pressure steam. The operational principle 

is shown in figure 6. 

When the pellets are fed into the combustor, in the presence of excess air, they are burnt in the 

combustor to produce heat. Water is then pumped from the condenser to the combustor using a 

high -pressure pump transforming it into high pressure steam which rotates the steam turbine 

blades. The turbine is mechanically coupled to a generator through a high -speed rotat ing shaft. 

When the shaft rotates, it causes the rotor of the generator to rotate, cutting the flux of the stator 

and generating electricity. The hot air from the combustor goes through the cyclone where tar is 

separated from the air. The solid slag is rec ycled back into the combustor for combustion. The 

solid free air then runs through a scrubber where it is purified by removing toxic gases and dust, 

making the air environmentally friendly and ready for discharge into the atmosphere through the 

chimney. 

One of the smallest generators was designed to supply a village of 200 households requiring 11 

KW of power. The quantity of pellets required to produce this power, for a plant efficiency of 35%, 

operating 24 hours a day was calculated from equation 1 (Olisa & Kotingo, 2014) .

𝑃 = 𝑀𝑄𝑒  

> 𝑡

(1) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 666 

Where P is the electrical power (kW), M is the quantity of pellets in (kg), Q is the net heating value 

of the pellets in (MJ/kg), t is the operational time (hours), and e is the plant efficiency. 

> Figure 6: Operational Principle of the Biomass Power Ge nerator

Design of the Micro -grid 

Each of the 18 Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch biomass generators was sized, based on estimates of 

the biomass available to feed the generators. The sizing provided an estimate of power output 

and this was used to determine the nu mber of villages which could be supplied by each generator. 

A micro -grid was then designed to transport power to the target villages. 14 of the generators 

were sized to supply several villages. Only 4 were sized to supply only one village each. 

Design of Run -of -river Mini -hydro Generators Driven by Fast Flowing Streams or Rivers 

All of the 16 Mini -hydro generators, driven by fast flowing streams and rivers, were designed as 

run -of -river diversion schemes. These are low -cost schemes since they do not incorporate 

reservoirs or dams. The scheme is shown in figure 7. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 667 

> Figure 7: Run -of -River Diversion Scheme

Water is diverted from the main stream or river to create a hydraulic head which is passed through 

the penstock with high energy. The pressu rized water in the penstock rotates the turbine which 

spins the shaft coupled to the generator. The subsystems of the scheme include the intake from 

the river or stream, Desilting tank, Power Canal (headrace), Forebay, Penstock, Power House 

and Tailrace Ca nal. 

The nominal power of the hydro system Phyd is the power produced by the hydro turbine. It is a 

function of Hydraulic Head and Flow Rate. The computation includes the efficiency of the hydro 

turbine but not the pipe head loss. The nominal hydro power is given by equation 2. .

. . . . 1,000, 000 /  

> hyd water design hyd nom

g h Q P W MW 

#  = &

(2) 

Where: 

Phyd,nom is the nominal hydro power output of the hydro turbine (MW) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 668 

hhyd is the hydro turbine efficiency (%) 

ρwater is the density of water (1000kg/m 3)

g is the acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s 2)

hnet is the effective water head (10m) 

Qdesign is the hydro turbine flow rate (15m 3/s and 20m 3/s) 

The application of equation 1 to one of the diversion schemes with a Head of 10m and Flow rate 

of 15m 3/s resulted in a numerical value of 1.1772 MW, obtained from: .

# 0.8 1000 9.81 10 15 1.1772 1,000,000 

> hyd nom

# P MW 

#    = =

The application to a second scheme with a Head of 10m and flow rate of 20m 3/s resulted in a 

numerical value of 1.596 MW, obta ined from: .

# 0.8 1000 9.81 10 20 1.5696 1,000,000 

> hyd nom

# P MW 

#    = =

The calculated  Phyd  values for each of the 18 Mini -hydro Power Generators were used to 

determine the number of villages which could be connected to the micro -grids transporting power 

from the generator to the villages. 

Design of Waterfall -driven Mini -hydro Power Generators 

All of the 8 Waterfall -driven Mini -Hydro Power Generators were designed as Diversion Schemes, 

but the diversions were from the base of each of the waterfalls (ground level). This design option 

maximizes the Hydraulic Head impacting the turbines. The diver sions are very short, compared 

with run -of -river schemes. 

Apart from this structural difference, the technology used in Waterfall -driven Mini -Hydro plants is 

exactly the same as that used in the run -of -river plants (Figure 7). 

A two -step methodology was used for each of the Waterfall -driven mini -hydro power plants :

• Dimensioning and configuration of the Hydraulic System 

• MATLAB Simulation for design of system parameters and testing of system stability and 

robustness to faults Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 669 

Dimensioning and Configuration of the Hydraulic System 

Table 2 shows the design parameters for one of the waterfalls with a Head of 30m and a flow rate 

of 2m 3/s. 

Table 2 Dimensioning of the Hydraulic System for a Waterfall with a Head of 30m 

Intake  Area of intake  1m 2

Flowrate  2 m 2/s 

Velocity  2 m/s 

Settling Basin 

Width  2m 

Length  10 m 

Depth  1.66 m 

Head race  Width  1.33 m 

Forebay  Storage volume  18 m 3/m 

Thrashrack height  1m 

Penstock 

Length  71m 

Diameter  0.76m 

Thickness  2.47mm 

Head loss  1.21m 

Net head  28.79m 

Turbine -Generator 

Turbine type  Francis turbine 

Nominal speed  500 rpm 

Turbine dimension (m)  D3=0.65; D 1=D 2=0.64 

Generator type  Synchronous 

Generator apparent power  584 kVA 

Combined efficiency  0.6 

Generator current  850A 

Generator frequency  50 Hz 

Generator poles  12 

Active power generated  467 kW 

Capacity factor  0.6 

Transformer  Rating  700 kVA 

Primary voltage  400 V 

Secondary voltage  15 kV 

Number of phases  3

MATLAB Simulation for Design of System Parameters and Testing of System Stability and 

Robustness to Faults 

The “ Powergui ” tool in MATLAB was used to automatically calculate the load flows. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 670 

A three -phase line -to -ground fault was introduced at 0.3s and removed at 0.4s. The simulated 

results from the generator, exciter and turbine showed that the response of the system was 

acceptable. The configuration of the system, obtained from the simulation is shown in table 3. 

From the simulation, five graphs were plotted: the turbine speed cha racteristics; the generator 

output voltage characteristics; the generator excitation voltage characteristics; field current 

characteristics; and the stator current were all plotted with respect to time. 

The plant’s ability to overcome faults rapidly and effectively was tested by the introduction of a 

fault. The fault type used was the three -phase line -to -ground fault, which is the most common in 

practice. The fault was initiated at 0.3s and lasted for a period of 0.1s. The following observations 

were mad e: 

• During the duration of the fault, the generated output voltage V a dropped significantly from 

the nominal 1 pu to 0.15pu where stabilised for the duration of the fault. 

• The stator current I abc increased from 1pu to 12 pu and even after the fault was c leared at 

0.4s, the current transients lasted for approximately 0.1s more. 

• The excitation voltage, V f increased from its initial values of 1 pu to 3.5pu during the fault 

and took 0.3s to return to the initial state. 

• The machine speed dropped from the initial value of 1 pu to 0.885 pu and then rose to 

1.118 pu at the start of the fault. The system took approximately 0.3s to attain equilibrium. 

Table 3: System Configuration generated from the MATLAB Simulation 

System Parameter  Value of Parameter 

Power and Voltage Rating of Synchronous 

Machine 

584 kVA 400V 

Nominal Power and Root -mean -Square 

Voltage 

584 kVA 400 V rms 

Bus Type  P & V generator 

Voltage of first Phase of Generator, Uan  400 Vrms [1 pu] -30.15° 

Voltage of second Phase of Generator, Uab  400 Vrms [1 pu] -0.15° 

Voltage of third Phase of Generator , Ubc  400 Vrms [1 pu] -120.15° 

Current of first phase of Generator, Ia  675.77 Arms [0.8017 pu] 

-34.24° 

Current of second phase of Generator, Ib  675.77 A rms [0.8017 pu] 

-154.24° 

Current of third phase of Generator, Ic  675.78 Arms [0.8017 pu] 

85.76° Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 671 

Power  4.67e+05 W [0.7997 pu] 

Mechanical Power, Pmec  4.7282e+05 W [0.8096 

pu] 

Torque  3010 N.m [0.8096 pu] 

Excitation Voltage, Vf:  2.3892 pu 

However, there was an abnormality in the generator excitation response graph. From the literature 

review, it was expected that excitation voltage would be constant (nominal value) at the start, 

then increase during the fault and then return to normal aft er the fault. The observed response 

was different. This was a consequence of the excitation signal from Simulink .

The response of the system to the simulated fault was consistent with the theoretical prediction. 

The voltage induced in a machine is a function of both the Flux linking the machine and the 

synchronous speed of the machine. Consequently, the increase in th e excitation voltage during 

the fault increases the induced flux. 

The machine speed which was expected to increase by the same order of magnitude as the 

excitation voltage, only increased by around 0.012 pu. This is explained by the fact that the speed 

is limited by the maximum flow rate which is only 2m 3/s. The Governor controls the position of 

the Wicket Gates, but the flow rate depends on the availability of flowing water. Furthermore, after 

the fault was removed, at 0.4s, the stator current and speed both oscillated down to their initial 

values before the fault with the latter oscillating for about 0.4s (0.3 -0.7) just around the pre -set 

condition and took longer to stabilize with a possible explanation being the rate of opening or 

closing of the wicke t gates by the governor. 

Design of Solar Power Generators 

The solar power generators for the 12 villages shown on table 1 were all designed as standalone 

(off -grid) systems. Each system was designed in a three -step process which included: 

• Energy Audit of the households in the village 

• Sizing of the battery bank 

• Sizing of the PV Array, Charge Controller and Inverter 

The design process for one of the villages with 200 households is presented. 

Energy Audit 

The Energy Audit for the village with 20 0 households is shown in table 4. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 672 

Table 4: Energy Audit of a Village with 200 households 

Average Daily Energy Consumption per household  1.315 KWh 

Daily Consumption for the community of 200 households  263 KWh 

Power required to supply the energy  10.96 KW 

Sizing of the Battery Bank 

Considering a 240V system, then the Ah rating (Q) of the battery will be given by equation (3). 

𝑄 = 𝐸𝑎𝑐  

> 240

= 292000  

> 240

= 1218 𝐴 ℎ (3) 

This calculation is done considering one day of autonomy. If a 70% Depth of Discharge (DOD )

is considered (Jäger et al., 2014), then the new system battery capacity becomes 

𝑄 = 1218 ÷ 0.7 = 1740 𝐴 ℎ. (4) 

Using 200 Ah, 12V batteries, the total number of batteries ( 𝑛 𝐵𝑎𝑡 ) required are computed from 

equation 5. 

𝑛 𝐵𝑎𝑡 = 1740 ÷ 200 = 9 (5) 

We obtained 9 batteries in parrallel and 20 batteries to be connected in series to give 240V as 

the system voltage since each battery outputs 12V. Therefore the total number of batteries ( 𝑁 𝐵𝑎𝑡 )

is 

𝑁 𝐵 𝑎𝑡 = 9 × 20 = 180 (6) 

The sizing of the battery bank is summarized in table 5. 

Table 5: Sizing of the Battery Bank 

Power Rating of Battery  1740 Ah 

Number of batteries  180 

Number of rows of batteries  9

Number of batteries connected in series in each row  20 

Sizing of the PV Array, Charge Controller and Inverter 

Considering a battery efficiency of 90%, 5% manufacturer’s tolerance and 3% cable losses [5], 

then the PV array current ( 𝐼 𝑃𝑉 ) r equirement is given by equation (7). 

𝐼 𝑃𝑉 (𝐴 ℎ) = 1740 ÷ 0.9 ÷ 0.97 = 1993 𝐴 ℎ (7) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 673 

Considering the worst months in the wet season with daily peak sun hours of 4.5 hours, then the 

current requirement of the PV array will be 

𝐼 𝑃𝑉 (𝐴 ) = 1993 ÷ 4.5 = 1136 .38 ÷ 4.5 = 443 𝐴 (8) 

Using the PV module of table 4, the current can be modified to 

𝐼 𝑃𝑉 _𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒 = 9.16 × 0.95 × 0.95 = 8.27 𝐴 

Therefore the number of modules ( 𝑛 𝑃𝑉 _𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒 ) to be connected in parallel is 

𝑛 𝑃𝑉 _𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒 = 443 ÷ 8.27 = 54 (8) 

The number of modules to be connected in series is 10, to give an input voltage of 240V to the 

charge controller since each module has a nominal voltage of 24V. 

The total numb er of modules 𝑁 𝑃𝑉 _𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒 

𝑁 𝑃𝑉 _𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑙𝑒 = 54 × 10 = 540 (9) 

Table 6: Sizing of the PV Array, Charge Controller and Inverter 

Subsystem  Characteristics  Value 

PV Array 

Technology  Silicon -Crystalline 

Rated Power  300 Watts 

Nominal Voltage  30.2 Volts 

Nominal Current  9.6 Amperes 

Short Circuit Current  9.6 Amperes 

Open Circuit Voltage  40.1 Volts 

Number of Panels connected in 

parallel 

54 

Number of modules connected 

in series 

10 

Total Number of Panels  540 

Charge 

Controller 

Rating  100 A 

Charge Controller Current  554 A 

Inverter  Rating  15 KW 

The charge controller current ( 𝐼 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟 ) is evaluated by equation (10) 

𝐼 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑟 = 1.25 × 443 = 554 𝐴 . (10) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 674 

The factor 1.25 (Ammar Alkhalidi, 2017) provides a margin of safety which protects the charge 

controller. Using a 100A charge controller, 6 charge controllers are ne eded. 

The Inverter was also sized to withstand the load demand. Considering the 10.958 kW which is 

the required output power to produce energy for 24 hours, the inverter size is calculated from 

equation (11). 

𝑃 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟 = 11 × 1.25 = 13 .75 𝐾𝑊 (11) 

This implies that an inverter rated at 15kW is suitable for the system. 

Development of Partnerships for Project Consolidation, Implementation and Replication 

Partnership for Project Implementation 

The project has now reached the construction phase. According to the Memorandum of 

Understanding between the University of Buea and the thirty -one Councils of the South -West 

Region of Cameroon, the responsibility for the construction of the Rural Electrification Systems is 

jointly shared by the thirty -one Councils and the Faculty of Engineering and Technology of the 

University of Buea. 

The role of the thirty -one Councils is resource mobilization. The Councils are presently sourcing 

for financial resources for the constru ction of the 54 Power Plants. Each Council will finance the 

construction of the plants within its Council area. 

The role of the Faculty of Engineering and Technology is the construction of the plants. In return, 

the Faculty will be paid consultancy fees b y the Councils. An agreement has already been 

reached on the amount of fees to be paid by each Council. This will significantly empower the 

Faculty to embark on other outreach activities. The resource mobilization by each Council will 

raise enough funds to cover both the procurement of equipment and payment of consultancy fees 

to the Faculty. 

Development of a Triple Helix Partnership for Extension of the Project to Other Parts of 

Cameroon 

Many Mayors from Councils of other Regions of Cameroon have expressed interest in the Rural 

Electrification Project between the University of Buea and the thirty -one Councils of the South -

West Region. This has caused the University of Buea to lobby several Government Line Ministries 

as well as Electricity Companies operating in Cameroon, to initiate a Triple Helix Partnership 

between Universities, Government and Power Industries. The purpose of the partnership is to 

provide a framework for extending the Rur al Electrification Project to the other Regions of 

Cameroon. The Government Line Ministries solicited for this partnership include the Ministry of 

Water and Energy; Ministry of Higher Education; Ministry of Scientific Research and Innovation; 

Ministry of I ndustrial Development; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Economy and Plan. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 675 

The broad outline of the Partnership has been elaborated. One University will be selected from 

each Region of Cameroon to develop the Renewable Energy Map of the Region and the Rura l

Electrification Master Plan for the Region. The University of Buea will coordinate and supervise 

the work of all the Universities involved in the project. 

The Electricity companies will build the Power Plants which are designed by the Universities. 

The Central Government will give tax exemption to the Electricity Companies for a period of five 

years, to enable them devote their resources to investment in the power plants. 

Partnerships for Capacity Building and Replication of the Project in other Countri es of 

Sub -Saharan Africa 

The University of Buea has developed partnerships with seven African Universities to build 

capacity in Renewable Energy on the African continent. These partnerships are within the 

framework of two European Union Intra -Africa Mobility Projects, funded in the 2019 round of 

projec ts. 

One project, MASTET (Mobility of African Scholars for Transformative Engineering Training), is 

implemented by a Consortium of five African Universities, including the University of Buea, in 

Cameroon, Makerere University, in Uganda, Stellenbosch Univer sity, in South Africa, Abomey 

Calavi University, in Benin, and Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 

Twenty -four African Scholars from 20 countries are currently being trained in Masters and PhD 

programmes offered by the Partner Univers ities. By the time the MASTET project ends, a total of 

thirty -four African scholars will have been trained. 

The second project, MIRET (Mobility for Innovative Renewable Energy Technologies), is 

implemented by another Consortium of five Universities, incl uding the University of Buea, Moi 

University, in Kenya, Makerere University, University of Sfax, in Tunisia and the University of 

Zambia. Thirty students are currently being trained at the Masters and PhD levels in programmes 

in the domain of Renewable Ene rgy. By the time the MIRET project ends, a total of forty African 

scholars will have been trained. 

Many of the MASTET and MIRET students are currently doing their research projects on various 

Rural Electrification thematic areas. This is a concrete strate gy to build capacity across Africa. 

The Partner Universities share their expertise and experience in various Renewable Energy 

Technologies. 

The project reported in this paper is already shared with other Partner Universities and is widely 

regarded as one of the best practices in the continental rural electrification drive. It can, therefore, 

be expected that many other countries will leverage and replicate the project. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 676 

Results 

The results of the project are six -fold: 

i. A Renewable Energy Map of the Sou th -West Region of Cameroon has been developed. 

ii. The Renewable Energy Map has been used to develop a Rural Electrification Master Plan 

for the Region. 

iii. The Master Plan includes the Design of 54 Power Plants to supply electricity to 480 

villages. The Power Plants include 18 Empty -Palm -Fruit -Bunch Biomass Generators; 16 

Run -of -River Mini -Hydro Power Stations, driven by fast flowing rivers and streams; 8 

Waterfall -driven Mini -Hydro Power plants and 12 Solar Power Plants. 

iv. The Renewable Energy Map provide s an innovative model of sustainability management 

and a tool for low -cost design of rural electrification systems. 

v. The project is an innovative case study which can be leveraged and replicated in other 

Sub -Saharan African countries to accelerate the atta inment of SDG7, in particular, and 

other energy -dependent SDGs, in general. The replication of the project in other parts of 

Sub -Saharan Africa will also impact the continental visions of Agenda 2063 and STISA -

2024. 

vi. The project is a concrete example of Un iversity/Local Government Partnership 

The impact of the project will be measured by three indicators: 

• The number of power generators built in the South -West Region 

• % increase in access to electricity by rural populations of the region 

• Number of regions which replicate the project in Cameroon 

Conclusions 

Five conclusions are drawn from the project: 

i. Renewable Energy Maps serve a dual purpose as a paradigm for sustainability modelling 

and a tool for the design of low -cost Rural Electrification Master Plans. 

ii. The application of the paradigm to the South -West Region of Cameroon has facilitated the 

identification of the renewable resources of the Region and quantif ication of the electricity 

generation potential of each of the resources. The Renewable Energy Map of the Region Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 677 

has revealed an abundance of four types of renewable resources: Empty -Palm -Fruit -

Bunch Biomass; Fast Flowing rivers and streams; Waterfalls an d Solar Energy 

iii. The Renewable Energy Map developed for the South -West Region of Cameroon has also 

facilitated the development of a Rural Electrification Master Plan for the Region. One 

deliverable in the Master Plan is a Power Generation Schedule which ass igns 54 Power 

Generators to 480 villages, based on the renewable resources which are closest to each 

of the villages. 

iv. The project, which is the fruit of a partnership between the University of Buea and the 

thirty -one Councils of the South -West Region of C ameroon, is a concrete example of how 

University/Local Government partnership can be used to positively impact the attainment 

of SDGs 

v. The project is a concrete case study which can be replicated across Sub -Saharan Africa, 

to accelerate the attainment of S DG7, in particular, and energy -dependent SDGs, in 

general. 

The project opens several perspectives for further work. These include: 

• Construction of the Power Plants by the Faculty of Engineering and Technology of the 

University of Buea, in collaboration w ith the thirty -one Councils of the Soth -West Region 

which are currently involved in the resource mobilization drive. 

• Future recruitment of Power Systems Engineers trained by the Faculty of Engineering and 

Technology to serve as Power Plant Operators in th e newly constructed plants. 

• Extension of the project to other Regions of Cameroon on the basis of numerous requests 

from the Mayors of the other Regions 

• Operationalising the Triple Helix Partnership between the Cameroon Government, the 

Universities and t he Electricity Companies operating in Cameroon, to provide a framework 

for extending the project to every Region of Cameroon 

Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the thirty -one Mayors of the municipalities of 

the South -West Region of Cameroon. The resource persons provided by the Mayors facilitated Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 678 

the development of the Renewable Energy Map. The resource persons a ccompanied the 

technical team from the Faculty of Engineering and Technology in the field trips to the forests. 

Their knowledge of the villages and ecosystems of the Council areas was fundamental to the 

development of a comprehensive Renewable Energy Map. 

References 

Abanda, F., 2012. Renewable energy sources in Cameroon: Potentials, benefits and enabling 

environment. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16, 4557 –4562. 

Al Dula imi, N.H., 2017. Design of an Off -Grid Solar PV System for a Rural Shelter. German 

Jordanian University. 

Antonio Castellano, Adam Kendall, Mikhail Nikomarov, Tarryn Swemmer, 2015. Brighter Africa: 

The growth potential of the Sub -Saharan electricity sector . McKinsey & Company. 

An Introduction to hydropower Concepts and planning [WWW Document], n.d. . Guide Hydro 

Power. URL http://www.canyonhydro.com/guide/Guide%20to%20Hydropower.pdf. 

(accessed 3.23.22). 

Asan, V., Abdullahi, A., Salman,A. , Razeman,M., Ruz airi, A., and Abu, B., 2015. Renewable 

Energy potentials in cameroon: Prospects and Challenges. Renewable Energy, 75 

(2014), 560 -565. 

Azimoh, C.L., Klintenberg, P., Wallin, F., Karlsson, B., Mbohwa, C., 2016. Electricity for 

development: Mini -grid solution for rural electrification in South Africa. Energy Convers. 

Manag. 110, 268 –277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.12.015 

Basnyat, D., 2006. Fundamentals of Small Hydro Power Technologies - Training 

BACKGROUND MATERIAL [WWW Documen t]. URL 

ttps://www.researchgate.net/publication/331132575_Fundamentals_of_Small_Hydro_Po 

wer_Technologies_ -_Training_BACKGROUND_MATERIAL (accessed 3.23.22). 

British Hydropower Association, 2012. A GUIDE TO UK MINI -HYDRO DEVELOPMENTS 

[WWW Document]. URL htt ps://www.british -hydro.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/A -

Guide -to -UK -mini -hydro -development -v3.pdf 

Canyon Hydro, n.d. Guide to Hydropower: An introduction to hydropower concepts and 

planning. Canyon Industries. Inc. 

Chhetri, A.B., Pokharel, G.R., Islam, M .R., 2009. Sustainability of micro -hydro systems -a case 

study. Energy Env. 20. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 679 

Colorado Energy Office, 2012. Colorado Small hydropower Handbook. The Colorado Energy 

Office. 

Duane Castaldi, Eric Chastain, Morgan Windram, Lauren Ziatyk, 2003. A Study of Hydroelectric 

Power: From a Global Perspective to a Local Application. College of Earth and Mineral 

Sciences The Pennsylvania State University. 

FICHTNER, n.d. Hydroelectric Power A Guide for Developers and Investors [WWW Document]. 

URL https://ww w.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/906fa13c -2f47 -4476 -9476 -

75320e08e5f3/Hydropower_Report.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=kJQl35z. (accessed 

3.23.22). 

Friedrich Sick, Thomas Erge, 1996. Photovoltaics in Buildings: A Design Handbook for 

Architects and Engineers, 1st ed. Routl edge. 

Gaelle, D., Xicang, Z., 2018. Current Status of Renewable Energy in Cameroon. North 

American Academic Research. 

Gebrehiwot, K., Mondal, M. A. H., Ringler, C., & Gebremeskel, A. G., 2019. Optimization and 

cost -benefit assessment of hybrid power syst ems for off -grid rural electrification in 

Ethiopia. Energy, 177, 234 –246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.04.095 

GTZ, 2010. Policy and regulatory framework conditions for small hydro power in Sub -Saharan 

Africa [WWW Document]. Eur. Union Energy Init iat. Euei. URL http://kerea.org/wp -

content/uploads/2012/12/Policy -and -regulatory -framework -conditions -for -small -hydro -

power -in -Sub -Saharan -Africa.pdf (accessed 3.23.22). 

Jäger, K., Isabella, O., Smets, A., Swaaij, R.A., Zeman, M., 2014. Solar Energy Funda mentals, 

Technology, and Systems. Delft University of Technology, Delft. 

Kalitsi, E.A.K., n.d. Hydropower Development in Africa [WWW Document]. URL 

https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/statements/3209nepadkalitsi_ppt.pdf (accessed 

3.16.22). 

Kenfack, J ., Neirac, F.P., Tatietse, T.T., Mayer, D., Fogue, M., Lejeune, A., 2009. Microhydro -

PV -hybrid system: Sizing a small hydro -PV -hybrid system for rural electrification in 

developing countries. Renew. Energy 34, 2259 –2263. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.20 08.12.038 

Kenfack, J., Bossou, O. V., Voufo, J., Djom, S., & Crettenand, N., 2016. New Renewable 

Energy Promotion Approach for Rural Electrification in Cameroon. II. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319 -18215 -5Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 680 

khurana, S., Kumar, A., 2011. Small hydropowe r, A Review. International Journal of 

Engineering, Science and Metallurgy 1, 278 –282. 

Lombardi, V., 1990. A Practical Guide to Solar Power System Design For Homeowners, Solar 

Power 101. Virginia Tech. 

Muh, E., Amara, S., & Tabet, F., 2018. Sustainable en ergy policies in Cameroon: A holistic 

overview. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 82, 3420 –3429. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.049 

Muh, E., & Tabet, F., 2017. Sustainable energy policies in Cameroon : A holistic overview. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.10.049 

Muh, E., & Tabet, F., 2019. Comparative analysis of hybrid renewable energy systems for off -

grid applications in Southern Cameroons.  Renewable Energy, 135, 41 –54. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.11.105 

Mur ugaperumal, K., Srinivasn, S., & Satya Prasad, G. R. K. D., 2020.  Optimum design of hybrid 

renewable energy system through load forecasting and different operating strategies for 

rural electrification. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 37, 1 00613. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2019.100613 

Nafu, Y. R., Foba -tendo, J., Njeugna, E., Oliver, G., & Cooke, K. O., 2015.  Extraction and 

Characterization of Fibres from the Stalk and Spikelets of Empty Fruit Bunch. Journal of 

Applied Chemistry, 2015, 1–10. 

Nasir, B.A., 2013.Design of micro -hydro electric power station . IJEAT 2, 39 –47. 

Naveen, R., Revankar, P. P., & Rajanna, S., 2020. Integration of renewable energy systems for 

optimal energy needs -a review. International Journal of Renewable Energy Research, 

10(2), 727 –742. 

Nasir, B., 2018.Matlab Simulation Procedure for Design of Micro -Hydro Electric power Plant. 

IOSR Journal of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (IOSR -JEEE), 13(4), 31 -45. 

Olisa, Y. P., & Kotingo, K. W., 2014. Utilization of palm empty fruit bunch (pefb) as solid fuel for 

steam boiler. European Journal of Engineering and Technology, 2(2), 1 –7. 

Onoja, E., Chandren, S., Ilyana, F., Razak, A., Arafat, N., & Wahab, R. A., 2018. Oil Palm ( 

Elaeis guineensis ) Bioma ss in Malaysia : The Present and Future Prospects. Waste and 

Biomass Valorization, 0(0), 0. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649 -018 -0258 -1Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 681 

Pacific Northwest, 2009. Washington State University Extension Energy Program: Solar Electric 

System Design, Operation a nd Installation. An Overview for Builders in the U.S [WWW 

Document]. Dir. Organ. URL (accessed 3.17.22). 

Pal, A.M., Das, S., Raju, N.B., 2015. Designing of a standalone Photovoltaic System for a 

Residential Building in Gurgaon, India. Sustainable energy 2 , 14 –24. 

Panhwar, I., Sahito, A.R., Dursun, S., 2017. Designing Off -Grid and On -Grid Renewable Energy 

Systems Using HOMER Pro Software 12, 7. 

Pasalli, Y.R., Rehiara, A.B., 2014.  Design Planning of Micro -hydro Power Plant in Hink River | 

Elsevier Enhanced Reader. Procedia Environmental Sciences 20, 55 –63. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2014.03.009 

Patel, 2015. Generating Equipment, in: International Conference on Hydropower for Sustainable 

Development. Dehradun, India. 

Penche, C., 1998. Layman’s Guidebook on How to Develop a Small Hydro Site. European 

Small Hydropower Association (ESHA). 

Power Africa., 2019. Off -Grid Solar Market Assessment Cameroon. 

Ramos, H., Belfast, N., 2000. Guidelines for Design of Small Hydropower Plants. WREAN 

(Western Regional Energy Agency and Network) 205. 

Rehman, S., 2021. Hybrid power systems – Sizes, efficiencies, and economics. Energy 

Exploration and Exploitation, 39(1), 3 –43. https://doi.org/10.1177/0144598720965022 

Rosalien Jezeer, Nick Pasiecznik, 201 9. Exploring inclusive palm oil production. ETFRN News 

59. 

Saleh, U., Haruna, Y.S., Onuigbo, F.I., 2015. Design and Procedure for Stand -Alone 

Photovoltaic Power System for Ozone Monitor Laboratory at Anyigba, North Central 

Nigeria. International Journal of Engineering Science and Innovative Technology (IJSIT) 

6, 41 –52. 

ScienceDirect, n.d. Hydro Power [WWW Document]. URL 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/engineering/hydro -power (accessed 3.16.22). 

Suarez, R.A., Toscano, P., Siri, R., Muse, P., Abal, G ., 2012.  Recent advances in solar resource 

assessment in Uruguay, in: 2012 Sixth IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution: Latin 

America Conference and Exposition (T&D -LA). Uruguay. 

United Nations., 2015. Sustainable Development Goals. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 682 

United Nations., 202 0. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020. 

https://doi.org/https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2020/The -Sustainable -Development -

Goals -Report -2020.pdf 

World Bank, 2015. Evaluation of Rural Electrification Concessions in Sub -Saharan Africa. 

Detailed Case Study:Cameroon [WWW Document]. URL 

http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/361311498151364762/pdf/116642 -WP -

PUBLIC -P150241 -20p -Detailed -Case -Study -Cam eroon -20151204 -No -Logo.pdf 

(accessed 3.23.22). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 683 

# Improvement of the Livelihoods of Rural Populations 

# of Sub -Saharan Africa through Post -harvest and Cook 

# Technologies Powered by Renewable Resources (SDG7) 

Nde Nguti, Divine Ngwashi , and Emmanuel Tanyi 

(University of Buea, Cameroon) 

Abstract 

In this research project, the thermal performance of a low -cost solar box cooker/dryer 

incorporating booster concentrators with optimum dimensions has been investigated. To achieve 

this, a dou ble V -trough solar concentrator was designed to concentrate the incident solar 

irradiance onto the absorber window of the solar box cooker/dryer tray. The introduction of the 

solar concentrator increased the direct insolation by a factor of 2.1. In order t o extend the 

drying/cooking time further beyond dusk, the effect of the energy storage material (basaltic rocks) 

was also studied. The solar cooker incorporating the rocks was found to have slightly reduced 

performance, as shown by the reduction in the fir st figure of merit F1 from 0.07 Km 2W-1 to 0.06 

Km 2W-1, an effect also predicted by (Verma et al., 2022 ). Experiments conducted on three system 

configurations (system with no basaltic rocks; system wit h 1 Kg of 5.6 mm pellets of basaltic rocks; 

system with 1 kg of 13 mm pellets of basaltic rocks) revealed that the reduction of performance 

(F1), due to the use of pellets of basaltic rocks, is independent of pellet size. The project is 

motivated by the ne ed for low -cost, dual -function, non -intermittent cooker/dryers for use in Sub -

Saharan Africa. 

Keywords: Solar drying, Solar Cooker, Solar Concentrator, Double V -trough Solar Concentrator, 

Energy storage Materials 

Introduction 

Brief Review of Solar Thermal Systems and Operation 

Solar Cooking 

Most solar cookers currently in use are relatively cheap to operate since no fuel is required. The 

uptake of these cookers has a major role to play in the fight against rising fuel prices, air pollution 

as well as slowing down the deforestation and desertification caused by the gathering of firewood 

for cooking (Abd -Elhady et al., 2020 ). The solar cooker was first demonstrated by a Swiss 

Scientist in 1767 (Garg et al., 1998 ) and cont inues to attract the interest of Engineers and 

Scientists the world over. Despite this early discovery and the availability of low cost solar cooker 

versions, the uptake of solar cooker as a household cooking stove remains low (Otte, 2014 ,

Panwar et al., 2012 ). Efforts are continuously being made to make solar cookers more user 

friendly, attractive and practicable for developing and developed countries (Nkhonjera et al., Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 684 

2017 ). In many countries with abundant annual solar radiation, the uptake of solar cookers has 

been observed to increa se (Mendoza et al., 2019 ). A comparison of solar cookers with other 

conventional cooking methods reported that, the solar box cookers are the most used among the 

different types of solar cookers. 

Energy requirements for cooking food remains one of the primary factors affecting the total energy 

consumption and consequently greenhouse gas emission the world over. Solar cooking offers an 

appropriate and practical solution as an inexpensive, green and renewable energy technology. 

The solar cooking technology can be divided into three main categories based on the different 

solar cooker structures: (i) box types, (ii) concentrating types, and (iii) panel types. These three 

different designs are also class ified according to their direct or indirect heat transfer modes and 

the use of optional equipment for latent heat and sensible heat type thermal storage units. The 

continuous rise in the level of greenhouse gas emissions and the increase in fuel prices rem ain 

the main driving forces behind efforts to seek alternative and to more effectively utilize sources of 

renewable energy. Apart from cooking, solar cookers could be utilized for warming food, drinks 

as well as to pasteurize water or milk (Panchal et al., 2018 , Rossi et al., 2019 ). In this regard, 

solar cookers h ave been observed to significantly improve energy security as well as reduce the 

reliance of energy consumption on the traditional fossil fuel based options, which have serious 

adverse effects on the environment via the greenhouse gases they emit (Wentzel et al., 2007 , Al -

Soud et al., 2010 ). In order to effectively collect the solar energy required for the cooking process, 

a number of different types of solar collectors have been designed, developed and studied. 

Solar cookers vary in design type and each of these designs are continually bei ng improved over 

time. Some of these solar cooker types include: the solar panel cooker, solar parabolic cooker 

and the solar box cookers.   

> Figure 35 : Types of solar cookers: (a) solar panel cooker; (b) solar parabolic cooker; and (c) solar box cooker (
> Cuce et al., 2013 ).

The solar panel cookers have a simple and inexpensive construction. They can be easily folded 

over and stored or transported in back packs. As a result of this, they are very common among 

communities. These type of cookers, however, suffer from low cooking power due to the fact that 

they concentrate sunlight from above only. However, their easy portability and convenience Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 685 

makes them desirable to people who are continuously on the move. The cooking vessel in the 

case of a panel cooker is enclose d in a cooking bag (a transparent plastic bag). 

The parabolic solar cookers have been very attractive due to their exceptional performances. 

Solar parabolic cookers have the capability of attaining extremely high temperatures in a very 

short time interval , and unlike the panel cookers and box solar cookers, they do not need a special 

cooking vessel. As a result of strong heating capability of parabolic cookers, the cooker can burn 

food if left unattended for some time because of the concentrated power deli very. A solar parabolic 

cooker consists of a parabolic reflector with a cooking pot which is located at the focus of the 

parabolic dish and a stand to support the cooking system. Parabolic solar cookers have 

concentration ratios as high as 50 and so can ac hieve high temperatures of up to 400 °C, much 

higher than temperatures observed in solar box cookers (Fatiha Yettou et al., 2018 ). The main 

drawbacks of the parabolic solar cooker are the dependence on solar tracking, a constant 

attention to prevent the burning of foods and fire out breaks during operation (Al -Soud et al., 

2010 ).This cooker is often used in conjunction with heat storage materials to improve energy 

availability (Senthil, 20 21 ). It has been through the use of automatic solar trackers in parabolic 

cookers that water temperatures of 90 0C could be attained easily (Al -Soud et al., 2010 ).

The solar box cooker is the most attractive to households in terms of cost and simplicity. A simple 

construction of a box type solar cooker is shown in 

Figure 38  below.It is worth noting that each of the components of the box cooker has a significant 

influence on cooking power and performance. These components remain a subject of research 

to many researchers. The optimization of these parameters has been the main pathway f or the 

improvement of the system performance. Box type solar cookers have been reported to show 

slow heat up to maximum temperature, but work well even in low irradiation, intermittent cloud 

cover, low ambient temperature and in windy conditions (Telkes, 1959 ). Recently, researchers 

have focused their attention more especially on the optimization of geometric parameters of solar 

box cookers since these have been found to have a dominant effect on its performance. In line 

with this approach, many resear chers have been analyzing the effects of booster mirrors on the 

performance of the box -type solar cookers. Booster mirrors have been reported to have a strong 

influence on the efficiency of solar collectors via the provision of extra solar radiation (Dang, 

1986 ). It was later found that the performance enhancement using booster mirrors was found to 

dependent strongly on the choice of the angle of the mirrors (Garg et al., 1988 ).

Many other researchers have focused on the glazing factor in solar box cookers as a means of 

performance enhancement (Mirdha et al., 2008 , Eckert et al., 1996 , Deubener et al., 2009 , Akhtar 

et al., 1999 ). Common glazing material used in the construction of box -type solar cookers include 

glass, fibreglass, and acrylics. Single glazed glass and double g lazed glass are the most common 

structures which have been demonstrated to have high transmission. Optimization of the gap 

between glass panes is also another significant problem since a large air gap may encourage 

convective heat transfer and result in hi gher heat loss. Air gaps in the range of 1 – 2 cm have 

been recommended (Saxena et al., 2011 , Eckert et al., 1996 , Deubener et al., 2009 ). The 

absorber plate inside the cooker emits long wavelength radiation towards the glazing glass, 

absorption of this radiation by the glass results in the increase in temperature, hence heat loss Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 686 

from the cooker to the surrounding atmosphere is possible. As a remedy to the energy lo ss via 

the glazing glass, Kalogirou proposed the use of transparent insulators for the glazing material 

(Kalogirou, 2004 , Kalogirou, 2003 ).

The absorber plate at the bottom of the box -type cooker has also been found to have a 

significant effect on the performance of the solar box cooker. The solar radiation that enters the 

cooker through the glazing window is absorbed by the absorber plate whi ch is usually painted 

black to improve its efficiency. An absorber plate is usually characterized by its absorptivity. The 

higher the absorptivity, the higher the heat energy it will be able to transfer to the food in the 

cooking vessel (Garg Hp et al., 2004 ). It has also been demonstrated that fin -like absorber plates 

(

Figure 36 ) exhibit better performance by upto 7 % (Harmim et al., 2010 ). 

> Figure 36 : (a) Schematic of the finned absorber plate; (b) conventional (A) and improved (B) solar box cooker
> (Harmim et al., 2010 ).

Solar Drying 

One of the most common post -harvest preservation techniques is by drying. Drying of food and 

fruits during peak seasons has the potential of improving food security throughout the year. Solar 

drying can be achieved by drying the food products in direct sun light. This technique is cheap to 

implement, however, apart from exhibiting a slow rate of drying, it also exposes the food crops to 

contamination. This results in the need for controlled drying systems for different agricultural 

products. Most conventiona l dryers are operated by coal, oil or firewood. Due to the emissions of 

greenhouse gases by these fuels there is need for alternative controlled drying systems such as 

solar dryers. 

Solar dryers could be classified into two main categories: direct and in direct solar dryers. The 

direct solar dryer involves directly exposing the material to be dried to the sun. While in the indirect 

dryer, the material is dried by circulating hot air over it without direct exposure to sunlight. The air 

circulation is achiev ed by use of an external fan or natural convection, resulting in active and 

passive solar dryers respectively (Figure 3). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 687   

> Figure 37 : (a) A passive indirect solar dryer, (b) passive direct dryer (Gupta et al., 1982 ).

From 3 above, the solar dryers generally come in the form of a hot box, in which fruit, vegetables 

or other food materials can be dried. It is often made of a rectangular box made from cheap and 

readily available materials such as p lywood, bricks, concretes and aluminium sheets - insulated 

at the base and sides and covered with a single and double layered transparent glazing material. 

Solar radiation is transmitted through the glazing surface and absorbed on the blackened interior 

su rfaces of the dryer. Due to the insulation, the internal temperature is much higher than the 

external temperature. In order to facilitate convection within the dryer, holes are drilled through 

the base of the dryer to permit fresh air to circulate into the dryer cabinet. Outlet holes are also 

drilled at the upper parts of the dryer, sides and rear panels and this helps to remove the moisture 

from the drying chamber. When the temperature inside the dryer increases, hot moist air passes 

out of the upper apert ures by natural convection creating a partial vacuum and creating a drag on 

the fresh air at the bottom, upwards through the base. This results in a constant flow of air over 

the drying material, which is placed on perforated trays, on the floor of the dry er, as shown in 

figure 4.   

> Figure 38 : Components of a typical solar box type cooker (Saxena et al., 2011 )

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 688 

Thermal Energy Storage Materials 

Due to the intermittent nature of solar energy, thermal energy heat storage materials form an 

important part of the construction of solar cookers/dryer systems (Nkhonjera et al., 2017 , Buddhi 

et al., 2003 , Anilkumar et al., 2022 ). In particular, solar cookers without heat storage materials 

have a major drawback that f ood can only be cooked during sunshine hours. This means that 

food which is near completely cooked cannot be cooked to completion once night falls or when 

there is a sudden change in weather condition such as rain and cloud cover. Thus, the large scale 

uti lization of this form of energy is not possible unless there is effective implementation of an 

efficient storage technology that can be developed with minimal capital and running costs. The 

incorporation of phase change materials (PCMs) in solar box cooker s as thermal energy storage 

(TES) media has been found to show significant improvement in the performance of the cooker 

mainly due to their high energy storage density capability (Mullick et al., 1987 , Sharma et al., 

2000 ). However, sensible heat storage materials have been found to be readily available and at 

minimal cost. Such materials may exist in either liquid or solid form and include materials such as 

sand, locally available rocks (basalts, granite, bricks, clay, pebbles, concretes, wood and 

limestone) and water (liquid form). (Muthusivagami et al., 2010 ), Nkhonjera et al., 2017) have 

demonstrated that ther e was no significant difference in cooking power between cookers made 

with sensible heat storage materials and PCMs. The effectiveness of these storage materials is 

strongly dependent on their specific heat capacities and densities.  Table 1 below shows the 

thermal properties of some of the aforementioned sensible thermal storage materials. In addition 

to these, properties, these materials have long term ch emical stability and non -toxic.PCM. They 

are vulnerable to degradation by loss of water or hydration, chemical decomposition or 

incompatibility with materials of the cooker construction while some can be potentially flammable 

and explosive in nature, posin g a serious safety challenge. 

Table 1: Thermal Properties of some Common Heat Storage Materials 

Medium  Density ρ (kgm -3) Specific heat 

capacity (Jkg -1K-1)

Basalts  3000  840 

Granite  2750  890 

Sand  2200  712 

Bricks  1698  840 

Pebbles  2700  880 

Concretes  2200  750 

Wood  700  2390 

Limestone  2500  900 

Water  1000  4190 

Clay  1458  879 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 689 

Health and Economic Benefits of Solar Cookers/Dryers 

Apart from the enormous environmental benefits that solar energy cookers offer, they also offer 

economic, health and productivity benefits to the end users (Achudume, 2009 , Heltberg, 2004 ,

Pattanayak et al., 2009 , Nandwani, 1996 ). Households using solar cookers/dryers are expected 

to make savings on cooking fuel as well as reduce their dependency on wood. It has been 

estimated that up to 36% savings can be made (Farh ar, 1998 ). It is believed that solar cookers 

will increase fuel security amongst underprivileged households (Wentzel and Pouris, 2007 ).

Despite these benefits, the penetration of solar cookers as an alternative cooking method 

depends strongly on the cost of the system. Thus, the vulgarisation of solar cookers in any 

community depends strongly on the cost of the solar cooker system compared to the available 

alternative solid fuels (Otte, 2013 ).

As an alternative to cooking with biomass, a common fuel in developing countries, a solar 

cooker/dryer presents itself as a healthy alternative (Matinga, 2010 , Schlag et al., 2008 ). Health 

hazards related to biomass such as firewood include the production of smoke and trekking over 

long distances to gather firewood. Furthermore, solar cook er/dryers improve energy security, 

leading to improvement in overall welfare (De Lange et al., 2002 , Clancy, 2002 , Bates et al., 

2005 ). Exposure to smoke pollutants has the potential to cause serious respiratory damage and 

cancer. Transporting firewood by head, a common practice in developing countries can lead to 

physical injuries and (Sovacool, 201 2, Wentzel and Pouris, 2007 ).

Purpose 

Solar cookers can serve three important purposes: reduction in domestic cooking costs by 

decreasing the need for purchase or collection of fuel especially done by women; reduction in 

postharvest losses hence aiding in value addition and food processing activities such as drying, 

blanching, pasteurization, boiling, stewing, frying and conservation of fuels for other uses, such 

as fertilizer in the case of dung, forest prote ction and erosion control in the saving of wood and 

charcoal. A major challenge to delivering on solar based stoves and technologies is using locally 

available materials and capacity building programmes to fabricate and implement these 

technologies and inn ovations at grass root level while assuring quality, cross -learning, resource 

sharing and rationalized use. While efficient harnessing of solar energy can mitigate many of 

SSA’s energy problems, this paper focuses on exploitation of solar energy for cookin g using solar 

cookers. 

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are designed to improve on the welfare of the 

world’s population. The majority of the population of Sub -Sahara Africa (SSA) resides in the rural 

areas. To these people, food security and suff iciency are the most impactful factors in their 

wellbeing. The form of energy used by this rural population for cooking and post -harvest 

preservation is predominantly firewood and charcoal. Their continuous use of firewood leads to 

the creation of greenhou se gases (GHGs), deforestation, health related issues as a result of 

smoke inhalation and the loss of quality free time by especially women and children who have to 

trek long distances to fetch firewood. The sustainable development of Sub -Saharan Africa i sWhy It Matters Vol. 1 | 690 

greatly undermined by the needs of the rural inhabitants. A large proportion of harvested crops 

perish because of the absence of basic post -harvest technologies for their preservation. Amongst 

the renewable energy alternatives, the application of solar -thermal energy to domestic cooking 

and post -harvest crop preservation appears to be the most promising alternative to firewood use. 

Therefore in this work, we propose a concrete realization of an aspect of Sustainable 

Development Goal Number 7 (SDG7),to pr ovide affordable and clean energy, by the application 

of solar -thermal energy to cooking and post -harvest crop preservation. 

Thus, a pre -condition for food security in Africa is the development and deployment of effective 

and affordable cooking and post -harvest technologies for rural communities. The deployment of 

such technologies, on a continental scale, will break the perennial cycle of relative abundance 

and waste in one season and acute scarcity and hunger in another season as well as provide a 

clean alternative to the traditional use of firewood for cooking and post -harvest preservation 

(Toonen, 2009 ). Such innovation will also directly or indirectly impa ct the attainment of three other 

Sustainable Development Goals: SDG3, to ensure healthy lives; SDG8, to promote sustained, 

inclusive and economic growth; SDG15, to protect, restore and promote sustainable use of 

terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage f orests, combat desertification and halt biodiversity 

loss. The potential to impact SDG15 results from a reduction of the pressure on forest exploitation 

for firewood used in cooking and drying of a variety of crops. 

In this paper, an affordable and effect ive solar cooker/dryer for post -harvest preservation is 

proposed. A review of different solar cooker designs finds the solar box type (Muthusivagami et 

al., 2010 , Geddam et al., 2015 , Harmim et al., 2012 ) to be the most promising design in terms of 

cost, usability, safety and the ready availability of local materials for construction. However, long 

cooking times and solar intermittency have traditionally hindered the uptake of solar cooking 

technologies. We approach this by maximizing the absorption area exposed to the sun via the 

incorporation of a simple solar concentrator while ensuring an optimu m, user -friendly design. This 

design will be adapted to generate heat required for drying: a common post -harvest preservation 

method. The combined effect of the solar concentrator and energy storage materials in the design 

has the potential of improving co oking and crop drying times as well as extending heat availability 

after dusk (Verma et al., 2022 ).

Design and Methodology 

Truncated Double V -trough Solar Concentrator 

The truncated double V -trough solar concentrator (see 5a) has been reported as the optimum 

design in terms of cost when compared to the truncated pyramidal design (Al -Najideen et al., 

2019 ). In addition, both the truncated pyramid and V -trough solar concentrator designs are 

expected to be less dependent on solar tracking (Kumar et al., 2008 ). The inclusion of solar 

concentrators is aimed at boosting the energy collection without increasing the absorption window 

which could increase energy loss from the cooker. This is expected to achieve higher 

temperatures, an important requirement for cooking and drying. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 691   

> Figure 39 :(a) Double V -trough solar concentrator (b) the truncated pyramid box solar cooker
> (Verma et al., 2022 )

Truncated Pyramid -type Solar Cooker 

The truncated pyramid design for the solar cooker is used. This ensures that an optimum heating 

volume is used for the cooking process. The cooker used was constructed using 9 mm thick 

plywood with dimensions as shown in 6. The inner walls of the cooker we re lined with 1 cm thick 

Styrofoam as a thermal insulator and inner surface finally dressed with highly reflective aluminium 

foil while the absorber plate at the bottom was made of a 1 mm cast iron (specific heat capacity 

of 550 Jkg -1k-1), painted black. T he absorber window was double glazed 5 mm glass. This ensures 

that a higher temperature is achieved at the bottom and that heat loss is minimal.   

> Figure 40 :Truncated pyramid -type solar cooker.

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 692 

Energy Storage Materials 

The use of solar energy for cooking/drying food is a well -known and attractive, clean method. 

Open solar drying for instance has a number of drawbacks most of which can be overcome by 

the so lar box dryer. Introduction of thermal energy storage materials into these dryers/cookers 

has the potential of extending the cooking/drying period beyond dusk as well as improving the 

performance of these systems. Some of the common, natural and inexpensiv e thermal energy 

storage materials readily available to the rural communities include basaltic rocks and sand. The 

performance analysis of solar dryers/cookers with and without basaltic rocks as energy storage 

materials is investigated experimentally. 

Ex perimental 

The double -sided solar concentrator was used in this study. Four booster mirror reflectors used 

were each of dimensions 40 cm by 60 cm, thus the total area was 0.96 m 2. The reflectors were 

setup in a double V -trough configuration as shown in 5, with a grazing angle of 25 0. This design 

has been found to produce optimum concentration of solar irradiance at minimal cost of reflectors 

(Al -Najideen et al., 2019 ). The absorption ar ea of the solar -box cooker was designed to match 

the output area of the double V -trough solar concentrator (40 by 40 cm). The cooker was designed 

to take the shape of a truncated pyramid as shown in 6. This design has been found to produce 

a minimized cook er volume that would reduce energy wastage within. Combining the advantages 

of a double V -trough solar concentrator with those of the truncated pyramid -type cooker produces 

a single design with enhanced performance. Owing to the geometry of the solar cooke r design, 

rays from the concentrator hitting the inner sidewalls (made of highly reflective aluminium foil) of 

the truncated pyramid cooker are reflected downward, so as to create a zone of high temperature 

at the bottom, resulting in improved convection d uring the cooking process (Kumar, 2004 ).

System Characterization 

Stagnation Test (First Figure of Merit F1) 

A number of no load tests were carried out on the solar box cooker to determine its stagnation 

parameters and the increase in temperature inside the cooker. The test was carried out for the 

different temperatures: stagnation temperature, ambient temperature (T amb. ) and absor ber plate 

temperature (T plate ) were measured daily between 11:00 and 15:00 during the operation of the 

cooker in time intervals of 30 minutes. One of the figures of merit often used to characterize solar 

box cookers is the first figure of merit (F1) for th e stagnation (see equation (1)) (Mullick et al., 

1987 ). F1 is a parameter that is unique for every cooker and provides a means to measure the 

cooker performance. saPLo

# ITTUF −==

> 1

……………………………………………………………..….……………. ( 1)Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 693 

Concentration Ratio 

The solar cooker depends principally on sunlight for its operation. Hence the need to collect the 

sun’s rays over a large area and concentrate them to a small but optimum surface of the cooker 

grazing area. The maximum collection occurs when the collection surface is perpendicular to the 

sun’s rays. For countries near/at the equator, this condition is achieved at midday with maximum 

solar intensity. Solar concentrators are characterised by the geometric concentration ratio (CR). 

The CR is often defined as in equation 2. as t

# AACR =

…………………………………………………………..….……………………..……. ( 2)

wher e A t is the total perpendicular collector area and A as is the area of the absorber surface. 

Estimation of Optimum Solar Reflector Dimensions 

The base of the double V -trough truncated solar concentrators was designed to be 40 cm by 40 

cm to match the absorption surface of the solar -box cooker used. However, in order to minimize 

the cost of the reflectors, the length (L) of each of the four refle ctors used was optimized for normal 

incidence that gives rise to minimal ray rejection. Using the design diagram shown in 7 (the angles 

i and r represent the incident and reflected angles respectively), the relationship between the 

grazing angle (α), the a bsorber width (b) and L is given by equation 3. )) sin( )2tan( )(cos( 

## −= Lb

……………………………………..……………………..……. ( 3)Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 694   

> Figure 41 :Design structure of the optimal truncated V -trough solar concentrator

Results 

The results of stagnation temperature test (8) for the designed solar box cooker without energy 

storage material shows a maximum no load achievable temperature of about 93 0C. This cooker 

maintains a high temperature (above 80 0C) for duration of 2 hours between 11:30 and 13:30. 

Using equation (1), F1 is calculated to be about 0.07 Km 2W-1.Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 695    

> Figure 42 :Stagnation temperature test of solar cooker without energy storage material for first figure of merit (F1),
> measured on the 13 th of March 2022.

Figure 43  shows the plot of concentration ratio of the solar concentrators. A maximum ratio of 2.1 

is obtained in a typical experiment. This is less than the geometric concentration ratio of 3.5 for 

thi s system as calculated using equation (2). From  Table 2, it can be seen that the optical 

efficiency of the concentrators estimated by dividing the inten sity ratios by the geometric 

concentration ratio varies between 30 and 60 %. The optical efficiency peaks at 12:00 as the 

system design was optimized for maximum concentration at normal incidence (see equation (3). 

This condition would be satisfied at arou nd 12:00 for Buea, location of experiment (Latitude 4° 9' 

33. 4872'' N and Longitude 9° 14' 36.7296'' E). 

Table 2 Typical Data Obtained from the Operation of the Solar Concentrator 

Time  Tamb (0C)  Tplate (0C) 

Is 

(W/m2) 

Is -

C/Is 

Optical efficiency 

(%) 

11:00  27.1  72.4  767  1.17  33.26 

11:30  31.1  85  740  1.69  47.75 

12:00  32.4  90.1  628  2.11  59.59 

12:30  32.8  90.4  667  1.72  48.53 

13:00  34.2  93.2  722  1.91  54.03 

13:30  33.4  80.6  675  1.46  41.32 

14:00  31.3  63.6  554  1.07  30.26 Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 696   

> Figure 43 :The plot of the ratio of the solar insolation obtained from the concentrators (Is_c) to the insolation (I s)

Figures 10 and 11 show the graphs for the stagnation temperature tests with solar -box cooker 

containing 1 kg of basaltic rocks pellets with average diameters of 13 mm and 5.6 mm 

respectively. An estimation of the figure of merit F1 gives the same value of 0.06 in both cases. 

This suggests that cooker performance was likely to be independent of the pellets size. The 

incorporation of the storage material into the solar cooker however resulted in a reduction in F1 

by about 14%. Similar observation has been ma de by (Verma et al., 2022 ). In all cases, effective 

cooking could be possible between 11:30 and 13:30 when the temperature within the cooker 

remains fairly high. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 697 

Figure 44 : Stagnation temperature test of solar cooker with 13 mm diameter basaltic pellets of energy storage 

material for first figure of merit (F1), measured on the 15 th of March 2022. 

Figure 45 : Stagnation temperature test of solar cooker with 5.6 mm diameter basaltic pellets of energy storage 

material for first figure of merit (F1), measured on the 16 th of March 2022. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 698 

The perspectives for further work include :

• Production of one hundred prototypes for partner NGOs to use in sensitizing rural 

communities in the South -West Region of Cameroon 

• Partnership with a Cameroon -based company for mass production 

Conclusions 

The solar -box cooker design proposed in this work has the potential to reduce cooking time due 

to the incorporation of the concentrator. The prototype is designed for low cost so that it can be 

affordable in SSA. It attains its maximum output when the sola r intensity is maximum, a common 

characteristics shared by most Sub -Saharan African countries. This ensures that maximum 

thermal energy is extracted during periods of maximum intensity. The double V -trough solar 

concentrator design used has been found to s how minimal dependence on tracking. A drawback 

with this design is that the solar concentrators are optimized for maximum concentration at noon 

and contribute minimally at other times. The experimental results obtained from the thermal 

performance tests F1 show that the performance of the solar -box cooker is not affected by the 

size of pellets of storage materials. In addition, the work provides an experimental support to the 

observations made by (Verma et al., 2022 ) via simulations. 

References 

2004. 04/02426 multi -criteria evaluation of cooking energy alternatives for promoting parabolic 

solar cooker in india: Pohekar, s. D. And ramachandran, m. Renewable energy, 2004, 

29,(9), 1449 –1460. Fuel and Energy Abstracts, 45 , 340. 

Abd -Elhady M. S., Abd -Elkerim A. N. A., Ahmed S. A., Halim M. A. & Abu -Oqual A. 2020. Study 

the thermal performance of solar cookers by using metallic wires and nanographene. 

Renewable Energy, 153 , 108 -116. 

Achudume A. C. 2009. Environmental health, development and economic empowerment of rural 

women in nigeria. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 11 , 459 -469. 

Akhtar N. & Mullick S. C. 1999. Approximate method for computation of glass cover temperature 

and top heat -loss coefficient of solar collectors with single glazing.  Solar Energy, 66 ,

349 -354. 

Al -Najideen M., Al -Shidhani M. & Min G. 2019.  Optimum de sign of v -trough solar concentrator 

for photovoltaic applications. AIP Conference Proceedings, 2149 , 030001. 

Al -Soud M. S., Abdallah E., Akayleh A., Abdallah S. & Hrayshat E. S. 2010. A parabolic solar 

cooker with automatic two axes sun tracking system. Applied Energy, 87 , 463 -470. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 699 

Anilkumar B. C., Maniyeri R. & Anish S. 2022. Modified thermal energy storage unit for solar 

cookers using iterative design algorithm. Materials Today: Proceedings .

Bates L., Bruce N., Theuri D., Owalla H., Amatya P., Malla M. B. & Hood A. 2005. What should 

we be doing about kitchen smoke? Energy for Sustainable Development, 9, 7-15. 

Buddhi D., Sharma S. D. & Sharma A. 2003. Thermal performance evaluation of a laten t heat 

storage unit for late evening cooking in a solar cooker having three reflectors. Energy 

Conversion and Management, 44 , 809 -817. 

Clancy J. 2002. Household energy and gender: An introduction. Briefing paper, Sparknet. 

http://doc. utwente. nl/5906 0/1/Clancy02blowing. pdf .

Cuce E. & Cuce P. M. 2013.  A comprehensive review on solar cookers. Applied Energy, 102 ,

1399 -1421. 

Dang A. 1986. Concentrators: A review. Energy Conversion and Management, 26 , 11 -26. 

De Lange E. & Wentzel M. 2002.  Boiling point 48: Harnessing solar stove technologies in south 

africa to promote improved household energy provision. 

Deubener J., Helsch G., Moiseev A. & Bornhöft H. 2009. Glasses for solar energy conversion 

systems. Jour nal of the European Ceramic Society, 29 , 1203 -1210. 

Eckert E. R. G., Goldstein R. J., Ibele W. E., Patankar S. V., Simon T. W., Strykowski P. J., 

Tamma K. K., Kuehn T. H., Bar -Cohen A., Heberlein J. V. R., Hofeldt D. L., Stelson K. A. 

& Davidson J. H. 1 996. Heat transfer —a review of 1993 literature. International Journal 

of Heat and Mass Transfer, 39 , 885 -963. 

Farhar B. C. 1998. Gender and renewable energy: Policy, analysis, and market implications. 

Renewable Energy, 15 , 230 -239. 

Fatiha Yettou, Boube keur Azoui, Ali Malek, Narayan Lal Panwar & Gama A. 2018.  Generating 

temperature maps of a solar receiver for a domestic parabolic concentrator for cooking 

purposes under algerian environment. Cham: Springer. 

Garg Hp & J. P. 2004. Solar energy: Fundamen tals and applications, Tata McGraw 

Hill Publications. 

Garg H. P. & Adhikari R. S. 1998. Renewable energy programme and vision in india. 

Renewable Energy, 14 , 473 -478. 

Garg H. P. & Hrishikesan D. S. 1988. Enhancement of solar energy on flat -plate collec tor by 

plane booster mirrors. Solar Energy, 40 , 295 -307. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 700 

Geddam S., Dinesh G. K. & Sivasankar T. 2015. Determination of thermal performance of a box 

type solar cooker. Solar Energy, 113 , 324 -331. 

Gupta S. K., Bhawalker R. H. & Sootha G. D. 1982. Performance study of solar dryers. In: 

Bowen, A. & Vagner, R. (eds.) Passive and low energy alternatives i. Pergamon. 

Harmim A., Belhamel M., Boukar M. & Amar M. 2010. Experimental investigation of a box -type 

solar cooker with a finned absorber plate. Energy, 35 , 3799 -3802. 

Harmim A., Merzouk M., Boukar M. & Amar M. 2012. Performance study of a box -type solar 

cooker employing an asymmetric compound parabolic concentrator. Energy, 47 , 471 -

480. 

Heltber g R. 2004. Fuel switching: Evidence from eight developing countries. Energy Economics, 

26 , 869 -887. 

Kalogirou S. 2003. The potential of solar industrial process heat applications. Applied Energy, 

76 , 337 -361. 

Kalogirou S. A. 2004. Solar thermal collectors and applications. Progress in Energy and 

Combustion Science, 30 , 231 -295. 

Kumar N., Agravat S., Chavda T. & Mistry H. N. 2008. Design and development of efficient 

multipurpose domestic solar cookers/dryers. Renewable Energy, 33 , 2207 -2211. 

Kumar S. 2004. Natural convective heat transfer in trapezoidal enclosure of box -type sol ar 

cooker. Renewable Energy, 29 , 211 -222. 

Matinga M. 2010. We grow up with it. An ethnographic study of the experiences, perceptions 

and responses to the health impacts of energy acquisitions and use in rural South Africa. 

Phd thesis. University of Twe nte, Netherlands .

Mendoza J. M. F., Gallego -Schmid A., Schmidt Rivera X. C., Rieradevall J. & Azapagic A. 2019. 

Sustainability assessment of home -made solar cookers for use in developed countries. 

Science of The Total Environment, 648 , 184 -196. 

Mirdha U. S. & Dhariwal S. R. 2008. Design optimization of solar cooker. Renewable Energy, 

33 , 530 -544. 

Mullick S. C., Kandpal T. C. & Saxena A. K. 1987. Thermal test procedure for box -type solar 

cookers. Solar Energy, 39 , 353 -360. 

Muthusivagami R. M., Velraj R. & Sethumadhavan R. 2010. Solar cookers with and without 

thermal storage —a review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 14 , 691 -701. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 701 

Nandwani S. S. 1996. Solar cookers —cheap technology with high ecological benefits. 

Ecological Economics, 17 , 73 -81. 

Nkhonjera L., Bello -Ochende T., John G. & King’ondu C. K. 2017. A review of thermal energy 

storage designs, heat storage materials and cooking performance of solar cookers with 

heat storage. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 75 , 157 -167. 

Otte P. P. 2013. Solar cookers in developing countries —what is their key to success? Energy 

Policy, 63 , 375 -381. 

Otte P. P. 2014. Solar cooking in mozambique —an investigation of end -user ׳s needs for the 

design of solar cookers. Energy Policy, 74 , 366 -37 5. 

Panchal H., Patel R., Chaudhary S., Patel D. K., Sathyamurthy R. & Arunkumar T. 2018. Solar 

energy utilisation for milk pasteurisation: A comprehensive review. Renewable and 

Sustainable Energy Reviews, 92 , 1-8. 

Panwar N. L., Kaushik S. C. & Kothari S. 2012. State of the art of solar cooking: An overview. 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16 , 3776 -3785. 

Pattanayak S. K. & Pfaff A. 2009. Behavior, environment, and health in developing countries: 

Evaluation and valuation. Annual Review of Res ource Economics, 1, 183 -217. 

Rossi F., Parisi M. L., Maranghi S., Manfrida G., Basosi R. & Sinicropi A. 2019. Environmental 

impact analysis applied to solar pasteurization systems. Journal of Cleaner Production, 

212 , 1368 -1380. 

Saxena A., Varun, Pandey S. P. & Srivastav G. 2011.  A thermodynamic review on solar box 

type cookers. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15 , 3301 -3318. 

Schlag N. & Zuzarte F. 2008. Market barriers to clean cooking fuels in sub -saharan africa: A 

review of literature. 

Senthil R. 2021. Enhancement of productivity of parabolic dish solar cooker using integrated 

phase change material. Materials Today: Proceedings, 34 , 386 -388. 

Sharma S. D., Buddhi D., Sawhney R. L. & Sharma A. 2000. Design, developm ent and 

performance evaluation of a latent heat storage unit for evening cooking in a solar 

cooker. Energy Conversion and Management, 41 , 1497 -1508. 

Sovacool B. K. 2012. The political economy of energy poverty: A review of key challenges. 

Energy for Su stainable Development, 16 , 272 -282. 

Telkes M. 1959. Solar cooking ovens. Solar Energy, 3, 1-11. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 702 

Toonen H. M. 2009. Adapting to an innovation: Solar cooking in the urban households of 

ouagadougou (burkina faso). Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, 34 , 65 -

71. 

Verma S., Banerjee S. & Das R. 2022.  A fully analytical model of a box solar c ooker with 

sensible thermal storage. Solar Energy, 233 , 531 -542. 

Wentzel M. & Pouris A. 2007. The development impact of solar cookers: A review of solar 

cooking impact research in south africa. Energy Policy, 35 , 1909 -1919. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 703 

# Financing Sustainable Energy in 

# the Ghanaian Energy Market – A Comprehensive 

# Policy Review and Recommendations 

Parth Ponkshe (India) 

Abstract 

The paper keeps sustainable development goal (SDG) 7 – affordable and clean energy – as its 

focal point, primarily focusing on enabling “affordability” of sustainable and clean energy sources. 

The goals of this paper are threefold. The first is to provide an overview of Ghana’s energy policy 

and apparatus. The second is to evaluate and highlight design flaws in the policy support 

mechanisms and financing constraints that dampen investor confidence and affect the risk profile 

of RE projects. Moreover, finall y, to recommend alternative policies and fiscal mechanisms such 

as tax -based incentive structures that stimulate a broader base of equity financing participation; 

financially engineered securitization model of renewable energy assets to offset the inadequa cies 

of the traditional means of project financing in order to create an enabling environment to 

accelerate the transition to affordable and clean energy. 

Keywords: Ghana, SDG 7, renewable Energy, cost of financing, liquidity shortfalls, securitization. 

Abbreviations 

AAGR……………… Average Annual Growth Rate 

ABS……………… Asset -backed Securities 

BoG……………… Bank of Ghana 

CAGR……………… Compounded Annual Growth Rate 

CAR……………… Capital Adequacy Ratio 

CSP……………… Cross -Sector Partnership 

EC……………… Energy Commission 

EC G……………… Electricity Company of Ghana 

EPPs……………… Emergency Power Producers 

ERP……………… Economic Recovery Program Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 704 

ESLA……………… Energy Sector Levy Act 

ESRP……………… Energy Sector Recovery Program 

FDI……………… Foreign Direct Investment 

FiT……………… Feed -in -Tariff rate 

GDP……………… Gross Domestic Product 

GEDAP……………… Ghana Energy Development and Access Project 

GH ₵……………… Ghanaian cedi 

GoG……………… Government of Ghana 

IMF……………… International Monetary Fund 

INR……………… Indian Rupee 

IPPs……………… Independent Power Producers 

IRR……………… Internal Rate of Return 

KW……………… Kilowatt 

kWh……………… Kilowatt per hour 

LIBOR……………… London Interbank Offer Rate 

LLC……………… Limited Liability Company 

MBS……………… Mortgage -backed Securities 

MFl……………… Microfinance Institutions 

MFL……………… Microfinance Loans 

MoE……………… Ministry of Energy 

MoF……………… Ministry of Finance 

MW……………… Megawatt Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 705 

MWh……………… Megawatt per hour 

OBSV……………… Off -balance -sheet Vehicle 

OPEC……………… Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 

PAYGo……………… Pay -as -you -go 

PPA……………… Power Purchase Agreement 

PSL……………… Priority Sector Lending 

PURC……………… Public Utilities Regulatory Commission 

PV……………… Photovoltaic 

PWD……………… Public and Words Department 

RBI……………… Reserve Bank of India 

RE……………… Renewable Energy 

REA……………… Renewable Energy Authority 

REC……………… Renewable Energy Certificate 

REMP……………… Renewable Energy Master Plan 

RPO……………… Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation 

RPS……………… Renewable Portfolio Standard 

SBUs……………… Stra tegic Business Units 

Scfd……………… Standard cubic feet per day 

SDG……………… Sustainable Development Goals 

SHS……………… Solar Home Systems 

SNEP……………… Strategic National Energy Plan 

SOEs……………… State -owned enterprises Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 706 

SPV……………… Special Purpose Vehicle 

USD……………… United States Dollar 

VALCo……………… Volta Aluminum Company 

VGF……………… Viability Gap Funding 

VRA……………… Volta River Authority 

WACC……………… Weighted Average Cost of Capital 

WAGP……………… West African Gas Pipeline 

Introduction 

The agenda of energy sust ainability has been at the forefront of global development, reiterated 

on numerous national and global platforms. The most prominent one is the adoption of the 

Sustainability Development Goal 7 (SDG 7) under the United Nations 2030 agenda for 

sustainable d evelopment. The agenda aims to facilitate universal access to reliable, affordable, 

and clean energy, further driving nations towards a sustainable energy future. According to the 

World Bank 2017 SDG targets review, SDG 7 has synergistic effects on 125 out of 169 SDG 

targets. (World Bank, 2017). Therefore, a state that understands the synergistic effects of access 

to modern energy services on economic growth, alleviating poverty, and national development, 

highly prioritizes mobilization of renewable energy (RE) into its energy mix. 

The paper focuses on the renewable energy sector of the Republic of Ghana – a country that is 

often seen as a model for other emerging African countries. (UNDP, n.d.) With abundant and 

favourable natural conditions, Ghana is well -suited to adopt a sustainable energy model. 

However, historical trends show that Ghana faces significant sectoral issues concerning inefficient 

capital allocation, policy inconsistency, insufficient fiscal incentives, financing limitations, and an 

overall lack of institutional support to develop a sophisticated renewable energy model. With the 

energy sector financing potential bottled up by unprofitable tariff structures, operational 

inefficiency, and contingent liabilities adding to its public debt stock, there is a massive disconnect 

between the need for SDG 7 financing and the availability of capital resources. This has called 

for a need for unleashing vast amounts of private capital to bridge the financing gap needed to 

accelerate the deployment of RE a ssets. 

The following study is divided into three sections – section I presents a historical correlation 

between economic growth and energy demand in order to highlight the inadequacy of the current 

energy model, and recommends adoption of a macro -scaled R E model to meet future energy 

demand. Secondly, section II dissects the strengths and weaknesses of the current renewable 

energy model. Finally, Section III recommends alternative regulatory frameworks and financing Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 707 

structures that hold the potential to r esolve sector weaknesses and enable Ghana to meet its 

SDG 7 goals. 

Methodology 

The paper primarily utilizes a mixed -method research approach from secondary sources to 

identify and review the key drivers of the Ghanaian renewable energy market. This research 

implements an inductive approach to identify the bottleneck factors that prevent Ghana from 

achieving its SDG 7 targets. 

In addition, a qualitative approach is implemented to recommend alternative methods to 

incentivize the Ghanaian renewable ene rgy apparatus. Data for this study is gathered from the 

World Bank database and country reports, Government of Ghana reports, Bank of Ghana 

database, annual reports of Volta River Authority, and from the existing literature and documents 

on the sector. 

Re sults 

Section I 

Background: Historical Economic Trends and its Effects on the Ghanian Energy Sector 

Embryonic Phase (1900s – 1970s) 

Under the Volta River Development Act, 1961, the government of Ghana (GoG) established the 

Volta River Authority (VRA). Its primary function – to construct and operationalize the Akosombo 

Dam over the Volta River and take charge of the duties of energy production; supply produced 

electricity to the Volta Aluminum Company (VALCO); and transmit the remaining energy to the 

tr ansmission system. The construction of the Akosombo Dam in 1972 gave rise to the first phase 

of the Ghanian energy sector – hydropower. 

During this period, Ghana followed a macroeconomic policy of lax fiscal management coupled 

with expansionary credit pol icy. In December 1972, the Bank of Ghana set the monetary interest 

rate to a historic low of 6.0% (Bank of Ghana, 2021c). Between 1972 and 1982, the money supply 

grew at an average of 39.1%. (World Bank, 2020a) As low -interest rates worked their way into 

the economy, industrial expansion and consumer spending fueled by cheap credit led to 

inflationary economic growth. Inflation between 1972 -83 averaged at 57.3%, peaking at 122.9% 

in 1983 (World Bank, 2020c). With a rapidly rising urban population and the in dustrial and service 

sector expansion due to monetary expansions of the late 70s, energy demand surged nearly 

sixfold. By 1976, the total domestic energy consumption peaked at about 3917GWh from 

540GWh in 1967, growing at an average annual growth rate (AAG R) of 10%.  (Volta River 

Authority, 1980) Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 708 

Second Coming (1980s – 2000s) 

> Fig 1. Trends in Energy supply and demand from 1970 to 1990
> Source: (VRA, 1980); (VRA, 1991).

In late 70s – early 80s, the Ghanian economy went into a downward spiral, due to a series of 

exogenous shocks, particularly, the second OPEC crude price hike of 1978 -79 – where the spot 

price shot up from $12.70 in 1978 to $40 per barrel by June 1979 (The New York Times, 1979). 

As a result, weak industrial production, and government failure to adjust domestic petroleum 

prices to the rising global prices of crude, led to an increase in the budget deficit by 44.94% 

(Dadson et al., 2018); (Ocran, 2007). 

Failing to recover from the oil crisis, Ghana was hit by another energy and labour supply shock in 

1983 – when Nigeria decided to clamp down on the oil supply (Brydon, 1985), and expel one 

million Ghanaians, which increased the domestic labour supply by 10% (World Bank, 1985 ; Van 

Hear, 1992) . The economic crisis was further exacerbated by a severe drought that led to the 

devastation of agricultural production; widespread bushfires destroyed cocoa production – a cash 

crop whose export revenues the Ghanaian economy heavily relied on (Kolavalli and Vigneri, 

2011). The drought of 1983 caused severe distortion in the generation capacity of the Akosombo 

dam – a primary energy production apparatus. Between the periods of 1982 and 1984, the total 

inflow was less than 15% of the projected total (ISSER, 2005). As represented in Figure 1 , the 

total electricity production went down from 5180GWh in 1981 to 1670GWh in 1984 (VRA, 1985). 

The following episode revealed a major electricity supply security issue within the Ghanaian 

energy apparatus. 

Crumbling economic infrastructure and energy systems led the government to adopt the 

Economic Recovery Program (ERP), a market liberalization approach supported by the Fund and 

> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> 4000
> 5000
> 6000
> 7000
> GWh

# Trends in Electricity Generation and Consumption 

# (1970 -1990)  

> Energy Supply (GWh) Energy Demand (GWh)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 709 

the World Bank (Nowak et al., 1996). The fundamental principles driving economic reform were 

– a progressive shift away from state intervention; enhancement of institutional reforms to boost 

private investment and activity; and restoration of fiscal prudence (Nowak et al., 1996). The 

program's initial phase brought about economic stabilization – the real GDP growth rate (%) wen t

up from -6.9% in 1982 to 8.6% in 1986, further stabilizing at the target rate of 5% a year (World 

Bank, 2020b). Consequently, economic recovery was on the way, and so was the rise in power 

demanded. As a result, the energy consumption shot up from 1670 G Wh in 1984 to 5110 GWh 

in 1991 (VRA, 1991). 

In 1993, Ghana experienced another drought, leading to power rationing and loss in industrial 

output. The ’93 power crisis sent a message to the VRA and the Government of Ghana (GoG) 

that the policy of over -reli ance on hydropower was flawed, and there was an urgent need to 

diversify the energy production mix of the country (Martin et al., 2001). A capital injection of USD 

1.5 billion would be needed to finance the development of electricity apparatus to keep up w ith 

the rising power demand (Martin et al., 2001). Calls for reforms in Ghana came when World Bank 

installed a policy of “commitment lending” – where there was a systematic relationship between 

the volume of aid granted and the extent to which African coun tries were committed to economic 

reforms (Devarajan et al., 2001). Urgent need to develop power production capacity and attract 

World Bank and private capital into the sector led to the power reforms of 1994. The government 

of Ghana (GoG) opted for a “comp etitive model” for its power sector, which entails inter 

alia private participation in energy production and unbundling of the vertically integrated monopoly 

of VRA into Strategic Business Units (SBUs) (Martin et al., 2001). By 1997, GoG implemented 

signif icant sectoral structural reforms such as the establishment of independent regulatory bodies 

– Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC) (Act 538), overseeing and setting of end -user 

energy tariff prices; and the Energy Commission (EC) (Act 541) overse eing licensing and 

regulatory environment of the sector (Energy Commission, n.d.). Satisfied with the GoG's 

commitment to reform the energy sector, the World Bank approved a USD 176 million credit 

facility for the 330 MW Takoradi Thermal Plant, leading to the second phase of the energy sector 

- diversification of energy mix into thermal energy (Martin et al., 2001). 

By the mid -2000s, Ghana had undergone several climatic shocks – 1983 -84, 1997 -98, 2003, 

2006 -07, which directly affected energy production and , consequently, industrial production and 

economic growth. Economic growth was cut down by about 2%, from 6.4% in 2006 to 4.3% in 

2007 (World Bank, 2020b). According to Databank Ghana, the power outage and rationing of 

2007 forced companies to spend about USD 744 million a year to offset power deficiencies, which 

was about 6% of Ghana’s economic output (Phillips, 2007). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 710 

Sector Maturity (2010s -present)  

> Fig 2. Trends in Energy supply and demand from 2000 to 2020
> Source: (Energy Commission, 2020b)

Since the 2010s, the country’s energy sector is in its third phase of hydro -thermal energy 

production model – about 51.8% and 48.2% of the total generation capacity (2010 data), 

respectively (EC, 2020b). 

Ghana has experienced a repeating climatic trend of rainfall shortage during the dry season of 

2012, lowering the water levels at Akosombo. Alternatively, the majority of the thermal power 

generating systems rely on Nigerian gas via the West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP). In 2013, due 

to infrastructu ral damages, Nigeria diverted gas to its domestic market, leading to a severe gas 

supply shortage – 30m -50m standard cubic feet per day (scfd) compared to 123m scfd as per the 

WAGP agreement (Oxford Business Group, 2017). The combined effect of low water l evels at 

hydro -dams and difficulty in fuel acquisition for thermal plants resulted in severe power shortages 

and extended periods of blackouts, leading to the local adoption of the word “ Dumsor,” which 

literally translates to “ on and off.” The energy crisi s had a significant impact on the total factors of 

productivity – the manufacturing shrunk by about 8% during Q4 of 2014 (Mensah and Smith, 

2018). In response to the crisis, the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) hastily signed 42 “take -

or -pay” based Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with the IPPs. In addition, the MoE signed three 

additional PPAs with emergency power producers (EPPs) (Ackah et al., 2021). The fiscal 

ramifications of this erratic response to the power crisis trickled down in subsequent years. 

The following years were dominated by government policy of sectoral debt management and 

fiscal adjustment programs to improve the financial sustainability of the energy sector. Due to 

inefficient operational management and uneconomic end -user tariff struc ture, the energy sector 

> 0
> 5,000
> 10,000
> 15,000
> 20,000
> 25,000
> GWh

# Trends in Electricity Generation and Consumption 

# (2000 -2020)  

> Energy Generated (GWh) Energy Consumed (GWh)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 711 

SOEs experienced heavy financial losses – 32.1% of the total revenue in 2014 to 40.7% in 2015 

(Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2018). As for VRA, two primary sources of financial losses were due 

to quasi -fiscal subsidies provided to VALCo and heavy discount in wholesale tariff that accounted 

for only 78% of the cost recovery levels (International Monetary Fund. African Dept., 2021). The 

build -up of excess energy capacity payment offloaded by the IPPs under the “take -or -pay” based 

PPAs signed during the 2012 -2015 power crisis began to take a heavy toll on the bottom line of 

SOEs financials. In 2017, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) incorporated a special purchase vehicle 

(SPV) – Energy Sector Levy Act (ESLA) Plc. – to refinance rising sect oral debt. The SPV issues 

debt securities backed primarily by receivables from ESLA Act – levies imposed on goods and 

services. By Q1 of 2019, the net sector arrears within the energy and gas sectors were 

outstanding at about USD 2.75 billion – 33% of 2018 tax revenue (Ministry of Energy, 2019). 

Costs involving energy sector arrears rose the budget deficit from 7.5% of the GDP in 2019 to 

15.2% in 2020, whereas public sector debt grew from 63% of GDP in 2019 to 79% in 2020 (IMF, 

2021). In 2020, the governmen t paid more than USD 1 billion for unused electricity (The Energy 

Year, 2022). Hence, the Ministry of Energy (MoE), in collaboration with MoF, initiated a 

comprehensive debt restructuring and sector stabilization and recovery program – Energy Sector 

Recov ery Program (ESRP) (MoE, 2019). The key recommendations of the program involve 

aggressive renegotiations of PPAs with IPPs; review of plausible increase in power sector tariffs; 

oversee sector stabilization payments to ensure the financial viability of SOE s; and shift from 

practice of “take -or -pay” basis to a competitive procurement of future PPAs (MoE, 2019).  

> Fig 3. Trend between GDP growth rate (%) and Change in Energy Consumption (%) (1970 -2021)
> Source: (World Bank, 2020b); (Energy Commission, 2020b)
> -15.0%
> -10.0%
> -5.0%
> 0.0%
> 5.0%
> 10.0%
> 15.0%
> 20.0%
> -120.0%
> -100.0%
> -80.0%
> -60.0%
> -40.0%
> -20.0%
> 0.0%
> 20.0%
> 40.0%
> 60.0%

# Ghana Historical Trend  

> Change in EC(%) GDP growth rate (%)

Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 712 

Proactive management and effective implementation of the recovery program yielded in 

commendable results – just by the end of 2020, the government had saved USD 5 billion in PPA 

renegotiation (Glover, 2021); (GhanaWeb, 2022). With fisc al deficits narrowing from 15.2% in 

2021 to 9.1% in 2022; forecasted average inflation slowing at 9.0% in 2022 from 9.8% in 2021; 

and projected GDP growth rate climbing up to 5.5% in 2022 from 0.4% in 2020, economic 

recovery is underway. (FitchRatings, 202 2a). 

Historical trends, as seen in Figure 3, show a strong correlation between economic recovery and 

increasing energy demand. In the past five years, peak power consumption has risen at an AAGR 

of around 10.3% - largely due to rapid urbanization expansi on of the industrial and service sector 

(especially banking and hospitality subsectors). Therefore, while supply apparatus meets current 

power demand, total demand is estimated to outpace supply capacities by 2025, further outpacing 

by 392 MW (The Energy Y ear, 2022). The current MoE policy of ESRP shows a huge potential 

for the sector to recover from its financial distress, creating opportunities to implement innovative 

incentive structures and use the available financial dry powder into diversifying its en ergy 

production portfolio. Rising power demand, sectoral improvement, and governmental commitment 

to promote energy security and efficiency opens up a new opportunity for Ghanaian energy sector 

to transition into the final phase – renewables. 

Section II – Efficiency of Renewable Energy Act and Financing Shortfalls. 

To transition towards the next phase of energy production and achieve the SDG 7 targets, there 

is a need to develop a long -term integrated roadmap and a guiding framework that incentivizes 

rap id development of RE apparatus. In Ghana, the policy inertia started to build up in the 

renewable energy sector after the power crisis of 2012 -2016. To create an incentivizing fiscal and 

regulatory regime, the Ghanaian parliament enacted the Renewable Ener gy Act 2011, Act 832. 

Support instruments and incentive mechanisms developed under the act include: 

Feed -in -Tariff (FiT) Scheme (Amended to Competitive Procurement Scheme) 

FiT scheme is considered as one of the most effective price incentive policies ado pted around 

the world for stimulating the rapid development of RE activity. The central principle behind the 

scheme is to create a stable and predictable cash flow by setting a fixed price or by providing a 

premium over the current market tariff for every kWh of power generated by renewable sources. 

FiTs guarantee fixed premiums over the lifetime of RE projects that generally have high upfront 

costs and overall high fixed to variable cost ratio. Therefore, FiTs can dramatically offset the price 

variability risk of a project and create an enabling environment for sectoral growth. 

Under the RE Act 2011, Ghana opted for the “fixed price model,” where the FiT rates chargeable 

are guaranteed for a period of 10 years and thereafter subject to review every two yea rs. 

(Renewable Energy Act, 2011). 

However, one of the key issues with the FiT scheme is difficulty optimizing tariff rates that offer 

“fair” compensation. Unfavorable tariff rates create competitive distortions in the energy markets Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 713 

as financially distre ssed state utilities are obligated to procure electricity at too high a price when 

compared to underlying competitive market prices. The Ghanaian tariff structure offered about 

0.15 -0.18 USD per kWh, significantly higher as compared to the other developing countries (Nii, 

2016); (PURC, 2016). 

In order to drive down the financial burden on utilities and consumers, Ghana replaced the FiT 

scheme with the Competitive Procurement Scheme, also known as demand auctions. (RE 

(Amendment) Act, 2020); (Parliament of Ghana, 2020). The procurement takes place according 

to annual energy supply and demand projections. A fixed capacity (kW) or power generation 

quantity (kWh) is auctioned for competitive bidding, and a producer that offers to generate at the 

lowest cost obt ains the government tender. The shift towards demand auction model resulted in 

a reduction of tariff rate from 0.18 USD per kWh to less than 0.10 USD per kWh (Afful, 2020). 

Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO) 

RPO acts as an ancillary mechanism to the FiT scheme, which mandates the distribution utilities 

to procure a specified percentage of its electricity from renewable sources (RE Act, 2011). The 

PURC, in consultation with the EC, determines the specific percentage of required obligation. 

RPO fra mework is supplemented with Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) – tradable 

certificates that account for verifying compliance with the purchase obligation. Purchase of a REC 

verifies procurement of 1MWh of energy by a bulk customer; the following certific ate can be traded 

and exchanged in order to meet the regulatory compliance. Joint implementation of FiT scheme, 

RPO, and an exchange market for RECs are globally used to create an effective RE market. 

However, the entire system collapses if the regulatory bodies are ineffective in enforcing RPO 

compliance unto power utilities. The RE Act specifies penalties charged for non -compliance but 

remains ambiguous regarding how the obligations are supposed to be met – whether utilities can 

trade RECs or do they nee d to self -generate to meet their purchase obligation. In addition, the 

public utilities are under severe financial distress, resulting in failure to meet its purchase 

obligations. Even though the legislation has deployed a definite Renewable Portfolio Stan dard 

(RPS), regulatory failure to enforce purchase obligations and financial incapacity to effectively 

procure electricity from RE sources has rendered the entire incentive system ineffective. 

Renewable Energy Fund (RE Fund) 

The RE Act has provided for the establishment of the RE Fund. Its primary objective is to enable 

capital for ‘the promotion, development, sustainable management, and utilization of renewable 

energy sources’ (RE Act, 2011). The Act specifies that the funds are to be channelled into 

renewable energy activities such as – payment of FiT rates, financing of grid integration and 

infrastructure, providing resources for off -grid and mini -grid RE power systems, and equity 

participation. 

Capital for the Fund comes from – budget allocations approved by the Parliament; premium paid 

to the EC for failure to meet RPO compliance; donations and grants received for RE activities; Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 714 

funds approved by the Board of Energy Fund under the EC Act, 1997 (Act 541); funds approved 

by the MoF; and levies collected from the export of biofuels as approved by the Parliament (RE 

Act, 2011). 

That said, under the Renewable Energy Master Plan, 2019 (REMP), the government 

acknowledged the lack of concessional funding sources for RE activ ities; in turn, the MoE signaled 

a strong intention to operationalize the Fund during the first cycle (Cycle I) of the REMP (EC, 

2019). However, as of today, the RE Fund is yet to be operationalized (MoE, 2020). 

Renewable Energy Authority (REA) 

To enter the energy market, renewable energy IPPs need to go through complex bureaucratic 

procedures to obtain various licenses and approvals to initiate final operation. A typical licencing 

process goes as follows - the IPPs initiate the procedure by unde rtaking pre -feasibility studies 

and conducts detailed studies on the technical and financial viability of the project; after the project 

is deemed viable, IPPs go through three stages of acquiring various licenses – Stage 1 involves 

the acquisition of a pr ovisional license; Prior to construction, Stage 2 involves obtaining siting 

clearance permit, and a permit to authorize construction of the project; Stage 3 deals with the 

permit to authorize the operation (EC, 2012). Throughout this cumbersome licensing p rocess, 

IPPs deal with various regulatory agencies such as, PURC, EC, the Environmental Protection 

Agency (EPA), MoE, MoF, and the Ghana Investment Promotion Agency. The complexity of the 

licensing regime leads to high transactional and administrative cost s, adding to the already high 

upfront costs. 

Furthermore, the onsite deployment of RE projects has been minimal due to the absence of a 

“one -stop -shop” system to streamline and fast -track the project approval process (Climate 

Investment Funds, 2015). As o f 2020, 130 proposals were submitted for Wholesale Electricity 

Supply Licenses with a total capacity to produce 7030.6 MW of electricity from RE sources. 40 

Licenses were approved for the siting clearance permit; further, 13 licenses were issued with 

Const ruction Permit; however, only four licenses were granted with the Operational permit, which 

is about 3% of the potential IPPs waiting for approval (EC, 2020a). 

Therefore, to streamline the bureaucratic and regulatory process, GoG made provisions for the 

establishment of an independent regulatory body. Section 53 of the RE Act called for the 

establishment of Renewable Energy Authority (REA). Its functions – to oversee implementation 

of RE activities, execute state -sponsored RE projects, and manage the state assets related to 

renewable energy (RE Act, 2011). 

However, 11 years after the adoption of the RE Act in 2011, REA is yet to be established (MoE, 

2020). Under the plans laid out for cycle I (end of 2020) of the REMP, the government affirmed to 

operationa lize the REA. Nonetheless, as of 2022, these efforts remain futile. Failure to institute 

an independent sectoral regulatory body points at legal and political noncommitment, in effect, 

hampering investor confidence. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 715 

Liquidity and Interest Rate Shortfall s Towards RE Project Financing 

One of the major disabilities with RE projects are its high upfront and installation costs; due to this 

fundamental characteristic of capital requirement, access to long -term, low -cost debt financing is 

vital for the develop ment of RE projects. However, The Ghanaian project financing market is 

riddled with high lending rates and liquidity shortfalls. For commercial banks, when liquidity risks, 

prime rate, and minimum reserve requirement regulations are taken into consideratio n, funding 

capital intensive renewable energy projects becomes less appealing. 

For instance, credit institutions need to comply with liquidity requirements such as Capital 

Adequacy Ratio (CAR), a metric of a bank’s capital in relation to its risk -weighted assets and 

current liabilities (BoG, 2021a). This metric aims to promote short -term credit resilience to 

potential financial risks.  The following ratio is reproduced as: 

𝐶𝐴𝑅 = 𝑇𝑖𝑒𝑟 1 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 + 𝑇𝑖𝑒𝑟 2 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 

𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔 ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐴 𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 ≥ 21% 

As of March 2021, the Bank of Ghana set the minimum CAR at 21% (BoG, 2021b). Financing 

capital intensive energy projects worsen the institution’s capital adequacy ratio due to their 

perceived risk, raising the cost of capital for the inten ded project. 

Further, looking at the demand side of the debt market, users of capital are primarily companies, 

individuals, and the government. Fiscal deficits and a government with a huge appetite for 

borrowing, influence the prices and lending rate of the available c apital. To enable borrowing, the 

government issues securities with high coupon rates, attracting capital towards government 

bonds, further crowding out private borrowers (Kwakye, 2010). For example, EcoBank Ghana 

PLC, Ghana’s second -largest bank, has a sig nificantly high sovereign exposure (about 43% of its 

total assets) to public sector lending (FitchRatings, 2022b).   

> Table 1 –RE project RoR v/s Ghanaian T -bill coupon rate
> Sources: (Pueyo, 2018); (Aguilar, 2015) ; (Bank of Ghana (BoG), 2021c).

International financing, including concessional financing, offers an average lending rate of 7.5%; 

in comparison, the domestic lending rates are between 21% to a whopping 37%. (Pueyo, 2018). 

Though, the commercial lending rate averaged at about 21% by 2021 (BoG, 2021c). Targeted 

Internal Rate of Return (IRR) demanded by equity inve stors can be as high as 30% to consider 

the RE project economically viable (Pfan et al., 2015). Comparing the risk -return profiles of RE 

Solar PV Projects  Government Securities (T -bills) 

Description  BXC  GCP  Nzema  Navrongi  91 -day  182 -day  364 -day 

Rate Of Return 

(RoR) 

21.3%  10.5%  7.5%  16.4%  14.7%  15.2%  18.2% Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 716 

projects in Ghana with other investment alternatives such as government securities, as illustrated 

in (Table 1), energ y projects fail to act as lucrative investments. Two elements keep the returns 

low - on one side, high cost of capital, whereas on the other, governmental intervention in keeping 

electricity prices below market level, further eroding the price competitiven ess of renewable 

energy. 

> Fig 4. Eurobond Spreads between Ghana and JP Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI+) (basis points)
> Source: (IMF, 2021)

The only project that seems economical, as seen in Table 1, is the 20MW solar PV plant 

developed by the Beijing Xiaocheng Technology (BXC) China – USD 30 million project financed 

by the Chinese development banks that offer soft loans and credit at an inter est rate of 4% to 5% 

(LIBOR + country risk premium) (Pueyo, 2018). Significantly lower when compared to the rates 

offered by the international concessional loans and domestic credit institutions. On top of low 

borrowing costs, the project was able to acces s low construction costs due to Chinese 

construction contractors; the factoring effects of low financing and factor costs led to the 

production of cost -competitive electricity (Pueyo, 2018). 

Finally, macroeconomic stresses on liquidity have put pressure o n domestic borrowing costs 

(FitchRatings, 2022c). Ghana, during the COVID -19 pandemic, has experienced tightening of 

external credit conditions – Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has fallen from 4.4% of GDP in 2019 

to 2.7% of GDP in 2020; whereas Net foreig n portfolio flows bottomed down to 2.3% of GDP in 

2020 from 3.4% of GDP in 2019 (IMF, 2021). Public sector debt has risen from 63% of GDP in 

2019 to 79% in 2020, having sharply increased debt service costs and the governmental need for 

credit (IMF, 2021). To meet its debt obligations, Ghana has heavily relied on international capital 

markets; for example, the Euro -denominated bond series issued by the GoG dating back to 2018, 

raising a cumulative of about USD 8 billion in 2020 (Graphic Online, 2021). Howeve r, increasing 

bond spreads between the Ghanaian Eurobond and Euro -denominated bonds from other 

emerging markets, as illustrated in Figure 4, show faltering investor confidence towards the 

Ghanaian security. For example, The Eurobond series issued in 2021 t otalled USD 3.03billion at 

8% with an average maturity of 11years; comparing that to the issuance of USD 3billion Eurobond, Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 717 

in 2020, which offered 7.5% with an average maturity of 17years, it can be concluded that the 

cost of external financing has significantly increased (IMF, 2021). 

Consequently, the government has heavily relied on domestic credit markets to absorb its cre dit 

requirements. This overreliance has pushed domestic absorption capacity to the limit; with over 

40 per cent of the domestic banking sector assets exposed to sovereign credit, the supply of 

money relative to demand has decreased, further raising the ris k of interest rate pressures (IMF, 

2021). In turn, the supply of appropriate financing for renewables has nearly vanished. 

That being the case, there should be a systematic attempt to explore innovative alternative debt 

financing mechanisms, tax -based inc entive structures, and regulatory measures to improve the 

current condition of capital flows towards the RE sector. 

Section III - Recommendations 

Bundling and Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme 

The following federal policy practices recommended in this subsection takes inspiration from the 

action plan of the Government of India’s 2009 National Solar Mission (Government of India, 2008). 

The mission unfolds into two phases – with Phase 1 primarily dealing with the bidding for RE 

project development and Pha se 2 dealing with reverse bidding for government capital grants. 

Phase 1 implemented procurement methods such as competitive auctions and the bundling 

scheme. As discussed in the previous section, Ghana has the necessary experience with 

competitive procur ement auctions, which has lowered the tariff rates by 44% (Afful, 2020). Ghana, 

as implemented in India, can adopt the bundling mechanism that has helped reduce the effective 

procurement costs for the Indian distribution companies by 70% (Thapar et al., 20 16). Under this 

scheme, a regulated intermediary would carry out price auctions where IPPs can bid with a 

composite tariff rate for RE -based power combined with a single conventional means of power 

(gas or coal) (Government of India, 2008). The Indian sche me mandates an electricity supply of 

at least 51% from RE sources. Ghana can adopt a more gradual approach of periodically 

increasing the mandated supply mix, which can help ease out challenges associated with energy 

transition. 

Furthermore, phase 2 of th e mission introduced equity grants for solar projects. The Viability Gap 

Funding scheme was implemented to lower the equity financing burden on project developers. 

The exact amount of capital grant was determined by employing reverse auction, where 

develop ers bid down on the required funding per MW. VGF lowered the equity investments made 

by project developers from 30% to 15% (Thapar et al., 2016). Further, reducing the weighted 

average cost of capital (WACC) from 13.9% to 11.5% (Thapar et al., 2016). The s cheme fuses 

market competition with the need for government financing. The implementation of reverse 

auctions for capital grants can help further reduce financing pressures on the government’s 

coffers. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 718 

The paper recommends implementing the following sche mes together, as their synergies can 

have a significant impact on reducing upfront equity as well as financing costs for RE developers. 

Tax Equity Financing Structure 

Governments conventionally subsidize sector activities through implied taxes. In projec t financing, 

tax subsidies are claimed directly by the developer engaged in the subsidized activity. However, 

under several other tax credits, the developer is often encouraged to partner with a third -party 

investor. These partnerships happen partially due to the intended party having minimal tax 

liabilities to offset, making the tax credits redundant, or because the tax credits are delivered over 

a long period, whereas, the developer needs short -term upfront financing to develop the project. 

The following conundrum can be solved by tax -equity partnership structures, where the primary 

tax beneficiary agrees to transfer rights to the tax credits to an investor in exchange for equity. 

The main objective behind developing tax -equity structures is to incentivize equity financing 

participation into the project’s capital structure. A typical capital structure for financing RE projects 

– about 35% (±5%) of equity comes from the tax -equity investor, whereas the developer finances 

the rest via equity and debt (Martin, 2021). 

> Fig 5. All -equity partnership flip example structure

While multiple tax equity structures can be implemented – partnership flips, sale lease -backs , and 

inverted leases – varying per transactional needs, they often share standard structural features. 

Due to the scope of this paper, the section focuses on arrangements that use partnership flip 

structures. Figure 5 provides a visual summary of how the transaction works (debt not included Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 719 

for simplicity). The transactional structure is relatively simple – a developer and a tax -equity 

investor, usually large financial institutions with a large tax liability, create a partnership or a joint 

LLC. The tax -equity investor injects equity into the LLC for 99% of the tax benefits upfront and 

with some agreed -upon percentage of cash benefits. Whereas the project developer retains most 

of the cash benefits associated with the project until full investment recovery . Thereafter, the cash 

benefits flow to the tax -equity investor. Once the tax -equity investor has reached a target yield 

(yield -based flip) or the transaction has reached a predetermined time (fixed -flip), the partnership 

will “flip” the allocation of the benefits. The developer will retain over 90% of the cash benefits 

post -flip, further having the right to buy out the remaining project interest of the tax equity investor. 

Thus, being the sole owner of the developed project (Bolinger, 2014). 

Under the Gha na Investment Promotion Act (Act 865), investors are provided with significant tax 

reduction credits to the infrastructural development of RE projects (Ministry of Power, 2015 , thus 

providing the building block of regulatory support for structuring tax -eq uity transactions in Ghana. 

However, there is a need for a comprehensive taxation framework – creating a type of tax credit 

that offsets the beneficiary’s liabilities, cedi -to -cedi, in order to develop a sophisticated tax -equity 

investment market. 

Microfi nancing Loan (MFL) Securitization 

This section recommends implementation of securitization structures to the world of microfinance 

lending. In order to better understand how the recommended securitization models would create 

an alternative financing marke t for the RE sector, a guided overview of the Ghanaian microfinance 

sector as well as introduction to securitization theory is needed. 

Overview of Ghanaian Microfinancing Sector 

Microfinancing infrastructure encompasses providing financial products that offer micro -credits 

and loans to low -income clients that are generally not catered by the formal banking institutions 

of the country. MFIs fill up this supply gap by employing sust ainable financing practices. 

Microfinancing practices have significantly enhanced the financial inclusion of individuals and 

households at the bottom of the socio -economic pyramid, further improving social indicators such 

as poverty, education, and health (UNCDF, 2005). 

Ghana, in the 2000s, saw a rapid growth in the spread of microfinancing activities which enabled 

broadening and deepening of the population base that was financially included in the banking 

sector. Clients catered by MFIs increased to arou nd 8million by the end of 2013, rising from 1.3 

million in 2001, while deposits and loans grew at a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 

21% and 26%, respectively (GHAMFIN, 2014). According to the (Global FINDEX, 2017 , about 

57.7% of Ghana’s adults had a bank account in a formal financial institution in 2017 compared to 

29% in 2011. 

The period of boom oversaw major financial collaborations, in terms of liquidity and capacity 

building, between banking institutions and MFIs. For example - Barclays partne ring with the Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 720 

Ghana Co -operative Susu Collectors Association (GCSCA , a non -bank financial institutions’ 

association, to supply MFIs with capital injection and wholesale funding (Fig 6.) (AAE, 2013); 

collaboration between EcoBank and ACCION, a global micr ofinancing non -profit that employs a 

financially -sustainable lending model (Earne, 2015); (Chu, 2006); and, Fidelity Capital’s 

acquisition of ProCredit Savings and Loans (Agbugah, 2014). From the following examples, it can 

be inferred that commercial banks expanded their activities in the MF sector due to the potential 

profitability of micro -lending. 

> Fig. 6 Barclays Bank Ghana & GCSCA Partnership Model

In 2011, the Bank of Ghana issued regulatory and operational guidelines to bring varying types 

of MFI s under a consistent legal framework. The sophistication of the MFI sector was done by 

developing a tiered structure to classify MFIs according to their capital size and perceived risk to 

the financial stability; a licensing regime was implemented with the aim to weed out insolvent and 

structurally weak MFIs; subsequently, minimum capital requirements were introduced to ensure 

transition towards a more robust MF sector (World Bank, 2016). 

Linking Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) with RE Financing 

Access to modern electricity among low -income households can be greatly enhanced by enabling 

a robust and sophisticated microfinancing sector. 

Globally, several energy -lending activities and programs related to microfinancing solar home 

systems (SHS) impr oved electricity access to rural households. For example, in 2009, a pilot 

project, known as Ghana Energy Development and Access Project (GEDAP), was launched to Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 721 

improve energy access to households by financing the distribution of SHS with commercial loan s. 

World Bank’s Global Partnership in collaboration with the ARB Apex Bank Ltd., a government -run 

banking syndicate for rural MFIs, funded a solar lending project. Credit received from the World 

Bank aid was distributed among 12 participating MFIs. MFLs of fered by the program were varied 

according to energy capacities and cost options. The program saw an active participation of 

private vendors to supply the households with the necessary hardware, installation, and further 

servicing of SHS. The financing con ditions were tailored as – 10% down payment, and the 

remaining with monthly interest payments. This result -based financing program resulted in over 

100,000 households benefiting from off -grid solar energy with a repayment rate of over 90%; 

about 93% of the clients further expressed willingness to solely pay for the costs associated with 

maintenance and repair (GPOBA, 2016). 

Another example of microfinancing renewable energy comes from Bangladesh. Founded in 1996, 

Grameen Shakti, a company with the aim of providing electricity to low -income households at 

affordable prices. The comprehensive package offered stand -alone SHS, including a warranty of 

5 years on the battery and 20 years on the panel system. In 2003, Grameen Shakti partnered with 

Infrastructure D evelopment Company Limited (IDCOL), a non -bank financial institution, to bridge 

the financing gap for SHS deployment in low -income households (Grameen Shakti, n.d.). The 

financing terms entailed a loan amount of 80% of the project cost with up to 10 -year m aturity at 

6-10% annual interest rate (IDCOL, n.d.). The results were – as of 2022, over 18million SHS 

deployed, benefiting more than 8million people in Bangladesh (Grameen Shakti, n.d.). The 

staggering success of these energy -lending programs highlights t hat if effective cross -sector 

partnerships are developed, and liquidity shortfalls in the microfinancing sector are resolved, 

Ghana can see a rapid mobilization of private capital towards the deployment of RE assets across 

the country. 

Introduction to Securitization 

The Subprime meltdown of 2007 gives securitization a bad name and undermines its capabilities 

to deploy vast amounts of capital and further democratize sector financing. In order to truly 

understand the potential of this financially -enginee red tool to tackle financing barriers faced by 

RE funding, an overview of securitization theory is needed. 

In the simplest term, asset securitization is a form of structured financing process where relatively 

homogenous cash -flow producing illiquid assets are pooled and repackaged into tradable 

securities and transferred to third -party investors who can now claim the impending cash -flows or 

any other financial benefits the pooled assets may generate (Fabozzi and Kothari, 2008). The 

four main phases of the securitization process include – (1) Pooling of assets (2) Transfer of 

pooled assets from originator to a bankruptcy -remote entity, such as a trust, or a special purpose 

vehicle (SPV) (3) Structuring of assets into credit pools offering varying risk/return profiles (credit 

enhancement) (4) Sale of securitised assets to third -party investors. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 722 

Fig. 7 Securitization Transaction Structure 

A typical transaction (Fig. 7) goes as follows: a loan -originator, typically a credit institution, 

extends a loan to a borrower in compliance with the underwriting standards of the institution; The 

originator or a sponsor, typically an investment bank, creates an off -balance -sheet vehicle 

(OBSV), referred to as an SPV, which has a legal status of a separate corporate ent ity with its 

own balance sheet. The creation of an SPV is critical for the securitization transaction to take 

place. It separates the originator from the risk associated with the creditworthiness of the pooled 

assets, further insulating the originator from bankruptcy claims on the SPV. Another benefit of 

creating an SPV is that it can obtain favourable financing as its creditworthiness is solely 

dependent on its underlying assets and not on the financial performance of the parent company 

(Originator); The o riginator transfers the pool of assets to the SPV by means of a “true -sale,” 

which entails that the pool of assets was legally sold, and not pledged as collateral for a financing 

(Fabozzi and Kothari, 2008); The SPV purchases the pooled assets from the fun ds received from 

issuance and sale of securities with varying bond classes (or tranches) to third -party investor; the 

following bond payments are serviced with the payments (i.e. interest and principal repayment) 

made by the borrower. The bond payments are made according to the varying cash distribution 

arrangements specific to the transactional needs. 

Securitizing a pool of assets can provide various financial and legal benefits for all the parties 

involved in the transaction. 

For the originator – due to turning on -balance -sheet financing into an off -balance sheet fee -based 

revenue model that is less capital intensive, originators can solely focus on lending and 

originating loans without assuming associated risks such as credit risk and interest rate risk . The 

following mechanism of transfer allows the originators to free up liquidity, as it transfers and sells Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 723 

off the loan pool to a sponsor in exchange for origination fees, while at the same time retaining 

its capital base. Financial institutions (origin ators) that have the necessary infrastructure to 

securitize the loan pool can also retain servicing fees associated with the transaction; 

securitization further allows credit institutions to better manage their risk -based capital 

requirements – such as CAR . These regulatory requirements focus on the financial cushion, such 

as capital reserves of the institution and credit risk associated with the portfolio assets on the 

institution’s balance sheet. Since securitization lowers retained risk, it enables the c reation of 

long -term financing structures with lower capital costs to create better value for its customers 

(borrower). 

As for the borrower – increasing credit availability in the market, as lenders now offer loans that, 

under normal conditions, would not have extended due to the rigidity of traditional on -balance -

sheet financing. Effects of securitization trickles down in enabling access to better financing 

conditions – long -term maturity at lower interest rates. Finally, as the market for securitization 

matures, standardization of legal frameworks and transactional processes take place; this 

enables an increase in specialized participants competing at various stages of the transaction, 

encouraging price and service competition, further driving down costs for the end -user (i.e., the 

borrower). 

Finally, for the investor – securitized assets are often tailored according to the risk -return appetite 

of investors, thus making the pool of assets more attractive to a wide range of retail and 

institutional invest ors. With the development of a secondary market for trading these collateralized 

securities, investors would benefit from improved liquidity; Further, by application of structural 

credit -enhancement techniques – over -collateralization, excess spread, subor dination, and third -

party guarantees – these securities improve their creditworthiness by offering credit support to 

absorb unexpected losses and risks associated with default and payment. On the demand side, 

this enables broadening of the investor base, a s regulated credit institutions would rather prefer 

to buy highly accredited securities backed by loans than hold the same individual loans with a 

lower credit rating; Finally, securitization provides a medium for asset diversification as it enables 

the de mocratization of investment opportunities in sectors previously inaccessible to the capital 

markets. 

From Households to the Capital Markets (Securitization of MF Loans to Enable Deployment 

of RE Assets) 

This section focuses solely on developing a more sophisticated form of structured financing –

securitization of micro -financed loans and RE equipment leases. The financing models prescribed 

in this chapter take key inspiration from the past securitization transactions such as – the 

Bangladesh Rural A dvancement Committee (BRAC) USD 180million, AAA -rated securitization 

deal of MFLs (Rahman et al., 2007); and the Bulgarian ProCredit Bank’s EUR47.8 million, BBB -

rated securitization deal of euro -denominated MFLs (MicroCapital, 2006). The section will 

recom mend two key securitization models – the cross -sector partnership model and the Pay -as -

you -go model. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 724 

Cross -sector Partnership (CSP) Securitization Model 

This financing structure partly takes a key element of cross -sector partnership between the 

regional MFIs and the private solar vendors, as primarily seen in the 2009 Ghana Energy 

Development and Access Project (GEDAP) that oversaw massive successes in improving 

household energy access and overall broadening of RE market participation. 

Like mortgage -bac ked securities (MBS), the CSP model solely relies on the interest payments 

and principal repayment, though it differs in underlying asset. Unlike MBS, which depend on 

mortgage payments, the CSP model relies on MFL repayments. The main characteristic of the 

model is the partnership agreement between regional MFI and individual RE systems providers 

(in this example, SHS providers), where these enterprises collaborate to provide financing and 

the technology needed to deploy solar systems for their clientele. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 725 

> Fig 8. CSP Model Financial Flow Structure

Due to regulatory capital requirements and prevailing liquidity constraints, MFIs need to access 

capital from sophisticated financial institutions to meet credit demand. MFIs can play the part of 

“originator” and a “primary servicer” in the securitization process. In return for the transfer of loan 

obligations, commercial banks can compensate MFIs with origination and servicers fees, on top 

of purchase of loan obligations. As a primary servicer, MFIs maintain regular relations with the 

borrower – with the s ole responsibility of monitoring and collecting interest payments; and in case 

of failure of loan repayment, recovery and disposal of collateral (i.e., solar system). MFIs have 

also transferred credit risk associated with the underlying loan obligations wi th the transfer of 

assets. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 726 

At the transaction pool level, the commercial banks create a reference portfolio of pooled assets 

acquired from MFIs and use it as collateral. The bank sets up an SPV and transfers the loan 

portfolio by the means of a “true” s ale. SPV issues asset -backed securities (ABS) and structures 

them according to the seniority of claims on underlying cash -flows. Structuring of the senior -most 

tranche is vital for the execution of the transaction (Fabozzi and Kothari, 2008). The followin g

tranches are structured as – senior tranche that entails the highest credit rating offering the lowest 

interest rate compared to other subordinated bonds; then comes the mezzanine tranche, which 

has a riskier position in the capital structure as compared to the senior -most tranche, though it 

offers a higher interest rate; and finally, the junior (equity) tranche that acts as first -loss tranche 

and minimizes credit risk for senior tranches. In conditions of high prepayment rates, the equity 

tranche absorbs the residual returns, further reducing prepayment risk for the senior tranches. 

Equity tranche investors receive the highest return to compensate for absorbing the highest risk 

in the capital structure. 

Subordination structures are a widely used method o f internal credit enhancement; the transaction 

can also implement other internal credit -enhancement mechanisms such as – excess spread, 

which is equal to the interest payments made by the asset portfolio minus funding costs, fees, 

and bond payments; the SP V can retain this excess profit by “trapping” it in a spread account to 

offset future losses. Overcollateralization, which is a form of equity that equals the price paid 

minus the par value of the collateralized assets. For example, the SPV purchase MFLs w orth 

USD 50million and transfers USD55million to the SPV, further issuing bonds worth USD 50 

million; the additional USD 5 million acts as excess collateral (Fabozzi and Kothari, 2008). Third -

party financial guarantees can also be used as a form of externa l credit enhancement to improve 

the credit quality of the bond structure. Here, the government can play a big part in offering 

insurance support to these financial transactions. 

The cash flows generated by the underlying portfolio are disbursed per the p ayment priority of the 

bondholders. 

Future transactions will become cost -effective as the portfolio size increases and economies of 

scale are realized. Improvement in investor comfortability towards this esoteric asset class; 

market maturity with standard ization of contracts, underwriting standards, and transactional 

processes; supply of reliable quality credit enhancers; and build -up of specialized competition at 

varying stages of the transaction will further lower costs and rates for the underlying RE as sets. 

Pay -as -you -go (PAYGo) Securitization Model 

The PAYGo model is an innovative business model that has provided sustainable energy to 

households at affordable prices. The model works as follows – the energy provider rents out solar 

PV systems to house holds in exchange for monthly receivables. Due to the “no -money -down” 

value proposition, widespread use of mobile online payments, and falling costs of RE equipment, 

the PAYGo business model has seen a record -breaking sales volume of 17,000 units sold in 

Ghana; 27% increase in annual sales recorded in 2019 (GOGLA, 2019). Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 727 

With system costs averaging at USD 15,500 per 10kW rooftop installation, few Ghanaians can 

afford to finance solar system installations outright (Dyson Energy, n.d.). Therefore, securitization 

of usage -based payment model that offers energy as a service for its consumers provides a more 

economical alternative 

.

> Fig 9. PAYGo Model Financial Flow

A typical securitization transaction for the PAYGo model would go as fol lows – A PAYGo company 

will buy solar PV equipment from a third -party manufacturer as per consumer demand. With 

installation sales, PAYGo will install, finance, and maintain the SHS for the customer in exchange 

for periodic payments per predetermined GH₵/k Wh rate with 1 -3% of annual price escalation to 

address the rise in electricity prices (Clark, 2014). The PAYGo company can bundle these leases 

and sell them to the SPV for securitization. The proceeds from the sale of underlying green -

backed securities ar e used to purchase the bundled leases. Further recapitalization can enable 

PAYGo to extend its services to other households. 

Securitization of these leases would have three immediate benefits to the RE industry. First, it 

provides PAYGo with a new means o f raising capital for an asset -intense SHS installation Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 728 

business, benefitting the PAYGo with recapitalization. Assuming growing demand, the PAYGo 

can expand lease sales to the existing portfolio for future securitization transactions. Second, the 

risk of default spreads among the ABS investors. Moreover finally, the development of green -ABS 

provides opportunities to diversify and broaden the investor base. If incentives are correctly 

aligned, securitization would have an additive effect on RE deployment ac ross the nation writ 

large. 

Ghana currently has the necessary financial infrastructure to employ securitization to develop a 

financing alternative for the RE industry (Asantey, 2013). Recent transactions conducted by GoG 

to raise capital on the internatio nal capital markets show that the concept of securitization is not 

foreign to Ghana. For example – Firstly, the ESLA deal, where an SPV sponsored by the GoG, 

E.S.L.A Plc. issued securitized bonds that denoted rights to the receivables collected from energy 

sector levies (E.S.L.A Plc, 2020). Finally, the Agyapa royalties deal, where the GoG created an 

SPV called Agyapa Royalties Ltd. and proceeded to transfer a 49% stake in Ghana’s future gold 

royalties in perpetuity. The following deal raised USD 500 millio n to ease the growing debt crisis. 

Though the transaction was not securitized, it certainly had the building blocks of a securitization 

transaction (West, 2020). The following models can dramatically enhance financing practices 

currently employed in the RE market of Ghana. 

System of Priority Sector Lending 

The recommended system of Priority Sector Lending (PSL) is adopted from the playbook of the 

Reserve Bank of India (RBI) that mandates the banking sector to reserve and disburse at least 

40% of their adj usted net bank credit of the previous year to sectors defined under the “Priority 

sector” category. The overarching philosophy behind mandating lending targets on financial 

institutions is to enable sectors of the economy that cannot receive credit either in adequate 

quantities or on time. PSL is synonymous with ethical financing. In India, credit institutions have 

made significant advancements in providing credit to green financing and social welfare (Sahoo 

and Goel, 2020). Under the recently revised RBI P SL guidelines, the renewable energy sector 

was added to the priority sector category, which enabled aligning the credit lines towards green 

financing. Similar to the RBI mandates, in 2015, Bangladesh Bank set up green lending 

requirements that dictated ban ks to allocate 5% of their advances into green projects (Volz, 2018). 

PSL guidelines and development of the RE securitization market have a synergistic effect on 

broadening the capital base for green financing. Debt securitization of green assets provides 

financial institutions with an alternative investment class to meet their PSL requirements. At the 

same time, further advancements in the development of a PSL framework will add to the 

institutional demand for PSL -asset securities. Banks prefer to invest in securitized assets that 

offer sufficient credit enhancement rather than risk direct exposure to underlying assets. An in -

practice example that shows the synergy between the PSL framework and securitization can be 

seen in the Indian MBS market, where the majority of the market is driven by PSL guidelines that 

categorize “housing” as a priority sector for credit extension. The majority of non -banking financial 

institutions use securitization as a route to sell Priority sector loans to financial institution s that fall 

short of PSL targets (Bothra, 2014). Consequently, MBS transaction and trading volume surged 

to INR 950 billion as of 2018 (Sitaraman et al., 2018). From this example, it can be inferred that if Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 729 

appropriate regulatory frameworks are put in pla ce, similar effects of increasing capital 

deployment can be seen in the renewable energy markets. 

The Bank of Ghana can adopt a similar regulatory mandate of PSL that could enable sectors of 

the economy with the much -needed financial inclusion. Determined legislative commitment to 

developing both the PSL guidelines and the securitization market can greatly help prime the 

Ghanaian sustainable energy market. 

Conclusion 

Ghana, currently, is at a critical juncture for transforming its energy apparatus into a new era of 

sustainability. The projected rise in future energy demand, and advancements made in the energy 

sector debt management program, ESRP, provides Ghana with the opportunity to develop 

policies and strategies to guide the transition towards renewables. Although there are incentive 

mechanisms and regulatory frameworks in place, they have failed to actively stimulate the 

development of the RE apparatus. This failure may be attributed to design flaws in the policy 

support mechanisms, en forcement failures of the regulatory purchase compliances, weakening 

of price mechanisms due to failures in the implementation of co -dependent supporting policies, 

institutional challenges, and lack of access to domestic and international project financing 

markets. 

Therefore, this paper has provided a critical assessment of the deficiencies in the current 

Ghanaian RE market and recommend alternative structures to offset the key constraints that 

hinder sectoral growth.  The paper suggests the following stra tegies:  

> •

Bundling scheme for renewable energy with conventional energy sources under current 

PPAs. Viability Gap Funding to bridge equity financing gaps with auctioned government 

grants.  

> •

Tax -equity structures such as partnership flip to incentivize institutional project equity 

participation.  

> •

Development of financially -engineered tools such as securitization of microfinance loans 

to lower risk and cost of capital for off -grid renewable systems.  

> •

Adoption of Priority -sector lending framewo rk to mandate institutional lending advances 

towards the RE sector. 

In conclusion, Ghana must pursue appropriate and actionable strategies in order to achieve its 

SDG 7 targets. It must be noted that no amount of financial and regulatory innovation can de ter 

risks involved with an uncommitted government. Therefore, it is of utmost importance that 

regulatory commitment goes hand -in -hand with private RE sector advancements to expedite the 

acceleration of renewable energy development in the country. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 730 

Referen ces 

Ackah, I., Auth, K., Kwakye, J. and Moss, T. (2021). A Case Study of Ghana’s Power Purchase 

Agreements . [online] Available at: https://www.energyforgrowth.org/wp -

content/uploads/2021/03/A -Case -Study -of -Ghanas -Power -Purchase -Agreements.pdf. 

Afful, M .C. (2020). Ghana: Gov’t Repeals Feed -In -Tariff to Make Way for Competitive Bidding 

for Procurement of RE Electricity . [online] Energy News Africa. Available at: 

https://energynewsafrica.com/index.php/2020/11/28/ghana -govt -repeals -feed -in -tariff -to -

make -way -for -competitive -bidding -for -procurement -of -re -electricity/. 

African Association of Entrepreneurs (AAE) (2013). Barclays Microbanking Initiative –

Partnering with Susu Collectors . [online] Africa Association of Entrepreneurs. Available 

at: https://a aeafrica.org/home/barclays -microbanking -initiative -partnering -with -susu -

collectors/. 

Agbugah, F. (2014). Fidelity Ghana Acquires Pro Credit Savings and Loans - Ventures Africa .

[online] Ventures Africa. Available at: https://venturesafrica.com/fidelity -ghana -acquires -

pro -credit -savings -and -loans/. 

Aguilar, L.A. (2015). Feasibility Study of Developing Large Scale Solar PV Project in Ghana: an 

Economical Analysis . [online] Available at: 

https://publications.lib.chalmers.se/records/fulltext/218869/218869.pdf [Accessed 15 

Mar. 2022]. 

Asantey, J.O. (2013). The Efficacy of Small and Medium Enterprise Securitization as an Option 

for Small and Medium Enterprise Financing in Ghana . [online] A vailable at: 

https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.408.1155&rep=rep1&type=pd 

f. 

Bank of Ghana (BoG) (2021a). Bank of Ghana Liquidity Assistance Framework . [online] p.4. 

Available at: https://www.bog.gov.gh/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/Bank -of -Ghana -

Liquidity -Assistance -Framework -February -2021 -1.pdf. 

Bank of Ghana (BoG) (2021b). Financial Soundness Indicators - Capital Adequacy Ratio (%) .

[online] Bog.gov.gh. Available at: https://www. bog.gov.gh/economic -data/financial -

soundness/. 

Bank of Ghana (BoG) (2021c). Interest Rates IR Indicators . [online] Economic Data. Available 

at: https://www.bog.gov.gh/economic -data/interest -rates/. 

Bolinger, M. (2014). An Analysis of the Costs, Benefit s, and Implications of Different 

Approaches to Capturing the Value of Renewable Energy Tax Incentives. Lawrence 

Berkeley National Laboratory . Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40n5f87b Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 731 

Bothra, N. (2014). Development in the Securitization M arket in India . [online] Indian 

Securitisation Foundation. Available at: https://vinodkothari.com/wp -

content/uploads/2015/11/Developments_in_Securitization_India_Nidhi -Bothra.pdf. 

Brydon, L. (1985). Ghanaian responses to the nigerian expulsions of 1983. African Affairs ,

[online] 84, pp.561 –585. Available at:  http://www.jstor.org/stable/722328 .

Chu, M. (2006). Commercial Returns and Social Value: the Case of Microfinanc e. [online] 

Harvard Business School. Available at: 

https://www.findevgateway.org/sites/default/files/publications/files/mfg -en -paper -

commercial -returns -and -social -values -the -case -of -microfinance -paper -2005.pdf. 

Clark, E. (2014). Why Lease Solar Panels When You Can Own Them? [online] Renewable 

Energy World. Available at: https://www.renewableenergyworld.com/storage/why -lease -

solar -panels -when -you -can -own -them/#gref. 

Climate Investment Funds (2015). Meeting of the SREP Sub -Committee Agenda Item 4 SREP 

INVESTMENT PLAN FOR GHANA . [online] Available at: 

https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/cif_enc/files/srep_13_4_srep_investment_ 

plan_for_ghana_0.pdf. 

Dadson Awunyo -Vitor, Samanhyia, S. and Elijah Addo Bonney (2018). Do oil prices influence 

econ omic growth in Ghana? An empirical analysis. Cogent Economics & Finance ,

[online] 6(2332 -2039), p.1496551. Available at: 

https://doi.org/10.1080/23322039.2018.1496551. 

Data.worldbank.org. (2017). Global Financial Inclusion (Global FINDEX) , Account(% age 15+) 

(percent) | Data . [online] Available at: <https://databank.worldbank.org/source/global -

financial -inclusion/Type/TABLE/preview/on> 

Dyson Energy (n.d.). Dyson Energy Packages . [online] Dysonenergysolar. Available at: 

https://www.dysonenergysolar.co m/copy -of -guarantee. 

Earne, J. (2015). Greenfielding in Africa : a Model for Building Capacity and Scale in Nascent 

Markets. In: SmartLessons Real Experiences, Real Development . [online] Available at: 

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/74424146 7991936459/pdf/99058 -BRI -

IFC -SMART -LESSONS -Box393181B -PUBLIC -20150507T160223 -2015 -Greenfielding -

in -Africa -B.pdf. 

Energy Commission (2006). Strategic National Energy Plan (2006 – 2020) : Main Report .

[online] www.energycom.gov.gh. Available at: 

http://www.energycom.gov.gh/files/snep/MAIN%20REPORT%20final%20PD.pdf. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 732 

Energy Commission (2012). Energy Commission, Ghana . [online] www.energycom.gov.gh. 

Available at:  http://www.energycom.gov.gh/files/RE%20LICENCE%20MANUAL.pdf .

Energy Commission (2019). Ghana Renewable Energy Master Plan . [online] Available at: 

http://www.energycom.gov.gh/files/Renewable -Energy -Masterplan -February -2019.pdf. 

Energy Commission (2020a). 2020 Electricity Supply Plan for the Ghana Power System a 

Power Supply Outlook with Medium Term Projections . [online] Available at: 

https://energ ycom.gov.gh/files/2020%20Electricity%20Supply%20Plan.pdf. 

Energy Commission (2020b). National Energy Statistics (2000 - 2019) . [online] Available at: 

https://energycom.gov.gh/files/2020%20ENERGY%20STATISTICS -revised.pdf. 

Energy Commission (EC) (n.d.). Mandate and Functions . [online] www.energycom.gov.gh. 

Available at:  https://www.energycom.gov.gh/about/mandate -and -functions .

E.S.L.A Plc (2020). Re lating to the Prospectus - for the Offer and Listing of Bonds under a GHS 

10 Billion Bond Issuance Programme . [online] Available at: 

https://www.eslaplc.com/pages/download/E_S_L_A_plc_Supplement_to_Prospectus.pdf 

Fabozzi, F.J. and Kothari, V. (2008). Introduction to Securitization . Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & 

Sons. 

FitchRatings (2022a). Correction: Fitch Downgrades Ghana to “B -”; Outlook Negative . [online] 

Fitchratings.com. Available at: 

https://www.fitchratings.com/research/sovereigns/correction -fi tch -downgrades -ghana -to -

b-outlook -negative -21 -01 -2022. 

FitchRatings (2022b). Fitch Rates Ecobank Ghana “B -”; Outlook Negative . [online] 

Fitchratings.com. Available at: https://www.fitchratings.com/research/banks/fitch -rates -

ecobank -ghana -b-outlook -nega tive -03 -02 -2022. 

FitchRatings (2022c). Ghana’s Financing Challenges Set to Rise If Yields Remain High . [online] 

Fitchratings.com. Available at: https://www.fitchratings.com/research/sovereigns/ghanas -

financing -challenges -set -to -rise -if -yields -remain -hig h-01 -11 -2021. 

Ghana Microfinance Institutions Network (GHAMFIN). 2014. “Performance Monitoring and 

Benchmarking of Microfinance Institutions in Ghana: Trends in the Industry during the 

2000s (2006 -12)”, Accra. 

GhanaWeb (2022). US$13.2bn Saved in Power Purchase Agreement Renegotiations . [online] 

GhanaWeb.com. Available at: 

https://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/business/US -13 -2bn -saved -in -power -

purchase -agreement -renegotiations -1465639. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 733 

Global Partnership on Output -Based Aid (GPOBA) (2016). Lessons L earned - Improving Rural 

Energy Access through Solar Home Systems in Ghana . [online] Available at: 

https://www.gprba.org/sites/gprba/files/publication/downloads/LL12_GhanaSHS.pdf. 

Glover, B.X. (2021). Energy Sector Recovery Programme: Govt Saves $5bn si nce 2019 .

[online] Graphic Online. Available at: https://www.graphic.com.gh/news/general -

news/ghana -news -energy -sector -recovery -programme -govt -saves -5bn -in -2019.html. 

GOGLA (2019). Global Off -Grid Solar Market Report Semi -Annual Sales and Impact Data 

Public Report the Voice of the Off -Grid Solar Energy Industry . [online] Available at: 

https://www.gogla.org/sites/default/files/resource_docs/global_off_grid_solar_market_re 

port_h2201 9.pdf. 

Government of India (2008). Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission Towards Building SOLAR 

INDIA . [online] Available at: 

https://www.seci.co.in/upload/static/files/mission_document_JNNSM(1).pdf. 

Grameen Shakti (n.d.). Grameen Shakti . [online] gs hakti.org. Available at: 

https://www.gshakti.org/about -us/history. 

Graphic Online (2021). Ghana Successfully Issues US$3 Billion Eurobond Notwithstanding 

COVID -19 Pandemic . [online] Graphic Online. Available at: 

https://www.graphic.com.gh/business/busi ness -news/ghana -successfully -issues -us -3-

billion -eurobond -notwithstanding -covid -19 -pandemic.html. 

Green Climate Fund (2021). FP168: Leveraging Energy Access Finance (“LEAF”) Framework .

[online] Available at: https://www.greenclimate.fund/sites/default/f iles/document/funding -

proposal -fp168.pdf. 

Hinshaw, D. (2014). In Africa, Calls for Heavenly (Currency) Intervention. Wall Street Journal .

[online] 7 Mar. Available at: https://www.wsj.com/articles/heavenly -currency -intervention -

is -sought -1394155501. 

Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL) (n.d.). Infrastructure Development 

Company Limited (IDCOL) . [online] idcol.org. Available at: 

https://idcol.org/home/r_lending_terms. 

Institute for Fiscal Studies (2018). Ghana: Implications of Energy Se ctor State -Owned 

Enterprises Debt Restructuring for the Fiscal Position and the Banking Sector . [online] 

Available at: http://ifsghana.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/Fiscal -Alert -10.pdf. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 734 

Institute of Stastical, Social and Economic Research, Universit y of Ghana, Legon (ISSER) 

(2005). Guide to Electric Power in Ghana First Edition RESOURCE CENTER FOR 

ENERGY ECONOMICS AND REGULATION . [online] Available at: 

https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnads932.pdf. 

International Monetary Fund (IMF). African Dept. ( 2021). Ghana: 2021 Article IV Consultation -

Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Ghana .

International Monetary Fund. 

Renewable Energy Act .832 [online] Available at: 

http://energycom.gov.gh/files/RENEWABLE%20ENERGY%20A CT%202011%20(ACT% 

20832).pdf. 

Renewable Energy (Amendment) Act .1045 [online] Available at: 

https://www.purc.com.gh/attachment/58406 -20210701030745.pdf. 

Kolavalli, S. and Vigneri, M. (2011). Cocoa in Ghana: Shaping the Success of an Economy .

[online] A vailable at: 

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/304221468001788072/930107812_20140 

8252033945/additional/634310PUB0Yes0061512B09780821387450.pdf. 

Kwakye, Dr.J.K. (2010). A Critical Analysis . [online] Available at: 

https://media.africaportal.org/documents/high -interest -rates -in -ghana -a-critical -

analysis.pdf. 

Martin, I., Amadu, B. and Brew -Hammond, A. (2001). Power Sector Reform in Ghana: the 

Untold Story . [online] Available at:  http://pdf.wri.org/power_politics/ghana.pdf .

Martin, K. (2021). Solar Tax Equity Structures | Norton Rose Fulbright . [online] 

www.projectfinance.law. Available at: 

https://www.projectfinance.law/publications/2021/december/solar -tax -equity -structures/. 

Mensah, N.Y. and Smith, P. (2018). Ghana Seeks Solutions to Power Woes for Economic 

Growth . [online] The Africa Report.com. Available at: 

https://www.theafricareport.com/702/ghana -seeks -solutions -to -power -woes -for -

economic -growth/. 

MicroCapital (2006). ProCred it Bank Bulgaria Securitizes $61.2 Million of Current Loan Portfolio 

to Facilitate Microfinance Investment - MicroCapital . [online] MicroCapital. Available at: 

https://www.microcapital.org/procredit -bank -bulgaria -securitizes -612 -million -of -current -

loan -portfolio -to -facilitate -microfinance -investment/. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 735 

Ministry of Energy (MoE) (2019). Energy Sector Recovery Program . [online] Available at: 

http://energycom.gov.gh/files/2019%201111%20ESRP%20ESTF_Clean_v3.0redacted% 

20final.pdf. 

Ministry of Energy (MoE ) (2020). Transforming Ghana beyond Aid . [online] p.55. Available at: 

https://mofep.gov.gh/sites/default/files/pbb -estimates/2021/2021 -PBB -MoEn.pdf. 

Ministry of Power (2015). National Renewable Energy Action Plans - Ghana . [online] Available 

at: https:/ /www.se4all -

africa.org/fileadmin/uploads/se4all/Documents/Country_PANER/Ghana_National_Rene 

wable_Energy_Action_Plans.pdf. 

Nii, J. (2016). How effectively has ghana implemented its policy for large -scale renewable 

electricity deployment: A qualitative a ssessment. Renewable Energy Law and Policy 

Review , [online] 7, pp.133 –144. Available at:  http://www.jstor.org/stable/26256493 .

Nowak, M., Rifaat Basanti, Horvath, B., Kochhar, K. and Prem, R. (1996). III ghana, 1983 –91. 

In: Adjustment for Growth - The African Experience . [online] International Monetary 

Fund, p.C3. Available at: https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/books/084/00149 -

9781557755667 -en/C3.xml. 

Ocran, M.K. (2 007). A Modelling Of Ghana’s Inflation Experience: 1960 -2003. Studies in 

Economics and Econometrics , [online] 31(1), pp.119 –144. Available at: 

https://media.africaportal.org/documents/RP169.pdf. 

Oxford Business Group (2017). Projects in Pipeline to Impr ove Grid Stability in Ghana’s Utilities 

Sector . [online] Oxford Business Group. Available at: 

https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/balance -power -number -projects -pipeline -are -

expected -improve -grid -reliability. 

Parliament of Ghana (2020). The Renewab le Energy (Amendment) Bill, 2020 Read the Third 

Time and Passed. [online] www.parliament.gh. Available at: 

https://www.parliament.gh/news?CO=98#:~:text=It%20has%20therefore%20become%2 

0imperative . 

Pfan, C., Boateng, A. and Namiti , M. (2015). 28MW Solar PV Plant – Ghana WAFCEF - 2.

[online] Ghana Capital Partners. Available at: 

http://www.ecreee.org/sites/default/files/editor/other/28mw_solar_pv_plant_ -

_ghana_wafcef_ -2_ -_ghana_capital_partners.pdf. 

Phillips, M.M. (2007). How Gh ana’s Economic Turnaround Is Threatened. Wall Street Journal .

[online] 6 Aug. Available at:  https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB118635544536388723 .Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 736 

Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC) (2016). Publication of Feed -in -Tariff for 

Electricity Generated from Renewable Energy Sources . Available at: 

https://www.purc.com.gh/attachment/302019 -20210309110342.pdf. 

Pueyo, A. (2018). What constrains re newable energy investment in Sub -Saharan Africa? A 

comparison of Kenya and Ghana. World Development , [online] 109, pp.85 –100. 

Available at:  https://www.sciencedirect.com/sc ience/article/pii/S0305750X1830127X .

Rahman, R., Shah, S. and Boston, M. (2007). BRAC Micro Credit Securitization Series I: 

Lessons from the World’s First Micro -Credit Backed Security (MCBS) . [online] Available 

at: 

https://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/sites/socialenterprise/files/BRAC_Micro_Credit_Securitiz 

ation_MFA.pdf. 

Sahoo, Dr.B.P. and Goel, P. (2020). Impact of Banks’ Lending Pattern on Total Priority Sector 

Lending (PSL): an Empirical Approach . [online] Available at :

http://paideumajournal.com/gallery/20 -july2020.pdf. 

Shantayanan Devarajan, Dollar, D. and Torgny Holmgren (2001). Aid and reform in Africa : 

lessons from ten case studies . Washington, D.C.: World Bank. 

Sitaraman, K., Chandran, D.K., Inamdar, R. and Bodhankar, S. (2018). Securitisation Resilient 

despite Roadblocks - Changing demand -supply Dynamics Help Navigate the 

Challenges . [online] CRISIL Ratings. Available at: 

https://www.crisil.com/content/dam/crisil/our -

analysis/reports/Ratings/documents/20 18/june/securitisation -resilient -despite -

roadblocks.pdf. 

Takouleu, J.M. (2022). AFRICA: AfDB Provides $164 Million for Decentralized Renewable 

Energy in 6 Countries . [online] Afrik 21. Available at: https://www.afrik21.africa/en/africa -

afdb -provides -16 4-million -for -decentralized -renewable -energy -in -6-countries/. 

Thapar, S., Sharma, S. and Verma, A. (2016). Economic and environmental effectiveness of 

renewable energy policy instruments: Best practices from India. Renewable and 

Sustainable Energy Revie ws , [online] 66, pp.487 –498. Available at: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032116304397. 

The Energy Year (2022). Ghana’s Power Sector Expansion . [online] Theenergyyear.com. 

Available at: https://theenergyyear.com/articles/ghanas -power -sector -expansion/?cn -

reloaded=1. 

The New York Times (1979). Two Decades of OPEC Price Moves. The New York Times .

[online] 29 Jun. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1979/06/29/archives/two -

decades -of -opec -price -moves.html. Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 737 

United Nations Capit al Development Fund (UNCDF) (2005). Microfinance and the Millennium 

Development Goals . [online] Available at: 

https://www.yearofmicrocredit.org/docs/mdgdoc_MN.pdf. 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (n.d.). About Ghana . [online] UNDP in 

Ghana. Available at: https:// 

www.gh.undp.org/content/ghana/en/home/countryinfo.html#:~:text=A%20well%2 

Dadministered%20country%20by. 

Ussif, R. (2020). CHALLENGES FACING M ICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS AND FINANCIAL 

REGULATIONS IN GHANA. International Journal of Academic Management Science 

Research (IJAMSR). 

Van Hear, N. (1992). CONSEQUENCES OF THE FORCED MASS REPATRIATION OF 

MIGRANT COMMUNITIES: Recent Cases from West Africa and the Middle East .

[online] Available at:  https://cdn.unrisd.org/assets/library/papers/pdf -files/dp38.pdf .

Volta River Authority (VRA) (1980). VRA 19th Annual Report and Accounts 1980 . [online] 

www.vra.com. Available at: 

https://www.vra.com/resources/annual_reports/VRA%2019th%20Annual%20Report%20 

and%20Accounts%201980.pdf .

Volta River Authority (VRA) (1985). VRA 24th Annual Report and Accounts 1985 . [online] 

www.vra.com. Available at: 

https://www.vra.com/resources/annual_reports/VRA%2024th%20Annual%20Report%20 

and%20Accounts%201985.pdf. 

Volta River Authority (VRA) (199 1). VRA 30th Annual Report and Accounts 1991 . [online] 

www.vra.com. Available at: 

https://www.vra.com/resources/annual_reports/VRA%2030th%20Annual%20Report%20 

and%20Accounts%201991.pdf. 

Volz, U. (2018). ADBI Working Paper Series FOSTERING GREEN FINANCE FOR 

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN ASIA Asian Development Bank Institute . [online] 

Available at: https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/403926/adbi -wp814.pdf. 

West, J. (2020). Agyapa Royalties Limited: a Brief on Potential Valuation of the IPO . [online] 

Available at: https://openoil.net/wp/wp -content/uploads/2016/12/Agyapa -IPO -Valuation -

GHEITI.pdf. 

World Bank. 1985. World Development Report 1985. New York: Oxford University Press. © 

World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/1098 6/5968 License: CC BY 

3.0 IGO Why It Matters Vol. 1 | 738 

World Bank (2017). STATE OF REPORT ELECTRICITY ACCESS 2017 . [online] Available at: 

https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/364571494517675149/pdf/114841 -

REVISED -JUNE12 -FINAL -SEAR -web -REV -optimized.pdf. 

World Bank (2 020a). Broad money growth (annual %) - Ghana | Data . [online] 

data.worldbank.org. Available at: 

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FM.LBL.BMNY.ZG?locations=GH. 

World Bank (2020b). GDP growth (annual %) - Ghana | Data . [online] data.worldbank.org. 

Ava ilable at:  https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=GH .

World Bank (2020c). Inflation, consumer prices (annual %) - Ghana | Data . [online] 

data.worldbank.org. Available at: 

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG?locations=GH. 

World Bank Group. (2016). Ghana Access to Finance. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World 

Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.or g/handle/10986/30216 License: CC BY 3.0 

IGO
