Title: sime_darby_ar2020_full_book_website.02112020.pdf

URL Source: https://www.simedarby.com/sites/default/files/annualreport-pdf/sime_darby_ar2020_full_book_website.02112020.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 29 Dec 2022 19:27:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 329

Markdown Content:
> Annual Report 2020

# RESILIENCE THROUGH DIVERSITY Live Broadcast Function Room, Ground Floor, Menara Sime Darby, Oasis Corporate Park, Jalan PJU 1A/2, Ara Damansara, 47301 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia Thursday, 12 November 2020 at 10.00 a.m. 

# 14 th Annual General Meeting 

Our Vision 

To be the leading Motors and Industrial player in Asia Pacific. 

Our Mission 

We are committed to developing a winning portfolio of sustainable businesses. We subscribe to good corporate governance and high ethical values. We continuously strive to deliver superior financial returns through operational excellence and high performance standards. We provide an environment for our people to realise their full potential. 

Our Core Values Integrity 

Uphold high levels of personal and professional values in all our business interactions and decisions. 

Respect & Responsibility 

Respect for the individuals we interact with and the environment that we operate in (internally and externally) and commit to being responsible in all our actions. 

Excellence 

Stretch the horizons of growth for ourselves and our business through our unwavering ambition to achieve outstanding personal and business results. 

Enterprise 

Seek and seize opportunities with speed and agility, challenging set boundaries. 

About This Report 08 

At a Glance 

Group Overview 10 Corporate Structure 12 Highlights 13 

Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review 

Chairman’s Statement 14 Group Chief Executive Officer’s Review 20 Business Environment 26 Business Model 34 Value Creation Plan 36 Engaging Stakeholders 38 Material Issues 40 Risk Management 43 

Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review 

Group Chief Financial Officer’s Review 52 Divisional Operations Review 60 

Creating Sustainable Value 

Overview 86 Safety 89 People 94 Community Contributions and Development 98 Environmental Sustainability 100 

Governance 

Board of Directors 106 Executive Leadership 112 Chairman’s Statement on Corporate Governance 116 Leadership & Effectiveness 118 Effective Audit & Risk Management 126 Integrity in Corporate Reporting and Meaningful Relationships with Stakeholders 134 Statement on Risk Management and Internal Control 136 Additional Compliance Information 144 Statement of Responsibility by the Board of Directors 148 

Financial Statements 

Directors’ Report 150 Statement by Directors 155 Statutory Declaration 155 Independent Auditors’ Report 156 Statements of Profit or Loss 164 Statements of Comprehensive Income 165 Statements of Financial Position 166 Statements of Changes in Equity 168 Statements of Cash Flows 171 Notes to the Financial Statements 175 

Appendices 

Corporate Information 292 Analysis of Shareholdings 293 Properties of the Group 296 Notice to Shareholders 304 Notice to Proxies 308 Independent Assurance Report 312 Notice of Annual General Meeting 314 Statement Accompanying Notice of Annual General Meeting 321 Form of Proxy 

# Contents Industrial 

Sime Darby Industrial is a major player in the global heavy equipment sector, partnering with one of the biggest names in the industry, Caterpillar, for over 90 years. Sime Darby Industrial is also associated with a comprehensive range of complementary products and industrial solutions throughout Asia Pacific. 

Read more on page 60 

# Healthcare 

Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care delivers world-class healthcare services, utilising the latest in medical technologies at our hospitals and specialist facilities in Malaysia, Indonesia and Hong Kong. 

Read more on page 76 Motors 

Sime Darby Motors is the automotive arm of Sime Darby Berhad and is involved in the retail, distribution and assembly businesses, in nine markets across the Asia Pacific region. It represents luxury brands such as BMW, Jaguar, Land Rover, Porsche and Volvo, and super-luxury names such as Rolls-Royce, Lamborghini, Ferrari and McLaren, as well as broad-appeal market brands such as Ford and Hyundai. 

Read more on page 68 

# Logistics 

Sime Darby Logistics is the primary operator of Weifang Port in Shandong Province, China, and the owner of three major river ports along the Grand Canal in Jining, also in the Shandong Province. Its shipping network services customers throughout North-eastern China, Southern China, and East Asia. 

Read more on page 80 RESILIENCE THROUGH DIVERSITY 

Sime Darby Berhad (Sime Darby) is a thriving multinational. Throughout its 110-year evolution, the Group’s diversified portfolio, business innovation and disciplined determination have proven resilient to  the challenges of local and global market forces. Sime  Darby has time and time again proven its business acuity and  dexterity to convert opportunities to gains. This strategic advantage complements its unwavering commitment to grow alongside its  stakeholders, cementing a foundation to create sustainable value  for  years to come. 

# Diversification Digitalisation Optimisation 

# 02 04 06 of Sectors and Geographies from Offline to Online Driven by Financial Management Discipline South Korea Papua New Guinea Maldives Christmas Island Indonesia Brunei Thailand Malaysia Taiwan Australia China Macau Vietnam Singapore New Caledonia Solomon Islands New Zealand Hong Kong 

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Group Chief Executive Officer (GCEO) The outlook for the global economy is set to be challenging, amid depressed sentiments brought about by the pandemic. Sime Darby’s time-tested strategy of geographical and sectoral diversification which provides a broader earnings base, is ever relevant in weathering and navigating the uncertain times ahead. 

# 18 countries and territories across the Asia Pacific region allows for a balanced exposure throughout the business cycle 

# Strategic Focus 

The Group’s broad geographical footprint has been key to its resilience. In FY2020, revenue contribution from its two largest geographical locations, China and Australasia, are at 40% and 36 % respectively. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Industrial Australasian operations provided a stable foundation for the Group to rely on when other markets were harder hit. The Group’s China operations also recovered quickly to provide further support. As a result, the Group was able to maintain consistent revenue streams and strong cash flow. 

# of Sectors and Geographies 

# Diversification 

02 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 The Industrial Division registered a PBIT increase of 21% to  RM967 million in  FY2020 due to higher  profits from its  Australia and China operations. Sime Darby Industrial’s Australia operations were mostly spared from the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic while its China operations made a strong recovery in the  fourth quarter of FY2020, supplemented by incentives from Caterpillar (CAT). An Essential Industry 

Sime Darby Industrial’s operations in China were impacted by the pandemic during the months of January and February 2020. Operations were disrupted as authorities implemented pandemic countermeasures such as movement restrictions and temporary business closures in  a majority of  the  provinces where the  Group operates. Sime  Darby Industrial’s China operations resumed in  March 2020 when these restrictions were relaxed. Fortunately, mining in Australia was classified as an  essential sector, and Sime Darby Industrial’s Australian operations remained uninterrupted all year. Customers in the heavy equipment business continued to depend on Sime Darby Industrial for maintenance and  parts, which bolstered its  performance for the year, with the strongest results out  of  Australia. The  solid performance served to mitigate the impact of China’s  lockdown in January and February 2020, and the  subsequent lockdown in  South-east Asia. The Group’s “ambidexterity” in tapping onto different markets is  certainly an advantage in  times of crisis. 

> 03

Datuk Thomas Leong Yew Hong 

Group Chief Strategy Officer (GCSO) Our focus on accelerating our digitalisation plans has provided much needed resilience during these trying times. The move to digital has never been more urgent, with technology fundamentally changing how businesses are  run and how we work. Sime Darby has spearheaded technological adoption across all  our businesses, preparing the Group for a digital future with the potential to unlock new  growth opportunities both in terms of  sales and productivity. 

# Digitalisation 

# from Offline to Online 

# The Sime Darby Industrial Australia Integrated Digital  Ecosystem 

Sime Darby Industrial Australasia (SDIA) is  transforming the way they do business by  implementing an integrated digital ecosystem. The digital ecosystem aims to  simplify processes for customers and employees, boost productivity, save costs  and essentially deliver value to shareholders. Built with the future in mind, the systems are designed to integrate with  future technologies and enable the  seamless connection for the business and  its  customers. The focus of the digital ecosystem has  been to improve operational excellence through the development of five key capabilities: 1.  An enterprise portal to provide a single digital entry point for employees and customers to access core data. 2.  A digital marketing platform offering an end-to-end digital content and commerce platform built to reach, engage, and convert customers rapidly with real-time, individualised digital experiences. 3.  Employee applications to simplify repetitive tasks for customer facing staff, including parts, service, assets, and sales. 4.  17 new robotic process automation processes including parts order conversion, customer invoice requests, customer statement requests, purchase order and  service technician app integration with the ERP system. 5.  Investment in data, analytics and business intelligence, focusing on prioritising customer experience and providing end-to-end services to increase customers’ uptime and productivity. The shift to a future-oriented digital ecosystem that delivers meaningful insights  will continue to improve operational efficiencies and reduce the cost  of ownership and downtime on customer equipment. Anticipating customer needs and integrating intelligence with automation, will deliver high-value services while optimising costs for the business. 

04 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 BMW Convenience 360 

Digitalisation is a core component of  the Group’s growth strategy, and enables the Group to leverage on digital infrastructure and technological solutions to create new sales channels and to improve service offerings. This  is especially relevant today as the Group continue to navigate the new environment brought about by the  pandemic. Nevertheless, it also brings with it new opportunities for  growth. BMW  Group Asia has  collaborated with the Group’s subsidiary, Performance Motors Limited in  Singapore to usher  in a  new era of car buying experience, with the introduction of BMW Convenience 360. This initiative provides a safe and easy way for customers to purchase the BMW of  their choice, whilst ensuring the  highest levels of customer service  Performance Motors  Limited is known for. An  important component of BMW  Convenience 360 is the BMW  Performance SG Mobile App. 

Browse BMW Models and Request for a Test  Drive 

Explore  your favourite BMW models and book a test drive, all at your fingertips. 

Receive a Complimentary Car Valuation 

Submit your request for a complimentary car  valuation and  find out the estimated trade-in value of your current car. 

Book a Service Appointment and Access the Status of your Service, Live 

Arrange your next service appointment for your BMW and access the status of your service, live through the app. 

Get Notified on the Latest Deals and Activities 

Be  the first to enjoy our latest deals and RSVP to  upcoming events such as car launches and  more. 

BMW Performance SG Mobile App at  a Glance: 05 Inventory Management 

The Group’s key operations entered  FY2020 with a focus on  optimising inventory holding, increasing inventory turnaround and  developing a sustainable inventory holding policy which resonates with the Group’s objective  to improve returns. The Industrial Division, particularly in  Australia and the Pacific Islands, succeeded in pushing  through a reduction in  holding of inventory aged more  than 180 days through a combination of innovative sales  strategy and careful inventory  management. At the Motors Division, inventory levels were centrally monitored across the Division to stem the build-up of inventory. This, coupled with an aggressive sales strategy, resulted in a significant drop in inventory holding in FY2020, notably  in the Malaysia, China, Hong  Kong and Macau operations, freeing up working capital for other  business operations and reducing short term borrowings. The concerted effort has shown considerable success, with inventory  levels for the Group declining to RM8.3 billion in FY2020 compared to RM8.5 billion in FY2019, notwithstanding the acquisition of  two major business operations which included RM496 million in  acquired inventories.  

> 06 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Optimisation 

# Driven by Financial Management Discipline 

# Net cash flow from operating activities in  FY2020 was RM3.01 billion against the  RM1.35 billion generated in FY2019. Working Capital Management 

In recognising the challenges that the  Group faced as FY2020 unfolded and  the COVID-19 outbreak quickly developed into a pandemic, a Downturn Action Plan was put into  place to proactively mitigate the  impact of the pandemic on our  businesses. A key thrust of the  Downturn Action Plan was on working capital management, where the Group restrategised inventory management policies to adapt to a dampened market and renegotiated trade terms with key stakeholders. Net cash flow from operating activities in FY2020 was RM3.01 billion against the RM1.35 billion generated in FY2019. Notably, working capital management strategies focused on inventories resulted in an increase in operating cash flow by RM947 million. The additional cash flows were largely used to repay  borrowings. With lower borrowings and a strong financial position, the Group has the  financial agility to navigate the  challenges posed by the global economic uncertainties in the days  ahead. 

Mustamir Mohamad 

Group Chief Financial Officer (GCFO) Moving forward, the focus on working capital optimisation will be sharpened to realise our  overarching objective of enhancing ROIC to  maximise value for our shareholders. 

07 The Sime Darby Annual Report (SDAR) covers  the financial and non-financial performance of Sime Darby’s group  of companies (the Group) for the financial year  2020 (FY2020). The SDAR informs our  stakeholders regarding the Group’s key  developments, challenges, solutions and  strategies. It  reflects our commitment to open communications and  full accountability. 

How We Can Further Improve 

Sime Darby endeavours to engage all stakeholders in  a fair and  transparent manner, and values all feedback that can  help us do  this better. We welcome queries and comments on this Report. Please contact our Investor Relations team: (603) 7623 2000 investor.relations@simedarby.com 

Reporting Philosophy and  Principles 

The SDAR details our key achievements, initiatives and results in FY2020. It  charts our progression towards our medium to long-term strategic goals, and provides insights into our strategy, operations and long-term sustainability. We provide stakeholders with the most relevant information for their needs and investment decisions. Our financial statements are independently audited and prepared in compliance with the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards (MFRS). 

Reporting Frameworks 

As much as possible, the SDAR adopts  the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) framework and marks our 7 th Integrated Report (IR). It is also aligned to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN  SDG), where strategic sustainability matters, which have a material impact and influence on our business and stakeholders over time, are clearly identified. Our reporting processes and publications meet the relevant requirements of  the Malaysian Code on  Corporate Governance 2017 (MCCG 2017), the Main Market Listing Requirements (MMLR) of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad, the Companies Act 2016, the  MFRS and the International Financial Reporting Standards. 

Reporting Scope and Boundaries 

The SDAR presents the performance of Sime Darby’s value-creating activities during the period 1 July 2019 to 30  June 2020. Unless otherwise indicated, data presented encompasses all Sime Darby business units unless stated otherwise. The information on our sustainability efforts covers all Sime Darby business operations, but excludes Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care which is a joint venture with Ramsay Health Care. In setting our reporting boundaries, we considered both internal and external impacts. Internal impacts refer to all operations and entities the Group manages and has a controlling interest in. External impacts arise   

> 08 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 08 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# About This Report in  situations where we do not own  the assets, directly engage or  employ  workers, or operate the  assets under  a contractual obligation. Beyond these prescribed  boundaries, we also report on developments, impacts and  data deemed to have a  high material impact on our business performance, based on our materiality assessment. Within the SDAR, Lost Time Injury (LTI) is a safety metric used to track  workplace safety. It is defined as an  occupational injury, illness or fatality that causes the injured worker to be unable to work for any  full shift, subsequent to the shift  on  which the injury occurred. An LTI is registered as a safety statistic when the injury is confirmed  as a work-related compensable case. The  injury must also be confirmed by  a medical practitioner/physician, as deemed appropriate by the jurisdictional Workers’ Compensation Board or appropriate regulatory authority. When someone  is classified as having  a ‘Total Incapacity’, that person must remain  away from work  until a medical certificate has  been issued  stating they are fit  for suitable  duties or are able to  return  to full duties. LTIs excludes situations where the  injured workers were medically  capable of performing either restricted work activities or  their normal work but had been provided Medical Leave by a medical  practitioner/physician. For the purposes of this  Report, the  term “Net profit” refers to “Net  profit attributable to owners of  the Company”. The SDAR should  be  read together with the information available on our website  http://www.simedarby.com for a  comprehensive overview of  the  Group. 

Our Use of Forward-Looking Statements 

Throughout the Report, we use forward-looking statements that relate to the plans, objectives, goals, strategies, future operations and performance of our organisation. Such statements usually contain words like ‘anticipates’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘expects’, ‘intends’, ‘may’, ‘plans’, ‘projects’, ‘should’, ‘would’ and ‘will’, among others. We  do not intend for these statements to be guarantees of future operating, financial or other results, as they involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions in their representation of possible scenarios. Actual results and outcomes could differ significantly from those expressed or implied. We  make no expressed or implied representation or warranty that the results anticipated by these forward-looking statements will be achieved. We are under no obligation to update either these forward-looking statements, or the historical information presented in this Report. 

Glossary ABMS Anti-Bribery Management System                                     

> AGM Annual General Meeting
> BCM Business Continuity Management
> BEA Board Effectiveness Assessment
> Bursa Securities
> Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad
> CAT Caterpillar
> CEL China Engineers Limited
> CEP Core Executive Programme
> COBC Code of Business Conduct
> ERM Enterprise Risk Management
> FY Financial Year
> GAC Governance & Audit Committee
> GCAD Group Corporate Assurance Department
> GCEO Group Chief Executive Officer
> GCFO Group Chief Financial Officer
> GCI Group Compliance & Integrity
> GCSSO Group Chief Safety & Sustainability Officer
> GHO Group Head Office
> GHR Group Human Resources
> GPA Group Policies & Authorities
> GPPA Group Procurement Policies and Authorities
> GRM Group Risk Management
> IR Integrated Report
> JV Joint Venture
> KPI Key Performance Indicator
> KRI Key Risk Indicators
> M&A Mergers and Acquisitions
> MCCG 2017
> Malaysian Code on Corporate Governance 2017
> MMLR Main Market Listing Requirements
> NGOs Non-governmental Organisations
> NRC Nomination & Remuneration Committee
> PBIT Profit Before Interest and Tax
> RMC Risk Management Committee
> ROAIC Return on Average Invested Capital
> ROIC Return on Invested Capital (calculated as PBIT/ Invested Capital)
> RPT Related Party Transactions
> RRPT Recurrent Related Party Transactions
> Sime Darby Sime Darby Berhad
> VCP Value Creation Plan
> 09 09 About This Report

9Maldives  

> 1

Geographical footprint is defined as locations in which Sime Darby has assets, employees or distribution rights, and includes joint venture (JV) operations (i.e. Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care’s operations in Indonesia). 2 As at 30 June 2020. Includes Group Head Office, Sime Darby Industrial, Sime Darby Motors, Sime Darby Logistics and other businesses. Excludes  employees of Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care. 

Geographical Diversification Leading Partnership with Premium Brands Significant Growth Potential Strong Financial Profile Empowered and Engaged People 

We have a diversified portfolio across different sectors and geographies, giving us the unique ability to leverage on an established network to broaden our earnings base. We are the partner of choice for some of the world’s leading brands, giving our customers access to a network of world-class products and services. We are continually growing our position and strengthening our foothold in key markets through strategic expansion opportunities and organic investment in innovation. Our strong balance sheets and low gearing ratio are underpinned by our capital allocation framework, allowing us to enhance shareholder returns and optimise future growth. Our talent pool of employees with diverse experiences and strong capabilities is supported by an inclusive and collaborative workplace culture, enabling the successful delivery of our Value Creation Plan (VCP). 

# With operations in 18 countries and territories across Asia Pacific, we continue to grow, delivering sustainable value to our stakeholders. Industrial Motors Logistics GHO Others 

# 8,147 11,767 785 121 100 

Staff Strength Staff Strength Staff Strength Staff Strength Staff Strength 

# 18 20,920 Countries & Territories 1Employees 2

10 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

10 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Group Overview 6 12 10 Indonesia 2Brunei 7Macau 4Christmas Island 3China 11 New Zealand New Caledonia Papua New Guinea 14 Solomon Islands 17 Thailand 18 Vietnam 1Australia Malaysia 8Taiwan 16 South Korea 15 5Hong Kong 13 Singapore 

1 Australia 

2 Brunei 

3 China 

4 Christmas Island 

5 Hong Kong 

6 Indonesia 

7 Macau 

8 Malaysia 

9 Maldives 

10 New Caledonia 

11 New Zealand 

12 Papua New Guinea 

13 Singapore 

14 Solomon Islands 

15 South Korea 

16 Taiwan 

17 Thailand 

18 Vietnam 

Industrial Motors Healthcare Logistics 11 11 At a Glance Industrial 100% 

Sime Darby Industrial Holdings Sdn Bhd 

100% 

Sime Darby Industrial Sdn Bhd 

100% 

Sime Darby Industrial Singapore Pte Ltd 

100% 

Sime Darby CEL (South China) Limited 

100% 

Sime Darby Industrial Australia Pty Ltd Note: Only key subsidiaries, JV and associates in the respective segments are shown above. Please refer to pages 276 to 291 for the list of companies in Sime Darby Berhad. 

Motors 100% 

Sime Darby Motors Sdn Bhd 

100% 

Sime Darby Auto Bavaria Sdn Bhd 

100% 

Sime Darby Motor Holdings Limited (Singapore) 

100% 

Sime Darby (Thailand) Limited 

100% 

Sime Darby Motor Group (NZ) Limited 

100% 

Sime Darby Motors Group (Australia) Pty Limited 

100% 

Sime Darby Motor Group (HK) Limited 

Healthcare & Others 50% 

Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Sdn Bhd 

60% 

Sime Darby Lockton Insurance Brokers Sdn Bhd 

11% 

Eastern & Oriental Berhad 

Logistics 100% 

Sime Darby Overseas (HK) Limited 

99% 

Weifang Sime Darby Port Co Ltd 

70% 

Jining Sime Darby Port Co Ltd 

12 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

12 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Corporate Structure 

As at 30 June 2020 Profit Before Interest and Tax (RM million) 

# RM1,407m 

(RM1,383m in FY2019) 

1,000 800 600 400 200 0-200 

Motors 

628 574 

Healthcare 

49 39 

Industrial 

798 967 

Others & Corporate 

(94) (79) 

Logistics 

2(94) FY2020 

FY2019 

FY2020 FY2019 

Net Profit (RM million) 

FY2019 

820 948 FY2020 

People 

# 20,920 

employees 

# 25% 

of employees are female 

Community 

# RM20m 

contributed to Yayasan Sime  Darby 

# Financial Non-Financial Safety 

# 1.99 

1.87 (FY2019) 

Industrial 

1.47 

Motors 

2.51 

Logistics 

1.36 

Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate 

(Incidents Per Million Man-hours Worked) 

3210

Revenue (RM million) 

# RM36,934m (RM36,156m in FY2019) 

21,000 19,000 17,000 15,000 13,000 300 150 0

FY2019 FY2020 Motors 

21,606 20,852 

Logistics 

283 219 

Industrial 

14,113 15,794 

Others 

154 69 FY2020 

FY2019 

13 13 At a Glance 

# Highlights “Sime Darby turns 110 this  year. Our  company is no stranger to market volatility, having survived two world wars and  multiple economic and financial downturns. Each time, we have adapted, innovated and taken the necessary strategic steps to evolve our businesses.” Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

> Chairman

# Chairman’s Statement  

> 14 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Dear Valued Shareholders, 

It is an honour for me to be appointed as the Chairman of Sime  Darby, a position I assumed in  June 2020. Whilst new to this role, I have been privileged to have served as a Board member since 2008. And I am very much looking forward to  working with my  fellow Board members and the Management team to continue building on the  strong operating and financial performance of the past few years. Since the demerger in 2017, Sime  Darby has been fortunate to  have sailed with the wind behind our  backs in that the economies in  the Asia Pacific region where we  operate have  remained resilient. This has provided the platform for the strong  financial performance of  the  Group  over the past few years. Sime Darby’s deep relationship with our major Principals like CAT and BMW, our detailed understanding of  the many  local markets we serve and our geographical spread will continue to provide us with the opportunities and competitive advantage to flourish in the fast-developing Asia Pacific region. Sime Darby turns 110 this  year. Our  company is no stranger  to market volatility, having  survived two world wars and  multiple economic and financial downturns. Each time, we have adapted, innovated and taken the necessary strategic steps to evolve our businesses. 

Financial Performance 

The pandemic has had a significant impact on people and economies worldwide. The extensive and recurring lockdowns imposed across  the globe have curtailed business activities and dampened revenues. Even though Sime  Darby has not  been spared, our  sectoral and  geographical diversification has  enabled us to  deliver a solid set  of results. I am pleased to announce that for  the  year under review, the  Group’s revenue rose 2% year-on-year to RM37 billion. Although net  profit has  declined by  14% to RM820 million, I  am pleased to  report that our core  net  profit for  the year was up  10% to just over RM1 billion. 

# Our Response to  COVID-19 – Putting Employees First 

In line with our culture of “No Harm”, we have put the  safety of our employees at the forefront of the COVID-19 pandemic. We  quickly transitioned our staff to work from home, and  equipped our  front line workers with  personal protection equipment so  they are  enabled to work in a safe  environment. 

# RM37b 

Revenue 

# RM820m 

Net profit The Group implemented various measures to promote workplace safety in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as the installation of perspex dividers to promote physical distancing. 

> 15 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

I am also pleased to report that the Group generated RM3.0 billion of operating cash flow this year and maintained a healthy gearing level of 26%, which provides us with the agility to pursue new growth opportunities. 

Business Expansion 

In FY2020, we were also able to expand our business, with the completion of two large acquisitions; the Gough Group, which is the Caterpillar dealer for New Zealand as  well as three car dealerships in  Sydney. These acquisitions consolidate Sime  Darby’s leadership in the Industrial and Motors sectors in Australasia. Since the demerger, we have also been consciously streamlining our portfolio to focus on a trading model, and in line with  this, we have sold our 30% stake in Tesco Malaysia. The transaction is  expected to be completed in the second half of 2020. 

Dividend and Share Price Performance 

The Group’s policy is to distribute a dividend of not less than 50% of net profit. For FY2020, we are pleased to have declared a dividend of 10 sen per share, including the first interim dividend of 2 sen per share paid in  May 2020. The total dividend pay-out for FY2020 amounted to RM680 million, equivalent to 83% of  our  net profit for the year. 

# Moving forward, we  will place a sharper  emphasis on  enhancing the  ROIC  of 

# our  businesses, to  ensure that we are  maximising the  productivity of our assets. 

Our share price opened at RM2.26  per share at the start of the  financial year and closed at RM2.15 per share. This reflected the  market weaknesses as a result of  the uncertainties around the impact of the pandemic. Nevertheless, in FY2020, with the dividend declared, our Total Shareholder Return (TSR) outperformed the FTSE  Bursa Malaysia KLCI by 7 percentage points. 

Strategic Areas 

Besides managing operating performance, we must always look  ahead to anticipate changes in  the  rapidly evolving business environment. The Board, having considered, discussed and evaluated the initiatives during the annual strategy retreat, is supportive of the  Management’s strategic focus areas and initiatives. Moving forward, we will place a sharper emphasis on enhancing the  ROIC of  our businesses, to  ensure that we  are maximising the  productivity of our assets. In line with this, we  will  be implementing initiatives on working  capital management, cost  optimisation and  network rationalisation to improve returns. A Capital Allocation Framework has  also been developed to set ROIC  targets for our businesses 

# Evolving over 110 years 

Founding of Sime, Darby & Co., in Melaka, a plantation agent company focused on rubber plantation, marking the birth  of a business icon whose  ascent began from a single commodity and grew  to become a multinational conglomerate. 

1910 

Sime, Darby & Co., acquired the Sarawak Trading Company and became the Sarawak dealer for the Caterpillar Tractor Company. This partnership is  today the oldest Caterpillar dealership in Asia, and the  world’s second largest CAT ® dealer. 

1929 

All operations of Sime, Darby & Co., in  Malaya  were transferred to  Singapore due to WWII. 

1942 

The success of the heavy equipment business saw  the  incorporation of Tractors  Malaysia Limited in Singapore. 

1964 16 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Chairman’s Statement In the Industrial business, our focus will be on exploring opportunities in  asset management and productivity solutions to harness data and provide value-adding services to our customers. Besides increasing customer engagement, it  will foster recurring income and improve customer satisfaction. As part of our Value Creation Plan, we  remain committed to streamlining our portfolio and will continue with  the rationalisation of our non-core assets. We are exploring opportunities in  asset management and productivity solutions to harness data and provide value-adding services to our customers. and  to guide future investment decisions in  terms of  geographies, financial targets and  business areas. Another area of focus for us will  be on the future of our Motors  business against the backdrop of technological disruption  from electric vehicles, ride-hailing services, omni-channel sales and the  disintermediation of  dealers. We are developing a plan on  how the role of  the  dealer will transform in order remain relevant. We also aim to put a  larger emphasis on our after-sales operations. Sime Darby Motors became the sole importer and distributor of BMW cars and motorcycles in Hong Kong and Macau, launching Sime Darby’s storied  partnership with BMW and the automotive industry. Tractors Malaysia relocated to Malaysia. China Engineers Limited became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sime Darby Berhad. 

1972 

Sime Darby Berhad commenced trading on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. 

1980 

The Dawn Raid: Permodalan Nasional Berhad gained control of Guthrie Corporation Limited (GCL) through the implementation of a dawn raid on  GCL  shares, bringing GCL under Malaysian control. 

1981 

> 17 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Sime Darby purchased a large  stake in United Estates Projects, renaming it to Sime  UEP Properties Berhad. The company was tasked to  develop former oil  palm plantation lands to  property lands, marking Sime Darby’s entry into the property business. 

1985 

Acquired Hastings Deering Caterpillar dealership for Queensland, Northern Territory, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands, solidifying Sime Darby Industrial’s position as a leader in heavy equipment in Asia Pacific. 

1992 

Merger of Sime Darby, Guthrie  and Golden Hope with  a market capitalisation of  RM59.5 billion to become the largest palm oil company in  the world, by planted area. 

2007 

Sime Darby Berhad and Ramsay Health Care Limited formed a 50:50 JV to expand their healthcare business in  Asia, establishing Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care. 

2013 Our Commitment to Good Corporate Governance 

The Group upholds the highest principles of transparency and accountability and at the core of  this  is our robust governance framework. We recognise that good  corporate governance is essential in supporting our businesses in executing its strategies and in generating long-term shareholder value and we ensure that our standards in corporate governance are aligned to global best practices. An important area of focus for the  Group during the year was to ensure  our preparedness in meeting the requirements of Section 17A of  the  Malaysia Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2009. The Act, which  was amended to introduce corporate liability for corruption offences of commercial organisations, was enforced on 1 June 2020. While  Sime Darby’s Code of Business Conduct has made it clear that the Group has zero tolerance towards bribery and corruption, we  have also taken the necessary steps to identify various corruption risks across our operations, in order to plan and adopt adequate mitigation measures. 

Nurturing Our Human Capital 

Our people are really the heart of  our  business. Sime Darby provides  training and development programmes to upskill capabilities, support the career aspirations of our  people and enhance internal competencies. By investing in human  capital, we are ensuring leadership succession in our drive towards our goals. One of the ways in  which we encourage talent development is through the cross transfer of employees between different operating units, business functions and geographies. This, we  have found, broadens perspectives and expands skillsets, leading to our  aim of fostering a truly global  workforce that propels the  organisation forward. We also believe strongly in maintaining a conducive and safe  work environment for our people. The aim of our safety initiatives is to  realise the goal of “No Harm” while  creating value in  all aspects of  the Group’s operations. This  year, the focus has been to embed a stronger safety  culture across the organisation. With this in  mind, we  implemented standardised injury reporting across the Group and inculcated an improved reporting culture for all incidents, which has seen an increase in the reporting of  lead and lag indicators. We will Learn more from our Corporate Governance section of the Annual Report from pages 116 to 148. 

> We continue to empower our community through our support of Yayasan Sime Darby, which funds impactful conservation, outreach and development programmes in education, environment, community and health, sports as well as arts and culture.

# Evolving over 110 years (Continued)   

> 18 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020 Sime Darby Motors launched its first Engine Assembly Facility in Kulim, Kedah, under Sime Darby Auto Engineering.

2018        

> Transformation of Sime Darby Berhad from aconglomerate to three independent entities through a demerger, with Sime Darby Berhad now focused as a trading company.

2017   

> Two major acquisitions to expand the Group’s Industrial and Motors Divisions in the Australasia region: Gough Group for New Zealand’s Caterpillar dealership and three car dealerships in Sydney.

2019 

remain focused on promoting an  embedded safety culture, and on  developing our people, along with  systems and processes to manage risks, build resilience and achieve continuous improvement in  safety performance. 

Caring for Our Community and  Our  Environment 

We are also deeply aware of our responsibility to support our local communities and to mitigate the impact of our operations on the environment. Sime Darby established Yayasan Sime Darby in 1982 and has  spent more than 30  years in the  corporate philanthropic sphere, funding impactful conservation, outreach and development programmes in education, environment, community and health, sports as well as arts and  culture. This is made possible thanks partly to an  annual grant of  RM20 million from  Sime Darby. Some of Yayasan Sime Darby’s notable projects during the year include a community-based mangrove conservation and sustainable livelihood programme in  Manjung, Perak and projects surrounding the  conservation of  biodiversity and  ecosystem services within the Central Forest Spine forest  complex. This year as well, RM6.3 million was  channelled through Yayasan Sime  Darby to COVID-19 relief efforts involving donations of food  supplies and hygiene kits to B40  communities and orphanages, as  well as personal protective equipment to healthcare and other frontline  workers. As part of the Group’s commitment to reduce its environmental footprint, we have set our focus on  emissions reduction, energy efficiency, better waste and effluent management and more efficient water consumption. We  remain on  track to achieving our  target to  reduce our carbon and  energy footprint by 5% in 2023 from our 2018 baseline. To  manage our water  usage and waste generation, we have established procedures across all our operations to monitor and  measure our performance and  to  determine reduction targets. Sime Darby is committed to champion sustainability not only in  how we do business, but also in  how we report our performance. Sime Darby shall benchmark our  sustainability initiatives against  the  UN SDG and we look forward to  sharing our progress on  these efforts with you in  our next  annual report. 

Acknowledgements 

I would like to thank Dato’ Abdul  Rahman Ahmad, who  resigned  as Chairman of  the Board in June 2020, for his invaluable contribution during  his tenure. I  would also like  to  thank Dato Sri Lim  Haw Kuang, who retired  as Senior  Independent Non-Executive Director after serving  for nine years. And finally, I would like to welcome Tan Sri Ahmad  Badri Mohd Zahir, who  was appointed as a Non-Independent Non-Executive Director, and Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon, who was  appointed Independent Non-Executive Director to the Board. On behalf of the Board of Directors, I would like to express  our  gratitude to our valued  shareholders for your  faith  and  support all these years.  My  sincere thanks go to my  fellow Board members, to Management and  to  staff for their hard work, dedication and loyalty. 

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

Chairman Read more about our approach to  sustainability in our Creating Sustainable Value section on pages  86 to 105. 

> 19 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

# Group Chief Executive Officer’s Review “What has helped us navigate through this incredibly challenging time, has  been our strength in diversity. We are extremely proud of being a home-grown Malaysian company, but many people tend to forget that we are a true international business. Our operations are scattered far and  wide throughout 18 countries and territories across the Asia Pacific region. This diversity, and the resilience of our multinational workforce, is  what has helped us  deliver a  very  creditable set of  results for  this  financial year.” Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson  

> Group Chief Executive Officer
> 20 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

This diversity, and the resilience of  our multinational workforce, is  what has helped us deliver a very creditable set of results for this financial year. We also recognised very early on  that  we needed to institute a detailed Downturn Action Plan to  mitigate the  impact of the COVID-19 storm. This involved bringing forward revenue, re-negotiating terms with our suppliers, deferring non-essential capital expenditure, fast forwarding digitalisation plans and, essentially, focusing on cash  preservation. We launched various sales and after-sales promotions to get as many customers as possible into our  showrooms and workshops. We  accelerated the enhancement of  our websites and the development of digital applications to meet the changing behaviours of our customers. We also instituted programmes to  reduce expenses, lower inventory levels and defer non-essential capital expenditure plans. Fortunately, by the fourth quarter, our businesses slowly started returning to normal. 

Dear Valued Shareholders, 

FY2020 was a strange year. And  quite a challenging one! We had finished FY2019 on an upward trajectory as demand for both cars and industrial equipment was strong. This momentum saw us  completing the first half of this financial year with an exceptionally solid set of results, as demand for Caterpillar machines from our coal mining customers in Australia and from our construction customers in  China remained robust. Car sales were also very encouraging. Then came an unprecedented health crisis which restricted movements, disrupted supply chains, shut businesses, spooked markets and plunged economies into recession. What has helped us navigate through this incredibly challenging time, has  been our strength in diversity. We  are extremely proud of being a home-grown Malaysian company, but many people tend to forget that we are a  true international business. Our operations are scattered far and wide throughout 18 countries and territories across the Asia Pacific region. 

# Diversity is Our Strength 

With businesses across  Asia Pacific in the motors, industrial, logistics and healthcare sectors, we are well poised to capture opportunities and at the same time, mitigate risks. 

# 18 

countries and territories across Asia Pacific 

> Our multinational workforce is key to our success.
> 21 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

We reported a marginal 2% year-on-year increase in revenue to  RM36.9 billion. And whilst our net  profit did decrease by 14% to RM820 million, our core net profit for the year was up 10% to just over RM1 billion. These results are, in my view, pretty good when you consider that many of our businesses were largely shut down for two months. I am also pleased to report that the Group generated a post-demerger record of RM3.0 billion in operating cashflow this year. 

Operations Review Industrial 

The Industrial Division reported very  strong results for FY2020. PBIT increased 21% from RM798 million in  FY2019 to RM967 million in FY2020. Hastings Deering, our Caterpillar dealership in Queensland and Northern Territories in Australia, led  the way. Their results were underpinned by the continuing strong exports of coal, largely metallurgical, for the Asian steel industry. Our operations in China were impacted by the lockdown in January and February but recovered very quickly. The Chinese government’s pump-priming measures created strong demand for our equipment and services from the many infrastructure projects initiated. Competition from local Chinese equipment manufacturers though, remained fierce. The Malaysian business has been extensively impacted by longer term structural shifts in the logging industry where activities have been curtailed and from the ship-building industry where operations have largely moved off-shore. Demand from the construction sector has also  been a  little muted. And at the current oil price, major oil  producers have not initiated many  new capital expenditure projects. Tractors Singapore Ltd, which supplies Caterpillar engines and generator sets to the marine and  oil & gas industry, has been somewhat impacted as a result of reduced ship and rig building activity. 

Motors 

Car sales have undoubtedly been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and its subsequent lockdowns. Our Motors Division recorded overall unit sales decline of 9% from 86,906 units in FY2019 to 79,241 units in FY2020. This has translated to a 9% decrease in PBIT to RM574 million. All regions have generally suffered a decline in car sales and profitability as a result of lockdowns, with the notable exception of China and Australia, which saw an increase in  both revenue and profit. In the first half of the financial year, demand for cars in China actually declined. However, sales of our BMW and super-luxury marques, supported by the introduction of new model launches, remained strong. Margins had also improved. But the lockdown saw a grinding halt  to all activity in  February. The market returned very strongly after the restrictions were eased and  we witnessed what  some Chinese commentators described as “revenge spending”, as  a result of the pent-up of demand from consumers following the reopening of businesses. Travel restrictions have curbed international travel plans and diverted spending domestically towards luxury products, like BMWs. In Australia, we recorded stronger profits, driven by higher margins from the Brisbane BMW and Sydney Porsche dealerships. Corefleet, which provides long-term vehicle leases to  the mining industry, benefited from sustained mining activities. The  acquisition of three additional car dealerships in Sydney during the  year will provide the economies of scale for our Motors Division in  Australia for the  longer term. And on the other side of the Tasman, both our retail and commercial vehicle businesses were impacted by  the lockdown and the subsequent decline in economic activities. 

# 79,241 

cars sold in FY2020 

# Expanding our  business 

We secured three car dealerships in Parramatta, Sydney representing BMW, MINI, Jaguar, Land  Rover and Volkswagen.  

> 22 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Group Chief Executive Officer’s Review In our home market of Malaysia, PBIT  declined by 14%. However, new  model launches, in particular the  new BMW 3-series boosted car  sales during the year. The sales tax exemptions on new cars, which was  effective towards the end of the  financial year, boosted demand and provided a much-needed stimulus to  the local automotive sector. Elsewhere in South-east Asia, the  pandemic subdued demand. This  situation was compounded by  the suspension of the Certificate of Entitlement bidding imposed by  the Singapore government and by  lower margins due to stiffer competition. 

Healthcare 

FY2020 was a challenging year for  our  hospital operations. Our Healthcare Division saw a decline in  profits for  the first time in many years. The  Group’s share of profit declined from RM49 million in FY2019 to RM39 million in FY2020. The lockdown resulted in reduced admissions, deferral of elective surgeries and, to a lesser degree, a decline in medical tourism. Total  admissions declined by 8%, inpatient days by 9% and  outpatient visits by 7%. I am, however, glad to note that activity had mostly returned by  the  end of the financial year. 

Logistics 

Weifang Port was hard hit. Economic  activity ground to a halt  in  February as China grappled with  the pandemic. And  once the lockdowns ended, throughput was slow to recover amidst the resultant weaker industrial activity in the surrounding hinterland. Our three river ports on the Grand  Canal in Jining, which largely serves as a coal trans-shipment port between the coal mines of the North  and North-west to the markets  on the Eastern seaboard of  China, were impacted by the lockdown and by the numerous enforced stoppages affecting all industries due to the worsening air  pollution in the region. The Logistics Division recorded a Loss Before Interest and Tax of  RM94 million in FY2020, which included an impairment of RM98 million for Weifang Port Services, our 37% joint-venture company. For deeper insights on our performance and outlook, please refer to the Divisional Operations Review on  pages 60 to 85. 

Value Creation Plan 

We had developed our Value Creation Plan in 2018 which essentially provides a clear “Road Map” on the  direction forward for the Group. 

Digitalisation 

We recognise how instrumental technology has become to operational efficiency and customer engagement, both of which are essential in boosting our revenues. Our various digitalisation efforts, introduced in FY2019, have been accelerated in response to the global  pandemic, and we will continue to prioritise them to stay  ahead of the game. Our Industrial operations in Australia, for example, has spearheaded the  development of a customer enterprise portal, which allows customers to  track assets, review fleet performance, order parts and initiate  payments through their smart phones, tablets or desktops, helping to improve productivity and  service delivery, resulting in a far better customer experience. Our Motors Division has launched its  digital showrooms which now allows customers to browse and purchase cars from the comfort and  safety of their homes. And to provide a  complete experience for  the  customer, a smart after-sales system has also been developed, to  include a  booking application that is fully integrated with workshops for  a seamless experience. Read more on our digital initiatives on page 04. In Australia, our Industrial Division developed a customer enterprise portal that allows customers to track assets, review fleet performance, order  parts and initiate payments through their smart phones, tablets or desktops. 

> 23 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

I am happy to report that a number of  organic expansion initiatives during the year to support our growth plans have been successful: • Sime Darby Motors – China secured two new BMW dealerships in Changsha and Dongguan, three Volvo dealerships in Shenzhen, Kunming and Guangzhou and a new Lamborghini dealership in  Changsha; • Sime Darby Motors – Malaysia acquired the BMW dealership from a competitor in Johor Bahru; and • Sime Darby Industrial – Malaysia secured the Hyster materials handling dealership for Malaysia and Brunei. We are also proud to have moved into our recently completed Sime Darby Motors City complex in Ara Damansara. It is a “state-of-the-art” facility with showrooms and service workshops equipped with the latest digital solutions to meet the growing demand from our customers for our BMW, MINI, Motorrad, Jaguar, Land Rover, Porsche, Ford and Hyundai vehicles. Our first Volvo showroom in Malaysia is also located at this facility. 

Monetisation of Non-Core Assets 

We have been very clear that Sime Darby would focus on its core trading business activity; that of selling and of providing after-sales support for industrial equipment and motor cars. We have also been squarely focused on the divestment of assets in the Group  which have been identified as  non-core. We continue to pursue this divestment strategy. During the year under review, we successfully divested our  30% stake in Tesco Malaysia to  the CP Group from Thailand for RM300 million. Completion is subject to various regulatory approvals, including approval from the Malaysian Ministry of Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs, but we expect the  deal to be fully concluded in the  second half of 2020. We also finalised the smaller divestment of  our Nissan dealership in Auckland, New Zealand during the year. 

Growing the Healthcare Business 

We believe that the healthcare business offers significant scope for growth and will continue to identify opportunities to grow this segment of the business. During the year, we pursued the acquisition of a large regional primary care hospital group but were  unsuccessful in the final stages. We  will continue exploring greenfield and brownfield opportunities to expand the healthcare component in  our portfolio. Read more about our Value Creation Plan on pages 36 and 37. 

Creating Sustainable Value 

We endeavour to strike a meaningful balance between our economic aspirations and our environmental, social and governance obligations. Our sustainability report will give our stakeholders a more comprehensive overview of the efforts that we have made during the year. In this report, I would only like to highlight the importance of safety. The safety of our employees is paramount and every day, we strive to ensure that our people return home safely to their families. Sadly, despite our best efforts, there was a fatality 

Growth and Business Expansion 

In FY2020, we completed the acquisition of the Gough Group, the  Caterpillar dealer in New Zealand, for RM574 million. Now rebranded as  Terra Cat, it has the distribution and service rights for Caterpillar throughout New Zealand. It also has  a transport business which complements our commercial trucks 

operations. There are not too many opportunities to acquire Caterpillar dealerships such as this and so, I am especially proud that Sime Darby, which is already amongst Caterpillar’s largest dealers, has been recognised as a top-performing dealer and therefore fully deserving of this opportunity to further develop the important market of New Zealand. We were also successful in securing three car dealerships in Parramatta, Sydney representing BMW, MINI, Jaguar, Land Rover and Volkswagen, for RM440 million from the Inchcape  Group. Both acquisitions are being embedded into our operations, and despite the disruptions caused by the pandemic, results from both businesses have been encouraging. As we continue to engage our Principals for further opportunities to expand our dealership network,   

> The state-of-the-art Sime Darby Motors City in Ara Damansara is equipped with the latest digital solutions to meet the growing demands of our customers.
> 24 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Group Chief Executive Officer’s Review involving a contracted stevedore at our Weifang Port in China, who died of heatstroke whilst unloading cargo. We take a serious view towards any lapses in safety and are taking expedient steps to further embed a “No Harm” culture across the Group. “No Harm” is not simply a  culture we espouse, but a common goal we all embrace through our collective actions. We have introduced a next-generation safety culture programme called “SELF”. “SELF” stands for Safe, Engage, Lead, Focus. The programme emphasises personal values and beliefs to assist us in achieving our goal of a “No Harm” organisation. Sime Darby’s Board and Management are absolutely committed to enhance safety across all the Group’s operations. The initiatives we have implemented include capabilities building, enhancements of lead indicator reporting, strengthening of  critical controls and increasing the  number of safety audits. 

Outlook 

Although the COVID-19 outbreak in  the regions we operate has been relatively well managed so far, its continuing impact in the upcoming financial year cannot be accurately estimated at this juncture. There remain significant uncertainties around how long restrictions remain in place, whether the outbreak might recur in a more significant manner, and whether a vaccine can be developed swiftly enough so that “things can return quickly to normal”. Nevertheless, we have been encouraged by the various support measures introduced by governments to stimulate economic activity resulting in improved demand for our products and services. We continue to keep a close eye on the ongoing trade conflict between the United States and China. As a trading company, we have benefitted from the growth and prosperity of the Asia Pacific region as result of free trade, over the last many decades. Trade protectionism and the risk of more inward-looking trade policies remain a concern for us. Some of the emerging trends impacting the traditional dealership model include the disintermediation of dealers, the gradual displacement of internal combustion engines with electric vehicles, “Uberisation” and its resultant impact on future car ownership models and, though still in  its infancy, autonomous driving. The Group continues to monitor these longer-term trends and has established our “Engine 2” strategy to better understand and to invest resources into possible new ventures. The reality is that these major factors make prediction a little difficult, but looking ahead, we remain optimistic that the economies of the  Asia Pacific region will continue to grow and will  provide the growth opportunities for  the Group in the coming years. 

Acknowledgements 

On behalf of the Board, I would like to offer our heartfelt thanks to Dato’  Abdul Rahman Ahmad, our former Chairman, for his valuable guidance during his relatively short tenure with us. We do wish him all the best in his new role as the Group Chief Executive Officer of the CIMB Group. The Management team and I look forward to working with Tan Sri Samsudin Osman, our new Chairman, to build on our momentum towards achieving our vision of becoming the leading Motors and Industrial player in Asia Pacific. My sincere thanks and  appreciation go to the Board of Directors for their constant guidance and wise counsel, and to our shareholders and stakeholders for your continued support of Sime Darby. We are where we are thanks to the hard work, enthusiasm and commitment of our remarkable team at Sime Darby. You will all continue to be a key part of our growth story. So, on behalf of the Management team, I would like to thank you for your unwavering support and dedication to the Group. 

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Group Chief Executive Officer 

# “No Harm” 

A common goal we embrace  through our collective actions. 

# Safety is Our Priority 

We are focused on promoting “No Harm” through safety leadership and culture programmes across the Group. We  regularly review our  safety policies and  implement measures to prevent incidents and  minimise risks. 

> 25 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Market Trend Description Impact of COVID-19 on the Global Economy 

COVID-19 has adversely impacted global economies. In China, although the virus shock came earlier it  has been contained more quickly, opening the path to a speedier recovery. Even so, with a demand drag from the rest of the world, growth has tapered. For other economies, unprecedented challenges ranging from unchecked and recurring virus outbreaks, inadequate economic stimuli, nosediving export demand and capital outflows, to crumbling commodity prices exacerbated a deep downturn and a faltering recovery. 

Commodity & Resource Cycle 

Commodity prices, in particular coal prices, have remained relatively flat and are forecasted to  soften as economies are still finding their footing following the outbreak. Negative demand from COVID-19 lockdowns in the major importing regions of Europe, India and the more developed parts of Asia have exerted the most influence on the market. Notwithstanding Chinese demand for coal, China’s coal import policy remains a key uncertainty which may impact prices. For  thermal coal, prices have dropped in the first half of 2020 mainly due to lower demand from India resulting from a higher supply of domestic coal. 

GDP Forecasts (%) Source: Bloomberg Intelligence “GLOBAL INSIGHT: Goodbye Hope, Clarity; Hello Gloom, Confusion” – June 2020             

> 2020 GDP Forecasts (New) China Indonesia S.Korea Australia Japan Turkey Saudi Arabia Germany Russia U.S. Brazil Canada Mexico Euro Area South Africa U.K. Argentina France India Italy -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0246810 12 2020 GDP Forecasts (Pre-Virus)

As an organisation with a large geographical footprint, the performance of our businesses is influenced by various unique market dynamics and the business environments in the countries we operate. 

Coal Prices 

Source: Bloomberg – July 2020 

Coking Coal Newcastle Thermal Coal Brent Crude Oil 

> Mar 2020 Jul 2018 Jul 2017 Coking Coal as at 31 July 2020: US$111/t Newcastle Thermal Coal as at 31 July 2020: US$52/t Brent Crude Oil as at 31 July 2020: US$43/t

26 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Business Environment Our Response Industries Involved 

Our China operations which were impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak in January and February 2020 rebounded strongly and positively since reopening. Our Industrial business  in  Australia was allowed to operate throughout the outbreak (as mining is an essential industry). Nevertheless, lockdowns and a slower recovery in South-east  Asia impacted our full year earnings for FY2020. The Group is fortunate to have a wide footprint across Asia Pacific that gives us the  ability to  leverage on different markets to gain exposure to a broader earnings base. Looking ahead, as the situation improves, we believe that our products in both the Industrial and Motors Divisions will benefit from the economic recovery. 

Australia remains one of the world’s largest exporters of coal. Throughout the COVID-19 outbreak, mining is classified as an essential service, hence our operations  continued to work throughout the lockdown. This has helped carry the  Group’s earnings in FY2020. Despite lower forecasted prices of metallurgical coal, we believe that the demand for  coal may strengthen as regional governments embark on infrastructure development to stimulate their economies. This should bode well for us in terms of  demand for construction and mining equipment. In addition, our focus on product support and after-sales will provide the recurring income to help cushion any softening in demand. Industrial Australia 

> 27 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Market Trend Description Digitalisation Today, digitalisation is not only accelerating in the typical B2C applications and channels, it is also gaining traction in the traditionally less digitalised parts of the economy, such as areas requiring heavy physical interactions and the B2B sector. Even before the onset of COVID-19, one of our main markets – China, has been a global front-runner in the digital economy. Indeed, China  is the world’s largest e-commerce market, accounting for nearly ~45% of global retail e-commerce transaction value. The growth of digitalisation provides an avenue for original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to engage customers directly, potentially posing a threat to the traditional car dealership model. Dealerships will need to embrace digital platforms as alternative sales channels and evolve to stay relevant to consumers. 

Increased Infrastructure Spend in China 

COVID-19 is a new challenge for the Chinese economy which is already facing a slowdown. The government’s response to this pressure is to use public spending to promote investment, particularly in infrastructure. Tens of trillions of yuan of investment is planned in major projects across China this year, according to figures in the state-run publication, Economic Information Daily. The latest figures indicate that among the batch of special-purpose bonds (SPBs) issued by local governments earlier in the year, about 67% has gone to the infrastructure sector which is a higher proportion compared to previous years. 

Higher Frequency of Digital Touchpoints for Searching Car Information 

Source: Ipsos Report on “Impact of Coronavirus to new car purchase in China” – March 2020         

> Frequency Increase Frequency Reduction
> Automobile APP 67% 3% Websites 63% 4% Social Media 57% 4% News APP 50% 5% Friends/Relatives 38% 17% Traditional Ads 36% 17% 4S Store 33% 33% Offline Marketing Activity 32% 38%

China has been a global leader in the digital economy 

> 25 20 15 10 50

E-commerce as Share of Total Retail Value (%) China US Germany       

> 2018 2020 2014 2016 2011 2012
> ~1.5 54.7
> ~36x
> 0.3 10.5
> ~35x
> Jan 27 Apr 15 Jan 2020 Feb 2020

Consumers and businesses have accelerated their use of digital platforms since COVID-19 Online medical consultations 

WeDoctor's number of registered doctors on their free consultation platform 

(in thousand) 

Virtual property ‘showrooms’ 

Beike VR virtual property showing sessions between agents and prospective buyers (in million) 

Fixed Assets Investment (YoY%) Total Fixed Asset Investment Property (rhs) Infrastructure (electricity excluded) (rhs) Manufacture (rhs)                   

> 2019 2020
> Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul 10 50-5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 15 10 50-5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 -35

Source: IResearch and MOFCOM for China; eMarketer for other countries; literature search; McKinsey analysis – September 2019 Source: Wind Info – July 2020 

28 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Business Environment Our Response Industries Involved 

Our Motors business sees these trends as opportunities to expand its existing business model and sales channels to achieve greater efficiency and to increase revenue. We are digitalising our business to counter  the disruptions and to improve operational efficiency in an ever competitive market. Our  Motors business aspires to  adopt a new  retail model – an omni-channel approach consisting of online virtual showrooms and offline showrooms that deliver a complementary and seamless user  experience. Our Industrial business has also spearheaded the development of a customer enterprise portal which allows customers to track assets, review fleet performance, order parts and initiate payments through their smartphones and tablets to improve productivity and service delivery. 

Sime Darby has multi-sectoral businesses spread across numerous cities throughout China, poised to capitalise on the projected increase in infrastructural investments to  stimulate the Chinese economy. Our Industrial Division should benefit from higher demand for  construction equipment. The multiplier effect from construction projects may also  feed into consumer spending, improving sales for  luxury automobiles. Indirectly, greater infrastructure spend in China may also spur demand for iron ore and  metallurgical  coal which are key components of steel making and which may lead to increased mining  activity in Australia – this will benefit our  Industrial equipment business in  Australia. Mainly Industrial China, and Australia but multiplier  effects to benefit  Motors China 

> 29 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Market Trend Description Increased Demand for New Car Purchases in China 

Electric Vehicles 

The automotive industry is in the midst of a fundamental change driven by the four mega trends of  ACES (autonomous, connected, electrification and shared mobility), that are reshaping the overall automotive ecosystem. OEMs and dealer groups will need to change and adapt to remain relevant. As battery electric vehicles (BEVs) are critical for OEMs to meet emission targets, we see that mainstream adoption of BEVs will begin to take place beyond 2025. From an infrastructure readiness standpoint, one of our major markets i.e. China is the front runner in the global charging station ramp-up which is a prerequisite for EV adoption. 

66% 45% 24% 15% 12% 

5% 

Consumers Tend to Use More Private Cars and Less Public Transportation 

After Coronavirus Outbreak Before Coronavirus Outbreak 

Private Car Two-wheeled Vehicle Bus/Metro Taxi Car Hailing Car Sharing/Car Rental 34% 45% 56% 21% 21% 3% 

Intention to Purchase New Cars is Increasing Among Consumers Who Currently Do Not Own a Car, Due to Lack of Trust in Public Transportation 

Source: Ipsos Report on “Impact of Coronavirus to new car purchase in China” – March 2020 

# 66% 

Especially in severe outbreak regions and tier 1 cities 

Strengthening Purchase Intention 

# 72% 

Would like to purchase a car within 6 months 

Purchase intention strongly enhanced 39% Purchase intention enhanced 33% 

Reasons of New Car Purchase 

Driving can reduce chances of infection Family travel needs Public transportation is not safe Flexibility of private vehicles Fewer travel restrictions with cars I believe that vehicle prices will fall 77% 51% 50% 48% 25% 4% 

Road Revolution 

Electric vehicle sales is forecasted to overtake internal combustion engine vehicle sales within just over 20 years 

90M 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Source: Bloomberg NEF Electric Vehicle Outlook 2020 

2040 2035 2025 2030 2020 2015 

EV Sales ICE Vehicle Sales 

2026 

86.8M 10.1M 

30 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Business Environment Our Response Industries Involved 

Following the easing of the lockdowns, the China automotive market has rebounded strongly and we witnessed what some Chinese commentators described as “revenge  spending”, as a result of pent-up of demand from consumers. Travel restrictions and border closures which have curbed international travel plans for Chinese consumers have diverted spending domestically towards luxury products, such as BMW. Our BMW and super-luxury brands in China should benefit from this uptake in luxury consumer goods. Motors China 

For widespread BEV adoption, we are aware that different markets will move at a different pace due to government regulations, infrastructure roll out and consumer preference with China being furthest along the BEV sales curve. Our Motors business will need to balance existing internal combustion engine  (ICE) vehicle business models whilst building new capabilities and partnerships within  the new EV ecosystem. We believe BMW’s new EV line up will be a strong contender in this space. We have also taken the BYD dealership in  Singapore as  a test  case for the adoption of EVs in South-east Asia. Nevertheless, we have established an internal Mobility Team to better understand the EV  landscape, build partnerships and devise strategies to leverage on the new  trend and find opportunities for growth. 

> 31 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Market Trend Description Autonomous Fleets for Mining 

As autonomous vehicles continue to develop, and the Internet of Things and wireless connectivity becomes more prevalent, the mining industry will begin adopting autonomous haul  trucks and other  mobile equipment for mine sites. Autonomous mining vehicles can be safer for workers and the data collected can increase productivity and efficiency. Equipment services companies will need to adapt to this new trend. 

Increased Healthcare Demand in Asia Pacific 

Several converging structural megatrends have put the healthcare sector in the Asia Pacific region on  a sustained growth trajectory. By 2025, 460 million of the global population will be over 65 years old, 60% of whom will be living in Asia Pacific. This will mean an increase in demand for health services. In  addition, the fast expanding affluent middle-class citizens in Asia will also drive demand for better quality healthcare. The growing prevalence of chronic lifestyle diseases such as diabetes and obesity is another demand driver, one that is rising most rapidly in South-east Asia. Given the strong underlying demand and the industry’s resilience at any stage of the economic cycle, the healthcare sector in Asia Pacific should continue a multi-year growth trajectory.    

> North America Europe Asia Pacific Rest of the World

Autonomous Tractors Market, by Region (Units)  

> 60,000 50,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 0
> Source: Markets and Markets Autonomous Tractors Market Report – Global Forecast up to 2025
> 2020-p 2021-p 2019-p

12,508 

> 2025-p

60,901 

Healthcare Expenditure Per Capita 

(As of 2017; Purchasing Power Parity, in Dollars)   

> 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 0
> Source: World Health Organisation
> Vietnam Philippines Malaysia Singapore Indonesia

Universal Healthcare Coverage Index Annual Healthcare Expenditure Per Capita CAGR’19-23E    

> Source: JPMorgan Healthcare Market Analysis 2020
> Indonesia vs Global Malaysia Malaysia Indonesia

90 49 70 7.2% 12.0% 8.2% vs Singapore  

> 32 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Business Environment Our Response Industries Involved 

Our Industrial Division is actively leveraging our partnership with CAT, which has carved out its unique role for autonomy in the industrial world. CAT’s autonomous and semi-autonomous machines are driving step-change improvements in operational efficiency and keeping humans safer by allowing work in extreme and hazardous conditions. These machines work 24/7, choosing the most efficient routes possible and helping to automate a critical part of the mining process. We believe that the improved efficiency and productivity offered by these tractors are major factors that  will drive the demand for autonomous tractors in the near future. In addition, we have developed a proprietary productivity solution offering that leverages the  endless streams of data generated across the assets from our customers’ operations to be utilised to enhance productivity, utilisation and predictive maintenance. 

Our hospital assets in Malaysia and Indonesia are poised to benefit from ongoing shifts in structural megatrends such as aging demographics and demand for quality healthcare with rising affluence. Investors will continue to look to Asia to capitalise on the growing demand for quality healthcare. The burgeoning medical tourism industry will broaden and diversify the patient volume base as Malaysia is fortunate to be one of the top three medical tourism destinations in the world. 

> 33 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

# Activities Inputs Financial 

Our strong cash flow and  robust balance sheet provides us with the ability to  implement and execute our  growth strategy. 

Intellectual 

Our businesses are empowered by our track record of developing industry-leading products and  services backed by strong management expertise. 

Manufactured 

We have a portfolio of high  quality facilities and infrastructure supported by a wide distribution network across Asia Pacific to which allows us to tap into a broad earnings base. 

Social 

We work hard to build strong  relationships with our  stakeholders while giving back to the communities we operate in. 

Human 

We tap into a diverse talent pool of people to build a collaborative, inclusive workforce that shares knowledge and experience. Our scholarship programme, run  by Yayasan Sime Darby, ensures a leadership pipeline of young talent to invigorate the business. 

Natural 

We use water, energy and other natural resources efficiently in creating sustainable value for our stakeholders. 

# Value Creation Process 

Bringing world-leading marques into Asia Pacific Provide a wide selection of products at competitive prices High quality service and assurance of original parts Local assembly to increase competitive product pricing Enable Malaysian shareholders to access world-class businesses across Asia Pacific 

# Value Adding Elements 

4

3

2

1

5Business Model Assembly Dealer and Distributor After-sales and Product Support Strategic Focus Areas Rental Port Management Healthcare Operations Expand Healthcare Monetisation of Non-Core Assets Revenue Enhancement Cost Optimisation Synergistic Mergers & Acquisitions Organic Business Expansion 34 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Value Creation Plan 

After incorporating a combination of key inputs and business activities with our value-adding elements and strategic focus areas, we have created a value creation plan that allows us to optimise the opportunities available to us to create sustainable growth and returns for our stakeholders. Read about our Value Creation Plan on the next  page 

# Outputs Creating value for our  shareholders 

We adopt a prudent approach to capital management and a disciplined investment strategy that allows us to deliver consistent returns to  our shareholders amidst macroeconomic headwinds and geopolitical tensions. 

Read more on the GCFO’s Review on  page 52 

Creating value for our  customers 

We strive to provide our customers with access to excellent products and high  quality services from world renowned and innovative brands. 

Read more on Divisional Operations Review on page 60 

Creating value for our  employees 

We invest in a platform that motivates our people to learn and develop themselves continuously with the aim of enabling them to achieve their career aspirations. 

Read more on the People and Community section on pages 94 to 99 

Creating value for our  partners 

We form long-term relationships with our principals, suppliers and business partners that allow us to share our capabilities and pool our resources to achieve a common goal. 

Creating value for our  communities 

We understand the impact we have on the local communities where we operate, and we support the economy and society through job creation, tax contributions and community development. 

Read more about our initiative on People and  Community on  pages 94 to 99 

# Outcomes Displaying our financial strength • FY2020 ROAIC of  7.3% 

• FY2020 Net Profit of RM820 million 

• Despite the challenging business environment and dampened market conditions, we successfully delivered higher core net profits of RM1.04 billion this year. 

Providing access to world-class brands and  high quality service • Sime Darby Industrial: 16 countries and territories, 192  branches, 30 brands 

• Sime Darby Motors: 9 markets, 203 outlets, 30  brands 

• We continue to expand our portfolio to bring world-class brands to our customers and focus our efforts on investing in digitalisation and technology to enhance our sales channels and provide a premium customer experience. 

Developing best-in-class infrastructure and  facilities • Our Inokom assembly plant assembling passenger and commercial vehicles caters for the domestic and export market in ASEAN. 

• Its “plant within a plant” concept fosters flexibility to serve various brands with split lines, dedicated staff and individual brand  identities. 

• Brands assembled: BMW, MINI, Mazda and  Hyundai 

• Engine assembly: 3- and 4-cylinder petrol, diesel and combustion engines for BMW’s plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) 

• State-of-the-art technology fosters knowledge and technology transfers to locals 

Supporting local communities • 817 volunteering hours achieved via Yayasan Sime Darby activities 

• RM20 million annual contribution to Yayasan Sime Darby. This year Yayasan Sime Darby contributed RM6 million towards COVID-19 relief efforts. 

• We engage with our local communities to understand where we can make a positive impact then work towards achieving a greater  good. 

Fostering a culture of development and  performance • 20,920 employees 

• Training opportunities for our people are tailored specifically to their needs and required skillsets to succeed. 

• We empower our people through our emphasis on talent development and by fostering a culture of continuous learning and collaboration, creating a high-performance workforce. 

Creating a sustainable ecosystem • Over a million kWh of electricity generated from solar panels to date 

• We utilise our resources efficiently and continue to innovate so as to minimise our environmental impact. 

• Our wide network across Asia Pacific distributes state-of-the-art energy-efficient vehicles and equipment which our Principals (BMW, CAT and Hyundai) have developed. 

> 35 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

# Strategy Blueprint To be the leading Motors and Industrial player in Asia Pacific 

Our implementation of the Value Creation Plan remains steadfast. The  plan involves enhancing revenues, managing costs and increasing productivity, while consciously seeking out opportunities. In  the year ahead, our  focus  will be on ROIC Enhancement to  improve capital efficiency and create operational excellence. 

# Value Creation Plan Industrial • One of the world’s largest Caterpillar dealers 

• Regional presence in 16 countries and territories 

• Global network of 192 branches in Asia Pacific 

Motors • One of the world’s largest BMW dealers 

• Presence in 9 markets 

• Representing 30 automotive brands ranging from luxury brands to those with broad market appeal 

Healthcare • Operations in  Malaysia, Indonesia and Hong Kong 

Logistics • Port operations in  Shandong, China 

Others Key Enablers: Safety and Sustainability Governance 

Aligned to our Core Values: Integrity 2 Respect & Responsibility 

1 21 2Strategy Overview Progress Made in FY2020 

Revenue Enhancement • Growth in volume and market share in core sectors 

• Growth in after-sales, parts and services for the Industrial and Motors Divisions 

• Connected assets as an enabler to increase and protect market  share 

• Despite the challenging conditions, revenue increased 2.2% to RM36.9 billion. 

• Core net profit, which is a good indicator of operational performance, increased 10% to  RM1.04 billion. 

• Financial performance was mainly driven by solid performance in  Industrial Australia and rebound in our China operations (Industrial & Motors) post lockdown. 

Cost Optimisation • Enhance operational excellence to strengthen resilience in down cycles via process standardisation, robotic process automation, Lean Six Sigma and procurement controls, among  others 

• Streamline and improve business processes through technology and innovation 

• Reviewed non-essential expenditures 

• Negotiated improved terms with key stakeholders 

• Implemented cost optimisation initiatives to improve efficiency and productivity 

Synergistic Mergers & Acquisitions • Leverage additional distribution channels and access new customer bases 

• Gain entry into new geographical markets 

• Seek collaborations with strategic partners to create shared value 

• Completed acquisition of New Zealand CAT dealer Terra CAT (formerly known as Gough Group) on 30  September 2019 

Organic Business Expansion • Expand our range of products, solutions and services to improve the customer experience 

• Identify new revenue streams and market adjacencies to counter cyclicality and increase recurring income 

• Obtained exclusive Hyster materials handling dealership rights in  Malaysia and Brunei 

Monetisation of Non-Core Assets • Disposal of non-performing assets to free up resources and strengthen core assets 

• Review of under-performing businesses for asset rationalisation 

• Divested City Nissan dealership in New Zealand to  optimise portfolio 

Expand Healthcare • Accelerate growth and diversify geographical footprint through acquisitions 

• Unlock the next phase of growth through strategic development projects 

• Improve quality of products and services and increase in-patient  volume 

• Completed expansion of the emergency department, Intensive Care Unit (ICU), Neonatal ICU (NICU), High-dependency Unit (HDU) facilities and heart centre at RS Premier Surabaya 

• Launched Cath Lab in RS Premier Surabaya to enhance specialist cardiology services 

• Expanded Subang Jaya Medial Centre’s chemotherapy facilities and outpatient clinic 

36 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Leadership and Succession Planning Capital Allocation Framework 

2 Excellence 2 Enterprise 

3 43 4Focus for FY2021 

• Expand CAT product offerings and capitalise  on  BMW model cycle 

• Leverage digital technology to grow volume  and  market share 

• Increase after-sales and product Support  contribution 

• Cost optimisation 

• Inventory level management 

• Operational efficiency initiatives 

• Expand asset management and productivity solutions harnessing data to provide value-added services 

• Acquire luxury car dealerships in growth markets (China and Indonesia) 

• Completed acquisition of transport and material  handling business of Gough Group on  30  September 2019 

• Completed acquisition of three new car dealerships in Sydney, Australia on 2 December 2019 

• Grow adjacencies such as asset management, rental services and expansion of non-CAT businesses to complement core businesses 

• Focus on organic expansion in the luxury cars segment 

• Implement assembly strategy and explore expansion of after-sales and used cars 

• Explore mobility opportunities: omni-channel sales, fleet management, EV 

• Secured three Volvo dealership rights in Shenzhen, Kunming and Guangzhou 

• Opened a new Lamborghini dealership in  Changsha 

• Secured a new BMW dealership in Changsha and a new MINI dealership in  Dongguan 

• Complete the divestment of our stake in Tesco Malaysia 

• Turnaround or exit low ROIC business for  Industrial and Motors 

• Ongoing rationalisation of non-core assets 

• Ongoing sale of the Group’s 30% stake in  Tesco Malaysia 

• Grow brownfield projects pipeline 

• Focus on greenfield development to deliver long-term value 

• Expand network of healthcare facilities through M&A 

• Maintain operational excellence initiatives 

# ROIC Enhancement 

Moving forward, we will place a greater emphasis on ROIC enhancement 

to extract more efficiency from existing businesses. We are guided by our 

Capital Allocation 

Framework in terms of returns, sectors and geographical presence. 

37 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review Stakeholders Key Topics Raised How We Engage How We Respond Investors • Internal strategies on how we navigated the COVID-19 outbreak • Expansion plans  for Industrial, Motors and Healthcare Divisions • Adequacy of inventory levels to meet any upsurge in demand • Update on disposal of  non-core assets • Principal support during  downturn • Update on the business environment in the Australian mining business • Climate change and environmental regulations • Analyst briefing sessions • Investor roadshows • One-on-one engagements • Conference calls • Site visits 

See our Value Creation Plan on pages 36 and 37 on how we create value for our  investors. 

Customers • Customer service • Efficiency, transparency  and user-friendliness of  retail experience • Reliability of after-sales service • Additional or value-added  services • Competitive pricing • Tradeshows, exhibitions and product  launches • Direct marketing and sales engagements e.g. visits by customers to sites operated by the Group; direct mailers to  customers • Online and social media marketing • Customer feedback surveys • Customer relationship programmes • Ensure all staff are well trained and receive continuous upgrading in product knowledge and customer service skills so they can provide exemplary customer service • Ensure continuous operational improvements for all our business units to optimise sales and marketing channels, taking customer feedback into prime consideration • Accelerate digitalisation to meet rising demand for online shopping and increase web-based customer service offerings e.g. timely delivery status updates via  mobile phone • Strengthen after-sales service e.g.  contactless pickup and delivery, online booking for vehicle servicing, predictive maintenance. • Dedicate headcount to customer service initiatives • Assess viability of additional turnkey services to sharpen our  unique selling proposition • Improve facilities to enhance customers’ comfort and convenience to gain competitive edge • Offer competitive pricing, sales 

promotions and other purchasing  incentives Our key stakeholders are those who influence or are influenced by our businesses. They include investors, customers,  suppliers, business partners, employees, communities, governments, authorities and regulators, the  media,  NGOs and international bodies. Engagement with stakeholders allows us to understand the issues that matter most to them. These insights in  turn  help  us shape our strategic priorities and align the interests of our stakeholders with those of our businesses. We  recognise that stakeholder engagement is an important component of good corporate governance. Read more about how we engage our stakeholders from a governance point of view on page 134.  

> 38 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Engaging Stakeholders Stakeholders Key Topics Raised How We Engage How We Respond Suppliers/ Business Partners 

• Efficient routes to market • Partnerships for  growth • Business opportunities and decisions • Joint venture operations • Networking sessions to build relationships • Vendor Development Programme • Increase meaningful engagements: 

– Top-level executive management meetings 

– Market/country-level meetings 

– Other engagements with suppliers/ business partners • Improve operations across all  business units to optimise our  business performance • Partner market-leading brands and offer them best-in-class facilities • Form joint committees or task forces to explore opportunities, discuss operational issues and collaborate on  key projects • Increase networking sessions with  business partners to share  information and improve alignment of business plans 

Employees (current and potential) 

• Health, safety and  wellbeing • Remuneration and  benefits • Employee engagement and motivation • Talent development and  career progression opportunities • Business growth and  sustainability • Town halls, leadership engagement sessions, department meetings and staff  activities like Teh Tarik sessions • Employee web portals, internal newsletters • Corporate website • Social media • Employee Engagement Survey, internal feedback surveys    

> See the Creating Sustainable Value section on pages 86 to 105 to read about our approach to Safety and People.

Communities • Social development • Community wellbeing • Education • Community engagement and outreach programmes • Strategic partnerships with NGOs, community organisations and social enterprises through Yayasan Sime  Darby     

> See the People and Community on pages 94 to 99 on our approach to Community Engagement and Development.

Governments/ Authorities/ Regulators 

• Corporate social responsibility • Environmental sustainability • Labour and safety regulations • Regular engagements and  dialogues • Consultation on regulatory matters    

> See the Creating Sustainable Value section on pages 86 to 105 on how we manage the relevant issues.

Media • Corporate developments • Long terms plans • COVID-19 Response • Response to geopolitical  events • Periodic updates on  corporate developments and key events via press release issuance • Group and one-on-one media interview  sessions • Quarterly media briefing sessions    

> See our Leadership Statements on pages 14 to 59 for a review on how we are managing these topics.
> 39 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Economic Environmental Social Material issues significantly impact the Group’s ability to create value over the short, medium and long term. As they concern the sustainability of our business, they are important to all our stakeholders. Identifying the Group’s material issues is the first step towards understanding the internal and external factors that affect our business. This promotes the alignment of our strategy with the interests of our stakeholders, and creates a symbiotic business ecosystem. It also scopes the risks and opportunities across our entire value chain. 

Our Materiality Review Process Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5 

Internal review of  existing material  issues Interviews with key stakeholders to assess the importance of each material issue Ranking of material issues based on results of assessment Mapping of material issues in a materiality matrix Aligning material issues with strategy 

> Influence on Stakeholder Assessments and Decisions High Medium Low

Significance of the Group’s Economic, Environmental and Social Impacts Medium High Low 

12634578910 11 12 Directors Management Principals/ Business Partners Suppliers/ Contractors Shareholders/ Investors Employees 1 Quality and Customer Satisfaction 

2 Occupational Health and Safety 

3 Business Growth and Performance 

4 Technology and Innovation 

5 Business Ethics and Compliance 

6 Fair Employment Practices 

7 Employee Training and Development 

8 Data Privacy and Security 

9 Waste and Effluent Management 

10 Community Contributions and Development 

11 Energy and Carbon Management 

12 Water Management The issues material to the Group were identified via a materiality exercise conducted with an independent third party. This process was guided by the principles of internationally recognised reporting frameworks as set out by the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC), Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), and the Dow Jones Sustainability Indices (DJSI), in addition to the Sustainability Reporting Guide by Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad. Industry trends and best practices of  selected industry players were also used as guidance. To determine the importance and relevance of the identified material issues, the most relevant stakeholder groups were identified (e.g. directors, management, principals, suppliers, shareholders and employees) to gather their input through various engagements. The chart below extrapolates the importance of each material issue based on stakeholder input and serves to inform the Group’s strategy. 

Materiality Matrix for Sime Darby 40 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Material Issues Material Issues Description How We Are Addressing This Issue Quality and Customer Satisfaction 

To ensure Sime Darby’s products and services consistently meet the standards expected by our business partners, we have stringent quality control (QC) processes in place. They include internal QC checks and third-party audits. Other Group-wide initiatives to emphasise customer service include addressing customer feedback promptly, generating added value and enhancing the shopping experience by the adoption of user-friendly technologies, all of which complement our continuous efforts to improve product quality and customer satisfaction. Continuous product improvement and service innovation is driven by  the respective Divisions.   

> See Divisional Operations Review on pages 60 to 85 for discussions on Quality and Customer Satisfaction.

Occupational Health and Safety 

Sime Darby is committed to achieving its goal of “No Harm” by ensuring that its occupational health and safety policies are effectively translated into practice across its operations, through clear measures that reinforce uncompromising safety standards. The Group strives to prevent injuries, fatalities and occupational hazards at all workplaces including warehouses, assembly sites and  showrooms. In addition to customising the health, safety and environment training programmes and making necessary protective equipment available where needed, the  Group has embarked on next-generation awareness and  safety culture programmes for both leadership and frontline employees. This is underpinned by mobile risk assessments, improved lead indicator reporting and a  targeted internal audit programme. Proactive measures to prevent incidents and minimise risks has been implemented Group-wide.  

> See pages 89 to 93 for the Group’s report on Safety.

Business Growth and Performance 

The Board of Directors and Management oversee the Group’s business growth and performance, supported by  strategy functions at both the Group and Division levels. Sime Darby’s business growth and performance are premised on optimising efficiency in business operations and expanding in existing and new markets.      

> See Divisional Operations Review on pages 60 to 85 for discussions on each business. For further understanding of the Group’s Strategy, see pages 34 to 37.

Technology and Innovation 

The Group and Division’s strategy and Information Technology (IT) functions drive technology and innovation by identifying and implementing cutting-edge solutions. The Group leverages on business innovation and appropriate technologies to grow its topline, manage bottomline and track business efficiency. Accelerating the adoption of technology drives competitive edge.    

> See Divisional Operations Review on pages 60 to 85 on the digitalisation efforts by the Group.

Business Ethics and Compliance 

Sime Darby is committed to uphold the highest standards of  business ethics and ensure zero breaches of regulatory requirements. To enable businesses to run smoothly, responsibly and sustainably, all our operations comply with  all  applicable local and update to foreign regulatory requirements. The Group has strictly enforced standards laid  out in the Anti-Corruption Policy, Whistleblowing Policy and Code of Business Conduct. The Group has a clear and robust framework to guide ethical decision-making.  

> Read more about our Governance on pages 116 to 148 to understand how this is addressed.

Fair Employment Practices 

Workplace diversity and inclusivity are entrenched in Sime Darby’s fair employment practices. The Group ensures that employees are productively engaged and fairly remunerated. Workplace initiatives that uphold the principles of fair employment are implemented Group-wide. They include the integration of knowledge and experience across Divisions and subsidiaries, continuous skills training and non-discriminatory hiring practices. Through equal opportunity and non-discriminatory hiring policies. The Group aims to provide equal employment, regardless of gender, race, disability, nationality, religion or age. 

> See pages 94 to 97 to read more about this.
> 41 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Material Issues Description How We Are Addressing This Issue Employee Training and Development 

Employees shape and sustain the Group’s future. To attract and retain a pool of professional and skilled talent at Sime  Darby, the Group implements a  comprehensive selection process, provide internal and external training programmes to strengthen competencies and nurture career  progression. By developing a strong talent pool, the  Group can build capacity in anticipation of future business needs. Talent Management is geared towards retaining right mix of intellectual capital and cultural fit to propel the organisation forward. 

> See pages 94 to 97 for more information on Employee Training and Development.

Data Privacy and Security 

Stakeholders’ privacy and security are of paramount importance. To achieve zero security breaches, stringent data protection procedures are implemented, to safeguard data and intellectual property. Strict measures in the event of any data loss or inaccessibility have also been identified. The Group has a robust framework  that governs data privacy and security.    

> Read more in the Governance section on pages 116 to 148 to understand how this material issue is addressed.

Waste and Effluent Management 

Efficient and effective waste and effluent management help reduce the impact of the Group’s operations on the environment. Sime Darby manages all its domestic, industrial and scheduled waste in accordance with Group-wide policy, to provide compliance across all regions to both national and local legislations. Waste and effluent management targets have been set to fulfil our environmental sustainability commitments. Additionally, the Group is prioritising its reduction targets for scheduled waste. The reduce, reuse, recycle methodology has been successfully implemented at a number of sites globally, in conjunction with the ongoing review of waste service suppliers to align with regulatory tracking requirements and reporting capability. Sime Darby is  focused on improving our monitoring and management mechanisms for hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and  effluents. We are focused on improving our  monitoring and management mechanisms for hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and effluents, while complying with regulatory requirements in the locations we operate.  

> See pages 100 to 105 for more information.

Community Contributions and Development 

Creating positive and lasting impact within local communities is  central to Sime Darby’s sustainability drive. The Group makes monetary and non-monetary contributions to Yayasan Sime Darby to support community development programmes. Aside from contributions to Yayasan Sime Darby, the Group encourages and supports local community initiatives by its operations worldwide.  

> See pages 98 and 99 to find out more.

Energy and Carbon Management 

Sime Darby endeavours to minimise the environmental impact  from its businesses with effective energy and carbon  management. This is achieved through stringent internal controls and monitoring mechanisms that track and  monitor emissions from the Group’s energy consumption. Energy efficiency initiatives are incorporated across the Group’s operations, such as by building workplaces to contemporary green standards, installing LED lighting, utilising solar  power, initiating renewable energy projects  and improving fuel  economy in  the Group’s fleet  of  company-owned vehicles and across heavy machinery operations. The Group is committed to reducing our carbon and energy footprint through energy efficiency programmes and emission monitoring.   

> See pages 100 to 105 to find out more.

Water Management 

Water is a finite and shared resource, and as such effective water management is critical to sustainability. Group-wide internal controls, monitoring mechanisms and data collection procedures have been implemented to manage, track and reduce water consumption. Initiatives include drives to raise awareness on water conservation and to devise practical solutions to recycle water at work sites. Guidelines to measure water consumption and water-saving initiatives are being implemented across all operations.  

> See pages 100 to 105 for more details.
> 42 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Material Issues Sime Darby has a diverse portfolio, with operations spanning Australasia, Greater China and South-east Asia. Global  events have had major repercussions across the Group’s business network and may continue to do so. Throughout FY2020, persistent US-China trade tensions and events such as the anti-government protests in Hong Kong and the  COVID-19 pandemic, have left systemic and far-reaching financial and non-financial impacts across  the Group’s businesses. Managing these increasingly complex risks warrants greater buy-in from all stakeholders and better integration of risk mitigation strategies. Identifying, prioritising and responding to threats and uncertainties are an integral part of the Group’s business operations and decision-making processes. During the year, the Group’s risk management function continued to  assist  the Risk Management Committee (RMC) in providing oversight of enterprise-wide risk management and supporting the Divisions in risk assessment and risk monitoring initiatives. 

Risk Management Blueprint 

In FY2020, the Group implemented strategic initiatives outlined in the Risk Management Blueprint (Blueprint). The  five-year roadmap developed in FY2019 is primarily aimed at developing a risk-centric culture across the organisation, embedding risk management into the Group’s operating and decision-making processes. The diagram below depicts key aspects of the Blueprint. 

Mission 

• Group-wide understanding and knowledge of risk management • Risk management deemed a value driver and proactively used for day-to-day decision making and  pursuit of opportunities • Risk management applied consistently and fully implemented across the Group 

Critical Success Factors Risk Capability & Awareness Framework, Policy & Guidelines Systems & Processes Organisational Resilience and Capability Tools & Techniques 

Strong risk-centric culture; shared accountability and  responsibility in managing risks Framework, policy and guidelines that are in line with global standards and applicable to Sime Darby Robust systems and processes to  drive more effective assessment and monitoring of risks Capabilities to  ensure our organisation is  resilient towards any crisis or disaster Innovative tools and techniques for  more effective risk assessment, quantification and analysis 

Key Medium to Longer-Term Strategic Priorities 

• Training and education • Risk awareness programme • Linking risk management with performance and reward • Continuous enhancement of Risk Management Framework • Roll out of key policies and guidelines to  lead risk champions • Quarterly risk assessment and monitoring processes • Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) system facelift • Investment and project risk assessment • Enhancement of Business Continuity Management (BCM) programme • Insurance coverage review • Explore new techniques for risk quantification and analysis 

> Stakeholder Engagement Continuous Improvement

Vision: Value Creation Through Integrated Risk Management 43 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review 

# Risk Management Critical Factors Strategic Impetus Key Initiatives Taken in FY2020 Next Steps for FY2021 1Risk Capability & Awareness 

• Building a strong risk-centric culture • Shared accountability and responsibility in managing risks • Facilitated risk awareness training sessions and technical risk management workshops for  all risk practitioners across  the Group • Linked risk management to  performance and reward by introducing a Risk Management Key Performance Indicator (KPI)  Index • Issued monthly bulletins on emerging risk events and technical risk management updates Continue to implement activities  to enhance knowledge and  understanding of risk management across the business. This includes periodic risk awareness sessions and technical risk assessment workshops covering key enterprise risk topics such as bribery and corruption risk, cyber security risk and business continuity planning 

2Framework, Policy & Guidelines 

• Systematic implementation of risk management framework across the Group • Introduction of relevant policies and guidelines on risk management • Established Investment and  Project Risk Assessment Guidelines to facilitate risk assessment for major investments and major projects • Developed guidelines on Key Risk Indicators (KRI), Incident Management and Reporting, • Refined Board Risk Appetite Statements, risk tolerance and guiding principles • Prepared an Annual Risk Forecast for the year 2020 Continue to roll out other key  policies and guidelines for  key risk management areas. This  includes: • Annual Risk Forecast for 2021– a compendium of key emerging risks across Sime Darby’s key markets • Bribery and Corruption Risk  Assessment Guidelines • Cyber Security Risk Assessment 

3Systems & Processes 

• Robust systems and processes to  drive more effective assessment and  monitoring of  risks • Implemented a KRI framework  and  incident management process for risk  monitoring purposes • Improved the ERM system’s user interface and reporting  template • Conducted bribery risk assessment for key business units in Malaysia and China in  line with Transparency International guidelines • Conducted data privacy gap assessment on key business units in Malaysia and China • Performed risk assessments on  key investment proposals and major projects 

Counterparty Risk 

• Alignment of risk management framework and processes for key JV  entities, vendors and  business partners 

Regulatory Risk 

• Develop bribery risk assessment profile for key  business and  operating  units • Perform data privacy gap assessment for key business and operating units 

Risk Identification and  Evaluation 

• Introduce cyber security risk assessment for strategic business decisions and M&As 

Risk Monitoring 

• Enhance risk monitoring via  identification of KRIs for  key enterprise risks Key initiatives in the Blueprint that were undertaken in FY2020:  

> 44 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Risk Management Critical Factors Strategic Impetus Key Initiatives Taken in FY2020 Next Steps for FY2021 4Organisational Resilience and Capability 

• Build resilience and sustainability as a response towards disruptions during  a crisis or  disaster • Optimise insurance coverage across the Group 

Business Continuity 

• COVID-19 – Run business impact analysis workshop for key Group Head Office (GHO) functions and departments • COVID-19 – Established a GHO Crisis Committee to facilitate response and recovery activities • Developed a road map to enhance the Group’s overall BCM. This includes setting up a BCM Steering Committee and  formalising governance, policies and procedures across the Group 

Insurance Management 

• Renewed the Group Directors & Officers (D&O) Insurance Policy 

Business Continuity Management 

Implement a Group-wide BCM enhancement programme covering the following scope: • Establish an integrated and  centralised BCM governance structure • Formalise incident classification, communication and escalation procedures • Develop standard framework and guidelines on key BCM processes • Validate and test the viability of business continuity plans 

Insurance Management 

• Work with insurance brokers to optimise the Group’s insurance coverage and explore other insurable risks based on Sime Darby’s enterprise risk profile 

5Tools & Techniques 

• Innovative tools and techniques for more effective risk assessment, quantification and  analysis • Developed customised risk  assessment methodology and  approach that cater specifically for Sime Darby’s  businesses • Explore other relevant tools and techniques to enhance risk assessment processes 

> 45 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Sime Darby’s Top Ten Risks 

Effective risk management can be a source of competitive advantage. By understanding and effectively managing risk in a holistic manner, the Group is able to provide greater certainty and confidence to all its stakeholders. With the diversification of its portfolio of businesses as a key element in the Group’s ERM approach, the Group view and manage its risks on a Group-wide basis. ERM is embedded in critical business activities, functions and processes. Key risks and how they are managed: 

Key Risks Risk Trend Description Key Highlights in FY2020 Key Mitigation Measures 1Macroeconomic Risk 

Sime Darby is susceptible to global macroeconomic and geopolitical factors, particularly in Australia and China where a significant portion of its business operations are located. The Group remains vigilant and  will continue to monitor the potential challenges posed by  the US-China trade conflict. In 2019, the Group experienced adverse risk impact as a result of the anti-government protests in Hong Kong. Since early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has also exposed the  Group to supply chain and market risks in some of the key  markets where Sime Darby operates. • Continuously monitor key  geopolitical and macroeconomic developments that may expose the Group’s business to  any  systemic risks. • Review of VCP and portfolios to take into account strategic plans to  diversify the Group’s businesses  to  mitigate over-concentration in one single territory or industry. • Specific hedging mechanisms (e.g. forward contracts) are undertaken to  mitigate forex exposure when necessary. 

2Competitors 

Intense price competition and innovative product offerings by competitors. Competition risk has been intense across all key  markets. For trading businesses, maintaining market leadership is expected to become more challenging as customers become more cautious in their  capital expenditure spend amidst economic uncertainties. Most  markets within the Group’s regional footprint are experiencing market shrinkage on the back  of  weakened customer  sentiment. For Sime Darby Logistics, competition remains intense amidst price competition from  nearby ports and the availability of  alternative modes  of  transportation. • Diversification strategies are  in place to alleviate concentration on individual brand/product • Close monitoring of competitors’ strategies to have a keen understanding of  industry and market trends. • Accelerate digitalisation strategy to offer innovative solutions that streamline operations and  optimise costs. • Continue to work with key  principals to enhance pricing competitiveness.  

> 46 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Risk Management Key Risks Risk Trend Description Key Highlights in FY2020 Key Mitigation Measures 3Technology Disruption 

Risk of technology disruption reshaping the automotive and heavy equipment industries leading to  disintermediation of the Group’s business. The risk of disintermediation has become increasingly imminent with the advent of  new digital ecosystems and  innovative business models  that are progressively transforming the Group’s operating environment. This in turn deepens the need  for Sime Darby to have its  mobility strategy ready for  a new business ecosystems in  order to capitalise on first  mover advantage. • Developed business transformation initiatives and  digital-proofing strategies to  counter the threat of digitalisation. • Continuously seek and explore  M&A opportunities with digital partners. • Leverage digitalisation as an  opportunity to develop new products and services. 

4Key Principals Dependence on Key Principals or Joint Venture Partners 

The Group’s dealership businesses are highly  dependent on two  key  principals; CAT and BMW, and thus heavily rely  on their performance. There were no significant events or incidents during the  year that has impacted the  Group’s CAT and BMW  dealerships. Concentration on key principals (particularly CAT which is the global market leader in the heavy equipment industry) remains high and could potentially increase as the Group continues to  expand its CAT business in the medium to  longer term. • Continuously engage with  key  principals to align  mutual business goals. • Strive to support principals’ initiatives and  programmes. • Seek to diversify business to spread the risk of concentration on key principals, while being fully  cognisant of the imperative to maintain strong relationships with  existing ones. 

5Acquisitions, Divestments & Projects 

Risk of inability to  generate expected returns from investments or  divestments. Or  failure to effectively manage key projects. During the year, the Group continued to expand its business across new markets; notably, the acquisition of a CAT dealership in New Zealand and three Motors dealerships in Australia. Integration plans for these investments are on track and  progressing well. From a risk perspective, failure  to manage these key projects and  investments may lead to undesirable outcomes that could significantly impact bottom line and growth strategy. • Conduct rigorous due diligence on key investment proposals and  projects. • The Board and Management provide oversight, review and approve key acquisitions and divestments based on  Group Policies and  Authorities. • Periodical reviews on the  status of key projects and investments by the  RMC. 

> 47 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Key Risks Risk Trend Description Key Highlights in FY2020 Key Mitigation Measures 6JV Partners 

Risk of inappropriate governance and oversight on the selection and management of JV  partners may harm Sime Darby’s interests. There were no key risks observed during the year. Whilst governance and oversight on JVs have improved over time, significant resources are required to achieve synergy and common direction with JV partners in order to align different and potentially incompatible priorities and vested interests. • The Board and Management provide oversight and receive periodic reporting (i.e. quarterly basis) of JV business performance. • Adopt stringent partner selection criteria and guidelines including appropriate governance arrangements. • Continually engage and have dialogue with partners to ensure alignment of business objectives. 

7Cash Flow & Funding 

Risk of the Group not generating adequate cash flow to meet funding for capital expenditure and working capital requirements. Post  pure-play, this  risk is contained given the Group’s healthy cash and gearing position. There were no significant cashflow/funding risk concerns at the Group as gearing remains at a healthy level. At Division and Business Unit levels, temporary suspension of  business amid lockdowns and  restrictions caused by the  pandemic could lead to  temporary cash flow and  liquidity issues in the medium  to  longer term. • Review of the VCP and portfolios take into account intertemporal analyses of portfolio returns and cash  requirements. • Established a Group Policies and Authorities framework which guides investment and financing activities. • The Group has access to a diverse range of funding sources and ensure maintenance of sufficient credit facilities as well as enforce stringent working capital measures. • Conduct regular reviews of  cash projections and funding plans.  

> 48 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Risk Management Key Risks Risk Trend Description Key Highlights in FY2020 Key Mitigation Measures 8People Development & Performance 

The risk of insufficient talent with required skills, knowledge and expertise to execute the Group’s strategy. The need for people with the  required skills, knowledge and  expertise is imperative as  Sime  Darby continues to expand its business across new  markets and geographies. This risk is being managed via  Group Human Resources’ (GHR) overall talent management and succession planning initiatives. • Developed a comprehensive plan to recruit vital strategic positions which the Group currently lacks. • Succession planning is included as part of the KPI  for key positions. • Continuous training and development programmes to enhance employee skills and knowledge. 

Health & Safety 

Risks that will compromise the health and safety of  stakeholders. There were occurrences of operational safety incidents and injuries arising from the Group’s operations. The COVID-19 pandemic led to  the risk of infection amongst employees, particularly frontline workers and those who  have difficulty maintaining social distance during work. • Established a Group Safety & Sustainability department to develop, implement and monitor the effectiveness of the Group’s safety and sustainability strategy • Across the Group, all businesses have enacted safety guidelines in compliance with government regulations including travel restrictions, quarantine and hygiene procedures to minimise risk of infection. 

9Cyber Security 

Risk of IT security breaches (e.g. intrusion, Distributed Denial of  Service (DDOS), malware, ransomware etc.) resulting in significant data breach or loss of  key  business systems. Cyber security risks are anticipated to increase in  tandem with the Group’s aggressive expansion strategy across a growing footprint. This risk is also heightened with the  increased reliance on  the  Internet and information technology as well as increased instances of remote/offsite network access during the  pandemic. • Installed comprehensive IT  security tools (e.g. firewall, antivirus software). • Installed a comprehensive intrusion detection and notification system. • Engaged an external IT vendor to monitor IT security risk exposure very closely. • Continuous training on cyber security awareness 

10 Regulatory Environment 

Changes to the regulatory regime in  the markets where  the Group operates may expose the Group to higher compliance cost and  scrutiny. There is a concerted shift towards policies that emphasise on environmental management and anti-pollution in the markets where the Group  operates. In the medium to longer term, this could drastically change the  operating environment of  the Group’s businesses and  potentially lead to higher compliance costs if it fails to  adapt to such changes. • Regularly engage and communicate with governments, regulators and authorities to ensure the potential adverse impacts of proposed regulatory changes are understood and where possible, mitigated. • Developed a regulatory compliance programme to undertake a comprehensive assessment of its compliance efforts with regard to regulatory requirements. 

> 49 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

Risk Appetite 

Risk appetite refers to the level of risk an organisation is prepared to accept in pursuit of its strategic objectives. Annually, the Board (via the RMC) determines the Group’s risk appetite and tolerance, and ensures that it is communicated appropriately across the Group. The Group’s risk appetite is documented in a formal written statement (Risk Appetite Statement) which articulates the Group’s risk strategy. The Risk Appetite Statement was developed by  Group Risk Management (GRM), in consultation with the RMC and the Group Management Committee, and was  presented to the Board for approval. GRM has also developed a Risk Appetite Framework to guide the formulation and implementation of the Risk Appetite  Statement. For more information on the Risk Appetite Framework, please refer to page 140. During the year, the following key risk appetite statements were approved by the Board and implemented across the Group: 

Key Enterprise Risks Risk Appetite Statements Impact on Policies and Internal Business Processes Acquisitions, Divestments and  Projects 

The Group will seek to generate return on investments above the cost of capital. Clarifies the minimum investment return criteria for all future investment proposals. The Group has low tolerance for investments that may adversely impact its financial position and reputation. Reinforces monitoring of low yielding or unprofitable investments and initiates proactive actions to mitigate losses. Such investments were monitored and periodically reported and discussed at Board and RMC meetings. The Group will continue to pursue investments in key markets but will avoid over-concentrating investments in  one single country or region. Reinforces monitoring of country concentration risk, amidst macroeconomic and geopolitical risk exposures within Sime Darby’s regional footprint. Macroeconomic and geopolitical risk exposure was monitored and reported in quarterly RMC risk  reports. The Group seeks to avoid investing in  businesses with high transaction multiples that could dilute its earnings. Clarifies the appropriate criteria for pricing and  valuation for all future investment proposals. These guiding principles were included in the  Group Investment Guidelines. The Group seeks to limit the portion of  purchase consideration allocated to intangibles to limit the risk of impairment. 

Cashflow and  Funding 

The Group will not venture into financial instruments that are speculative, volatile or any that will increase the Group’s risk exposure. Defines the types of high-risk treasury instruments to be avoided. This will allow capital and resources to focus on core investments that  are part of the Group’s VCP. 

JV Partners The Group has a low tolerance for financial loss in JV businesses, and will  ensure appropriate governance and  oversight on the selection and management of JV partners. Reinforces the requirement to conduct due diligence on new JV partners. 

People – Health & Safety 

The Group will minimise risks that could compromise the safety and health of employees, partners and local communities in its areas of operations. The Group aims to  work towards a goal of “No Harm” in  all  of  its operations. Defines the Group’s tolerance with regards to  health, safety and environment (HSE) risk  exposure. Clarifies the Group’s overall mandate and  direction with regard to HSE.  

> 50 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Risk Management Key Enterprise Risks Risk Appetite Statements Impact on Policies and Internal Business Processes People – Ethics and Integrity 

The Group has high expectations for ethical and integrity standards and will not tolerate any breaches of the COBC. Defines the Group’s expectations with regard to  ethical and integrity standards. Reinforces the significance of the Group’s anti-bribery and anti-corruption programme. 

Technology Disruption 

The Group will seek to minimise the risk of  technology disruption by leveraging on  digital-proofing strategies, and continually exploring collaborations with  digital partners to innovate its business processes and product offerings. Defines the Group’s tolerance in greenfield and  startup investments, considering the high failure rate and other risks associated with such  investments. Clarifies the investments required to run the  Group’s digital-proofing strategy. 

Regulatory Environment 

The Group will comply with all relevant legislation within the jurisdictions where it  operates; and have no tolerance for significant non-compliance. Clarifies the Group’s expectations with regards to  regulatory compliance. Reinforces Group Compliance’s regulatory attestation programme to provide assurance  in terms of the compliance with  key regulations. A tougher set of challenges and complexities are anticipated ahead in the new financial year. This comes amidst a growing list of uncertainties in the macroeconomic and socio-political environments within the Group’s operational footprint. Managing risks will be key as the Group endeavours to manoeuvre through these challenges to retain market share and  grow shareholder value. GRM will continue to support the Group’s business and operating units in assessing emerging risks that could positively or negatively influence the outcome of its business activities and processes. 

> 51 Management Discussion & Analysis: Strategic Review

# Group Chief Financial Officer’s Review “The Group’s strong core net profits was largely attributable to the resilience of the Industrial Division’s Australian operations and  the strong rebound of both the  Industrial and Motors operations in China in the fourth quarter of  the  financial year.” Mustamir Mohamad  

> Group Chief Financial Officer
> 52 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Dear Valued Shareholders, Overview 

The Group registered a commendable set of results in FY2020, particularly in the second half of the financial year. The Group’s diversity and geographical spread across the Asia  Pacific region helped mitigate the adverse impact of the pandemic which differed in severity and timing by business area and geographical location. A Downturn Action Plan, swiftly put in place, helped the Group’s operations navigate through the challenging times. Overall, the Group recorded a 13.5% decline in net profit from RM948 million in FY2019 to RM820 million in FY2020. This shortfall was primarily due to the one-off deferred tax credit of RM129 million in the previous year, compounded by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in FY2020. In  addition, the Group also recorded several significant impairments which offset some one-off gains in FY2020. Excluding these one-off items, the Group recorded a 9.5% increase in core net profit to RM1,040 million in FY2020 compared  to RM950 million in FY2019. The Group’s strong core net profits was largely attributable to the resilience of the Industrial Division’s Australian operations and the strong rebound of both the  Industrial and Motors operations in  China in the fourth quarter of the financial year. During the year, the Group also  completed two significant acquisitions – the acquisition of the  Gough Group in New Zealand for  RM574 million and three dealerships in Sydney, Australia for  RM440 million. However, the contribution from these acquisitions were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly the  operations in  New  Zealand. Sime Darby also entered into an agreement to divest its entire 30% equity interest in Tesco Stores Malaysia for RM300 million. The  transaction is  expected to  be  completed in the second half of 2020. 

Adoption of MFRS 16 – Leases 

FY2020 saw the Group adopting the new accounting standard, MFRS 16 – Leases. The adoption of MFRS 16 resulted in  the recognition on the balance sheet of previously off-balance sheet operating leases of RM1.8 billion in  the form of right-of-use assets and  corresponding lease liabilities. There was also a negative impact on  the Group’s profitability arising from the adoption as the additional depreciation (RM416 million) and finance costs (RM72 million) arising from the adoption totalling RM488 million was greater than the  lease rentals of RM447 million. The Group opted not to restate comparatives as allowed under the transitional provisions of  the  standard, after taking into consideration the significant number of leases involved and weighing the cost-benefit of undertaking a full retrospective restatement. 

Key Financial Performance Indicators 

Sime Darby uses several key financial indicators to measure its financial performance. These key financial indicators are: Revenue, Profit before interest and tax (PBIT), Net Profit, Return on average invested capital (ROAIC) and Return on average shareholders’ equity (ROE). The Board and Management regularly review these financial indicators to measure the Group’s performance against set  targets. The Group’s strong core net profits was largely attributable to the resilience of the Industrial Division’s Australian operations and the strong rebound of both the  Industrial and Motors operations in  China. 

# 7.3% 

ROAIC 

# 5.5% 

ROE 

# 10 sen 

Net Dividend per Share 

# RM36,934m 

Revenue 

# RM1,407m 

PBIT 

# RM820m 

Net Profit 

# Our Results 53 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review 1 Greater China includes China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan 2 Australasia includes Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands 

> -300 0300 600 900 1,200 1,500

Profit Before Interest and Tax (RM million)     

> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020

Industrial 341 (4) 612 798 967 Motors 503 633 543 628 574 Logistics 103 64 74 2 (94) Healthcare 27 36 57 49 39 Others (31) 55 (212) (94) (79) 

Total 943 784 1,074 1,383 1,407 

> Note: There was no revenue reported under Healthcare as our healthcare business is represented by Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care, a 50%-50% joint venture entity that is equity accounted.
> 05,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000

Revenue (RM million)     

> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020

Industrial 9,946 10,127 13,041 14,113 15,794 Motors 19,155 20,602 20,341 21,606 20,852 Logistics 294 303 341 283 219 Others 57 55 105 154 69 

Total 29,452 31,087 33,828 36,156 36,934 

FY2020 Revenue by Geographical Location (%) 

Revenue 

Malaysia 11 Other Countries in Asia 13 Australasia 2 36 Greater China 1 40 

Total 100 

FY2020 PBIT by Geographical Location (%) 

PBIT 

Malaysia 13 Other Countries in Asia 6Australasia 2 55 Greater China 1 26 

Total 100 

Revenue 

The Group’s revenue increased slightly by 2.2% to RM36.9 billion in  FY2020, as the adverse impact of  the COVID-19 outbreak on business volume was mitigated by  revenue of RM1.3 billion from  the  two new acquisitions. By  business segment, the Industrial Division recorded a  11.9% increase in  revenue to RM15.8 billion, supported mainly by  higher equipment sales to the Australian mining sector and strong equipment sales in China. The Motors Division recorded a 3.5% decrease in  revenue to RM20.9 billion mainly due to the  impact of COVID-19 restrictions, particularly in Malaysia and Singapore. Revenue of the Logistics Division declined 22.6% to  RM219 million, with lower port throughput mainly due to the impact  of the COVID-19 outbreak, environmental restrictions and stiff  competition. In terms of geographical breakdown, 89% of the Group’s revenue for FY2020 was generated outside Malaysia, with 40% contributed by  our Greater China 1 operations, 36% from Australasia 2 and 13% from  other  countries in Asia. 

Profit Before Interest and Tax 

The Group’s PBIT increased 1.7% to  RM1,407 million mainly due to  the  strong performance of the  Industrial Division despite the  COVID-19 pandemic, particularly  in Australia and China.  By  comparison, the strong operational performance was partly  offset by the lower one-off gains in FY2020 (RM72 million) vs FY2019 (RM167 million). One-off impairments/losses for both years was RM283 million respectively.  

> 54 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Group Chief Financial Officer’s Review ROE 

The Group’s ROE declined from 6.5%  to 5.5% mainly due to the lower Net Profit as mentioned earlier. Our aim is to increase our  ROE to more than 8% over the  medium term. 

Invested Capital & ROAIC 

The performance of each Division is  also measured in terms of  ROAIC which is a measure of the efficiency of capital employed in the respective businesses for generating profitable returns. The Group’s ROAIC was 7.3% in FY2020 against 7.9% in FY2019. The ROAIC for FY2020 has limited comparability to  that of FY2019 as a  result of the adoption of  MFRS 16, which resulted in an increase in invested capital by RM1.8 billion on initial adoption. During FY2020, the Group developed and rolled-out a Capital Allocation Framework that formalises and sets ROIC targets for our businesses in addition to guiding future investment decisions in terms of geographies, financial targets and business areas. With this framework in place, it is envisaged that the Group will optimise its capital allocation to result in  greater returns to shareholders. expenses in  certain subsidiaries as  well as withholding taxes. 

Statement of Financial Position 

Total assets increased from RM25.5 billion as at 30 June 2019 to  RM27.3 billion as at 30 June 2020 mainly due to the adoption of MFRS 16 (from the recognition of right-of-use assets) and the acquisitions. Total debt increased from RM2,575 million as at 30 June 2019 to  RM4,045 million as at 30 June 2020 mainly due to the adoption of MFRS  16 (from the recognition of  lease liabilities). Within this category however, total borrowings declined to RM2,231 million from RM2,575 million despite the acquisitions as a result of  strong operating cash flows in  FY2020. Debt/equity ratio was at  26.2% as  at  30 June 2020 against 28.8% as  at  1 July 2019 (post adoption of MFRS  16) and 17% as at 30 June 2019. Given these parameters, the Group still has ample debt headroom for  future strategic expansions and  M&As. Debt/Adjusted EBITDA was 1.54x as  at 30 June 2020, which was not directly comparable with the  1.24x as  at 30 June 2019 as a result of  the adoption of MFRS  16. 

Finance Income and Costs 

Finance income for the Group increased to RM51 million in FY2020 from RM32 million in RM2019. This was mainly due to higher interest income from finance lease receivables and RM8 million interest income earned on the India withholding tax recoverable that was received in  FY2020. Finance costs increased to  RM183 million in FY2020 mainly due  to the adoption of MFRS 16, which resulted in RM72 million increase in  finance costs  relating to lease liabilities. The weighted average cost of borrowings (which only includes finance costs relating to borrowings) declined to 2.4% in FY2020 from 3.5% in FY2019 with the lowering of policy rates in many countries following the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Taxation 

The Group recorded a higher tax expense of RM402 million in FY2020 mainly due to the lower comparative figure in FY2019. This arose from a deferred tax credit of RM129 million following a change in Real Property Gains Tax rates in Malaysia. The effective tax rate (excluding share of results of associates and joint ventures) of 29.1% was higher than the applicable tax rate of 26.4%  mainly due to non-deductible Note: Average Invested Capital for FY2020 adjusted for MFRS 16 adoption   

> Invested Capital & ROAIC
> FY2018 FY2019 FY2020
> Industrial Motors Logistics Healthcare Others
> Sime Darby
> FY2018
> 7,700 5,896 2,334 730 718
> 17,378
> FY2019
> 7,626 6,235 1,989 784 795
> 17,429
> FY2020
> 8,618 7,640 1,832 649 608
> 19,347
> Invested Capital (RM million)
> Industrial Motors Logistics Healthcare Others
> Sime Darby
> FY2018
> 7.8 9.3 3.2 8.1 –
> 6.0
> FY2019
> 10.4 10.4 0.1 6.5 –
> 7.9
> FY2020
> 11.2 7.8 (4.9) 5.4 –
> 7.3
> ROAIC (%) 12,000 9,000 6,000 3,000 0-3,000 -6,000 12 9630-3 -6
> 55 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

# Group CFO’s Key Focus Areas for FY2021 

A key focus of the Group in FY2021 will be the  enhancement of the  Group’s returns on  invested capital from  its  businesses. Several initiatives that  have been identified that would help support this  target include: • Improving working capital management, particularly inventory management and debtor collections • Enhancing revenue and  margins, including developing new revenue streams with higher profitability and improving operating efficiencies • Optimising cost, including  reviewing cost structures and branch network rationalisation   

> RM million FY2020 FY2019

Non-current assets 12,552 10,346 Other assets excluding bank and cash 13,027 13,447 Bank and cash 1,694 1,723 

Total Assets 27,273 25,516 

Borrowings and leases (Debt) 4,045 2,575 Other liabilities 7,815 7,823 

Total Liabilities 11,860 10,398 

Share capital 9,300 9,299 Reserves 5,697 5,414 

Shareholders’ Equity 14,997 14,713 

Non-controlling interests 416 405 

Total Equity 15,413 15,118 Total Equity and Liabilities 27,273 25,516 Cash Flow RM million FY2020 FY2019 

Operating cash flow 3,012 1,352 Interest received 36 25 Capital expenditure (556) (377) Lease payments (447) –Finance costs paid (116) (143) 

Free cash flow 1,929 857 

Acquisitions and investments (1,021) (255) Disposals and repayments 113 361 

Free cash flow after acquisitions and disposals 1,021 963 

The Group’s operating cash flow increased from RM1,352 million in FY2019 to RM3,012 million in FY2020 mainly due to improved working capital management, with a particular focus on the reduction of inventories held. This is one of the key action items to  conserve cash and improve cash flow. The strong operating cash flows enabled the Group to effectively fund  the FY2020 acquisitions and contribute to the reduction in total  borrowings. Additional information is provided in  our Cash Flow Statement on pages 171 to 174. 

Dividend 

The Group’s policy is to distribute a dividend of not less than 50% of net profit each financial year. For FY2020, the Group declared a total dividend of  10 sen per share or RM680 million, equivalent to about 83% of the FY2020 net profit of RM820 million. 

Outlook 

FY2021 is expected to remain challenging with the ongoing uncertainties relating to the pandemic  and unresolved global trade  tensions. The Group has undoubtedly demonstrated tenacity in  this unprecedented economic climate. Our strong financial position  and our ongoing initiatives to  strengthen the  Group’s resilience would put us  in  good stead to weather  any  upcoming challenges. With most countries adopting fiscal and monetary measures to recover from the  economic effects of  the pandemic, challenges as well as opportunities are  available to the Group in  the  days ahead and our priority remains  to ensure that our  operations are financially agile to  quickly adapt to an  unpredictable market environment. In  this regard, the financial management objectives of the Group will be focused on conserving cash, streamlining working  capital utilisation and maximising value from existing business operations. 

Mustamir Mohamad 

Group Chief Financial Officer  

> 56 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Group Chief Financial Officer’s Review Healthcare & Other Businesses 

The Group’s share of profits from the Ramsay Sime  Darby Health Care joint venture decreased by  20.4% YoY to RM39 million mainly due to impairment of assets and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during the second half of the financial year. 

Logistics 

The Logistics Division registered a loss before interest and tax of RM94 million in FY2020 mainly due to  losses from  joint ventures and impairments. By  comparison, the  previous year’s results included the gain on the disposal of  Weifang Water of RM78 million. 

Motors 

Profits fell 8.6% YoY for the Motors Division to RM574 million in FY2020 as business operations were  affected by movement restrictions of varying lengths in several markets while consumer sentiment had been dampened by the pandemic in general. The  Division’s  China operations recorded strong first half results and had rebounded strongly in the fourth  quarter. 

Industrial 

The Industrial Division recorded higher profits of  RM967 million, a YoY improvement of 21.2%. The results for FY2020 include a reversal of impairment of assets in Papua New Guinea of RM32 million, offset  by fair value loss on financial assets of RM72 million (FY2019: RM47 million). Excluding these one-off items, the higher profits were mainly contributed by the operations in  Australia and China. During the year, the Australian operations were not significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic while the China operations registered strong performance in the first  half and  made swift recovery in the fourth quarter.  

> FY2020 967
> FY2019
> 798
> 0200 400 600 800 1,000
> PBIT (RM million)

# RM967m  

> 036912 15
> FY2020 15.8
> FY2019
> 14.1
> Revenue (RM billion)

# RM15.8b  

> 0200 400 600 800 1,000
> FY2020 574
> FY2019
> 628
> PBIT (RM million)

# RM574m  

> 0510 15 20 25
> FY2020 20.9
> FY2019
> 21.6
> Revenue (RM billion)

# RM20.9b  

> 020 40 60 80 100
> FY2020 39
> FY2019
> 49
> Healthcare PBIT (RM million)

# RM39m  

> FY2020 (94)
> FY2019
> 2
> -100 -70 -40 -10 2.0 0
> PBIT (RM million)

# -RM94m  

> 060 120 180 240 300
> FY2020 219
> FY2019
> 283
> Revenue (RM million)

# RM219m 

Included in the results for the Group’s other businesses for FY2020 is  the share of loss (including impairment) of  the equity interest in  E&O of RM58 million (previous year: RM117 million). The  previous year also included the recognition of the arbitration award received for the ONGC Wellhead project of RM26 million and a RM17 million gain on the disposal of a trademark. 

> 57 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

5-Year Financial Highlights Financial Year Ended 30 June (RM Million) 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Financial results 

Revenue* 29,452 31,087 33,828 36,156 36,934 

Profit before interest and tax* 943 784 1,074 1,383 1,407 

Profit before tax* 1,046 1,007 1,065 1,291 1,275 

Profit after tax* 864 795 685 1,010 873 

Non-controlling interests and perpetual sukuk* (72) (180) (67) (62) (53) Profit attributable to owners of the Company 

– Continuing operations 792 615 618 948 820 

– Discontinued operations 1,626 1,823 1,301 – –

– Total 2,418 2,438 1,919 948 820 Financial position 

Share capital and share premium 5,766 9,299 9,299 9,299 9,300 

Reserves other than share premium 26,629 28,044 5,071 5,414 5,697 

Shareholders’ equity 32,395 37,343 14,370 14,713 14,997 

Perpetual sukuk 2,230 2,230 – – –

Non-controlling interests 965 976 389 405 416 

Total equity 35,590 40,549 14,759 15,118 15,413 

Borrowings and leases 15,968 3,205 2,889 2,575 4,045 

Liabilities associated with assets held for distribution – 17,290 – – –

Other liabilities 12,951 6,636 7,225 7,823 7,815 Total equity and liabilities 64,509 67,680 24,873 25,516 27,273 

Non-current assets 39,826 10,853 10,412 10,346 12,552 

Current assets excluding Cash 21,162 12,286 12,789 13,447 13,027 

Assets held for distribution – 42,469 – – –

Cash 3,521 2,072 1,672 1,723 1,694 Total assets 64,509 67,680 24,873 25,516 27,273 Financial ratios 

Operating margin (%)* 3.1 2.4 3.3 4.3 4.1 

Return on average shareholders’ equity (%) 7.7 7.0 7.4 6.5 5.5 

Debt/Equity (%) 1 44.9 32.4 19.6 17.0 26.2 Share information 

Basic earnings per share (sen) 38.5 36.7 28.2 13.9 12.1 

Net assets per share attributable to owners of the Company (RM) 5.1 5.5 2.1 2.2 2.2 

Net dividend per share (sen) 27 23 8 10 10    

> 1Debt includes leases and borrowings under liabilities associated with assets held for distribution
> *The financial results have been restated to exclude discontinued operations
> 58 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Group Chief Financial Officer’s Review Value Distribution 

The value that Sime Darby creates for its stakeholders can be in the form of financial returns or in non-financial or intangible forms. The Statement of Value Added illustrates how Sime Darby’s performance supports the Group’s ability to deliver financial value to its stakeholders. The financial value in the statement is based on the profit before finance costs, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) expenses, tax, depreciation and amortisation and staff cost.   

> RM million FY2019 FY2020

Directors and employees 3,639 3,609 Government and society 1 302 423 

Providers of capital 

• Dividends 2 680 680 • Finance costs 3 148 195 • Non-controlling interest 62 53 Reinvestment and future growth 866 1,193 

Total Distributed 5,697 6,153  

> FY2019 FY2020

Government & Society Employees Providers of Capital Reinvestment and Future Growth 

Total 58.6 6.9 15.1 19.4 100 

63.9 5.3 15.6 15.2 100 

Value Distribution (%) 

FY2020 RM6,153m FY2019 RM5,697m    

> 1Tax and CSR expenses 2Dividends refer to dividends declared for the respective financial years 3Gross finance costs
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

Our Share Price Movement  

> Price (RM) Volume Traded (Million Shares)

Highest Lowest Total Vol (Million) 2.34 2.18 125.21 

> Jul 2019

2.29 2.09 131.85 

> Aug 2019

2.35 2.25 130.80 

> Sep 2019

2.32 2.25 112.32 

> Oct 2019

2.36 2.25 110.99 

> Nov 2019

2.38 2.22 99.46 

> Dec 2019

2.26 2.15 141.31 

> Jan 2020

2.22 1.99 146.64 

> Feb 2020

2.01 1.59 252.58 

> Mar 2020

2.00 1.80 157.46 

> Apr 2020

2.11 1.90 92.68 

> May 2020

2.24 2.08 148.02 

> Jun 2020 050 100 150 200 250 300
> 59 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Industrial 

Sime Darby Industrial is a world leader in the heavy equipment business. Supported by a regional network of branches spanning 16  countries and territories, it is one  of the largest Caterpillar dealers globally, through a partnership that  has lasted close to a century. Its  core businesses are in the retail and rental of heavy equipment and power systems, providing after-sales product support, and in  providing industrial solutions for customers in  the mining, construction, power  generation, forestry, marine, agriculture and the  oil and  gas sectors. Sime Darby Industrial also represents a range of  other premium brands including Terberg,  Hyster, New  Holland and Perkins. 

60 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 9Brunei 10 Christmas Island 11 Maldives 15 New Caledonia 13 Papua New Guinea 14 Solomon Islands 5 Vietnam South Korea* 416 New Zealand Australia +12 Malaysia 78Singapore 2Macau 3Hong Kong 1China #6Thailand 

Business Activities 

Heavy Equipment Sales – New and  Used Power Systems Sales Product Support Equipment Rental Industrial Solutions  

> #

Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan and Xinjiang only 

* Seoul only  

> +

Northern Territory and Queensland only Key Developments in FY2020 Acquired Terra Cat (formerly known as the  Gough Group) in  New  Zealand Secured the Hyster materials handling dealership in Malaysia and  Brunei 

# RM15,794m 

Revenue 

# RM967m 

PBIT 

61 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review 03,000 6,000 9,000 12,000 15,000 18,000 

Revenue (RM million) 

FY2018 

13,041 

FY2019 

14,113 

FY2017 

10,127 

FY2020 15,794 

FY2016 

9,946 

PBIT (RM million) 

FY2018 

612 

FY2019 

798 

FY2017 

(4) 

FY2020 967 

FY2016 

341 

-5 

250 400 550 700 850 1,000 05

AUS: Australasia CH: China MY: Malaysia AS: Asia (excluding China and Malaysia) 

Revenue by Region (RM million) 

712 

723 

AS MY CH AUS 

FY2020 FY2019 

913 

1,121 

4,255 

3,810 

FY2020 

FY2019 

9,914 

8,459 

02,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 

PBIT by Region (RM million) 

61 

60 

AS MY CH AUS 

FY2020 FY2019 

17 

52 

212 

188 

FY2020 

FY2019 

677 

498 

0150 300 450 600 750 

ROAIC (%) 7.8 10.4 (0.1) 11.2 

FY2018 FY2019 FY2017 FY2020 FY2016 

4.3 

-3 

036912 

036912 

Key Highlights 62 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Industrial 02 01 Operations Review 

Sime Darby Industrial delivered solid  gains in terms of revenue, PBIT  and market share in FY2020 despite the widespread economic challenges and uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue increased by 12% YoY from RM14.1 billion to RM15.8 billion while PBIT grew by 21% from RM798 million to RM967 million. PBIT margins improved to 6.1%, up  0.4% from FY2019. Sime Darby Industrial’s Australasian operations was the Division’s largest revenue and PBIT contributor in FY2020, followed by its business in  China, with each contributing 63%  and 27% respectively to the Division’s sales. The acquisition of New Zealand’s Gough Group in September 2019, now  rebranded as Terra Cat, 

# Sime Darby Industrial delivered solid  gains in  terms of revenue, PBIT  and market share in FY2020 despite the widespread economic challenges and uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 01 Hastings Deering delivered the  first new D11 dozer in  December 2019.    

> 02 A China Engineers Limited (CEL) technician inspecting a rebuilt cylinder head prior to installation work.

was the Group’s largest acquisition since the  demerger. This  presented a rare opportunity to  further strengthen Sime Darby Industrial’s partnership with Caterpillar, and to  expand into  the construction and  forestry sectors in New Zealand. Both key industries are set to benefit  from  New Zealand’s national  infrastructure investments and strong  demand for  forestry exports  to China. In January 2020, Sime Darby Industrial’s Malaysian business entered into  an  agreement with  leading global lift  truck manufacturer, Hyster-Yale Group Inc. to be the exclusive Hyster dealer in Malaysia and Brunei. The partnership complements Sime Darby Industrial’s vast experience in  lift trucks and industrial products, strengthening its  position in the materials handling  market. 

> 63 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

parts were particularly strong, growing at 51% and 20% respectively against FY2019. In concluding its first financial year under Sime Darby Industrial, which was over a 9-months period, Terra Cat registered a loss before interest and tax of RM12 million. Timber exports were  severely disrupted due to the  pandemic, as  ports in China, which account for  52% of all forestry exports for  New  Zealand, were shut. The  New  Zealand Industrial business resumed operations in late April, with business activity increasing each  month afterwards, although not  returning to pre-pandemic levels  during the financial year. 

China 

Sime Darby Industrial’s operations in  China, represented by China Engineers Limited (CEL), saw its PBIT  increase to RM212 million on  the back of RM4.3 billion in revenue in FY2020. CEL’s strong performance throughout the financial year was on the back of encouraging hydraulic excavator sales, driven by domestic demand from infrastructure projects. The dealership, however, continued to  experience increasingly fierce competition from local brands. Nevertheless, CEL retained its leading position among foreign brands across its dealership territories. 

Malaysia 

The Movement Control Order (MCO) placed Malaysia under lockdown from March until June. During this The oversupply of metallurgical and  thermal coal continues to put pressure on prices. And the low oil prices have exacerbated the situation. Metallurgical coal prices have fallen from the highs of USD180 per tonne in July 2019 to USD110 per tonne in June 2020. Likewise, thermal coal prices slumped from USD70 per tonne to USD50 per tonne over the  same period. Nevertheless, given  Sime Darby Industrial’s strong  fundamentals, diversified geographical spread and the continuing demand especially for  metallurgical coal to fuel the Asian steel industry, Sime Darby Industrial is  confident of weathering the turbulence. Building on its resilient performance during a challenging third quarter of FY2020, Sime Darby Industrial’s regional portfolio has progressively resumed operations since the fourth quarter and has been  making good recovery. 

Australasia 

Sime Darby Industrial’s operations in  Australasia performed strongly in  FY2020, posting a PBIT of RM677 million on the back of RM9.9 billion in revenue. This was led mainly by Hastings Deering, the Caterpillar dealership in Queensland and the Northern Territory in Australia. Uninterrupted mining activity in Australia throughout the pandemic played a key role in bolstering Hastings Deering’s market share and  leadership position. Revenue growth had been positive across all  segments, in which sales of mining  equipment and equipment 

# Building on its resilient performance during a challenging third quarter of FY2020, Sime Darby Industrial’s regional portfolio has  progressively resumed operations since the fourth quarter and has been making good recovery. 64 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Industrial time, almost all activities within the  construction sector came to a halt. Project  deliveries were heavily  affected, resulting in a 36%  contraction of the heavy equipment market as compared to  FY2019. Notwithstanding the difficulties, Sime Darby Industrial’s Malaysian operations recorded a PBIT of  RM17 million on the back  of  RM913 million in revenue for  FY2020, while maintaining its  position as the market leader. 

Singapore* 

PBIT increased marginally to RM61 million despite lower revenues of RM712 million in FY2020. Whilst government support  in the form of  subsidies offered some reprieve, economic activity in Singapore was badly affected by the imposition of  the  Circuit Breaker in April 2020 to  halt the spread of COVID-19. The low oil prices resulted in the postponement or cancellation of  projects in the marine, oil  and  gas  sectors. This impacted engine sales, which is a core component of  Tractors Singapore Limited’s (TSL)  operations. All construction work in Singapore was temporarily suspended and projects only gradually resumed in  June 2020, resulting in a 15% contraction of the construction equipment market. Nevertheless, TSL remains as one of the top three players in Singapore. 

Risks to the Business Key Risk Description Key Mitigation Measures Cyclical Risk The cyclical nature of the mining  and oil & gas sectors can  cause large variations in customer spend. • Continue to diversify the Division’s products and expand  its geographical markets, while  developing businesses adjacent to its  core  activities. • Established a downturn strategy that better  predicts the timing of cyclical downturns  and  provides specific actions to  protect both  profitability and the balance  sheet and  to  minimise the impact of the downturn. • Implemented continuous cost management, operational efficiency and inventory reduction  initiatives throughout its operations. 

US-China Trade War The ongoing conflict between the US and China could pose negative sentiment towards US-branded products in China. • There has been no observable impact from any  negative sentiments in China. Sime Darby Industrial continues to leverage on its relationship  with its customers while working diligently with Caterpillar on strategies to  maintain its strong market position. 

Lower Priced Competition 

More competitively-priced products from China and Japan continue to penetrate the market. • To leverage on the technological capabilities of  its  products and the strength of its after-sales capability and network coverage. * Financial results for Singapore includes other operating units in Asia excluding China and Malaysia      

> 65 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review 01 Sime Darby Industrial will continue to closely monitor the evolving business environment and harness any strategic advantage to seize opportunities for growth.
> 02 Power Systems sales is a core component of Tractors Singapore Limited’s operations.
> 03 New Holland protects the value of its customer’s investment by providing preventive maintenance.
> 01

of  Australia’s coal given its superior  quality. The Australian government had also  announced an additional package of AUD1.5 billion for infrastructure investment, on top  of  an earlier commitment to deliver on a AUD100 billion, 10-year transport infrastructure  pipeline. This is expected to  trigger  sustained demand for  heavy  equipment. The New Zealand government had  announced a NZD3 billion “shovel-ready” fund to “kick-start” its economic recovery. This is in 

Outlook 

There are positive signs of economic  recovery in all the markets  in which Sime Darby Industrial operates. However, the  continuing impact of  the pandemic cannot be accurately  predicted. Prices of metallurgical and thermal  coal are softening due to  falling demand for steel and China’s tightening of restriction on  imported  coal. However, Sime  Darby Industrial remains confident of the competitiveness 

66 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Industrial 02 

addition to the NZD12 billion in  infrastructure spending spanning  four  years announced in  January 2020, largely earmarked for  transport infrastructure. Exports  of forestry products is  expected to  be  strong as  China has  emerged from lockdown. Both  developments are  expected to  increase demand for  heavy industrial equipment. The Chinese government remains committed to the country’s growth post COVID-19. Infrastructure spend  remains strong and will continue to drive demand for the Division’s products and services. Demand for heavy equipment in  Malaysia will be highly dependent on  ongoing infrastructure projects  such as the Pan Borneo Highway, the  East Coast Railway Link  and the  Rapid Transit System. Singapore’s construction sector was  heavily impacted by the pandemic and is expected to contract. However, several key projects like the North-South Corridor Expressway and the  new MRT lines will provide opportunities in the  coming years. The  short to medium  term outlook for  the marine, oil and  gas sectors remains  subdued amidst uncertain oil  prices, although in the longer term, Singapore will likely remain a  major ship and rig building and repair centre. 

> 03

# Quality & Customer Satisfaction 

Hastings Deering has embarked on a digital transformation programme, launching an asset management initiative focused on helping customers increase their productivity. This initiative saw  the successful launch of HDAdvantage™ for the construction industry, and more recently, for the mining industry. This portal provides customers with insights into equipment health events and maintenance requirements, to  drive better product availability and productivity. This resulted in an improved customer experience and an increase in customer loyalty for Hastings Deering. 

> 67 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Motors 

Sime Darby Motors is the automotive  arm of Sime Darby. As  a major industry player with operations across nine markets in  the  Asia Pacific region, Sime  Darby  Motors is  actively invested across the entire  value chain  of the automotive business, from assembly, importation, distribution and retail, to after-sales services and rental. Over the past five decades, Sime Darby Motors has  nurtured long-standing partnerships with some of the world’s largest brands to provide them with access to a region that is home to a flourishing affluent middle class with a penchant for luxury goods and services. Today, it is one of the largest BMW  dealers globally and a top Rolls-Royce dealer in Asia Pacific. Sime Darby Motors represents over 30 automotive brands across the Asia  Pacific region. These range from  super-luxury marques such as Rolls-Royce, Lamborghini, McLaren and Ferrari to luxury brands including BMW, Jaguar, Land Rover, Porsche and Volvo, household names such as Hyundai, Ford and Mazda, as well as electric vehicle brands such as BYD and Singulato. Sime Darby Motors’ portfolio also includes popular commercial truck brands such as Volvo, Hino and Mack as well as vehicle rental business, through the Hertz, Thrifty and Corefleet brands.  

> 68 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

2Macau 9New Zealand 5Thailand Australia 8Malaysia 6Taiwan 43Hong Kong 7Singapore 1China 

Key Developments in FY2020 Acquisition of the transport business of Gough Group Limited based in New Zealand on  30 September 2019 and  three car dealerships in  Sydney, Australia in  December 2019. Opening of a new Volvo 3S dealership in Ara Damansara, Malaysia in February 2020 and a new Volvo 4S dealership in Shenzhen, China in August 2020. Acquisition of a BMW 4S dealership in Tebrau, Johor Bahru in July 2020. Opening of the 18 th  Truckstops Centre in  North Auckland, New  Zealand in July 2019. 

# RM20,852m 

Revenue 

# RM574m 

PBIT 

Business Activities 

Assembly Distributor/ Importer Retail of New & Used Cars After-Sales Rental 69 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review CH: China HK: Hong Kong SG: Singapore TH: Thailand MC: Macau TW: Taiwan MY: Malaysia AUS: Australia NZ: New Zealand 

Key Highlights 

05,000 10,000 15,000 20,000 25,000 

Revenue (RM million) 

FY2018 

20,341 

FY2019 

21,606 

FY2017 

20,602 

FY2020 20,852 

FY2016 

19,155 

Revenue by Region (RM million) 

3,403 

2,779 

AUS/NZ MY SG/TH CH/HK/MC/TW 

FY2020 FY2019 

3,256 

3,935 

3,885 

4,494 

FY2020 

FY2019 

10,308 

10,398 

02,000 4,000 6,000 8,000 10,000 

PBIT by Region (RM million) 

90 

98 

AUS/NZ MY SG/TH CH/HK/MC/TW 

FY2020 FY2019 

212 

247 

21 

48 

FY2020 

FY2019 

251 

235 

050 100 150 200 250 

0140 280 420 560 700 

PBIT (RM million) 

FY2018 

543 

FY2019 

628 

FY2017 

633 

FY2020 574 

FY2016 

503 

036912 

ROAIC (%) 

FY2018 

9.3 

FY2019 

10.4 

FY2017 

10.9 

FY2020 7.8 

FY2016 

8.2 

018,000 36,000 54,000 72,000 90,000 

Unit Sales 

FY2019 

86,906 

FY2020 79,241 

70 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Motors Operations Review 

All the markets where Sime Darby Motors operates were affected to varying degrees by the pandemic and  the resulting lockdowns in  FY2020. Management was quick to  respond and implemented the following measures to limit the impact on profitability: • Collaborating with its principals to  manage inventory and extend payment terms to manage cash  flows; • Reducing discretionary costs and capital expenditure; and • Accelerating the digitalisation of  its dealerships. PBIT for FY2020 fell 8.6% YoY from  RM628 million to RM574 million due  to business disruptions caused by  the lockdowns. China was the first  country to emerge  from the lockdowns and their recovery helped ease the negative impact in  the other markets that experienced lengthier and more stringent lockdowns. The  Greater China region contributed 49.4% of Sime Darby Motors’ overall  revenue. The acquisition of three Sydney-based dealerships from Inchcape representing five marques – BMW, MINI, Volkswagen, Jaguar and Land Rover, is aligned with Sime Darby Motors’ strategy to  expand in the luxury and super-luxury segments. This  move has  bolstered Sime Darby Motors’ leadership status and strengthened its brand visibility along one of Sydney’s most recognised automotive belts in Parramatta. Digitalisation continues to be a key  thrust of Sime Darby Motors’ strategy to  remain at the forefront of  technological disruption and changing consumer preferences. It  also presents an opportunity to  grow its online presence and digital marketing channels, as well as to optimise costs for greater  operational efficiency. 

# Digitalisation continues  to be a key thrust of Sime  Darby Motors’ strategy to remain at  the forefront of  technological disruption and changing consumer preferences. 

In FY2020, Sime Darby Motors launched digital showrooms for  BMW, Ford and Peugeot in  Singapore  and Malaysia, which have  helped the  sales teams stay engaged with  customers during lockdown. These  digital showrooms seamlessly combine information and  convenience in a pleasurable home shopping experience. Customers are now able  to reach a sales consultant through the live  chat function and arrange for a contactless test drive. An internally developed sales funnel  management application was  introduced last year to better track and capture sales leads and is  continually updated and  enhanced with new features. Sime Darby Motors City at Ara Damansara is home to the latest  state-of-the-art showrooms and a  smart after-sales system, featuring digital appointment booking, job control boards and vehicle tracking systems that provide  a seamless after-sales experience. Sime Darby Motors has  also introduced servicing-at-your-doorstep, where customers’ vehicles can be serviced at their homes or offices, for  convenience and  peace of  mind.   

> 01 01 The first all-electric Porsche Taycan
> 02 Range Rover Velar
> 02 71 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

China 

Sime Darby Motors’ operations in  China were bolstered by strong demand for BMW cars despite the  pandemic. Sime Darby Motors’ China operations saw  strong growth in PBIT  in FY2020 with  a 22.2% rise YoY to RM253 million, as  compared with RM207 million the previous year. The  total number of units sold during the year increased 0.2% YoY to 33,711 units, bucking the trend for China’s total industry volume (TIV) which decreased by 6.5% in 2019* to  27.4 million units. 

Hong Kong and Macau 

Hong Kong was rocked by socio-political unrest in the first half of FY2020, followed by the  pandemic in  the second half. The  combined TIV for  Hong Kong and  Macau shrank by  9.4% to 38,309 units in 2019* compared with 2018 volumes. The  poorer results and net impairment of RM26 million led to lower PBIT for  Hong Kong and Macau, which registered a 66% YoY fall from RM53 million to RM18 million. Total  units sold decreased by 16.1% over the financial year to 6,139 units. However, in rising against the odds, Sime Darby Motors’ Rolls-Royce and  Suzuki Hong Kong operations achieved higher unit sales in FY2020 

with the new Cullinan and  Jimny models leading the way respectively. Overall, the market remains shaky in Hong Kong and consumer sentiment has not been restored since the passing of the new national security law on  30 June 2020. The  situation remains challenging as  the  territory continues to battle the pandemic through stringent social distancing and other preventive measures. 

Taiwan 

Taiwan’s TIV rose by 1.1% over the  year to 439,839 units in 2019*. Sime Darby Motors’ Taiwanese dealers achieved higher unit sales during the year, an increase of 1.2% YoY to 2,602 units. After-sales throughput grew and cost reduction  measures were successfully implemented, rounding up a positive year-round performance as losses were reduced from RM25 million in  FY2019 to RM20 million in FY2020 – a 20.0% YoY improvement. 

Malaysia 

TIV in 2019 grew by 1% to 604,297 units in 2019* mainly due to a stable economy and employment market. In  the first half of 2020 however, TIV  fell by 33.5% as the lockdowns had a negative impact on big ticket purchases such as cars. The number of cars sold in FY2020 declined as compared to the previous year, when sales were buoyed by the  zero rating of GST in July and August 2018. This resulted in  a 14.2% YoY fall  in PBIT from RM247 million to RM212 million in  FY2020. The total number of units  sold by Sime Darby Motors’ Malaysian operations fell by 20.1% YoY to 13,477 units for the  year. 

Singapore 

Singapore’s automotive market saw  a 2.3% increase in TIV in 2019* to reach 109,785 units. However, a competitive market and aggressive     

> 01 Rolls Royce Ghost
> 02 Volvo XC40
> 03 Lamborghini Urus
> 02 03 01 72 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Motors Risks to Our Business Key Risk Description Mitigation Strategies Disintermediation of  Dealerships due to  Technological Disruption 

Principals may directly engage with customers digitally. This may threaten Sime Darby Motors’ position as an intermediary in the automotive value  chain. • Sharpen and accelerate our sales and  marketing strategies (e.g. digital marketing, digital showrooms) to  improve the customer journey and  experience • Monitor emerging technologies and  launch new offerings ahead of  the  competition 

Changing Attitudes to  Vehicle Ownership that may Reduce Demand for New  Vehicles 

Today’s customers have more mobility options that do not involve personal car ownership. This may reduce demand for  new vehicles sales. • Experimenting with “vehicles on demand” to capture customers who are not in favour of the traditional ownership model by introducing new  solutions, such as: 

– Subscription services e.g. Access by BMW 

– Alternative ownership financing solutions e.g. Guaranteed Future Value programme and Easy Drive by BMW • Focus on fleet management services and after-sales   

> *TIV is for the calendar year; from January to December 2019.

discounting reduced margins in  Sime  Darby Motors’ operations in  Singapore, as reflected in the 15.4% YoY reduction in PBIT from  RM26 million in FY2019 to  RM22 million in FY2020. Car sales were further curtailed by  a reduced supply of Certificates of  Entitlement (COE) for passenger vehicles in FY2020 as compared with  previous years. This was largely due to the business restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic  which extended to non-essential services such as COE  tender exercises. Sime  Darby Motors’ Singapore operations saw  its  total units sold in FY2020 fall 15.2% YoY to 8,398 units. 

New Zealand 

An overall slowdown in the New  Zealand economy was driven largely by the strict lockdown resulted in lower sales of commercial vehicles. TIV for New Zealand fell to  154,754  units in  2019*, a decrease of  4.3% compared with 2018. Sime Darby Motors’ New Zealand operations recorded lower profits for  FY2020 due to poorer sales and  the significant downturn in  servicing opportunities during the  lockdown. The recently acquired Gough Transport also contributed to  the losses as their businesses were  also impacted negatively by the  lockdown. Excluding the units sold by Gough Transport, the total  number of units sold in FY2020 decreased 18.3% to 4,395 units. 

Australia 

Australia’s TIV fell to 1,062,867 units in 2019* due to economic uncertainty and environmental factors such as floods, drought and bushfires, marking a 7.8% decrease from the  previous year. Sime Darby Motors’ operations in  Australia achieved higher revenues in  FY2020 mainly due to the newly acquired dealerships in  Sydney. Total  units sold during the  year increased sharply by 71.1% YoY to 6,353 units. Stronger profits were also reported by its BMW, Porsche and Corefleet operating units, resulting in an increase in PBIT for the year from RM27 million to RM34 million. 

Thailand 

TIV for Thailand weakened slightly by 3.3% to 1,007,552 units in 2019* compared with 2018 due to increasingly stringent loan approvals and higher down payment requirements. Sime Darby Motors’ results in Thailand for FY2020 reflected these challenges, which were compounded by the pandemic. Ongoing product issues for Mazda  and Ford vehicles proved detrimental to car sales. The bottomline moved into negative  territory with a loss of  RM1 million for the year, compared with profits of RM10 million the previous year. Total  units sold for the  year decreased by 44.4% to 4,166. 

> 73 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

Outlook 

The growth of an increasingly affluent class in China bodes well for the luxury segment. The Chinese government has also announced stimulus policies aimed at the automotive industry, particularly for  new energy vehicles (NEV), which  are a big part of China’s strategy to  transition into electrification. China’s NEV market is  expected to  be the largest in the world. To  capitalise on  this growing segment, BMW  will  be producing the first China-sourced BMW, the iX3 which is an  electric SUV made for  the domestic market and for global export. China has delayed implementing the China 6  emission standards for light-duty vehicles by  six months, giving the industry a reprieve to prepare for the eventual transition to the new  standards come  1 January 2021. Factors that could impact demand and supply in  the short to medium term include the ongoing US-China trade conflict, the  introduction of stricter emission standards and cuts  to NEV  subsidies. Hong Kong and Macau continues to  face headwinds due to weakening consumer spending and  business sentiments. Headwinds  in the possible deterioration in US-China relations  and uncertainty around Hong Kong’s status as a global financial centre create a cautious economic outlook for 2021. Hence vehicle sales in Hong Kong are  expected to weaken further as  economic and political risks mount  against the backdrop of a weaker global economic outlook sparked by  the pandemic. The spillover effect of waning global  economic output is depressing Taiwan’s economic growth. Weakened consumer confidence will  in turn rein in demand for both passenger cars and commercial vehicles. Notwithstanding the overall elevated risk to Taiwan’s automotive sector, there will be some  degree of support  for commercial vehicle sales  from the government’s continued commitment to its Forward-Looking Infrastructure Development Programme. The Malaysian government unveiled  PENJANA, a short-term national stimulus package in July  2020 to  spur  economic recovery post-lockdown. The biggest beneficiary was the automotive sector as car buyers stood to gain a 100% sales tax  exemption on complete knocked-down, locally assembled cars, and a  50%  sales tax exemption on Completely Built Up (CBU), fully imported car  models. The Malaysian National  Automotive Policy 2020 is  also expected to contribute to the  growth  of  local automotive production volumes through the adoption of Industrial Revolution 4.0 technologies as well as the introduction of new services to improve mobility and transportation. A poor economic outlook has influenced consumers to cut down on  discretionary spend in Singapore. The tightening of the COE quota is  driving its premiums higher and further weakening demand. These factors will exacerbate an already challenging sales outlook for vehicles in Singapore. However, the high percentage of affluent consumers who  can afford the COE prices will  allow certain premium brands to  outsell mass market brands. 

Key Risk Description Mitigation Strategies Shift to Zero Emission and Self-driving Vehicles 

Vehicle manufacturers have announced plans to ramp up investments in electric cars. Sime  Darby Motors expects to continue selling electric and hybrid vehicles, but after-sales revenue per  unit  may decline, as electric vehicles are  anticipated to require less  physical maintenance compared with  internal combustion engine (ICE) vehicles which currently form the bulk of  Sime Darby Motors’  servicing. The availability of driverless vehicles is uncertain due to regulatory requirements, additional technological criteria, and consumer acceptance of these vehicles. The  impact of driverless vehicles could include changes in the level of vehicles sales, the price of new vehicles, and the role of dealerships, any of which could affect our business. • Increase representation of brands with a focus  on electric vehicles/fuel cell electric vehicles (EV/FCEV) e.g. BMW, Porsche, Jaguar, Land Rover, Hyundai and  BYD • Embrace EV marques e.g. launched the first EV  showroom with the Singulato Brand Experience Centre in  China and BYD in  Singapore • Explore digital sales channels and alternative car ownership models  

> 74 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Motors Government initiatives to encourage the testing of autonomous vehicles and EV adoption will ensure that Singapore remains at  the forefront of  technological innovation within the region. As the lockdowns in New Zealand have eased, vehicle dealerships have  resumed business operations albeit in a contactless environment. Sime Darby Motors remains optimistic of a healthy rebound in  demand for commercial vehicles from the agriculture and freight transport sectors, supported by a low domestic interest rate  environment. Weaker consumer sentiment across  Australia because of the pandemic has  significantly affected  vehicle sales growth. Sime  Darby Motors expects this to  improve as the Australian economy reopens on  a state-by-state basis, which will increase traffic to its  dealerships. Despite the competitive market, demand for premium and sport utility  vehicles is  expected to remain  resilient in the  long term. Thailand expects to see a fall in  vehicle sales due to increased scrutiny on motor loans by the central bank and lower consumer confidence caused by the  slowing economy, headwinds from COVID-19 and political unrest. On  the upside, the  recent proposal  of  a scrappage plan will, if  implemented, bolster the 

medium–term vehicle sales outlook. Sime Darby Motors is closely monitoring the impact of disruptive  trends surrounding the  four ACES  in  the automotive sector – autonomous driving, connectivity, electrification and shared services. A  mobility strategy  that focuses on alternative  ownership models and  a seamless omni-channel customer experience has been developed to future-proof Sime Darby Motors and  strengthen its leadership position in  Asia Pacific. Customer satisfaction is our top priority at Sime Darby Motors, hence its commitment towards continuous service and quality improvements throughout the entire customer experience journey. For  new car buyers, Sime  Darby Motors has invested in  end-to-end digital offerings in response to customers’ increasing preference to browse and buy online. It also aims to expand its range of offerings online to finance, insurance, extended warranties and other after-market products to its  customers. In the used vehicle segment, Sime  Darby Motors provides vehicle history  reports and participates in  manufacturer certification processes to inspire customer confidence. Customers whose vehicles are  accorded certifications are  typically provided benefits and warranties by the applicable manufacturer like those enjoyed by  new vehicle owners. Sime Darby Motors is exploring providing customers with greater assurance through extended warranty packages. Closing a sale marks the beginning of  the after-sales journey that is focused on making a customer’s service experience seamless and hassle-free. Sime Darby Motors maintains detailed maintenance and service histories  to enable timely reminders when customers’ vehicles are due for service. It has invested in  premium facilities, recruited and trained expert technicians, and increased service bays – all in an effort to improve the customer’s after-sales experience. Sime Darby Motors’ efforts at meeting and exceeding customers’ expectations are reflected in the numerous accolades and awards received this past year, which include the  following: • Sime Darby Motors’ BMW and MINI dealerships in China received a total of 101 awards for dealer and marketing excellence from BMW China, including the 2019 BMW Dealer Excellence Award for Guangzhou Bowyue and Changsha Bowyue • Auto Bavaria received 39 awards at the BMW Dealer Awards Night 2020 and has been crowned Champion of Malaysia’s BMW Excellence Club in the Diamond Category for nine consecutive years • Rolls-Royce Hong Kong and Macau received the Dealer and Service Dealer of the Year – Asia Pacific from Rolls Royce • Performance Motors Limited received the BMW Asia Loyalty and Engagement Award from BMW Asia • Hino Distributors Ltd/Truck Stops (NZ) Ltd received the Hino  Parts Department and Service Department of the Year  from Hino Motors, Ltd • Continental Cars Ferrari’s Craig Pryor won the Sales Manager of  the Year award at  the Ferrari Australasia Dealer of the Year  awards • Continental Cars Audi’s Kerry Hoffman was named Sales and Sports Sales Executive of 2019 at the Audi Excellence Awards 2020 • Continental Cars Audi’s Service Advisors Jason McCrorie and Jonathan Sargent were crowned New Zealand Twin Cup Winners at the Audi Excellence Awards 2020 • Continental Cars Volkswagen’s Jackie Colburn was named Business Manager of the Year 2019 – at the Volkswagen Dealer of the Year Awards 2020 • Hertz Malaysia received the Hertz Asia Business Excellence Award from the Hertz Corporation • The Santa Fe 2.2 Diesel was crowned the Midsize Crossover & SUVs 7-seater of the Year at the Malaysia Cars of the Year Awards 2019 • The Ford Ranger was crowned Pick Up Truck of the Year (Twin  Cab) at the Malaysia Cars of the Year Awards 2019 

# Quality & Customer Satisfaction 75 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review Divisional Operations Review Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care 

Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care is a 50:50 joint venture with Australia’s Ramsay Health Care. Ramsay  Sime Darby Health Care provides award-winning primary to  quaternary healthcare through its  six  premium hospitals in  Malaysia and  Indonesia, and a day surgery facility in Hong Kong. In its commitment to providing the  best private healthcare services to  its  patients, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care benchmarks itself against  world-class standards. All  its  hospitals have attained local and international accreditations and  are equipped with the latest in  medical technologies. 

Key Highlights 

015 30 45 60 75 

Profit Contribution from Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care JV (RM million) 

FY2018 

57 

FY2019 

49 

FY2017 

36 

FY2020 39 

FY2016 

27 

76 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Business Activities 

Day Surgery Centre Hospital Operations Healthcare Education 

Key Developments in FY2020 Brownfield expansion included expansion of the emergency department and the addition of new beds and consultation rooms in RS Premier Bintaro, the addition of new outpatient clinics in ParkCity Medical Centre (PMC) and the upgrading of existing facilities across all Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care hospitals to enhance patient experience. Launch of Telehealth Plus – a digital health application with multi-platform virtual access that enables existing patients to make follow-up appointments, e-payments, keep track of their consultation history and hold video consultations with their doctors. Established COVID-19 swab centres across all six hospitals to support the  public health sectors in Malaysia and  Indonesia. 

2Indonesia Malaysia 13Hong Kong 

# 6

hospitals in Malaysia and  Indonesia 

# 1

day surgery centre in Hong Kong 

# 1

nursing college in Malaysia 

# 1,600+ 

licensed beds 

# 690+ 

specialists 

# 4,400+ 

highly trained and skilled employees 

> 77 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

Risk to Our Business Key Risk Description Mitigation Strategies Pandemic Risk The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has  impacted the operations of healthcare facilities and highlighted two operational risks: • The safety of stakeholders • Disruptions to global supply chains that may impact critical supplies • Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care has refined its business contingency plan with a sharpened focus on SOPs that  pre-empt and  address the impact of  pandemics on its operations. They  include: 

– Ensuring all staff are trained in up-to-date pandemic management/ operations skills and supplied with personal protective equipment 

– Mitigating the spread of COVID-19 through a  stringent sanitation regime across its premises  to ensure  the safety of patients, visitors  and staff 

– Establishing swab centres across all  six  private  hospitals in Malaysia and  Indonesia to aid crisis containment  efforts 

– Collaborating closely with the Malaysian government to take  in  non-COVID-19 patients to  alleviate pressures in the public health  system 

– Diversifying the set of approved suppliers 

– Tightening inventory controls to safeguard critical supplies 

– Stockpiling appropriately to balance between pandemic-readiness and cost  efficiency 

Operations Review 

In FY2020, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care posted a PBIT of RM91 million, which represents a 29% YoY decline. This  was mainly due to the general reduction in patient volumes between March and  June 2020 as a result of the pandemic as well as one-off impairments. The effects of the pandemic on Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care were severe across all its operating units. In-patient volume fell significantly as elective surgeries and other scheduled appointments and procedures were deferred. In response to this, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care ventured into other avenues to optimise income, including securing new corporate clients, imposing more stringent cost control measures and launching the company’s digital patient service application – Telehealth Plus. Throughout this public health crisis, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care’s utmost concern has always been to continue providing a safe and conducive environment for all its stakeholders. Whilst all its facilities have been kept open to continue caring for its patients, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care has implemented strict visitor policies and screening procedures, which are also in compliance with the relevant local  government regulations. 

Accreditation 

Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care is  proud to have achieved local and  international accreditations for  its  hospitals, giving patients the  assurance that the services, protocols and facilities it provides  are at the forefront of  private healthcare. 

# In the long run, Ramsay  Sime Darby Health Care  will continue its  focus on  driving the  growth of its core hospital operations while capturing adjacent out-of-hospital opportunities via strategic acquisitions and greenfield projects  in order to  build a sustainable consumer-centric brand. 78 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Divisional Operations Review Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Accreditation* Subang Jaya Medical Centre ParkCity Medical Centre Ara Damansara Medical Centre RS Premier Bintaro RS Premier Jatinegara RS Premier JCI ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

> MSQH

✓ ✓ ✓ 

> KARS

✓ ✓ ✓ 

> HICMR

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

> *JCI (Joint Commission International), MSQH (Malaysian Society for Quality in Health), KARS (Komisi Akreditasi Rumah Sakit), HICMR (Healthcare Infection Control Management Resources)

Outlook 

There are signs of recovery in Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care’s  businesses in Malaysia. However, in Indonesia, the outlook continues to be challenging and near-term recovery is unlikely as  recurring waves of COVID-19 infections worldwide continue to  exacerbate an already uncertain business climate. The threat of prolonged socio-political unrest is  another risk  factor to economic recovery in Hong Kong. Nevertheless, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care aims to focus on  building up its brand in  Hong Kong as well as in China to  increase patient volume and expand its scope of services at its day surgery facility in  Hong Kong. Expanding Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care is an integral part  of  the Group’s Value Creation Plan. This  is in view of private healthcare holding promising long-term growth prospects as there  is strong demand for affordable yet high quality healthcare from an increasingly affluent class, a global ageing population and the growing prevalence of chronic lifestyle diseases such as diabetes and obesity. This demand is  expected to  rise most rapidly in the  Asia Pacific  region. In the near term, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care’s core business will remain in the hospital business in South-east Asia. In the long run, Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care will continue to focus on driving the growth of its  core hospital operations while capturing  adjacent out-of-hospital opportunities via strategic acquisitions and greenfield projects in order to build a sustainable consumer-centric brand. To do this, it will continue strengthening its accreditation and its quality of service while supporting the advancement of  innovation and  technology within  its hospitals. 

Key Risk Description Mitigation Strategies Technological Disruptions 

Technological advancements are swiftly reshaping many aspects of healthcare, including new platforms that transform the patient-doctor interaction model and applications that drive operating efficiencies. All  hospital and healthcare facility operators must keep pace with and embrace relevant technologies in  a timely manner to succeed in  a competitive business landscape. • Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care is making efforts to adopt digital technology that provides patients with more efficient yet personalised service such as the recently launched Telehealth Plus. This digital health application provides an integrated interface that streamlines appointments, payments, consultation history and offers new functions such as video consultations. 

Regulatory & Compliance Risk 

The need to ensure business operations comply  with relevant regulatory requirements which are  evolving rapidly and are becoming increasingly demanding. Increase in pandemic awareness due to COVID-19 may fundamentally reshuffle the relationship between governments and healthcare providers. The challenges in multi-layer coordination across healthcare providers (both public and private) may cause government to rethink how crises are managed to enable faster and more consistent decision-making. • Engage closely with the regulators to prepare Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care for any impending regulatory changes. • Foster collegial relationships with fellow healthcare industry players to build the  foundation for information and knowledge sharing and collaborative working partnerships. 

> 79 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

# Divisional Operations Review 

# Sime Darby Logistics 

Sime Darby’s port and logistics business is located in Shandong, China’s second most populous province. Sime Darby Logistics is the primary operator of Weifang  Port, which lies within the  key region of Bohai Bay’s economic belt. It also owns three  major river ports in  the coal  mining prefecture of Jining. Its  ports in  Jining are reachable by  navigation  along the Grand Canal, making it an  important  node in  the  inland shipping network. Weifang Port handles dry and liquid bulk, general cargo and containers while all three Jining river ports handle mostly coal/coke, bulk and general cargo. Sime Darby Logistics also provides value-added services such as ship tallying and tugging, container-related services, sorting and repackaging of general cargo, management of  stack yard operations as well as washing and blending of coal. All four ports serve an expanding network of  shipping customers throughout North-east China, Southern China, East Asia and South-east Asia. 

80 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 China Shandong Weifang 1Jining 2

# RM219m 

Revenue 

# 24.2m MT 

Bulk Cargo Throughput 

# 156.7k 

TEU Container Throughput 

Business Activities 

Loading and Discharging Tallying and Tugging Container Related Services Sorting and Repackaging Stack Yard Storage 

Key Developments in FY2020 Long-term collaboration with a key customer to construct cement powder tanks at Weifang Port to handle and store cement and building materials for infrastructure construction in the hinterland. The construction of a 100,000 metric tonne (MT) grain warehouse and container logistics facilities to boost Weifang Port’s throughput. This high-profile project, in collaboration with China Oil and Foodstuffs Corporation, the largest state-owned enterprise and  leading supplier of grain and agriculture products in China, will likely add to investment and business activities at the Logistics Park. Investments in equipment and facilities at the three Jining ports to meet the government’s increasingly stringent environmental requirements and strengthening Sime Darby Logistics’ commitment to environmental sustainability. 

> 81 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

Key Highlights 

080 160 240 320 400 

Revenue (RM million) 

FY2018 

341 

FY2019 

283 

FY2017 

303 

FY2020 219 

FY2016 

294 

010 20 30 40 

Port Throughput (Bulk Cargo) (million MT) 

FY2018 

32.6 

FY2019 

30.3 

FY2017 

31.1 

FY2020 24.2 

FY2016 

30.3 

060 120 180 240 300 

Port Throughput (Container) (‘000 TEU) 

FY2018 

240.5 

FY2019 

272.4 

FY2017 

219.8 

FY2020 156.7 

FY2016 

215.7 

-100 -50 050 100 150 

PBIT (RM million) 

FY2018 

74 

FY2019 

2

FY2017 

64 

FY2020 (94) 

FY2016 

103 

-6 -3 036

ROAIC (%) 

FY2018 

3.2 

FY2019 

0.1 

FY2017 

2.9 

FY2020 (4.9) 

FY2016 

5.2 

82 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Logistics Operations Review 

For the year under review, Sime Darby Logistics registered a decline in revenue by 22.6% to RM219 million and a loss before interest and taxes of RM94 million. The decline in revenue was mainly due to an overall drop in port throughput, with bulk cargo throughput declining YoY from  30.3 million MT to 24.2 million MT and container throughput declining YoY from 272,435 TEU to  156,662 TEU. These results include impairments amounting to RM127 million, offset  by a gain on the disposal of  sea  use rights and related assets worth RM18 million. Excluding these  items, the port operation’s core  PBIT for the year stood at RM15 million, a  56% fall from RM34 million recorded in FY2019. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the port operations in FY2020. China’s GDP contracted by  6.8% 1 in Q12020, the country’s first contraction in four decades. Chinese ports reported an overall YoY decline in throughput of 

# To mitigate future  challenges, Sime  Darby Logistics will undertake strict measures to  tighten control over overheads, extend the  service chain from  port handling to  logistics, lock in customers and improve infrastructure and equipment to meet  the increasingly stringent environmental standards. 

4.6%  and 8.5% for bulk cargo and container respectively. The pandemic also derailed global economies and disrupted supply chains, adversely impacting global trade. Growing competition from Shandong  Port Group also dented earnings for  Sime Darby Logistics. In  FY2020, state-owned Qingdao Port, Yantai Port, Rizhao Port and Bohai Bay Port were consolidated into Shandong Port Group, as part of the Central Government’s national port consolidation drive. As a result, many  of Weifang Port’s major customers made the switch to the larger and more integrated port group for trans-shipment. The increasingly high environmental standards imposed by the Jining government continue to exert pressure on the business. In FY2020, the three Jining ports suspended operations for 71 days due to a severe air pollution alert and inspection by port authorities. This  significantly lowered cargo throughput for the year. Unloading of bauxite at the dry & break bulk terminal of Weifang Sime Darby Port Co., Ltd. 1 Source: China National Statistics Bureau. 

> 83 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

Risks to Our Business Key Risk Description Mitigation Strategies Competition Intensive price competition from nearby ports, especially Shandong Port Group. • Refine pricing strategy to defend market share. • Develop end-to-end logistics services to  lock in end customers and increase revenue streams. 

COVID-19 Pandemic and Macroeconomic Effects 

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected business operations. In addition, the  ongoing US-China trade conflict continues to dampen international trade. • Tighten cost of sales and overhead expenses. • Defer non-revenue generating capital and operational expenses. 

Stricter Environmental Controls 

The Shandong government continues to tighten environmental regulations, adversely impacting the transportation industry. E.g. stricter overloading controls on trucks and compulsory upgrading of stacking yards and facilities at all Jining ports. • Upgrade stacking yards and port facilities to  comply with the revised environmental standards. Upgrading works are on target to be completed within the expected time frame.    

> 01 Connecting hose to load liquid cargo to the ship berthing at Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co., Ltd.
> 02 Operator supervising the coal unloading operation at Jining Sime Darby Port Co., Ltd.
> 03 Loading and unloading of container at the container terminal of Weifang Sime Darby Port Co., Ltd.
> 02 01

84 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Divisional Operations Review Sime Darby Logistics Quality & Customer Satisfaction 

Sime Darby Logistics strives to improve operations to better serve  its customers. In  February 2020, Weifang  Port expediently completed the loading of  12,000 MT of calcined coke despite limited production capacity due to  COVID-19 restrictions. The team’s timely and efficient handling of the task helped the customer gain valuable time to meet their delivery deadline. A letter of thanks to Weifang Port from the customer attests to the dedication, professionalism and diligence of the team. Sime Darby Logistics remains committed to discovering more ways to enhance customer-centricity across its operations. 

> 03

Outlook 

China’s container ports are facing their first decline in throughput since  the  financial crisis in 2009 due  to  reduced global demand for Chinese goods resulting from the economic uncertainty. Coupled with  increasing competition and stricter environmental standards imposed by the Chinese government, port operations in Weifang and Jining will continue to face challenging times ahead. However, port activities have progressively recovered as measures  have been taken to contain  the COVID-19 outbreak and  lockdown restrictions have gradually  eased in  China and abroad. To mitigate future challenges, Sime  Darby Logistics will undertake strict measures to tighten control over overheads, extend the service chain from port  handling to  logistics, lock  in  customers and improve infrastructure and equipment to meet  the increasingly stringent environmental standards. Sime Darby Logistics will also seek new opportunities  for cooperation with  other businesses and customers to optimise land resources in the logistics park at  Weifang Port. 

> 85 Management Discussion & Analysis: Performance Review

Sime Darby’s Commitment 

Sime Darby’s commitment towards sustainable operations is demonstrated by balancing economic aspirations with having genuine care and  respect for our people and the communities the Group operates in, and in our programmes to reduce the  impact of  our operations on the environment. Sime  Darby believes that a focus  on  sustainability not only strengthens our social licence to  operate, but also  enhances our ability to run our businesses efficiently, competitively and generatively into  the future. With sustainability inherent in the Group’s organisational strategy and  business model, sustainability-related information is integrated throughout this report, reflecting how the Group’s sustainability mindset guides operations and  its  ability to create value over  time. The following table outlines the main topics in relation to  the sustainability statement within this report. 

Sustainability Statement Topics Section in This Report Page Number 

Sustainability Reporting Scope About This Report 08 Sustainability Governance Creating Sustainable Value 87 Sustainability Framework Creating Sustainable Value 87 Stakeholders engaged to identify and determine material issues Engaging Stakeholders; Integrity in Corporate Reporting and Meaningful Relationships with Stakeholders 38 and 134 How material issues are determined Material Issues 40 Safety Performance Safety 89 People and Community Performance People; Community Contributions and Development 94 and 98 Environmental Sustainability Performance Environmental Sustainability 100 Governance Chairman’s Statement on Corporate Governance 116 Economic Performance Divisional Operations Review 60 

# We are committed to  champion sustainability through a conscientious approach to business and a culture of transparency in reporting our sustainability performance.   

> 86 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 86 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Overview Sustainability Governance 

Sime Darby’s commitment to sustainability begins with an established governance model. The Board of Directors ultimately governs the Group’s sustainability strategy, with support from the GCEO, who reports to the Board on safety and sustainability matters. Sime Darby acknowledges the significance of safety and sustainability in its long-term business strategy, and  in October 2019, appointed a Group Chief Safety & Sustainability Officer (GCSSO), who reports directly to the GCEO. The GCSSO is accountable for setting the strategic direction for safety and  sustainability across the Group. Since  the appointment of the GCSSO, the Group has: • Implemented a structure to support all Divisions; 

Sustainability Framework Our Purpose: Delivering Sustainable Futures Our Enabler of Value Creation: Sustainability Strategy Sustainability Pillars Safety People and Community Environmental Sustainability Governance Economic Addressing Our Material Issues 

Occupational Health and Safety Community Contributions and Development Waste and Effluents Management Business Ethics and Compliance Quality and Customer Satisfaction Employee Training and Development Energy and Carbon Management Data Privacy and Security Business Growth and Performance Fair Employment Practices Water Management Technology and Innovation Read more on Page 89 Read more on Page 94 to 99 Read more on Page 100 Read more on Page 116 Read more on Page 60 

Supporting the  United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UN SDGs) 

• Established a strategic direction to identify and address risks, standardise reporting and improve workplace safety culture and capabilities; and • Formulated a Safety and Sustainability Strategic Plan to position Sime Darby as a global  leader in safety and sustainability, to realise its goal  of  “No Harm” and embed sustainability across all aspects of operations. 

Group Chief Executive Officer Group Chief Safety & Sustainability Officer Safety & Sustainability Management Team Industrial Australasia MD Industrial Asia MD Motors MD Healthcare MD Logistics MD Board of Directors 87 87 Creating Sustainable Value Sustainability is a key enabler of  the  Group’s VCP, which in turn helps  Sime Darby fulfil its  purpose of  Delivering Sustainable Futures. As  aresponsible business entity, Sime Darby aims  to  promote a safety  culture, nurture  its 

people, community and environment, and  generate a business environment that is guided by  transparent and accountable governance. The Group’s Sustainability Framework supports and contributes  towards achieving the  UN  SDGs. To ensure that it is on track to  deliver on the VCP, the Group has  developed Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) related to each  material issue to track its  performance in an open, transparent manner. 

Sustainability Accolades Constituent of the FTSE4Good Index Series 

Sime Darby remains a constituent of the FTSE4Good Index Series for the third consecutive year. The FTSE4Good Index Series is designed to measure the performance of  companies demonstrating strong Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) practices, and is used by a wide variety of market participants to create and assess responsible investment funds and other products. 

2nd Place, Building Trust Awards 2019 by PwC Malaysia 

PwC’s Building Trust Awards is the first in Malaysia to measure trust among the top 50 companies in Malaysia by market capitalisation. The awards assess companies from two perspectives: the company’s communication of value creation, and their trust perception among their internal and external stakeholders.   

> 88 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 88 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Overview Our safety initiatives aim to  realise the goal of “No Harm” while creating value in all  aspects of the Group’s operations. 

The health and safety of our employees, partners and local communities is the top priority for the Group. Our goal is  to position Sime Darby as a globally recognised leader in safety and sustainability, realising the goal of  “No Harm” with sustainability creating value in all aspects of the Group’s operations. In collaboration with all partners and stakeholders, the Group will continue to develop its people, systems and processes to  manage risks, build resilience and achieve continuous improvement in safety and sustainability performance. 

Stakeholder Health and Safety 

In an unfortunate incident in July 2019, a fatality occurred involving a contracted stevedore at Weifang Port in China. Any fatality is unacceptable and deeply regrettable. The Group is  determined to further enhance safety culture and systems across all  operations and influence cultural change with its contractors to prevent a recurrence of such an incident. We have introduced a next-generation safety culture programme called “SELF”, which stands for Safe Engage Lead and Focus, which will be rolled out to  all  operations in stages. The unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the health  and wellbeing of millions of  people globally, bringing social  and economic disruption. COVID-19 has threatened the health  and safety  of the Group’s stakeholders, primarily our employees and customers. The Group has responded  swiftly to  the pandemic, with the implementation of a business continuity management plan across  all operations. In managing safety and health, the  Group has focused its  efforts on  prompt and clear  communication to  employees, while the necessary personal protective equipment was procured, and travel was restricted in  line with  guidance from the relevant health authorities. Workplace exposure was also limited, with the  institution of work-from-home arrangements, split teams and increased frequency of cleaning and  sanitisation of premises. The Group’s focus on a transparent reporting culture, in addition to  standardised reporting and classification procedure, has improved the consistency of injury reporting across geographical boundaries. 

> 89 89 Creating Sustainable Value

# Creating Sustainable Value Safety 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0   

> Sime Darby's Lost Time Injury (LTI) and Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate (LTIFR)
> 125 100 75 50 25 0
> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019
> LTI Cases LTIFR 60 1.45 96 2.32 91 1.90 91 1.87
> 99 1.99* FY2020

We  firmly believe that consistent injury reporting, the timely sharing of preventive actions and the roll out of a safety culture programme to all operations will provide the support required to reduce injury rates in the  future. 

Health and Safety Strategy 

The Group’s health and safety strategy is guided by the Safety and  Sustainability Strategic Blueprint  which identifies the  critical  success factors for delivery in  FY2021. This  includes the  delivery and a roll  out plan for  the Group’s safety culture programme, “SELF”. The Blueprint focuses on four critical  success factors: improving health and safety, building value through sustainability, managing risk  and quality assurance, and enhancing business resilience. These  four success factors are  instrumental to achieving the  Group’s “No Harm” goal, which  is  supported by the following  initiatives: • Promoting a generative safety  culture; • Building capability through Felt  leadership; • Group-wide safety culture programmes; • Enhancing lead indicator reporting; • Customising training programmes and audits that target high risk  activities; • Delivering systems and processes to support assurance through organisational governance activities; and • Embedding a continuous improvement culture. 

Standardisation 

With the Group focused upon improving the culture of reporting all  safety and sustainability events, a standardised incident reporting, investigation and classification process has been rolled out * Sime Darby LTIFR data has been assured by a third party. LTIFR = The total number of lost time injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked. LTIFR = The total number of lost time injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked.    

> 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0
> Sime Darby Industrial's Lost Time Injury and Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate
> 84 72 60 48 36 24 12 0
> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019
> LTI Cases LTIFR 51 3.37 30 2.24 34 1.87 32 1.63
> 31 1.47 FY2020

Group-wide. Standardised safety and sustainability KPI’s aligned to  the Safety and Sustainability Strategic Blueprint have been implemented across all Divisions and  operating units. In the second half of FY2020, an  internal health, safety, environment and quality (HSEQ) self-assessment programme was conducted across the Group. The  outcome of the assessment will  help determine the  framework and schedule for the  independent Sime Darby safety and sustainability audit team for the  coming year. Additionally, Sime Darby Logistics had in FY2020 introduced formatted daily pre-operational safety meetings designed to enable every employee to be switched on and focused on safety for their upcoming work shift. Along with its partner at the Weifang Liquid Terminal, Sime Darby Logistics engaged an  external party to undertake a full compliance review of joint   

> 90 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 90 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Safety LTIFR = The total number of lost time injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked.       

> 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0
> Sime Darby Motors' Lost Time Injury and Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate
> 70 56 42 28 14 0
> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019
> LTI Cases LTIFR 60.33 52 2.42 52 2.13 53 2.07
> 64 2.51 FY2020
> LTIFR = The total number of lost time injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked.
> 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0
> Sime Darby Logistics’ Lost Time Injury and Lost Time Injury Frequency Rate
> 10 86420
> FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019
> LTI Cases LTIFR 20.78 42.09 51.48 61.83
> 41.36 FY2020

operations. In addition to the outcomes of the audit, focus has been upon ensuring critical hazards are minimised and hazardous chemicals are stored in accordance with internal standards. 

Life Saving Commitments 

Sime Darby Industrial maintained its  focus on minimising critical hazards within work processes throughout FY2020. Following the successful roll  out of Life Saving Commitments in FY2018 in the Australasia operations, the programme is being deployed across Sime Darby Industrial’s Asia operations and is scheduled for to  make safety forms and data more accessible and transparent, thereby improving efficiencies. The successful deployment of digital  forms has improved the user  experience and delivered an  immediate data source with enhanced data integrity. This has enabled greater identification of  non-compliances and the development of more targeted training for quality risk assessments. Sime Darby Logistics implemented a digital application to report incidents and hazards. Since the application went live, the target of identifying one hazard for every ten employees per month has been exceeded by over six times, attesting to the effectiveness of the application and  improved user experience. The use of advanced materials technologies has also become a feature of safety initiatives for some operating units. The safety of night workers has been further improved, using more reflective coatings and lighting modifications, while higher resolution cameras have enabled wider coverage of operational areas to more effectively monitor safety and environmental hazards. Particulate filters for non-road mobile machinery, online particulate detectors, fog gun trucks, and sweeping vehicles have helped control exposures to airborne hazards at several operations. 

Recognition 

Hastings Deering has introduced an  Excellence Awards programme for  “No Harm” achievements. As part of  an enterprise-wide Employee Excellence Reward and Recognition strategy, employees can be nominated by their leaders, peers or other colleagues for recognition of any innovation or improvement they have made to a system or process that contributes to the business’ “No  Harm” goal. Award winners receive company-wide recognition and cash prizes which reward and incentivise continuous improvement and innovation in workplace safety. completion by the end of 2020. Standardised controls developed to support the Life Saving Commitments will be incorporated into safety management systems across Sime  Darby Industrial. This in turn will be supported by baseline health and safety audits and action plans to  address any gaps. 

Technology 

In FY2020, Sime Darby Industrial’s focused upon data-driven projects to digitise forms and make data-based decisions. The Sime Darby Industrial Safety and Sustainability team has  leveraged digital platforms 

> 91 91 Creating Sustainable Value

Sime Darby’s demonstration of  operational efficiency during the  pandemic Terra Cat 

The Terra Cat dealership in New Zealand implemented a full shutdown as part of the COVID-19 response in  compliance with the New Zealand government’s requirements in March 2020. The business transitioned from full operations to effective closure within two  days. With approvals to reopen in June 2020, it  successfully achieved a return to 80% operational efficiency within two days. Throughout the seven-week interruption to business operations due to the lockdown, employees were closely monitored and supported. All  Terra Cat employees remained free of COVID-19. By managing this period strategically, Terra Cat was able to control the financial impact of the lockdown whilst maintaining positive engagement with customers and the workforce. 

Sime Darby’s Digital Solutions 

Sime Darby Motors and Sime Darby Industrial accelerated the adoption of digital solutions to  present customers with a seamless online shopping  experience. Examples include the launch of  Auto Bavaria’s and Performance Motors’ digital showrooms in Malaysia and Singapore respectively, Continental Cars’ contactless engagement with customers in New  Zealand, which included home test  drives and China Engineers Limited’s 720° online exhibition gallery. 

CEL’s COVID-19 Response 

To minimise business disruption, CEL adopted a rapid response to the pandemic outbreak by immediately reviewing travel plans and developing an alternating team roster to ensure staff safety. PPE supplies were  immediately acquired at the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak. 

Sime Darby Industrial leads the way with a refreshed safety culture programme 

During FY2020, Sime Darby Industrial Australasia progressively deployed its next-generation safety culture programme, “SELF”, throughout its businesses. “SELF” is designed to deliver enhanced engagement of  people and to train them to make safer  choices by exploring and challenging their existing thoughts and  behaviours in the workplace. “SELF” challenges participants to explore the reasons they are safe, the  choices they make each day, the standards they  set  and the actions they take. It aims to  reinforce  the culture of safety by promoting personal  ownership for safety in a mindful process while complementing safety leadership. The “SELF” programme will be delivered across the broader Group  in  the coming year. 

Sime Darby Motors drives home safety message 

Sime Darby Motors has longstanding collaborations with its Principals to promote driver safety. Not only is  safety a fitting extension of customer care, it  is also a valuable service to the community, both  of  which will  strengthen brand loyalty which ultimately boosts business resilience. In December 2019, Sime  Darby Motors again partnered with Ford  to  deliver the annual Safe Driving Skills for Life  Programme workshop in  Sabah, this being the  first  time the programme was  introduced to East  Malaysia.   

> 92 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 92 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Safety FY2020 Safety Achievements and Accolades Highest level of workplace safety accreditation 

Awarded to Terra Cat by the New Zealand Accident Compensation Corporation in recognition of its first-class claims management and internal processes 

Gold Class 1 Award, MSOSH 2019 Awards 

Sime Darby Industrial Klang Valley (Workshop) and Sime Darby Industrial’s operations in Ipoh were awarded Gold  Class 1 for proven outstanding occupational safety and health (OSH) performance by the Malaysian Society for  Occupational Safety & Health 

Gold Class 2 Award, MSOSH 2019 Awards 

Sime Darby Industrial’s operations in Kuantan were awarded Gold Class 2 for proven outstanding OSH performance by the MSOSH 

Advanced Safety Company 

Sime Darby Motors’ dealership in Chongqing received the ‘Advanced Safety Company’ award twice from the local  authorities 

Advanced Unit in Safety Operation 2019 

Jining’s Yuejin Port was awarded Advanced Unit in Safety by the Jining People’s Government Safety Committee 

Plans for Next Year 

Our Safety and Sustainability Strategy Blueprint has identified the  critical success factors for delivery next financial year. We  are  reviewing the delivery and  a roll out plan for our safety culture programme, “SELF”, across targeted areas within the Group. Sime Darby Industrial is launching a new HSEQ management reporting system in FY2021. The new system is  an enterprise-wide solution aimed at replacing existing safety reporting systems which will allow for full lifecycle recording and management of all HSEQ events. The solution contains functionalities to support and manage lead and lag indicator reporting including incidents, hazards, audits and inspections, safety interactions, as well as preventive and corrective actions. The integrated system will also enhance user experience and increase the quality of event reporting thereby improving data analysis and review processes. A comprehensive range of specific injury prevention strategies will continue to be deployed, ranging from  working at heights programmes, chemicals surveillance, noise risk  assessments and hearing conservation programmes, through to indoor air quality monitoring. Initiatives to promote incident reporting, hazard identification and  safety culture have been identified by each Division and will  support Sime Darby’s continuous improvement journey towards “No Harm”. To underpin these strategies and  initiatives, existing internal regulatory systems and processes will be enhanced to strengthen regulatory understanding across the  Divisions and to promote a culture beyond compliance underpinned by teamwork. 

> 93 93 Creating Sustainable Value

# Our people are at  the heart of our  business. We  are committed to promoting fair  employment practices and investing in the development of  our people. 

The Group’s employees are the life  force that sustains the business; they deliver on the Group’s corporate strategies and are ambassadors of  the brand. Sime Darby is committed to continuously engage  in  a respectful and fair manner with all its employees, honouring their potential by investing in relevant training and development opportunities to help  them  realise their potential and  aspirations. The Group’s approach is  geared towards retaining the right  mix of intellectual capital and  cultural fit to  propel the organisation forward. 

Employee Engagement 

A positively engaged workforce boosts productivity, reduces turnover, strengthens internal company culture and increases customer satisfaction. In short, it  underpins the Group’s ability to do  right and  to  do it well. In view of  this, Sime  Darby conducted a Group Employee Engagement Survey  in Q3  of FY2020, which saw  83% of employees taking the  opportunity to  have their say about what it feels like to work in  the  Group. The Group Head Office, Sime Darby Industrial and Sime Darby Motors saw  an increase in scores compared to  the previous survey conducted in  2016. This was due in part to a planned and  concerted effort to  strengthen management culture, placing more emphasis on “Safety” and “Manager or  Business Unit Leadership”. The results of the survey were discussed and analysed at the Group, function, business and country levels  with respective teams and leaders addressing areas to be improved. In  the  coming year, the  Group will continue to develop and  implement targeted action plans for improvement. 

Employee Training and Development 

The capability and capacity of the Group’s employees is one of the key  enablers of the Group’s VCP. By  investing in human capital, the Group  is preparing for leadership succession in driving the  organisation towards its goals. In FY2020, 87% of the trainings conducted were job-specific, while 11.3% were on personal effectiveness and the remaining 1.6% comprised of  leadership trainings.   

> 94 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 94 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value People Core Executive Programme (CEP) 

Sime Darby has a proprietary training  framework called the CEP. CEPs are designed to harness the leadership competencies of the Group’s workforce and ensure that  talent are kept abreast of requisite skillsets and are primed for  optimum performance. At  the Divisions, the Human Resources departments proactively identify skill gaps among employees based  on  prevailing and predictive market trends, then recommend and  provide relevant training opportunities to ensure employees are prepared to respond to dynamic business landscapes. In FY2020, a new CEP was introduced  at the executive level, with enhanced content which included a platform for each Division  to facilitate sharing and  discussions around key focus areas. For Sime Darby Motors, this involved a focus on performance driven culture whereas for Sime  Darby Industrial, the focus was  on safety, innovation and customer service. A review of the CEP curriculum for other levels in  the  organisation will take place  progressively. 

Targeted Leadership Programmes 

Sime Darby also runs programmes that empower leaders, expand talent  capabilities and engage employees in  a manner that supports  the delivery of business strategies. Initiatives such as the  Young Executive Incubation Programme, conducted by CEL, is  targeted at grooming young executives and engineers as part of  a future-focused manpower and  succession planning strategy. Similar young talent development programmes are implemented in  Sime Darby Motors in China. Structured programmes, such as  those catered towards entry-level management trainees and Executive MBA for potential general managers, have proven successful. Some of the  management trainees and potential general managers have already assumed leadership roles in  operating units. At Hastings Deering in Australia, leadership programmes such as iLead and Step  Up are designed to focus on  the  development of core behaviours, values and delivery of  results amongst their current and  future leaders. 

World-Class Management Training in Easily Accessible On-Demand Modules 

As a global business with operations in 18 countries and territories, there  is an opportunity for the Group  to develop world-class content to provide its talent pool with the latest management skills, in  a way that is conveniently accessible regardless of where they  are based. In FY2020, Sime  Darby launched an on-demand learning and performance support resource, in partnership with Harvard  Business School Publishing, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Harvard University. This initiative addresses the need to upskill company leaders and is delivered in  a format that is highly efficient and  familiar to the tech-savvy, time-pressed learners. 

Technical Training Programmes 

Hastings Deering, in collaboration with industry leaders, state government and national education bodies, is developing and deploying specifically-designed technical training programmes to support workforce development. Programmes such as “Introduction to Technology” and “Advanced Technology and Diagnostics” are designed to suit the  workforce of the future. At Sime Darby Motors, in addition to  providing Principal-driven product  and technical trainings to  its  technicians, a team and individual competition was organised in China for after-sales personnel, to  assess and evaluate key after-sales points including painting work and quick repair process. The aim was to  improve technical skills, ensure the quality of  repairs and improve work efficiency rate. 

Ensuring Leadership Continuity 

In building a strong leadership bench  strength, the Group has adopted robust talent assessment methods to identify high potentials and external incumbents for critical and pivotal roles. Sime Darby’s approach is based on a combination of scientifically-validated psychometric assessments and a comprehensive leadership framework to ensure a consistent and accurate assessment of talent fit. Over the past 12 months, the Group has embarked on a Group-wide assessment of senior leaders and will continue in FY2021 with the assessment of the next tier of leaders. This ensures that the Group will continue to have a healthy  talent pipeline for continuity in leadership. 

Fair Employment Practices 

The Group believes in promoting and  developing a diverse workforce, as it brings with it a variety of complementary skills, experiences and perspectives, which will enhance the Group’s capacity to create value. To support this, equal opportunity and non-discriminatory policies for  remuneration, promotion, recruitment and selection have been  instituted Group-wide. These  policies ensure that all qualified candidates regardless of gender, race, disability, nationality, religion and age are treated equally, providing fair opportunity for all. The Group also abides by local labour  laws, regulations and cultural practices. Employment statistics are  regularly reviewed, to monitor workforce diversity. 

> 95 95 Creating Sustainable Value

Breakdown of Employees by Position and Gender Management Category Female Male Grand Total Headcount (%) Headcount (%) Headcount 

Top Management 2 6.5 29 93.5 31 Senior Management 19 23.5 62 76.5 81 Middle Management 132 22.7 449 77.3 581 Junior Management 1,104 31.7 2,375 68.3 3,479 Non-Executive 3,861 28.2 9,839 71.8 13,700 Workers 78 2.6 2,970 97.4 3,048 

Total 5,196 24.8 15,724 75.2 20,920 Overview of Sime Darby’s Employees Total Employees by Country/Territory 

# 20,920 Employees 100% Malaysia 

# 5,969 

28.5% 

Singapore 

# 1,089 

5.2% 

Gen X (1963 – 1979) 

# 5,942 

Gen Y (1980 – later) 

# 14,037 

Baby Boomers (1962 & earlier) 

# 941 

Total Employees by Generation Group Total Employees by Gender Female 

# 5,196 

> Female Male

24.8%  4.5%  28.4%  67.1% 

Male 

# 15,724 

75.2% 

New Zealand 

# 1,556 

7.4% 

Thailand 

# 677 

3.2% 

Others 

# 813 

4.0% 

China 

# 6,131 

29.3% 

Australia 

# 3,494 

16.7% 

Hong Kong 

# 1,191 

5.7% 

96 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

96 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Creating Sustainable Value People 01 Joanne Best of Hastings Deering was awarded the 2020 Exceptional Woman of the Year Award from QRC/WIMARQ    

> 02 CEL is the first of four dealers in China to receive the excellent capability level for Caterpillar’s Technician Career Development Process – Assessment
> 01 02

Promoting diversity at Hastings  Deering 

Hastings Deering was awarded the Queensland Resource Council’s Excellence in Diversity Programmes and Performance for its ‘Together as One’ initiative, in recognition for its exceptional work in promoting diversity and inclusion within its workplace. The ‘Together as One’ initiative was first launched in January 2018 with specific action areas around culture, gender, abilities and generational inclusion. The purpose of the initiative is to  ensure that every one of the 3,500 people who come to work at Hastings Deering each day, feel like they truly belong. The  programme’s mission is to create a workplace that is both supportive and safe for  employees of diversified backgrounds, experiences and perspectives to ensure they can deliver their best at work. It is sponsored by the company’s leadership team and guided by a council of nominee employees from all areas and levels of the business, establishing Terms of  Reference for activities and ensuring that the quality and best practice initiatives are aligned to  enterprise strategy. In 2019, ‘Together as One’ also won the National Association of Women in  Construction’s Queensland Award for Diversity and in August this year was named  a finalist in the Queensland Mining Awards. 

Most Popular Graduate Employer in the Automotive Industry in 2019 

Sime Darby was awarded the Most Popular Graduate Employer in the Automotive Sector at Malaysia’s 100 Leading Graduate Employers Award. 

Technician Career Development Process – Assessment 

CEL and Hastings Deering both received the excellent capability level for  Caterpillar’s Technician Career Development Process – Assessment, with CEL being the first of four dealers in China to receive the award. 

Caterpillar 5-Star Award 

CEL Industrial Equipment Training Centre (IETC) facility was awarded 5 Stars in Contamination Control by Caterpillar. 

2020 Woman of the Year 

Joanne Best, General Manager of Enterprise Excellence and Employee Experience at Hastings Deering was awarded the 2020 Exceptional Woman of the Year award by the Queensland Resource Council/Women in Mining and Resources Queensland. 

VISTA Award For 2019/2020 

Ben Treagus, Luke Ross and Shannan Smith from Truckstops Napier won the  New Zealand leg of the 2019/20 VISTA (Volvo International Service Training Award) competition. 

Plans for Next Year 

Sime Darby will continue to champion excellence in human resources practices and promote initiatives to improve workforce strength, based on the principles of diversity, non-discrimination and fair opportunity. 

FY2020 Human Resource Achievements and Accolades 

In FY2020, the Group and its employees were recognised for excellence and performance in their respective fields of work. 

> 97 97 Creating Sustainable Value

# As a responsible corporate steward, we believe in  delivering sustainable futures  to our stakeholders by  supporting the communities in which we operate. 

The Group values and respects the  communities in its areas of operations. Sime Darby believes in  giving back to the communities by  backing worthy social causes and contributing to their development. And in doing so, the Group fulfils its  purpose to deliver sustainable futures to its  stakeholders. The Group, together with Sime  Darby  Plantation Berhad and  Sime Darby Property Berhad, makes social investments through a philanthropic foundation, Yayasan  Sime Darby. Over the years, Yayasan Sime Darby has expanded its  wings from  offering scholarships to outstanding and  deserving individuals to funding impactful conservation, outreach and development programmes today. The  GCEO of Sime Darby is on the  Governing Council of Yayasan Sime Darby, ensuring that the foundation’s strategies are relevant and aligned with Sime Darby’s organisational objectives and strategies. Every year, the Group contributes RM20 million to the foundation, representing about 40% of the total contribution Yayasan Sime Darby receives annually. Yayasan Sime Darby supports five  pillars: education, environment, community and health, sports and arts and culture. Internal strategic reviews of these five pillars were conducted in FY2019 and FY2020 to  ensure that they continue to be aligned with the ten UN SDGs which Sime Darby has pledged to support. Yayasan Sime Darby runs a variety of  community activities every year to  promote its five pillars. In FY2020, its  contributions have been allocated to the five pillars accordingly:  

> Pillar % Contribution

Education 48.0 Community & Health 30.6 Environment 12.8 Arts & Culture 5.8 Sports 2.8 

Sparking Young Scientists: Sime  Darby Young Innovators Challenge 

One of Yayasan Sime Darby’s flagship programmes is the annual Sime Darby Young Innovators Challenge (SDYIC), a unique platform where participating teams of secondary school students pit their coding and   

> 98 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 98 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Community Contributions and Development The Sime Darby Young Innovators Challenge provides an opportunity for youth to explore science and technology skills that are critical for the fourth industrial revolution. software design skills in a showdown of teamwork, creative thinking, leadership and entrepreneurial skills. SDYIC is unique in the way it is designed to be highly collaborative. The programme partners undergraduate students as mentors to junior participants giving the opportunity for the seniors to hone soft skills. It also brings in leading industry expertise with the aim to reduce gaps in access to quality education between rural and urban communities and to improve access to basic education for the marginalised. SDYIC 2019 was held for the first time in a state outside the Klang Valley, in Terengganu. For 2020, the programme was organised virtually via an online platform for the first time, which meant  that there were minimal disruptions despite the global pandemic. Plans are underway to  bring this programme to other states in the future, and to continue to spark  interest in critical science and  technology skills in the younger generation to prepare them for IR4.0. 

Catalyst for Communities: Hubs for Good 

Hubs for Good is an arts and culture programme supported by Yayasan Sime Darby in collaboration with British Council Malaysia and the University of Malaya. The programme connects Malaysian creative hubs and hub leaders with each other and to various local stakeholders. It provides dynamic, informative, and research-based resources that can advance the professional development of creative hub leaders, which will allow them to better support hundreds of creative practitioners in Malaysia. The programme involves projects including country-wide mapping and  research, a toolkit for the use of  creative hub leaders and creative practitioners, a digital networking platform, and capacity building activities to address skills and knowledge needs of local creative hub leaders. Yayasan Sime Darby plays a key role as co-funder of the three-year programme, enabling the  programme to double its scope and number of activities. The foundation’s support also aided scholarships for three research assistants working on the research and development of the toolkit and the digital platform. By nurturing creative hubs, it is hoped that they become social catalysts, radiating positive social impact to communities across Malaysia. 

Sporting for Good: Malaysia Rugby  Sponsorship 

Yayasan Sime Darby has been the sponsor of Malaysia Rugby since 2019, supporting talent scouting, a series of elite training camps and  participation in tournaments. The  RM1.4 million sponsorship, for a period of one and a half years, filled a critical gap in the development of the sport, where funding aids were few and far between. It aims to produce a pool of 30 male players aged between 15 and 20 years old for the U19 and U20 men’s elite team by FY2022. Additionally, in FY2020, Yayasan Sime  Darby has started supporting 21  players for the  U20 women’s elite team, to encourage female participation in the  sport. This  echoes Sime Darby’s talent management philosophy of promoting diversity and inclusivity. The foundation’s partnership creates a well-rounded rugby ecosystem that involves the government, the National Sports Council and Malaysia Rugby. 

Fostering the Spirit of Volunteerism 

The Group takes a holistic view to developing human capital by focusing on  professional as well as personal growth. Encouraging volunteerism for  causes which employees personally identify with is a meaningful way to  facilitate that growth. Yayasan Sime Darby’s Huluran Kasih is a volunteering programme spearheaded for employees of Sime Darby Plantation Berhad, Sime Darby Property Berhad and Sime Darby. With it, the foundation aims to provide a platform to nurture employees’ spirit of giving while contributing fruitfully to the  causes it  supports. In FY2020, 103  employees from Sime Darby contributed 817 volunteering hours through 19 initiatives. 

Plans for Next Year 

Sime Darby will continue to support and develop communities through its contributions to Yayasan Sime Darby. The Group will also continue to ensure  that its community contributions are strategically aligned  with its corporate objectives through representation at Yayasan Sime  Darby’s Governing Council. 

> 99 99 Creating Sustainable Value

# Our approach to  environmental stewardship is a balance between the pursuit of socio-economic and environmental sustainability. 

Climate change, scarcity of resources and improper management of waste  and effluents are pressing environmental issues on a global scale that have the potential to pose  regulatory, physical and reputational risks to Sime Darby’s operations. It is therefore imperative that the Group’s environmental footprint is proactively managed. Of the 18 countries and territories in  which Sime Darby operates, 15  are signatories to the Paris Agreement 1, which calls on countries to strengthen the global response to  the threat of  climate change. Furthermore, in  the 11 th Malaysia Plan, the Malaysian government has set a target for Malaysia to become an advanced economy in a resilient, low-carbon, resource-efficient, and  socially-inclusive manner. Sime Darby is committed to supporting the efforts of the governments in the  areas it operates. In alignment to  this, Sime Darby’s mission is to  develop a  winning portfolio of sustainable businesses in  an ethical way that balances the  interests of  stakeholders while delivering superior financial returns. The pursuit of socio-economical and environmental sustainability must  be in a way that creates long-term value. The Group’s policy on carbon, energy, water and effluents management and  waste disposal encapsulates the following, and is  applicable across the Group: • Track carbon emissions, energy  and  water consumption, and waste disposal • Set reduction targets for carbon emissions, energy and  water consumption and waste disposal • Identify and implement water, waste and energy-efficient measures • Develop, implement and monitor  progress of action plans • Comply with all local and country-specific legislation regarding carbon, energy, water  and waste management The Group will continue to work towards reducing greenhouse gas  emissions, water consumption and waste generation to limit its  environmental impact. 1 https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement   

> 100 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 100 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Environmental Sustainability Carbon and energy management 

Clear Group-wide carbon and energy management targets have been set, to  mitigate the Group’s impact and fulfil its sustainability commitments. Electricity to power operations and  fuel for vehicles and machinery form a significant component of  carbon emission and energy consumption across the Group. All  Divisions are making progress in  energy saving initiatives. To  reduce carbon footprint and energy consumption, the Group is  focused on renewable power generation, installation of LED lighting, asset efficiency and behavioural change. 

Renewable Power Generation 

Since 2016, Sime Darby Industrial has installed over 525kW of solar photovoltaic (PV) systems across its  operations in Australia, China and  New Zealand, generating over  1,000MWh of electricity. Solar lighting projects have been undertaken along the quay front at  Sime Darby Logistics’ Weifang and  Longgong ports. Longgong Port has  also installed solar lighting on its  production road while Motors’ Inokom operations has  installed solar  lighting along new  walkways. 

LED Lighting 

Across the Group’s operations, existing lighting has been progressively switched to LEDs. LED  lighting uses at least 65% less  energy compared to metal halide  and  incandescent lighting. Sime Darby Industrial has replaced incandescent lighting with  LED lighting across its  operations in  Australia, Singapore  and New Zealand. Meanwhile, Sime  Darby Motors has  commenced installation of  LED  lighting solutions across all  its  operations in Australia, Malaysia,  New Zealand and Thailand.  Motors’ Gough Transport Solutions’ Victoria site completed an  LED replacement project in  2018  which  has saved approximately AUD14,000 in  energy  cost per  annum. 

Asset Improvements 

Sime Darby Logistics’ Weifang Port has invested RMB9.2 million to install shore power facilities. The  facilities include a 2000kVA high-voltage variable frequency shore power system in its West operations area and a 1000kVA high-voltage variable frequency shore power system in the container  berth located in its East  operations area. This project has  enabled vessels to connect to the  power facilities rather than utilise diesel generators, which  reduces emissions and noise  generated during berthing. 

Telematics for lower carbon emissions and better resource efficiency 

In FY2020, Hastings Deering installed a telematics system across its light vehicle fleet which  includes service and light vehicles. The project is estimated to deliver reductions in carbon emissions and improve efficiency in how resources are deployed, in  particular: • A reduction in CO 2 emissions of  enrolled vehicles by 6% to  10%, distance driven by 19%, and fuel consumed by  8%; and • A reduction of up to 10% in  the  number of pool cars required for use by employees. The system is targeted to be rolled  out to all vehicles in stages by mid-2021. 

Targets Sime Darby Industrial 

• Reduce absolute GJ energy use/total headcount by 5% between FY2017 and FY2023 

Sime Darby Motors 

• Reduce Scope 1 & 2 Emission (tCO 2e) per car assembled at Inokom Corporation Sdn Bhd (Inokom) by 5% between FY2018 and FY2023 • Obtain baseline energy and carbon emissions for  all business units in FY2021 

Sime Darby Logistics 

• Reduce Scope 1 & 2 emissions per 1000 port throughput by 5% between FY2018 to FY2023 In the year under review, Hastings  Deering’s Brisbane Business  Centre replaced its aged air-conditioning system. The  replacement system is  at minimum 25% to 30% more efficient  resulting in reduced power  consumption and the elimination of R22 gas use (ozone  depleting gas). 

Behavioural Programmes 

Across the Group, there is  a focus  on  behavioural programmes  to  promote energy  conservation practices, including switching off equipment  and lights which are  not  in  use and  setting air conditioning temperatures appropriate to the climate. The  Group and the respective Divisions track and report energy  consumption and  carbon  emissions  on a six-monthly basis. 

> 101 101 Creating Sustainable Value

Carbon and Energy Management Plans for Next Year 

In addition to the Group-wide plans, Inokom is embarking on a project to harvest solar power. Project tendering is in progress and the target completion date is February 2021. Similarly, throughout Sime Darby Motors’ operations in Australia, installation of rooftop solar harvesting is planned for Porsche Centre Parramatta and Denlo Volkswagen. The Group will continue to replace lighting with LEDs, review renewable energy solutions, undertake energy audits and improve asset efficiency across its business. 

Waste and Effluent Management 

The Group generates a broad range of wastes and effluents due to the diverse nature of its operations. All  businesses comply with the Group-wide policy on waste and effluents management, with 

Greening Sime Darby Motors City 

Sime Darby Motors City in Malaysia has achieved the provisional Green Building Index (GBI) certification in April 2019. The index is Malaysia’s industry-recognised green rating tool for buildings to promote sustainability in  the built environment. As part of fulfilling GBI’s full certification, Sime  Darby Motors City has introduced initiatives such as: • Implementation of a 3R (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) initiative by providing dedicated recycling waste bins at every retailer’s store • Use of LED lighting throughout the complex • Installation of systems for efficient management and usage of water and electricity • Establishment of a herb garden Sime Darby Motors aims to attain full GBI certification by fulfilling the conditions required, including maintaining the building for at least a year based on the criteria set to attain provisional certification. 

Powering up renewables 

Terra Cat has procured 100% renewable energy across its business centre footprint. Effectively, Terra Cat has achieved zero carbon emissions from its electricity consumption. In addition to this, the dealership has installed a 50kW solar energy system at its Component Rebuild Centre. Terra Cat’s initiatives on renewable energy contributes to the Group’s and global efforts to achieve the commitments in the Paris Agreement to reduce emissions. 

Improving energy efficiency at  Inokom 

Inokom has embarked on a company-wide initiative to improve energy efficiency through  the replacement of conventional lighting systems with LED lighting. This involves: • 3644 units of 36W fluorescent tubes replaced with 18W LED  lights; • 285 units of 400W high bay lights replaced with 55W LED  lights; • 81 units of 250W street lanterns replaced with 100W  LED lights; and • 23 units of 250W normal flood  lights replaced with 100W LED lights. In addition, Inokom’s new  walkway project utilises solar  lighting instead of conventional lighting. hazardous and scheduled waste specifically tracked and managed across all regions in accordance with  respective national and local  regulations. The Group is prioritising reduction targets for hazardous and scheduled waste. Clear waste and effluent management targets have been set, to fulfil the Group’s environmental sustainability commitments. 

Targets Sime Darby Industrial 

• Reduce scheduled waste by 5% between FY2019 2and FY2023 

Sime Darby Motors 

• Reduce scheduled waste per car assembled on the wastewater treatment sludge at the Inokom vehicle assembly plant by 5% between FY2017/2018 and FY2022/2023 

Sime Darby Logistics 

• 100% compliance to waste and effluent regulations All Divisions are making positive progress in waste and effluent management initiatives. During FY2020, some of the programmes introduced were: 

Reduce, Reuse, Recycle 

Performance Motors Limited (PML) in Singapore identified that a significant amount of waste was generated across the industry 2 Changed from FY2017 to FY2019, due to improved and standardised reporting capability across Division to capture waste in FY2019   

> 102 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 102 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Environmental Sustainability Inokom has embarked on a company-wide initiative to improve energy efficiency at their assembly plant in Kulim, Kedah. through custom car backdrops, welcome counters and furniture requirements as set by the principals.  In FY2017, PML set out  with an objective to minimise waste and cost  by reusing and upcycling materials wherever and  whenever possible. PML has successfully reused almost 80% of  all  set-up materials from events, resulting in reduced waste and cost savings of more than SGD150,000 per year. In FY2020, nearly 65% of all waste generated at Hastings Deering was recycled or reused. Gough Transport Solutions in Australia reviewed and renewed waste contracts with an increased recovery of cardboard waste which has led to an annual cost savings of  AUD10,000, while Sime Darby Motors Thailand reduced paper usage by about 8% over the past  year. Sime Darby Motors City in Malaysia saved RM117,315 in FY2019 and  RM21,762 as at March 2020 through a recycling initiative of used  lubrication oil. Sime Darby Motors’ New Zealand operations completed waste audits  at three different premises to  identify waste streams as well as  waste segregation processes. This  resulted in opportunities to improve waste disposal and waste minimisation. In particular, plastics was identified as a priority, and steps  have been taken to increase awareness to replace plastics with more sustainable options. 

Waste Supplier 

Haynes Group in Australia engaged  a new waste service contract with a  supplier to provide improved reporting capabilities for  hazardous and non-hazardous wastes, identify waste sent for landfill and to be recycled. In the coming year, Haynes  Group aims to  develop strategies to improve recycling and  reduce waste sent to  landfill by  utilising the baseline data  developed. All of CEL’s branches that produce hazardous wastes have signed contracts with registered hazardous waste disposal agencies to ensure that its hazardous wastes are properly collected and treated. 

Waste Management Plans for  Next Year 

Sime Darby Logistics has commissioned and is installing vessel waste intelligent collection bins at Taiping Port, Yuejin Port and  Longgong Port. The waste bin system has intelligent positioning, overflow warning and usage frequency monitoring functions. The collection points are able to automatically identify vessel names, weigh the waste, and  generate an  electronic receiving receipt. The  collection bins will improve waste  management and tracking across the ports. The Haynes Group will further undertake an internal audit of its waste management, in addition to energy and water consumption, to identify excess usage or problem areas. Action plans will subsequently be developed to address priority reduction opportunities in FY2021. Meanwhile, Sime Darby Motors’ New Zealand operations aims to identify additional waste material recycling opportunities through site audits. Collaboration with clients to reduce all waste streams, particularly e-waste and hazardous waste, is a common focus across the Group. 

> 103 103 Creating Sustainable Value

Water Management 

The Group’s policy on water management promotes conservation efforts through water-saving initiatives. These include the adoption of technologies to improve  management of water as  a precious resource, and to enhance the tracking of water consumption and efficiency. Clear  water management targets to  fulfil the Group’s environmental sustainability commitments have also  been set. 

Monitoring 

In FY2020, a water management study was undertaken at Hastings Deering’s sites in Brisbane with the following scope: • Investigate the deployment of ‘Smart Meters’ • Investigate early leak detection and meter accuracy • Reinforce water conservation across sites • Consider the pilot installation of  sub-smart water meters 

> Sime Darby Logistics’ Longgong Port has introduced a domestic sewage treatment station to treat production sewage.

Targets Sime Darby Industrial 

• Reduce water consumption by 5% between FY2017 and FY2023 

Sime Darby Motors 

• Reduce water consumed per car assembled at Inokom by 5% between FY2018 and FY2023 

Sime Darby Logistics 

• Reduce water used per 1,000MT port throughput by 5% between FY2018 and FY2023   

> 104 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020
> 104 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Creating Sustainable Value Environmental Sustainability Asset Improvement 

In the rebuilding of the Jaguar Land  Rover showroom in Parramatta, Australia in 2018, several water management elements were incorporated in the design. For  example, on-site stormwater retention and water treatment systems make water available for  in-house vehicle detailing and  wash bays. Separation and filtration facilities were also installed  to improve the quality of  treated storm water discharge. A project to harvest rainwater for internal use was also completed at  Castle Hill BMW, Australia. Sime Darby Logistics has installed dust suppression systems at material  ports. Additionally, the  use  of fog machines and fog sprays have reduced the volume of water consumption. Innovations such as solar reflectors have increased illumination of premises and saved electricity, while engineered grates and roller brush systems have reduced dust and improved cleaning  processes. A water monitoring dashboard has  been piloted across the Brisbane  sites to enable ongoing review and analysis of water consumption. Having transparent information about water usage will  challenge current practices and facilitate the  generation of options to reduce  water usage or develop re-use strategies. 

Reuse 

At Sime Darby Logistics’ Longgong Port, a domestic sewage treatment station treats production sewage which is then used for greening and  dust suppression. The use of recycled treated water conserves up  to 70 kilolitres of surface water  daily. Similar initiatives have been rolled  out at Taiping Port, where treated water from domestic and production sewage is also used for dust suppression. At Inokom, initiatives were also introduced to reuse wastewater for the watering of local football fields. 

Industry Environmental Excellence (Heavy Industry Category) 

Inokom was recognised for its compliance and performance from 2018-2019 by the Malaysian Department of Environment 

Advanced Unit in Port Spring Greening 2020 

All three Sime Darby Logistics’ Jining ports, namely Longgong, Taiping and  Yuejin, were recognised for their greening efforts to reduce dust generation by Jining Port and Waterway Development Centre 

FY2020 Environmental Achievements and Accolades 105 105 Creating Sustainable Value ABalanced Board Our Board of Directors comprises  strategic thinkers  with  relevant operational experience, industry success and professional expertise. The  balanced leadership team  reflects Sime Darby’s corporate  governance framework that embraces workplace diversity and independent thinking as tools  that drive excellence and  enterprise. 

Independence 

Non-Independent Directors Independent Directors 55% 45% 

Non-Executive Tenure 

3–6 Years 0–3 Years More than 9 Years 

80% 10% 10% 

Ethnicity 

Chinese Malay Indian 

64% 18% 9% 

Others 9% 

Age Band 

50–59 Years Old 40–49 Years Old 60–69 Years Old 70–79 Years Old 

9% 64% 9% 18% 

Gender 

Female Male 73% 27% 

106 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Board of Directors Committee Membership NRC Nomination & Remuneration Committee    

> GAC Governance & Audit Committee
> RMC Risk Management Committee Chairman Member

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

Non-Independent Non-Executive Chairman Malaysian Age 73 Male 

Date of Appointment 

19 December 2008 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

11 years 9 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Arts (Hons) and Diploma in  Public Administration, University of  Malaya • Master in Public Administration, Pennsylvania State University 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Public Administration and Fund Management 

Relevant Experience 

Held various senior positions in the Malaysian Government including as the  Secretary-General, in the Ministry of  Home Affairs and Ministry of Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs, and as the  Chief Secretary to the Government of  Malaysia. Former President of Perbadanan Putrajaya and former Chairman of the Employees Provident Fund (EPF) Board and  EPF  Investment Panel. 

> RMC

Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir 

Non-Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 60 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 September 2020 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

1 month 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Master in Business Administration, University of Hull • Degree in Land and Property Management, Universiti Teknologi MARA 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020* 

Not applicable* 

Areas of Expertise 

Public Administration, Strategic Investment, Loan Management and Financial Market 

Relevant Experience 

Currently the Chairman of the Employees Provident Fund. Has held various senior positions in the Ministry of Finance, including as the Secretary General of  Treasury. Vastly experienced in the  fields  of strategic investment, loan  management, financial markets and  actuarial science.   

> *Not applicable as appointment was after FY2020.
> 107 Governance

Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz 

Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 63 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 December 2017 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years 10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Bachelor in Business Administration and Master in Business Administration, Ohio University 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

• AmBank (M) Berhad • AmBank Islamic Berhad • Chubb Insurance Malaysia Berhad 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Banking, Finance and Fund Management 

Relevant Experience 

Has over 30 years of banking experience in the fields of finance, commercial, investment and Islamic banking. Former Chief Executive Officer/Managing Director of Pengurusan Danaharta Nasional Berhad, Affin Bank Berhad and Kuwait Finance House (Malaysia) Berhad.  

> NRC GAC

Datuk Wan Selamah Wan Sulaiman 

Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 65 Female 

Date of Appointment 

15 January 2016 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

4 years 8 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Master in Business Administration (Finance), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia • Fellow, Association of Chartered Certified Accountants • Member, Public Sector Accounting Committee • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Accounting and Finance 

Relevant Experience 

Served in the ministries of Education and  Defence. Held various positions in  the Accountant-General’s Department of the Ministry of Finance, including as  the Director of the Central Operations and Agency Services Division, Director of  the Information Technology Services Division and Deputy Director of the Government Pensions Trust Fund. Former  Accountant-General of Malaysia.   

> GAC NRC
> 108 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Board of Directors Dato’ Ahmad Pardas Senin 

Senior Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 67 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 December 2017 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years 10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Fellow, Chartered Institute of  Management Accountants • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants • Member, Institute of Internal Auditors,  Inc • Member, Institute of Corporate Directors Malaysia 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

• S P Setia Berhad 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Business Administration, Accounting and  Management 

Relevant Experience 

Has more than 41 years’ experience in the corporate sector, including 23 years at board level. Former Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of UEM Group Berhad. Held various key positions within the UEM Group, including as Managing Director of UEM World Berhad, Renong Berhad, TIME Engineering Berhad, TIME dotCom Berhad and EPE Power Corporation Berhad. 

Thayaparan Sangarapillai 

Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 65 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 December 2017 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years 10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Fellow, Institute of Chartered Accountants in England & Wales • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Certified Public Accountants • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

• Axiata Group Berhad 

Other Public Companies 

• AIG Malaysia Insurance Berhad • Celcom Axiata Berhad 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Audit, Business and Corporate Finance 

Relevant Experience 

Began his career with Price Waterhouse (now known as PricewaterhouseCoopers) and has over 30 years of experience in providing audit and business advisory services to clients in a wide range of industries. His portfolio of clients included major public listed companies involved in power, telecommunications, automotive, property development, plantation, manufacturing and trading sectors. Led assignments on financial due diligence, mergers & acquisitions, initial public offerings, finance function effectiveness reviews and other advisory  work.  

> GAC NRC

Dato’ Lawrence Lee Cheow Hock 

Non-Independent Non-Executive Director Singaporean Age 66 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 March 2018 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years 7 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

Fellow, Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Automotive, Accounting and  Management 

Relevant Experience 

Former Managing Director of Sime Darby Motors. Has served the Sime Darby Group in various capacities for more than 36 years during which he saw the growth of the Motors Division.  

> RMC GAC RMC 109 Governance

Mohamad Idros Mosin 

Non-Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 48 Male 

Date of Appointment 

15 November 2018 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

1 year 10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration (Hons), International Islamic University Malaysia • Executive Diploma in Investment Analysis, Universiti Teknologi MARA • Graduate Diploma in Applied Finance and Investment, Securities Institute Australasia • Advanced Management Programme, Harvard Business School 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

9/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Finance and Business Administration 

Relevant Experience 

Currently the Group Head, Strategic Investments of Permodalan Nasional Berhad (PNB) with key role focusing on  the formulation and implementation of  initiatives on value creation plan involving public listed strategic and core  investee companies of PNB. Has  been involved in  various assignments including development/evaluation of value enhancement strategies for strategic investment in automotive, chemical, infrastructure, logistics, oil  & gas, plantation, property, and pharmaceutical sectors. 

> NRC

Moy Pui Yee 

Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 53 Female 

Date of Appointment 

2 July 2018 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years 3 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Graduated in Economics and in Law, Monash University of Australia • Admitted to the Malaysian Bar in 1992 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Legal and Corporate Finance 

Relevant Experience 

Currently a partner and the Head of the  Mergers & Acquisition department of  Rahmat Lim & Partners. Former partner in  the Corporate & Financial Services practice at Chooi & Company for 13 years.  

> RMC
> 110 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Board of Directors Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon 

Independent Non-Executive Director Malaysian Age 60 Female 

Date of Appointment 

15 November 2019 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Degree in Medicine, University of  Mysore 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

• Nestle (Malaysia) Berhad 

Other Public Companies 

Nil 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

5/6* 

Areas of Expertise 

Insurance, Medical and Healthcare 

Relevant Experience 

Has vast experience in the insurance and health sectors. Held various leadership positions within the Asian life and health insurance industry and had served as a Medical Officer at Hospital Kuala Lumpur for 7 years before commencing her career in the insurance industry. She was the first female Chief Executive Officer in the life insurance industry in Malaysia when she was appointed the President and Chief Executive Officer of ING Malaysia Berhad, and thereafter as the Head of South Asia at ING Asia Pacific Ltd. Had served as the Executive Vice President and Head of Designated Markets & Health Asia at Metlife Asia Pacific Ltd. 

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Executive Director/Group Chief Executive Officer Malaysian Age 56 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 December 2017 

Length of Service (as at 30 September 2020) 

2 years and 10 months 

Academic/Professional Qualification/ Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Science in Geology, University College London • Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants in England & Wales • Advanced Management Programme, Harvard Business School 

Present Directorship(s) 

Listed Entity 

Nil 

Other Public Companies 

• Sime Darby Holdings Berhad • Sime Darby Malaysia Berhad • Kumpulan Sime Darby Berhad 

Attendance at Board Meeting in FY2020 

10/10 

Areas of Expertise 

Accounting, Finance and Management 

Relevant Experience 

Began his career with Coopers & Lybrand, London, United Kingdom in 1986 before joining the Sime Darby Group in 1992. Has held various senior finance positions in the Industrial Division in China and Singapore before being appointed as the  Deputy Group Chief Financial Officer of  Sime Darby. Has also served in senior  finance roles in NS Water Konsortium Sdn Bhd, Cahya Mata Sarawak Berhad and Putrajaya Holdings  Sdn Bhd.                  

> RMC
> *Reflect the number of meetings held during the period of office held. Additional Information 1. Save as disclosed below, none of the Directors have any family relationship with and are not related to any Director and/or major shareholder of Sime Darby: (i) The Nominee Directors of Permodalan Nasional Berhad are: •Tan Sri Samsudin Osman; •Dato’ Lawrence Lee Cheow Hock; and •Mohamad Idros Mosin (ii) Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir is the Nominee Director of the Employees Provident Fund 2. None of the Directors have any conflict of interest with Sime Darby. 3. Other than traffic offences, none of the Directors have any conviction for offences within the past five years nor public sanctions or penalties imposed by the relevant regulatory authorities during the financial year. 4. Directorships held by the Directors in other companies, if any, are disclosed in the Board of Directors section at http://www.simedarby.com/company/ board-of-directors. 5. The full profiles of Directors are available on the Sime Darby website at http://www.simedarby.com/company/ board-of-directors.
> 111 Governance

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Group Chief Executive Officer Malaysian Age 56 Male 

Date of Appointment 

21 November 2017 

Relevant Experience 

He began his career with Coopers & Lybrand, London, United Kingdom in  1986 before joining the Sime Darby Group in 1992. He has held various senior  finance positions in the Industrial Division in China and Singapore before he was appointed as the Deputy Group Chief Financial Officer of Sime Darby. He has also served in senior finance roles  in NS Water Konsortium Sdn Bhd, Cahya Mata Sarawak Berhad and Putrajaya Holdings Sdn Bhd. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Science in Geology, University College London • Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants in England & Wales • Advanced Management Program, Harvard Business School 

Mustamir Mohamad 

Group Chief Financial Officer Malaysian Age 48 Male 

Date of Appointment 

21 November 2017 

Relevant Experience 

He began his career with PricewaterhouseCoopers, London in 1995 followed by a seven-year stint at Bank Negara Malaysia where he  was the Manager of Investment Operations and Financial Markets. He  joined the Sime Darby Group in  September 2005 as Manager, Value  Management in Group Strategy. In  September 2007 he moved to Sime Darby Plantation to lead the EVP  Office prior to the completion of the merger of Sime Darby, Golden Hope Plantations and Kumpulan Guthrie. Before assuming the GCFO role, he was the Head of Group Finance. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Science in Accounting and  Finance, London School of Economics and Political Science • Fellow, Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants • Advanced Management Program, Harvard Business School 

Datuk Thomas Leong Yew Hong 

Group Chief Strategy Officer Malaysian Age 48 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 December 2017 

Relevant Experience 

He joined the Sime Darby Group as the Head of Group Strategy and Corporate Finance in 2016. Prior to that, he was the  Executive Vice President and the Head of  Maybank Group’s Strategy and  Business Development. He has also held  various senior positions in Accenture and  Deloitte Consulting, based in Australia, Hong Kong and Malaysia. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Software Engineering, Australian National University • Master of Business Administration (MBA), University of Sydney 

112 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Executive Leadership Roselaini Faiz 

Group Chief Human Resources Officer Malaysian Age 55 Female 

Date of Appointment 

1 August 2018 

Relevant Experience 

She was formerly the Director, Human Capital & Communications at Danajamin Nasional Berhad. Before that, she headed Human Resources at Hong Leong Bank Berhad. Her previous roles included Director of Human Resources at CIMB Aviva Assurance Berhad, Chief Human Resources Officer at Kuwait Finance House (Malaysia) Berhad, Head of Rewards & Benefits Administration at  Standard Chartered Bank Berhad and  Vice  President of Compensation and  Benefits at Citibank Berhad. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Economics (majoring in  Analytical Economics), University  of  Malaya 

Dean Mehmet 

Managing Director, Industrial  Division – Australasia Australian Age 56 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 January 2020 

Relevant Experience 

He has more than 35 years of industry experience including Chief Executive leadership roles for the past 17 years at  multinational corporations such as BlueScope Steel and  Royal Dutch Shell. He joined the Sime  Darby Group in 2012 as the Chief Operating Officer at Hastings Deering (Australia) Limited. He was later promoted to the position of Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of the Hastings Deering Group where he led the  entire Industrial business portfolio across Australia, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and New Caledonia. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Mechanical Engineering (Hons), Queensland University of  Technology • Stanford Executive Program in  Organisational Leadership • Member, Australian Institute of  Company Directors 

Shiu Chi Yan 

Managing Director, Industrial Division – Asia Chinese (HKSAR) Age 56 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 January 2020 

Relevant Experience 

He joined CEL in 1986 and spent 23 years in various positions in the Power Systems Division, from being a technical assistant, sales  engineer, and project manager to  general manager before assuming the  role of Managing Director of CEL. He  has extensive experience in project management, and in the sales and marketing of Caterpillar engine products in Hong Kong and China. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Higher Diploma in Electrical Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic • Master of Science in Engineering Business Management, Warwick  University • Global CEO Program for China, Harvard  Business School 

> 113 Governance

Timothy Lee Chi Tim 

Managing Director, Logistics Division Chinese (HKSAR) and Canadian Age 55 Male 

Date of Appointment 

15 December 2011 

Relevant Experience 

He has over 20 years of operational experience in the ports and container terminal management industry in Hong Kong, one of the world’s busiest ports. Prior to joining the Sime Darby Group, he  held the  position of Operations Manager for  the  Hong Kong Business Unit for Modern  Terminals Limited, the second largest port operator in Hong Kong. He  was formerly the Chairman of the Sea  Cargo Customer Liaison Group in  2010, a committee organised by the Hong Kong Customs & Excise Department to gather  industry expertise to improve port  competitiveness. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Science, Simon Fraser University of British Columbia 

Peter Hong Kah Peng 

Managing Director, Healthcare Division Malaysian Age 48 Male 

Date of Appointment 

2 January 2019 

Relevant Experience 

He has close to 25 years of working experience with large multinationals in  the healthcare, pharmaceutical, medical devices, hospital & FMCG industries. Prior to joining the Sime Darby Group, he  was the Group Operations Director of  Siloam International Hospital Group (part of Lippo Group), the largest private hospital group in Indonesia. He was previously the Finance and Operations Head at Fresenius Medical Care in Malaysia. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Economics (Accounting), Monash University • Member, CPA Australia • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants 

Andrew Basham 

Managing Director, Motors Division Australian Age 54 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 February 2018 

Relevant Experience 

He has more than 23 years of extensive experience in management, business development and operations for  leading brands in the automotive industry globally. He started his career  in  audit and accounting with PriceWaterhouse Australia before moving  to distribution and logistics, and  later  assumed senior  management roles in various automotive  companies. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Economics, University  of  Adelaide • Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants, Australia  

> 114 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Executive Leadership Goh Hai Peow 

Group Chief Information & Digital Officer Australian Age 62 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 November 2019 

Relevant Experience 

He has more than 37 years of experience in  the information technology sector including in senior global leadership roles with major resource, logistics, oil and gas, IT and services companies. Prior to joining  the Sime Darby Group, he was the  Chief  Information Officer with Aurizon, Australia’s largest rail freight operator. He also had  an extensive career with Rio  Tinto as  its Chief Operating Officer responsible for business information systems and technology, strategy, global  IT infrastructure and the delivery of major  enterprise applications. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Science in Computer Science, University of Manchester • Master of Business Administration, Murdoch University 

Glenn Sheahan 

Group Chief Safety & Sustainability Officer Australian Age 51 Male 

Date of Appointment 

1 October 2019 

Relevant Experience 

He has more than 25 years of industry experience and has held senior safety management roles at Halliburton, Rio  Tinto, Comalco, Downer EDI Mining, the John Holland Group and Thiess Process. He has international experience working in Bahrain, Qatar, Indonesia and Thailand in oil and gas, metallurgical refining and construction industries and has held safety and security positions in Dubai and  auditing and compliance positions in  Qatar. He is also a qualified nurse. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Post Graduate Certificate in Managing Occupational Health and Safety, University of Southern Queensland 

Noor Zita Hassan 

Group Secretary Malaysian Age 54 Female 

Date of Appointment 

21 November 2017 

Relevant Experience 

She began her career as a management trainee in the accounting, internal audit, tax and corporate planning functions with  Kumpulan Sime Darby Berhad (KSDB) in 1989 and subsequently transferred to  the  Group Secretarial department of  KSDB in 1993. She was the Company Secretary of Hyundai-Sime Darby Berhad, a subsidiary of KSDB listed on the Main Board of Bursa  Malaysia Securities Berhad from December 2004 until its delisting from the Official List of Bursa Securities in  July  2006. She is also currently the Company Secretary of Sime  Darby Motors. 

Academic/Professional Qualification/Membership(s) 

• Bachelor of Economics with Accountancy, Loughborough University of Technology • Master in Accountancy, Charles Sturt  University • Member, CPA Australia • Member, Malaysian Institute of  Accountants Additional Information 1.  None of the Executive Leadership has any family relationship with and is not related to any Director and/or major shareholder of Sime Darby. 2.  None of the Executive Leadership has any conflict of interest with Sime Darby. 3.  Other than traffic offences, none of the Executive Leadership has any conviction for offences within the past five years nor public sanctions or penalties imposed by the relevant regulatory authorities during the financial year. 4.  Directorships held by the Executive Leadership in public companies and listed issuers, other than companies within the Group, if  any, are  disclosed in  the Executive Leadership section at http://www.simedarby.com/company/executive-leadership 5.  The full profile of the Executive Leadership is available on the Sime Darby website at http://www.simedarby.com/company/executive-leadership. 

> 115 Governance

# “Sime Darby’s rigorous governance framework has kept the Group agile and effective in uncertain times, sustaining our growth and steering us to new strengths. The Board will continue to refine the Group’s governance structure, sustain our ethical corporate culture and guide the Management on the furtherance of the Group’s Value Creation Plan.” Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

Chairman 

Dear Shareholders, 

I am pleased to present the Group’s report on corporate governance for  FY2020. In presenting this report, we have implemented, where applicable, the  principles of the Malaysian Code on Corporate Governance 2017. However, our approach to corporate  governance has always been more than just meeting regulatory requirements. My Board colleagues and I strive to discharge our duties to  the highest ethical standards and  see to it that the principles of  transparency, integrity and accountability are instilled in  our  corporate culture. We have also  taken it upon ourselves to provide a robust governance regime that evaluates and enhances the management structure, policies and  systems, in order to safeguard our shareholders’ long-term interests  while driving growth. Our reporting is premised upon the  three principles of the MMLR – Leadership and Effectiveness, Effective Audit and Risk Management and Integrity in Corporate Reporting and Meaningful Relationship with  Stakeholders. 

Leadership and Effectiveness 

Good corporate governance underpins a well-run business. The  distinct roles played by the Board and the Management create a healthy ecosystem of checks and  balances, in the Group’s pursuit  of its interests. Supported by  the Governance & Audit, Risk  Management and Nomination & Remuneration committees, the Board deliberates on the strategies proposed by the Management in a supportive and collaborative manner in order to stimulate careful  consideration of issues and  to  minimise undue risks. This  sets  the tone for a culture of  openness and collaboration. Over the year, we focused on  ensuring that the Board’s collection  of professional skills  remain relevant  to our businesses,  and that  we continue to  be informed  of  the latest developments  in our sectors and are  balanced in  our  decision-making. The  Nomination &  Remuneration Committee (NRC) continually reviews  the composition of the Board  to ensure that it comprises a diverse team with complementary expertise and experience relevant to  the Group’s  needs. The Board Effectiveness Assessment  (BEA) is conducted annually to evaluate the Board’s performance and to identify opportunities to increase its effectiveness. This year, the BEA was  conducted internally through questionnaires based on the Corporate Governance Guide (3 rd Edition) on the Guidance on Board Leadership and Effectiveness issued by Bursa Malaysia Berhad and  the Board was satisfied with the  overall  results  of the BEA 2020. The  Board will focus its efforts on  addressing the areas which were  identified for  improvement and  ensure that  Board members are  equipped  with the latest skills and  industry knowledge to enhance  their performance. 

Effective Audit and Risk  Management 

The Group’s ethical business framework includes a Code of Business Conduct (COBC) and an Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption Policy. This year, in alignment with  the Guidelines  

> 116 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Chairman’s Statement on Corporate Governance on  Adequate Procedures pursuant to  Section 17A of the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission Act  2009 (Amendment 2018), the  Governance & Audit  Committee (GAC) has  made  concerted efforts to  enhance  these policies, which constitutes the Group’s Anti Bribery  Management System. Through these efforts, we  aim to  maintain a healthy business environment for all our  stakeholders. The Group also upholds a healthy risk  culture by encouraging all  employees to respond to opportunities, threats and stresses  with sound judgement while  upholding high ethical values.  In FY2020, one of the key  initiatives undertaken by the  RMC was the formalisation of  the  Group’s Risk Appetite Statement, which communicates the  Group’s risk  management strategy and serves  as a guide on  the  level of risk  the Group is  willing to take in  pursuit of our  objectives. 

Integrity in Corporate Reporting  and Meaningful Relationship with Stakeholders 

The Board advocates meaningful engagement with the Group’s key  stakeholders by communicating openly, clearly, effectively and in a timely manner through authorised channels and personnel to disclose  information. Two-way communication is vital, and we ensure that we remain attuned to  stakeholders’ concerns through  regular engagements, while  keeping them apprised of  our  financial and operational performance, as well as the future  direction of the company. In responding to stakeholders’ concerns, we adopt a holistic approach, considering both financial  and non-financial aspects in  our decision-making process. This  integrated approach is comprehensive, authentic and breaks  down organisational silos  thus  encouraging different conversations to take place. We  warmly welcome feedback and  look forward to continue engaging with our investors, shareholders, employees and other stakeholders in the coming year. Further information can  be found in  the Engaging Stakeholders section  on page 38 and in the Integrity in Corporate Reporting and  Meaningful Relationships with  Stakeholders on  page 134. 

Looking Ahead 

With global market conditions expected to remain challenging and  the world still in the grips of  the  pandemic, active corporate governance and robust systems of  oversight are critical. Sime Darby’s rigorous governance framework has  kept the Group agile and effective in  uncertain times, sustaining our  growth and steering us to new  strengths. The Board will  continue to  refine the Group’s governance structure, sustain our  ethical corporate culture and  guide  the Management on the  furtherance of  the Group’s Value  Creation Plan. We will maintain a close watch on  the  rapidly  evolving market conditions, but I am confident we  have the right governance structure and team in place to maintain the momentum of  our high-performance business units in  leading the Group towards greater  resilience and recovery. 

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

Chairman 

# Guidelines Followed 

This Corporate Governance Overview Statement is to be read in conjunction with the Corporate Governance Report, which  is published online at http://www. simedarby.com/investor/ annual-reports 

Bursa Malaysia Berhad Corporate Governance Guide MCCG 2017 ASEAN CG MMLR IIRC CA 2016 117 Governance Creating the Right Culture Through a Strong Governance  Framework 

A healthy corporate culture and a robust governance framework ensures that the organisation continues to run smoothly and efficiently. It sets the tone for how  the employees within the Group  engage with one another 

1 Promote transparency, accountability and a responsive attitude; 

2 Provide operating autonomy to the Divisions and the Group’s companies in achieving business objectives while maintaining adequate checks and balances; and 

3 Cultivate ethical business conduct and desired behaviours, based on  the Group’s core values and business principles. 

Our Corporate Culture and Core Values Others Logistics Healthcare Motors Industrial Group Chief Executive Officer Group Management Committee Governance & Audit Committee Nomination  & Remuneration Committee Risk Management Committee Stakeholders Board of Directors 

and  with other stakeholders, creating an environment of trust and  respect that leads to better teamwork, improved decision-making and increased efficiency. To the Board of Directors, embedding the right culture starts with a clear definition of the standards expected in the day-to-day conduct of every  individual in Sime Darby, in  accordance with  the  Group’s core  values. These values are reflected in the Group’s governance framework which defines the way in which strategic and operational activities are managed. The framework is based on the following principal  aims:  

> 118 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Leadership & Effectiveness The powers of the Chairman, Senior Independent Director, Non-Executive Directors and the GCEO are set out in the  Board  Charter. The Board may exercise all powers conferred on it by the Board Charter, in accordance with the Companies Act 2016 and other  applicable legislations. The Board is satisfied that each Director has devoted sufficient time  to effectively discharge their  responsibilities. The current composition of Directors on the  Board  has a blend of skills, experience and knowledge suited to  the Group’s needs. 

Information and Support for the Board 

The Chairman, assisted by the Group Secretary, ensures that the Board and its Committees receive pertinent information on a timely basis to enable all  Directors to discharge their duties competently. They  are provided with copies of the minutes of meetings from the Group Management Committee and  Board Committees, the Group’s operational and  financial reports, reports on the Group’s Health, Safety and Environment matters as well as reports on  the Group’s compliance with the relevant ethical and security standards. The Group Secretary attends all  Board meetings and provides support to the Directors, in addition to the documents they receive. The Board also has access to independent professional advice at the Group’s expense to facilitate informed decision-making. 

Board and Committee Meeting Attendance 

In FY2020, the Board held ten meetings. All Directors exceeded the requirements set out in the Board Charter in  terms of attendance, demonstrating  their commitment and dedication in fulfilling their  duties and responsibilities. In addition to Board  meetings, the Chairman and the Non-Executive Directors have maintained regular contact and held ad-hoc meetings without the GCEO or other members of the Management present to discuss matters relating to the Group. Discussions and deliberations during Board meetings and otherwise were always open and challenging yet cordial and constructive. The Board received regular reports and Management presentations to ensure that the Directors were suitably briefed to fulfil their  roles. 

1 Group strategy, plans and budgets 

2 Acquisitions, disposals and transactions exceeding the authority limits of  the GCEO 

3 Changes to the Board and executive leadership of the  Group 

4 Changes in key policies, procedures and delegated authority limits of  the Group 

Board Matters and Delegation 

The Board has established a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for its approval. Other specific responsibilities have been delegated to its Committees, which are clearly defined within their Terms of Reference. The Board Committees’ Terms of Reference and other delegated authorities are formalised and reviewed from time to  time, as and when required. 

Summary of Key Board Reserved Matters 

> The Board Charter is available at www.simedarby.com/operating-responsibly/governance
> The Terms of Reference are available at www.simedarby.com/operating-responsibly/governance
> 119 Governance

Key Areas of Focus During the Year Board Effectiveness 

A BEA was conducted to provide opportunities to increase efficiency, maximise strengths and to highlight  areas for improvement. Where applicable, professional consultants are engaged to conduct the assessment in alternate years. The BEA 2020 was conducted internally through questionnaires. The questionnaires were based on the Corporate Governance Guide (3 rd Edition) on the Guidance on Board Leadership and Effectiveness 

1 Reviewing and adopting the strategy blueprint for the Group, which includes setting the Group’s budget as well as reviewing the challenges to the Group’s business strategy and plan. 

2 Improving diversity in terms of gender, age, experience and expertise across the Group. Presently, the Group has achieved female representation of 27% for the Board, 18% for the senior management team and 25% in the Group’s general workforce. 

4 Ensuring a ready pipeline of talent with the right combination of technical competencies and leadership potential, which is key to smooth leadership transition and the Group’s future growth. 

5 Ensuring the integrity of the Group’s financial and non-financial reporting. 

3 Ensuring an appropriate risk management framework to identify, analyse, evaluate, manage and monitor significant financial and non-financial risks to the Group, including setting the Group’s Risk Appetite Statement. 

Areas for Improvements Identified in FY2019 Actions Taken to Address in FY2020 

1.  Improve oversight on the Group’s investment in JVs, particularly in Australia and China. The Board discussed key highlights, material risks and issues from  JV  and associate companies in the quarterly Board meetings during which, GCEO presented key information from significant JVs  and associates in his report to the Board. 2.  Ensure proper governance structures are in place for JVs and improve the reporting of information and issues to the Board. issued by Bursa Malaysia Berhad. The  results of the BEA 2020 were presented to the Board at its meeting held on 28 September 2020 and the Board was satisfied with the  results. The Board as a whole had  discharged its functions, duties and responsibilities effectively in  accordance with its Board Charter and there was a positive Boardroom environment and healthy Boardroom dynamic. Arising from the BEA 2020 were areas of focus for FY2021 as identified by the Board: 1.  To review the Terms of Reference  and the structure of  Board Committees; and 2.  To ensure continued focus and  deliberation by the Board on  strategy, succession planning,  the  digitalisation of the Group’s  business and environmental, social and governance matters. The Board had taken the following actions to address the areas highlighted for improvement in the  BEA  2019:  

> 120 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Leadership & Effectiveness Governance & Audit Committee Performance Review 

Pursuant to Paragraph 15.20 of the  Listing Requirements, the NRC also reviewed the terms of office and  performance of the GAC and is  satisfied that the GAC as a whole and its members individually have discharged their functions, duties and responsibilities in accordance with the Committee’s Terms of  Reference. 

Nomination & Remuneration and Risk Management Committee Performance Review 

During the financial year under review, the Board is satisfied with the performance and effectiveness of the NRC and RMC respectively, in  providing sound advice and recommendations to the Board. 

Board Induction and Development 

The Group has a multi-faceted Board  induction and development programme. The Group Secretary facilitates the orientation of newly appointed Directors, which consists of comprehensive trainings through tailored induction programmes to  familiarise themselves with the  Group’s businesses. They  receive  briefings covering a range of topics, including: (a)  The Group’s corporate governance framework; (b)  The Group’s financial position; (c)  The Group’s risk management processes; (d)  The internal audit function; (e)  Policies and procedures; (f)  Key areas of business and operations by Divisional Managing Directors; and (g)  Innovation and technological advancements in the sectors relevant to the Group. On-boarding sessions help new Directors become acquainted with  the various aspects of their new  roles  smoothly and quickly. Such  sessions are reviewed regularly  to ensure that they remain  relevant and  effective. The  Group Secretary also coordinates a range of training programmes for all Directors, contributing to the continued development of the Board. For an  immersive learning experience, annual Board retreats and technical visits are designed to enhance Directors’ understanding and knowledge of the Group’s operations and keep them informed of the latest industry-specific or technological developments. In FY2020, the Board met with the Management team on a regular  basis to better understand their respective areas of responsibility. In  addition to  that, the Board visited the Group’s assembly operations in  Kedah to better understand the growth opportunities in  the industry, as well as the Group’s businesses in  China, to  acquire a deeper appreciation of the Group’s operations in the region. During the year under review, Directors participated in a range of  conferences, seminars and training  programmes covering relevant industry updates and a diverse range  of topics, such as: (a)  Leadership; (b)  Governance; (c)  Finance; (d)  Risk management; (e)  Legal; (f)  Information technology; and (g)  Social security. 

Areas for Improvements Identified in FY2019 Actions Taken to Address in FY2020 

3.  Review the composition of the Board from time to time; enhance the diversity of the Board by appointing Directors with relevant international, digital/ technology or healthcare experience. The NRC carried out a recruitment exercise for the Board and was mindful of the need to achieve diversity in ethnicity, age and gender, when shortlisting potential candidates from internal as well as external independent sources. To that end, the Board appointed Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon to the Board on 15 November 2019. With  this, the Board’s gender composition is closer to its target of  having 30% female Directors. Dato’ Dr Nirmala holds a degree in  medicine from the University of Mysore in India, which will be a valuable skillset for the Group’s healthcare business. 4.  Ensure sufficient focus and deliberation by the Board on strategy, risk, digital economy and on environmental, social and governance matters. The Board was apprised of the latest social, environmental, innovation and technology updates by qualified speakers at the annual Board retreat. Site visits to operations were also arranged to provide Directors with an in-situ, visual perspective of the Group’s operations, deepening their understanding and appreciation of the key drivers behind the  Group’s diverse operations. Key matters requiring the attention of  the Board were brought up and deliberated at Board meetings. 

Board Effectiveness (Continued) 

> 121 Governance

List of Training Attended Board Members 

External Opportunities and Threats Marketing & Innovations Khazanah Megatrend 2019 – Building Our Collective Brain PNB Corporate Summit 2019 – Rebooting Corporate Malaysia The Diverse Facets of Leadership International Social Well-Being Conference China & The World Disruption Meets Tradition Leadership in Digital World Prolonged Lockdowns and Post-MCO Obligations – Are You Ready For The Perfect Storm The Role of the Board in Talent Management and Succession Planning COVID-19 and Current Economic Reality The Digital Boardroom (Shaping Policy, Business and Finance in a Time of Crisis) Navigating in Turbulent Times Anti-Money Laundering Training Workshop on Corporate Governance Boards and Post COVID-19 Governance Business Valuation How to Develop Integrated Reports Thematic Sustainability Workshop – Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate related Financial Disclosure Role of Board in Strategy and Risk Management Oversight Risk Management – Why Are We Embarking Internal Rating Based Journey and Accreditation Expectations Damages in Mergers & Acquisitions Disputes Introduction to Section 17A MACC (Amendment) Act 2018 – Corporate Liability ISO 37001: 2016 & MACC Act Section 17A Foundation Course Raising Defences Section 17A MACC Guidelines Cybersecurity Awareness Cybersecurity Risk Data Analytics for Business 

Group Secretary 

The Diverse Facets of Leadership China & The World Related Party Transactions and Provision of Financial Assistance A summary of training courses attended by the Directors and the Group Secretary during the year is listed below:  

> 122 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Leadership & Effectiveness Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz 

Chairman of the Nomination & Remuneration Committee 

Nomination & Remuneration Committee Report Composition 

The NRC, chaired by Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz, comprises three  Independent Non-Executive Directors and one Non-Independent Non-Executive Director. 

Roles and Responsibilities 

The NRC manages the nomination and remuneration process for the Board and the various Board Committees, as well as for other critical management positions within  the Group. The NRC 

Meetings and Attendance Members Membership Appointment Attendance 

Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy  Abdul Hafiz ^Chairman/Independent Non-Executive Director 4 September 2019 6/6 100% Dato’ Ahmad Pardas  Senin Member/Senior Independent Non-Executive Director 1 December 2017 7/7 100% Encik Mohamad Idros  Mosin Member/Non-Independent Non-Executive Director 21 November 2018 7/7 100% Datuk Wan Selamah Wan Sulaiman Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 9 June 2020 – –   

> Former Members Membership Appointment Attendance

Dato Sri Lim Haw  Kuang *Member/Senior Independent Non-Executive Director 23 November 2015 2/2 100%   

> *Resigned as Chairman of NRC on 14 November 2019
> ^Appointed as Chairman of NRC on 26 November 2019

also assists the Board in reviewing the  mix  of skills, experience, core competencies and  other qualities required for an effective Board for Sime Darby. The NRC recommends candidates for appointments to the Board and Board Committees, and ensures appropriate assessment of Directors occurs on an ongoing basis. 

> Detailed Terms of Reference of the NRC is available at www.simedarby.com/operating-responsibly/governance

Key Activities of FY2020 Nomination Function 

• Reviewed the composition of the Board and Board Committees; • Evaluated and recommended suitable candidates for appointments to the Board, Board Committees and senior management of the Group; • Evaluated the contributions of Directors seeking election and re-election at the AGM and made recommendations on the suitability of Directors for election and re-election to the Board; and • Oversaw the succession planning and performance evaluation of the Board, Board Committees and the senior management team. 

Remuneration Function 

• Reviewed and recommended the remuneration framework for Non-Executive Directors; • Reviewed and recommended the Group’s rewards philosophy and remuneration structure; • Recommended the bonus pay out and salary increment for employees of the Group; • Appraised the performance and recommended the bonus pay-out and salary increment for the GCEO and his direct reports. • Reviewed and recommended the renewal of fixed-term contracts of senior management; • Reviewed the parameters and eligibility criteria for the Long-Term Incentive Plan; and • Recommended the allotment and issuance of new Sime Darby shares to eligible grantees pursuant to the Long-Term Incentive Plan. 

> 123 Governance

Election and Re-Election of  Directors 

The NRC ensures that the Directors  retire and are re-elected in  accordance with the relevant laws and regulations, and the Constitution of the Company. The performance of  each retiring Director at the next  AGM is considered by the NRC before making recommendation to the Board  for election or re-election of  the relevant Directors. 

Board Independence and  Diversity 

The Board, under the advice of the NRC, has adopted the policy that  the tenure of an Independent Non-Executive Director should not  exceed a cumulative term limit of  nine years. The NRC has determined that the  criteria for appointment of Board members are as follows: (a)  Required skills, knowledge, expertise and experience; (b)  Time commitment, character, professionalism and integrity; (c)  Ability to work cohesively with  other members of the Board; (d)  Specialist knowledge or technical skills in line with the Group’s strategy and businesses; (e)  Diversity in age, gender and experience/background; (f)  Number of directorships in companies outside the Group; and (g)  Appropriateness and fit in terms of the person’s probity, soundness of judgement and competency. 

Remuneration Approach 

The approach to the Non-Executive Directors’ remuneration is aligned to  the Group’s strategic objectives and allows the Group to attract, motivate and retain talent and leaders of high calibre. Periodic reviews are  performed by the NRC on  the remuneration structure to  ensure that the compensation of  the  Non-Executive Directors is  competitive, appropriate and aligned with prevalent market practices and trends. The review takes into account the level of responsibilities undertaken by the Non-Executive Directors concerned and the complexity of the Group’s operations. The Group also reimburses all expenses incurred by the Non-Executive Directors, where relevant, in the course of carrying out their duties as Directors. The components of the remuneration for the GCEO are structured to link rewards to corporate and individual performance. It comprises salary, allowances, bonuses and other customary benefits as accorded by comparable companies. Performance is measured against individual KPIs in  a scorecard aligned with corporate objectives as approved by the Board, as well as profits and other targets set in accordance with the Group’s annual budget and plans. The NRC reviews the performance of the GCEO  annually and submits their views and recommendations to the  Board on adjustments in remuneration and/or rewards to reflect the GCEO’s contribution towards the Group’s achievements for the year. The GCEO recuses himself from deliberation and voting on his remuneration and/or rewards at Board meetings. The remuneration philosophy reflects the Group’s commitment to comply with best practices in the areas of remuneration, retention and rewards, to ensure that the Group continues to attract and retain the best talent. The remuneration packages and incentives are regularly evaluated against market-related surveys. 

Effectiveness Review and  Performance 

From the BEA 2020 exercise, the Board reviewed the performance of the NRC and based on the results, is satisfied with the performance and effectiveness of the NRC in  discharging its duties and responsibilities as stated in its Terms  of Reference. 

Employee Engagement 

The alignment between employees and the organisation relies upon the  workforce’s engagement level. An  engaged workforce would display more productive and demonstrate discretionary efforts to achieve the  desired level of performance. In  FY2020, Sime Darby partnered with Kincentric conducted the Global  Employee Engagement Survey (GEES) 2020. The objective of  this exercise is to gauge the level of engagement of Sime Darby’s employees across the Group. It  received an encouraging response rate which demonstrated the employees’ commitment towards making Sime  Darby an engaged workplace. The GEES 2020 results were presented to the NRC and the  NRC’s views and recommendations were taken and formulated into action plans to drive  further employee engagement at Sime Darby. 

Key Activities of FY2020 (Continued) 

Governance Function 

• Reviewed the Terms of Reference of the Board Committees; • Reviewed the terms of office and the performance of the GAC; • Reviewed the Board composition policy; • Reviewed the GCEO’s key performance indicators and scorecard for the new financial year; and • Reviewed the results of the Global Employee Engagement Survey.  

> 124 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Leadership & Effectiveness Salary & Other Remuneration (RM’000) Directors’ Fees Benefits-in-kind (RM’000) PBESS @(RM’000) Total (RM’000) Company (RM’000) Subsidiary (RM’000) Present Directors Executive Director +

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 4,437 – – 87 657 5,181 

Non-Executive Directors 

Dato’ Lawrence Lee Cheow Hock N/A 1415 58 14 N/A 1487 Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai 349 – 10 359 Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz 334 – 11 345 Dato’ Ahmad Pardas Senin 325 – 12 337 Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 318 – 6 324 Datuk Wan Selamah Wan Sulaiman 292 – 6 298 Ms Moy Pui Yee 275 – 2 277 Encik Mohamad Idros Mosin 275 ^ – 1 276 Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon 2 259 – – 259 

Total for Non-Executive Directors 2,842 58 62 2,962 Former Directors Non-Executive Directors 

N/A 1 N/A 1Dato’ Abdul Rahman Ahmad 3 408 # – 22 430 Dato Sri Lim Haw Kuang 4 177 56 25 258 Tan Sri Dato’ Sri Dr Wan Abdul 187 – 30 217 Aziz Wan Abdullah 5

Total for Non-Executive Directors 772 56 77 905 Grand Total for Non-Executive Directors 3,614 114 139 3,867 Focus Areas for FY2021 Promote Diversity 

• Strive to create a diverse, non-discriminatory and inclusive environment across the Group’s operations. • Actively promote diversity from a broad range of perspective including mix of skills, background, ability, professional and industry experience, age, independence and ethnicity across all levels to help the Group to  remain competitive and to ensure sustainable business growth. 

Succession Planning 

• Maintain a steady supply of suitable talent to meet future leadership and business growth demands, ensuring the long-term sustainability of the Group. • Identify and develop a pipeline of talent for succession planning at various levels of the organisation. 

Directors’ Training 

• Equip Directors with up-to-date knowledge and skills to strengthen their ability to discharge their fiduciary duties. • Identify the training needs of the Board of Directors and develop the appropriate training solutions for them. 

Compensation and Reward  Framework 

• Shape the remuneration framework to ensure that the Group continues to attract and retain talent. • Review the compensation and rewards framework to ensure that it remains competitive, appropriate and in alignment with prevalent market practices. 1 N/A – Not Applicable 2 Appointed on 15 November 2019 3 Appointed on 1 September 2019 and resigned on 10 June 2020 4 Retired on 14 November 2019 5 Retired on 31 October 2019     

> @Long-Term Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme
> +Paid by Sime Darby Holdings Berhad
> ^Fees paid to PNB
> #Fees for the period from 1 September 2019 to 30 September 2019 were paid to PNB
> 125 Governance

Thayaparan Sangarapillai 

Chairman of the Governance & Audit Committee 

Composition 

The GAC, chaired by Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai, comprises four members, all of whom are Independent Non-Executive Directors, in compliance with the  listing requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities and the Malaysian Code on  Corporate  Governance. 

Roles and Responsibilities 

The GAC is a committee of the Sime  Darby Board tasked with the  following primary objectives: (a)  To assist the Board in fulfilling its  statutory and fiduciary responsibilities of monitoring the  Group’s management of its  financial risk processes, and accounting and financial reporting  practices; (b)  To review the Group’s business processes, quality of accounting function, financial reporting and  internal controls; (c)  To enhance the independence of both the external and internal audit functions by providing direction and oversight on behalf of the Board; and (d)  To assist the Board in monitoring the implementation of an effective  ethics programme and  compliance with established policies and procedures. 

Governance & Audit Committee Report Meetings and Attendance Members Membership Appointment Attendance 

Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai Chairman/Independent Non- Executive Director 1 December 2017 6/6 100% Datuk Wan Selamah Wan  Sulaiman Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 1 March 2016 6/6 100% Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 1 December 2017 6/6 100% Dato’ Ahmad Pardas  Senin Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 1 December 2017 5/6 83% 

Detailed Terms of Reference of the GAC is available at www.simedarby.com/ operating-responsibly/governance 

Key Activities of FY2020 Financial Reporting 

• All quarterly financial results and the annual audited financial statements for FY2020 were reviewed and recommended to the Board for approval; and • The GAC’s review focused on changes to accounting policies, areas of significant judgement, corrected and uncorrected misstatements. 

External Audit 

• Reviewed and approved the Group Audit Plan, which outlines the audit strategy and approach for FY2020; • Affirmed that Messrs. PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT and all members of its engagement team maintained their independence in accordance with the provisions of the By-Laws on Professional Ethics, Conduct and Practice of  the Malaysian Institute of Accountants; • Noted the internal control memorandum for FY2019; • Considered in consultation with the Management, the audit fees of the external auditors for FY2020 for recommendation to the Board for approval; and • Completed the annual external auditor assessment prior to the recommendation for re-appointment to the Board for  approval. The assessment covered, amongst others: 

– Governance and independence; 

– Communication and interaction; and 

– Quality of resources and services.  

> 126 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Effective Audit & Risk Management Internal Audit 

• Reviewed and approved the Group Corporate Assurance Department’s (GCAD) Audit Plan and operating budget for FY2021; • Reviewed internal audit reports at each GAC meeting; • Considered the following: 

– Results of planned, follow-up and special audits including whistleblowing investigations and data analytics initiatives; 

– Adequacy of the Management’s responses to the audit findings and recommendations; 

– Status of audits as compared with the approved Corporate Assurance Plan; and 

– Adequacy of audit resources. • Approved the KPIs for FY2020 and at the end of the financial year, conducted the performance appraisal for the Group Head – GCAD. 

Related Party Transactions (RPTs) and Recurrent Related Party Transactions (RRPTs) 

• Reviewed RPTs and RRPTs of the Group to ensure compliance with the Companies Act 2016, the Main Market Listing Requirements and the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards. The objective is to ensure that RPTs and RRPTs are not accorded conditions more favourable than that generally available to the public, and that they are not detrimental to minority shareholders. 

Governance and Regulatory Compliance 

• Conducted annual review of the Group Policies & Authorities (GPA). Changes to the GPA which were reviewed include: 

– Amendments emphasising the impact of the new Section 17A of the Malaysian Anti-Corruption Act 2009 (Amendment 2018) and the implementation of the Group’s Anti-Bribery Management System (ABMS); and 

– Amendments to the existing policy on Board Appointments and Corporate Representatives. • Approved the Vendor Due Diligence Guidelines to identify potential bribery related “red flags”; • Continuously reviewed the results of risk-based vendor due diligence for the Group, including remediation plans to be undertaken by Management to address issues identified; • Reviewed the Bribery Risk Assessment which identified low, medium and high-risk operating environments. The  results of further analysis of bribery risks within each high risk operating environment were also considered; • Reviewed the revised Gifts, Hospitality and Donation procedures; • Reviewed the Regulatory Compliance Monitoring Report which was carried out through self-assessment and self-attestation; • Approved the Interactions with Regulators and Authorities Framework, which is a high-level guidance framework  that sets out the broad approach for routine interactions with regulators and/or authorities and during Dawn Raid protocols; • Reviewed the Statement of Risk Management and Internal Control attestations by the Management; and • Approved the KPIs for FY2020 and at the end of the financial year, conducted the performance appraisal for the  Head - Group Compliance & Integrity. 

Annual Report 

Reviewed and endorsed the following: • Annual Audited Financial Statements for FY2020; • Statement on Risk Management and Internal Control; • The GAC report for inclusion in the FY2020 Annual Report; and • The Corporate Governance Overview Statement. 

Other Activities 

• Noted on a quarterly basis: 

– The Group’s cash and borrowings position and cash flow projections; and 

– The status of key investments, material litigations and major operational issues. • Noted the Group’s sponsorships and donations approved by the GCEO for FY2020; • Noted the initiatives by Group IT on cybersecurity, including the development of the cybersecurity framework and risk reduction measures; and • Noted the shares granted under the Long-term Incentive Plan. 

> 127 Governance

Key Matters Considered 

The GAC receives updates on key  governance matters, audit initiatives and observations across  the Group at each Committee  meeting. The Committee reviews and  reports  to the Board on significant matters including financial reporting, significant judgments made by the Management, significant and unusual events or transactions, and how these matters were addressed. Some of the key matters considered by the Committee during the financial year include: 

Significant Initiatives/Issues Matters Considered Outcomes 

Recoverability of the  Group’s investments in  the Logistics Division Focus was given on the Group’s investments in Logistics Division as a number of its operating entities were performing below expectation. In view of  uncertainty on  the recoverability of the Group’s investment in Weifang Port Services Co., Ltd (WPS), the  Management fully impaired the Group’s investment in it along with receivables from WPS amounting  to  RM98 million. Impairment assessments were also performed on  the Group’s investment in Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co., Ltd (WSDLT) and Jining Sime Darby Longgong Port. Co., Ltd (JSDLP). The Management concluded that the Group’s share of  the recoverable amount from WSDLT and JSDLT had dropped and an  impairment of RM22 million and RM7 million respectively  were recorded as at 30 June 2020. The GAC considered and  concurred with the  Management’s assessment and decision on  the impairment charge. Recoverability of the  carrying amount  of  intangible assets in  Industrial Australasia The Management performed an impairment assessment on  the  Cash Generating Units (CGU) in the Group’s Industrial operations in Australasia based on the Value-in-Use (VIU) methodology using the five-year discounted cash flows. As a result of the exercise, the Management reversed the 

RM28 million impairment made for the distribution rights in  Papua New Guinea, given the improved positive  results and  outlook. The GAC considered and  concurred with the  Management’s assessment on the recoverability of 

the carrying amount of  the  intangible assets in  the  Group’s Industrial operations in Australasia. Recoverability of the Group’s investment in Mines Energy Solution Pty Ltd (MES) The Management performed an assessment of the shareholder’s loan extended to MES, a 50% joint venture company in Australia. MES is conducting a pilot project for its truck engine technology at a customer’s site in the United States. The pilot has  been delayed from June 2019 to June 2021 due to  technical  issues and travel restrictions caused by  the  COVID-19 pandemic. In view of heightened risks  and  uncertainties around the commencement of  the pilot  project and its success, the Management recognised a fair value loss of RM72 million, being the  entire carrying value of the shareholder’s loan. The GAC considered and  concurred with the  Management’s assessment and decision on the impairment charge.  

> 128 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Effective Audit & Risk Management Significant Initiatives/Issues Matters Considered Outcomes 

Acquisition of Gough Group Limited  and three automotive dealerships in Sydney, Australia (Sydney dealerships) The acquisitions of Gough Group Limited and the Sydney dealerships were completed during the year. Purchase Price Allocation exercises were performed to determine the fair  value of the net identifiable assets, franchise rights and  goodwill. The GAC considered and  concurred with the Management’s decision. Adoption of the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standard (MFRS) 16 The Group adopted MFRS 16 with effect from FY2020, which  led to the recognition of previously off-balance sheet  operating leases. This resulted in the recognition of  right-of-use assets and lease liabilities of RM1,773 million. In  addition, leasehold land and prepaid lease rentals were  also  reclassified as right-of-use assets. The GAC considered and  concurred with the Management’s decision. Cybersecurity practices  and posture of the Group The Management completed a review of its readiness against  cybersecurity risk. Arising from the review, actions are  being  taken to enhance the Group’s defences  against this  threat. These included the setting  up of a dedicated cybersecurity team, a Security Operations Centre and the  implementation of  a Group-wide cybersecurity awareness and  improvement  programme. The GAC considered the Management’s actions and  requested for status updates periodically. ABMS Focus was given to ensure that the Group has adequate procedures in place across all its operations  in  preparation for  S17A of the MACC Act. The  Management had implemented the ABMS, which is benchmarked against the  ISO 37001 standard. The implementation of  ABMS will  continue to be reviewed and enhanced, where necessary, to improve its  effectiveness. The GAC considered the Management’s actions and  requested for quarterly  status updates. 

> 129 Governance

Corporate Assurance Department 

The Group has an internal audit function which is carried out by GCAD, headed by Mr Ramesh Ramanathan. Mr Ramesh is a  Chartered Accountant (ACCA) with  more than 20 years of experience with two prominent “Big 4” accounting firms. He is a member of the Malaysian Institute of Accountants. GCAD is a centralised function with regional corporate assurance teams having direct control and supervision over audit services across the Group. There is a total of 35 internal auditors across the Group led by  regional heads in Malaysia, Australia  and China. GCAD is guided by its Charter which specifies functional reporting to the  GAC and administrative reporting to the GCEO, to allow an appropriate degree of independence from the operations of the Group. GCAD’s principal responsibilities are to undertake regular and systematic reviews of internal controls systems, and to  provide reasonable assurance that  the systems in place continue to  operate satisfactorily and effectively throughout the Group. The GAC reviews, challenges and approves the annual GCAD audit plan with periodic reviews to ensure business alignment, appropriate risk assessment and audit methodology, and to ensure robustness in the audit planning process. The GAC also approves the appointment and termination of  the Group Head – GCAD and GCAD regional heads. There were no outsourced audit assignments during the year  under  review. The Quality Assurance & Improvement Programme (QAIP), which focuses on  the efficiency and  effectiveness of audit processes,  continues to be applied to  assess the quality of audit processes adopted. It is an ongoing internal assessment to identify and make appropriate recommendations for  improvement of key activities within GCAD. These  are carried out  in  the form of annual internal team validations. The Quality Assurance Review (QAR) is an external assessment conducted at least once every five  years by a qualified, independent assessor from an external organisation. It is expected to be conducted in  FY2021. In FY2020, the total cost incurred for  the internal audit function was  RM13.1 million (FY2019: RM13.1 million). 

Group Compliance & Integrity 

The Group’s independent in-house compliance function is carried out by  Group Compliance & Integrity (GCI). Ms Chuah Yean Ping is the Head – GCI. Ms Chuah is a member of  The Honourable Society of Lincoln’s Inn and was admitted to  the  Malaysian Bar in 1996. With  over 20 years of work  experience, beginning as a legal practitioner, she now heads compliance activities across the Group. GCI monitors regulatory compliance and administers the Group’s ABMS, which provides reasonable assurance that the Group’s operations and activities are conducted in line with  key regulatory requirements, internal policies and the COBC. Guided by  its  Compliance Charter and Compliance Management Framework, GCI reports functionally to the GAC and administratively to  the  GCFO. The  dual reporting line  ensures a level of independence and  objectivity in  discharging of responsibilities. The  GAC reviews and approves GCI’s work plan annually. It also approves the appointment of Head – GCI. This report is made in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors dated 28 September 2020.  

> 130 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Effective Audit & Risk Management Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

Chairman of the Risk Management Committee 

Composition 

The Risk Management Committee led by Tan Sri Samsudin Osman, consists of three Independent Non-Executive Directors and a Non-Independent Non-Executive Director. Members of the RMC bring with them a diverse set of expertise and experience and have a  solid understanding of the sectors in which the Group operates. This  enables them to execute their  role of anticipating, assessing and mitigating potential risks, by challenging and facilitating robust discussions on the management of  the Group’s key risk areas. 

Roles & Responsibilities 

The RMC is primarily responsible for  risk monitoring and oversight across the Group. The Committee assists the Board in discharging its main responsibilities of identifying principal risks and key trends, and deliberating strategic action plans to mitigate the impact of such risks. Specific duties of the RMC are as  follows: (a)  Reviewing the adequacy of the  scope, function, authority, competence and resources of the  GRM department; (b)  Providing direction, counsel and oversight over risk management processes, specifically to: 

– ensure that appropriate risk  management policies, framework and processes are  implemented; 

– review the Group’s risk profile  and ensure that potential significant risks beyond tolerable ranges are  responded to with appropriate and effective mitigation actions; and 

– monitor and evaluate the risk  profile and appetite of  the Group. (c)  Reviewing significant investment proposals and monitoring the execution of risk mitigation strategies for such proposals; and (d)  Following up on post-investment risk mitigation strategies to ensure that they are implemented as prescribed by the Board. In discharging its responsibilities, the  RMC is assisted by the GRM  department. 

Risk Management Committee Report   

> Detailed Terms of Reference of the RMC is available at www.simedarby.com/operating-responsibly/governance

Meetings and Attendance Members Membership Appointment Attendance 

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman Chairman/Non-Independent Non-Executive Chairman 1 December 2017 6/6 Dato’ Lawrence Lee  Cheow Hock Member/Non-Independent Non-Executive Director 20 July 2018 6/6 Ms Moy Pui Yee Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 20 July 2018 6/6 Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 4 September 2019 3/4 Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon Member/Independent Non-Executive Director 26 November 2019 2/2    

> Former Members Membership Appointment Attendance

Dato Sri Lim Haw  Kuang * Member/Senior Independent Non-Executive Director 23 November 2015 3/3  

> *Resigned on 14 November 2019
> 131 Governance

Key Activities of FY2020 Group Risk Management Framework 

Reviewed and advised the Board on amendments to the Group Risk Management Framework to reflect the latest risk  management standards and changes to the Group’s business environment. 

New Risk Management Guidelines 

Reviewed and approved the implementation of an Investment and Project Risk Assessment Guideline to facilitate the identification, evaluation and management of risks for major projects and investments. 

Bribery Risk Assessment 

Reviewed and advised the Board on bribery risks for key business units in key markets in-line with Transparency International guidelines. 

Risk Appetite Statements 

Developed the Risk Appetite Statement which articulates the level of risk that the Group is prepared to take in  pursuing its strategic objectives. Please see pages 50 and 51 for more details. 

Appraise New Investments 

Evaluated risks pertaining to new major investment proposals in accordance with the Group’s Limits of Authority. 

Review of Group and Divisional Risks 

Reviewed and assessed the Group’s and Divisional risk profiles, and managed the significant financial and non-financial risks identified. 

Enhance Organisational Resiliency 

Developed a road map to enhance the Group’s overall BCM programme, which included the set-up of a BCM Steering Committee and the formalisation of governance, policies and procedures across the Group. 

Group Risk Management 

GRM’s primary role is to assist the RMC and the Board in discharging their risk management responsibilities. GRM is structured to  ensure that adequate support is  provided at both  the GHO and Divisional levels, with responsibilities mainly, but not limited to, the following: • Outline a strategic plan to guide the priorities and direction  of the Group’s risk  management activities; • Develop appropriate risk management policies and  guidelines; • Conduct annual or periodical review of the Group Risk Management Policy and Framework, as well as continuously monitor risk exposure across the Group; • Develop and articulate the Group’s risk appetite, and periodically assess the level of  risk exposure via continuous monitoring of risk  tolerance and  limits; • Facilitate risk management structure, processes, tools and  systems to support risk assessment activities at the GHO  and Divisional levels; • Conduct risk assessments on  all major investments and  tenders in  accordance with  the Group’s Limits of Authority; and • Continuous effort to inculcate and raise risk awareness across the Group. GRM is currently headed by Mr Richard Ong Aik Jin. Richard  is a Fellow Member of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants with 15 years of experience in governance, risk and control. He  joined the Group in October 2018 as  the Head of Group Risk Management and  is  responsible for implementing appropriate systems, programmes and initiatives to manage the Group’s overall risk exposure. Richard also leads and manages the Group’s insurance and business continuity management programme. Key focus areas for FY2020 as highlighted in the Annual Report 2019 were successfully implemented.  

> 132 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Effective Audit & Risk Management Focus Areas for FY2021 

The RMC will continue to assist  the  Board to oversee the implementation of the Group’s risk  management framework, which  includes recommending the appropriate risk appetite, policies and  risk management methodologies throughout the  Group. The RMC’s key priorities and initiatives for FY2021 include: 

Risk Management Awareness 

Implement activities to enhance knowledge and understanding of risk management across the business. 

Risk Management Blueprint 

Provide guidance, governance and oversight over the implementation of strategic priorities and initiatives outlined in  the Risk Management Blueprint. Read pages 43 to 49 for more information. 

GRM-Developed Initiatives and Programmes 

Assess how effective these initiatives are in instilling risk awareness across the Group, including integrating risk  management into the day-to-day decision-making process across all operations. 

Strategic and Emerging Risks 

Review and monitor strategic and emerging risks based on approved risk appetite thresholds. Evaluate the effectiveness of internal controls and mitigative actions in ensuring that risks taken are within the Group’s risk appetite and in the event of a breach, within the Group’s risk appetite  threshold. 

Business Continuity Management 

Evaluate effectiveness of the Group’s BCM programme with an eye towards how it can strengthen the Group’s preparedness and resilience during crisis or disasters. 

> 133 Governance

The Board maintains an open and constructive relationships with all its stakeholders – large and small, institutional and  private. The Chairman, supported by the Management, has the overall responsibility of ensuring that the Group listens to and effectively communicates with its stakeholders. The Group’s Investor Relations unit, headed by the Group Chief Strategy Officer, facilitates communication between the Group and the investment community. Pertinent matters that may concern stakeholders include strategic developments, financial results and material business matters affecting the Group. A comprehensive investor relations programme, designed for institutional investors and private shareholders, addresses these matters on a regular basis. 

How the Group Communicates Meetings, Conference Calls and Site Visits 

The Investor Relations unit holds regular meetings, conference calls and site visits with investors, intended to keep the investment community abreast of the Group’s operations, strategic developments and financial performance. In addition, investment roadshows are held to engage with shareholders and potential investors across the globe. 

Engagements in FY2020 

1. FY2019 Results Announcement – 27 August 2019 2. Citi Malaysia Investor Symposium 2019 – 4 September 2019 3. UOB Kay Hian: Healthcare Day – 19 September 2019 4. BMW 3 Series Test Drive Event for Research Analysts – 4 October 2019 5. Investor Relations Visit to Inokom with Affin & CIMB – 15 October 2019 6. 13 th Annual General Meeting – 14 November 2019 7. Q12020 Analyst Briefing – 26 November 2019 8. CGS-CIMB 12 th Annual Malaysia Corporate Day – 6 & 7 January 2020 9. UBS Malaysia Corporate Day 2020 (Singapore) – 21 January 2020 10. Citibank Pan Asia Regional Investor Conference (Virtual) – 19 & 20 May 2020 11. UBS Virtual Malaysia Corporate Day 2020 (Virtual) – 11 June 2020 12. Daiwa Auto and Industrials Leaders Conference (Virtual) – 29 June 2020 13. UBS Virtual Asia Industrials Day 2020 (Virtual) – 8 July 2020 

Quarterly Financial Results Briefings and Announcements 

Every quarter, the Investor Relations and Group Communications units provide the investment and media community with an up-to-date view of the Group’s financial performance and operations via analyst briefing and media briefing sessions, which coincide with the release of the Group’s quarterly financial results on Bursa Malaysia Securities. These sessions are also broadcasted live via webcast to members of the investment community who are overseas or unable to participate in person. 

Corporate Website 

The Group maintains a comprehensive website which includes an up-to-date investor centre to communicate with stakeholders. Regular news, announcements, share price updates, investor presentations, events and other relevant information are posted on the website. Shareholders are also welcomed to raise queries by contacting the Group at any time throughout the year. Contact details are available at the Contact Us section of the Group’s website at http://www.simedarby.com/contact-us.  

> 134 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Integrity in Corporate Reporting and Meaningful Relationships with Stakeholders Annual General Meeting (AGM) 

The AGM provides a platform for the Chairman and GCEO to share how the Group has performed during the year with  shareholders. It also provides all shareholders with the opportunity to put forward questions to the Chairman of the Board, the chairmen of the Governance & Audit, Nomination & Remuneration and Risk Management committees, and to the Senior Independent Director. At these meetings, e-polling is conducted on each resolution. Shareholders also have the opportunity to cast their votes by proxy in advance of the meeting. Following the AGM, results of the polls are published on the Group’s website and released to Bursa Malaysia Securities. The FY2020 AGM will be held virtually at 10.00 a.m. on 12 November 2020. The notice of the AGM is issued at least 28  days prior to the date of the meeting in accordance with the Malaysian Code on Corporate Governance 2017. The  notice and  agenda will also be published in the local Bahasa Melayu and English newspapers and made available on  the Group’s website at www.simedarby.com. 

Financial Calendar for the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Announcement of Unaudited Consolidated Results 1st Quarter ended 30 September 2019 2 nd Quarter ended 31 December 2019 3rd Quarter ended 31 March 2020 4 th Quarter ended 30 June 2020 

26 November 2019 26 February 2020 21 May 2020 27 August 2020 

1st Interim Dividend of 2.0 sen Per Ordinary Share 

Announcement of the Notice of Entitlement and Payment: 26 February 2020 Date of Entitlement: 27 April 2020 Date of Payment: 12 May 2020 

2nd Interim Dividend of 7.0 sen and Special Dividend of 1.0 sen Per Ordinary Share 

Announcement of the Notice of Entitlement and Payment: 27 August 2020 Date of Entitlement: 5 October 2020 Date of Payment: 30 October 2020 

Dividends Notice Date 14 October 2020 Meeting Date 12 November 2020 14 th Annual General Meeting 135 Governance Introduction 

The Board is pleased to provide this statement on Risk Management and Internal Control which outlines the nature of risk management and internal controls within Sime Darby for the year under review. Risk management and internal controls are integrated into management processes and embedded in the business activities of the Group. 

Responsibilities and Accountabilities A)  The Board 

The Group is led by the Board. The Board has delegated the governance and risk management responsibilities to Board Committees which ensure independent oversight of  internal controls and risk management. Notwithstanding the delegated responsibilities, the Board takes overall responsibility in the establishment and oversight of the Group’s risk  management framework and  internal controls systems. The Board is cognisant of its role in  setting the tone and  nurturing a culture towards managing key  risks to achieve the  Group’s business objectives. The Board also recognises that  internal controls systems are  designed to  manage and minimise  rather than eliminate and avoid  occurrence of material misstatements or unforeseeable circumstances, fraud or losses. 

• Governance & 

Audit Committee 

The key responsibility of the GAC is to assist the Board in fulfilling the Board’s statutory and fiduciary responsibilities of  monitoring the Group’s management of  financial risk processes, accounting and financial reporting practices. The GAC is also tasked to review the processes and quality of the Group’s accounting function, financial reporting and the internal controls system, which include ensuring that an effective ethics programme is implemented across the Group, and to monitor compliance of established policies and procedures. The  GAC’s Terms of Reference and activities in assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of  internal controls system and their implementation within the Group are detailed on pages 126 to 130 of this annual report. In discharging its duties, the  GAC is supported and assisted by two functional units within the Group, i.e. GCI and the GCAD. 

• Risk Management Committee 

The RMC assists the  Board in providing oversight, direction and counsel on the overall risk  management process; establishing and reviewing the  risk management framework, processes and responsibilities; as well as assessing whether they provide reasonable assurance that risks are managed within tolerable ranges. The RMC is  also entrusted to set the tone and  culture towards effective risk management and control within the Group. The responsibilities of the RMC are detailed on pages 131 to 133 of this annual report. The RMC is chaired by  a Non-Independent Non-Executive Director. In discharging its responsibilities, the RMC is  assisted by the Group Risk Management Department. 

B)  The Management 

The Management is responsible for implementing Board-approved frameworks, policies and procedures related to risk management and internal controls. The Management is also  accountable for identifying, assessing and monitoring the risks that may impede the Group’s goals and objectives. The Management’s responsibility includes but is not limited to: • Implementing relevant policies and processes to identify, evaluate, monitor and report risks and internal controls. • Ensuring appropriate and timely corrective actions are  taken to strengthen internal controls and minimise  occurrence of non-compliant incidents. • Assuring the Board that adequate mitigative actions have been promptly and properly carried out to address any  lapses. • Setting the right example (in  words and actions) to encourage and reinforce the  importance of ethical business  conduct. • Applying all required rules and  regulations. • Seeking guidance from the Board on matters concerning risks and internal controls when required. The Management also provides assurance to the Board that the risk management and internal controls systems are adequate and operating effectively based on the risk management framework adopted by the Group. 

C)  Group Compliance & Integrity 

GCI’s main role is to assist the Board, GAC and Management in  coordinating compliance risk  management activities such  as programmes or activities  to identify, mitigate and educate employees about the  risks of  non-compliance, and  to provide reasonable  

> 136 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Statement on Risk Management and Internal  Control assurance that  the Group’s operations and  activities are conducted in  line with key regulatory requirements. This  role is executed via oversight, coordination, consultation, validation and monitoring of the  Group’s state  of compliance. In recognising the diverse nature and the challenges faced by the  Group, GCI’s programmes and  activities are tailored to meet  the specific needs and requirements of each of the Division focusing on emerging areas of compliance not addressed or covered by other  assurance functions to minimise duplication of work. The GAC monitors the strategy and delivery of the compliance programmes via periodic progress reports submitted and reported by the Head of GCI. The GAC provides feedback to GCI, including through the annual GAC survey conducted by GCI as part of its continuous improvement efforts. GCI’s mandate and activities are  detailed on page 130 of this  annual report. 

D)  Group Corporate Assurance Department 

GCAD which is an integral part of  the Group’s internal controls system, reports directly to the  GAC. GCAD’s primary role is  to provide independent, reasonable and objective assurance in addition to consulting services designed to  add value and improve efficiency of the Group’s operations. In assisting the Group  to achieve its objectives, the GCAD employs a systematic and disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the  effectiveness of risk management, internal controls and governance processes. A risk-based annual audit plan is  developed by GCAD which sets out GCAD’s audit engagements within the Group for the year, and is reviewed and approved by the GAC. GCAD’s audit practices conform to the International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) published by the US Institute of  Internal Auditors Inc. GCAD conducts periodic assessments of emerging business risks and actively monitors and responds to adverse  indicators and key risks. Adjustments are made to the audit coverage as required, including scope extensions and/or undertaking special reviews with amendments to  the  audit plan. These are reported to the GAC periodically. GCAD’s mandate and activities are detailed on page 130 of this  annual report. 

E)  Group Risk Management Department 

The GRM department assists the Board and  RMC in discharging their risk  management responsibilities. GRM is structured to provide adequate support to both the GHO and  the  Divisions in  regard to  risk  management implementation. GRM also sets  the strategic plan to guide  the  priorities and direction  of  the  Group’s risk management  activities. GRM’s mandate and activities are  on page 132 of this annual  report. 

Reporting Structure – Assurance, Compliance and Risk Governance & Audit Committee Risk Management Committee GCEO Group Corporate Assurance Group Compliance & Integrity Group Risk Management Group Management Committee Board of Directors 137 Governance Risk Management and Internal  Controls Framework 

The Group’s ERM Framework is  integrated and where appropriate, embedded into the day-to-day business activities and management decision-making. Designed and adapted as reasonably practicable from the ISO 31000:2018 Risk Management Guidelines, the framework is aimed at establishing a robust risk management process across the  Group and to ensure that  all business risks are prudently  identified, analysed and  effectively  managed. Supporting this broader risk management framework is an internal controls system that facilitates internal controls design and operating effectiveness to manage key risks. Key aspects of the Group’s overall risk management and internal controls system are selectively outlined below, where they provide assurance that the framework is adequate and effective for the purposes of this Statement. 

Mandate and Commitment 

The Board has approved, via the RMC, the ERM Framework which encapsulates the governance arrangements as well as assigns responsibility to relevant levels of  management and operations. The  implementation of the Framework is  ultimately the responsibility of the  GCEO and  members of the Sime Darby Group Management Committee. Evidence of implementation can be  seen in the appropriate risk management practices integrated into the relevant  business  processes. These  practices which assist with  decision-making aimed at achieving the Group’s objectives are  supplemented by a  more formal  and  explicit risk management  process. The diagram below provides an overview of the governance structure: 

Overview of the Group’s Governance Structure Governance & Audit Committee Risk Management Committee Nomination & Remuneration Committee GCEO Group Corporate Assurance 3rd Line of Defence 2 nd Line of Defence 1st Line of Defence Group Risk Management Board of Directors Divisional Managing Directors & Chief Financial Officers Divisional Managing Directors & Chief Financial Officers Compliance Lead Compliance Champions Divisional Risk Lead Divisional Risk Champions/ Risk Owners/Control Owners Group Compliance & Integrity Group Management Committee 138 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Statement on Risk Management and Internal  Control As illustrated, a top-down review  of  enterprise level risks is  conducted  as part of the annual strategic planning update to ensure  that the risk implication of  any change in strategy is  identified, assessed and 

Integration of Risk Management and Internal Control 

Integration of the formal ERM Framework into the wider management framework occurs 

Risk Assessment Activities 

documented. This is supplemented by quarterly risk  updates and regular  reviews of  projects along with assessments of  investment proposals and tenders where required. The  outcome of these reviews is the  identification wherever practicable. The Group has  embedded risk assessment into  key operational activities and decision-making processes across the Group (refer to the tables below). Risk assessments are performed based on a pre-defined risk management process adapted from ISO 31000 guidelines as well as globally acceptable risk management practices. 

Level/Context Assessment Management Involvement Frequency 

Strategic Annual Strategy Planning Set risk appetite, tolerance, limits and threshold Annually Enterprise-wide (Division/Business Units/Operating Units) Quarterly Risk Profile Submission and Reporting Update risks to reflect changes in  rating, status of controls and action plans Quarterly Major Proposals/ Investments *Proposal/Investment Risk  Assessment Assess key risk exposure and controls required to manage them As required Major Tenders * Tender Risk Assessment  

> *Selective investments/tenders based on the Group Policies and Authorities.

of  new  risks and the  reassessment of  others,  and may  also  lead to  the  development of  specific action  plans.  Where conditions significantly  change during the year, changes to  the strategy and risk  implication may be necessary. 

Risk Management Process Establish Context Risk Treatment Communication & Consultation Monitoring & Review Risk Assessment Risk Evaluation Recording & Reporting Risk Identification Risk Analysis 139 Governance Risk Appetite 

Risk appetite refers to the amount of  risk an organisation is prepared to  accept in pursuit of its strategic objectives. The Board, via the RMC, determines the Group’s risk appetite and tolerance, and ensures that it is communicated appropriately across Any critical breach of risk tolerance limits will be reported to the RMC. Any breach of appetite or limits also warrants the need to review the effectiveness of internal controls and mitigation actions; or a need to recalibrate the appetite or  limits if they no longer reflect the Group’s actual risk appetite. Please refer to pages 50 and 51 for more details on the Group’s risk appetite statements. the Group. The Group’s risk appetite is documented in a formal written statement (Risk Appetite Statement) which articulates the Group’s risk  strategy. The Risk Appetite Statement was developed by GRM, in consultation with the RMC and the  Group Management Committee, and was presented to the Board for  approval. GRM has also developed a Risk Appetite Framework to guide the formulation and implementation of  risk appetite statements. This is shown in the following diagram: 

How it works 

Risk appetite is developed in  alignment with the strategic  goals and objectives of  the Group, as identified in  the  Strategy Blueprint; and refers to the amount of risk that  the Group is willing to  accept  in pursuing its  goals  and  objectives. The Risk Appetite Statement provides measurable guidelines demonstrating the Group’s risk tolerance levels. Risk appetite statements are  crafted at the Group Level and cascaded down to the  Divisions and operating units  level. Execution and monitoring of  risk  appetite occur within the  risk management framework and periodic risk assessment and  monitoring process. 

Strategy Blueprint 

Defines the Group’s Strategic Goals & Objective 

Risk Appetite 

Amount of  risk the Group is willing to accept in  pursuit of value 

Risk Tolerance 

Boundaries of risk  taking; outside of  which we are not  prepared to accept 

> Division/Business Unit Level  Enterprise Level

RiskAssessmentControlAssessmentM o n i t o r i ng&ReviewEngagemen tRiskIdentificationRiskMitigation&TreatmentRisk Appetite Framework 140 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

# Statement on Risk Management and Internal  Control Control Environment Group Policies and Authorities 

The Board has put in place the GPA which  act as a key pillar of the  Group’s governance framework. It is a tool the Board uses to formally delegate functions and powers to the  Management with specific oversight and supervisory functions. This enables the Board to facilitate a robust control environment encircling clear lines of responsibilities, accountability and authority limits that are aligned with the Group’s business operations. As the GPAs cover a wide range of  areas, they also act as an ethical road map for the Group’s diverse businesses to navigate the intricacies of global business practices and cultures. The GPAs are reviewed annually whereby any new GPAs and/or enhancement to the current GPAs shall be approved by the Board  prior to implementation. The Divisions develop further delegated authorities with supporting policies and  procedures based on the mandate and guidance provided by the GPAs. The key supporting policies and procedures developed are as listed  below: 

• Core Values, Business Principles and the Code of Business Conduct 

The Group has clearly set out expected behaviours of Directors and employees of the Group in  the Group’s Core Values, Business Principles and the COBC. An attestation programme is in place with the aim to confirm that each Director and employee has read and agreed to comply with the provisions of the COBC. The COBC is available in five major local languages in recognition of  the large geographical spread that the Group operates from, ensuring that it reaches far and wide to Group personnel with minimal risk of translation error. 

• Integrity, Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption 

The Group’s COBC articulates expected behaviours of all employees in terms of dealing with internal and external stakeholders. Strict adherence is  expected without compromise. It  upholds the Group’s core values, the first of which is Integrity. The Group has in place the Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption Policy to strengthen the ring-fencing of the Group’s ethics parameters, particularly in  the area of anti-bribery and anti-corruption. The Group also has in place an  ABMS. In November 2019, GCI  formalised the appointment of Compliance Champions throughout the Group (compliance governance structure), to increase efficiency for the ongoing implementation and monitoring of compliance obligations (in particular, ABMS) throughout the Group’s operations. All  Compliance Champions carry  10% compliance KPI in  their  respective scorecards. As part of demonstrating top level  commitment, an Anti-Bribery Management System Steering Committee (ABMS Steering Committee) has been set  up, chaired by the GCFO. Members of  the ABMS Steering Committee include the Group Secretary, Head  – GCI, Division Managing Directors and Deputy Division Managing Directors. The role of  the ABMS Steering Committee is  to advise the GCEO on the  progress of continuous improvement of the Group’s ABMS, and escalate anti-bribery issues to the GCEO  for finality on  Management’s position. 

• Whistleblowing Policy and Whistleblowing Mechanism/ Channels 

The Group has in place a Whistleblowing Policy that provides clarity on the oversight and responsibilities of the whistleblowing process, the reporting process, protection of  whistleblowers and the confidentiality afforded to whistleblowers. The primary aim  of the Whistleblowing Policy and its supporting mechanism is  to enable individuals to raise genuine concerns without fear of  reprisal. The policy on whistleblowing as set out in the  GPA is available in the Group’s Enterprise Portal. 

> The COBC is available at www.simedarby.com/sites/default/ files/pdf/new_cobc_english.pdf
> The Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption Policy may be accessed from www.simedarby. com/sites/default/files/ anti-bribery_anti-corruption_ policy_february_2019.pdf
> An overview of the whistleblowing policy is accessible to all at www.simedarby.com/operating-responsibly/whistleblowing
> 141 Governance

A brief summary of how whistleblowing communications are escalated through the organisation is provided as follows: The Group’s whistleblowing mechanism and channels are managed by GCI, to provide independence from Management. This is articulated in the Whistleblowing Policy (as stated in the GPA), where GCI can be  contacted for reporting either through emails, letters or calls. The Senior Independent Non-Executive Director has oversight over all whistleblowing cases, from the receipt of the cases via  the online system or otherwise, through to the closure of each investigation. A summary of trends and analysis reports is  presented to the Board for  notation. 

• Group Procurement Policies and  Authorities 

The Group Procurement Policies and Authorities (GPPA) covers all  types of purchases (capital expenditure, operating expenditure, trade) made by all  businesses in the countries in  which the Group operates. The  GPPA states the key principles and procedures required in the procurement of  goods and services within the  Group. These key principles and procedures shall also serve as  guidelines in establishing the  detailed procurement procedures at all Divisions. 

• Vendor Code of Business Conduct 

Vendors are expected to adhere  to standards of behaviour aligned to promote a fair, honest and ethical business environment. The Group’s Vendor COBC provides a guide on these standards of behaviour when dealing with or  on behalf of the  Group. 

Whistleblowing (WB) Team HR GCAD Line Management Senior Independent Director (SID) WB Team 

> Case to be handled by Line Management Communication received via Whistleblowing Channel In cases where the preliminary findings disclose a possible criminal offence, SID to decide appropriate course of action SID to determine appropriate course of action/ concur with recommendations from Head – GCI Concur with investigation outcome? Is it a Products & Services complaint? If there is a complaint alleging wrongdoing/misconduct/grievance that does not require the involvement of a full investigation by GCAD or HR, it shall be directed to Line Management for full checking and resolution Close case Assign case to Line Management Line Management conducts investigation Communication to be redirected to appropriate recipient If preliminary assessment indicates serious wrongdoing/misconduct, and/or where there are reasonable suspicions that Line Management is implicated/involved/cannot be entrusted with the investigation, case is to be assigned to GCAD Ensure investigation team proceeds with SID’s recommendations Assign case to GCAD Case to be handled at Divisional HR Level GCAD conducts investigation No No Yes Yes No Yes Is it a HR grievance? Preliminary Assessment by WB Team

142 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 

# Statement on Risk Management and Internal  Control • Vendor Letter of Declaration 

The Vendor Letter of Declaration (VLOD) was introduced as one of  the Group’s initiatives to align the Group’s expectations with the behaviours of our suppliers and the principles contained in  the Vendor COBC. The VLOD captures vendors’ formal affirmation to comply with the principles of the Vendor COBC, to  refrain from involvement with any offence of  bribery, corruption or fraud; and  to refrain from engaging in  bribery, corruption or  fraud with  the Group. 

• Regulatory Compliance Monitoring 

The Group’s state of compliance to key regulatory requirements is  monitored to manage potential breaches and to detect incidents which may have a material effect on the annual Statement on Risk Management and Internal Control. 

• Risk Management Policy 

The Group has a formal risk management policy that describes the risk management framework and supporting processes that have been approved by the RMC. Supporting policies, standards and guidelines are also available to  guide decision making. Wherever appropriate, risk management practices are integrated into operating policies, procedures and guidelines. 

• Business Continuity 

Management to ensure that the  Group is able to respond to  and  recover from significant unexpected events, work on BCM  is  ongoing to facilitate the  development of robust policy, frameworks and plans to protect the interests of  all stakeholders. 

• Financial Budgets 

The Group’s Divisions prepare budgets on an annual basis. The  budgets are reviewed by Management prior to submission to the Board for approval. The  Group Management Committee reviews the Division’s financial performance (actual against budget) and forecasts for  the financial year on a regular basis. Additionally, the financial performance of the Group is reported to the Board on a quarterly basis. 

Communication and Reporting • Reporting to Shareholders/ Stakeholders 

External stakeholder relations and communication are given high priority in view of the types of risks faced by the  Group. As  a large government-linked company in Malaysia, an effective external communications strategy is essential to protect the Group’s  reputation. The Group has established processes and procedures to ensure that quarterly and annual audited financial statements which cover the Group’s performance, are submitted to Bursa Securities for release to shareholders and stakeholders on a timely basis. All  quarterly financial results are reviewed and approved by the Board prior to announcement. The Group’s Annual Reports which contain the annual audited  financial statements, together with the auditors’ and  Directors’ reports are issued to the Group’s shareholders within  the stipulated time prescribed under the MMLR of  Bursa Securities. 

Material Joint Venture and  Associates 

The disclosures in this Statement do  not include the risk management and internal controls practices of the  Group’s material joint ventures and associates. The Group’s interests in  these entities are safeguarded through the appointment of members of the Group Management Committee to the respective joint venture and  associate boards, and in certain  cases, the management or  operational committees of these  entities. 

Review of the Statement by the  External Auditors 

As required by Paragraph 15.23 of  the MMLR of Bursa Securities, the  External Auditors have reviewed this  Statement on Risk Management and Internal Control. Their limited assurance review was performed in  accordance with Audit and Assurance Practice Guide (AAPG) 3 issued by the  Malaysian Institute of Accountants. AAPG 3 does not require the  External Auditors to form  an opinion on the adequacy and  effectiveness of the risk management and internal controls systems of the Group. 

Conclusion 

For the financial year under review  and up to the date of approval  of this  Statement, the Board is satisfied  with the adequacy and effectiveness of the Group’s system of risk management and internal controls to  safeguard shareholders’ investments and the  Group’s assets. The Board has  received reasonable assurance from the GCEO and the GCFO that the Group’s risk  management and internal controls system, in all material aspects, are operating adequately and effectively. This statement is prepared in accordance with the Statement on  Risk Management and Internal Control – Guidelines for  Directors of  Listed Issuers (Guidelines) issued  on 31 December 2012, which  is  in line with the requirements of Paragraph 15.26 (b) of the MMLR  of  Bursa Securities and Principle B of  the Malaysian Code  on  Corporate Governance 2017  issued by Securities Commission Malaysia. This statement is made in accordance with a resolution of the  Board dated 28 September 2020. 

> The VLOD is available at www.simedarby.com/sites/ default/files/vlod_eng_2018. pdf
> 143 Governance

1.  Utilisation of Proceeds from Corporate Proposals 

There were no proceeds raised from corporate proposals during the financial year. 

2.  Audit and Non-Audit Fees 

The amount of audit and non-audit (inclusive of assurance related services) fees paid or payable to PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT and member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, the auditors of the Company and Group, for work performed during the financial year are as follows: 

> RM million Audit Work (RM million) Non-Audit Work (RM million)

Company 1 – 1Group 17 3 

> Note: 1. Less than RM1 million

3.  Material Contracts Involving Interests of Directors and Major Shareholders 

There were no material contracts entered into by the Company and/or its subsidiaries involving interests of Directors and major shareholders during the financial year. 

4.  Contracts Relating to Loans 

There were no contracts relating to loans by the Company and/or its subsidiaries involving interests of Directors and major shareholders during the financial year. 

5.  Share Buy-Back 

The Company did not buy back any of its issued shares from the open market during the financial year. 

6.  Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme 

The Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme for the eligible employees (including Executive Directors) of the Company and its subsidiaries (excluding subsidiaries which are dormant) (PBESS) was approved by the shareholders at the Extraordinary General meeting held on 8 November 2012 and effected on 15 January 2013. The  PBESS is in force for a maximum period of ten (10) years from the effective date and is under the administration of  the Nomination & Remuneration Committee of the Board. The grants under the PBESS comprise the Group Performance Share (GPS), the Division Performance Share (DPS) and the  General Employee Share (GES). Brief details of the grants offered since the commencement of the PBESS are set  out below:    

> Grant Date Grant Type Total Executive Director

1st Grant – 7 October 2013 GPS 4,100,000 82,200 DPS 5,537,700 65,300 GES 5,300,500 –2nd Grant – 20 October 2014 GPS 3,899,300 82,200 DPS 5,260,000 65,300 GES 5,422,600 –The 1 st and 2 nd grants were lapsed on 18 August 2016 and 23 August 2017 respectively as the vesting conditions which include performance targets were not met. On 21 November 2018, the GPS Grant, DPS Grant and GES Grant were replaced by the Performance Share (PS) Grant, Restricted Share (RS) Grant and Group Chief Executive Special Grant. The 3 rd and 4 th Grants comprising the PS Grant and RS Grant were made to the eligible employees on 15 January 2019 and 15 January 2020 respectively. The grants shall be vested upon the fulfilment of certain performance criteria by the Company and individuals as at vesting date with potential multiplier effect on the number of shares to be vested.  

> 144 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Additional Compliance Information 

(In accordance with Appendix 9C of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Securities Malaysia Berhad) On 11 November 2019, the Company issued and allotted 608,400 new ordinary shares under the RS Grant of  the  PBESS at an issue price of RM2.293. Following the issuance and allotment, the Company’s issued shares had  increased from 6,800,839,377 ordinary shares to 6,801,447,777 ordinary shares. The number of shares granted and vested under the PBESS and the number of shares outstanding at the end of the financial year are as follows      

> Total Executive Director Description PS RS PS RS

Granted 14,295,900 3,566,600 1,072,100 268,000 Forfeited (956,500) (197,200) – –Vested – (608,400) – (41,400) Outstanding 13,339,400 2,761,000 1,072,100 226,600 The Company did not grant any share pursuant to the PBESS to the Non-Executive Directors. 

7.  Recurrent Related Party Transaction of a Revenue or Trading Nature 

At the Thirteenth AGM held on 14 November 2019, the Company obtained a general mandate from its shareholders for recurrent related party transactions of a revenue or trading nature, to be entered into by the Company and/or its subsidiaries set out in the Circular to Shareholders dated 16 October 2019 (RRPT Mandate). The RRPT Mandate is  valid until the conclusion of the forthcoming Fourteenth AGM of the Company to be held on 12 November 2020. Pursuant to Paragraph 10.09(2)(b) and Paragraph 3.1.5 of Practice Note 12 of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad, details of the recurrent related party transactions of a revenue or trading nature entered into during the financial year ended 30 June 2020 were as follows:   

> No. Transacting companies in our Group Transacting Related Party Nature of Transaction Related Party Value of Transaction RM’ million

Transactions with Sime Darby Plantation Berhad (SD Plantation) and its subsidiaries 

1. Kumpulan Sime Darby Berhad SD Plantation • Leaseback of the Malaysia Vision Valley Land 1 from KSDB to SD Plantation for the SD Plantation Group to  carry out the planting/replanting, maintenance of  oil palm, and the harvesting and selling of  fresh fruit bunches #AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad – Amanah Saham Bumiputera (ASB) 17.4 2. Sime Darby Malaysia Berhad SD Plantation • Grant of a non-exclusive, non-assignable and non-transferable licence to  use the “SIME DARBY” mark, Sime  Darby Shield Device Logo, Shield Device  Logo, Sime Darby in Chinese Characters, the  “DEVELOPING SUSTAINABLE FUTURES” tagline and the “DELIVERING SUSTAINABLE FUTURES” tagline worldwide, solely in the course of or in  connection with SD Plantation’s business 2.0   

> 145 Governance No. Transacting companies in our Group Transacting Related Party Nature of Transaction Related Party Value of Transaction RM’ million

3. Sime Darby Rent-A-Car Sdn Bhd SD Plantation and its subsidiaries • Car rental service income ASB 1.9 4. Sime Darby Auto ConneXion Sdn Bhd SD Plantation and its subsidiaries • Sale of motor vehicles, parts & services 0.5 5. • Sime Darby Industrial Sdn Bhd • Hastings Deering (PNG) Limited • Hastings Deering (Solomon Islands) Limited SD Plantation and its subsidiaries • Sale of heavy equipment and spare parts and provision of maintenance services 17.2 6. • Sime Darby Energy Solutions Sdn Bhd • Mecomb Malaysia Sdn Bhd SD Plantation and its subsidiaries • Provision of engineering maintenance services –37. Hastings Deering (PNG) Limited New Britain Palm Oil Limited, a subsidiary of SD Plantation • Foreign currency payment  arrangement 116.6 Total 145.6  

> 146 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Additional Compliance Information 

(In accordance with Appendix 9C of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Securities Malaysia Berhad) No. Transacting companies in our Group Transacting Related Party Nature of Transaction Related Party Value of Transaction RM’ million Others 

1. Inokom Corporation Sdn Bhd (Inokom) Mazda Malaysia Sdn Bhd (Mazda Malaysia) • Rental income received from Mazda Malaysia ^• Contract manufacturing assembly fee received from Mazda Malaysia Bermaz Auto Berhad (Bermaz) 297.8 Total 97.8 Grand Total 243.4 

Notes: 1 ASB is a Major Shareholder of Sime Darby Berhad, holding 41.83% direct equity interest in Sime Darby. ASB is also a Major Shareholder of SD  Plantation holding 45.22% in SD Plantation as at 30 June 2020. 2 Bermaz is a Major Shareholder of Inokom, holding 29.00% direct interest in Inokom. Bermaz is an indirect Major Shareholder of Mazda Malaysia, holding an effective interest of 30.00% through Bermaz Motor Sdn Bhd, a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of Bermaz as at 30 June 2020. 3 Less than RM0.1 million.  

> ^

Lands held under H.S. (D) 4103, PT No 439 and H.S. (D) 4104, PT No 440, Mukim Padang Meha, Kulim, Kedah bearing postal address at Lot 38, Mukim Padang Meha, 09400 Padang Serai, Kulim, Kedah. The duration of the rental is 10 years (on a 3-year term basis for 3 terms and 1 year extended term). The payment is made on a monthly basis.  

> #

Location  : 29 plots of agricultural land with development potential with a total land area of 3,518 hectares in Labu, Negeri Sembilan. 

Term  : Original fixed period of 3 years from 30 June 2017 to 29 June 2020. Agreement has been extended by another 3 years from 

30 June 2020 to 29 June 2023. 

Rental Formula  : The preceding month’s average price of crude palm oil (CPO) per metric tonne for Malaysia x total planted area (in hectares)/12. 

Average price of CPO refers to average Malaysian Palm Oil Board delivered CPO price. 

Payment Term  : Monthly basis on or before the seventh (7 th ) day of each calendar month. The Company proposes to seek a renewal of the existing RRPT Mandate and a new mandate for additional recurrent related party transactions of a revenue or trading nature at its forthcoming Fourteenth AGM. The renewal of the existing RRPT Mandate and the new mandate, if approved by the shareholders, will be valid until the conclusion of  the Company’s next AGM. Details of the RRPT Mandate and the new mandate being sought are provided in the Circular to Shareholders dated 14 October 2020. 

147 Governance The Directors are responsible for  the  preparation, integrity and 

fair presentation of the annual financial statements of the Sime Darby Berhad Group. As required by  the Companies Act, 2016 (Act) and the Main Market Listing Requirements of  Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad, the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2020, as  presented on  pages 164 to 291, have been prepared in accordance with the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards, International Financial Reporting Standards and the requirements of the Act. The Directors consider that in preparing the financial statements, the Group and the Company have used the appropriate accounting policies, consistently applied and supported by reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates. The Directors are satisfied that the  information contained in the financial statements give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and of the Company at the  end of the financial year and the financial performance the Group and the Company for the financial year. The Directors have responsibility for  ensuring that proper accounting records are kept. The accounting records should disclose with reasonable accuracy the financial position of the Group and of the Company to enable the Directors to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Act. The Directors have the general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets  of the Group and Company to  prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities. This statement is made in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors dated 28 September 2020. 

Board Approval of Financial  Statements 

The annual financial statements for  the financial year ended 30 June 2020 are set out on pages 164 to 291. The  preparation thereof  was supervised by the Group  Chief Financial Officer and approved by  the Board of Directors on 28  September 2020.  

> 148 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

# Statement of Responsibility by  the Board of Directors Directors’ Report 150 Statement by Directors 155 Statutory Declaration 155 Independent Auditors’ Report 156 Statements of Profit or Loss 164 Statements of Comprehensive Income 165 Statements of Financial Position 166 Statements of Changes in Equity 168 Statements of Cash Flows 171 Notes to the Financial Statements 175 

# Contents 

# FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Directors’ Report 

The Directors have the pleasure of presenting their report together with the audited financial statements of the Group and of the Company for the financial year ended 30 June 2020. 

PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES 

The Company is principally an investment holding company. There has been no significant change in the principal activity of the Company during the financial year. The principal activities and details of the subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are disclosed in Note 54 to the financial statements. 

FINANCIAL RESULTS 

The results of the Group and of the Company for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 were as follows: 

> Group RM million Company RM million

Profit before interest and tax 1,407 717 Finance income 51 –1Finance costs (183) –1Profit before tax 1,275 717 Taxation (402) –1Profit for the financial year 873 717 Profit for the financial year attributable to owners of: – the Company 820 717 – non-controlling interests 53 –Profit for the financial year 873 717 1 Less than RM1 million 

DIVIDENDS 

Since the end of the previous financial year, the Company had paid the following dividends: 

> RM million

a. In respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2019, a second interim dividend of 7.0 sen per share and special dividend of 1.0 sen per share were paid on 31 October 2019; and 544 b. In respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2020, an interim dividend of 2.0 sen per share was paid on 12 May 2020 136 680 The Board of Directors has declared a second interim dividend of 7.0 sen per ordinary share amounting to RM476 million and a special dividend of 1.0 sen per ordinary share amounting to RM68 million in respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2020. The dividends will be paid on 30 October 2020.  

> 150 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

RESERVES AND PROVISIONS 

All material transfers to or from reserves and provisions during the financial year are shown in the financial statements. 

SHARE CAPITAL AND DEBENTURES 

During the financial year, the Company issued 608,400 new ordinary shares under the Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme (“PBESS”) as disclosed in the PBESS paragraph of this report and Note 37 of the financial statements. With the allotment of the new shares, the Company’s issued and paid-up capital has increased from 6,800,839,377 ordinary shares to 6,801,447,777 ordinary shares. There were no other issuance of shares or debentures during the financial year. 

PERFORMANCE-BASED EMPLOYEE SHARE SCHEME 

The Company’s PBESS is governed by the by-laws approved by the shareholders at the Extraordinary General Meeting held on 8 November 2012 and was effected on 15 January 2013. Under the PBESS, ordinary shares in the Company are granted to eligible employees and executive directors of the Group. The PBESS is in force for a maximum period of ten (10) years from the effective date and is administered by the Nomination & Remuneration Committee (“NRC”). On 15 January 2020, the Company offered the fourth Grant Offer of ordinary shares of the Company under the PBESS which comprised the Performance Share (“PS”) Grant and Restricted Share (“RS”) Grant. The salient features of the PBESS and the vesting conditions are disclosed in Note 37 to the financial statements. On 11 November 2019, the Company issued 608,400 new ordinary shares under the PBESS for RS Grant at an issue price of RM2.293. With the allotment of the new shares, the Company’s issued and paid-up capital has increased from 6,800,839,377 ordinary shares to 6,801,447,777 ordinary shares. The number of shares granted under the PBESS and the number of shares outstanding at the end of the financial year are as follows: Third grant Grant date: 15 January 2019  

> PS RS

At 1 July 2019 7,656,800 1,910,100 Forfeited (807,100) (159,900) Vested – (608,400) At 30 June 2020 6,849,700 1,141,800 Fourth grant Grant date: 15 January 2020  

> PS RS

Granted 6,489,700 1,619,200 At 30 June 2020 6,489,700 1,619,200 

> 151 Financial Statements

Directors 

The Directors who held office since the end of the previous financial year up to the date of the report are as follows: Tan Sri Samsudin Osman Datuk Wan Selamah Wan Sulaiman Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz Dato’ Ahmad Pardas Senin Thayaparan Sangarapillai Dato’ Lawrence Lee Cheow Hock Moy Pui Yee Mohamad Idros Mosin Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon (Appointed on 15 November 2019) Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir (Appointed on 1 September 2020) Dato’ Abdul Rahman Ahmad (Appointed on 1 September 2019 and resigned on 10 June 2020) Dato Sri Lim Haw Kuang (Retired on 14 November 2019) Tan Sri Dato’ Sri Dr Wan Abdul Aziz Wan Abdullah (Retired on 31 October 2019) The names of Directors of subsidiaries are set out in the respective subsidiaries’ financial statements, where applicable, and the said information is deemed incorporated herein by such reference and made a part hereof. 

Directors’ Benefits 

During and at the end of the financial year, no arrangements subsisted to which the Company is a party, with the object or objects of enabling Directors of the Company to acquire benefits by means of the acquisition of shares in, or debentures of, the Company or any other body corporate other than those arising from the PBESS as disclosed in the Directors’ Interests in Shares. Since the end of the previous financial year, no Director has received or become entitled to receive a benefit (other than benefits disclosed as Directors’ remuneration in Note 8 to the financial statements) by reason of a contract made by the Company or a related corporation with the Director or with a firm of which he or she is a member, or with a company in which he or she has a substantial financial interest except for any benefits which may be deemed to have arisen from the transactions disclosed in Note 8 to the financial statements. The Directors and officers of the Group and of the Company are covered by Directors and Officers liability insurance for any liability incurred in the discharge of their duties, provided that they have not acted fraudulently or dishonestly or derived any personal profit or advantage. The insurance premium paid during the financial year amounted to RM0.4 million, which covers the period up to November 2020 (2019: RM0.4 million, which includes the period up to November 2019). 

Directors’ Interests in Shares 

According to the Register of Directors’ Shareholdings, the interest of Directors in office at the end of the financial year in shares or debentures of the Company were as follows:  

> As at 1 July 2019 Addition As at 30 June 2020

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson – 41,400 1 41,400 1 Shares vested pursuant to the PBESS    

> Number of ordinary shares granted under PBESS Grant Date Grant Type As at 1 July 2019 Vested Granted As at 30 June 2020

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 15 January 2019 PS RS 497,700 124,400 –(41,400) ––497,700 83,000 15 January 2020 PS RS ––––574,400 143,600 574,400 143,600 

# Directors’ Report 152 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

Statutory Information on the Financial Statements 

a. Before the financial statements of the Group and of the Company were prepared, the Directors took reasonable steps: i. to ascertain that proper action had been taken in relation to the writing off of bad debts and the making of provision for doubtful debts, and satisfied themselves that all known bad debts had been written off and adequate provision had been made for doubtful debts; and ii. to ensure that any current assets, which were unlikely to be realised in the ordinary course of business including the values of current assets as shown in the accounting records of the Group and of the Company, had been written down to an amount which the current assets might be expected so to realise. b. At the date of this Report, the Directors are not aware of any circumstances: i. which would render the amount written off for bad debts or the amount of provision for doubtful debts in the financial statements of the Group and of the Company inadequate to any substantial extent; or ii. which would render the values attributed to current assets in the financial statements of the Group and of the Company misleading; or iii. which have arisen which would render adherence to the existing method of valuation of assets or liabilities of the Group and of the Company misleading or inappropriate. c. As at the date of this Report: i. there are no charges on the assets of the Group and of the Company which have arisen since the end of the financial year which secures the liabilities of any other person; and ii. there are no material contingent liabilities in the Group and in the Company which have arisen since the end of the financial year. d. No contingent or other liability of any company in the Group has become enforceable or is likely to become enforceable within the period of twelve months after the end of the financial year which, in the opinion of the Directors, will or may affect the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to meet their obligations when they fall due. e. At the date of this Report, the Directors are not aware of any circumstances not otherwise dealt with in this report or the financial statements of the Group and of the Company which would render any amount stated in the respective financial statements misleading. f. In the opinion of the Directors: i. the results of the operations of the Group and of the Company during the financial year were not substantially affected by any item, transaction or event of a material and unusual nature other than as disclosed in Notes 4, 11, 12, 13, 26 and 45 of the financial statements; and ii. there has not arisen in the interval between the end of the financial year and the date of this report any item, transaction or event of a material and unusual nature likely to affect substantially the results of the operations of the Group and of the Company for the financial year in which this report is made. 

Immediate and Ultimate Holding Companies 

The Directors regard Permodalan Nasional Berhad as the Group’s immediate holding company and Yayasan Pelaburan Bumiputra as its ultimate holding company. Both companies are incorporated in Malaysia. 

> 153 Financial Statements

Auditors’ Remuneration 

Details of auditors’ remuneration are set out in Note 9 of the financial statements. 

Auditors 

The auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT (LLP0014401-LCA & AF 1146), have expressed their willingness to accept re-appointment as auditors. This report was approved by the Board of Directors on 28 September 2020. Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors: 

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Chairman Executive Director/Group Chief Executive Officer Petaling Jaya Selangor 28 September 2020 

# Directors’ Report  

> 154 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

We, Tan Sri Samsudin Osman and Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson, two of the Directors of Sime Darby Berhad, do hereby state that, in the opinion of the Directors, the financial statements set out on pages 164 to 291 are drawn up, in accordance with the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards, International Financial Reporting Standards and the requirements of the Companies Act 2016, so as to give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and of the Company as at 30 June 2020 and of the financial performance of the Group and of the Company for the financial year ended on that date. Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors in accordance with a resolution of the Directors dated 28 September 2020. 

Tan Sri Samsudin Osman Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Chairman Executive Director/Group Chief Executive Officer Petaling Jaya Selangor 28 September 2020 

# Statutory Declaration 

Pursuant to Section 251(1) of the Companies Act 2016 I, Mustamir Mohamad, the officer primarily responsible for the financial management of Sime Darby Berhad, do solemnly and sincerely declare that the financial statements set out on pages 164 to 291 are, to the best of my knowledge and belief, correct, and I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of the Statutory Declarations Act, 1960. 

Mustamir Mohamad 

(MIA No. 15302) Group Chief Financial Officer Subscribed and solemnly declared by the abovenamed Mustamir Mohamad, at Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia on 28 September 2020. Before me, 

Shahrudin bin Esa 

Commissioner for Oaths (No. B520) Petaling Jaya Selangor 

# Statement by Directors 

Pursuant to Section 251(2) of the Companies Act 2016 

> 155 Financial Statements

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements 

Our opinion In our opinion, the financial statements of Sime Darby Berhad (“the Company”) and its subsidiaries (“the Group”) give a true and fair view of the financial position of the Group and of the Company as at 30 June 2020, and of their financial performance and their cash flows for the financial year then ended in accordance with Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards, International Financial Reporting Standards and the requirements of the Companies Act 2016 in Malaysia. What we have audited We have audited the financial statements of the Group and of the Company, which comprise the statements of financial position as at 30 June 2020 of the Group and of the Company, and the statements of profit or loss, statements of comprehensive income, statements of changes in equity and statements of cash flows of the Group and of the Company for the financial year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies, as set out on pages 164 to 291. Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with approved standards on auditing in Malaysia and International Standards on Auditing. Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the “Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements” section of our report. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. Independence and other ethical responsibilities We are independent of the Group and of the Company in accordance with the By-Laws (on Professional Ethics, Conduct and Practice) of the Malaysian Institute of Accountants (“By-Laws”) and the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (“IESBA Code”), and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the By-Laws and the IESBA Code. Our audit approach As part of designing our audit, we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements of the Group and of the Company. In particular, we considered where the Directors made subjective judgements; for example, in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain. As in all of our audits, we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls, including among other matters, consideration of whether there was evidence of bias that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud. We tailored the scope of our audit in order to perform sufficient work to enable us to provide an opinion on the financial statements as a whole, taking into account the structure of the Group and of the Company, the accounting processes and controls, and the industry in which the Group and the Company operate. 

# Independent Auditors’ Report 

To the Members of Sime Darby Berhad (Incorporated in Malaysia) Registration No. 200601032645 (752404 U)  

> 156 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company for the current financial year. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.  

> Key audit matters How our audit addressed the key audit matters

Recoverability of investments in joint ventures in the Logistics Division The carrying amounts of the Group’s investment in two of its joint ventures, namely Weifang Port Services Co., Ltd (“WPS”) and Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co., Ltd (“WSDLT”) as at 30 June 2020 amounted to RM nil million and RM230 million respectively. During the financial year, the Group has fully impaired its investment in WPS of RM74 million and receivables from WPS of RM24 million. The Group has also recognised an impairment loss of RM22 million on its investment in WSDLT. We focused on the recoverability of the Group’s carrying amounts on its investments in WPS and WSDLT due to the significant estimates and judgement involved in determining the key assumptions used in deriving the recoverable amounts of the investments. For WPS, management made a judgement that WPS will not have excess cash inflows from the potential disposal of sea-use-rights after the eventual settlement of an outstanding legal claim by its vendor. In addition, the channel operation business will be impacted by the local operating conditions resulting in the inability to be profitable. Management performed the impairment assessment of the investment in WSDLT based on the fair value less cost to sell method determined using the discounted cash flow projection where the key inputs are based on the budget approved by the Directors of the Group. The key assumptions used in the cash flow projections are growth rates for revenue, port operation cost and overhead, and the discount rate. Refer to Notes 4(c), 12 and 30 to the financial statements. For WPS, we compared the estimated proceeds from disposal of sea-use-rights to a quotation received from third party for comparable sea-use-rights owned by WPS and discussion with local authority. We checked the potential settlement of the outstanding legal claim by WPS’s vendor to the court final adjudication issued by the Qingdao Maritime Court. We checked the mathematical accuracy of the interest charges on the outstanding legal claim computed by management. We have also discussed with the Logistics Division and Group management on the future business plans for WPS. For WSDLT, we agreed the discounted cash flow projections of the investments to the cash flow projections approved by the Directors of the Group. We evaluated the reasonableness of the key assumptions used by management in the cash flow projections by comparing the growth rates for revenue, port operation cost and overhead to historical results, market data where available and inflationary rates in China. We also compared the increase in sales volume and price escalation in the cash flow projections, being the two primary driving factors of revenue growth, to historical trends. We involved our internal valuation expert to assess the discount rate used in determining the recoverable amount of investment in WSDLT and the appropriateness of the valuation methodology adopted by management in their cash flow projections. We assessed the appropriateness of sensitivity analysis performed by management, including the disclosures, on a reasonable possible change in the key assumptions and the corresponding effect on the recoverable amount. Based on the above procedures performed, we did not note any material exceptions to the Directors’ assessment on the impairment of investments in joint ventures totalling RM96 million and impairment of receivables of RM24 million as at 30 June 2020. 

> 157 Financial Statements

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Key audit matters (continued)  

> Key audit matters How our audit addressed the key audit matters

Recoverability of carrying amount of intangible assets in the Industrial operations in Australasia Intangible assets of the Group as at 30 June 2020 included Bucyrus distribution rights and goodwill of RM708 million and RM40 million respectively, which are allocated to the heavy equipment business within the Industrial operations in Australasia. We focused on the recoverability of the carrying amount of intangible assets arising from the heavy equipment business in Australasia within the Industrial segment due to the significant estimates involved in determining the key assumptions used in deriving the recoverable amounts of the cash-generating units (“CGUs”), i.e. revenue growth, earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (“EBITDA”) growth rate, terminal growth rate and discount rate. Management performed impairment assessments of the CGUs based on the value-in-use determined using the discounted cash flow projections based on the budgets approved by the Directors of the Group. Management has prepared the cash flow projections considering actual historical results, current available information such as the outcome of tender processes, secured contracts or latest available market information. Based on management’s assessment, the Directors are of the opinion that the carrying amount of the intangible assets is recoverable. Refer to Notes 4(a) and 23 to the financial statements. We evaluated the reasonableness of the key assumptions used by management in the approved cash flow projections by comparing the revenue growth rate, EBITDA growth rate and terminal growth rate to historical results and industry data, where appropriate. We assessed the reliability of management’s forecast by comparing their previous years’ forecasted results against past trends of actual results. We involved our valuation expert to assess the discount rate used in determining the recoverable amounts of the CGUs. We checked the appropriateness of sensitivity analysis performed by management, including the disclosures in the financial statements. Based on the above procedures performed, we did not note any material exceptions to the Directors’ assessment on the recoverability of carrying amount of intangible assets in the Industrial operations in Australasia as at 30 June 2020. 

# Independent Auditors’ Report 

To the Members of Sime Darby Berhad (Incorporated in Malaysia) Registration No. 200601032645 (752404 U)  

> 158 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Key audit matters (continued)  

> Key audit matters How our audit addressed the key audit matters

Recoverability of financial asset from a joint venture, Mine Energy Solution Pty Ltd During the financial year, the Group has fully impaired its shareholder’s loan extended to its joint venture, Mine Energy Solutions Pty Ltd (“MES”) of RM72 million. The shareholder’s loan was classified as a financial asset at fair value through profit and loss (“FVTPL”) in the financial statements of the Group. We focused on the recoverability of the financial asset due to the significant estimate and judgement involved in determining the key assumptions used in deriving the recoverable amounts of the financial asset i.e. the eventual commercialisation and the net cash flows derived thereon for the projects in MES. Management determined the fair value of the financial asset based on the probability weighted discounted cash flows calculated under several scenarios, that were approved by the Directors of the Group. Based on management’s assessment, the Directors have fully impaired the financial assets. Refer to Notes 4(e) and 26 to the financial statements. We reviewed the multiple scenarios fair value model of the shareholder’s loan to MES which was developed by management. We evaluated the reasonableness of the key assumptions and the probability weighting applied for the difference scenarios developed by management. We enquired management of MES to obtain an understanding of the status of the ongoing project and corroborated those facts with the assumptions that were used by management in the fair value model. We performed a look back assessment and compared the status of the project in the current financial year to the previous financial year. Based on the above procedures performed, we did not note any material exceptions to the Directors’ assessment on the recoverability of the shareholder’s loan to MES as at 30 June 2020. 

> 159 Financial Statements

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Key audit matters (continued)  

> Key audit matters How our audit addressed the key audit matters

Acquisition of dealerships from Gough Group Limited and Inchcape Australia Limited On 30 September 2019, the Group completed the acquisition of Gough Group Limited (“GGL”) for a purchase consideration of RM574 million. On 2 December 2019, the Group acquired business assets and properties of three luxury car dealerships (collectively “Sydney dealerships”) from Inchcape Australia Limited for a purchase consideration of RM440 million. Management assessed that the acquisitions of GGL and Sydney dealerships qualify as business combinations based on MFRS 3 “Business Combination”. Management performed a purchase price allocation (“PPA”) and determined that the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired from GGL is RM574 million, resulting in no goodwill. The fair value adjustments to the net assets acquired from GGL amounted to RM17 million. Based on the PPA for the Sydney dealerships, management determined that the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired from the Sydney dealerships is RM425 million, of which RM57 million relates to dealership rights, which are classified as intangible assets. Goodwill recognised on the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships as at 30 June 2020 amounted to RM15 million. We focused on the acquisition of GGL due to its significance to the financial statements of the Group. We focused on the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships as the determination of the dealership rights is a significant area of judgement. The goodwill arising from the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships is also highly dependent on the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Refer to Notes 4(d), 23 and 45 to the financial statements. We obtained management’s assessments that the acquisitions of GGL and the Sydney dealerships qualify as business combinations in accordance with the definition in MFRS 3. We assessed the appropriateness of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date by reading the clauses set out in the respective Share Purchase Agreements and discussions with management. We agreed the final purchase consideration to the respective Share Purchase Agreements. We obtained the PPA report for the acquisition of GGL which was prepared by an external party. We assessed the competency, capabilities and objectivity of management’s expert who prepared the PPA report by considering their professional background, reputation and experience in similar industry. We involved our valuation expert to assess the appropriateness of the methodology adopted by management in the PPA of GGL assessments. We also involved our tax experts to assess the tax implications arising from the acquisition of GGL. We also obtained the PPA assessment for the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships which was prepared by management and incorporating assessment on the fair value of the identified dealership rights performed by an external party. We assessed the competency, capabilities and objectivity of management and their expert in the preparation of the PPA assessment by considering their respective professional background and experience. We assessed the basis for determining the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities assumed at the respective dates of acquisition and the appropriateness of the discount rate used, where applicable. We tested the calculation of goodwill arising from the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships, being the difference between the total purchase consideration and the fair value of net identifiable assets. Based on the above procedures performed, we did not note any material exceptions to the Directors’ recognition of identifiable assets and liabilities including intangible assets arising from the acquisitions of GGL and the Sydney dealerships as at 30 June 2020. There are no key audit matters to report for the Company. 

# Independent Auditors’ Report 

To the Members of Sime Darby Berhad (Incorporated in Malaysia) Registration No. 200601032645 (752404 U)  

> 160 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Information other than the financial statements and auditors’ report thereon The Directors of the Company are responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Group Chief Executive Officer’s Review, Creating Sustainable Value segment, Chairman’s Statement on Corporate Governance, Nomination & Remuneration Committee Report, Governance & Audit Committee Report, Risk Management Committee Report, Statement on Risk Management and Internal Control, Statement of Responsibility by the Board of Directors, and Directors’ Report, which we obtained prior to the date of this auditors’ report, and the rest of the Annual Report 2020 of Sime Darby Berhad, which is expected to be made available to us after that date. Other information does not include the financial statements of the Group and of the Company and our auditors’ report thereon. Our opinion on the financial statements of the Group and of the Company does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. In connection with our audit of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company, our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements of the Group and of the Company or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed on the other information that we obtained prior to the date of this auditors’ report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements The Directors of the Company are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company that give a true and fair view in accordance with Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards, International Financial Reporting Standards and the requirements of the Companies Act 2016 in Malaysia. The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements of the Group and of the Company that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. In preparing the financial statements of the Group and of the Company, the Directors are responsible for assessing the Group’s and the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements of the Group and of the Company as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors’ report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with approved standards on auditing in Malaysia and International Standards on Auditing will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements. 

> 161 Financial Statements

Report on the Audit of the Financial Statements (continued) 

Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements (continued) As part of an audit in accordance with approved standards on auditing in Malaysia and International Standards on Auditing, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also: a. Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. b. Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s and of the Company’s internal control. c. Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the Directors. d. Conclude on the appropriateness of the Directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s or on the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditors’ report to the related disclosures in the financial statements of the Group and of the Company or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditors’ report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group or the Company to cease to continue as a going concern. e. Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements of the Group and of the Company, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements of the Group and of the Company represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. f. Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the financial statements of the Group. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. We communicate with the Directors regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. We also provide the Directors with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, related safeguards. 

# Independent Auditors’ Report 

To the Members of Sime Darby Berhad (Incorporated in Malaysia) Registration No. 200601032645 (752404 U)  

> 162 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements 

In accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2016 in Malaysia, we report that the subsidiaries of which we have not acted as auditors, are disclosed in Note 54 to the financial statements. 

Other Matters 

This report is made solely to the members of the Company, as a body, in accordance with Section 266 of the Companies Act 2016 in Malaysia and for no other purpose. We do not assume responsibility to any other person for the content of this report. 

PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS PLT PAULINE HO 

LLP0014401-LCA & AF 1146 02684/11/2021 J Chartered Accountants Chartered Accountant Kuala Lumpur 28 September 2020      

> 163 Financial Statements Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019

Revenue 6 36,934 36,156 766 742 Operating expenses 7 (35,703) (34,937) (49) (46) Other operating income 10 342 268 – 1 –1Other (losses) and gains 11 (60) 55 – –

Operating profit 1,513 1,542 717 696 Share of results of joint ventures 12 (62) (62) – –Share of results of associates 13 (44) (97) – –Profit before interest and tax 1,407 1,383 717 696 Finance income 14 51 32 – 1 1Finance costs 15 (183) (124) – 1 –

Profit before tax 1,275 1,291 717 697 Taxation 16 (402) (281) – 1 (6) 

Profit for the financial year 873 1,010 717 691 Profit for the financial year attributable to owners of: – the Company 820 948 717 691 – non-controlling interests 53 62 – –

873 1,010 717 691  

> Sen Sen

Basic and diluted earnings per share attributable to owners of the Company: 12.1 13.9 1 Less than RM1 million The weighted average number of ordinary shares used to calculate the basic earnings per share was 6,801 million (2019: 6,801 million). The diluted earnings per share of the Group is equal to the basic earnings per share as the Group does not have any material potential dilutive ordinary shares in issue. 

# Statements of Profit or Loss 

For the financial year ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated The notes on pages 175 to 291 form an integral part of these financial statements. 

164 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019 Profit for the financial year 873 1,010 717 691 

Other comprehensive income/(loss): 

Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Currency translation differences 133 (59) – –Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates 4 2 – –Net change in fair value of cash flow hedges 19 (4) – –Taxation (5) 2 – –

151 (59) – –Reclassified to profit or loss: – currency translation differences on: – repayment of net investments (7) (3) – –– disposal/liquidation of subsidiaries – 5 – –– changes in fair value of cash flow hedges as adjustment to revenue and other gains and losses (1) 12 – –Reclassification of changes in fair value of cash flow hedges to inventories (7) 3 – –Taxation 2 (2) – –

138 (44) – –Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Actuarial loss on defined benefit pension plans (4) – – –Share of actuarial gain on defined benefit pension plans of a joint venture 1 2 – –

(3) 2 – –Total other comprehensive income/(loss) 18 135 (42) – –Total comprehensive income for the financial year 1,008 968 717 691 Total comprehensive income for the financial year attributable to owners of: – the Company 954 907 717 691 – non-controlling interests 54 61 – –

1,008 968 717 691 

# Statements of Comprehensive Income 

For the financial year ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated The notes on pages 175 to 291 form an integral part of these financial statements.      

> 165 Financial Statements Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019

NON-CURRENT ASSETS 

Property, plant and equipment 19 6,010 5,727 – –Right-of-use assets 20 2,395 – – 1 –Prepaid lease rentals 21 – 292 – –Investment properties 22 296 286 – –Intangible assets 23 1,596 1,484 – –Subsidiaries 24 – – 8,887 3,890 Joint ventures 12 993 1,145 – –Associates 13 351 433 – –Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 26 22 87 – –Deferred tax assets 27 613 542 – –Tax recoverable 28 46 65 – –Derivative assets 29 – 2 – –Receivables and other assets 30 230 283 – –

12,552 10,346 8,887 3,890 

CURRENT ASSETS 

Inventories 31 8,346 8,538 – –Receivables and other assets 30 4,042 4,120 1 2Contract assets 32 54 46 – –Amounts due from subsidiaries 25 – – 969 5,897 Prepayments 33 423 563 – –Tax recoverable 28 56 72 – 1Derivative assets 29 3 6 – –Bank balances, deposits and cash 34 1,694 1,723 130 150 

14,618 15,068 1,100 6,050 

Assets held for sale 35 103 102 – –

TOTAL ASSETS 27,273 25,516 9,987 9,940 1 Less than RM1 million 

# Statements of Financial Position 

As at 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

166 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019 EQUITY 

Share capital 36 9,300 9,299 9,300 9,299 Reserves 38 540 380 15 6Retained profits 5,157 5,034 670 633 

ATTRIBUTABLE TO OWNERS OF THE COMPANY 14,997 14,713 9,985 9,938 Non-controlling interests 39 416 405 – –

TOTAL EQUITY 15,413 15,118 9,985 9,938 

NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES 

Borrowings 40 110 178 – –Lease liabilities 41 1,438 – – 1 –Payables and other liabilities 42 21 10 – –Contract liabilities 32 147 169 – –Government grants 43 153 152 – –Provisions 44 22 16 – –Deferred tax liabilities 27 331 289 – –

2,222 814 – –

CURRENT LIABILITIES 

Borrowings 40 2,121 2,397 – –Lease liabilities 41 376 – – 1 –Derivative liabilities 29 6 18 – –Payables and other liabilities 42 4,317 4,647 2 2Contract liabilities 32 2,128 1,991 – –Provisions 44 417 405 – –Tax payable 273 126 – –

9,638 9,584 2 2

TOTAL LIABILITIES 11,860 10,398 2 2

TOTAL EQUITY AND LIABILITIES 27,273 25,516 9,987 9,940 1 Less than RM1 million The notes on pages 175 to 291 form an integral part of these financial statements. 

> 167 Financial Statements

Group 2020 Note Share capital Reserves 1Retained profits Attributable to owners of the Company Non-controlling interests Total Equity 

At 1 July 2019 9,299 380 5,034 14,713 405 15,118 

Profit for the financial year – – 820 820 53 873 

Other comprehensive income/(loss) for the financial year 18 – 137 (3) 134 1 135 

Total comprehensive income for the financial year – 137 817 954 54 1,008 

Transfer between reserves 2 – 14 (14) – – –

Acquisition of a non-wholly owned subsidiary – – – – 3 3

Performance-based employee share scheme – 10 – 10 – 10 

Issuance of shares under the performance-based employee share scheme 1 (1) – – – –

Transactions with owners: – acquisition of non-controlling interests – – – – (1) (1) 

– capital repayment by a non-wholly owned subsidiary – – – – (8) (8) 

– dividends paid by way of cash 17 – – (680) (680) (27) (707) 

– dividends payable – – – – (10) (10) 

At 30 June 2020 9,300 540 5,157 14,997 416 15,413  

> 1

An analysis of the movements in each category within reserves is disclosed in Note 38. 2 Reclassification from retained profits to legal and capital reserves to reflect the restricted nature of the reserves at subsidiaries. 

# Statements of Changes in Equity 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

168 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Group 2019 Note Share capital Reserves 1Retained profits Attributable to owners of the Company Non-controlling interests Total Equity 

At 1 July 2018, as previously stated 9,299 341 4,730 14,370 389 14,759 Effects of adoption of MFRS 9 – (3) (19) (22) – (22) Restated as at 1 July 2018 9,299 338 4,711 14,348 389 14,737 Profit for the financial year – – 948 948 62 1,010 Other comprehensive (loss)/income for the financial year 18 – (43) 2 (41) (1) (42) Total comprehensive (loss)/income for the financial year – (43) 950 907 61 968 Transfer between reserves 2 – 94 (94) – – –Reclassification upon disposal of a subsidiary – (15) 15 – – –Acquisition of non-wholly owned subsidiary – – – – 5 5Disposal of non-wholly owned subsidiary – – – – (4) (4) Performance-based employee share scheme – 6 – 6 – 6Transactions with owners: – issue of shares in a subsidiary – – – – 2 2– acquisition of non-controlling interests – – (4) (4) 1 (3) – dividends paid by way of cash 17 – – (544) (544) (49) (593) At 30 June 2019 9,299 380 5,034 14,713 405 15,118 1 An analysis of the movements in each category within reserves is disclosed in Note 38. 2 Reclassification from retained profits to legal and capital reserves to reflect the restricted nature of the reserves at subsidiaries.  

> 169 Financial Statements Company 2020 Note Share capital Share grant reserve Retained profits Total equity attributable to owners of the Company

2020 

At 1 July 2019 9,299 6 633 9,938 

Profit for the financial year – – 717 717 

Performance-based employee share scheme – 10 – 10 

Issuance of shares under the performance-based employee share scheme 1 (1) – –

Transaction with owners: – dividends paid by way of cash 17 – – (680) (680) 

At 30 June 2020 9,300 15 670 9,985 2019 

At 1 July 2018 9,299 – 486 9,785 Profit for the financial year – – 691 691 Performance-based employee share scheme – 6 – 6Transaction with owners: – dividends paid by way of cash 17 – – (544) (544) At 30 June 2019 9,299 6 633 9,938 

# Statements of Changes in Equity 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated The notes on pages 175 to 291 form an integral part of these financial statements.      

> 170 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020 Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

Cash flow from operating activities Profit for the financial year 873 1,010 717 691 Adjustments for: – dividend from subsidiaries – – (766) (742) – dividend income from financial assets (120) (135) – –– share of results of joint ventures and associates 106 159 – –– finance income (51) (32) – 1 (1) – finance costs 183 124 –1 –– taxation 402 281 – 1 6– gain on disposals and compensation (net) (43) (122) – –– impairment losses/(reversal of impairment losses) on receivables and loans to joint venture (net) 72 (4) – –– impairment losses on non-financial assets (net) 20 1 – –– depreciation and amortisation 1,053 598 – –– inventory writedown and provision (net) 242 225 – –– fair value loss on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 72 47 – –– other non-cash items 21 26 – –

2,830 2,178 (49) (46) Changes in working capital: – inventories 947 (1,085) – –– rental assets (677) (710) – –– receivables and other assets 465 459 1 2– payables and other liabilities (524) 652 – (3) Cash generated from/(used in) operations 3,041 1,494 (48) (47) Tax (paid)/refunded (269) (289) 1 (6) Dividends received from: – subsidiaries – – 828 592 – joint ventures and associates 120 12 – –– financial assets 120 135 – –Net cash flow from operating activities 3,012 1,352 781 539 1 Less than RM1 million 

# Statements of Cash Flows 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated      

> 171 Financial Statements Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019

Cash flow from investing activities Finance income received 36 25 – –Proceeds from sale of: – property, plant and equipment 62 42 – –– other non-financial assets 23 32 – –Net cash inflow from disposal of subsidiaries 1 278 – –Purchase of: – property, plant and equipment 19(d) (526) (360) – –– other non financial assets (30) (17) – –Additions to financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (8) (17) – –Subscription of shares in subsidiaries – – – (300) Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 45 (990) (182) – –Subscription of shares in joint ventures (2) (12) – –(Advances to)/settlement by subsidiaries (net) – – (126) 290 Repayment of loans by joint ventures 3 9 – –Loans to joint ventures (20) – – –Capital repayment by an associate 24 – – –

Net cash flow used in investing activities (1,427) (202) (126) (10) 

# Statements of Cash Flows 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated       

> 172 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020 Group Company Note 2020 2019 2020 2019

Cash flow from financing activities Proceeds from shares issued to non-controlling interest – 2 – –Proceeds from performance-based employee share scheme – – 5 2Purchase of additional interest in subsidiaries (1) (44) – –Capital repayment by a subsidiary (8) – – –Finance costs paid (116) (143) – –Long term borrowings raised 19 – – –Long term borrowings repaid (72) (288) – –Short term loans raised 887 – – –Short term loans repaid (206) – – –Short term Islamic financing and other short term borrowings repaid (net) (943) (97) – –Repayment of lease liabilities (447) – – –Dividends paid to shareholders (680) (544) (680) (544) Dividends paid to non-controlling interests (27) (49) – –

Net cash used in financing activities (1,594) (1,163) (675) (542) Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents (9) (13) (20) (13) Foreign exchange differences 30 13 – –Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the financial year 1,629 1,629 150 163 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the financial year [note (a)] 1,650 1,629 130 150 

a. Cash and cash equivalents at end of the financial year: 

Bank balances, deposits and cash 34 1,694 1,723 130 150 Bank overdrafts 40 (44) (94) – –Cash and cash equivalents 1,650 1,629 130 150 

> 173 Financial Statements

b. Reconciliation of liabilities arising from financing activities of the Group 2020 2019 Borrowings Lease liabilities Borrowings 

At 1 July 2,575 – 2,889 Adoption of MFRS 16 [Note 51] (3) 1,776 –Long term borrowings raised 19 – –Long term borrowings repaid (72) – (288) Short term loans raised 887 – –Short term loans repaid (206) – –Short term Islamic financing and other short term borrowings repaid (net) (943) – (97) Repayment of lease liabilities – (447) –Net overdraft repayment disclosed as cash and cash equivalents (65) – 51 Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 18 160 –Addition and termination of leases – 216 –Finance costs [Note 15] 100 72 113 Finance costs paid (97) – (110) Exchange differences 18 37 17 At 30 June 2,231 1,814 2,575 Breakdown of finance costs paid:  

> 2020 2019

Borrowings 97 110 Payables and others 19 31 Cross currency swap – 2

116 143 

# Statements of Cash Flows 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated The notes on pages 175 to 291 form an integral part of these financial statements.  

> 174 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

1 General Information 

The Company is principally an investment holding company. There has been no significant change in the principal activity of the Company during the financial year. The Group’s subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are primarily involved in the trading (industrial and motors), logistics and healthcare businesses. The principal activities and details of the subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are disclosed in Note 54. 

2 Basis of Preparation 

The financial statements of the Group and of the Company have been prepared in accordance with the Malaysian Financial Reporting Standards (“MFRS”), International Financial Reporting Standards and the requirements of the Companies Act 2016 in Malaysia. The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention except as disclosed in the significant accounting policies in Note 3. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with MFRS, requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. It also requires Directors to exercise their judgement in the process of applying the Group and the Company’s accounting policies. Although these estimates and judgements are based on the Directors’ best knowledge of current events and actions, actual results may differ. The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity, or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the Group’s and to the Company’s financial statements are disclosed in Note 4. During the financial year, the Group has considered the new accounting pronouncements in the preparation of the financial statements. 

a. Standards and amendments to published standards that are applicable to the Group and the Company 

The Group and the Company have applied the following new standards, amendments to published standards and IC interpretations for the first time for the financial year beginning 1 July 2019: 

• MFRS 16 ‘Leases’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 128 ‘Long-term Interests in Associates and Joint Ventures’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 9 ‘Prepayment Features with Negative Compensation’ 

• IC Interpretation 23 ‘Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments’ 

• Annual Improvements to MFRSs 2015 – 2017 Cycle: 

• Amendments to MFRS 3 ‘Business Combinations’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 11 ‘Joint Arrangements’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 112 ‘Income Taxes’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 123 ‘Borrowing Costs’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 119 ‘Plan Amendment, Curtailment or Settlement’ The Group has adopted MFRS 16 for the first time in the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2020, which resulted in changes in accounting policies. The Group has applied MFRS 16 with the date of initial application of 1 July 2019 by applying the simplified retrospective transition method. Under the simplified retrospective transition method, the 2019 comparative information was not restated and the cumulative effects of initial application of MFRS 16 where the Group is a lessee were recognised as an adjustment to the opening balance of statement of financial position as at 1 July 2019. The comparative information continued to be reported under the previous accounting policies governed under MFRS 117 ‘Leases’ and IC Interpretation 4 ‘Determining whether an Arrangement Contains a Lease’. 

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

> 175 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

2 Basis of Preparation (continued) a. Standards and amendments to published standards that are applicable to the Group and the Company (continued) 

As a lessor, the Group is not required to make any adjustment on transition, except for the reassessment of existing operating subleases at the date of initial application. The Group has elected not to reassess whether a contract is, or contains a lease at the date of initial application. Instead, for contracts entered into before the transition date, the Group relied on its assessment made applying MFRS 117 ‘Leases’ and IC Interpretation 4 ‘Determining whether an Arrangement Contains a Lease’. The practical expedients elected and the detailed impact of change in accounting policies are set out in Note 51. The details of the accounting policies on leases are disclosed separately in Note 3(d). Other than MFRS 16, the adoption of other amendments to published standards and interpretation to existing standards listed above did not have any material impact in the current period or any prior period and is not likely to materially affect future periods. 

b. Amendments to published standards that has been early adopted by the Group 

The Group has early adopted Amendments to MFRS 16 on COVID-19 related rent concessions. As a practical expedient, the Group as a lessee has elected not to assess whether a rent concession that meets conditions as set out in MFRS 16 is a lease modification. As such, any change in lease payments resulting from the rent concession shall be accounted as a variable lease payment in the period(s) in which the event or condition that triggers the reduced payment occurs and is recognised directly to profit or loss. The adoption of this amendment had no material impact in the current period. 

c. Standards, amendments to published standards and interpretations to existing standards that are applicable to the Group and the Company but not yet effective 

i. Amendments to published standards and interpretations that are effective for the financial year beginning on or after 1 July 2020, where their adoption are not expected to result in any significant changes to the Group’s and Company’s results or financial position, are as follows: Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2020 

• Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting: The Reporting Entity and corresponding amendments to references in the relevant standards 

• Amendments to MFRS 3 ‘Definition of a Business’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 101 and MFRS 108 ‘Definition of Material’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 9, MFRS 139 and MFRS 7 ‘Interest Rate Benchmark Reform’ Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 MFRS 17 – Insurance Contracts and amendments to MFRS 17 ii. Amendments to published standards and interpretations that are effective for the financial year beginning on or after 1 July 2020, where the Group and Company are still assessing their impact to the Group’s and Company’s financial statements in the year of initial application: Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 

• Annual improvements to MFRS standards 2018 – 2020: 

• Amendments to MFRS 9 ‘Fees in the 10% test for derecognition of financial liabilities’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 3 ‘Reference to Conceptual Framework’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 116 ‘Proceeds before intended use’ 

• Amendments to MFRS 137 ‘Onerous contracts – cost of fulfilling a contract’ Effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 

• Amendments to MFRS 101 ‘Classification of Liabilities as Current or Non-current’  

> 176 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

2 Basis of Preparation (continued) d. The effective date for the following amendment has been deferred to a date to be determined by Malaysian Accounting Standards Board 

Amendments to MFRS 10 ‘Consolidated Financial Statements’ and MFRS 128 ‘Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures – Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture’. 

3 Significant Accounting Policies 

The following accounting policies have been applied consistently in dealing with items that are considered material in relation to the financial statements, and to all the financial years presented, unless otherwise stated. 

a. Basis of consolidation 

The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Company and all its subsidiaries made up to the end of the financial year and are prepared using uniform accounting policies for like transactions and other events in similar circumstances. i. Subsidiaries Subsidiaries are entities over which the Group has control. The Group controls an entity when the Group has power over the entity, has exposure to or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity. Subsidiaries are consolidated using the acquisition method except for those subsidiaries acquired under common control. Under the acquisition method, subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and de-consolidated from the date when control ceases. The consideration is measured at the fair value of the assets given, equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred at the date of exchange. Contingent consideration is recorded at fair value as a component of the purchase consideration with subsequent adjustment resulting from events after the acquisition date taken to profit or loss. Acquisition related costs are recognised as expenses when incurred. Existing equity interests in the acquiree are re-measured to fair value at the date of business combination with any resulting gain or loss taken to the profit or loss. Identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured at their fair values, at the date of acquisition. The excess of the consideration and the fair value of previously held equity interests over the Group’s share of the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired at the date of acquisition is reflected as goodwill. Any gain from bargain purchase is recognised directly in profit or loss. Intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated on consolidation, but unrealised losses arising therefrom are eliminated only to the extent of the cost of the asset that can be recovered, and the balance is recognised in the profit or loss as reduction in net realisable value or as impairment loss. Non-controlling interests in the results and net assets of non-wholly owned subsidiaries are presented separately in the financial statements. Transactions with owners of non-controlling interests without a change in control are treated as equity transactions in the statement of changes in equity. When control ceases, the disposal proceeds and the fair value of any retained investment are compared to the Group’s share of the net assets disposed. The difference together with the carrying amount of allocated goodwill and the exchange reserve that relate to the subsidiary is recognised as gain or loss on disposal. 

> 177 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) a. Basis of consolidation (continued) 

ii. Business combinations under common control Business combinations under common control are accounted using the predecessor method of merger accounting where the profit or loss and other comprehensive income include the results of each of the combining entities from the earliest date presented or from the date when these entities came under the control of the common controlling party (if later). The assets and liabilities of the combining entities are accounted for based on the carrying amounts from the perspective of the common controlling party, or the combining entities if the common controlling party does not prepare consolidated financial statements. The difference in cost of acquisition over the aggregate carrying amount of the assets and liabilities of the combining entities as of the date of the combination is taken to equity. Transaction costs for the combination are recognised in profit or loss. A similar treatment applies in the Company’s separate financial statements when assets and liabilities representing the underlying businesses under common control are directly acquired by the Company. In accounting for business combinations in the Company’s separate financial statements, the excess of the cost of acquisition over the aggregate carrying amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the combination is taken to equity. iii. Joint ventures Joint ventures are separate vehicles in which the Group has rights to its net assets and where their strategic, financial and operating decisions require unanimous consent of the Group and one or more parties sharing the control. Joint ventures are accounted using the equity method. Equity method is a method of accounting whereby the investment is recorded at cost inclusive of goodwill and adjusted thereafter for the Group’s share of the post-acquisition results and other changes in the net assets of the joint ventures based on their latest audited financial statements or management accounts. Where necessary, adjustments are made to the financial statements of joint ventures used by the Group in applying the equity method to ensure consistency of accounting policies with those of the Group. After application of the equity method, the carrying amount of the joint ventures will be assessed for impairment. When the Group’s share of losses in joint venture equals or exceeds its interests in the joint venture, including any long-term interests that, in substance, form part of the Group’s net investment in the joint venture, the Group does not recognise further losses, unless the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations in respect of the joint venture. Unrealised gains on transactions between the Group and its joint ventures are eliminated to the extent of the Group’s interest in the joint ventures. Unrealised losses are also eliminated on the same basis but only to the extent of the costs that can be recovered, and the balance that provides evidence of reduction in net realisable value or an impairment of the assets transferred is recognised in profit or loss. When joint control ceases, the disposal proceeds and the fair value of any retained investment are compared to the carrying amount of the joint venture. The difference together with the cumulative exchange reserve that relate to the joint venture is recognised as gain or loss on disposal. In the case of partial disposal without losing joint control, the difference between the proceeds and the carrying amount disposed, and the proportionate exchange reserve is recognised as gain or loss on disposal.  

> 178 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) a. Basis of consolidation (continued) 

iv. Associates Associates are entities in which the Group is in a position to exercise significant influence. Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions, but not control over those policies. Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method, similar to Note 3(a)(iii) above. 

b. Foreign currencies 

i. Presentation and functional currencies Ringgit Malaysia is the presentation currency of the Group and of the Company. Ringgit Malaysia is also the functional currency of the Company. The functional currency is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the Company operates. The Group’s foreign operations have different functional currencies. ii. Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions and monetary items are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the transaction dates and at the end of the reporting period, respectively. Foreign exchange differences arising therefrom and on settlement are recognised in profit or loss. Foreign exchange differences arising from the translation of a monetary item designated as a hedge of net investment in a foreign operation are recognised in other comprehensive income in the consolidated financial statements until the net investment is disposed. iii. Translation of foreign currency financial statements For consolidation purposes, the foreign operations’ results are translated into the Group’s presentation currency at average exchange rates for the financial year whilst the assets and liabilities, including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation, are translated at exchange rates ruling at the end of the reporting period. The resulting translation differences are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in exchange reserve. Intercompany loans where settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future, are treated as part of the net investment in the subsidiary. Translation differences arising therefrom are recognised in other comprehensive income and reclassified from equity to profit or loss upon repayment or disposal of the relevant entity. Exchange reserve in respect of a foreign operation is recognised in profit or loss when control, joint control or significant influence over the foreign operation is lost. On partial disposal without losing control, a proportion of the exchange reserve in respect of the subsidiary is re-attributed to the non-controlling interest. The proportionate share of the cumulative translation differences is reclassified to profit or loss in respect of all other partial disposals. 

> 179 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) c. Property, plant and equipment 

Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of an asset. The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognised and all repairs and maintenance costs are charged to the profit or loss. Freehold land is not depreciated as it has indefinite life. Other property, plant and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis to write down the cost of each asset to their residual values over their estimated useful lives. The principal annual depreciation rates are as follows: Buildings 2% to 20% Plant and machinery 4% to 20% Rental assets 10% to 33.3% Vehicles, equipment and fixtures 5% to 50% The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, annually. Rental assets will be transferred to inventories at their carrying amounts when they cease to be rented and are held for sale. Accounting policies applied from 1 July 2019 From 1 July 2019, leasehold land are presented as a separate line item in right-of-use assets. See accounting policy Note 3(d) on right-of-use assets for these assets. Accounting policies applied until 30 June 2019 Leasehold land is depreciated over the lease period of up to 99 years. 

d. Leases 

Group as a lessee Accounting policies applied from 1 July 2019 Leases are recognised as right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a corresponding liability at the date on which the leased asset is available for use by the Group (i.e. the commencement date). The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. A contract is or contains a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Contracts may contain both lease and non-lease components. The Group allocates the consideration in the contract to the lease and non-lease components based on their relative stand-alone prices. However, for leases of properties for which the Group is a lessee, it has elected the practical expedient provided in MFRS 16 not to separate the lease and non-lease components. Both components are accounted for as a single lease component and payments for both components are included in the measurement of lease liability. In determining the lease term, the Group considers all facts and circumstances that create an economic incentive to exercise an extension option, or not to exercise a termination option. Extension options (or periods after termination options) are only included in the lease term if the lease is reasonably certain to be extended (or not to be terminated).  

> 180 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) d. Leases (continued) 

Group as a lessee (continued) Accounting policies applied from 1 July 2019 (continued) The Group reassesses the lease term upon the occurrence of a significant event or change in circumstances that is within the control of the Group and affects whether the Group is reasonably certain to exercise an option not previously included in the determination of lease term, or not to exercise an option previously included in the determination of lease term. A revision in the lease term results in a remeasurement of lease liabilities. See accounting policy in Note 3(d)(ii) on reassessment of lease liabilities. i. ROU assets ROU assets are initially measured at cost comprising the following: 

• The amount of the initial measurement of lease liability; 

• Any lease payments made at or before the commencement date less any lease incentive received; 

• Any initial direct costs; and 

• Decommissioning or restoration costs. ROU assets that are not investment properties are subsequently measured at cost, less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment loss. In addition, the ROU assets are adjusted for certain remeasurement of lease liabilities. ROU assets are generally depreciated over the shorter of the asset’s useful life and the lease term on a straight-line basis. If the Group is reasonably certain to exercise a purchase option, the ROU asset is depreciated over the underlying asset’s useful life. The principal annual depreciation rates are as follows: Leasehold land and sea-use rights Up to 99 years Buildings 5% to 50% Vehicles, equipment, fixtures and rental assets 5% to 50% ii. Lease liabilities Lease liabilities are initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at that date. The lease payments include the following: 

• Fixed payments (including in-substance fixed payments), less any lease incentive receivable; 

• Variable lease payments that are based on an index or a rate, initially measured using the index or rate as at the commencement date; 

• Amounts expected to be payable by the Group under residual value guarantees; 

• The exercise price of a purchase and extension options if the Group is reasonably certain to exercise that option; and 

• Payments of penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term reflects the Group exercising that option. Lease payments are discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease. If that rate cannot be readily determined, which is generally the case for leases in the Group, the lessee’s incremental borrowing is used. This is the rate that the individual lessee would have to pay to borrow the funds necessary to purchase an asset of similar value to the ROU in a similar economic environment with a similar term, security and conditions. The finance cost is charged to profit or loss over the lease period so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability for each period. 

> 181 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) d. Leases (continued) 

Group as a lessee (continued) Accounting policies applied from 1 July 2019 (continued) ii Lease liabilities (continued) The Group presents the lease liabilities as a separate line item in the statement of financial position. Interest expense on the lease liability is presented within the finance cost in profit or loss. i. Reassessment of lease liabilities The Group is also exposed to potential future increase in variable lease payments that depend on an index or rate, which are not included in the lease liability until they take effect. When adjustments to lease payments based on an index or rate take effect, the lease liabilities is remeasured and adjusted against the ROU assets. ii. Short term leases and leases of low value assets The Group has elected not to recognise right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for short term leases that have a lease term of 12 months or less and leases of low-value assets. The Group recognises the lease payments associated with these leases as an expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Accounting policies applied until 30 June 2019 i. Finance leases Leases of property, plant and equipment where the Group, as lessee, has substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership were classified as finance leases. Finance leases are capitalised at the lease’s inception at the fair value of the leased property or, if lower, the present value of the minimum lease payments. The corresponding rental obligations, net of finance charges, are included in short-term and long-term borrowings. Each lease payment is allocated between the liability and finance cost. The finance cost is charged to the profit or loss over the lease period so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability for each period. The property, plant and equipment acquired under finance leases is depreciated over the asset’s useful life or over the shorter of the asset’s useful life and the lease term if there is no reasonable certainty that the Group will obtain ownership at the end of the lease term. ii. Operating leases Leases where substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of assets remain with the lessor are accounted for as operating leases. Rentals on operating leases are charged to the profit or loss on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Group as a lessor i. Finance leases When assets are leased out under a finance lease, the present value of the lease payments is recognised as a receivable. The difference between the gross receivable and the present value of the receivable is recognised as unearned finance income. Lease income is recognised over the term of the lease. ii. Operating leases When assets are leased out under an operating lease, the asset is included in the statement of financial position based on the nature of the asset. Lease income is recognised over the term of the lease on a straight-line basis.  

> 182 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) e. Prepaid lease rentals 

Accounting policies applied from 1 July 2019 From 1 July 2019, prepaid lease rentals are reclassified to right-of-use assets. See accounting policy Note 3(d) on right-of-use assets for these assets. Accounting policies applied until 30 June 2019 Prepaid lease rentals represent payment for rights to use land or sea over a predetermined period that is accounted for as an operating lease and is stated at cost less amount amortised and accumulated impairment losses. The prepaid lease rentals are amortised on a straight-line basis over the lease period of up to 51 years. 

f. Investment properties 

Investment properties are land and buildings held for rental income and/or capital appreciation which are not significantly occupied or intended to be occupied for use by, or in the operations of the Group. Right-of-use assets that meet the definition of investment property in accordance with MFRS 140 are presented in the statement of financial position as investment property. Subsequent measurement of the right-of-use asset is consistent with those investment properties owned by the Group. Investment properties are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. Freehold land and buildings under construction are not depreciated. Other investment properties are depreciated on a straight-line basis to write down the cost of each asset to their residual values over their estimated useful lives. The principal annual depreciation rates are as follows: Leasehold land over the lease period of 62 years Buildings 2% to 5%, or over the lease term if shorter The assets’ residual values and useful lives are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, annually. 

g. Investments in subsidiaries 

Investments in subsidiaries and contribution to subsidiaries are recorded at costs less accumulated impairment losses, if any, in the Company’s financial statements. Contributions to subsidiaries are amounts which the Company does not expect repayment in the foreseeable future and are considered as part of the Company’s investment in the subsidiaries. 

h. Intangible assets 

i. Goodwill Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration and the fair value of previously held interests over the Group’s share of the fair value of identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Goodwill is allocated to cash-generating units for the purpose of impairment testing. Goodwill on acquisition of joint ventures and associates is included as part of the cost of investments in joint ventures and associates. Such goodwill is tested for impairment as part of the overall net investment in each joint venture and associate. ii. Distribution and dealership rights Distribution and dealership rights with no predetermined service period are stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses, if any, and are not amortised. 

> 183 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) h. Intangible assets (continued) 

iii. Other intangible assets Other intangible assets include computer software, trademarks, customer relationships and development costs. Research costs are charged to the profit or loss in the financial year in which the expenditure is incurred whilst development costs which fulfill commercial and technical feasibility criteria are capitalised at cost. These intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses. Amortisation is calculated using the straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives and commences from the date of commercial production of the product to which the development costs relate or when the intangible assets are ready for use. The annual amortisation rates are as follows: Computer software 10% to 33.3% Trademarks 5% to 20% Customer relationships 10% Development costs over the period of the expected benefit, not exceeding a period of 5 years 

i. Assets held for sale 

Non-current assets or groups of assets are classified as “held for sale” if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use. Similarly, liabilities directly associated with the disposal groups are also presented separately from other liabilities in the statement of financial position. Depreciation ceases when an asset is classified as an asset held for sale. Assets held for sale are stated at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less cost to sell. 

j. Inventories 

Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The cost of inventories is determined principally by the following methods: Equipment and motor vehicles Specific identification basis Spare parts and accessories Weighted average basis The cost of raw materials, consumable stores, replacement parts and trading inventories represents cost of purchase plus incidental costs, and in the case of other inventories, includes cost of materials, direct labour, other direct costs and related production overheads based on normal operating capacity. Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less cost to completion and selling expenses. Demonstration vehicles are classified as inventories as they are readily available for sale and are generally sold within a year.  

> 184 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) k. Financial assets 

The Group classifies its financial assets in the following measurement categories: i. Financial assets at amortised cost – Debt instruments The Group classifies its financial assets at amortised cost when the asset is held within a business model with the objective to collect contractual cash flows and the contractual terms give rise to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest. Financial assets of the Group which fall under this category are trade and other receivables, amounts due from subsidiaries, bank balances, deposits and cash. At initial recognition, the Group measures a financial asset at its fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition of the financial asset. Interest income from these financial assets is included in finance income using the effective interest rate method. Any gain or loss arising on derecognition is recognised directly in profit or loss together with the related foreign exchange gains and losses. Impairment losses are presented as a separate line item in the notes to the statement of profit or loss. ii. Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (“FVTPL”) Financial assets that do not meet the criteria for amortised cost or fair value through other comprehensive income (“FVOCI”) are measured at FVTPL. Derivatives, including separated embedded derivatives, are also measured at FVTPL unless they are designated as effective hedging instruments. The accounting policy for derivatives designated as a hedge is disclosed in Note 3(l). At initial recognition, the Group measures this financial asset at its fair value. Transaction costs attributable to financial assets carried at FVTPL are expensed in profit or loss. Net changes in the fair value of financial assets at FVTPL are subsequently recognised in other gains and losses in profit or loss. Purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised at trade date, the date at which the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset. Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the financial assets have expired or have been transferred and the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership. Financial assets are classified as current assets for those having maturity dates of not more than 12 months after the end of the reporting period, and the balance is classified as non-current. See Note 3(n)(iii) on impairment of financial assets. 

l. Derivatives and hedging activities 

Derivatives are measured at fair value. A derivative that is neither designated nor an effective hedging instrument is categorised under fair value through profit or loss and changes in its fair value are recognised in profit or loss. In the case of a derivative that qualifies for cash flow hedge and borrowings that are used as hedge instruments against receivables or net investments, the changes in the derivative’s fair value and the exchange differences arising from the translation of the borrowings are recognised in other comprehensive income. The gain or loss is removed from equity and included in profit or loss in the same period or periods during which the hedged item affects profit or loss. In the case of a hedge of a forecast transaction which results in the recognition of a non-financial asset or a non-financial liability, the gain or loss is removed from equity and included in the carrying amount of the asset or liability. The gain or loss is also removed from equity and included in profit or loss when the derivative expires, no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting, or the forecasted transaction is no longer expected to occur. Derivatives are carried as assets when the fair value is positive and as liabilities when the fair value is negative. Derivatives are classified as current asset or current liability for those having maturity dates of not more than 12 months after the end of the reporting period, and the balance is classified as non-current. At the inception of the hedge relationship, the Group documents the economic relationship between hedging instruments and hedged items including whether changes in the cash flows of the hedging instruments are expected to offset changes in the cash flows of hedged items. The Group documents its risk management objective and strategy for undertaking its hedge transaction. 

> 185 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) m. Contract assets and liabilities 

Contract asset is the right to consideration for goods or services transferred to the customers. In the case of engineering contracts, contract asset is the excess of cumulative revenue earned over the billings to-date. See note 3(n)(iii) on impairment of contract assets. Contract liability is the obligation to transfer goods or services to customers for which the Group has received the consideration or has billed the customer. In the case of engineering contracts, contract liability is the excess of the billings to-date over the cumulative revenue earned. Contract liabilities include downpayments received from customers and other deferred income where the Group has billed or has collected the payment before the goods are delivered or services are provided to the customers. 

n. Impairment 

Goodwill and other intangible assets that have an indefinite useful life or are not yet available for use are tested annually for impairment. Other non-financial assets are assessed for indication of impairment. If an indication exists, an impairment test is performed. In the case of financial assets, investment in subsidiaries and interest in joint ventures and associates, they are assessed for objective evidence of impairment. This exercise is performed annually or whenever events or circumstances occur indicating that impairment may exist. The recognition and measurement of impairment are as follows: i. Non-financial assets An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the carrying amount of the non-financial asset exceeds its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is the higher of an asset’s fair value less costs to sell and value-in-use. Impairment loss on non-financial assets is charged to profit or loss. Except for goodwill, assets that were previously impaired are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at the end of each reporting period. Any subsequent increase in recoverable amount is recognised in profit or loss. Reversal of impairment loss is restricted by the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years. An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed. ii. Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the carrying amount of the subsidiary, joint venture or associate exceeds its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is the higher of an asset’s fair value less costs to sell and present value of the estimated future cash flows expected to be derived from the investment, including the proceeds from its disposal. Any subsequent increase in recoverable amount is recognised in profit or loss and reversal of impairment loss is restricted by the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.  

> 186 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) n. Impairment (continued) 

iii. Impairment of financial assets and contract assets The Group recognises an allowance for expected credit loss (“ECL”) for all debt instruments not held at FVTPL. ECLs are based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due in accordance with the contract and all the cash flows that the Group expects to receive, discounted at an approximation of the original effective interest rate. The expected cash flows will include cash flows from the sale of collateral held or other credit enhancements that are integral to the contractual terms. While cash and cash equivalents are also subject to the impairment requirements of MFRS 9, the identified impairment loss is immaterial. ECLs are measured based on a general 3-stage approach and a simplified approach. General 3-stage approach for other receivables and amounts due from subsidiaries ECLs are recognised in two stages. For credit exposures for which there has not been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition, ECLs are provided for credit losses that result from default events that are possible within the next 12 months (a 12-month ECL). For those credit exposures for which there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition, a loss allowance is required for credit losses expected over the remaining life of the exposure, irrespective of the timing of the default (a lifetime ECL). Simplified approach for trade receivables, contract assets and finance lease receivables For trade receivables, contract assets and finance lease receivables, the Group applies a simplified approach in calculating ECLs. Therefore, the Group does not track changes in credit risk, but instead recognises a loss allowance based on lifetime ECLs at each reporting date. Significant increase in credit risk The Group considers the probability of default upon initial recognition of the asset and whether there has been a significant increase in credit risk on an ongoing basis throughout each reporting period. To assess whether there is a significant increase in credit risk, the Group compares the risk of a default occurring on the asset as at the reporting date with the risk of default as at the date of initial recognition. The assessment considers available, reasonable and supportable forward-looking information such as: 

• internal credit rating/assessment 

• external credit rating (as far as available) 

• actual or expected significant adverse changes in business, financial or economic conditions that are expected to cause a significant change to the debtor’s ability to meet its obligations 

• actual or expected significant changes in the operating results of the debtor (where available) 

• significant increases in credit risk on other financial instruments of the same debtor 

• significant changes in the value of the collateral supporting the obligation or in the quality of third-party guarantees or credit enhancements 

• significant changes in the expected performance and behaviour of the debtor, including changes in the payment status of debtor in the Group and changes in the operating results of the debtor 

> 187 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) n. Impairment (continued) 

iii. Impairment of financial assets and contract assets (continued) Significant increase in credit risk (continued) The Group considers a receivable as credit impaired when one or more events that have a detrimental impact on the estimated cash flow have occurred. These instances include adverse changes in the financial capability of the debtor and default or significant delay in payments. However, in certain cases, the Group may also consider a financial asset to be in default when internal or external information indicates that the Group is unlikely to receive the outstanding contractual amounts in full before taking into account any credit enhancements held by the Group. A financial asset is written off to profit or loss when there is no reasonable expectation of recovering the contractual cash flows. Grouping of instruments for ECL measured on collective basis Collective assessment To measure ECL, trade receivables and contract assets are grouped into categories. The categories are differentiated by the different business risks and are subject to different credit assessments. Contract assets relate to unbilled work in progress and have substantially the same risk characteristics as the trade receivables for the same types of contracts. The Group considers the expected loss rates for trade receivables as a reasonable approximation of the loss rates for contract assets with similar risk characteristics. Individual assessment Trade receivables, contract assets, other receivables and amounts due from subsidiaries which are in default or credit-impaired are assessed individually. 

o. Share capital 

Proceeds from ordinary shares issued are accounted for as share capital in equity. Cost directly attributable to the issuance of new shares are deducted from equity. Dividends to owners of the Company and non-controlling interests are recognised in the statement of changes in equity in the period in which they are declared. 

p. Provisions 

Provisions are recognised when the Group has a legal or constructive obligation, where the outflow of resources is probable and can be reliably estimated. Provisions are measured at the present value of the obligation. The increase in the provision due to the passage of time is recognised as finance cost. 

q. Government grants 

Government grants are recognised at fair value when there is reasonable assurance that the Group will comply with the conditions attached to them and the grants will be received. Grants are carried in the statement of financial position and allocated to profit or loss over the useful lives of the related assets or over the period of the operating expenditure to which the grants are intended to compensate. Grants relating to costs are recognised in profit or loss over the periods to match the related costs for which the grants are intended to compensate.  

> 188 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) r. Employee costs 

i. Employee benefits Wages, salaries, paid annual leave and sick leave, bonuses and non-monetary benefits are accrued in the period in which the services are rendered by employees. ii. Defined contribution pension plans A defined contribution pension plan is a pension plan under which the Group pays fixed contributions into a separate entity. The Group has no legal or constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not hold sufficient assets to pay all employees the benefits relating to employee service in the current and prior periods. The Group has various defined contribution pension plans in accordance with local conditions and practices in the countries in which it operates. The Group’s contributions to defined contribution pension plans are charged to profit or loss in the financial year in which they relate to. iii. Defined benefit pension plans Defined benefit pension plans typically define an amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement, usually dependent on one or more factors such as age, years of service and compensation. The Group’s defined benefit pension plans are determined based on a periodic actuarial valuation by external consultants where the amount of the benefits that eligible employees have earned in return for their services in the current and prior years are estimated. The liabilities in respect of the defined benefit pension plans are the present values of the defined benefit obligations at the end of the reporting period, adjusted for actuarial gains and losses and past service costs, and reduced by the fair value of the plan assets. The defined benefit obligations, calculated using the Projected Unit Credit Method, are determined by independent actuaries, considering the estimated future cash outflows. Actuarial gains or losses arising from market adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in other comprehensive income. iv. Termination benefits Termination benefits are payable whenever an employee’s employment is terminated in exchange for these benefits. The Group recognises termination benefits when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the employment of current employees according to a detailed formal plan without possibility of withdrawal or providing termination benefits as a result of a proposal to encourage voluntary redundancy. 

> 189 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) r. Employee costs (continued) 

v. Share-based compensation The Company operates an equity-settled, share-based compensation plan for the Group’s employees. Employee services received in exchange for the grant of the Company’s shares are recognised as an expense in the profit or loss over the vesting period of the grant, with a corresponding increase in equity. The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the shares granted. Non-market vesting conditions are included in the assumptions to arrive at the number of shares that are expected to vest. At the end of the reporting period, the Group and the Company revise their estimates of the number of shares that are expected to vest. The impact of the revision of original estimates, if any, is recognised in the profit or loss, with a corresponding adjustment to equity. The fair value of shares granted to employees of subsidiaries is recharged by the Company to the relevant subsidiaries. 

s. Financial liabilities 

The Group’s financial liabilities are classified into the following categories and the accounting policies for each of these categories are as follows: i. Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Derivatives not designated as hedges are classified as fair value through profit or loss. These financial liabilities are measured at fair value. Any gain or loss arising from changes in fair value and transaction costs is recognised in profit or loss. ii. Financial liabilities at amortised cost Payables, amounts due to subsidiaries and borrowings are recognised initially at fair value plus transaction costs and thereafter, at amortised cost using the effective interest method. Amortisation is charged to profit or loss. iii. Derivatives used for hedging activities The accounting policy for derivatives used for hedging activities is disclosed in Note 3(l). Financial liabilities are classified as current liabilities for those having maturity dates of not more than 12 months after the reporting date, and the balance is classified as non-current. 

t. Cash and cash equivalents 

For the purpose of the statements of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand and deposits held at call with banks, net of bank overdrafts.  

> 190 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) u. Revenue recognition 

Revenue from contracts with customers is recognised by reference to each distinct performance obligation in the contract with customer. Revenue from contracts with customers is measured at its transaction price, being the amount of consideration which the Group expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer, net of goods and service tax, returns, rebates and discounts. Transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on the basis of the relative standalone selling prices of each distinct good or services promised in the contract. Depending on the substance of the contract, revenue is recognised when the performance obligation is satisfied, which may be at a point in time or over time. Performance obligations by segment are as follows: i. Industrial Industrial segment revenue consists of sale and installation of equipment, sale of parts, provision of after-sales services and engineering services. (a) Sale and installation of equipment, parts and provision of after-sales maintenance Revenue from sale of equipment and after-sales maintenance are recognised respectively in the period in which the customer accepts the delivery of the goods and services rendered. Contracts that bundle the sale of equipment, after-sales maintenance, provision of parts credit and extended warranty are recognised as four distinct performance obligations for revenue recognition purposes. Parts credit represents prepaid amounts for equipment parts which customers will redeem in the future. Credit is given together with the sale of machine based on negotiated terms with the customer. Revenue from parts credit is recognised upon utilisation of credit for parts exchange. Contracts that bundle the sale and installation of generator sets are recognised as a single performance obligation as the installation includes a significant integration service. Revenue is recognised progressively based on the percentage of completion determined by reference to the completion of the physical proportion of contract work to-date. There is no significant financing component in the revenue arising from sale and installation of equipment, parts and provision of after-sales maintenance as almost all sales are made on the normal credit terms not exceeding 12 months. (b) Extended warranty programme The Group operates an extended warranty programme where customers are given additional 12-month warranty in addition to the standard warranty. Revenue for the extended warranty is recognised in the period in which the warranty services are rendered. No element of financing is deemed present as the sales are made on normal credit terms. Obligations to repair or replace faulty products under standard warranty terms is recognised as a provision. 

> 191 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) u. Revenue recognition (continued) 

Performance obligations by segment are as follows: (continued) i. Industrial (continued) (c) Construction of equipment Contracts for construction of equipment comprise multiple deliverables which include asignificant integration service and are therefore recognised as a single performance obligation. Revenue is recognised progressively based on the percentage of completion determined by reference to the completion of the physical proportion of contract work to-date. (d) Sale and leaseback arrangements Accounting policy applied from 1 July 2019 Sales of equipment arising from sale and leaseback arrangements are recognised when the Group transfers control of the equipment to the customer, being when the customer accepts delivery of the equipment. If it is clear that the sale and leaseback transaction is established at fair value, the Group recognises immediately any profit or loss relating to the rights transferred to buyer-lessor and ROU assets arising from the leaseback at the proportion of the previous carrying amount of the assets retained. If the sale price is below fair value, the Group recognises immediately any profit or loss and a prepayment of the lease payments. If the sale price is above fair value, the Group accounts it as additional financing by the buyer-lessor. Accounting policy applied until 30 June 2019 Sales of equipment arising from sale and operating leaseback arrangements are recognised when the Group transfers control of the equipment to the customer, being when the customer accepts delivery of the equipment. If it is clear that the sale and operating leaseback transaction is established at fair value, the Group recognises any profit or loss immediately. If the sale price is below fair value, the Group recognises immediately any profit or loss except when the loss is compensated for by future lease payments at below market price, in which case the Group defers and amortises the loss in proportion to the lease payments over the period for which the asset is expected to be used. If the sale price is above fair value, the Group defers the excess over fair value and amortises the excess over the period for which the asset is expected to be used. (e) Engineering services Engineering contracts involving engineering services comprise multiple deliverables which are highly integrated, and are therefore recognised as a single performance obligation. Revenue is recognised progressively based on the percentage of completion determined by reference to the completion of the physical proportion of contract work to-date.  

> 192 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) u. Revenue recognition (continued) 

Performance obligations by segment are as follows: (continued) ii. Motors The Group is the authorised distributor of vehicles and parts and also operates a network of dealerships selling vehicles and parts and offering after-sales services. Motors segment revenue consists of sales of vehicles and parts, after-sales services, assembly of vehicles and handling and commission income. (a) Sale of vehicles and parts Revenue from sale of vehicles and parts is recognised when the Group sells the vehicle to customers and control of the vehicle and parts has transferred, being when the vehicles and parts are delivered to the customer. The retail sale of parts normally occurs during performance of after-sales services. Therefore, revenue from sale of parts is reported with the performance of after-sales services. The vehicles and parts are often sold with volume based discounts and incentives based on aggregate sales over an agreed period. Accumulated experience is used to estimate and provide for the discounts and incentives, using expected value or most likely methods depending on the type of discounts and incentives. Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal will not occur. A contract liability is recognised for the expected discounts and incentives payable to customers in relation to sales made. Consistent with market practice, the Group collects deposits from customers for the sale of vehicles. A contract liability is recognised for the customer deposits as the Group has an obligation to transfer vehicle to the customer in respect of deposits received. Customer deposits would be recognised as revenue upon sale of the vehicle to the customer. No element of financing is deemed present as the sales are made with a credit term of 30 to 60 days, which is consistent with market practice. The Group’s obligation to provide warranty for the vehicles and parts under the standard warranty terms is recognised as a provision (see Note 44). (b) After-sales services The Group provides after-sales services or routine vehicle maintenance services within and/or outside of the warranty period in relation to the vehicle brands that the Group sells. The performance of maintenance services is often accompanied with the sale of parts. Revenue from after-sales services is recognised over the period of performance of services to customers. The sale of vehicle to the customer may be bundled together with extended warranties and/or free services. The extended warranty provides assurance to the customer that the vehicle parts comply with agreed-upon specifications beyond the general standard warranty period. The extended warranties and free services are separate performance obligations and the transaction price is allocated to the service obligations based on its relative standalone selling prices. The extended warranties and free services are deferred and recognised over the period covered by the extended warranties and when the free services are performed respectively. There is no significant financing component in the sale of extended warranties and/or free services as the sales are made on normal credit terms not exceeding 12 months. Where consideration is collected from customers in advance of services being performed, a contract liability is recognised. The contract liability would be recognised as revenue when the related services are rendered. 

> 193 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) u. Revenue recognition (continued) 

Performance obligations by segment are as follows: (continued) ii. Motors (continued) (c) Assembly of vehicles The Group manufactures and assembles light commercial and passenger vehicles, and are contract assemblers of motor vehicles. Revenue arising from the assembly of vehicles is either recognised upon completion of the assembly service or over the period when assembly services are rendered based on the contractual terms with the customers. Revenue recognised upon completion of assembly service Revenue is recognised for certain assembly customers when control of vehicles has transferred, being when the vehicles are delivered to the customer, the customer has full discretion over the channel and price to sell the vehicle and there is no unfulfilled obligation that could affect the customers’ acceptance of the vehicles. Delivery occurs when the vehicles have been accepted by the customers upon completion of the assembly service. Revenue from these services is recognised based on the fixed price specified in the contract and the variable expenses recoverable from the customers, based on the aggregate service provided over an agreed period. Accumulated experience is used to estimate and provide for the variable expenses recoverable, using the expected value method, and revenue is only recognised to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal will not occur. There is no significant financing component in the revenue arising from assembly of vehicles as the sales are made on the normal credit terms not exceeding 12 months. Revenue recognised over the assembly period Revenue is recognised over the assembly period for certain assembly customers if the vehicles being assembled do not have any alternative use and when the Group is able to enforce payment for performance completed to date during the assembly period. Revenue is recognised based on the actual costs incurred at the end of the reporting period plus a proportion of the expected profit margin with the customer. This method represents a faithful depiction of the service as the actual costs incurred represents the percentage of service rendered. Estimates of revenues or expected profit margin are revised if circumstances change. Any resulting increases or decreases in estimated revenues are reflected in profit or loss in the period in which the circumstances that give rise to the revision become known by management. The Group’s obligation to provide warranty for the vehicles under the standard warranty terms is recognised as a provision. (d) Handling and commission income Revenue arising from rendering services, handling income and commission income is recognised when the relevant services are completed.  

> 194 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) u. Revenue recognition (continued) 

Performance obligations by segment are as follows: (continued) iii. Logistics (a) Revenue from terminal handling and related services Revenue from providing services is recognised in the period in which the services are rendered. The price of handling contracts is usually defined as fixed charge rate per tonne or container box, hence revenue is recognised based on the actual tonnage or number of container boxes handled multiplied by the contracted charge rates. Some handling contracts include multiple deliverables, such as the cargo storage services. Generally, the storage service is charged by fixed price per day and has no relationship with the handling charges. It is therefore accounted for as a separate performance obligation and revenue is recognised based on the unit price multiplied by days of storage. iv. Other revenue Revenue from other sources are recognised as follows: (a) dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established; and (b) rental income is generally recognised on a straight-line basis over the tenure of the lease. 

v. Finance income 

Finance income is recognised on an accrual basis using the effective interest method. Finance income from financial assets at FVTPL is recognised as part of net gains or net losses on these financial instruments. Finance income on financial assets at amortised cost is calculated using the effective interest method and is recognised in the statements of profit or loss. Finance income is calculated by applying the effective interest rate to the gross carrying amount of a financial asset except for financial assets that subsequently become credit-impaired. For credit-impaired financial assets the effective interest rate is applied to the net carrying amount of the financial asset (after deduction of the loss allowance). 

w. Borrowing costs 

Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of qualifying assets are capitalised to the cost of those assets until the assets are substantially ready for their intended use or sale. 

x. Taxation 

Taxation comprises current and deferred tax. Tax is recognised in the profit or loss, except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income. In this case, the tax is recognised in other comprehensive income. The current income tax charge is the expected income taxes payable in respect of the taxable profit for the financial year and is measured using the applicable tax rates. Management periodically evaluates positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulation is subject to interpretation. Provisions are established where appropriate on the basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities. 

> 195 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

3 Significant Accounting Policies (continued) x. Taxation (continued) 

Deferred tax is recognised on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements, including those arising from business combinations. Deferred tax is not recognised on goodwill and those arising from initial recognition of an asset or liability which at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss. Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised. Deferred tax is recognised on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future. Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates (and laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled. 

y. Contingent liabilities 

The Group does not recognise contingent liabilities but discloses their existence in the notes to the financial statements. A contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events whose crystallisation will be confirmed by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events beyond the control of the Group or a present obligation that is not recognised because it is not probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation. A contingent liability also arises in the extremely rare circumstances where there is a liability that is not recognised because it cannot be measured reliably. 

z. Segment reporting 

Segment information is presented in a manner that is consistent with the internal reporting provided to management for the allocation of resources and assessment of its performance. Segment revenue, profit, assets and liabilities are those reported by the segment and also include consolidation adjustments directly attributable to the segment. Inter-segment sales and purchases are generally based on similar terms as those available to external parties. 

aa. Fair value estimation 

Fair values shown in the financial statements are categorised into three different levels to increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements. The levels of hierarchy are based on the input used to measure the fair value of an asset or a liability. The hierarchy based on highest to the lowest priority is as follows: Level 1 – quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 – valuation inputs (other than Level 1 input) that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly Level 3 – valuation inputs that are not based on observable market data 

4 Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgement in Applying Accounting Policies 

The preparation of financial statements in compliance with MFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates that involve complex and subjective judgements and the use of assumptions, some of which may be for matters that are inherently uncertain and susceptible to change. The Directors exercise their judgement in the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies. Estimates and assumptions are based on the Directors’ best knowledge of current events. Such estimates and judgement could change from period to period and have a material impact on the results, financial position, cash flows and other disclosures.  

> 196 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

4 Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgement in Applying Accounting Policies (continued) a. Impairment of non-financial assets 

The estimates and assumptions that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are outlined below. The Group assesses whether there is any indication that non-financial assets are impaired at the end of each reporting period. Impairment is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset with its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount is measured at the higher of the fair value less cost to sell for that asset and its value-in-use. The value-in-use is the net present value of the projected future cash flow derived from that asset discounted at an appropriate discount rate. Projected future cash flows are calculated based on historical sector and industry trends, general market and economic conditions, changes in technology and other available information. Changes to any of these assumptions would affect the amount of impairment. The key assumptions used to determine the recoverable amount of intangible assets are set out in Note 23 to the financial statements. During the financial year, impairment of non-financial assets totalling RM52 million (2019: RM3 million) was charged and RM32 million (2019: RM2 million) was reversed to profit or loss, as disclosed in Note 11. 

b. Taxation 

The Group has recognised certain tax recoverable for which the Group believes that there is a reasonable basis for recognition. Where the final tax outcome of this matter is different from the amount that was initially recorded, such difference may cause a material adjustment to the carrying amount of the tax recoverable balance recorded in the period in which such determination is made. As at 30 June 2020, the tax recoverable of the Group in relation to withholding taxes recoverable from the Indian tax authorities was RM46 million (2019: RM65 million). The realisation of this tax recoverable is dependent on the decision of the Indian tax authorities which may take a significant amount of time before the Group fully receives the tax refunds. Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which temporary differences or unutilised tax losses and tax credits can be utilised. This involves judgement regarding future taxable profits of a particular entity in which the deferred tax asset has been recognised. 

c. Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures (including share of impairment of non-financial assets of associates and joint ventures) 

The Group assesses the recoverability of its investments in associates and joint ventures for indication of impairment at the end of each reporting period. During the financial year, the Group has computed the recoverable amount of its investment in Eastern & Oriental Berhad and has recorded an impairment charge of RM49 million (2019: RM118 million). The assessment of the recoverable amount is set out in Note 13(a) to the financial statements. During the financial year, the Group assessed the recoverability of two joint ventures, Weifang Port Services Limited (“WPS”) and Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Limited (“WSDLT”). During the financial year, the Group fully impaired its investment in WPS of RM74 million and receivables from WPS of RM24 million. The Group also recognised an impairment loss of RM22 million on its investment in WSDLT. The key assumptions used in the assessment are set out in Note 12(a) to the financial statements. 

d. Recognition of intangible assets arising from acquisitions 

During the financial year, the Group acquired the Gough Group Limited (“Gough group”) and Sydney dealerships and purchase price allocations (“PPA”) were undertaken. The fair value of net assets acquired of the Gough group was RM574 million (including RM17 million attributed to fair value adjustments). The fair value of net assets acquired for the Sydney dealerships was RM425 million, including RM57 million for dealership rights (part of intangible assets) while RM15 million was recognised as goodwill. Details of the acquisitions are set out in Note 45. 

> 197 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

4 Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgement in Applying Accounting Policies (continued) e. Fair valuation of Financial Assets at FVTPL 

The fair valuation of Financial Assets at FVTPL under Level 3 fair valuation methods require significant estimates and judgements. During the financial year, the Group fully impaired its shareholder’s loan to Mine Energy Solutions Pty Limited (“MES”) loss of RM72 million. The key assumptions used in the fair valuation are set out in Note 26 to the financial statements. 

f. Extension options for leases 

In determining the lease term of a lease, management considers all facts and circumstances that create an economic incentive to exercise an extension option. Extension options are only included in the lease term if the lease is reasonably certain to be extended. Potential future cash outflows have not been included in the lease liability because it is not reasonably certain that the leases will be extended. The assessment is reviewed if a significant event or a significant change in circumstances occur which affects this assessment and that is within the control of the lessee. Details of such extension option are disclosed on Note 41. 

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies a. Financial Risk Management 

The Group’s operations expose it to a variety of financial risks, including foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk, credit risk and liquidity and cash flow risk. The Group’s overall financial risk management policies seek to manage and minimise the potential adverse effects of these risks on the financial performance of the Group. The Group’s exposure to these financial risks are managed through risk reviews, internal control systems, insurance/takaful programmes and adherence to Group Policies and Authorities which are implemented on a group-wide basis. The Board regularly reviews these risks and approves the policies covering the management of these risks. The Group uses derivative financial instruments such as forward foreign exchange contracts to hedge the Group’s exposure to financial risk. Whilst all derivatives entered into provide economic hedges to the Group, hedge accounting is not always applied. Where there are open positions, these are managed in accordance with the Group’s policies. The notional amounts and fair values of derivative financial instruments as at 30 June are disclosed in Note 29. i. Foreign exchange risk The Group’s foreign exchange risk refers to adverse exchange rate movements on foreign currency positions originating primarily from financial assets or liabilities denominated in currencies which are not in the functional currency of the respective subsidiaries and from net assets in overseas subsidiaries where the functional currencies are not in Ringgit Malaysia. The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from various currency exposures, primarily with respect to United States Dollar, Chinese Renminbi, European Union Euro and Australian Dollar. Foreign exchange risk arises from future commercial transactions, recognised assets and liabilities, and investments in foreign operations. The Group applies natural hedging, to the extent possible, by matching foreign currency assets or income against foreign currency liabilities or costs. Net foreign currency exposures and forecasted foreign currency cash flows are hedged via forward foreign exchange contracts. Details of the Group’s foreign currency exposure and the currency profile of monetary financial assets and financial liabilities are disclosed in Note 49(a).  

> 198 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

ii. Interest rate risk The Group’s interest rate risk arises from its borrowings. Changes in market interest rates will be re-priced into the floating rate borrowings. The Group manages its interest rate risk on its long-term borrowings by targeting a mix of fixed and floating rate debt by using derivatives such as interest rate swaps. There are no outstanding interest rate swaps as at 30 June 2020. As at 30 June 2020, the Group’s percentage of fixed rate borrowings to the total borrowings was 1.8% (2019: 1.3%). The relatively low percentage of fixed rate borrowings is because most of the Group’s borrowings are for short term working capital funding or pending refinancing to long term loans. Details of the percentages of fixed rate borrowings over total borrowings are disclosed in Note 49(b). iii. Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of a financial loss to the Group due to counterparties defaulting on their commitments. Credit risk arises on sales made on credit terms, derivatives with positive fair value, deposits with banks, guarantees and performance guarantees given on behalf of others and risk sharing arrangements. The Group seeks to control credit risk by dealing with counterparties with appropriate credit histories and deposit with banks and financial institutions with good credit ratings. Credit risk is also managed through credit assessment and approval, credit limit and monitoring procedures. Where appropriate, guarantees or securities are obtained to limit credit risk. The credit risks concentration profile of the Group’s net trade receivables analysed by country where the Group operates and by reportable segment is as follows:     

> Industrial Motors Logistics Others Total

2020 

Malaysia 170 368 – 70 608 

China 1 409 134 22 1 566 

Other countries in Asia 76 90 – 4 170 

Australasia 2 825 286 – – 1,111 1,480 878 22 75 2,455 2019 

Malaysia 227 345 – 32 604 China 1 417 147 39 2 605 Other countries in Asia 116 267 – 1 384 Australasia 2 872 227 – – 1,099 1,632 986 39 35 2,692 The Company has no significant concentration of credit risks except for loans to its subsidiaries where risk of default has been assessed to be low. 1 China consists of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. 2 Australasia consists of Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands. 

> 199 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

iii. Credit risk (continued) A summary of the assumptions underpinning the Group’s expected credit loss (“ECL”) is as follows: Trade receivables using the simplified approach The ECL for trade receivables is generally calculated based on the net flow rate method and is calculated at the operating unit level. The factors considered in arriving at the calculation include: 

• Appropriately grouping trade receivables if historical (or forecast) credit loss experience shows significantly different loss patterns for different customer segments 

• Adjusting historical credit loss experience to incorporate relevant, current and more forward-looking information that is reasonable and supportable, and available without undue cost or effort 

• Determining different loss rates for the different past due brackets of trade receivables. In arriving at the net flow rate model, the operating units have used debtor past due information over a 12-36 month period. No significant changes to estimation techniques or assumptions were made during the reporting period. The gross carrying amount of trade receivables also represents the maximum exposure to credit risk on these assets. The expected credit loss rate is the weighted average rate applied for the respective groups of trade receivables. Impairment for specific debtors in default or credit impaired is assessed individually, where applicable.  

> 30 June 2020 Gross trade receivables Expected credit loss rate (%) Impairment Net carrying amount

Industrial Division Current 1,042 0.3 (3) 1,039 

Past due by – 1 to 30 days 185 3.3 (6) 179 

– 31 to 60 days 59 6.6 (4) 55 

– 61 to 90 days 87 7.1 (6) 81 

– 91 to 180 days 123 15.9 (20) 103 

– more than 181 days 74 68.8 (51) 23 

Individually assessed 11 99.5 (11) –

Total 1,581 (101) 1,480 

Motors Division Current 458 – – 458 

Past due by – 1 to 30 days 289 0.4 (1) 288 

– 31 to 60 days 94 1.5 (1) 93 

– 61 to 90 days 18 2.8 (1) 17 

– 91 to 180 days 12 4.0 (1) 11 

– more than 181 days 25 58.7 (14) 11 

Individually assessed 1 70.6 (1) –

Total 897 (19) 878 200 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

iii. Credit risk (continued) Trade receivables using the simplified approach (continued)  

> 30 June 2019 Gross trade receivables Expected credit loss rate (%) Impairment Net carrying amount

Industrial Division Current 1,232 0.1 (1) 1,231 Past due by – 1 to 30 days 204 5.4 (11) 193 – 31 to 60 days 108 5.9 (6) 102 – 61 to 90 days 40 8.7 (3) 37 – 91 to 180 days 64 16.3 (11) 53 – more than 181 days 42 74.9 (31) 11 Individually assessed 22 74.5 (17) 5Total 1,712 (80) 1,632 Motors Division Current 567 – – 567 Past due by – 1 to 30 days 291 0.5 (2) 289 – 31 to 60 days 41 – – 41 – 61 to 90 days 74 – – 74 – 91 to 180 days 8 – – 8– more than 181 days 10 33.3 (3) 7Total 991 (5) 986 The remaining net trade receivables of RM97 million (2019: RM74 million) relates to the Logistics and Other businesses and the total impairment for these receivables is RM1 million (2019: RM1 million). The impairment of finance lease receivables has been assessed to be immaterial as at 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019. The impairment of contract assets of the Industrial Division (carrying value of RM54 million (2019: RM46 million)) has been assessed to be immaterial. 

> 201 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

iii. Credit risk (continued) The ECL for other receivables and amounts due from subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates is calculated based on the 3-stage approach.   

> Category Definition of category Basis for recognising ECL

Performing Debtors have a low risk of default and a strong capacity to meet contractual cash flows. 12-month ECL Underperforming Debtors for which there is a significant increase in credit risk due to actual or expected significant adverse changes in business, financial or economic conditions that are expected to cause a significant change to the debtor’s ability to meet its obligations. Lifetime ECL Non-performing There is evidence indicating the asset is credit-impaired. Lifetime ECL (credit impaired) Write-off There is evidence indicating that there is no reasonable expectation of recovery based on unavailability of the debtor’s sources of income or assets to generate sufficient future cash flows to repay the amount. Asset is written off Based on the above, loss allowance is measured on either 12 month ECL or lifetime ECL, by considering the likelihood that the debtor would not be able to repay during the contractual period, the percentage of contractual cash flows that will not be collected if default happens and the outstanding amount that is exposed to default risk. The main categories of other receivables of the Group are as follows: 

• Amounts due from joint ventures and associates – this includes loans and interest receivable from joint ventures (see also Note 30). The amount due from a joint venture, Weifang Port Services, of RM24 million has been fully impaired as it categorised as non performing. The remaining balances due from joint ventures and associates were largely categorised as performing taking into consideration the credit risks of the joint ventures and associates. 

• Rebates from principals – these are amounts receivable based on rates or amounts agreed by the principals. These amounts are mostly categorised as performing as they are assessed to have low credit risk except for certain instances where there are disagreements. Impairment losses are made for these balances, with RM3 million provided in the current financial year (2019 : RM1 million). 

• Assembly purchases and expenses recoverable – these are goods purchased or expenses incurred in relation to the assembly business that can be recovered from a principal. These amounts are categorised as performing as they are assessed to have low credit risk. The impairment loss is considered immaterial. 

• Warranty and parts claims and amounts due from principal are transactions involving principals. They are categorised as performing as they are assessed to have low credit risk. The impairment loss is considered immaterial. 

• Infrastructure project cost recoverable relates to built and transfer projects relating to the Logistics division and have been settled. 

• Deposits consist mainly of rental, utilities and tender deposits as well as deposits with authorities and principals. These amounts are mostly categorised as performing as they are assessed to have low credit risk. The impairment loss is considered immaterial.  

> 202 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

iii. Credit risk (continued) An impairment of RM77 million (2019: RM77 million) has been provided for other receivables, including an impairment of RM65.5 million (2019: RM65.5 milllion) for advances for a groundwater development project that was fully impaired in the financial year ended 30 June 2011. Management has assessed and determined that the majority of the other receivables were fully recoverable and adequate loss allowance has been recognised. Company The Company provides unsecured advances to its subsidiary, Sime Darby Holdings Berhad (“SDHB”). The outstanding balance as at 30 June 2020 was RM872 million (2019: RM5,743 million). The reduction in the balance was mainly due to capitalisation of RM4,997 million during the financial year (Note 25). No impairment was provided for this balance as SDHB is in a net asset position and can settle the outstanding balance by transferring its cash and other assets to the Company. The other amounts due from subsidiaries are primarily dividends and PBESS charges receivable. Management is of the view that the impairment loss is considered immaterial based on the financial position and performance of these subsidiaries. Reconciliation of impairment for trade and other receivables of the Group is as follows:  

> 2020 Trade receivables Amounts due from joint ventures Rebates from principals Other receivables Total

As at 1 July 2019 86 2 1 77 166 

Impairment losses 57 24 3 – 84 

Reversal of impairment losses (11) (2) – – (13) 

Write offs (12) – – – (12) 

Exchange differences 1 – (1) – –

At 30 June 2020 121 24 3 77 225 

Reconciliation of impairment of loans to joint venture: As at 1 July 2019 –

Impairment losses 1

At 30 June 2020 1203 Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) a. Financial Risk Management (continued) 

iii. Credit risk (continued) Reconciliation of impairment for trade and other receivables of the Group is as follows: (continued)  

> 2019 Trade receivables Amounts due from joint ventures Rebates from principals Other receivables Total

As at 30 June 2018 calculated under MFRS 139 75 – 1 75 151 Adoption of MFRS 9 27 2 – – 29 As at 1 July 2019 calculated under MFRS 9 102 2 1 75 180 Impairment losses 1 – – 3 4Reversal of impairment losses (7) – – (1) (8) Write offs (10) – – – (10) At 30 June 2019 86 2 1 77 166 Details of the credit risk exposure are disclosed in Note 49(c). During the financial year, the Group reclassified the loans due from Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Limited of RM89 million from other receivables to net investment in joint ventures following the restructuring of the terms of the loans (Note 12). The Group also has a risk sharing arrangement with a third party leasing company which is a member of our principal vendor, in connection with the sale of its equipment. Details of the arrangement are disclosed in Note 50(a). An amount of RM37 million (2019: RM19 million) has been provided for based on a percentage of risk sharing ratio over the total outstanding lease portfolio (see Note 44). iv. Liquidity and cash flow risk Liquidity risk refers to the risk that the Group or the Company will encounter difficulty in meeting its financial obligations when they fall due. The Group maintains a prudent borrowing policy which is aimed towards maintaining sufficient cash for all cash flow requirements, managing debt and investment portfolio within the relevant time buckets to maturity, obtaining a diverse range of funding sources, and keeping an adequate amount of credit facilities to provide ample liquidity cushion. As at 30 June 2020, the Group’s total cash and cash equivalents was RM1,650 million (2019: RM1,629 million) which included cash in hand and deposits held at call with banks, net of bank overdrafts. As at 30 June 2020, the Company had total cash and cash equivalents of RM130 million (2019: RM150 million). The Group believes that its contractual obligations, including those disclosed in commitments and contingencies in Notes 49(d) and 50 respectively, can be met from existing cash and investments, operating cash flows, credit lines available and other financing that the Group reasonably expects to be able to secure should the need arise.  

> 204 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

5 Financial Risk and Capital Management Policies (continued) b. Capital Management 

The Group’s capital management objectives are to ensure the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern and maximise shareholders’ value. The Group is committed towards optimising its capital structure and ensuring competitive cost of capital. Implementation of an optimal capital structure includes balancing between debt and equity by putting in place appropriate dividend and financing policies which influence the level of debt and equity. The appropriate debt level is subject to the composition of the Group’s business, business cycle and economic conditions. i. Gearing ratios The gearing ratios used to assess the appropriateness of the Group’s debt level are set out below. The comparative ratios for the financial year ended 30 June 2019 is without the adjustments relating to operating leases as MFRS 16 had not been adopted. Ratio 1 is calculated as Total Debt divided by Total Equity.  

> 2020 2019

Borrowings 2,231 2,575 Lease liabilities 1,814 –Total Debt 4,045 2,575 Total Equity 15,413 15,118 Total Debt/Equity ratio 0.26 0.17 Ratio 2 is calculated as Total Debt divided by Adjusted earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (“EBITDA”).  

> 2020 2019

Total Debt 4,045 2,575 Operating profit 1,513 1,542 Add: Depreciation and amortisation 1,053 598 Add/(less): Other gains and losses 60 (55) Adjusted EBITDA 2,626 2,085 Debt/Adjusted EBITDA ratio 1.54 1.24 The debt/equity ratio of the Group has increased from 0.17 as at 30 June 2019 to 0.26 as at 30 June 2020, mainly due to the leases capitalised as a result of the adoption of MFRS 16 in the financial year ended 30 June 2020. This gearing level still allows the Group the flexibility of raising borrowings to fund the Group’s expansion. ii. Externally imposed capital requirements The Group maintains a debt to equity ratio that complies with the applicable debt covenants as at the reporting date. 

> 205 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

6 Revenue 

Revenue comprise the following:     

> Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

Revenue from contracts with customers 36,195 35,436 – –Revenue from other sources – rental income 739 720 – –– dividend income from subsidiaries – – 766 742 

36,934 36,156 766 742 Analysis of the Group’s revenue from contracts with customers:      

> 2020 Industrial Motors Logistics Others Total

Major goods and services Sale of equipment and vehicles 8,104 17,039 – – 25,143 

Sale of parts, assembly charges and provision of after-sales services 6,842 3,275 – – 10,117 

Engineering services 327 – – 15 342 

Port and related charges – – 219 – 219 

Commission, handling fees and others – 335 – 39 374 15,273 20,649 219 54 36,195 

Geographical market Malaysia 871 3,156 – 45 4,072 

China 1 4,095 10,307 219 2 14,623 

Other countries in Asia 704 3,843 – 7 4,554 

Australasia 2 9,603 3,343 – – 12,946 15,273 20,649 219 54 36,195 

Timing of revenue recognition – at a point in time 12,354 17,944 – 25 30,323 

– over time 2,919 2,705 219 29 5,872 15,273 20,649 219 54 36,195    

> 1China consists of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. 2Australasia consists of Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands.
> 206 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

6 REVENUE (CONTINUED) 

Analysis of the Group’s revenue from contracts with customers: (continued)      

> 2019 Industrial Motors Logistics Others Total

Major goods and services Sale of equipment and vehicles 7,039 18,106 – – 25,145 Sale of parts, assembly charges and provision of after-sales services 6,292 2,918 – – 9,210 Engineering services 304 – – 26 330 Port and related charges – – 264 – 264 Sale of water – – 19 – 19 Commission, handling fees and others – 354 – 114 468 13,635 21,378 283 140 35,436 Geographical market Malaysia 1,060 3,807 – 132 4,999 China 1 3,662 10,398 283 2 14,345 Other countries in Asia 717 4,452 – 6 5,175 Australasia 2 8,196 2,721 – – 10,917 13,635 21,378 283 140 35,436 Timing of revenue recognition – at a point in time 10,618 18,572 – 21 29,211 – over time 3,017 2,806 283 119 6,225 13,635 21,378 283 140 35,436 1 China consists of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. 2 Australasia consists of Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands. Revenue from contracts with customer of the Group includes RM1,871 million (2019: RM1,272 million) that was included in contract liabilities at the beginning of the reporting period. The Group generates rental revenue mainly from leasing of equipment and motor vehicles. It also receives rental income from the leasing certain properties. The following table sets out the maturity analysis of lease payments of the Group, showing the undiscounted lease payments to be received after the reporting date and includes rental income recognised as other income (Note 10):  

> 2020 2019

Within 1 year 399 295 Between 1-2 years 198 176 Between 2-3 years 123 136 Between 3-4 years 67 89 Between 4-5 years 20 53 After 5 years 68 48 Total undiscounted lease payments 875 797 Included in revenue is RM243 million arising from subleasing of right-of-use assets. 

> 207 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

7 Operating Expenses Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Direct costs Finished goods, work in progress and other direct overheads 29,850 29,205 – –Inventory writedown and provision (net) 242 225 – –Raw materials and consumables 293 282 – –Engineering contract costs 122 114 – –

30,507 29,826 – –Director and employee costs Salaries, allowances, overtime and bonus 2,802 2,902 1 – –Defined contribution pension plans 201 197 – –Termination benefits 11 19 – –Performance-based employee share scheme [Note 37] 9 6 – –Training, insurance and other benefits 577 505 – –Directors’ remuneration [Note 8] 9 10 4 4

3,609 3,639 4 4Depreciation and amortisation Amortisation: – prepaid lease rentals – 7 – –– intangible assets 70 67 – –Depreciation: – property, plant and equipment 546 517 – –– right-of-use assets 430 – – –– investment properties 7 7 – –

1,053 598 – –Receivables and loans to joint venture – Impairment of receivables 84 4 – –– Impairment of loans to joint venture 1 – – –– Reversal of impairment of receivables (13) (8) – –

72 (4) – –1 Includes reclassification of employee benefits of RM665 million which were previously included in direct costs in FY2019.  

> 208 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

7 Operating Expenses (continued) Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Leases Hire of plant and machinery and rental of vehicles from: 2– a subsidiary – – – 1– others – 207 – –Operating lease payments for land and buildings 2 – 264 – –Short-term leases 85 – – –Lease of low-value assets 8 – – –

93 471 – 1General expenses Auditors’ remuneration [Note 9] 20 24 1 1Management fee charged by a subsidiary – – 43 37 Other expenses 349 383 1 3

369 407 45 41 

35,703 34,937 49 46 2 Operating lease rental expenses are recognised as lease liabilities unless they are classified as short-term leases or lease of low-value assets upon the adoption of MFRS 16. 

8 Directors’ Remuneration Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Executive Director Emoluments and benefits 4 5 – –Defined contribution pension plans – 1 1 – –Performance-based employee share scheme 1 – 1 – –

5 6 – –Non-Executive Directors Fees and benefits 4 4 4 4

9 10 4 41 Less than RM1 million Estimated monetary value of benefits-in-kind of the Executive Director amounted to RM0.03 million (2019: RM0.03 million) for the Group. Estimated monetary value of benefits-in-kind of Non-executive Directors amounted to RM0.04 million (2019: RM0.1 million) for the Group and the Company. During the financial year, the Group sold vehicles to the Directors and their close family members for RM0.06 million (2019: RM2.5 million) at prices not lower than that offered to employees. Other than as disclosed above, there were no compensation to directors for loss of office, no loans, quasi-loans and other dealings in favour of directors and no material contracts subsisting as at 30 June 2020 or if not then subsisting, entered into since the end of the previous financial year by the Company or its subsidiaries which involved the interests of Directors. 

> 209 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

9 Auditors’ Remuneration Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Fees for statutory audits PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT Malaysia 3 3 1 1Member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited 14 12 – –

17 15 1 1Fees for assurance related services PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT Malaysia 1 – 1 –1 –1Member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited –1 –1 – –

1 – 1 –1 –1Fees for non-audit services PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT Malaysia –1 1 – –Member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited 2 8 – –

2 9 – –

20 24 1 11 Less than RM1 million Non-audit services provided by the Company’s auditors and its member firms comprise tax related services and other advisory services. Non-audit services can be offered by the external auditors if there are efficiency and value added benefits to the Group, without compromising auditor independence. The reduction in non-audit services in the financial year ended 30 June 2020 was mainly due to non-recurring advisory services engaged in prior year relating to the Group’s acquisitions in Australasia and was in compliance with applicable independence policies. 

10 Other Operating Income Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Dividend income from financial assets 120 135 – –Hire of plant and machinery 3 18 – –Operating lease income 1 46 31 – –Government grant income 2 90 5 – –Sales of scrap 22 12 – –Forfeiture of customer deposits 16 8 – –Recoveries and other miscellaneous income 45 59 – 3 –3

342 268 – 3 –31 The operating lease income is primarily from the leasing of properties by operations where their principal activity is not property leasing. The maturity analysis for operating lease income is included in Note 6. 2 The increase during the financial year was mainly due to government wage subsidies in several countries relating to COVID-19. 3 Less than RM1 million  

> 210 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

11 Other (Losses) and Gains Group 2020 2019 

Net foreign currency exchange gain/(loss): – realised foreign exchange gain/(loss) arising from: – settlement of intercompany loans 7 3– liquidation of subsidiaries – (1) – other foreign exchange loss (15) (17) Fair value loss: – forward foreign currency exchange contracts (3) (4) – financial assets at FVTPL (72) (47) Gain on disposal of: – property, plant and equipment 10 24 – investment properties – 1– intangible assets – 17 – subsidiaries – 91 – ROU assets 10 –– others 2 –Loss on disposal of: – property, plant and equipment (11) (6) – subsidiaries – (5) Reversal of impairment of: – intangible assets 28 2– ROU assets 4 –Impairment of: – property, plant and equipment (11) (3) – ROU assets (41) –Compensation income for fixed assets 32 –

(60) 55 

> 211 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

12 Joint Ventures – Group 

The Group’s interest in joint ventures as at 30 June, their respective principal activities and countries of incorporation are disclosed in Note 54. The Group’s interest in joint ventures are as follows:      

> 2020 2019 Material joint ventures Others Total Material joint ventures Others Total

Share of results (66) 1 4 (62) (69) 7 (62) Share of other comprehensive income/(loss) 1 (1) – (1) – (1) Share of total comprehensive (loss)/income (65) 3 (62) (70) 7 (63) Unquoted shares, at costs 988 77 1,065 988 84 1,072 Loans to joint venture 87 – 87 – – –Impairment of loans to joint venture (1) – (1) – – –Share of post-acquisition reserves (88) 43 (45) 57 33 90 Unrealised profit on transactions with joint ventures (11) (6) (17) (11) (6) (17) Impairment losses (96) – (96) – – –

879 114 993 1,034 111 1,145 1 Includes impairment losses of RM96 million. During the financial year, the loans to Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd were reclassified from other receivables to joint ventures as the loans were considered to be part of the net investment in the joint venture following the restructuring of the terms of the loans, where the repayment of the loans are extended. The loans bear fixed interest rates ranging from 6.0% to 6.4% per annum. 

a. Material joint ventures 

In the opinion of the Directors, the joint ventures that are material to the Group are as follows:  

> Name of joint venture Description

Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Sdn Bhd group (“RSDH”) RSDH was formed following the merger of Sime Darby Healthcare Sdn Bhd and Affinity Health Care Holdings Pty Ltd, a subsidiary of Ramsay Health Care Ltd, to build a quality portfolio of hospitals throughout Asia. The principal activities of RSDH are management of hospitals and provision of related healthcare services. Weifang Port Service Co., Ltd. (“WPS”) WPS was formed to own and manage certain shared infrastructure for the port operations in Weifang city and to facilitate the future expansion of the sea channel via the development of the shoreline. Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co., Ltd. (“WSDLT”) WSDLT was previously a subsidiary of the Group and became a joint venture of the Group since 23 May 2016. WSDLT provides terminal handling services relating to the liquid cargoes.  

> 212 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

12 Joint Ventures – Group (continued) 

a. Material joint ventures (continued) 

Summarised financial information The summarised statements of comprehensive income of the material joint ventures are as follows:       

> 2020 2019 RSDH WPS WSDLT RSDH WPS WSDLT

Revenue 951 6 85 939 15 87 Depreciation and amortisation (96) (18) (25) (77) (25) (23) Profit/(loss) before interest and tax 91 (10) 35 129 (326) 25 Interest income 3 – – 3 – 1Interest expense (4) (23) (28) (2) – (24) Profit/(loss) before tax 90 (33) 7 130 (326) 2Taxation (11) – (1) (30) – –Profit/(loss) for the financial year 79 (33) 6 100 (326) 2Non-controlling interests (2) – – (3) – –Profit/(loss) attributable to joint venturers 77 (33) 6 97 (326) 2Other comprehensive income/(loss) 3 (5) 1 12 (16) (1) Total comprehensive income/(loss) 80 (38) 7 109 (342) 1        

> 2020 2019 RSDH WPS WSDLT Total RSDH WPS WSDLT Total

Share of results, excluding impairment losses 39 (12) 3 30 49 (119) 1 (69) Impairment – (74) (22) (96) – – – –Share of results 39 (86) (19) (66) 49 (119) 1 (69) Share of other comprehensive income/(loss) 1 (2) 2 2 1 6 (6) (1) (1) Share of total comprehensive income/(loss) 40 (88) (17) (65) 55 (125) – (70) Dividend received 100 1 – – 100 – – – –1 Another RM75 million is receivable from RSDH. This amount is included under amounts due from joint ventures (Note 30). 2 Includes foreign exchange differences arising from translation of the loans to joint venture. 

> 213 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

12 Joint Ventures – Group (continued) 

a. Material joint ventures (continued) 

Summarised financial information (continued) The summarised statements of financial position of the material joint ventures are as follows:       

> 2020 2019 RSDH WPS WSDLT RSDH WPS WSDLT

Non-current assets 1,258 804 843 1,273 828 861 Current assets Cash and cash equivalents 71 5 38 155 4 7Other current assets 181 22 42 173 13 59 

252 27 80 328 17 66 Non-current liabilities Financial liabilities 1 (42) – (432) (29) – (439) Other non-current liabilities (101) – – (92) – (1) 

(143) – (432) (121) – (440) Current liabilities Financial liabilities 1 – (68) (88) – (66) (38) Other current liabilities (311) (560) 2 (72) (161) (538) (125) 

(311) (628) (160) (161) (604) (163) Non-controlling interests (22) – – (15) – –Net assets 1,034 203 331 1,304 241 324 1 Financial liabilities consist of borrowings and shareholders’ loan. 2 Includes RMB741 million owed to CCCC Tianjin Dredging Co Ltd and accruals for associated costs relating to the material litigation (refer to Note 52). The summarised statements of financial position reflect the amounts presented in the financial statements of the joint ventures adjusted for differences in accounting policies between the Group and the joint ventures, fair value adjustments at date of acquisition and unrealised profit adjustments.  

> 214 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

12 Joint Ventures – Group (continued) 

a. Material joint ventures (continued) 

Reconciliation Reconciliation of the summarised financial information presented to the carrying amounts of the Group’s interest in the material joint ventures are as follows:         

> 2020 2019 RSDH WPS WSDLT Total RSDH WPS WSDLT Total

Net assets At 1 July 1,304 241 324 1,197 583 300 Total comprehensive income/(loss) 80 (38) 7 109 (342) 1Dividend paid (200) – – – – –Dividend payable (150) – – – – –Adoption of MFRS 9 – – – (2) – –Share issue – – – – – 23 At 30 June 1,034 203 331 1,304 241 324 Group’s interest (%) 50.0 36.6 50.0 50.0 36.6 50.0 Interest in joint ventures 517 74 166 757 652 88 162 902 Loans to joint venture – – 86 86 – – – –Goodwill 132 1 – – 132 132 1 – – 132 Impairment – (74) (22) (96) – – – –Carrying amount at end of the financial year 649 – 230 879 784 88 162 1,034 1 Goodwill relates to the Group’s retained interest in RSDH following the disposal of the Group’s healthcare business in June 2013. During the financial year ended 30 June 2020, the Group undertook impairment assessments on WPS and WSDLT, both in the Logistics segment. For WPS, the Group assessed that WPS will not have excess cash inflows from the potential disposal of sea-use-rights after the eventual settlement of an outstanding legal claim by its vendor. In addition, the channel operation business will be impacted by the local operating conditions resulting in the inability to be profitable. As such, the Group’s investment in WPS was written down to nil and impairment of RM74 million was recognised. In addition, the receivables from WPS was also fully impaired and an impairment of RM24 million was recognised. There will not be any further financial exposure to the Group pursuant to the full impairment as the liability of the Group is only limited to the capital contributed. In view of the net current liability position of WSDLT as at 30 June 2020, management has performed an impairment assessment on the recoverability of the investment in WSDLT. The impairment assessment was based on the fair value less costs to sell (“FVLCS”) model using the discounted cash flow projections that were incorporated into the Group Budget that was approved by the Board. The key assumptions in the FVLCS calculation are: 

• Projection period of 8 years; 

• Post-tax discount rate of 12.1%; 

• Average annual revenue growth of 6% for the first 8 years and 3% annually until 2062, (being the end of the useful life of the key non-current assets); and 

• Average annual port operating and overhead costs growth rate of 8% for the first 8 years and 3% annually until 2062. If the discount rate were to increase by 0.5 percentage point, the additional impairment is approximately RM16 million. If the revenue growth rate is reduced by 1 percentage point, the additional impairment is approximately RM17 million. 

> 215 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

12 Joint Ventures – Group (continued) 

b. Commitments and contingent liabilities 

Please refer to Note 52 for a litigation involving WPS. Other than the above, there are no commitments nor contingent liabilities relating to the Group’s interest in the joint ventures. 

13 Associates – Group 

The Group’s interest in the associates as at 30 June, their respective principal activities and countries of incorporation are disclosed in Note 54. The Group’s interest in associates are as follows:      

> 2020 2019 Material associate Others Total Material associate Others Total

Share of results (58) 14 (44) (117) 20 (97) Share of other comprehensive income – 1 5 5 –1 5 5Share of total comprehensive (loss)/income (58) 19 (39) (117) 25 (92) Quoted shares in Malaysia, at costs 292 – 292 292 – 292 Unquoted shares, at costs – 166 166 – 262 262 Share of post-acquisition reserves 47 127 174 60 55 115 Unrealised profit on transactions with associates (8) (2) (10) (8) (2) (10) Impairment losses (270) (1) (271) (221) (5) (226) 

61 290 351 123 310 433 1 Less than RM1 million  

> 216 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

13 Associates – Group (continued) 

a. Material associate 

In the opinion of the Directors, the associate that is material to the Group is as follows:  

> Name of associate Description

Eastern & Oriental Berhad group (“E&O”) E&O is listed on the Main Market of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad with presence in the property development and hospitality sectors, primarily in Greater Kuala Lumpur, Penang and Johor. Summarised financial information The summarised statement of comprehensive income and dividends received from the material associate are as follows: 

> 2020 E&O 2019 E&O

Revenue 487 886 Depreciation and amortisation (23) (15) Profit before interest and tax 2 300 Interest income 25 25 Interest expense (62) (77) (Loss)/profit before tax (35) 248 Taxation (37) (86) (Loss)/profit for the financial year (72) 162 Non-controlling interests (4) (14) (Loss)/profit attributable to owners of the associate (76) 148 Other comprehensive loss (1) –Total comprehensive (loss)/income (77) 148 Share of results – current year (9) 17 – dilution – (16) Impairment (49) (118) Share of total comprehensive loss (58) (117) Dividends received 4 – 11 Distribution of treasury shares as stock dividend. 

> 217 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

13 Associates – Group (continued) 

a. Material associate (continued) 

Summarised financial information (continued) The summarised statement of financial position of the material associate is as follows: 

> 2020 E&O 2019 E&O

Non-current assets 3,576 3,430 Current assets Cash and cash equivalents 296 855 Other current assets 758 1,033 

1,054 1,888 Non-current liabilities Financial liabilities 1 (743) (908) Other non-current liabilities (117) (57) 

(860) (965) Current liabilities Financial liabilities 1 (302) (505) Other current liabilities (412) (675) 

(714) (1,180) Non-controlling interests (45) (42) Net assets 3,011 3,131 1 Financial liabilities consist of borrowings.  

> 218 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

13 Associates – Group (continued) 

a. Material associate (continued) 

Summarised financial information (continued) The summarised statement of financial position reflects the amounts presented in the financial statement of the associate adjusted for differences in accounting policies between the Group and the associate, fair value adjustments at the acquisition date and unrealised profit adjustments. The most recent available financial statement of the associate is used in applying equity method of accounting with appropriate adjustments made for significant transactions occurring between that date and 30 June. Reconciliation Reconciliation of the summarised financial information presented to the carrying amount of the Group’s interest in the material associate is as follows: 

> 2020 E&O 2019 E&O

Net assets At 1 July 3,131 2,881 Total comprehensive income (77) 148 Dividend paid (43) – 1Other reserve adjustments – (26) Share issue – 128 At 30 June 3,011 3,131 Group’s interest (%) 10.9 10.9 Interest in associates 328 341 Goodwill 3 3Impairment losses (270) (221) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 61 123 1 Distribution of 25.9 million treasury shares as stock dividend at a rate of one treasury share for every 50 ordinary shares held. The continued decline in share price of E&O has triggered an impairment assessment of the investment in E&O. The recoverable amount of the Group’s investment in E&O, which is included in Others segment, is determined based on the higher of the value-in-use and its fair value less costs to sell. During the current financial year, the value-in-use calculation was computed using the dividend discount model on the assumption that the dividend per share will remain at the same quantum as the average dividend declared by E&O for the past 5 years from 2016 to 2020. The fair value less costs to sell was determined using the market price of the E&O shares as listed on Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad website on 30 June 2020. As a result, the Group recognised an impairment charge of RM49 million (2019: RM118 million) to write down the investment in E&O to its fair value less costs to sell. 

b. Commitments and contingent liabilities 

There are no commitments nor contingent liabilities relating to the Group’s interest in the associates. 

> 219 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

14 Finance Income Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Interest income from: – subsidiaries – – – 1– banks and other financial institutions 14 14 – 1 –– joint ventures 8 7 – –– other interest income 9 1 – –Islamic profit distribution 9 9 – –

40 31 – 1Accretion of discount on receivables 11 1 – –

51 32 – 1 11 Less than RM1 million 

15 Finance Costs Group 2020 2019 

Interest expense payable to banks and other financial institutions 78 84 Islamic financing distribution payment 22 29 Interest on borrowings 100 113 Cross currency swap interest – 2Interest expense on leases 72 – 1Interest on payables and others 23 33 Total finance costs 195 148 Interest capitalised in: – property, plant and equipment (12) (24) Net finance costs 183 124 1 Less than RM1 million The Company’s finance costs in the current financial year arose from leases and the amount is less than RM1 million. The capitalisation rate used to determine the amount of borrowing costs to be capitalised during the financial year was 3.34% (2019: 4.25%).  

> 220 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

16 Taxation Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Income tax: In respect of current year – Malaysian income tax 33 43 – 1 –– foreign income tax 409 249 – –In respect of prior years – Malaysian income tax (5) 19 – 6– foreign income tax 8 3 – –Total income tax 445 314 – 1 6Deferred tax: – origination and reversal of temporary differences (3) 114 – –– effects of recognition of previously unrecognised temporary differences and temporary differences not recognised (40) (18) – –– effects of change in real property gain tax (“RPGT”) rates – (129) – –Total deferred tax (43) (33) – –Total tax expense 402 281 – 1 61 Less than RM1 million Tax reconciliation Reconciliation from tax at applicable tax rate to tax expense is as follows:     

> Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

Profit before tax 1,275 1,291 717 697 Less: Share of results of joint ventures 62 62 – –Share of results of associates 44 97 – –

1,381 1,450 717 697 Applicable tax 365 361 172 167 Withholding tax on foreign income 28 26 – –Effects of tax incentives and non-taxable income: – non-taxable dividends (29) (32) (184) (178) – tax incentives and other income (14) (21) – –Effects of non-deductible expenses 89 80 12 11 Effects of capital gains tax – (8) – –Effects of change in RPGT rates – (129) – –Effects of deferred tax assets not recognised and previously unrecognised deferred taxes (40) (18) – –Under provision in prior years 3 22 – 6Tax expense for the financial year 402 281 – 1 6Applicable tax rate (%) 26.4 24.9 24.0 24.0 Effective tax rate (%) 29.1 19.4 – 0.9 1 Less than RM1 million The Group’s higher effective tax rate of 29.1% for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 was mainly due to non-deductible expenses in certain subsidiaries and withholding taxes. The Group’s lower effective tax rate of 19.4% for the financial year ended 30 June 2019 was mainly due to the effects of change in RPGT rates in Malaysia. 

> 221 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

17 Dividends paid in cash Group/Company 2020 2019 

Second interim dividend of 7.0 sen per share for the financial year ended 30 June 2019, paid on 31 October 2019 476 –Special interim dividend of 1.0 sen per share for the financial year ended 30 June 2019, paid on 31 October 2019 68 –Second interim dividend of 4.0 sen per share for the financial year ended 30 June 2018, paid on 31 October 2018 – 272 Special interim dividend of 2.0 sen per share for the financial year ended 30 June 2018, paid on 31 October 2018 – 136 First interim dividend of 2.0 sen per share for the financial year ended 30 June 2020, paid on 12 May 2020 (2019 : 2.0 sen per share, paid on 8 May 2019) 136 136 

680 544 The Board of Directors has declared a second interim dividend of 7.0 sen per ordinary share (amounting to RM476 million) and a special dividend of 1.0 sen per ordinary share (amounting to RM68 million) in respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2020. The dividends will be paid on 30 October 2020. 

18 Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) – Group 

Other comprehensive income/(loss) and the tax effects are analysed as follows:   

> Attributable to owners of the Company 2020 Hedging reserve Exchange reserve Retained profits Total Non-controlling interests Total Tax effects Net of tax

Currency translation differences – 132 – 132 1 133 – 133 

Net change in fair value of cash flow hedges 19 – – 19 – 19 (5) 14 

Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates 1 3 – 4 – 4 – 4

Reclassified to profit or loss: – currency translation differences on repayment of net investments and disposal/ liquidation of subsidiaries – (7) – (7) – (7) – (7) 

– changes in fair value of cash flow hedges as adjustment to revenue and other gains and losses (1) – – (1) – (1) – (1) 

– changes in fair value of cash flow hedges to inventories (7) – – (7) – (7) 2 (5) 

Actuarial loss on defined benefit pension plans – – (4) (4) – (4) – (4) 

Share of actuarial gain on defined benefit pension plans of a joint venture – – 1 1 – 1 – 1

Other comprehensive income/(loss) before tax 12 128 (3) 137 1 138 (3) 135 

Taxation (3) – – (3) – (3) 

Total other comprehensive income/(loss) after tax 9 128 (3) 134 1 135 222 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

18 Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) – Group (continued) 

Other comprehensive income/(loss) and the tax effects are analysed as follows: (continued)   

> Attributable to owners of the Company 2019 Hedging reserve Exchange reserve Retained profits Total Non-controlling interests Total Tax effects Net of tax

Currency translation differences – (58) – (58) (1) (59) – (59) Net change in fair value of cash flow hedges (4) – – (4) – (4) 2 (2) Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates – 2 – 2 – 2 – 2Reclassified to profit or loss: – currency translation differences on repayment of net investments and disposal/ liquidation of subsidiaries – 2 – 2 – 2 – 2– changes in fair value of cash flow hedges as adjustment to revenue and other gains and losses 12 – – 12 – 12 (1) 11 – changes in fair value of cash flow hedges to inventories 3 – – 3 – 3 (1) 2Share of actuarial gain on defined benefit pension plans of a joint venture – – 2 2 – 2 – 2Other comprehensive income/(loss) before tax 11 (54) 2 (41) (1) (42) – (42) Taxation – – – – – –Total other comprehensive income/(loss) after tax 11 (54) 2 (41) (1) (42) 

> 223 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

19 Property, Plant and Equipment – Group 2020 Freehold land Leasehold land Buildings Plant and machinery Rental assets Vehicles, equipment and fixtures Capital work in progress Total 

At 1 July 2019 before restatement 399 398 2,472 363 1,003 471 621 5,727 

Adoption of MFRS 16 [Note 51] – (398) – – – – – (398) 

At 1 July 2019 after restatement 399 – 2,472 363 1,003 471 621 5,329 

Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 18 – 281 28 97 16 1 441 

Additions – – 30 65 677 229 206 1,207 

Disposals – – (11) (5) – (19) (10) (45) 

Impairment losses – – (8) – (3) – – (11) 

Reclassification 68 – 473 16 62 47 (666) –

Depreciation – – (96) (75) (248) (127) – (546) 

Exchange differences 4 – 33 2 14 6 (1) 58 

Transferred to: – inventories – – – – (397) – – (397) 

– finance lease receivables 1 – – – (16) – – (9) (25) 

– assets held for sale – – (1) – – – – (1) 

At 30 June 2020 489 – 3,173 378 1,205 623 142 6,010 

Cost 489 – 4,266 1,073 1,668 1,568 142 9,206 

Accumulated depreciation – – (1,047) (687) (459) (941) – (3,134) 

Accumulated impairment losses – – (46) (8) (4) (4) – (62) 

Carrying amount at end of the financial year 489 – 3,173 378 1,205 623 142 6,010   

> 1Reclassified to finance lease receivables following the execution of an agreement with a customer in May 2019.
> 224 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

19 Property, Plant and Equipment – Group (continued) 2019 Freehold land Leasehold land Buildings Plant and machinery Rental assets Vehicles, equipment and fixtures Capital work in progress Total 

At 1 July 2018 400 395 2,521 431 1,015 435 576 5,773 Acquisition of subsidiaries – – 19 22 – 1 – 42 Disposal of subsidiaries – – – – – (6) – (6) Additions 1 1 44 31 710 130 163 1,080 Disposals – (1) (4) (5) (1) (10) (1) (22) Impairment losses – – – (1) (2) – – (3) Reclassification – – 37 28 4 41 (110) –Depreciation – (7) (95) (77) (218) (120) – (517) Exchange differences (1) 10 (24) (4) – 1 (1) (19) Transferred to: – inventories – – – – (505) – – (505) – finance lease receivables 1 – – (25) (62) – (1) (6) (94) – assets held for sale (1) – (1) – – – – (2) At 30 June 2019 399 398 2,472 363 1,003 471 621 5,727 Cost 399 470 3,458 1,041 1,435 1,403 621 8,827 Accumulated depreciation – (68) (944) (666) (432) (928) – (3,038) Accumulated impairment losses – (4) (42) (12) – (4) – (62) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 399 398 2,472 363 1,003 471 621 5,727 1 Reclassified to finance lease receivables following the execution of an agreement with a customer in May 2019.   

> At 1 July 2018 Freehold land Leasehold land Buildings Plant and machinery Rental assets Vehicles, equipment and fixtures Capital work in progress Total

Cost 400 459 3,411 1,061 1,425 1,366 576 8,698 Accumulated depreciation – (60) (850) (621) (410) (925) – (2,866) Accumulated impairment losses – (4) (40) (9) – (6) – (59) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 400 395 2,521 431 1,015 435 576 5,773 

> 225 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

19 Property, Plant and Equipment – Group (continued) a. Capital work in progress 

Included in additions to the capital work in progress is interest expense capitalised of RM12 million (2019: RM24 million). 

b. Assets pledged as security 

Property, plant and equipment with a total carrying amount of RM69 million (2019: RM72 million) were pledged as security for borrowings (see Note 40). 

c. Impairment losses 

During the financial year, certain subsidiaries carried out a review of the recoverable amount of its property, plant and equipment. The review led to the recognition of an impairment of RM11 million (2019: RM3 million). The impairment recognised includes RM8 million relating to Jining Sime Darby Longgong Port Limited in the Logistics segment. The impairment assessment was undertaken as a result of the deterioration in its financial performance and net current liabilities position. 

d. Reconciliation to the statement of cash flows 

Reconciliation to the cash flow for purchase of property, plant and equipment is as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Additions for the financial year 1,207 1,080 Add/(less): Net changes in payables for purchase of property, plant and equipment 8 14 Additions to rental assets, included as changes in working capital in the statements of cash flows (677) (710) Interest expense capitalised in capital work in progress (12) (24) Total cash payments during the financial year 526 360  

> 226 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

20 Right-of-use assets 2020 - Group Leasehold land and sea-use rights Buildings Vehicles, equipment and fixtures Rental assets Total 

Adoption of MFRS 16 [Note 51] 873 1,001 105 471 2,450 

At 1 July 2019 after restatement 873 1,001 105 471 2,450 

Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses – 137 22 – 159 

Additions 36 132 41 24 233 

Disposals (12) – – – (12) 

Terminations – (7) – – (7) 

Sublease arrangement – – – (6) (6) 

Impairment losses (net) 1 (37) – – – (37) 

Depreciation (40) (179) (47) (164) (430) 

Exchange differences 16 16 5 8 45 

At 30 June 2020 836 1,100 126 333 2,395 

Cost 1,099 1,285 174 481 3,039 

Accumulated depreciation (222) (185) (48) (148) (603) 

Accumulated impairment losses (41) – – – (41) 

Carrying amount at end of the financial year 836 1,100 126 333 2,395  

> 1

Includes an impairment of RM41 million relating to a potential compulsory land acquisition at below carrying value in the Motors segment. The impairment assessment was based on the FVLCS model taking into account the compensation received by the government for the compulsory land acquisition. The fair value is categorised as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as the FVLCS was determined based on an observable input. The amount also includes a reversal of impairment of RM4 million relating to the impairment assessment of the Industrial segment’s Papua New Guinea intangible assets (Note 23). The Company’s ROU assets comprise of vehicles leased from a subsidiary. The carrying value of these assets is less than RM1 million as at 30 June 2020. 

227 Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

21 Prepaid Lease Rentals – Group 

The prepaid lease rentals are payments for rights in respect of the following:  

> Land-use rights Sea-use rights Total

2020 

At 1 July 2019 before restatement 184 108 292 

Adoption of MFRS 16 [Note 51] (184) (108) (292) 

At 1 July 2019 after restatement / At 30 June 2020 – – –2019 

At 1 July 2018 184 116 300 Additions 6 – 6Disposals – (4) (4) Amortisation (4) (3) (7) Exchange differences (2) (1) (3) At 30 June 2019 184 108 292 Cost 253 123 376 Accumulated amortisation (69) (15) (84) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 184 108 292 

At 1 July 2018 

Cost 244 135 379 Accumulated amortisation (58) (19) (77) Accumulated impairment losses (2) – (2) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 184 116 300  

> 228 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

22 Investment Properties – Group Freehold land Leasehold land Buildings Capital work in progress Total 2020 

At 1 July 2019 45 28 213 – 286 

Additions – – 17 – 17 

Depreciation – (1) (6) – (7) 

Exchange differences – – – 1 – –1

At 30 June 2020 45 27 224 – 296 

Cost 45 38 270 – 353 

Accumulated depreciation – (11) (45) – (56) 

Accumulated impairment losses – – (1) – (1) 

Carrying amount at end of the financial year 45 27 224 – 296 2019 

At 1 July 2018 3 29 99 158 289 Additions 6 – – – 6Disposals – – (2) – (2) Reclassification 36 – 122 (158) –Depreciation – (1) (6) – (7) Exchange differences – – – 1 – – 1At 30 June 2019 45 28 213 – 286 Cost 45 38 256 – 339 Accumulated depreciation – (10) (39) – (49) Accumulated impairment losses – – (4) – (4) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 45 28 213 – 286 

At 1 July 2018 

Cost 3 38 137 158 336 Accumulated depreciation – (9) (34) – (43) Accumulated impairment losses – – (4) – (4) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 3 29 99 158 289 1 Less than RM1 million The fair value of investment properties as at 30 June 2020 was RM2,970 million (2019: RM2,955 million). The fair value was arrived at after taking into consideration the valuation performed by external professional firms of surveyors and valuers. The fair value is categorised as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy as the valuation, which was performed using comparable and investment basis, was based on observable valuation inputs. 

> 229 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

22 Investment Properties – Group (continued) 

Rental income generated from and direct operating expenses incurred on income generating investment properties are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Rental income 15 15 Direct operating expenses (4) (2) 

23 Intangible Assets – Group Acquired Internally generated assets 1Total intangible assets Goodwill Distribution/ dealership rights Computer software Trademarks and others Total 2020 

At 1 July 2019 225 769 13 54 1,061 423 1,484 

Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 23 57 43 – 123 – 123 

Additions – – 9 – 9 – 9

Reversal of impairment losses – 28 – – 28 – 28 

Amortisation – – (11) (6) (17) (53) (70) 

Exchange differences 4 15 1 (2) 18 4 22 

At 30 June 2020 252 869 55 46 1,222 374 1,596 

Cost 416 869 90 62 1,437 568 2,005 

Accumulated amortisation – – (35) (15) (50) (194) (244) 

Accumulated impairment losses (164) – – (1) (165) – (165) 

Carrying amount at end of the financial year 252 869 55 46 1,222 374 1,596 2019 

At 1 July 2018 126 776 13 10 925 490 1,415 Acquisition of subsidiaries 106 12 2 55 175 – 175 Additions – – 5 – 5 – 5Disposals – – (1) (7) (8) – (8) Reversal of impairment losses – – – 2 2 – 2Amortisation – – (6) (6) (12) (55) (67) Exchange differences (7) (19) – – (26) (12) (38) At 30 June 2019 225 769 13 54 1,061 423 1,484 Cost 387 797 62 64 1,310 563 1,873 Accumulated amortisation – – (49) (9) (58) (140) (198) Accumulated impairment losses (162) (28) – (1) (191) – (191) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 225 769 13 54 1,061 423 1,484 1 Internally generated assets consist of computer software and development costs.  

> 230 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

23 Intangible Assets – Group (continued) Acquired Internally generated assets 1Total intangible assets At 1 July 2018 Goodwill Distribution/ dealership rights Computer software Trademarks and others Total 

Cost 292 804 77 61 1,234 579 1,813 Accumulated amortisation – – (63) (36) (99) (86) (185) Accumulated impairment losses (166) (28) (1) (15) (210) (3) (213) Carrying amount at end of the financial year 126 776 13 10 925 490 1,415 1 Internally generated assets consist of computer software and development costs. 

a. Intangible assets under development 

No interest expense was capitalised in the financial years ended 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019. 

b. Material intangible assets 

In the opinion of the Directors, intangible assets and their carrying amounts which are material to the Group are as follows:     

> Carrying amount Segment Investment Intangible asset 2020 2019

Industrial Heavy equipment business Goodwill 40 38 Distribution rights 708 668 Chroming business Goodwill 101 99 New enterprise resource planning system Computer software 374 423 Motors Australia Goodwill 47 30 Dealership rights 150 89 Goodwill, distribution rights and dealership rights The goodwill and the distribution rights for the heavy equipment business arose from the acquisition of the Bucyrus distribution business in the Industrial division’s dealerships in December 2011. The chroming business goodwill arose from the acquisition of the Heavy Maintenance group in December 2018. The goodwill and dealership rights for the Motors segment are in respect of the dealership rights in Brisbane and Sydney, Australia. The increase in the current year was mainly due to the acquisition of the dealerships in Sydney, Australia (Note 45(b)). Computer software The internally generated computer software is in relation to the new enterprise resource planning system which was developed for the Industrial division and has been rolled out to all its dealerships in the different regions. The annual amortisation rate is 10%. 

> 231 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

23 Intangible Assets – Group (continued) 

c. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives 

Goodwill and distribution/dealership rights are intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. These assets are not amortised as they are not confined to a predetermined service period and they are expected to contribute to net cash inflows indefinitely, but are tested for impairment annually, either individually or at the cash-generating unit (“CGU”) level. The remaining goodwill allocated to other CGUs amounted to RM64 million (2019: RM58 million). Based on impairment assessment performed by management, no impairment was required for the current and previous financial year. Heavy equipment goodwill and distribution rights The recoverable amounts of the CGUs were determined based on the CGUs’ value-in-use (“VIU”) model, determined using the discounted cash flow projections based on the five year budget projections for the heavy equipment business of the Industrial operations in Australasia that were included in the Group Budget approved by the Board. Most of the distribution rights and goodwill have been allocated to Australia. The key assumptions used in the impairment assessment for Australia are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Discount rates (%) per annum 9.0 9.0 Range of forecast growth rates (%): – revenue (15) – 4 (1) – 3 – earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (“EBITDA”) (15) – 9 2 – 14 – terminal 2.5 2.5 Based on management’s assessment, no impairment charge is required on the carrying value of the goodwill and distribution rights for the heavy equipment business of the Industrial operations in Australasia in the current and previous financial years. Management believes that there is no reasonable possible change in any key assumption that would cause the carrying amounts of the CGUs to materially exceed the recoverable amounts in the current and previous financial years. During the financial year, management decided to reverse the impairment for distribution rights of RM28 million and right-of-use assets of RM4 million during the financial year due to the reversal of the impairment indicator following the improvement of the mining operations in Papua New Guinea.  

> 232 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

23 Intangible Assets – Group (continued) c. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives (continued) 

Chroming business goodwill The recoverable amount of the CGU is determined based on the CGU’s VIU model, determined using the discounted cash flow projections based on the five year budget projections for the chroming business of the Industrial operations in Australia that were included in the Group Budget approved by the Board. The key assumptions used in the impairment assessment for the chroming business in Australia are as follows: 

> 2020

Discount rates (%) per annum 9.0 

Range of forecast growth rates (%): – revenue 0 – 11 

– EBITDA 0 – 17 

– terminal 2.5 

Based on management’s assessment, no impairment charge is required on the carrying value of the goodwill of the chroming business of the Industrial operations in Australia. Management believes that there is no reasonable possible change in any key assumption that would cause the carrying amount of the CGU to materially exceed the recoverable amount. In 2019, management assessed that no impairment charge was required as there was no indicator of impairment. The purchase price allocation for the acquisition of the Heavy Maintenance group was completed in June 2019. Australia Motors goodwill and dealership rights – Brisbane operations The recoverable amounts of the Brisbane operations are determined based on the VIU model, using five year budget projections that were included in the Group Budget approved by the Board. The key assumptions used for the impairment testing are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Discount rates (%) per annum 9.9 10.5 Range of forecast growth rates (%): – revenue (13) – 17 3 – 11 – terminal 2.0 2.5 Based on management’s assessment, no impairment charge is required on the carrying value of the goodwill and dealership rights of the Brisbane operations in the current and prior financial years. Management believes that there is no reasonable possible change in any key assumption that would cause the carrying amounts of the CGUs to materially exceed the recoverable amounts in the current and previous financial years. 

> 233 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

23 Intangible Assets – Group (continued) c. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives (continued) 

Australia Motors goodwill and dealership rights – Sydney operations The goodwill and dealership rights of the Sydney operations arose from the acquisition of the dealerships in Sydney, Australia during the financial year. The recoverable amounts of the Sydney operations are determined based on the VIU model, using five year budget projections that were included in the Group Budget approved by the Board. The key assumptions used for the impairment testing are as follows: Discount rates (%) per annum 9.9 Range of forecast growth rates (%): – revenue (15) – 57 – terminal 2.0 A residual value of properties at AUD91 million (approximately RM268 million) in the terminal year calculated at a yield of 6% per annum Based on management’s assessment, no impairment charge is required on the carrying value of the goodwill and dealership rights of the Sydney operations in the current financial year. Management believes that there is no reasonable possible change in any key assumption that would cause the carrying amounts of the CGUs to materially exceed the recoverable amounts in the current financial year. 

d. Intangible assets with finite useful lives 

Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortised over their useful lives. The amortisation charge for the financial year of RM70 million (2019: RM67 million) was recorded in profit or loss. 

24 Subsidiaries – Company 

The Company’s equity interest in the subsidiaries, their respective principal activities and countries of incorporation are disclosed in Note 54.  

> 2020 2019

Unquoted shares at cost 8,000 3,034 Accumulated impairment – (31) Contribution to a subsidiary 887 887 

8,887 3,890 During the financial year, the Company subscribed to additional shares issued by a subsidiary for RM4,997 million by way of capitalisation of outstanding amount due from the subsidiary. In addition, two subsidiaries were transferred to another subsidiary at their carrying values. Contribution to a subsidiary refers to amounts for which the Company does not expect repayment in the foreseeable future and is considered as part of the Company’s investment in the subsidiary.  

> 234 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

25 Amounts Due from Subsidiaries – Company 2020 2019 

Current (non-interest bearing) 969 5,897 

969 5,897 The amounts due from subsidiaries are unsecured and mainly consists of advances to Sime Darby Holdings Berhad (“SDHB”) and dividends receivable from subsidiaries. During the year, RM4,997 million of the advance to SDHB was capitalised as part of the inter-company balance restructuring. As at 30 June 2020, the remaining advance to SDHB of RM872 million and amounts due from other subsidiaries of RM97 million are classified as current as these amounts are mainly cash sweeping arrangements within the Group and dividend receivable which are expected to be realised in the next financial year. 

26 Financial Assets at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss Loan to a joint venture Unquoted shares Others Total 2020 

At 1 July 2019 65 21 1 87 

Additions 8 – – 8

Changes in fair value (72) – – (72) 

Exchange differences (1) – – (1) 

At 30 June 2020 – 21 1 22 2019 

At 1 July 2018 before restatement – – – –Adoption of MFRS 9 98 21 1 120 At 1 July 2018 after restatement 98 21 1 120 Additions 17 – – 17 Changes in fair value (47) – – (47) Exchange differences (3) – – (3) At 30 June 2019 65 21 1 87 The loan to a joint venture (Mine Energy Solutions Pty Ltd (“MES”)) has no fixed and determinable payment terms and bears interest at 15% (2019: 15%) per annum. The fair value of the loan was based on the probability weighted discounted cash flows calculated under several scenarios. A discount rate of 15% (2019: 15%) is used. During the financial year, the carrying value of the loan was fully impaired due to the increased uncertainties on the eventual commercialisation and the net cash flows derived thereon for the projects in MES. As a result, a fair value loss of RM72 million was recognised in profit or loss during the financial year. 

> 235 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

27 Deferred Tax 

Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred taxes relate to the same tax authority. The following amounts, determined after appropriate offsetting, are shown in the statements of financial position:  

> Group 2020 2019

Deferred tax assets 613 542 Deferred tax liabilities (331) (289) 

282 253 Deferred taxes expected to be realised within 12 months 310 293 Deferred taxes expected to be realised after 12 months (28) (40) 

282 253 Tax losses for which the tax effects have not been recognised in the financial statements – Expiring within 10 years 1,753 1,845 – With no expiry period 379 278 

2,132 2,123 Under the Malaysia Finance Act 2018 which was gazetted on 27 December 2018, the unutilised tax losses in Malaysia will be imposed with a time limit of utilisation of 7 years. Any accumulated tax losses from year of assessment 2018 can be carried forward for another 7 years of assessment. Deferred tax is not recognised on the unremitted earnings of overseas subsidiaries where the Group is able to control the timing of the remittance and it is probable that there will be no remittance in the foreseeable future. If these earnings were remitted, tax of RM226 million (2019: RM207 million) would be payable.  

> 236 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

27 Deferred Tax (continued) 

The components and movements of the Group’s net deferred taxes are as follows:   

> 2020 Property, plant and equipment and investment properties Intangible assets Impairment and provisions Tax losses and unabsorbed capital allowances Others Total

At 1 July 2019 205 (339) 261 85 41 253 

(Charged)/credited to profit or loss (3) 1 83 (21) (17) 43 

Charged to other comprehensive income – – – – (3) (3) 

Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 13 (22) (2) 5 (2) (8) 

Exchange differences 1 (5) 2 – (1) (3) 

At 30 June 2020 216 (365) 344 69 18 282 

Deferred tax assets (before offsetting) 326 – 344 69 33 772 

Deferred tax liabilities (before offsetting) (110) (365) – – (15) (490) 

Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 216 (365) 344 69 18 282 Deferred tax before offsetting Offsetting Deferred tax after offsetting 

Deferred tax assets 772 (159) 613 

Deferred tax liabilities (490) 159 (331) 

Net deferred tax assets 282 – 282 2019 Property, plant and equipment and investment properties Intangible assets Impairment and provisions Tax losses and unabsorbed capital allowances Others Total 

At 1 July 2018 before restatement 123 (310) 183 220 17 233 Adoption of MFRS 9 – – 8 – – 8At 1 July 2018 after restatement 123 (310) 191 220 17 241 Credited/(charged) to profit or loss 85 (16) 76 (134) 22 33 Acquisition of subsidiaries (2) (20) 5 – – (17) Disposal of subsidiaries – – (3) – – (3) Exchange differences (1) 7 (8) (1) 2 (1) At 30 June 2019 205 (339) 261 85 41 253 Deferred tax assets (before offsetting) 306 1 261 85 59 712 Deferred tax liabilities (before offsetting) (101) (340) – – (18) (459) Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) 205 (339) 261 85 41 253  

> Deferred tax before offsetting Offsetting Deferred tax after offsetting

Deferred tax assets 712 (170) 542 Deferred tax liabilities (459) 170 (289) Net deferred tax assets 253 – 253 

> 237 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

28 Tax Recoverable Group 2020 2019 

Non-current 46 65 Current 56 72 

102 137 The non-current tax recoverable includes additional tax assessments paid and withholding taxes, which would normally take more than a year to resolve with the relevant tax authorities. These taxes are recognised as recoverable as the Group has reasonable grounds to believe that the additional tax assessments were incorrectly issued and the withholding taxes will be refunded once the Group complies with the claim procedure and documentation requirements. 

29 Derivative Assets/Liabilities – Group 

The Group’s derivative assets and liabilities are as follows:    

> 2020 2019 Derivative assets Derivative liabilities Net Derivative assets Derivative liabilities Net

Non-current Derivatives not designated as hedges: – forward foreign exchange contracts [note (a)] – – – 2 – 2

– – – 2 – 2Current Derivatives not designated as hedges: – forward foreign exchange contracts [note (a)] – (2) (2) 2 (16) (14) Cash flow hedges: – forward foreign exchange contracts [note (a)] 

3 (4) (1) 4 (2) 2

3 (6) (3) 6 (18) (12) Total 3 (6) (3) 8 (18) (10) These derivatives are entered into to hedge foreign currency risks as described in Note 5. Whilst all derivatives entered provide economic hedges to the Group, derivatives not designated as hedges are instruments that either do not qualify for the application of hedge accounting or where the certain subsidiaries have chosen not to apply hedge accounting.  

> 238 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

29 Derivative Assets/Liabilities – Group (continued) a. Forward foreign exchange contracts 

Forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into with the following notional amounts and maturities:   

> 2020 Maturities 2019 Maturities Less than 1 year Less than 1 year 1 year to 3 years Total

Forward contracts used to hedge anticipated sales denominated in: – United States Dollar 55 59 – 59 – other currencies 21 28 – 28 

76 87 – 87 Forward contracts used to hedge receivables denominated in: – United States Dollar 54 5 – 5– European Union Euro 4 15 – 15 – other currencies 16 9 – 9

74 29 – 29 Forward contracts used to hedge intercompany receivables denominated in: – Chinese Renminbi 15 7 – 7– Australian Dollar 59 – – –– New Zealand Dollar 27 – – –

101 7 – 7Forward contracts used to hedge anticipated purchases denominated in: – United States Dollar 308 475 – 475 – European Union Euro 24 573 90 663 – Australian Dollar 50 98 – 98 – other currencies 45 80 – 80 

427 1,226 90 1,316 

> 239 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

29 Derivative Assets/Liabilities – Group (continued) a. Forward foreign exchange contracts (continued) 

Forward foreign exchange contracts have been entered into with the following notional amounts and maturities: (continued)   

> 2020 Maturities 2019 Maturities Less than 1 year Less than 1 year 1 year to 3 years Total

Forward contracts used to hedge payables denominated in: – United States Dollar 190 336 – 336 – European Union Euro 85 191 – 191 – other currencies 18 28 – 28 

293 555 – 555 Forward contracts used to hedge borrowings denominated in: – United States Dollar 47 58 – 58 Total notional amount 1,018 1,962 90 2,052 Net fair value (liabilities)/assets (3) (12) 2 (10)  

> 240 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

30 Receivables and other assets Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Non-current Trade receivables 3 25 – –Amounts due from joint ventures [note (a)] 56 125 – –Finance lease receivables [note (a)] 82 81 – –Other receivables 18 7 – –

159 238 – –Accumulated impairment losses – amounts due from joint ventures – (1) – –Total receivables 159 237 – –Prepayments 63 35 – –Pension assets [note (b)] 8 11 – –Total receivables and other assets 230 283 – –Current Trade receivables 2,573 2,753 – –Amounts due from joint ventures 168 86 – –Amounts due from associates 5 – – –Finance lease receivables 70 35 – –Other receivables: – rebates from principals 385 390 – –– assembly purchases and expenses recoverable 447 430 – –– warranty and parts claims 128 95 – –– amount due from principal 120 – – –– infrastructure costs recoverable – 30 – –– others 198 267 1 –Deposits 78 90 – –

4,172 4,176 1 –Accumulated impairment losses: – trade receivables (121) (86) – –– rebates from principals (3) (1) – –– amounts due from joint ventures (24) (1) – –– other receivables (77) (77) – –Total receivables 3,947 4,011 1 –Indirect taxes recoverable 86 109 – 2Government grant receivable 9 – – –Total receivables and other assets 4,042 4,120 1 2Total non-current and current receivables 4,106 4,248 1 –The Group’s credit risk management objectives and policies are described in Note 5. 

> 241 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

30 Receivables and Other Assets (continued) a. Non-current receivables 

i. Amounts due from joint ventures The amounts due from joint ventures represent unsecured long-term loans advanced to Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd (“WSDLT”) and Weifang Sime Darby West Port Co Ltd (“WSDWP”). During the financial year, the loans to WSDLT amounting to RMB148 million (approximately RM89 million) were reclassified to net investment in joint ventures following the restructuring of the terms of these loans. As at 30 June 2020, the loans to WSDLT and WSDWP amounted to approximately RMB33 million and RMB59.5 million (approximately RM20 million and RM36 million) (2019: RMB148 million and RMB59.5 million (approximately RM89 million and RM36 million)) respectively. Long-term loans to joint ventures bear fixed interest rates of 6.0% per annum (2019: 6.0% to 6.4%). ii. Finance lease receivables Finance lease receivables are in respect of specific assets acquired for contract assembly projects which the Group leases to a customer of the Group. The finance lease receivables are discounted at the effective discount rates ranging from 1.3% to 10.7% (2019: 4.5% to 8.2%). Movement in finance lease receivables is as follows:  

> 2020 2019

At 1 July 116 –Additions 37 27 Acquisition of subsidiaries 2 –Lease payments received during the financial year (40) (6) Finance income 11 1Transfer from property, plant and equipment 25 94 Exchange differences 1 –At 30 June 152 116 The following table sets out a maturity analysis of lease receivables, showing the undiscounted lease payments to be received after the reporting date:  

> 2020 2019

Within 1 year 77 41 Between 1-2 years 54 54 Between 2-3 years 25 28 Between 3-4 years 3 2Between 4-5 years 2 1After 5 years 2 2Total undiscounted lease payments 163 128 Unearned finance income (11) (12) Net investment in the lease 152 116 

b. Pension assets 

Certain subsidiaries in Hong Kong operate funded defined benefit plans. The defined benefit plans are determined based on an annual actuarial valuation as at 30 June by external consultants where the amount of the benefits that eligible employees have earned in return for their services in the current and prior financial years are estimated. The pension assets presented is net of present value of obligations of RM28 million (2019: RM28 million).  

> 242 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

31 Inventories – Group 2020 2019 

Raw material and consumables 27 46 Work in progress 384 377 Trading inventories – equipment 2,815 2,765 – motor vehicles 3,152 3,521 – parts and accessories 1,948 1,812 – others 20 17 

8,346 8,538 Inventories are written down where the net realisable value is expected to be below the carrying amount. During the financial year, the Group wrote down and provided an amount of RM242 million (2019: RM225 million). The carrying amount of trading inventories stated at net realisable value was RM1,906 million (2019: RM1,095 million). Inventories with a total carrying amount of RM20 million (2019: Nil) were pledged as security for borrowings (see Note 40). 

32 Contract Assets and Liabilities – Group 2020 2019 

Contract assets Current Engineering contracts [note (a)] 54 46 

54 46 Contract liabilities Non-current Deferred income: – maintenance income and extended warranties 147 169 

147 169 Current Engineering contracts [note (a) and (b)] 15 14 Deferred income: – maintenance income and extended warranties [note (b)] 343 441 Customer deposits [note (c)] 1,740 1,503 Incentives payable and others 30 33 

2,128 1,991 

2,275 2,160 

> 243 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

32 Contract Assets and Liabilities – Group (continued) a. Engineering contracts 

The engineering contracts represent the timing differences in revenue recognition and the milestone billings. The milestone billings are structured and/or negotiated with customers to reflect the physical completion of the contracts. 

b. Contract value yet to be recognised as revenue 

Revenue expected to be recognised in the future relating to performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) at the reporting date, are as follows:    

> 2021 2022 After 2022 Total

Deferred income 346 78 76 500 Engineering contracts 108 14 44 166 454 92 120 666 

c. Customer deposits 

Customer deposits relate to deposits made by customers for the purchases of equipment and vehicles which were partially delivered or have yet to be delivered by the Group at the reporting date. The Group applies the practical expedient in MFRS 15 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” on not disclosing the aggregate amount of the revenue expected to be recognised in the future as the performance obligation is part of a contract that has an original expected duration of less than one year. Customer deposits increased 16% mainly arising from higher orders placed by customers. 

33 Prepayments – Group 2020 2019 

Prepaid inventories 263 448 Other prepayments 160 115 

423 563 

34 Bank Balances, Deposits and Cash Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Deposits – Islamic 245 342 130 –– conventional 343 335 – –

588 677 130 –Cash at bank and in hand 1,106 1,046 – 150 Total bank balances, deposits and cash 1,694 1,723 130 150 Effective profit/interest rates per annum on deposits with licensed banks/financial institutions    

> %%%%

– Islamic 1.95 3.13 1.95 –– conventional 1.52 1.75 – – 

> 244 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

35 Assets Held for Sale 

Assets held for sale consists primarily of a property in Australia under the Industrial segment and the sale has been completed subsequent to the financial year end. On 22 April 2020, the Group had entered into conditional agreements with C.P. Retail Development Company Limited (“CP”), Tesco Holdings B.V. (“Tesco BV”) and Tesco Plc for the disposal of the Group’s entire 30% equity interest in Tesco Stores (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. (“Tesco Malaysia”), an associate of the Group, to CP in accordance with the joint venture agreement with Tesco BV dated 28 November 2001 (“Proposed Disposal”). The Proposed Disposal is pursuant to Tesco BV’s conditional agreement with CP entered into on 9 March 2020, to dispose of its interest in Tesco Malaysia. The carrying amount of the investment in Tesco Malaysia is RM nil as at 30 June 2020 (2019: RM nil) and is included under Others in Note 46. The Group expects to record an estimated net gain on disposal of RM270 million from the Proposed Disposal which is expected to be completed within the second half of calendar year 2020. 

36 Share Capital Group/Company Number of shares (million) Share capital 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Issued and fully paid up: Ordinary shares with no par value At 1 July 6,801 6,801 9,299 9,299 Issuance of shares under performance-based employee share scheme – 1 – 1 –At 30 June 6,801 6,801 9,300 9,299 1 Less than 1 million 

37 Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme 

The Company’s Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme (“PBESS”) is governed by the by-laws approved by the shareholders at the Extraordinary General Meeting held on 8 November 2012 and was effected on 15 January 2013. Under the PBESS, ordinary shares in the Company (“Sime Darby Shares”) are granted to eligible employees and executive directors of the Group. On 15 January 2020, the Company offered the fourth Grant Offer of Sime Darby Shares, comprising Performance Share (“PS”) Grant and Restricted Share (“RS”) Grant. The salient features of the PBESS are as follows: a. Eligible employees are those executives (including executive director) of the Group (other than dormant subsidiaries) who have attained the age of 18 years; entered into a full-time or fixed-term contract of employment with and are on the payroll of a company within the Group; have not served notice of resignation or received notice of termination on the date of the offer; whose service/employment have been confirmed in writing; and have fulfilled other eligibility criteria which have been determined by the Nomination & Remuneration Committee (“NRC”) at its sole and absolute discretion from time to time. b. The total number of Sime Darby Shares to be allocated to an employee shall not be more than 10% of the Sime Darby Shares made available under the PBESS if the employee either singly or collectively through persons connected with the said employee, holds 20% or more of the Company’s issued and paid up share capital. c. The maximum number of Sime Darby Shares to be allotted and issued under the PBESS shall not be more than in aggregate 10% of the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital of the Company at any point in time during the duration of the PBESS. 

> 245 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

37 Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme (continued) 

d. The PBESS shall be in force for a period of 10 years commencing from the effective date of implementation. e. The new Sime Darby Shares to be allotted and issued pursuant to the PBESS shall, upon allotment and issuance, rank pari passu in all respects with the then existing issued Sime Darby Shares and shall be entitled to any rights, dividends, allotments and/or distributions attached thereto and/or which may be declared, made or paid to the Company’s shareholders, provided that the relevant allotment date of such new shares is before the record date (as defined in the PBESS By-Laws) for any right, allotment or distribution. f. If the NRC so decides (but not otherwise), in the event of any alteration in the capital structure of the Company during the duration of the PBESS, such corresponding alterations (if any) may be made in the number of unvested Sime Darby Shares and/or the method and/or manner in the vesting of the Sime Darby Shares comprised in a grant. The shares granted will be vested only upon fulfilment of vesting conditions which include achievement of service period and performance targets as follows:  

> Grant date: 15 January 2019 (third grant offer), 15 January 2020 (fourth grant offer) Type of grant PS RS

Vesting conditions 3-year cliff vesting, i.e. over a period of the 3 financial years from 1 July 2018 (third grant offer) or 1 July 2019 (fourth grant offer) Total RS divided into 3 tranches with each tranche vesting at the end of each financial year over 3 financial years from 1 July 2018 (third grant offer) or 1 July 2019 (fourth grant offer) Vesting of the shares is subject to meeting certain performance targets. Depending on the employee, the performance targets consist of relative Total Shareholder Returns (“TSR”) and/ or financial performance targets. Depending on the level of achievement of the performance targets as determined by the NRC, the total amount of shares which will vest may be lower or higher than the total number of shares offered. An eligible employee must remain in employment and shall not have served a notice of resignation or received a notice of termination as at the Vesting Date. The Vesting Date is expected to be in November of the applicable vesting year.  

> 246 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

37 Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme (continued) 

The movements in the number of Sime Darby Shares granted under the PBESS to the Group’s eligible employees are as follows: Third Grant 

> Fair value at grant date (RM) At 1 July 2019 ‘000 Reallocated 1‘000 Forfeited ‘000 Vested ‘000 At 30 June 2020 ‘000

Group PS – Relative TSR target 2.52 971 – (172) – 799 PS – Financial targets 2.11 6,686 – (635) – 6,051 RS – Year 1 vesting 2.29 637 (3) (26) (608) –RS – Year 2 vesting 2.20 637 (3) (67) – 567 RS – Year 3 vesting 2.11 636 6 (67) – 575 

> Fair value at grant date (RM) At 1 July 2018 ‘000 Granted ‘000 Forfeited ‘000 At 30 June 2019 ‘000

Group PS – Relative TSR target 2.52 – 971 – 971 PS – Financial targets 2.11 – 6,835 (149) 6,686 RS – Year 1 vesting 2.29 – 649 (12) 637 RS – Year 2 vesting 2.20 – 649 (12) 637 RS – Year 3 vesting 2.11 – 649 (13) 636 1 During the financial year, the RS grants for Grant 3 were reallocated so that each of the three tranches do not result in odd lots when the shares are vested Fourth Grant 

> Fair value at grant date (RM) At 1 July 2019 ‘000 Granted ‘000 At 30 June 2020 ‘000

Group PS – Relative TSR target 2.28 – 1,087 1,087 PS – Financial targets 1.95 – 5,403 5,403 RS – Year 1 vesting 2.15 – 537 537 RS – Year 2 vesting 2.05 – 537 537 RS – Year 3 vesting 1.95 – 545 545 There are no eligible employees under the Company for both the third and fourth grants. The fair value of the Sime Darby Shares granted is determined using the Monte Carlo Simulation model, taking into account the terms and conditions on which the shares were granted. 

> 247 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

37 Performance-Based Employee Share Scheme (continued) 

The significant inputs in the model for the third and fourth grants are as follows:    

> Grant date Third Grant 15 January 2019 Fourth Grant 15 January 2020 PS RS PS RS

Closing market price at grant date (RM) RM2.36 RM2.23 

Expected volatility (%) 30% 30% 

Expected dividend yield (%) 3.73% 3.4%-4.0% 4.70% 4.4%-4.9% 

Risk free rate (%) 3.58% 3.56%-3.58% 3.10% 3.02%-3.10% 

The expected dividend yield used was based on future estimates, which may not necessarily be the actual outcome. Volatility is based on average historical volatility over 1 to 3 years on a weekly basis. 

38 Reserves 

The Group’s reserves comprise:  

> Nature Description

Capital reserve Arising from non-distributable reserves Legal reserve Arising from statutory requirements of countries where the Group operates. Subsidiaries established in China are required to maintain certain statutory reserves by transferring from their profit after taxation in accordance with the relevant laws and regulations and, if applicable, the articles of association of subsidiaries in China, before any dividend is declared and paid Hedging reserve Arising from changes in fair value of hedge instruments under cash flow hedges Share grant reserve Arising from the PBESS, as disclosed in Note 37 Available-for-sale reserve Arising from changes in fair value of available-for-sale investments, prior to the adoption of MFRS 9 Exchange reserve Arising from exchange differences on retranslation of the net investments in foreign operations  

> 248 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

38 Reserves (continued) Group Share grant reserve Capital reserve Legal reserve Hedging reserve Available-for-sale reserve Exchange reserve Total 2020 

At 1 July 2019 6 231 99 (6) – 50 380 

Other comprehensive income [Note 18] – – – 9 – 128 137 

Transfer from retained profits – 2 12 – – – 14 

PBESS expenses 10 – – – – – 10 

Issuance of shares under the PBESS (1) – – – – – (1) 

At 30 June 2020 15 233 111 3 – 178 540 2019 

At 1 July 2018 as previously stated – 189 62 (17) 3 104 341 Adoption of MFRS 9 – – – – (3) – (3) Restated as at 1 July 2018 – 189 62 (17) – 104 338 Other comprehensive income/(loss) [Note 18] – – – 11 – (54) (43) PBESS expenses 6 – – – – – 6Transfer from retained profits – 42 52 – – – 94 Reclassification upon disposal of a subsidiary to retained profits – – (15) – – – (15) At 30 June 2019 6 231 99 (6) – 50 380 Company The reserves of the Company relates to the share grant reserve as disclosed in the Statement of Changes in Equity. 

39 Non-Controlling Interests – Group 

The profit, comprehensive income and net assets attributable to owners of non-controlling interests are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Profit for the financial year 53 62 Other comprehensive income/(loss) 1 (1) Total comprehensive income 54 61 Net assets 416 405 The Group had no non-controlling interests which were material as at 30 June 2020. 

> 249 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

40 Borrowings Group 2020 2019 Secured Unsecured Total Secured Unsecured Total 

Non-current Term loans 32 – 32 26 – 26 Islamic financing – 78 78 – 150 150 Finance leases 1 – – – 2 – 2

32 78 110 28 150 178 Current Term loans due within one year 9 – 9 4 – 4Islamic financing due within one year – 73 73 – 65 65 Short term loans 2 – 715 715 – – –Bank overdrafts – 44 44 – 94 94 Short term Islamic financing – 204 204 – 595 595 Revolving credits, trade facilities and other short-term borrowings – 1,076 1,076 – 1,638 1,638 Finance leases 1 – – – 1 – 1

9 2,112 2,121 5 2,392 2,397 Total borrowings 41 2,190 2,231 33 2,542 2,575 1 Finance leases are reclassified to lease liabilities after the adoption of MFRS 16. 2 Short term loans consists of borrowings raised to finance the acquisition of Gough Group Limited and the Sydney dealerships. 

a. Other information on borrowings 

i. Effective interest rates The average effective interest rates of borrowings per annum are as follows: 

> Group 2020 %2019 %

Term loans and Islamic financing 3.03 4.10 Other borrowings 2.31 3.45 The Group’s floating rate term loans and Islamic financing that are subject to contractual interest rates repricing within 1 year amounted to RM151 million (2019: RM215 million). ii. Secured financing As at 30 June 2020, borrowings amounting to RM41 million (2019: RM30 million) are secured by property, plant and equipment with a carrying value of RM69 million (2019: RM72 million) and inventories with a carrying value of RM20 million (2019: Nil).  

> 250 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

41 Lease liabilities 2020 Group 

Non-current 1,438 

Current 376 1,814 a. Undiscounted contractual cash flows 2020 

Future minimum lease payments: – within 1 year 422 

– between 1 to 2 years 354 

– between 2 to 5 years 607 

– above 5 years 855 2,238 

Less: unexpired finance charges (424) 1,814 b. Currency profile 

All lease liabilities are denominated in the functional currency of the respective subsidiaries. 

c. Lease commitments 

As at 30 June 2020, commitments for short term leases and low value leases amounted to RM6 million and RM15 million respectively. 

d. Other information on lease liabilities 

The lease terms range from 2 to 40 years. The average effective interest rates of lease liabilities ranges from 1.8% to 8.0% per annum. 

e. Extension options 

The Group did not include potential lease payments from extension options that it is not reasonably certain to exercise. Most of these leases involve land and/or building leases. The undiscounted potential future lease payments not recognised as lease liabilities as at 30 June 2020 was RM974 million and range between 2-20 years. The Company’s lease liabilities were not material (less than RM1 million). 

> 251 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

42 Payables and other liabilities Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019 

Non-current Employee benefits 9 6 – –Others 12 4 – –Payables 21 10 – –Current Trade payables 2,642 2,983 – –Vehicle financing [note (a)] 276 182 – –Accruals and other payables [note (b)] 622 610 1 1Employee benefits and directors fees 615 622 1 1Amounts due to joint ventures 40 47 – –Amounts due to associates 6 – – –Payables 4,201 4,444 2 2Indirect taxes payable 101 203 – –Government grant [Note 43] 15 – – –Payables and other liabilities 4,317 4,647 2 2Non-current and current payables 4,222 4,454 2 2

a. Vehicle financing 

In certain markets, the Group finances the purchase of vehicles using vehicle financing arrangements. The Group is normally required to repay the outstanding amounts within 2 days of the sale of the associated vehicle inventories. These arrangements carry interest rates ranging from 2.2% to 5.9% per annum (2019: 3.7% to 5.9%). 

b. Accruals and other payables 

Included in accruals and other payables are amounts payable for the purchase of property, plant and equipment of RM22 million (2019: RM29 million). 

43 Government Grants – Group 

Government grants received were mainly in relation to the construction of the port infrastructure and other facilities in China. During the financial year, government grant relating to port infrastructure and facilities of RM7 million (2019: RM5 million) has been amortised to profit or loss. In the current financial year, the Group also received government grants relating to Covid-19 wage subsidies. To comply with conditions of the government grants received, the Group is required to keep the affected employees in employment for the period stipulated by the government grant received. The grants received have largely been recognised in profit or loss during the financial year.  

> 252 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

44 Provisions – Group Warranties Risk sharing Disputes Others Total 2020 

At 1 July 2019 before restatement 184 19 197 21 421 

Adoption of MFRS 16 [Note 51] – – – (4) (4) 

At 1 July 2019 after restatement 184 19 197 17 417 

Additions 220 37 – 25 282 

Reversals (60) (19) – – (79) 

Translation differences – – 7 – 7

Charged to profit or loss 160 18 7 25 210 

Utilised (200) – – (15) (215) 

Acquisition of subsidiaries 23 – – – 23 

Exchange differences 4 – 1 – –1 4

At 30 June 2020 171 37 204 27 439 2019 

At 1 July 2018 132 15 192 34 373 Additions 192 32 – 14 238 Reversals (48) (28) – (15) (91) Translation differences – – 5 – 5Charged/(credited) to profit or loss 144 4 5 (1) 152 Utilised (96) – – (12) (108) Acquisition of subsidiaries 2 – – – 2Exchange differences 2 – 1 – – 1 2At 30 June 2019 184 19 197 21 421 1 Less than RM1 million The provisions are subject to the following maturity periods:  

> 2020 2019

Non-current Due later than one year 22 16 Current Due no later than one year 417 405 

439 421 

a. Warranties 

Provision is recognised on warranties provided for the sales of machinery, vehicles and other products that are not covered by manufacturers’ warranties. The provision was estimated based on historical claims experience, as well as recent trends which are indicative of future claims. 

b. Risk sharing 

Provision is recognised for possible future losses arising from customer defaults pursuant to the risk sharing arrangements entered into by the Group with Caterpillar (China) Financial Leasing Co., Ltd. 

> 253 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

45 Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses 

Subsidiaries acquired by the Group during the financial year ended 30 June 2020 were as follows: a. On 30 September 2019, Sime Darby (NZ) Holdings Limited, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Sime Darby Berhad, completed the acquisition of the entire share capital in Gough Group Limited for a cash consideration of NZD218 million (approximately RM574 million). The acquisition is a strategic fit for the Group as it expands the Group’s Caterpillar distribution rights to New Zealand, broadens the suite of franchises through brands such as Palfinger and complements the Group’s commercial vehicle business in New Zealand. Details of net assets and net cash outflow arising from the acquisition of the subsidiaries are as follows:  

> Book value Fair value

Property, plant and equipment 163 185 ROU assets 152 152 Intangible assets 37 43 Associates 3 3Deferred tax assets (net) 12 6Inventories 360 355 Receivables 178 178 Cash and cash equivalents 40 40 Lease liabilities (154) (154) Other current liabilities (231) (231) Net assets acquired 560 577 Non-controlling interest (3) Purchase consideration 574 Less: Cash and cash equivalent of subsidiaries acquired (40) Net cash outflow on acquisition 534 For the financial year ending 30 June 2020, the acquisitions contributed a revenue of RM891 million and loss after tax and non-controlling interests of RM30 million. Had the acquisitions been completed at 1 July 2019, the acquisition would have contributed additional revenue of approximately RM370 million and additional loss after tax and non-controlling interests of approximately RM2 million.  

> 254 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

45 Acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses (continued) 

Businesses acquired by the Group during the financial year ended 30 June 2020 were as follows: b. On 2 December 2019, Sime Darby Motors Sdn Bhd acquired the business assets and properties of three luxury car dealerships in Sydney, Australia (“Sydney dealerships”) for a cash consideration of AUD156 million (approximately RM440 million) from Inchcape Australia Limited. The three dealerships represent the BMW, MINI, Volkswagen, Jaguar and Land Rover marques. The acquisition is part of the Group’s strategy of expanding the Motors segment’s retail luxury business in Australia and strengthen its brand visibility in Sydney. Details of net assets and net cash outflow arising from the acquisition of the Sydney dealerships are as follows: Property, plant and equipment 249 ROU assets 7Intangible assets 57 Deferred tax liabilities (14) Inventories 141 Lease liabilities (6) Net current liabilities (9) Fair value of net assets acquired 425 Goodwill 15 Purchase consideration 440 Other than fair value adjustment to intangible assets of RM57 million, the fair value of the remaining net assets acquired approximates the book value of these assets pre-acquisition. For the financial year ending 30 June 2020, the Sydney dealerships contributed a revenue of RM396 million and loss after tax and non-controlling interests of RM8 million. It is not practical to disclose the financial impact if the acquisition had completed on 1 July 2019 as the business acquired constitute only a part of the business of the seller and there are no separate financial statements that are specific to the business acquired prior to the acquisition. c. On 1 July 2019, a commercial vehicle service facility in New Zealand was acquired by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sime Darby Motors Sdn Bhd for a cash consideration of NZD6 million (approximately RM16 million), comprising of net assets of RM8 million and goodwill of RM8 million. 

> 255 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

46 Segment Information – Group 

The Group’s main businesses comprise Industrial, Motors, Logistics and Healthcare. The Industrial, Motors, Logistics and Healthcare divisions offer different products and services, and are each headed by a Divisional Managing Director. The healthcare segment consists of the Ramsay-Sime Darby Health Care joint venture. The Group Chief Executive Officer reviews the internal management reports on a monthly basis and conducts performance dialogues with the business units on a regular basis. Segments comprise: Industrial Sales, rental and servicing of equipment and engineering services Motors Assembly, sale and rental of vehicles and the provision of after-sales services Logistics Management of port facilities Healthcare Investment in the Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Group, providers of healthcare services Others Insurance broking and other general investments Transactions between segments are carried out on agreed terms between both parties. The effects of such inter-segment transactions are eliminated on consolidation. The measurement basis and classification are consistent with those adopted in the previous financial year.  

> 256 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

46 Segment Information – Group (continued) a. Segment results 2020 Industrial Motors Logistics Healthcare Others Corporate and intra-group adjustments Total 

Segment revenue: External 15,794 20,852 219 – 69 – 36,934 

Inter-segment 8 33 – – 4 (45) –15,802 20,885 219 – 73 (45) 36,934 

Segment results: Operating profit/(loss) 948 571 15 – 22 (43) 1,513 

Share of results of joint ventures and associates 19 3 (109) 39 (58) – (106) 

Profit/(loss) before interest and tax 967 574 (94) 39 (36) (43) 1,407 

Included in operating profit/(loss) Depreciation and amortisation (587) (389) (60) – (4) (13) (1,053) 

Reversal of impairment/ (impairment losses) (net): – non-current assets 29 (41) (8) – – – (20) 

– receivables and loans to joint venture (25) (24) (23) –(1) 1 (72) 

Fair value loss on financial assets at FVTPL (72) – – – – – (72) 

Gain on disposals (net) and compensation income for fixed assets – 23 19 – 1 – 43 

Inventory writedown and provision (net) (103) (139) – – – – (242) 257 Financial Statements Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

46 Segment Information – Group (continued) a. Segment results (continued) 2019 Industrial Motors Logistics Healthcare Others Corporate and intra-group adjustments Total 

Segment revenue: External 14,113 21,606 283 – 154 – 36,156 Inter-segment 2 11 – – 45 (58) –14,115 21,617 283 – 199 (58) 36,156 Segment results: Operating profit/(loss) 768 626 125 – 66 (43) 1,542 Share of results of joint ventures and associates 30 2 (123) 49 (117) – (159) Profit/(loss) before interest and tax 798 628 2 49 (51) (43) 1,383 Included in operating profit/(loss) Depreciation and amortisation (295) (222) (60) – (8) (13) (598) (Impairment losses)/reversal of impairment (net): – non-current assets (1) (2) – – 2 – (1) – receivables 4 2 – – – (2) 4Fair value loss on financial assets at FVTPL (47) – – – – – (47) Gain/(loss) on disposals (net) 29 (1) 78 – 13 3 122 Inventory writedown and provision (net) (97) (128) – – – – (225)  

> 258 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

46 Segment Information – Group (continued) b. Segment assets and liabilities and additions to non-current assets Industrial Motors Logistics Healthcare Others Corporate and intra-group adjustments Total 2020 

Segment assets 11,956 10,850 2,096 649 261 746 26,558 

Segment liabilities (3,338) (3,210) (264) – (384) (15) (7,211) 

Segment invested capital 8,618 7,640 1,832 649 (123) 731 19,347 

Net tax assets 111 

Borrowings and lease liabilities (4,045) 

Total equity 15,413 

Associates and joint ventures included in segment assets 276 75 282 649 62 – 1,344 

Additions to non-current assets are as follows: Capital expenditure 738 667 41 – 1 19 1,466 

Addition to financial assets at FVTPL 8 – – – – – 8

Addition to interest in joint ventures 2 – – – – – 2748 667 41 – 1 19 1,476 2019 

Segment assets 10,939 9,691 2,253 784 276 894 24,837 Segment liabilities (3,313) (3,456) (264) – (361) (14) (7,408) Segment invested capital 7,626 6,235 1,989 784 (85) 880 17,429 Net tax assets 264 Borrowings (2,575) Total equity 15,118 Associates and joint ventures included in segment assets 280 82 307 784 125 – 1,578 Additions to non-current assets are as follows: Capital expenditure 655 404 20 – 9 9 1,097 Addition to financial assets at FVTPL 17 – – – – – 17 Addition to interest in joint ventures – – 12 – – – 12 672 404 32 – 9 9 1,126 

> 259 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

46 Segment Information – Group (continued) b. Segment assets and liabilities and additions to non-current assets (continued) 

Capital expenditure consists of the following:  

> 2020 2019

Property, plant and equipment 1,207 1,080 Right-of-use assets 233 –Prepaid lease rentals – 6Investment properties 17 6Intangible assets other than goodwill 9 5

1,466 1,097 Reconciliation of segment assets and liabilities to total assets and total liabilities are as follows:     

> Assets Liabilities 2020 2019 2020 2019

Segment total 26,558 24,837 7,211 7,408 Tax assets/liabilities 715 679 604 415 Borrowings – – 2,231 2,575 Lease liabilities – – 1,814 –

27,273 25,516 11,860 10,398 

c. Segment by geography 

Revenue, profit before interest and tax (“PBIT”) and non-current assets, other than financial instruments and tax assets, by location of the Group’s operations are analysed as follows:        

> Revenue PBIT Non-current assets 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019

Malaysia 4,230 5,202 180 238 2,595 2,629 China 1 14,784 14,493 370 425 3,576 3,069 Other countries in Asia 4,603 5,223 87 124 712 633 Australasia 2 13,317 11,238 770 596 4,829 3,082 

36,934 36,156 1,407 1,383 11,712 9,413 1 China consists of China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. 2 Australasia consists of Australia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands.  

> 260 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

46 Segment Information – Group (continued) c. Segment by geography (continued) 

Revenue by location of customers is not materially different from that of revenue by location of operations. Reconciliation of non-current assets, other than financial assets and tax assets to the total non-current assets are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Non-current assets other than financial instruments and tax assets 11,712 9,413 Financial assets at FVTPL 22 87 Deferred tax assets 613 542 Tax recoverable 46 65 Derivative assets – 2Receivables 159 237 

12,552 10,346 The Group’s operations are diverse in terms of the range of products and services it offers and the geographical coverage. There was no single customer that contributed 10% or more to the Group’s revenue. 

47 Related Parties 

Significant related party transactions and balances other than as disclosed in Notes 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 30 and 42 are as follows:   

> Group 2020 2019

a. Transactions with joint ventures and associates 

Purchase of products and services from Sitech Construction Systems Pty Ltd 9 11 Contribution paid to Yayasan Sime Darby 20 20 Loans to Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd 20 –Loans repaid by Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd 3 9

b. Transactions between subsidiaries and significant owners of non-controlling interests 

Purchase of agricultural tractors, engines and parts by Sime Kubota Sdn Bhd from Kubota Corporation – 18 Royalty payment to and procurement of cars and ancillary services by Inokom Corporation Sdn Bhd (“ICSB”) from Hyundai Motor Company and its related companies –1 24 Contract assembly service provided by ICSB from Mazda Malaysia Sdn Bhd 96 116 Sale of vehicles and parts by Jaguar Land Rover (M) Sdn Bhd to Sisma Auto Sdn Bhd 30 40 Acquisition of 30% of the units in Brisbane BMW Unit Trust collectively owned by Burke Management Pty Ltd and Roller Management Pty Ltd – 41 

c. Transactions with Directors and key management personnel and their close family members 

Sale of motor vehicles by the Group –1 31 Less than RM1 million 

> 261 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

47 Related Parties (continued) 

Significant related party transactions and balances other than as disclosed in Notes 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 30 and 42 are as follows: (continued)     

> Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

d. Remuneration of Directors and key management personnel (“KMP”) 

Salaries, other emoluments and benefits 29 27 4 4Defined contribution pension plan 2 2 – –Performance-based employee share scheme 3 1 – –Estimated monetary value of benefits-in-kind –1 –1 –1 –11 Less than RM1 million Key management personnel are employees who have authority and responsibility over key activities of the Group and are direct reports of the Group Chief Executive Officer. 

e. Performance-based employee share scheme (“PBESS”) 

The movement in the number of ordinary shares of the Company granted under the PBESS to the Executive Director and key management personnel of the Group is as follows: 

> Fair value at grant date (RM) At 1 July 2019 ‘000 Granted ‘000 Changes in KMP ‘000 Forfeited ‘000 Vested ‘000 At 30 June 2020 ‘000

Third grant PS – Relative TSR target 2.52 790 – 28 (172) – 646 PS – Financial targets 2.11 790 – 707 (172) – 1,325 RS1 – Year 1 vesting 2.29 132 – 4 – (136) –RS2 – Year 2 vesting 2.20 132 – 61 (29) – 164 RS3 – Year 3 vesting 2.11 132 – 62 (29) – 165 Fourth grant PS – Relative TSR target 2.28 – 810 – – – 810 PS – Financial targets 1.95 – 810 195 – – 1,005 RS1 – Year 1 vesting 2.15 – 135 16 – – 151 RS2 – Year 2 vesting 2.05 – 135 16 – – 151 RS3 – Year 3 vesting 1.95 – 135 17 – – 152  

> 262 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

47 Related Parties (continued) 

Significant related party transactions and balances other than as disclosed in Notes 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 24, 25, 26, 30 and 42 are as follows: (continued) 

f. Transactions with shareholders and the Government 

As at 30 June 2020, Permodalan Nasional Berhad (“PNB”) and the funds managed by its subsidiary, Amanah Saham Nasional Berhad (“ASNB”), together owned approximately 53.1% (2019: 51.3%) of the issued share capital of the Company. PNB is an entity controlled by the Malaysian Government through Yayasan Pelaburan Bumiputra (“YPB”). The Group regards YPB as the ultimate holding company. As a result, the Malaysian Government and Malaysian Government’s controlled bodies (collectively referred to as government-related entities) are related parties of the Group and of the Company. Transactions entered into during the financial year with government-related entities include the sales and purchases of goods and services. These related party transactions were entered into in the ordinary course of business. On 29 November 2017, the Group completed the distribution of SD Plantation and SD Property shares to shareholders of the Company. Transactions between the Group and SD Plantation or SD Property are classified as related party transactions as YPB is the common major shareholding of the 3 groups. Significant related party transactions with the former subsidiaries are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

Provision of shared services – 69 Sales, servicing and leasing of equipment and vehicles 25 63 Renovation work on Automotive complex – 14 Royalty income charged 4 4Rental income 7 7Rental charges 12 10 Foreign currency payment arrangement 117 116 Balance payment for the purchase of office towers 17 –

g. Outstanding balances with related parties 

The significant outstanding balances between the Group and related parties are as follows:  

> 2020 2019

i. Amounts due from/(to) joint ventures (net) Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd 158 134 Weifang Sime Darby West Port Co Ltd 40 43 Weifang Port Services Co Ltd (12) 17 Malaysia - China Hydro Joint Venture (23) (23) Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Sdn Bhd 77 – 1ii. Amount due from YPB group companies Sime Darby Plantation Berhad group 31 29 Sime Darby Property Berhad group 2 61 Less than RM1 million All outstanding balances are unsecured and repayable in accordance with agreed terms. Other than as disclosed above, there were no material contracts subsisting as at 30 June 2020 or if not then subsisting, entered into since the end of the financial year by the Company or its subsidiaries which involved the interests of substantial shareholders. 

> 263 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

48 Financial Instruments a. Financial instruments measured at fair value 

The measurement and categorisation of the financial instruments carried at fair value are as follows: Financial assets at FVTPL The fair values of these assets are based on valuation techniques with significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) as quoted market prices in active markets (Level 1) or valuation techniques using market observable inputs (Level 2) are not available. Derivatives The fair values of derivatives are based on price quotes for similar instruments or valuation techniques based on market observable inputs (Level 2) as quoted prices of identical instruments from an active market (Level 1) are not available. The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts are calculated using observable forward exchange rates at the end of the reporting period, with the resulting value discounted to present value. The following table presents the Group’s financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value as at 30 June into three different levels as defined above:     

> Group 2020 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total

Financial assets Financial assets at FVTPL – – 22 22 

Derivative assets – forward foreign exchange contracts – 3 – 3– 3 22 25 

Financial liabilities Derivative liabilities – forward foreign exchange contracts – 6 – 6264 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

48 Financial Instruments (continued) a. Financial instruments measured at fair value (continued) 

The following table presents the Group’s financial assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value as at 30 June into three different levels as defined above:     

> Group 2019 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total

Financial assets Financial assets at FVTPL – – 87 87 Derivative assets – forward foreign exchange contracts – 8 – 8– 8 87 95 Financial liabilities Derivative liabilities – forward foreign exchange contracts – 18 – 18 The financial assets categorised as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy are non-traded equity investments or debt instruments which are valued at their recoverable amounts. The Company does not have any financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value as at 30 June 2020 (2019: Nil). 

b. Financial instruments measured at amortised cost 

The carrying amounts and fair values of long-term financial assets and liabilities measured at amortised cost as at 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019 approximated its fair values. The Company does not have any long-term financial assets and liabilities measured at amortised cost as at 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019. 

> 265 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

49 Financial Risk Management 

The Group’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks, including foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk, credit risk, liquidity risk and cash flow risk. The policies on financial risk management is described in Note 5. Details of each financial risk are as follows: 

a. Foreign exchange risk 

The currency profile of monetary financial assets and financial liabilities are as follows:   

> Denominated in currencies other than functional currencies Group United States Dollar Chinese Renminbi European Union Euro Others Denominated in functional currencies Total

2020 

Financial assets at FVTPL – – – – 22 22 

Loans to joint venture – 86 – – – 86 

Receivables (net) 202 62 31 53 3,758 4,106 

Bank balances, deposits and cash 131 5 1 5 1,552 1,694 

Borrowings (341) – – – (1,890) (2,231) 

Payables (148) – (87) (79) (3,908) (4,222) (156) 153 (55) (21) (466) (545) 2019 

Financial assets at FVTPL – – – – 87 87 Receivables (net) 292 151 19 36 3,750 4,248 Bank balances, deposits and cash 71 21 – 15 1,616 1,723 Borrowings (531) – – – (2,044) (2,575) Payables (396) – (212) (40) (3,806) (4,454) (564) 172 (193) 11 (397) (971) The Company does not have any other financial assets or liabilities denominated in foreign currency as at 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019.  

> 266 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

49 Financial Risk Management (continued) 

Details of each financial risk are as follows: (continued) 

a. Foreign exchange risk (continued) 

Foreign exchange risk which impacts the statements of profit or loss arises where monetary assets/liabilities that are not denominated in the functional currency of the respective subsidiaries are not hedged. i. Borrowings Of the RM341 million (2019: RM531 million) borrowings denominated in US dollars, RM47 million (2019: RM58 million) has been hedged with derivatives and RM294 million (2019: RM462 million) is designated as hedge instruments for receivables and anticipated sales. ii. Bank balances Bank balances denominated in non-functional currencies are not hedged. However, they are generally held for a short period and would either be converted to the functional currency or used to hedge or settle payables in the same currency. As such, foreign exchange risk for unhedged bank balances is generally limited. iii. Receivables and payables Receivables and payables in non-functional currencies are generally hedged using derivatives or borrowings or exposed for a short period (pending settlement or hedging), with limited foreign exchange risk. The US Dollar and Euro payables have largely been hedged with derivatives. However, certain material balances in non functional currencies have not been hedged due to the uncertainty in the timing of the receipt/settlement. The following table illustrates the effect of changes in exchange rate on the translation of the material unhedged financial assets or liabilities against the functional currency at 30 June based on a 5% movement in rates, which is a reasonable assumption based on recent volatility of the exchange rates. 

> Group Functional currency Foreign currency Amount in RM million Foreign currency scenario Impact on profit after tax

2020 

Receivables and bank balances HKD RMB 67 (5%) (3) 

2019 

Receivables and bank balances HKD RMB 172 (5%) (9) Foreign currency translation for loans to joint venture is taken to exchange reserves as it forms part of the net investment in the joint venture. 

> 267 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

49 Financial Risk Management (continued) 

Details of each financial risk are as follows: (continued) 

b. Interest rate risk 

The percentages of fixed rate borrowings held by the Group, to the total borrowings are as follows:  

> Group 2020 2019

Total borrowings 2,231 2,575 Fixed rate borrowings 41 33 Percentage of fixed rate borrowings over total borrowings 1.8 1.3 The Group does not have any interest rate swap (“IRS”) contract as at 30 June 2020 and 30 June 2019. The borrowings on floating rates that have not been swapped as they consist mainly of short term borrowings used for working capital purposes at the Industrial and Motors divisions or are pending refinancing to long term. As at 30 June 2020, the Group’s floating rate borrowings not swapped to fixed stood at RM2,190 million (2019: RM2,542 million). The following table demonstrates the effect of changes in interest rates of floating rate borrowings. If the interest rate for all borrowings increased by 1 percentage point, the Group’s profit after tax will be lower by: 

> Impact

2020 

Profit after tax (16) 2019 

Profit after tax (19) A 1% decrease in interest rates would have an equal but opposite effect. 

c. Credit risk 

The maximum exposure and collateral and credit enhancements are as follows:     

> Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

Maximum exposure Amounts due from subsidiaries – – 969 5,897 Loans to joint venture 86 – – –Receivables 4,106 4,248 – –Derivative assets 3 8 – –Bank balances, deposits and cash 1,694 1,723 130 150 

5,889 5,979 1,099 6,047 Collateral and credit enhancement Receivables 883 957 – – 

> 268 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

49 Financial Risk Management (continued) 

Details of each financial risk are as follows: (continued) 

d. Liquidity and cash flow risk 

The undiscounted contractual cash flows of the financial liabilities are as follows: 

> Group On demand or within 1 year Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 5 years Above 5 years Total contractual cash flows Total carrying amount

2020 

Borrowings – principal 2,115 86 18 6 2,225 2,225 

– interest 16 1 3 1 21 6

Derivative liabilities 6 – – – 6 6

Payables 4,201 21 – – 4,222 4,222 

Guarantees granted to joint ventures 24 114 42 32 212 –6,362 222 63 39 6,686 6,459 2019 

Borrowings – principal 2,394 77 91 10 2,572 2,572 – interest 19 6 4 1 30 3Derivative liabilities 18 – – – 18 18 Payables 4,444 10 – – 4,454 4,454 Guarantees granted to joint ventures 19 32 133 47 231 –6,894 125 228 58 7,305 7,047 

> Company On demand or within 1 year Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 5 years Above 5 years Total contractual cash flows Total carrying amount

2020 

Payables 2 – – – 2 22019 

Payables 2 – – – 2 2

> 269 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

50 Guarantees, Claims and Commitments 

Guarantees, claims and commitments are as follows: 

a. Guarantees 

In the ordinary course of business, the Group may obtain surety bonds and letters of credit, which the Group provides to customers to secure advance payment, performance under contracts or in lieu of retention being withheld on contracts. A liability would only arise in the event the Group fails to fulfill its contractual obligations. The Company has also provided a performance guarantee to a customer of a subsidiary to secure performance under contracts or in lieu of retention withheld on contracts. The outstanding guarantees as at 30 June are as follows:     

> Group Company 2020 2019 2020 2019

Performance and advance payment guarantees to customers of: – subsidiaries – – 1,582 1,582 – the Group 2,100 2,147 – –Guarantees in respect of credit facilities granted to: – certain joint ventures 212 231 – –

2,312 2,378 1,582 1,582 In addition, the Group guarantees the payment from its customers under a risk sharing arrangement with a third party leasing company in connection with the sale of its equipment up to a pre-determined amount. As at 30 June 2020, the total outstanding risk sharing amount on which the Group has an obligation to pay the leasing company should the customers default, amounted to RM324 million (2019: RM276 million). 

b. Claims 

As at 30 June 2020, claims not taken up in the statement of financial position are as follows:   

> Group 2020 2019

Potential claims 15 19 These claims include disputed amounts for the supply of goods and services. There were no claims against the Company as at 30 June 2020 (2019: Nil). 

c. Capital commitments 

Contracted capital expenditure not provided for in the financial statements:   

> Group 2020 2019

Property, plant and equipment 150 253 Other capital expenditure 2 60 

152 313 The Company did not have any capital commitments as at 30 June 2020 (2019: Nil).  

> 270 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

50 Guarantees, Claims and Commitments (continued) 

Guarantees, claims and commitments are as follows: (continued) 

d. Leases 

The future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases are as follows:  

> Group 2019

Due no later than one year 433 Due later than one year but no later than five years 959 Due later than five years 691 2,083 

51 Effects of the adoption of MFRS 16 

The adoption of MFRS 16 Leases has resulted in changes in the Group’s accounting policies. Under MFRS 16, a lease is a contract (or part of a contract) that conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. MFRS 16 eliminates the classification of leases by the lessee as either finance leases (on balance sheet) or operating leases (off balance sheet). MFRS 16 requires a lessee to recognise a “right-of-use” of the underlying asset and a lease liability reflecting future lease payments for most leases. The right-of-use asset is depreciated in accordance with the principles in MFRS 116 - Property, Plant and Equipment and the lease liability is accreted over time with interest expense recognised in profit or loss. For lessors, MFRS 16 retains most of the requirements in MFRS 117. Lessors continue to classify all leases as either operating leases or finance leases and account for them differently. The Group has adopted the simplified retrospective approach as permitted by MFRS 16 and has not restated the comparatives. The reclassifications and adjustments arising from the adoption of MFRS 16 are therefore recognised in the opening balance of statement of financial position as at the date of initial application (1 July 2019). The comparative information continued to be reported under the previous accounting policies governed under MFRS 117- Leases and IC Interpretation 4 – Determining whether an Arrangement Contains a Lease. The Group has elected not to reassess whether a contract is, or contains a lease at the date of initial application. Instead, for contracts entered into before the transition date, the Group relied on its assessment by applying MFRS 117 and IC Interpretation 4 “Determining whether an Arrangement contains a Lease”. The impact of the adoption of MFRS 16 is as follows: i. Leases previously classified as operating leases 

• Recognition of lease liabilities measured at the present value of the remaining lease payments, discounted using the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate at the date of initial application (1 July 2019). 

• Recognition of the associated right-of-use assets at an amount equal to the lease liability, adjusted for any prepaid or accrued lease payments. 

• Provisions for onerous leases have been reclassified to right-of-use assets. 

• The exemption to apply the standard principles on leases for which the underlying asset is of low value. 

> 271 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

51 Effects of the adoption of MFRS 16 (continued) 

The impact of the adoption of MFRS 16 is as follows: (continued) i Leases previously classified as operating leases (continued) The Group has also applied the following practical expedients at initial application as permitted by the standard: 

• the accounting for operating leases with a remaining lease term of less than 12 months as at 1 July 2019 as short-term leases, 

• the exclusion of initial direct costs for the measurement of the right-of-use asset at the date of initial application, 

• reliance on assessments made immediately before the transition date on whether leases are onerous. On 1 July 2019, the Group adjusted the right-of-use assets by the amount of provision for onerous leases recognised immediately before the transition date, and 

• the use of hindsight in determining the lease term where the contract contains options to extend or terminate the lease. ii. Leases previously classified as finance leases Finance lease liabilities as at the date of initial application have been reclassified from borrowings to lease liabilities. iii. Property, plant and equipment and prepaid lease rentals For leasehold land (within property, plant and equipment) and prepaid lease rentals, the Group recognised the carrying amount of these lease assets immediately before transition as the carrying amount of the ROU assets at the date of initial adoption. The effects arising from these changes on the statements of financial position of the Group are as follows: 

> Statement of Financial Position As at 30 June 2019 (MFRS 117) Effects of adoption of MFRS 16 As at 1 July 2019 (MFRS 16)

Non-current assets Property, plant and equipment 5,727 (398) 5,329 Right-of-use assets – 2,450 2,450 Prepaid lease rentals 292 (292) –Current assets Prepayments 563 (3) 560 Non-current liabilities Borrowings 178 (2) 176 Lease liabilities – 1,405 1,405 Current liabilities Borrowings 2,397 (1) 2,396 Lease liabilities – 371 371 Payables and other liabilities 4,647 (12) 4,635 Provisions 405 (4) 401 The adoption of MFRS 16 did not result in changes to the Company’s statement of financial position.  

> 272 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

51 Effects of the adoption of MFRS 16 (continued) 

The weighted average lessee’s incremental borrowing rate applied to the lease liabilities on 1 July 2019 ranges from 1.4% to 8.0% per annum. The reconciliation between the operating lease commitments disclosed in applying MFRS 117 as at 30 June 2019 to the lease liabilities recognised as at 1 July 2019 is as follows: 

> Group

Operating lease commitments disclosed as at 30 June 2019 2,083 Discounted using the lessee’s incremental borrowing rates (404) Add: Reclassification from borrowings 3Adjustments for extension options 121 Less: Short-term leases recognised as an expense (18) Leases of low value assets recognised as an expense (9) Lease liabilities recognised as at 1 July 2019 1,776 

52 Material Litigation 

The material litigations outstanding are as follows: 

a. Qatar Petroleum Project (“QP Project”), Maersk Oil Qatar Project (“MOQ Project”) and the Marine Project Civil Suits (“Oil & Gas Suit”) 

On 23 December 2010, Sime Darby Berhad and four subsidiaries (collectively, “the Plaintiffs”) filed a civil suit against Dato’ Seri Ahmad Zubair @ Ahmad Zubir Hj Murshid, Dato’ Mohamad Shukri Baharom, Abdul Rahim Ismail, Abdul Kadir Alias and Mohd Zaki Othman (collectively, “the Defendants”) for damages arising from the Defendants’ negligence and breaches of duty relating to the QP Project, the MOQ Project and the project relating to the construction of a derrick lay barge for an aggregate amount of RM93 million and USD79 million (approximately RM338 million) together with general and aggravated damages and other relief. On 13 June 2014, all the Defendants consented to an Interlocutory Judgement being recorded on the Defendants’ liability with damages to be assessed by the Court. The Plaintiffs shall be permitted to enforce any final judgement entered after the assessment of damages, upon recovering all claims from the QP and MOQ projects and proceeds from the sale of the derrick lay barge, or after the expiry of 3 years from the date of final judgement, whichever is earlier. The Plaintiffs have filed a Notice of Application for directions to assess damages. After several postponements, the Court fixed the hearing for the assessment of damages on 2, 3, 4, 17 and 13 February 2021. 

> 273 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

52 Material Litigation (continued) 

The material litigations outstanding are as follows: (continued) 

b. Bakun Hydroelectric Project (“Bakun Project”) and the Indemnity Agreement Civil Suits (“Bakun Suit”) 

On 24 December 2010, Sime Darby Berhad and three subsidiaries (collectively, “the Plaintiffs”) filed a civil suit against Dato’ Seri Ahmad Zubair @ Ahmad Zubir Hj Murshid, Dato’ Mohamad Shukri Baharom (“DMS”) and Abdul Rahim Ismail (collectively, “the Defendants”) for damages in connection with the Defendants’ negligence and breaches of duty relating to the Package CW2-Main Civil Works for the Bakun Project and in respect of the Receipt, Discharge and Indemnity Agreement dated 12 January 2010 given to DMS for an aggregate amount of RM91 million together with general and aggravated damages to be assessed and other relief. On 13 June 2014, all the Defendants consented to an Interlocutory Judgement being recorded on the Defendants’ liability and for damages to be assessed by the Court. The Plaintiffs shall be permitted to enforce any final judgement entered after the assessment of damages, upon the Malaysia-China Hydro Joint Venture receiving full settlement from Sarawak Hidro Sdn Bhd or the Ministry of Finance in relation to the Bakun Project, or after the expiry of 3 years from the date of final judgement, whichever is earlier. The Plaintiffs have filed a Notice of Application for directions to assess damages. The Registrar directed that the Plaintiffs’ application for assessment of damages for the Oil & Gas Suit and the Bakun Suit be heard separately and that the assessment of damages for the Oil & Gas Suit will be heard first before the Bakun Suit. 

c. Emirates International Energy Services (“EMAS”) 

On 13 January 2011, EMAS filed a civil suit in Abu Dhabi against Sime Darby Engineering Sdn Bhd (“SDE”) claiming payment of USD178 million (approximately RM762 million) comprising a payment of USD128 million (approximately RM548 million) for commissions; and a payment of USD50 million (approximately RM214 million) as “morale compensation”. EMAS was unsuccessful in its claim against SDE in Abu Dhabi, and subsequently on 24 January 2016 submitted a request for arbitration against SDE to the Dubai Chamber of Commerce and Industry, claiming an amount of AED41 million (approximately RM48 million). On 23 December 2018, the arbitration tribunal rejected all claims by EMAS against SDE and ordered EMAS to pay for SDE’s portion of the arbitration costs and the tribunal fees and expenses. On 7 April 2019, EMAS filed an application at the Abu Dhabi Court of Appeal (“COA”) to seek the annulment of the tribunal award on the basis that the award was issued beyond the tribunal’s mandated time to which SDE filed an objection. The hearing was completed on 19 September 2019. On 8 October 2019, the COA rendered its judgement and dismissed EMAS’ appeal. On 8 December 2019, EMAS filed an appeal to the Court of Cassation against the COA’s decision. The appeal has been dismissed by the Court of Cassation on 30 December 2019. This matter is now closed. 

d. Claim against Qatar Petroleum (“QP”) 

On 15 August 2012, Sime Darby Engineering Sdn Bhd (“SDE”) filed a Statement of Claim at the Qatar Court against QP for the sum of QAR1 billion (approximately RM1.17 billion) seeking the repayment of a liquidated performance bond, payment of outstanding invoices, compensation and additional costs incurred in relation to an offshore engineering project in Qatar undertaken by SDE pursuant to a contract dated 27 September 2006. On 21 July 2016, the Court ordered QP to pay QAR12.9 million (approximately RM15 million) (“Judgement Sum”) to SDE (“Judgement”) and both parties had appealed to the Court of Appeal against the Judgement. The Court of Appeal upheld the Judgement on 29 July 2019 and ordered for QP to pay SDE the Judgement Sum. The decision is final and binding. SDE initiated enforcement proceedings on 4 November 2019 where QP requested for an adjournment to settle the Judgement Sum. On 25 November 2019, QP paid the Judgement Sum to Court. On 6 July 2020, the Court remitted the Judgement Sum via Qatar National Bank to Maybank in Malaysian Ringgit. However, Maybank was unable to accept the remittance as it was not in compliance with Bank Negara’s regulations. SDE instructed its lawyers to request the Court to remit the Judgement Sum in US Dollars. Remittance by the Court is pending. Once received, the case will be closed.  

> 274 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

52 Material Litigation (continued) 

The material litigations outstanding are as follows: (continued) 

e. B-193 Process Platform Project (“PP Project”) 

SDE and Swiber Offshore Construction Pte Ltd (“SOC”) entered into a Consortium Agreement to govern their relationship as a consortium (“the Consortium”) to undertake works relating to the PP Project awarded by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd (“ONGC”). A contract dated 3 July 2010 was executed for a total contract price of USD618 million (approximately RM2.65 billion). Disputes have arisen between the Consortium and ONGC and on 1 June 2016, the Consortium initiated arbitration proceedings against ONGC. SDE’s portion of the Consortium’s claim is circa USD76 million (approximately RM326 million). On 22 March 2018, the tribunal ordered ONGC to pay the Consortium a net sum of USD5.12 million (approximately RM22 million) as full and final settlement of all claims. On 27 March 2018, ONGC filed an application at the High Court in Mumbai, India to set aside the arbitration award. A hearing date has not been fixed. SDE and Swiber will initiate enforcement proceedings against ONGC for the arbitration award. 

f. CCCC Tianjin Dredging Co., Ltd. v Weifang Port Services Co., Ltd. and Weifang Port Group Co., Ltd. 

Weifang Port Services Co., Ltd. (“WPS”) is a joint venture company between Weifang Port Group Co., Ltd. (“WPG”) (38%), Weifang Sime Darby Port Co., Ltd. (“WSDP”) (37%) and Shandong Hi-speed Transport & Logistics Investment Co., Ltd. (25%). WSDP is an indirect 99% owned subsidiary of Sime Darby Berhad. CCCC Tianjin Dredging Co., Ltd. (“Tianjin Dredging”) was engaged to construct a 35,000 deadweight tonne (“DWT”) main channel in Weifang, Shandong Province, People’s Republic of China (the “Project”) which was completed in November 2016 at a total cost of approximately RMB1.17 billion (RM708 million). Under the terms of engagement, both WPG and WPS are jointly liable for any payments due to Tianjin Dredging. On 31 July 2018, Tianjin Dredging (the “Plaintiff”) filed a lawsuit against WPS (“First Defendant”) and WPG (“Second Defendant”) claiming the outstanding sum of the RMB741 million (RM448 million). On 20 December 2019, WPS received the final Court’s decision which ordered WPS to pay the sum of RMB711 million (approximately RM430 million) (“Outstanding Sum”), costs of RMB3.6 million (equivalent to approximately RM2.2 million) and late payment interests to the Plaintiff (“Judgement”). The Court held that WPS and WPG are jointly and severally liable for the above payments. The Plaintiff has applied to Court to enforce the Judgement against WPS and WPG to auction the sealed assets to settle the Judgement sum. The Plaintiff had filed a second lawsuit against WPS, WPG and subsidiaries of WPS (Weifang Port Operating Management Co. Ltd and Weifang Port Dredging Project Co. Ltd) for the Court to confirm its right of first claim with respect to auction proceeds (from the sale of assets owned by WPS and its subsidiaries). On 13 December 2019, the Court dismissed the Plaintiff’s petition and ruled that the Plaintiff has no right of first claim with respect to auction proceeds from the sale of sea-use-rights owned by WPS and its subsidiaries. The Plaintiff has filed an appeal against the Court’s decision which has been further dismissed by the Court on 10 April 2020. The Plaintiff has no avenue for further appeals for the second lawsuit and the second lawsuit is now closed. On 11 September 2020, WPS, WPG and the Plaintiff entered into a settlement agreement in relation to the Judgement, which has been registered in Court. In view of the settlement, the enforcement proceedings against WPS and WPG have been suspended. If WPS or WPG defaults on their obligations under the settlement agreement, the Plaintiff has the right to apply to the Court to resume enforcement proceedings. 

53 Holding Companies 

The Directors regard Permodalan Nasional Berhad as the Group’s immediate holding company and Yayasan Pelaburan Bumiputra as the ultimate holding company. Both companies are incorporated in Malaysia. 

> 275 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows:   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Industrial – Subsidiaries 

Chubb Malaysia Sendirian Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Marketing, installation, rental and servicing of security products Mecomb Malaysia Sdn Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Marketing and installation of advanced electronic and electro-mechanical equipment, instruments and systems integration Shandong Equipment Malaysia Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Sales and service support for Shandong Engineering machinery Sime Darby Electropack Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Manufacturing and assembly of generators, agricultural and industrial machinery Sime Darby Energy Solutions Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Systems integration and marketing of products and service provider primarily for oil & gas/petrochemical industry and biogas value chain Sime Darby Industrial Academy Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Training services Sime Darby Industrial Holdings Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Investment holding Sime Darby Industrial Power Sdn Bhd Malaysia 91.2 91.2 1 Sale of generators, agricultural and industrial machinery Sime Darby Industrial Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Sale, rental and assembly of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Sime Darby Joy Industries Sdn Bhd Malaysia 55.0 55.0 1 Designing and manufacturing of heat exchangers, radiators, process equipment modules, filters and separators Sime Darby Material Handling Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Sale of lift trucks and spare parts, and the rental and servicing of other material handling equipment Sime Darby TMR Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Reconditioning of used equipment and machinery Sime Surveillance Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Security services Site Technology Asia Pacific Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Supplying Global Positioning System (GPS)/digital work site positioning and machine control for heavy and highway construction applications under the SITECH brand  

> 276 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Industrial – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Tractors Petroleum Services Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Supply, repair and maintenance of Caterpillar engines and other equipment for the oil and gas industry, refurbishment of gas turbines and the sale and installation of pressure vessels Tractors Singapore (Maldives) Private Limited Maldives 100.0 100.0 2 Sale and rental of engines, power systems, assembly and product support for industrial machinery and parts Mecomb Singapore Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Manufacture and installation of industrial equipment and the import and sale of technical, nautical and scientific instruments and mechanical, electrical and electronic equipment Sime Darby Eastern Investments Private Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 )))Investment holding Sime Darby Eastern Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Energy Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Industrial Singapore Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 ))Tractors Machinery International Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Sale, installation and servicing of marine and other equipment and parts Tractors Singapore Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Sale, rental and assembly of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Foshan Sime Darby Elco Power Equipment Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Wholesale of diesel generators and spare parts Guangzhou Sime Darby SITECH Dealers Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 3 Sale, hire and servicing of survey equipment Sime Darby CEL Machinery (Guangdong) Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 ))) Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Sime Darby CEL Machinery (Guangxi) Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 )))

> 277 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Industrial – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Sime Darby CEL Machinery (Hunan) Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 )))Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Sime Darby CEL Machinery (Jiangxi) Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 )))Sime Darby CEL Machinery (Xinjiang) Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 )))Sime Darby Joy (Shanghai) Co Ltd China 55.0 55.0 2 Supply of process equipment and heat exchangers Sime Darby SEM Dealer (Fujian) Limited China 100.0 100.0 2 Sale of equipment and spare parts and service support Xiamen Sime Darby CEL Machinery Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Sime Darby CEL (South China) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Sime Darby Elco Power Systems Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution of Perkins engine products and spare parts and after-sales services The China Engineers Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Austchrome Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Chroming and hydraulic repairs Hastings Deering (Australia) Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Sale, rental and servicing for Caterpillar products, hardchroming and hydraulic repair Hastings Deering Property Services Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 4 Leasing entity and effective lessee for Hastings Deering Haynes Mechanical Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Labour hire/contracting, sale of mining machinery parts, service and repair and crane hire Heavy Maintenance Group Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Manufacturing or refurbishment of hydraulic cylinders, chrome plating and general engineering HMG Hardchrome Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Design, manufacture and refurbishment of components and assemblies used in heavy industries Sime Darby Allied Operations Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 4 )) Investment holding Sime Darby Industrial Australia Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 )) 

> 278 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Industrial – Subsidiaries (continued) 

TFP Engineering Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 95.0 2 Sale of mining machinery, service and labour hire Sime Darby Industrial (B) Sdn Bhd Brunei 70.0 70.0 3 Assembly, marketing and distribution of agricultural and industrial equipment CICA Limited Channel Islands 

100.0 100.0 3 Supply of industrial equipment and after-sales services Caltrac SAS New Caledonia 

100.0 100.0 2 Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support SCI Sime Darby Invest NC New Caledonia 

100.0 100.0 4 Property investment Sime Darby (NZ) Holdings Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Gough Group Limited New Zealand 100.0 – 2 Investment holding Sime Darby Industrial (NZ) Holdings Limited New Zealand 100.0 – 2 Investment holding Sitech Construction NZ Limited New Zealand 66.0 – 2 Sale of Trimble technical solutions Terra Industrial Finance (formerly known as Gough Finance Limited) New Zealand 100.0 – 2 Financing of equipment sales Terra Industrial New Zealand Limited (formerly known as Gough Gough & Hamer Limited) New Zealand 100.0 – 2 Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Hastings Deering (PNG) Limited Papua New Guinea 

100.0 100.0 2 )) Sale of Caterpillar equipment and spare parts and service support Hastings Deering (Solomon Islands) Limited Solomon Islands 

100.0 100.0 3 )))Sime Darby Elco Power Korea Limited South Korea 100.0 100.0 4 Sale and assembly of engines, power systems and related service support Mecomb (Thailand) Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 Sale of electrical and mechanical equipment components and instruments Haynes Group (USA) Holdings Inc. United States of America 

100.0 100.0 4 Investment holding Haynes Group (USA) Holdings LLC. United States of America 

100.0 100.0 4 Sale of patented hydraulic jacking system and maintenance of slew bearings in electric rope and hydraulic mining shovels CICA Vietnam Company Limited Vietnam 100.0 100.0 3 Provision of consultancy and services in connection with installation, operation, repair and maintenance of industrial machines, equipment and vehicles 

> 279 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Industrial – Joint ventures 

Sime Darby Gas Malaysia BioCNG Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 + 51.0 + 1 Sale and supply of bio-compressed natural gas Terberg Tractors Malaysia Sdn Bhd group Malaysia 50.0 50.0 1 Marketing, distributing and servicing of Terberg terminal tractors Mine Energy Solutions Pty Ltd Australia 50.0 50.0 4 Service provider for end-to-end energy solution to the mobile mining industry 

Industrial – Associates 

Kubota Malaysia Sdn Bhd (formerly known as Sime Kubota Sdn Bhd) Malaysia 40.0 40.0 1 Assembly and distribution of Kubota range of agricultural machinery and other machinery and equipment Gas Malaysia Synergy Drive Sdn Bhd Malaysia 30.0 50.0 1 Provision of electricity, steam, chilled water, hot water, hot air and/or any other utilities to customers through combined Heat and Power System APac Energy Rental Pte Ltd Singapore 30.0 30.0 3 Rental of industrial machinery and equipment Chubb Singapore Private Limited group Singapore 30.0 30.0 2 Marketing of security and fire protection products and services FG Wilson Asia Pte Ltd Singapore 50.0 50.0 2 Sale and servicing of diesel generator sets Energy Power Systems Australia Pty Ltd Australia 20.0 20.0 2 Distribution and rental of Caterpillar engine and associated products Sitech Construction Systems Pty Ltd Australia 30.6 30.6 3 Sale and servicing of Trimble Technology construction products Ultimate Positioning Group Pty Ltd Australia 29.4 29.4 3 Sale, hire and servicing of Trimble surveying equipment Buildingpoint New Zealand Limited New Zealand 49.0 – 2 Sale of Trimble geospatial solutions Geosystems New Zealand Limited New Zealand 49.0 – 2 Sale of Trimble building products  

> 280 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries 

Auto Bavaria Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ) Investment holding Ford Malaysia Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 51.0 1 )Hyundai-Sime Darby Motors Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Sale and distribution of passenger and light commercial vehicles and spare parts Inokom Corporation Sdn Bhd Malaysia 53.5 53.5 1 Manufacture and assembly of light commercial and passenger vehicles, and contract assembly of motor vehicles Jaguar Land Rover (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Malaysia 60.0 60.0 1 Importation and distribution of motor vehicles and spare parts Sime Darby Auto Assembly Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Manufacturing and assembly of auto components for motor vehicles Sime Darby Auto Bavaria Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Management services, retail of motor vehicles, spare parts and accessories, after-sales services and importer of Completely Knocked-Down packs Sime Darby Auto ConneXion Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Sime Darby Auto Engineering Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Assembly of internal combustion engine and other modular assembly for motor vehicles Sime Darby Auto Hyundai Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 51.0 1 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Sime Darby Auto Imports Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Importation of motor vehicles and spare parts Sime Darby Auto Performance Sdn Bhd Malaysia 70.0 70.0 1 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles, spare parts and accessories and after-sales services Sime Darby Auto Selection Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Retail of used motor vehicles and spare parts Sime Darby Auto Stuttgart Sdn. Bhd. Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Manufacturing and assembly of auto components for motor vehicles Sime Darby Hyundai Integrated Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 51.0 1 Distribution of motor vehicles 

> 281 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Sime Darby Hyundai Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 51.0 1 Investment holding and importation of motor vehicles Sime Darby Motors Overseas Holdings Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))) Investment holding Sime Darby Motors Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))Sime Darby Rent-A-Car Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Rental of motor vehicles Sime Darby Swedish Auto Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Retail of motor vehicles, spare parts and accessories and provision of after-sales services Europe Automobiles Corporation Holdings Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Performance Motors Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Motor vehicles dealership Performance Munich Autos Pte Ltd Singapore 60.0 60.0 2 Motor vehicles dealership Performance Premium Selection Limited Singapore 60.0 60.0 2 Retailer, wholesaler and exporter of used cars Sime Darby Motor Holdings Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Sime Darby Services Private Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Rental of motor vehicles Sime Darby Singapore Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 General insurance agency business Sime Singapore Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Vantage Automotive Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Motor vehicles dealership Changsha Bow Yue Vehicle Services Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Changsha Sime Darby Motor Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts, and provision of after-sales services Changsha Yue Zhi Bow Motor Sales and Services Co. Ltd. (formerly known as Changsha Yue Zhi Bow Motor Service Co. Ltd.) China 100.0 – 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare vehicles and provision of after-sales services Chengdu Bow Yue Used Cars Centre Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of used cars and related services Chengdu Bow Yue Vehicle Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts, after-sales services and investment holding Chongqing Bow Chuang Motor Sales & Services Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services  

> 282 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Chongqing Sime Darby Motor Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts, and provision of after-sales services Dongguan Chuang Yi Motor Sales and Services Limited Company China 100.0 – 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Guangdong Deda Bow Ma Motor Service Co Ltd China 65.0 65.0 2 Retail of spare parts and after-sales services Guangzhou Bow Yue Vehicle Trading Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts Guangzhou Sime Darby Fu Yue Motors Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 – 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Hainan Bow Yue Vehicles Trading and Services Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 ))Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Hangzhou Sime Darby Motors Sales and Services Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 )))Hangzhou Sime Darby Trading Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 ))Kunming Bow Chuang Motor Sales and Services Co Ltd China 65.0 65.0 2 )))Kunming Sime Darby Fu Yue Motors Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 – 2 ))))Nanjing Sime Darby Motors Sales & Services Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 )))Qujing Bow Kai Motors Sales & Services Company Limited China 65.0 65.0 2 ))))Shanghai Sime Darby Motor Commerce Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and investment holding Shanghai Sime Darby Motor Sales and Services Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Shanghai Sime Darby Motor Trading Co., Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services 

> 283 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Shanghai Sime Darby Motor Enterprises Co., Ltd China 60.0 – 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Shantou Bow Yue Dehong Motors Services Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2 Retail of spare parts and after-sales services for motor vehicles Shantou Bow Yue Vehicle Trading Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 )) Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts Shenzhen Bow Chuang Vehicle Trading Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 ))Shenzhen Sime Darby Motor Enterprises Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of spare parts and after-sales services for motor vehicles Shenzhen Sime Darby New Energy Vehicles Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Shenzen Sime Darby Fu Yue Motors Sales and Services Company Limited China 100.0 – 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Yunnan Bow Yue Vehicle Trading Co Ltd China 65.0 65.0 2 )) Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Yunnan Dekai Bow Ma Motors Technology & Service Co Ltd China 65.0 65.0 2 )))BMW Concessionaires (HK) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles, after-sales services and investment holding Bow Ma Motors (South China) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Goodwood Motors Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 )) Distribution and retail of motor vehicles Island Motors Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 )Marksworth Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Sime Darby Hongkong Finance Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Provision of intra-group financial services Sime Darby Managing Agency (Hong Kong) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Insurance agency Sime Darby Motor Group (HK) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 )) Investment holding Sime Darby Motor Group (PRC) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Motor Services Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles and spare parts, after-sales services, management services and property investment  

> 284 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Universal Automobile Company Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles Universal Cars (Importers) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding Universal Cars Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of motor vehicles Wallace Harper & Company Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Holder of car testing licence Wallace Harper Motors Company Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution, retail and leasing of motor vehicles Warwick Motors Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding BMW Concessionaires (Macau) Limited Macau 100.0 100.0 2 )) Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and after-sales services Harper Engineering (Macau) Limited Macau 100.0 100.0 2 ))Brisbane BMW Bodyshop Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of spare parts, panels and accessories Brisbane BMW Unit Trust Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Owns the BMW, MINI, Volvo, Ferrari and Rolls-Royce motor dealerships LMM Holdings Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Operates Brisbane BMW Unit Trust’s BMW, MINI, Volvo, Ferrari and Rolls Royce motor dealerships Sime Darby Automobiles Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding in retail dealership property Sime Darby Fleet Services Pty Ltd Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Vehicle rental and related mechanical services Sime Darby Motors Group (Australia) Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Provision of management services and investment holding Sime Darby Motors Retail Australia Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and after-sales services Sime Darby Motors Wholesale Australia Pty Limited Australia 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding and vehicle rental services Sime Darby Transport Holdings Australia Pty Ltd (formerly known as Gough Transport Holdings Australia Pty Ltd) Australia 100.0 – 2 Investment holding Transport Engineering Solutions Pty Ltd (formerly known as Gough Transport Solutions Pty Ltd) Australia 100.0 – 2 Design, supply and installation of transportation and related equipment Continental Car Services Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of new and used passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, spare parts and accessories and related services 

> 285 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Hino Distributors (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of trucks Infinity Automotive Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of new and used passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, spare parts and accessories and related services Motor Truck Distributors (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of trucks and buses North Shore Motor Holdings Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of new and used passenger cars, spare parts and accessories and related services Sime Darby Property (NZ) Limited (formerly known as Sime Darby Automobiles NZ Limited) New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Property holding Sime Darby Commercial (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 ))Investment holding Sime Darby Motor Group (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Transport Limited (formerly known as Gough Transport Supplies Limited) New Zealand 100.0 – 2 )))Sime Darby Transport (NZ) Limited (formerly known as Gough Transport NZ Limited) New Zealand 100.0 – 2 Design, supply and installation of transportation and related equipment Truck Stops (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of spare parts and services for trucks UD Truck Distributors (NZ) Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2 Distribution and retail of trucks, spare parts and accessories and related services Performance Motors (Thailand) Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services SD Motors Company Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 Leasing of properties Sime Darby (Thailand) Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding and provision of management and auxiliary services Sime Darby Auto Services Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 License holder of body and paint facility Sime Darby Mazda (Thailand) Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 )) Retail of motor vehicles and spare parts and provision of after-sales services Sime Darby Vantage (Thailand) Limited Thailand 100.0 100.0 2 )) 

> 286 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Motors – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Sime Darby Auto Kia Co Ltd Taiwan 100.0 100.0 2 Wholesale and retail of vehicles, spare parts and accessories and after-sales services Sime Darby Kia Taiwan Co Ltd Taiwan 100.0 100.0 2 Manufacture and sales of vehicles, spare parts and accessories and repairs and maintenance of vehicles and other automotive services 

Motors – Associates 

BMW Malaysia Sdn Bhd Malaysia 49.0* 49.0* 3 Sale and distribution of motor vehicles and motorcycles Sime Kansai Paints Sdn Bhd Malaysia 40.0 40.0 3 Manufacturing, selling and marketing of automotive and industrial paints BMW Financial Services Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong 49.0 49.0 3 Provision of financing and hire purchase facilities 

Logistics – Subsidiaries 

Sime Darby Logistics Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Investment holding Jining Sime Darby Longgong Port Co Ltd China 70.0 70.0 2 )) Port operations Jining Sime Darby Port Co Ltd China 70.0 70.0 2 ))Jining Sime Darby Taiping Port Co Ltd China 70.0 70.0 2 Port and warehousing operations Weifang Sime Darby General Terminal Co Ltd China 99.9 99.9 2 )))Port operations Weifang Sime Darby Logistics Services Co. Ltd China 100.0 100.0 3 Ownership and management of logistics park Weifang Sime Darby Port Co Ltd China 99.0 99.0 2 Port operations Weifang Wei Gang Tugboat Services Co Ltd China 99.5 99.5 3 Tugboat pilot and related services Sime Darby Overseas (HK) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Investment holding 

Logistics – Joint ventures 

Weifang Port Services Co Ltd group China 36.6 36.6 3 Construction, management and maintenance of sea channel, anchorage and port infrastructure Weifang Senda Container Service Provider Co Ltd China 50.0 50.0 3 Operation of container services 

> 287 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Logistics – Joint ventures (continued) 

Weifang Sime Darby Liquid Terminal Co Ltd China 50.0 50.0 2 Operation of liquid terminal and storage services Weifang Sime Darby West Port Co Ltd China 50.0 50.0 2 Port operations 

Logistics – Associate 

Weifang Ocean Shipping Tally Co Ltd China 39.6 39.6 3 Shipping tally services for cargo and containers 

Others – Subsidiaries 

Kumpulan Sime Darby Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Property investment Sime Darby Allied Products Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 )) Investment holding Sime Darby Energy Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))Sime Darby Engineering Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Engineering, procurement, construction, installation, hook-up and commissioning services relating to the oil and gas industry Sime Darby Holdings Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Investment holding, property investment and provision of management services to group companies Sime Darby Holiday Homes Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Property management services and childcare services to employees Sime Darby Insurance Pte Ltd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Onshore and offshore captive insurer Sime Darby Lockton Insurance Brokers Sdn Bhd Malaysia 60.0 60.0 1 Insurance and reinsurance brokers, insurance advisory and consultancy services Sime Darby Malaysia Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 Holding of trademarks Sime Darby Nominees Sendirian Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))Investment holding Sime Darby Ventures Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))Sime Darby Water Resources Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1 ))Sime Darby Eastern International Limited Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Insurance Brokers (Singapore) Pte Ltd Singapore 100.0 100.0 2 Insurance brokers  

> 288 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates which are active as at 30 June 2020 are as follows: (continued)   

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors Principal activities 2020 2019

Others – Subsidiaries (continued) 

Sime Darby Far East (1991) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 )) Investment holding Sime Darby Hong Kong Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 ))Sime Darby Insurance Brokers (Hong Kong) Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2 Insurance brokers 

Others – Joint ventures 

Malaysia–China Hydro Joint Venture Malaysia 48.9 48.9 1 Engineering, procurement and construction work Ramsay Sime Darby Health Care Sdn Bhd group Malaysia 50.0 50.0 1 Operation of healthcare facilities and related healthcare services 

Others – Associates 

Eastern & Oriental Berhad group Malaysia 10.8 10.8 3 Investment holding, hotel ownership and management, property investment and development Tesco Stores (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Malaysia 30.0 30.0 3 Operation of hypermarkets Yayasan Sime Darby Malaysia @ @ 1 Administration of scholarship awards and educational loans and undertake sports, environmental conservation and sustainability projects Union Sime Darby (Thailand) Ltd Thailand 49.0 49.0 2 Insurance brokers 

> 289 Financial Statements

# Notes to the Financial Statements 

For the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 Amounts in RM million unless otherwise stated 

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint venture and associates which are dormant/inactive as at 30 June 2020 are as follows:  

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors 2020 2019

Industrial – Subsidiaries 

Associated Tractors Sendirian Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Sime Darby Yangon Limited Myanmar 100.0 100.0 4

Industrial – Joint ventures 

Wilpena Pty Ltd Australia – 50.0 4

Motors – Subsidiaries 

Associated Motor Industries Malaysia Sdn Bhd Malaysia 51.0 51.0 1Hyundai-Sime Darby Berhad Malaysia 99.9 99.9 1Sime Darby Auto Britannia Sdn Bhd Malaysia 75.0 75.0 1Palfinger Australia Pty Limited Australia 100.0 – 2Sime Darby Hong Kong Group Company Limited Bermuda 100.0 100.0 2Hainan Bow Yue Vehicle Trading Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 2Tianjin Sime Winner Motors Trading Co Ltd China 60.0 60.0 2AutoFrance China Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2Sime Darby Management Services Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2Sime Winner Holdings Limited Hong Kong 60.0 60.0 2SimeWinner Nissan Autocrafts Limited Hong Kong 60.0 60.0 2Continental Cars Limited New Zealand 100.0 100.0 2Europe Automobiles Company Limited Vietnam 100.0 100.0 2Performance Motors Vietnam Company Limited Vietnam 100.0 100.0 2

Logistics – Subsidiaries 

Jining Sime Darby Guozhuang Port Co Ltd China – 70.0 2 

> 290 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

54 List of Subsidiaries, Joint Ventures and Associates (continued) 

Subsidiaries, joint venture and associates which are dormant/inactive as at 30 June 2020 are as follows:  

> Name of company Country/ territory of incorporation Group’s effective interest (%) Auditors 2020 2019

Others – Subsidiaries 

Golden Hope Plantations Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Highlands & Lowlands Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Kumpulan Guthrie Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Sime Darby Marine Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Sime Darby Water Resources (Perak) Sdn Bhd Malaysia 75.0 75.0 1Sime Engineering Sdn Bhd Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Sime UEP Properties Berhad Malaysia 100.0 100.0 1Sime Darby (China) Enterprise Management Co Ltd China 100.0 100.0 4Sime Darby Marine (Hong Kong) Private Limited Hong Kong 100.0 100.0 2Sime Darby Investment (BVI) Limited British Virgin Islands 100.0 100.0 4

Others – Associate 

Sime Darby Almana WLL Qatar 49.0 49.0 4Notes: 1 – audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT Malaysia 2 – audited by member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, which are separate and independent legal entities from PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT Malaysia 3 – audited by firms other than member firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited 4 – no legal requirement to appoint auditors + – notwithstanding the Group holds more than 50% equity interest in these companies, the investment is classified as joint venture (and not subsidiary) as significant decisions require unanimous consent from all its shareholders * – notwithstanding the Group holds more than 20% equity interest in BMW Malaysia Sdn Bhd, the investment is classified as a financial asset at fair value through profit or loss (and not associate) due to the Group’s restricted influence pursuant to the shareholders’ agreement @ – Yayasan Sime Darby is a company without share capital, limited by guarantee 

55 Approval of Financial Statements 

The financial statements have been approved for issue in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors on 28 September 2020. 

> 291 Financial Statements

Board of Directors Tan Sri Samsudin Osman 

(Non-Independent Non-Executive Chairman) 

Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir 

(Non-Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Datuk Wan Selamah Wan Sulaiman 

(Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Dato’ Sri Abdul Hamidy Abdul Hafiz 

(Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Dato’ Ahmad Pardas Senin 

(Senior Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Thayaparan Sangarapillai 

(Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Dato’ Lawrence Lee Cheow Hock 

(Non-Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Moy Pui Yee 

(Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Mohamad Idros Mosin 

(Non-Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Dato’ Dr. Nirmala Menon 

(Independent Non-Executive Director) 

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

(Executive Director) 

Group Chief Executive Officer 

Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Group Secretary 

Noor Zita Hassan (MIA 15073) (SSM PC No. 202008002513) 

Registered Office 

Level 9, Menara Sime Darby Oasis Corporate Park Jalan PJU 1A/2, Ara Damansara 47301 Petaling Jaya Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia Telephone : +(603) 7623 2000 Facsimile : +(603) 7623 2100 Email : communications@simedarby.com Website : www.simedarby.com 

Share Registrar 

Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd (Registration No. 197101000970 (11324-H)) Office: Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Telephone : +(603) 2783 9299 Facsimile : +(603) 2783 9222 Email : is.enquiry@my.tricorglobal.com Customer Service Centre: Unit G-3, Ground Floor, Vertical Podium Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 

Auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT 

(LLP0014401-LCA & AF 1146) Chartered Accountants Level 10, 1 Sentral, Jalan Rakyat Kuala Lumpur Sentral 50706 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Telephone : +(603) 2173 1188 Facsimile : +(603) 2173 1288 

Form of Legal Entity 

Incorporated on 7 November 2006 as a private company limited by shares under the Companies Act, 1965 and deemed registered under the Companies Act 2016. Converted into a public company limited by shares on 5 April 2007 

Stock Exchange Listing 

Listed on the Main Market of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad since 30 November 2007 Stock Code : 4197 Stock Name : SIME 

Place of Incorporation and Domicile 

Malaysia 

# Corporate Information 

As at 17 September 2020 

292 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 Analysis of Shareholdings 

As at 17 September 2020 Number of Issued Shares : 6,801,447,777 ordinary shares Voting Right : One vote per ordinary share in the case of a poll and one vote per person on a show of hands     

> Size of Shareholdings No. of Shareholders %No. of Shares Held %

Less than 100 2,735 9.37 70,209 0.00 1100 to 1,000 7,217 24.72 4,413,465 0.06 1,001 to 10,000 14,423 49.41 50,157,429 0.74 10,001 to 100,000 3,624 12.41 100,403,417 1.48 100,001 to less than 5% of issued capital 1,192 4.08 2,385,650,924 35.08 5% and above of issued capital 4 0.01 4,260,752,333 62.64 

Total 29,195 100.00 6,801,447,777 100.00 

Note: 1 less than 0.01%     

> Classification of Shareholders No. of Shareholders %No. of Shares Held %

Individuals 23,601 80.84 146,375,691 2.15 Banks/Finance Companies 62 0.21 4,163,082,820 61.21 Investment Trusts/Foundations/Charities 17 0.06 664,612 0.01 Industrial and Commercial Companies 563 1.93 83,681,021 1.23 Government Agencies/Institutions 2 0.01 1,365,652 0.02 Nominees 4,947 16.94 2,406,159,706 35.38 Others 2 0.01 105,275 0.00 1Trustee 1 0.00 1 13,000 0.00 1

Total 29,195 100.00 6,801,447,777 100.00 

Note: 1 less than 0.01% 

Directors’ Direct and Indirect Interests in the Company and its Related Corporations 

Save as disclosed in the Directors’ Report of the Financial Statements as set out on page 152, none of the Directors of the Company has any interest, direct or indirect, in the Company and its related corporations. 

293 Appendices 30 Largest Shareholders as per the Record of Depositors No. Name of Shareholder No. of Shares Held %

1. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Bumiputera 2,749,360,500 40.42 2. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Employees Provident Fund Board 569,874,410 8.38 3. Permodalan Nasional Berhad 497,080,374 7.31 4. Kumpulan Wang Persaraan (Diperbadankan) 444,437,049 6.53 5. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Malaysia 2 – Wawasan 94,975,300 1.40 6. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Malaysia 77,500,000 1.14 7. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Employees Provident Fund Board (NOMURA) 68,954,600 1.01 8. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Great Eastern Life Assurance (Malaysia) Berhad (PAR 1) 65,334,549 0.96 9. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Malaysia 3 61,000,000 0.90 10. HSBC Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd JPMCB NA for Vanguard Total International Stock Index Fund 58,850,674 0.87 11. Cartaban Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd PAMB for Prulink Equity Fund 54,418,327 0.80 12. HSBC Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd JPMCB NA for Vanguard Emerging Markets Stock Index Fund 47,746,736 0.70 13. Cartaban Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd Exempt AN for State Street Bank & Trust Company (West CLT OD67) 46,857,028 0.69 14. Affin Hwang Investment Bank Berhad Exempt AN CLR for AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad (101) 40,000,000 0.59 15. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Bumiputera 2 35,000,000 0.51 16. Maybank Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd MTrustee Berhad for Principal Dali Equity Growth Fund (UT-CIMB-DALI) (419455) 31,948,536 0.47 17. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Exempt AN for AIA Bhd 31,929,925 0.47 18. Cartaban Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd GIC Private Limited for Government of Singapore (C) 30,678,274 0.45 19. Citigroup Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd Exempt AN for Citibank New York (Norges Bank 14) 29,792,500 0.44 20. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Great Eastern Life Assurance (Malaysia) Berhad (PAR 3) 24,820,202 0.36 

# Analysis of Shareholdings 

As at 17 September 2020  

> 294 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

30 Largest Shareholders as per the Record of Depositors (continued) No. Name of Shareholder No. of Shares Held %

21. Lembaga Tabung Haji 22,210,000 0.33 22. Citigroup Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd CBNY for Dimensional Emerging Markets Value Fund 21,654,600 0.32 23. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Public Islamic Dividend Fund 21,536,563 0.32 24. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Amanah Saham Bumiputera 3 – Didik 21,184,100 0.31 25. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Great Eastern Life Assurance (Malaysia) Berhad (LSF) 20,970,644 0.31 26. Citigroup Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Employees Provident Fund Board (CIMB PRIN) 20,806,992 0.31 27. Citigroup Nominees (Asing) Sdn Bhd UBS AG 20,647,878 0.30 28. Hong Leong Assurance Berhad AS Beneficial Owner (LIFE PAR) 20,421,831 0.30 29. Maybank Nominees (Tempatan) Sdn Bhd Maybank Trustees Berhad for Public Ittikal Fund (N14011970240) 20,000,000 0.29 30. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad Public Islamic Equity Fund 19,452,529 0.29 

Substantial Shareholders as per the Register of Substantial Shareholders No. Name of Substantial Shareholder No. of Shares Held (Direct Interest) %No. of Shares Held (Indirect/Deemed Interest) %

1. AmanahRaya Trustees Berhad – Amanah Saham Bumiputera 2,749,360,500 40.42 – –2. Employees Provident Fund Board 566,507,410 8.33 156,124,857 2.28 3. Permodalan Nasional Berhad 537,080,374 7.90 – –4. Yayasan Pelaburan Bumiputra 1 – – 537,080,374 7.90 5. Kumpulan Wang Persaraan (Diperbadankan) 444,437,049 6.53 32,161,275 0.47 Note: 1 Deemed interest by virtue of its interest in Permodalan Nasional Berhad pursuant to Section 8(4) of the Companies Act 2016. 

> 295 Appendices

# Properties of the Group Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million) INDUSTRIAL DIVISION Malaysia 

Jalan Lahat, Bukit Merah, Ipoh Leasehold expiring 2036-2056 3 1982-1996 24 - 40 Single-storey office building, factory, workshop and warehouse 1Semambu Industrial Estate, Kuantan Leasehold expiring 2041 3 1982 40 2 blocks of single-storey office building with detached factory, workshop and warehouse 3Kompleks Kejuruteraan, Jalan Puchong, Taman Perindustrian Puchong Utama, Puchong Freehold 14 1993 22 Land, 5-storey commercial office, training centre, workshop and warehouse 49 Tuaran Road, Kota Kinabalu Leasehold expiring 2025 1 1982 40 2-storey office building, training centres, workshop and warehouse ^Jalan Piasau, Miri, Kidurong Light Industrial Estate, Bintulu, Lorong Then Kung Suk, Sibu Leasehold expiring 2028-2060 4 1982-1986 20-40 Office buildings with detached factory, workshop and warehouse 4

Singapore 

Benoi Sector, Jurong Pier Leasehold expiring 2025-2032 9 1978-2004 12-49 Office building, warehouse and workshop 2

Brunei 

Beribi Industrial Estate, Bandar Seri Begawan Leasehold expiring 2029 * 2003 17 Office, service centre and warehouse ^

China 

Changsha Economic Technological Development Area, Changsha, Hunan Leasehold expiring 2063 4 2013-2016 4 Industrial land, 2-storey office buildings, warehouse and workshop 34 Ji Mei District, Xiamen, Fujian Leasehold expiring 2062 

11 1 2012-2015 6 3-storey office buildings, warehouse and workshop 14    

> 296 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020 Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

INDUSTRIAL DIVISION (continued) China (continued) 

Xiao Lan Industrial Park, Nanchang, Jiangxi Leasehold expiring 2059 1 2009-2011 9 3-storey office building, warehouse and workshop 5Nanning, Guangxi Leasehold expiring 2064 3 2014-2019 1 Industrial land, 3-storey office building with carpark, warehouse and workshop 35 Shunjiang Juweihui Industrial Park, Shunde, Foshan, Guangdong Leasehold expiring 2045 2 1996-2011 9-23 Land, 2 blocks of 4-storey and 2-storey buildings, warehouse and workshops 10 Yifu Garden, Dongguan, Guangdong Leasehold expiring 2072 – 2014 7 Staff quarters ^Urumqi, Xinjiang Leasehold expiring 2061 4 2010-2012 8 Land, office building, warehouse and workshop 24 

Hong Kong 

Yuen Long Industrial Estate, Yuen Long District Leasehold expiring 2047 2 1993 – Land for 2-storey office building, warehouse and workshop 7

Australia 

Alice Springs, Darwin and Gove Facilities Freehold 6 1992-2011 14-53 Single-storey office buildings, warehouse and workshops 17 Archerfield Facility, Kerry Road, Archerfield, Bellrick Street, Beaudesert Road, Acacia Ridge, Brisbane Freehold 19 1992-2012 10-74 Single-storey and 2-storey commercial offices, warehouses and workshops 82 Boundary Road, Richlands, Brisbane Freehold 1 2010 10 2 blocks of 2-storey and single-storey office buildings, warehouse and workshop 17 Cairns Facility, Kenny Street, Comport St, Portsmith, Cairns Freehold 1 1992-2008 40 Single-storey commercial office, workshop and warehouse 15   

> 297 Appendices Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

INDUSTRIAL DIVISION (continued) Australia (continued) 

Emerald Facility, Archer Drive, Alstonia Drive, Buckland Street Freehold 13 1992-1996 23-46 Single-storey commercial offices, workshops and staff hostels 10 Mackay Facility, Farrellys Lane, Connors Road, Broadsound Road, Commercial Avenue, Mackay Freehold 51 1992-2013 6-38 2-storey commercial offices, training facilities, workshops and warehouses 351 Mt Isa Facility, Kolongo Crescent Kalkadoon, Mt Isa Freehold 2 1992-2011 42 Single-storey commercial office, workshop and warehouse 23 Rockhampton Facility, Port Curtis Road, Richardson Road, Rockhampton Freehold 35 1992 5-46 13 blocks of single-storey commercial office, workshop, warehouse and training facility 107 Toowoomba Facility, Carrington Road, Torrington Freehold 4 1992-2012 20-48 Single-storey commercial offices, workshop and warehouse 47 Townsville Facility, Corner Woolcock Street and Blakey Street, Garbutt, Townsville Freehold 2 1992 46 2-storey commercial offices, workshop and warehouse 24 North Coast Facility, 22 Lear Jet Drive, Caboolture Leasehold expiring 2023 6 2019 17 Commercial Offices 1

# Properties of the Group 298 Sime Darby Berhad   

> Annual Report 2020 Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

INDUSTRIAL DIVISION (continued) New Zealand 

276 & 280 Te Ngae Road, Rotorua Freehold 1 2019 41 Commercial office, workshop and warehouse 17 24 Branston Street, Hornby, Christchurch Freehold * 2019 8 Commercial office, workshop and warehouse 19 

New Caledonia 

Canala, Kouaoua Freehold – 2000-2004 26 Commercial office, workshop and warehouse and residential dwelling ^Lot 1 & 2 Lotissement ZICO II, Paita Freehold 2 2010 – Office building, workshop, warehouse and operational bay 70 

Papua New Guinea 

Port Moresby Facility, Spring Garden Road, Moresby, Lae Facility, Corner Milford Street & Malaita Street, Lae, Tabubil Facility, Batch Street Leasehold expiring 2094 16 1992-2017 24-68 Land, 2-storey and single- storey office buildings, sales service and parts facility, and staff hostels 47 

Solomon Islands 

Honiara Facility, Guadalcanal Island, Panatina Village, Honiara Leasehold expiring 2091 3 1992 36 Office, industrial building, warehouse and 2-storey staff hostels ^

Total Industrial Division 1,035 299 Appendices Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million) MOTORS DIVISION Malaysia 

Padang Meha, Kulim Freehold 78 2004 23 Assembly plant 76 Automotive Complex, Ara Damansara Freehold 9 2014-2015 1 Office buildings, showrooms and workshops 466 Temasya Industrial Park, Shah Alam Freehold * 2004-2006 17-19 3-storey office buildings and showrooms 14 Bandar Bukit Raja, Kapar, Klang Freehold 10 2008 – Land held for development of a pre-delivery inspection centre 9193-195, Jalan Klang Lama Leasehold expiring 2026 * 2015 6 2-storey office building, showroom and workshop 4362, Jalan Tun Razak Freehold * 2010 10 4-storey 4S service centre and workshop 48 Kajang, Balakong Freehold Leasehold expiring 2116 **2018 – Land for development of a 4S centre 38 Sedco Industrial Estate, Jalan Limau Manis, Kota Kinabalu Leasehold expiring 2034 2 2003 44 Single-storey showroom and service centre ^

Singapore 

303 & 305 Alexandra Road Leasehold expiring 2047-2057 9 2002-2005 12-14 6-storey 4S showroom, service centre and workshop 217 Kampung Arang Road Leasehold expiring 2034 * 1982 51 2-storey service centre and workshop 9

Thailand 

Paradise Road, Bangkok Freehold * 2013-2016 4-7 Land, showrooms, workshops and offices 50 Branches in Bangkok and Samutprakarn Leasehold expiring 2023-2049 5 2002-2019 5-20 3S showrooms, workshops and offices 29 

# Properties of the Group 300 Sime Darby Berhad   

> Annual Report 2020 Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

MOTORS DIVISION (continued) China 

Jinkai Avenue, Chongqing Leasehold expiring 2031 2 2016 5 5-storey 5S centre 34 Yingbin Road, Panyu, Daguang Nan Road, Tianhe, Guangzhou, Guangdong Leasehold expiring 2023-2032 3 1999-2015 5-22 2-storey and 4-storey 4S centre 19 Tianshan Road, Shantou, Guangdong Leasehold expiring 2022 * 2002 16 2-storey 4S centre 2Shen Nan Road, Yue Liang Wan Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, Guangdong Leasehold expiring 2042 1 1994-2004 16-25 2-storey and 8-storey 4S centres 11 Hai Yu Zhong Xian Road, Nanhai Road, Haikou District, Hainan Leasehold expiring 2059-2070 2 2000-2004 14-25 2-storey 4S centre 16 Hongqiao land, East 3 rd Ring, Yunnan Leasehold expiring 2027 2 2010 10 3-storey 4S centre 10 Qilin Central Business District, Qujing, Yunnan Leasehold expiring 2038 * 2019 9 6-storey BMW 4S centre 18 Jinke Nan Road, Jin Niu District, Chengdu, Sichuan Leasehold expiring 2052 1 2008-2011 9-12 7-storey 4S showrooms, service centres and workshops 79 West of Houzishi Bridge, Yue Lu District, Changsha, Hunan Leasehold expiring 2028 1 2011 9 2-storey 4S centre 10 North Jinxing Road, Changsha , Hunan Leasehold expiring 2052 * 2019 5 2-storey 4S centre 24 

Hong Kong and Macau 

2-4 Floor, Kailey Industrial Centre, Fung Yip Street, Chai Wan Leasehold expiring 2047 – 1989 29 3 floors of a 20-storey office building and service centre 21 Matauwei Road, Tokwawan, Kowloon Leasehold expiring 2035 * 1978 57 11-storey service centre, showroom and petrol filling station 13 Castle Peak Road, Tsuen Wan, New Territory Leasehold expiring 2047 * 1972 48 6-storey 4S service centre 7  

> 301 Appendices Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

MOTORS DIVISION (continued) Hong Kong and Macau (continued) 

Fanling, New Territories Leasehold expiring 2047 * 2015 – Land held for development of an automotive support centre 192 3 & 4 Floor, Topsail Plaza, 11 on Sum Street, Shatin Leasehold expiring 2047 – 1992 25 2 floors of a 16-storey office building and service centre 53 3719D, 3719E, 3719F6, 3719I & 3723F, Yuen Long District Leasehold expiring 2047 4 1984 114 4 separate plots of land for pre-delivery inspection/ commercial repair/storage ^120-158 Rua dos Pescadores, Macau Leasehold expiring 2026 * 1977 44 5-storey industrial building with BMW showroom and service centre ^

Australia 

Church Street, Granville, New South Wales Freehold * 2015 - 2019 21 Offices, showrooms and workshops 303 Mangrove Rd, Ferry Rd Sandgate, New South Wales Freehold – 2019 – Land and building 7Littlefield St, Fortitude Valley, Monier Road, Queensland Freehold 1 2014 12-40 Single-storey and two-storey offices, showrooms and workshops 170 

New Zealand 

Great South Road, Manukau Road, Maranui Avenue, Silverfield Street, Auckland Freehold Leasehold expiring 2022-2029 291998-2017 4-55 Offices, workshops, and warehouses 28 12 Crowley Place, Albany Leasehold expiring 2025 * 2019 3 Workshop 7Malden Street, Palmerston North Freehold 3 2005 17-51 Workshop, office and central parts warehouse 15 Wairau Road, Wairau Valley, Auckland Freehold 1 2014 – 3S service centre 100 

Total Motors Division 2,099 Properties of the Group 302 Sime Darby Berhad   

> Annual Report 2020 Location Tenure Land area (Hectares) Year of acquisition Age of building (Years) Description Net book value (RM million)

LOGISTICS DIVISION China 

Jining City, Shandong Leasehold expiring 2022-2064 83 2009-2020 1-11 Ports, warehouses and offices 277 Weifang Port, Shandong Leasehold expiring 2048-2067 651 2005-2020 4-50 Port, warehouse and other buildings 963 

Total Logistics Division 1,240 OTHERS Malaysia 

Labu, Negeri Sembilan Freehold 3,518 1978-1991 – Malaysia Vision Valley land 9Ara Damansara, Selangor Freehold 2 2017-2018 2-3 Office towers 287 Jalan Tandang, Petaling Jaya Leasehold expiring 2065-2066 15 1985-1994 27-57 Industrial land and building 44 Apartments and holiday bungalows in Malaysia Freehold Leasehold expiring 2026 *11982-1999 29-91 Apartments/holiday bungalows 1

Total Others 341 TOTAL GROUP PROPERTIES 4,715   

> Note – The list excludes capitalised lease payments *Less than one hectare ^Less than RM1 million
> 303 Appendices

Sime Darby Berhad (“Sime Darby” or “we” or “us” or “our”) strives to protect your personal data in accordance with the Personal Data Protection Act 2010 (“the Act”). The Act was enacted to regulate the processing of personal data. To comply with the Act, we are required to manage the personal data that we collect from you relating to your shareholding in Sime Darby. The purposes for which your personal data may be used are, but not limited to: 

• Internal record keeping including but not limited to the registration and management of your shareholding in Sime Darby 

• To provide services to you 

• To communicate with you as a shareholder of Sime Darby 

• To better understand your needs as our shareholder 

• For security and fraud prevention purposes 

• For the purposes of statistical analysis of data 

• For marketing activities 

• For the purposes of our corporate governance 

• To send you event invitations based on selected events 

• To comply with any legal, statutory and/or regulatory requirements 

• For the purposes of inclusion in media engagements and/or any relevant or related events 

• For the purposes of us preparing guest invitations, registration and/or sign-ups for our events 

• For the purposes of printed and on-line publications (collectively, “the Purposes”) Your personal data is or will be collected from information provided by you, including but not limited to, postal, facsimile, telephone, and e-mail communications with or from you, and information provided by third parties, including but not limited to, Bursa Malaysia Berhad and any other stock exchange, and your stockbrokers and remisiers. You may be required to supply us with your name, correspondence address, telephone number, facsimile number and email address. If you fail to supply us with such personal data, we may not be able to process and/or disclose your personal data for any of the Purposes. Please be informed that your personal data may be disclosed, disseminated and/or transferred to companies within the Sime Darby Group (including the holding company, subsidiaries, related and affiliated companies, both local and international), whether present or future (collectively, “the Group”) or to any third party organisations or persons for the purpose of fulfilling our obligations to you in respect of the Purposes and all such other purposes that are related to the Purposes and also in providing integrated services, maintaining and storing records including but not limited to the share registrar(s) appointed by us to manage the registration of shareholders. The processing, disclosure, dissemination and/or transfer of your personal data by us and/or the Group and/or third party organisations or persons may result in your personal data being transferred outside of Malaysia. To this end, we are committed to ensuring the confidentiality, protection, security and accuracy of your personal data made available to us. It is your obligation to ensure that all personal data submitted to us and retained by us are accurate, not misleading, updated and complete in all aspects. For the avoidance of doubt, we and/or the Group and/or our or their employees or authorised officers or agents will not be responsible for any personal data submitted by you to us that is inaccurate, misleading, not up to date and incomplete. 

# Notice to Shareholders 

Under the Personal Data Protection Act 2010  

> 304 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Further, we may request your assistance to procure the consent of third parties whose personal data is made available by you to us and you hereby agree to use your best endeavours to do so. You may at any time after the submission of your personal data to us, request for information relating to your personal data by contacting our share registrar Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd if you wish to enquire about any aspects of share registration matters: Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur. Attention : Ms Lim Lay Kiow, Senior Manager Tel : 03-2783 9299 e-mail : lay.kiow.lim@my.tricorglobal.com In addition, you may request for access to your personal data by contacting your broker or alternatively Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd as shown above if: 

• you require access to and/or wish to make corrections to your personal data subject to compliance of such request for access or correction not being refused under the provisions of the Act and/or existing laws; or 

• you wish to enquire about your personal data. Any personal data retained by us shall be destroyed and/or deleted from our records and system in accordance with our retention policy in the event such data is no longer required for the said Purposes. In the event of any inconsistency between the English version and the Bahasa Malaysia version of this Notice, the English version shall prevail over the Bahasa Malaysia version. We trust that you will consent to the processing of your personal data and that you declare that you have read, understood and accepted the statements and terms herein. 

> 305 Appendices

Sime Darby Berhad (“Sime Darby” atau “kami”) bermatlamat untuk melindungi data peribadi anda selaras dengan Akta Perlindungan Data Peribadi 2010 (“Akta”). Akta tersebut diperbuat untuk mengawal selia pemprosesan data peribadi. Bagi mematuhi Akta tersebut, kami dikehendaki untuk menguruskan data peribadi yang kami kumpulkan daripada anda berkenaan dengan pegangan saham anda di Sime Darby. Tujuan penggunaan data peribadi anda adalah untuk, tetapi tidak terhad kepada: 

• Penyimpanan rekod dalaman termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada pendaftaran dan pengurusan pegangan saham anda di Sime Darby 

• Untuk memberikan perkhidmatan kepada anda 

• Untuk berkomunikasi dengan anda sebagai pemegang saham Sime Darby 

• Untuk lebih memahami keperluan anda sebagai pemegang saham kami 

• Bagi maksud-maksud keselamatan dan pencegahan penipuan 

• Bagi maksud analisis statistik data 

• Untuk aktiviti pemasaran 

• Bagi maksud tadbir urus korporat kami 

• Untuk menghantar jemputan acara berdasarkan acara-acara terpilih 

• Untuk mematuhi apa-apa kehendak di sisi undang-undang, statut, dan peraturan 

• Bagi maksud penyertaan dalam penglibatan media dan/atau apa-apa acara relevan atau berkaitan 

• Bagi maksud kami menyediakan jemputan tetamu, pendaftaran dan/atau kemasukan untuk acara-acara kami 

• Bagi maksud penerbitan bercetak dan penerbitan dalam talian kami (secara kolektif, “Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut”). Data peribadi anda sedang atau akan dikumpul daripada maklumat yang diberikan oleh anda, termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada, komunikasi-komunikasi pos, faksimili, telefon, dan e-mel dengan atau daripada anda, dan maklumat yang diberikan oleh pihak ketiga, termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada, Bursa Malaysia Berhad dan bursa saham yang lain, dan broker saham dan remisier anda. Anda mungkin diperlukan untuk memberikan kepada kami nama, alamat surat-menyurat, nombor telefon, nombor faksimili, dan alamat emel anda. Jika anda gagal untuk memberikan kami data peribadi tersebut, kami mungkin tidak dapat memproses dan/atau menzahirkan data peribadi anda bagi mana-mana Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut. Sila maklum bahawa data peribadi anda boleh dizahirkan, disebarkan dan/atau dipindahkan kepada syarikat-syarikat di dalam Kumpulan Sime Darby (termasuk syarikat induk, anak-anak syarikat, syarikat-syarikat berkaitan dan bersekutu tempatan dan antarabangsa), samada pada masa kini atau masa hadapan (secara kolektif, “Kumpulan”), atau kepada mana-mana organisasi atau individu pihak ketiga bagi maksud memenuhi tanggungjawab kami kepada anda berkenaan dengan Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut dan bagi semua maksud lain yang berkaitan dengan Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut dan juga untuk memberikan perkhidmatan-perkhidmatan bersepadu, menyelenggara dan menyimpan rekod-rekod termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada pendaftar saham atau pendaftar-pendaftar saham yang dilantik oleh kami untuk menguruskan pendaftaran pemegang saham. Pemprosesan, penzahiran, penyebaran dan/atau pemindahan data peribadi anda oleh kami dan/atau Kumpulan dan/atau organisasi atau individu pihak ketiga mungkin mengakibatkan data peribadi anda dipindah ke luar Malaysia. Untuk tujuan ini, kami komited dalam memastikan penyulitan, perlindungan, keselamatan dan ketepatan data peribadi anda yang diberikan kepada kami. Adalah tanggungjawab anda untuk memastikan bahawa semua data peribadi yang diberikan kepada kami dan disimpan oleh kami adalah tepat, tidak mengelirukan, terkini dan lengkap dalam semua aspek. Bagi mengelakkan keraguan, kami dan/atau Kumpulan dan/atau pekerja atau pegawai yang diberi kuasa atau ejen kami tidak akan bertanggungjawab untuk apa-apa data peribadi yang diberikan oleh anda kepada kami yang tidak tepat, mengelirukan, bukan terkini dan tidak lengkap. 

# Notis Kepada Pemegang Saham 

Di Bawah Akta Perlindungan Data Peribadi 2010  

> 306 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Selanjutnya, kami boleh meminta bantuan anda untuk memperolehi persetujuan pihak ketiga yang data peribadinya telah diberikan oleh anda kepada kami dan anda dengan ini bersetuju untuk menggunakan usaha terbaik anda untuk berbuat demikian. Anda boleh pada bila-bila masa selepas penyerahan data peribadi anda kepada kami, meminta untuk mengakses data peribadi anda dengan menghubungi pendaftar saham kami Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd jika anda ingin membuat sebarang pertanyaan berkenaan dengan aspek-aspek pendaftaran saham: Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur. Untuk perhatian : Cik Lim Lay Kiow, Pengurus Kanan No.Tel : 03-2783 9299 e-mel : lay.kiow.lim@my.tricorglobal.com Anda juga boleh membuat permintaan untuk mengakses data peribadi anda dengan menghubungi broker anda atau secara alternatif Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd seperti yang tersebut di atas jika: 

• anda memerlukan akses kepada dan/atau ingin membuat pembetulan kepada data peribadi anda, tertakluk kepada pematuhan permintaan untuk akses atau pembetulan itu tidak ditolak di bawah peruntukan Akta tersebut dan/atau undang-undang yang sedia ada; atau 

• anda ingin membuat pertanyaan mengenai data peribadi anda. Apa-apa data peribadi yang dikekalkan oleh kami akan dimusnahkan dan/atau dipadamkan daripada rekod dan sistem kami megikut polisi penyimpanan kami sekiranya data tersebut tidak lagi diperlukan bagi Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut. Sekiranya terdapat apa-apa percanggahan antara versi Bahasa Inggeris and versi Bahasa Malaysia dalam Notis ini, versi Bahasa Inggeris akan mengatasi versi Bahasa Malaysia. Kami percaya bahawa anda akan bersetuju kepada pemprosesan data peribadi anda dan anda mengakui bahawa anda telah membaca, memahami dan menerima pernyataan-pernyataan dan terma-terma yang terkandung di dalam Notis ini. 

> 307 Appendices

Sime Darby Berhad (“Sime Darby” or “we” or “us” or “our”) strives to protect your personal data in accordance with the Personal Data Protection Act 2010 (“the Act”). The Act was enacted to regulate the processing of personal data. To comply with the Act, we are required to manage the personal data that we collect from you relating to your acting as a proxy for a shareholder in Sime Darby. The purposes for which your personal data may be used are, but not limited to: 

• Internal record keeping including but not limited to the registration of attendance at the general meeting(s) 

• To communicate with you as a proxy for a shareholder of Sime Darby 

• For security and fraud prevention purposes 

• For the purposes of statistical analysis of data 

• For the purposes of our corporate governance 

• To comply with any legal, statutory and/or regulatory requirements (collectively, “the Purposes”). Your personal data is or will be collected from information provided by you, including but not limited to, postal, facsimile, telephone, and e-mail communications with or from you, and information provided by third parties, including but not limited to, Bursa Malaysia Berhad and any other stock exchange, and your stockbrokers and remisiers. You may be required to supply us with your name, NRIC No. and correspondence address. If you fail to supply us with such personal data, we may not be able to process and/or disclose your personal data for any of the Purposes. Please be informed that your personal data may be disclosed, disseminated and/or transferred to companies within the Sime Darby Group (including the holding company, subsidiaries, related and affiliated companies, both local and international), whether present or future (collectively, “the Group”) or to any third party organisations or persons for the purpose of fulfilling our obligations to you in respect of the Purposes and all such other purposes that are related to the Purposes and also in providing integrated services, maintaining and storing records including but not limited to the share registrar(s) appointed by us to manage the registration of shareholders. The processing, disclosure, dissemination and/or transfer of your personal data by us and/or the Group and/or third party organisations or persons may result in your personal data being transferred outside of Malaysia. To this end, we are committed to ensuring the confidentiality, protection, security and accuracy of your personal data made available to us. It is your obligation to ensure that all personal data submitted to us and retained by us are accurate, not misleading, updated and complete in all aspects. For the avoidance of doubt, we and/or the Group and/or our or their employees or authorised officers or agents will not be responsible for any personal data submitted by you to us that is inaccurate, misleading, not up to date and incomplete. 

# Notice to Proxies 

Under the Personal Data Protection Act 2010  

> 308 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Further, we may request your assistance to procure the consent of third parties whose personal data is made available by you to us and you hereby agree to use your best endeavours to do so. You may at any time after the submission of your personal data to us, request for access to your personal data from Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd if: 

• you require access to and/or wish to make corrections to your personal data subject to compliance of such request for access or correction not being refused under the provisions of the Act and/or existing laws; or 

• you wish to enquire about your personal data. Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur. Attention : Ms Lim Lay Kiow, Senior Manager Tel : 03-2783 9299 e-mail : lay.kiow.lim@my.tricorglobal.com Any personal data retained by us shall be destroyed and/ or deleted from our records and system in accordance with our retention policy in the event such data is no longer required for the said Purposes. In the event of any inconsistency between the English version and the Bahasa Malaysia version of this Notice, the English version shall prevail over the Bahasa Malaysia version. We trust that you will consent to the processing of your personal data and that you declare that you have read, understood and accepted the statements and terms herein. 

> 309 Appendices

Sime Darby Berhad (“Sime Darby” atau “kami”) bermatlamat untuk melindungi data peribadi anda selaras dengan Akta Perlindungan Data Peribadi 2010 (“Akta”). Akta tersebut diperbuat untuk mengawal selia pemprosesan data peribadi. Bagi mematuhi Akta tersebut, kami dikehendaki untuk menguruskan data peribadi yang kami kumpulkan daripada anda berkenaan dengan perwakilan anda sebagai proksi untuk pemegang saham Sime Darby. Tujuan penggunaan data peribadi anda adalah untuk, tetapi tidak terhad kepada: 

• Penyimpanan rekod dalaman termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada pendaftaran kehadiran di mesyuarat (-mesyuarat) agung 

• Untuk berkomunikasi dengan anda sebagai proksi untuk pemegang saham Sime Darby 

• Bagi maksud-maksud keselamatan dan pencegahan penipuan 

• Bagi maksud analisis statistik data 

• Bagi maksud tadbir urus korporat kami 

• Untuk mematuhi apa-apa kehendak di sisi undang-undang, statutori, dan/atau peraturan (secara kolektif, “Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut”). Data peribadi anda sedang atau akan dikumpul daripada maklumat yang diberikan oleh anda, termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada, komunikasi-komunikasi pos, faksimili, telefon, dan e-mel dengan atau daripada anda, dan maklumat yang diberikan oleh pihak ketiga, termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada, Bursa Malaysia Berhad dan bursa saham yang lain, dan broker saham dan remisier anda. Anda mungkin diperlukan untuk memberikan kepada kami nama, No. KP Baru dan alamat surat-menyurat. Jika anda gagal untuk memberikan kami data peribadi tersebut, kami mungkin tidak dapat memproses dan/atau menzahirkan data peribadi anda bagi mana-mana Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut. Sila maklum bahawa data peribadi anda boleh dizahirkan, disebarkan dan/atau dipindahkan kepada syarikat-syarikat di dalam Kumpulan Sime Darby (termasuk syarikat induk, anak-anak syarikat, syarikat-syarikat berkaitan dan bersekutu tempatan dan antarabangsa), samada pada masa kini atau masa hadapan (secara kolektif, “Kumpulan”), atau kepada mana-mana organisasi atau individu pihak ketiga bagi maksud memenuhi tanggungjawab kami kepada anda berkenaan dengan Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut dan bagi semua maksud lain yang berkaitan dengan Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut dan juga untuk memberikan perkhidmatan-perkhidmatan bersepadu, menyelenggara dan menyimpan rekod-rekod termasuk tetapi tidak terhad kepada pendaftar saham atau pendaftar-pendaftar saham yang dilantik oleh kami untuk menguruskan pendaftaran pemegang saham. Pemprosesan, penzahiran, penyebaran dan/atau pemindahan data peribadi anda oleh kami dan/atau Kumpulan dan/atau organisasi atau individu pihak ketiga mungkin mengakibatkan data peribadi anda dipindah ke luar Malaysia. Untuk tujuan ini, kami komited dalam memastikan penyulitan, perlindungan, keselamatan dan ketepatan data peribadi anda yang diberikan kepada kami. Adalah tanggungjawab anda untuk memastikan bahawa semua data peribadi yang diberikan kepada kami dan disimpan oleh kami adalah tepat, tidak mengelirukan, terkini dan lengkap dalam semua aspek. Bagi mengelakkan keraguan, kami dan/atau Kumpulan dan/atau pekerja atau pegawai yang diberi kuasa atau ejen kami tidak akan bertanggungjawab untuk apa-apa data peribadi yang diberikan oleh anda kepada kami yang tidak tepat, mengelirukan, bukan terkini dan tidak lengkap. 

# Notis Kepada Proksi 

Di Bawah Akta Perlindungan Data Peribadi 2010  

> 310 Sime Darby Berhad
> Annual Report 2020

Selanjutnya, kami boleh meminta bantuan anda untuk memperolehi persetujuan pihak ketiga yang data peribadinya telah diberikan oleh anda kepada kami dan anda dengan ini bersetuju untuk menggunakan usaha terbaik anda untuk berbuat demikian. Anda boleh pada bila-bila masa selepas penyerahan data peribadi anda kepada kami, meminta untuk mengakses data peribadi anda daripada Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd jika: 

• anda memerlukan akses kepada dan/atau ingin membuat pembetulan kepada data peribadi anda, tertakluk kepada pematuhan permintaan untuk akses atau pembetulan itu tidak ditolak di bawah peruntukan Akta tersebut dan/atau undang-undang yang sedia ada; atau 

• anda ingin membuat pertanyaan mengenai data peribadi anda. Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur. Untuk perhatian : Cik Lim Lay Kiow, Pengurus Kanan No.Tel : 03-2783 9299 e-mel : lay.kiow.lim@my.tricorglobal.com Apa-apa data peribadi yang dikekalkan oleh kami akan dimusnahkan dan/atau dipadamkan daripada rekod dan sistem kami mengikut polisi penyimpanan kami sekiranya data tersebut tidak lagi diperlukan bagi Tujuan-Tujuan tersebut. Sekiranya terdapat percanggahan antara versi Bahasa Inggeris and versi Bahasa Malaysia dalam Notis ini, versi Bahasa Inggeris akan mengatasi versi Bahasa Malaysia. Kami percaya bahawa anda akan bersetuju kepada pemprosesan data peribadi anda dan anda mengakui bahawa anda telah membaca, memahami dan menerima pernyataan-pernyataan dan terma-terma yang terkandung di dalam Notis ini. 

> 311 Appendices

# Independent Assurance Report 

312 Sime Darby Berhad 

Annual Report 2020 313 Appendices NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the Fourteenth Annual General Meeting (“ AGM ”) of Sime Darby Berhad (“Sime Darby” or “Company”) will be held fully virtual through live streaming from the broadcast venue at Function Room, Ground Floor, Menara Sime Darby, Oasis Corporate Park, Jalan PJU 1A/2, Ara Damansara, 47301 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia on Thursday, 12 November 2020 at 10.00 a.m. for the following businesses: 

AS ORDINARY BUSINESS 

1. To receive the Audited Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 together with the Reports of the Directors and the Auditors thereon. 

Refer to Explanatory Note 1 

(Resolution 1) (Resolution 2) (Resolution 3) (Resolution 4) (Resolution 5) (Resolution 6) (Resolution 7) (Resolution 8) 

2. To approve the payment of fees to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM4,300,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company. 

Refer to Explanatory Note 2 

3. To approve the payment of benefits to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM1,500,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company. 

Refer to Explanatory Note 3 

4. To elect the following Directors who retire pursuant to Rule 8 2.2 of the Constitution of the Company and who being eligible, offer themselves for election: 

(i) Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon 

(ii) Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir 

Refer to Explanatory Note 4 

5. To re-elect the following Directors who retire pursuant to Rule 103 of the Constitution of the Company and who being eligible, offer themselves for re-election: 

(i) Dato‘ Ahmad Pardas Senin 

(ii) Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai 

(iii) Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson 

Refer to Explanatory Note 4 

6. To re-appoint Messrs PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT as Auditors of the Company for the financial year ending 30 June 2021 and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration. Refer to Explanatory Note 5 

# Notice of Annual General Meeting 314 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

AS SPECIAL BUSINESS 

7. To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following Ordinary Resolutions: (i) Proposed Renewal of Share Buy Back Authority for the Company to Purchase its Own Shares of up to Ten Percent (10%) of the Total Number of Issued Shares of the Company (“Proposed Share Buy-Back”) 

“THAT subject to the Companies Act 2016 (“Act”), the Constitution of the Company, the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad (“Listing Requirements”) and all other applicable laws, guidelines, rules and regulations that may be in force from time to time, the Company be and is hereby authorised to purchase such number of ordinary shares in the Company as may be determined by the Directors of the Company from time to time through Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad upon such terms and conditions as the Directors may deem fit and expedient in the best interest of the Company provided that: (a) the aggregate number of shares purchased (which are to be treated as treasury shares) does not exceed ten per cent (10%) of the total number of issued shares of the Company; and (b) the funds allocated for the purchase of shares shall not exceed its retained profits. THAT the Directors be and are hereby authorised, at their absolute discretion, to deal with the treasury shares which may be distributed as dividends, resold, transferred, cancelled and/or in any other manners as may be permitted or prescribed by the Act, the Listing Requirements and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, guidelines, requirements and/or orders of any other relevant authorities for the time being in force. THAT such authority shall continue to be in force until: (a) the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting (“AGM”); or (b) the expiration of the period within which the next AGM is required by law to be held; or (c) revoked or varied in a general meeting, whichever is the earlier; AND THAT the Directors of the Company be and are hereby authorised to take all such steps as are necessary or expedient to implement, finalise and give full effect to the Proposed Share Buy-Back with full power to assent to any condition, modification, variation and/or amendment as may be imposed by the relevant authorities.” (Resolution 9) 

Refer to Explanatory Note 6 

(ii) Proposed Renewal of Existing Shareholders’ Mandate for the Company and/or its Subsidiaries to enter into Recurrent Related Party Transactions of a Revenue or Trading Nature with Related Parties Involving Interest of AmanahRaya Trustee Berhad – Amanah Saham Bumiputera (“ASB”) 

“THAT in accordance with Paragraph 10.09 of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad, and subject to the Companies Act 2016 (“Act”), the Constitution of the Company, other applicable laws, guidelines, rules and regulations, and the approvals of the relevant governmental and/or regulatory authorities, approval be and is hereby given to the Company and/or its subsidiary companies to enter into recurrent related party transactions of a revenue or trading nature with the related parties involving interest of ASB, as set out in Section 2.3 of Part B of the Circular to Shareholders dated 14 October 2020, which are necessary for the day-to-day operations in the ordinary course of business of the Company and/or its subsidiary companies on normal commercial terms which are not more favourable to the related parties than those generally available to the public, undertaken on arm’s length basis, and are not detrimental to the minority shareholders of the Company (“Mandate”); 

> 315 Appendices

THAT the Mandate shall continue to be in force until: (a) the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Company following this AGM at which such Mandate is passed, at which time it will lapse, unless by an ordinary resolution passed at that meeting whereby the Mandate is renewed; or (b) the expiration of the period within which the next AGM is required to be held pursuant to Section 340(2) of the Act, (but shall not extend to such extensions as may be allowed pursuant to Section 340(4) of the Act); or (c) the Mandate is revoked or varied by ordinary resolution passed by the shareholders of the Company in a general meeting, whichever is the earlier; AND THAT the Directors of the Company be and are hereby authorised to complete and do all such acts and things (including executing all such documents as may be required) as they may consider expedient or necessary to give effect to the Mandate.” (Resolution 10) 

Refer to Explanatory Note 7 

(iii) Proposed Renewal of Existing Shareholders’ Mandate and Proposed New Shareholders’ Mandate for the Company and/or its Subsidiaries to enter into Recurrent Related Party Transactions of a Revenue or Trading Nature with Related Parties Involving Interest of Bermaz Auto Berhad (“Bermaz”) 

“THAT in accordance with Paragraph 10.09 of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad, and subject to the Companies Act 2016 (“Act”), the Constitution of the Company, other applicable laws, guidelines, rules and regulations, and the approvals of the relevant governmental and/or regulatory authorities, approval be and is hereby given to the Company and/or its subsidiary companies to enter into recurrent related party transactions of a revenue or trading nature with the related parties involving interest of Bermaz, as set out in Section 2.3 of Part B of the Circular to Shareholders dated 14 October 2020, which are necessary for the day-to-day operations in the ordinary course of business of the Company and/or its subsidiary companies on normal commercial terms which are not more favourable to the related parties than those generally available to the public, undertaken on arm’s length basis, and are not detrimental to the minority shareholders of the Company (“Mandate”); 

# Notice of Annual General Meeting 316 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

THAT the Mandate shall continue to be in force until: (a) the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Company following this AGM at which such Mandate is passed, at which time it will lapse, unless by an ordinary resolution passed at that meeting whereby the Mandate is renewed; or (b) the expiration of the period within which the next AGM is required to be held pursuant to Section 340(2) of the Act, (but shall not extend to such extensions as may be allowed pursuant to Section 340(4) of the Act); or (c) the Mandate is revoked or varied by ordinary resolution passed by the shareholders of the Company in a general meeting, whichever is the earlier; AND THAT the Directors of the Company be and are hereby authorised to complete and do all such acts and things (including executing all such documents as may be required) as they may consider expedient or necessary to give effect to the Mandate.” (Resolution 11) 

Refer to Explanatory Note 7 

8. To transact any other business for which due notice shall have been given in accordance with the Companies Act 2016 and the Constitution of the Company. 

By Order of the Board 

Noor Zita Hassan 

Group Secretary (MIA15073) (SSM PC No. 202008002513) Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia 14 October 2020 

> 317 Appendices

Notes: 

1. The broadcast venue is strictly for the purpose of complying with Section 327(2) of the Companies Act 2016 which requires the Chairperson of the meeting to be present at the main venue of the meeting. Members and proxies WILL NOT BE ALLOWED to attend this AGM in person at the broadcast venue on the day of the AGM. Members and proxies are advised to participate and vote remotely at this AGM through live streaming and online remote voting using the Remote Participation and Voting (“RPV”) facilities provided by the Company’s Share Registrar, Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd (“Tricor”) through its TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Members are advised to read the Administrative Guide carefully and follow the procedures in the Administrative Guide for this AGM in order to participate remotely. 2. For the purpose of determining who shall be entitled to attend this AGM, the Company shall be requesting Bursa Malaysia Depository Sdn Bhd to make available to the Company, a Record of Depositors as at 2 November 2020. Only a Member whose name appears on this Record of Depositors shall be entitled to attend this AGM or appoint a proxy to attend, participate, speak and vote on his/her behalf. 3. A Member entitled to attend and vote at this AGM is entitled to appoint not more than two (2) proxies to exercise all or any of his/her rights to attend, participate, speak and vote at this AGM on his/her behalf. Where a Member appoints more than one (1) proxy, the appointment shall be invalid unless he/she specifies the proportion of his/her shareholdings to be represented by each proxy. A proxy may, but need not, be a Member of the Company. A Member may appoint any person to be his/her proxy without any restriction as to the qualification of such person. 4. Pursuant to Paragraph 8.29A(1) of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad (“Listing Requirements”), all resolutions set out in the Notice of the Fourteenth AGM of the Company shall be put to vote by way of a poll. 5. Where a Member of the Company is an Authorised Nominee as defined under the Securities Industry (Central Depositories) Act 1991 (“SICDA”), he/she may appoint not more than two (2) proxies in respect of each Securities Account he/she holds with ordinary shares of the Company standing to the credit of the said Securities Account to attend and vote at a meeting of the Company instead of him/her. 6. Where a Member of the Company is an Exempt Authorised Nominee as defined under SICDA which holds ordinary shares in the Company for multiple beneficial owners in one (1) Securities Account (“Omnibus Account”), there is no limit to the number of proxies which the Exempt Authorised Nominee may appoint in respect of each Omnibus Account it holds PROVIDED THAT each beneficial owner of ordinary shares, or where the ordinary shares are held on behalf of joint beneficial owners, such joint beneficial owners, shall only be entitled to instruct the Exempt Authorised Nominee to appoint not more than two (2) proxies to attend and vote at a general meeting of the Company instead of the beneficial owner or joint beneficial owners. 7. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing signed by the appointor or his/her attorney duly authorised in writing or, if the appointor is a corporation, either under its common seal or signed by an officer or attorney so authorised. Any alteration to the instrument appointing a proxy must be initialled. 8. The Form of Proxy and power of attorney or other authority, if any, under which it is signed or a notarially certified copy of that power or authority, must be deposited with Tricor not less than 24 hours before the time appointed for the taking of the poll or no later than Wednesday, 11 November 2020 at 12:00 p.m.. The Form of Proxy can be submitted through either one of the following avenues: (i) Lodgement of Form of Proxy in hard copy To be deposited at Tricor’s office at Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A, Vertical Business Suite, Avenue 3, Bangsar South, No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi, 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia or alternatively, at Tricor’s Customer Services Centre at Unit G-3, Ground Floor, Vertical Podium, Avenue 3, Bangsar South, No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi, 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (ii) Electronic lodgement of Form of Proxy The Form of Proxy can be lodged electronically via Tricor’s TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Please follow the procedures for electronic lodgement of Form of Proxy in the Administrative Guide for this AGM. 9. A Member who has appointed a proxy to participate in this AGM must request his/her proxy to register himself/ herself for the RPV at Tricor’s TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Please follow the procedures in the Administrative Guide for this AGM. 10. The Administrative Guide on the conduct of a fully virtual AGM of the Company is available at the Company’s website at http://www.simedarby.com/investor/agmegm. 

# Notice of Annual General Meeting 318 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

Explanatory Notes 1. Audited Financial Statements for the Financial Year Ended 30 June 2020 

The Audited Financial Statements are laid in accordance with Section 340(1)(a) of the Act for discussion only. The Audited Financial Statements do not require shareholders’ approval and as such, will not be put forward for voting to be formally approved by the shareholders. 

2. Resolution 1 – Payment of Fees to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM4,300,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company 

Pursuant to Section 230(1) of the Act, fees and benefits payable to the Directors of the Company will have to be approved by shareholders at a general meeting. The Company is requesting for the shareholders’ approval for the payment of NEDs fees up to an amount of RM4,300,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company in accordance with the remuneration structure as set out below:   

> NED Fee (RM/Year) Board/Board Committee Chairman Member

Board 560,000 240,000 1380,000 2Governance & Audit Committee 80,000 50,000 Other Committees 60,000 35,000 Board of Subsidiary 150,000 100,000   

> Notes:
> 1. Fee for Resident Director 2. Fee for Non-Resident Director

The resolution, if passed, will allow the Company and the subsidiary to make the payment of fees to the NEDs on a monthly basis instead of in arrears after every AGM. The Board is of the view that it is just and equitable for the NEDs to be paid such payment on a monthly basis after they have discharged their responsibilities and rendered their services to the Company. The decision in respect of fees by the subsidiary will be made by the shareholders of the subsidiary in accordance with the laws applicable in its jurisdiction. The fees of each NED for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 are set out in the Nomination & Remuneration Committee Report on page 125 of the Company’s Annual Report 2020. 

3. Resolution 2 – Payment of Benefits to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM1,500,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company 

The benefits payable to the NEDs comprising the following: 

• Company car, petrol and driver for the Non-Executive Chairman 

• Telecommunication devices/facilities 

• Club membership subscription 

• Medical and insurance coverage 

• Discount on purchases of Group/Company products on terms not more favourable than those given to the public/employees 

• Other claimable benefits including reimbursable expenses incurred in the course of carrying out their duties as Directors The payment of benefits to the NEDs will be made by the Company on a monthly basis and/or as and when incurred. 

4. Resolutions 3 to 7 – Election and re-election of Directors Pursuant to Rules 8 2.2 and 103 of the Constitution 

of the Company 

(i) Rule 8 2.2 of the Constitution of the Company expressly states that a Director appointed by the Board shall 

hold office until the conclusion of the next AGM of the Company and shall be eligible for election. Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon and Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir were appointed since the last AGM and being 

eligible, have offered themselves for election at the Fourteenth AGM pursuant to Rule 8 2.2 of the Constitution 

of the Company. The Directors have completed their Mandatory Accreditation Programme pursuant to the 

provision of the Listing Requirements. 

> 319 Appendices

(ii) Rule 103 of the Constitution of the Company expressly states that at every AGM, at least one-third (1/3) of the Directors for the time being shall retire from office at each annual general meeting. A Director retiring at a meeting shall retain office until the conclusion of the meeting. In addition, Rule 104 of the Constitution of the Company states that all Directors shall retire from office at least once every three (3) years. A retiring Director shall be eligible for re-election. Dato‘ Ahmad Pardas Senin, Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai and Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson being eligible, have offered themselves for re-election at the Fourteenth AGM pursuant to Rule 104 of the Constitution of the Company. The Board recommends for the election and re-election of the Directors. All Directors standing for election and re-election have abstained from deliberations and decisions on their own eligibility to stand for election and re-election at the relevant Nomination & Remuneration Committee and Board meetings and will continue to abstain from deliberations and decisions on their own eligibility to stand for election and re-election at this AGM. 

5. Resolution 8 – Re-appointment of Auditors 

The Governance & Audit Committee (“GAC”) at its meeting held on 21 September 2020 undertook the annual assessment of the suitability and effectiveness of the external audit process, and the performance, suitability and independence of the external auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT (“PwC”). The following factors were taken into consideration: (i) Dissemination of information about policies and processes for maintaining independence, objectivity and the monitoring of PwC’s compliance with professional ethical standards; (ii) Communication of audit strategy and current developments in relation to accounting and auditing standards relevant to the Group’s financial statements and the potential impact on the audit; (iii) Timeliness and quality of communication with regard to significant audit, accounting, related risks and control weaknesses and recommendations as well as effective use of meetings with the GAC without management presence; (iv) Competency in the coordination of resources and technical knowledge, and expertise in managing its engagement; and (v) Reasonableness of the audit fees charged. The GAC was satisfied with the suitability of PwC based on the quality of audit, performance, competency and sufficiency of resources that the external audit team had provided to the Sime Darby Group as prescribed under Paragraph 15.21 of the Listing Requirements. The Board at its meeting held on 28 September 2020 approved the GAC’s recommendation that the shareholders’ approval be sought at the Fourteenth AGM on the re-appointment of PwC as external auditors of the Company for the financial year ending 30 June 2021, under Resolution 8. The present external auditors, PwC, have indicated their willingness to continue their services for the next financial year. 

Explanatory Notes on Special Business 6. Resolution 9 – Proposed Share Buy-Back 

The proposed Resolution 9, if passed, will give authority to the Company to purchase its own shares through Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad up to ten per centum (10%) of the total number of issued shares of the Company. Please refer to the Share Buy-Back Statement dated 14 October 2020 for further information. 

7. Resolutions 10 and 11 – Proposed Shareholders’ Mandate 

The proposed Resolutions 10 and 11, if passed, will enable the Company and/or its subsidiary companies to enter into recurrent related party transactions with related parties in the ordinary course of business which are necessary for the Group’s day-to-day operations and are on normal commercial terms not more favourable to the related parties than those generally available to the public and are not detrimental to the minority shareholders of the Company. Detailed information on the Proposed Shareholders’ Mandate is set out in Section 2.3, Part B of the Circular to Shareholders dated 14 October 2020. 

# Notice of Annual General Meeting 320 Sime Darby Berhad 

> Annual Report 2020

The profile of the Directors who are standing for election and re-election (as per Resolutions 3 to 7 as stated above) at the Fourteenth AGM of Sime Darby are set out in the “Board of Directors” section on pages 106 to 111 of the Company’s Annual Report 2020. The details of any interest in securities held by the said Directors are set out in the “Directors’ Report” section on pages 150 to 154 of the Company’s Annual Report 2020. 

# Statement Accompanying Notice of Annual General Meeting 

(Pursuant to Paragraph 8.27(2) of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad) 

321 Appendices This page is intentionally left blank SIME DARBY BERHAD 

(Registration No. 200601032645 (752404-U)) (Incorporated in Malaysia) 

Number of ordinary shares held CDS Account No. 

– –

# Form of Proxy 

I/We (FULL NAME OF SHAREHOLDER AS PER NRIC/PASSPORT/CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION IN CAPITAL LETTERS) (NRIC/Passport/Company No. ) of (ADDRESS) (ADDRESS) Tel. No. being a member/members of SIME DARBY BERHAD hereby appoint (NRIC/Passport No. )(FULL NAME OF PROXY AS PER NRIC/PASSPORT IN CAPITAL LETTERS) of (ADDRESS) *and/or (NRIC/Passport No. )(FULL NAME OF PROXY AS PER NRIC/ PASSPORT IN CAPITAL LETTERS) of (ADDRESS) **or failing him/her, the Chairman of the Meeting, as my/our proxy/proxies to participate and vote for me/us and on my/our behalf at the Fourteenth Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of Sime Darby Berhad (“Company”) to be held fully virtual through live streaming from the broadcast venue at Function Room, Ground Floor, Menara Sime Darby, Oasis Corporate Park, Jalan PJU 1A/2, Ara Damansara, 47301 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia on Thursday, 12 November 2020 at 10.00 a.m. and at any adjournment thereof. 

No. Agenda 

1. To receive the Audited Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2020 together with the Reports of the Directors and the Auditors thereon 

Ordinary Business Resolution For Against 

2. To approve the payment of fees to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM4,300,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company 13. To approve the payment of benefits to the Non-Executive Directors up to an amount of RM1,500,000 from the Fourteenth AGM until the next AGM of the Company 24.(i) To elect Dato’ Dr Nirmala Menon who retires in accordance with Rule 8 2.2 of the Constitution of the Company 34.(ii) To elect Tan Sri Ahmad Badri Mohd Zahir who retires in accordance with Rule 8 2.2 of the Constitution of the Company 45.(i) To re-elect Dato’ Ahmad Pardas Senin who retires in accordance with Rule 103 of the Constitution of the Company 55.(ii) To re-elect Mr Thayaparan Sangarapillai who retires in accordance with Rule 103 of the Constitution of the Company 65.(iii) To re-elect Dato’ Jeffri Salim Davidson who retires in accordance with Rule 103 of the Constitution of the Company 76. To re-appoint PricewaterhouseCoopers PLT as Auditors of the Company and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration 8

Special Business 

7.(i) To approve the Share Buy-Back Authority for the Company to purchase its own shares 97.(ii) To approve the Shareholders’ Mandate for Recurrent Related Party Transactions of a Revenue or Trading Nature with Related Parties Involving Interest of AmanahRaya Trustee Berhad – Amanah Saham Bumiputera 10 7.(iii) To approve the Shareholders’ Mandate for Recurrent Related Party Transactions of a Revenue or Trading Nature with Related Parties Involving Interest of Bermaz Auto Berhad 11 My/Our proxy is to vote on the resolutions as indicated by an “X” in the appropriate space above. If no indication is given, my/our proxy shall vote or abstain from voting as he/she thinks fit. 

For appointment of two (2) proxies, percentage of shareholdings to be represented by the proxies must be indicated below: Percentage (%) 

First proxy Second proxy 

IMPORTANT: Disclosure of Shareholder’s and Proxy’s Personal Data 

Please refer to the Notice to Shareholders under the Personal Data Protection Act 2010 (“PDPA Notice”) in the Annual Report 2020 concerning the Company’s collection of your personal data for the purpose of the Company’s general meeting(s). You hereby declare that you have read, understood and accepted the statements and terms contained in the PDPA Notice. In disclosing the proxy’s personal data, you as a shareholder, warrant that the proxy(ies) has/have given his/her/their explicit consent for his/her/their personal data being disclosed and processed in accordance with the Notice to Proxies under the Personal Data Protection Act 2010 attached. Dated this day of 2020 Signature/Common Seal of Member(s) * Please delete as applicable. ** If you do not wish to appoint the Chairman of the Meeting as your proxy/one of your proxies, please strike out the words “or failing him/her, the Chairman of the Meeting” and insert the name(s) of the proxy(ies) you wish to appoint in the blank space(s) provided. Please fold here to seal Please fold here to seal 

THE SHARE REGISTRAR SIME DARBY BERHAD (200601032645 (752404-U)) c/o Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd (11324-H) Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3, Bangsar South No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia 

Affix Postage Stamp Notes: 

1. The broadcast venue is strictly for the purpose of complying with Section 327(2) of the Companies Act 2016 which requires the Chairperson of the meeting to be present at the main venue of the meeting. Members and proxies WILL NOT BE ALLOWED to attend this AGM in person at the broadcast venue on the day of the AGM. Members and proxies are advised to participate and vote remotely at this AGM through live streaming and online remote voting using the Remote Participation and Voting (“RPV”) facilities provided by the Company’s Share Registrar, Tricor Investor & Issuing House Services Sdn Bhd (“Tricor”) through its TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Members are advised to read the Administrative Guide carefully and follow the procedures in the Administrative Guide for this AGM in order to participate remotely. 2. For the purpose of determining who shall be entitled to attend this AGM, the Company shall be requesting Bursa Malaysia Depository Sdn Bhd to make available to the Company, a Record of Depositors as at 2 November 2020. Only a Member whose name appears on this Record of Depositors shall be entitled to attend this AGM or appoint a proxy to attend, participate, speak and vote on his/her behalf. 3. A Member entitled to attend and vote at this AGM is entitled to appoint not more than two (2) proxies to exercise all or any of his/her rights to attend, participate, speak and vote at this AGM on his/her behalf. Where a Member appoints more than one (1) proxy, the appointment shall be invalid unless he/she specifies the proportion of his/her shareholdings to be represented by each proxy. A proxy may, but need not, be a Member of the Company. A Member may appoint any person to be his/her proxy without any restriction as to the qualification of such person. 4. Pursuant to Paragraph 8.29A(1) of the Main Market Listing Requirements of Bursa Malaysia Securities Berhad (“Listing Requirements”), all resolutions set out in the Notice of the Fourteenth AGM of the Company shall be put to vote by way of a poll. 5. Where a Member of the Company is an Authorised Nominee as defined under the Securities Industry (Central Depositories) Act 1991 (“SICDA”), he/she may appoint not more than two (2) proxies in respect of each Securities Account he/she holds with ordinary shares of the Company standing to the credit of the said Securities Account to attend and vote at a meeting of the Company instead of him/her. 6. Where a Member of the Company is an Exempt Authorised Nominee as defined under SICDA which holds ordinary shares in the Company for multiple beneficial owners in one (1) Securities Account (“Omnibus Account”), there is no limit to the number of proxies which the Exempt Authorised Nominee may appoint in respect of each Omnibus Account it holds PROVIDED THAT each beneficial owner of ordinary shares, or where the ordinary shares are held on behalf of joint beneficial owners, such joint beneficial owners, shall only be entitled to instruct the Exempt Authorised Nominee to appoint not more than two (2) proxies to attend and vote at a general meeting of the Company instead of the beneficial owner or joint beneficial owners. 7. The instrument appointing a proxy shall be in writing signed by the appointor or his/her attorney duly authorised in writing or, if the appointor is a corporation, either under its common seal or signed by an officer or attorney so authorised. Any alteration to the instrument appointing a proxy must be initialled. 8. The Form of Proxy and power of attorney or other authority, if any, under which it is signed or a notarially certified copy of that power or authority, must be deposited with Tricor not less than 24 hours before the time appointed for the taking of the poll or no later than Wednesday, 11 November 2020 at 12:00 p.m.. The Form of Proxy can be submitted through either one of the following avenues: (i) Lodgement of Form of Proxy in hard copy : To be deposited at Tricor’s office at Unit 32-01, Level 32, Tower A, Vertical Business Suite, Avenue 3, Bangsar South, No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi, 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia or alternatively, at Tricor’s Customer Services Centre at Unit G-3, Ground Floor, Vertical Podium, Avenue 3, Bangsar South, No. 8, Jalan Kerinchi, 59200 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (ii) Electronic lodgement of Form of Proxy : The Form of Proxy can be lodged electronically via Tricor’s TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Please follow the procedures for electronic lodgement of Form of Proxy in the Administrative Guide for this AGM. 9. A Member who has appointed a proxy to participate in this AGM must request his/her proxy to register himself/herself for the RPV at Tricor’s TIIH Online website at https://tiih.online. Please follow the procedures in the Administrative Guide for this AGM. 10. The Administrative Guide on the conduct of a fully virtual AGM of the Company is available at the Company’s website at http://www.simedarby.com/investor/agmegm. Sime Darby Berhad 

Company No. 200601032645 (752404-U) Level 9, Menara Sime Darby, Oasis Corporate Park, Jalan PJU 1A/2, Ara Damansara, 47301 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. Tel: (603) 7623 2000 Fax: (603) 7623 2100 Email: communications@simedarby.com 

# www.simedarby.com
