Title: 

URL Source: https://www.cityofwildwood.com/AgendaCenter/ViewFile/Item/31349?fileID=33493

Markdown Content:
CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

1

Chapter 5: 1990 – 2020 

“Surrounding History” 

Celebrate the History of Wildwood, Missouri 

Chapter Introduction: 

Our last chapter looked at the seven decades from 1920 -1990 in Wildwood history. This final chapter 

looks at the thirty -one years from 1990 through 202 1. As we join in this journey, we will look at the 

National, State and Local events and conditions that hav e brought us through the end of the 20 th 

century and into the first two decades of the 21 st Century. This 3 1-year period is one of great change for 

our local area: the historic Meramec Township with its 13 historic communities transition ed to the City 

of W ildwood. It has grown from a rural area to a suburban area . We invite you along for this exciting 

adventure. 

The Nineties 

The 1990 U.S. Census noted that the population center of the United States was , at that time , ten miles 

southeast of Steelville, Missouri. In 1990, Doctor Iben Browning predicted a major earthquake along the 

New Madrid Fault on December 3 rd . His prediction caused a lot of hysteria. Students and their families 

were asked to bring earthquake kits to schoo l. The kits were to include emergency mylar blankets, 

water, tissues, etc. 

<<<BEGIN G.H.W. BUSH SIDEBAR>>> 

George H.W. Bush (1924 -2018) 

George H.W. Busch was the 41 st U.S. President from 1989 -1993. 

Did you know that in 1993 President Bush was the target of an assassination attempt orchestrated by 

the Iraqi Intelligence Service? President Bush stated: “Let future generations understand the burden and 

the blessings of freedom. Let them say, we stood where duty required us to stand.” [Beim -Esche] Find 

out more at the George H.W. Presidential Library and Museum on the campus of Texas A & M University 

in College Station, Texas or at  www.bush41.org 

<<< END G.H.W. BUSH SIDEBAR>>> 

The St. Louis Science Center open ed across Highway 40 from Forest Park’s Planetarium in 1991. That 

year also saw the band, Guns n’ Roses , leaving the stage at the new Riverport Amphitheatre which 

caused the fans to riot. Riverboat gambling approved in Missouri on Mississippi and Missouri Ri vers in 

1992 with the first riverboat opening in 1994. 

In 1993, t he Missouri Outstanding Schools Act was passe d. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

2

MetroLink -Post -rev -use.jpg 

St. Louis Post -Dispatch, 7/25/1993 

Photo credit of page: Jill F. VonGruben 

The MetroLink trains began operation in the St. Louis area in 1993. 

Former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher deliver ed a speech in 1996 at Fulton’s Westminster 

College to commemorate the 50 th anniversary of Winston Churchill’s “Iron Curtain” speech pre sented 

th ere in 1946. 

1997 was the year for several significant events to occur in the greater St. Louis area . AmerenUE 

absorb ed the long -time utility, Union Electric . The last of the dioxin -contaminated soil from Times Beach 

was incinerated during that year . Times Beach, one of Wildwood’s neighboring cities , is now the site of 

the Route 66 Missouri State Park. The “New” Cathedral of St. Louis was named a basilica. St. Louis is one 

of the few cities in the world that is home to two basilicas in the C atholic Church. The “Old” Cathedral 

on the St. Louis Riverfront is also a basilica. The City Museum also opened during 1997 .

Steve Fossett took off from Busch Stadium in 1997 to attempt the first around -the -world balloon flight. 

Unfortunately, t hat fligh t was cut short , but Fossett was successful in this balloon fight goal in 2002 

when he landed in Queensland , Australia . Fossett died in 2007 in a crash of a single -engine plane he was 

flying. The Wildwood connection with the Fossetts ’ is through his late wife, Peggy Fossett. Mrs. Fossett ,

who died in 2017, was a direct descendant of the Hencken Family . The Wildwood Historical Society is 

located on th at historic Hencken Family homestead . Mrs. Fossett through her Charitable Foundation 

si gnificantly supported the building projects of the Society and the preservation of her ancestral home. 

In 1999 , t he Chain of Rocks Bridge over the Mississippi River reopened as a pedestrian and bicycle 

bridge. Pope John Paul II visited St. Louis in 1999 . President Clinton met with the Pope in St. Louis .

20,000 St. Louis youth were in attendance for a service officiated by the Pope at Kiel Center .CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

3

<<<BEGIN WILDWOOD HISTORICAL SOCIETY HISTORY SECTION/ SID EBAR >>> 

# Logo -round -jpg.jpg 

Wildwood Historical Society - History 

The City of Wildwood officially began in September 1995. In January 1996, the City Council established 

the Wildwood Historical Preservation Committee to be under the umbrella of the city government. In 

April 1998, the City Co uncil created the legal Wildwood Historical Preservation Commission to uphold 

the City’s Historical Preservation Ordinances. Discussions began during 1998 about separating the 

functions of the Committee from the Commission. It was decided that the Committe e’s name would be 

changed to the Wildwood Historical Society, a private organization. It was agreed upon that all of the 

property of the Committee would be officially transferred to the Society at its first meeting. The Society 

was founded as a 501(c)3 non -profit organization and its first official meeting was held on February 16, 

1999. The first officers were selected from volunteers. Among the early volunteers who worked to 

establish this organization were: Patty Frazer, Aurelia Lewis, Johnnie Bender, Erv in Schaedler, Rusty & 

Dot Pendleton, Dave & Kay Sutton, Lynn e Martin, Dave & Margaret McGrath, Ron James, Jo Beck, Dovie 

Berry, Helen Gaehle, Joyce Mercer, Mark Trout and Ron Kreienkamp. 

Originally, the Society’s monthly meetings were held in the Fellows hip Hall of Bethel Methodist Church 

in Pond, Missouri. Meetings were held on the third Tuesday of the month. 

From the start, a focus of the Society was to find a permanent home for accumulated history, files and 

artifacts of the historic Meramec Township and its 13 historic communities – the area that roughly 

became the City of Wildwood in 1995. Over the years, many properties were explored for that purpose. 

In November 2009, the Wildwood Historical Society was able to purchase the historic Hencken Family 

Homestead. Through the work of our volunteers, donations and the significant financial help from the 

Peggy and Steve Fossett Charitable Foundation, the Society was able to build out the Museum and 

Library and expand our Meeting Hall. ( the late Peggy Fosset t was the direct descendant of the Hencken 

Family.) The acreage is also home to the Hencken Family home, the original portion of which dates from 

1852. The Hencken Home is listed on the City of Wildwood’s Register of Historic Places. 

The Society has been led by amazing volunteers. The Society’s presidents have included Lynne Martin, 

Jim Martin, the late Lisa Kelpe and Sandy Becker -Gurnow. The Trustees and Officers have always been 

dedicated to further the Mission of the organization to pr eserve and share our local history. 

The Society also fosters research and publication. The first major published research work was At Rest in 

Wildwood (a.k.a. the Cemetery Book ). It has since been followed with the books in the Before It Was 

Wildwood Series: One -Room Schoolhouses; Whiskey, Rebellion, and Wildwood; Early Churches; and 

Roadside History. Our Early Churches book, was nominated for the State Historical Society of Mis souri’s 

2019 History Book of the Year. Karen Fox is a valued research volunteer of the Society. Kare n’s article, CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

4

“Elijah Madison: The Courage and Perseverance of One Man,” was published in the Spring 2018 issue of 

the Missouri Historical Society’s quarterl y magazine, Gateway .

The Society also publishes an annual historical calendar which focuses on aspects of area history. Recent 

local themes have included the Civil War in Wildwood, the One -Room Schoolhouses, the Early Churches, 

the 100 th Anniversary of th e End of WWI, the Groves of Wildwood and the 75 th Anniversary of the End of 

WWII. 

The Society, in the past and currently, works on selected projects in conjunction with the City of 

Wildwood’s Historical Preservation Commission. The current project is a b ook, Celebrate the History of 

Wildwood, Missouri , which covers from pre -history through 202 1. Its final publication was delayed by 

the COVID -19 Pandemic. 

The Wildwood Historical is completely supported by its members and volunteers. 

Past Volunteers & Memb ers, In Memoria: 

Dovie Berry , Joyce Buford , Jim Downs , Peggy Fossett , Lorene Hardt Godair , Roy Godair , Irene Gaehle 

Hairston , Lucie Huger , Ron James , Claude “Red” Kelpe , Lisa Kelpe , Anna Mae Mottert Klump , Carmen 

Kreienkamp , Helen Madlinger , John Madlinger , Dorothy “Dot” Pendleton , Steve Pendleton , Winston 

“Rusty” Pendleton , Virginia Laupp Ross , Judy Sahm , Ervin Schaedler , Kenneth Schaedler , Elmer “Mick” 

Schott , Jack Sheehan , Paul Spoeneman , Marcia Stegmann , Ron Throckmorton 

<<< END WILDWOOD HI STORICAL SOCIETY HISTORY SECTION/ SIDEBAR>>> 

<<<BEGIN PERSONAL REFLECTIONS SECTION >>> 

Why did you move to Wildwood? 

“After several years working to re -establish the relationship between MoDOT and the newly formed City 

of Wildwood through the Rte. 109 Commission, I moved here because I fell in love with the planning 

approach the City was taking and it was close to work at MoDOT. I was then appointed to the Planning 

and Zoning Commission by Mayor Marc antano.” 

Paul Wojciechowski 

Chai r, Historic Preservation Commission, City of Wildwood 

“We were looking for a new home in the early to mid -1980’s and liked the floor plan and area. We were 

living in the Ballwin/Manchester area and wanted to stay close by so that the connections we had 

established in the past 20 plus years could be maintained.” 

Jan Stevens 

Historic Preservation Commissioner , City of Wildwood 

“When my Dad asked my Mom to marry him, she said she would only marry him if he got her a place in 

the country where she could have horses…that’s how our family ended up out here.” 

Debbie Quarternik 

Historic Preservation Alternate Commissioner , City of Wildwood CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

5

“It’s beauty a nd rural makeup that is part of a large metro area – we have the best of both worlds, so t o

speak.” 

Jim Bowlin 

Mayor, City of Wildwood 

“We moved to what was (then) unincorporated Chesterfield (now Wildwood) in 1994. We moved for 

the land, a place we could keep our horses at home. We were young and didn’t have kids yet, but the 

Rockwood School District was the deciding factor. We knew this part of Chesterfield would be the 

perfect place to raise a family. There wasn’t much out here, even then. The Valley, as it is now, was 

mostly farmland. I always like to explain to newcomers, ‘not even that Mc Donalds on Long Road was 

there. ’”

Karen Fox 

Wildwood Resident ; Researcher, Wildwood Historical Society 

“We moved here in 1976. My husband grew up in Grover. The area that would become Wildwood has 

been home to my husband’s family since the 1830’s . Our mo ve here was coming home, so to speak.” 

Jill VonGruben 

Wildwood Resident ; Archivist, Wildwood Historical Society 

Why have you stayed in the Wildwood area? 

“When I went to Portland, Oregon, I had the feeling that it was a unique and different place from what I 

was used to. Wildwood gives me that same feeling. It is a unique place that feels different from all other 

municipalities, which is something to hold close to your heart as a community .”

Paul Wojciechowski 

Chair, Historic Preservation Commissio n, City of Wildwood 

“Very happy with area and home. Shopping is convenient. Enjoy the parks. It is HOME – no place like 

HOME!” 

Jan Stevens 

Historic Preservation Commissioner, City of Wildwood 

“We stayed because of the schools, life -long friends and because we love ‘our little farm, in town.’” 

Debbie Quarternik 

Historic Preservation Alternate Commissioner, City of Wildwood 

“It’s home!” 

Jill VonGruben 

Wildwood Resident ; Archivist, Wildwood Historical Society 

What are the biggest changes you’ve notice d since you’ve moved here? 

“Many more people, homes and businesses and DEER ! Development of parks and trails since becoming 

a city. Many utilities remained the same once we became a city but since becoming a city, many services CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

6

are much better than when w e were unincorporated St. Louis County. Very pleased! There is more of a 

feeling of community – not just suburbia.” 

Jan Stevens 

Historic Preservation Commissioner, City of Wildwood 

“What has changed? The Valley. The growth of subdivisions along Wild Horse Creek Road. What has 

stayed the same? The area west of 109 has changed very little. It’s still a beautiful setting for those who 

enjoy nature and open spaces.” 

Karen Fox 

Wildwood Resident; Researcher, Wildwood Historical Society 

“The traffic on Highway 109 and the amount of deer! It is a great change to have services and stores 

much closer to home. It was a wonderful thing that the (then) new Lafayette High School opened in time 

for my daughters to attend. Having the high school a mile from home gave our daughters the logistical 

freedom to really be involved in a variety of school activities. Life out here since 1976 has changed ; but 

more due to societal changes rather than just due to the increased population. ”

Jill VonGruben 

Wild wood Resident ; Archivist, Wildwood Historical Society 

Why did you choose to serve on the Historic Preservation Commission? 

“After having served on the Planning and Zoning Commission, Council Member for two terms, and on 

the Board of Adjustment, the Hist oric Preservation Commission is different and very positive. It has 

opened my eyes to how even more special Wildwood is from a historic perspective. People ask me ‘what 

history is there in Wildwood ?’ and I say ‘you really do not know Wildwood do you, come see for 

yourself. ’”

Paul Wojciechowski 

Chair, Historic Preservation Commission, City of Wildwood 

“Family roots in the area from before Missouri became a state, always interested in local history and 

educating others about our past, help preserve doc umented information on the history of the area, 

maintain as much accurate history as possible for others to enjoy and learn. Community service. I am a 

first -term commissioner and hope to be able to continue my service. ”

Jan Stevens 

Historic Preservation Co mmissioner, City of Wildwood 

“Since my family has been in the area for 70+ years, I have a concern for my hometown. So I thought I’d 

be an excellent candidate for the Historic Preservation Commission.” 

Debbie Quarternik 

Historic Preservation Alternate Com missioner, City of Wildwood 

Why did you decide to restore the Gimble -St. Onge cabin that is on your property? What was the most 

surprising thing you discovered about the cabin? CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

7

StongeCabin.jpg 

Gimble -St. Onge Cabin 

Photo credit: Jim Bowlin 

“The initial plan was the cabin would be a place to visit and relax while my house was being built, but 

the reverse occurred – the house was completed first. The most surprising thing about the cabin was the 

fact that it was occupied by ancestors o f one of my good friends, Tom Kelpe. ”

Jim Bowlin 

Mayor, City of Wildwood 

Why do you work with the Wildwood Historical Society? 

“As Archivist and Researcher, I am preserving the history of the area and my husband’s family. This is my 

gift to the area and to my children. I have always loved history and I love sharing those stories, so this 

position is perfect for me.” 

Jill VonGruben 

Wildwood Resident, Archivist, Wildwood Historical Society 

<<< END PERSONAL REFLECTIONS SECTION >>> 

<<<BEGIN CLINTON SIDEBAR>>> 

William Jefferson Clinton (1946 -

William Jefferson Clinton was the 42 nd U.S. President from 1993 -2001. 

Did you know that starting in 1994 President Clinton launched the first White House website 

(www.whitehouse .gov)? A final version was released in 2000. Find out more at the William J. Clinton 

Presidential Library and Museum in Little Rock, Arkansas or online at  https://clintonlibrary.gov 

<<< END CLINTON SIDEBAR>>> CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

8

Sports in St. Louis area 

The St. Louis area has often been named as Best Sports City in the nation . St. Louis has baseball, football, 

hockey , s occer , golf and other sports , basketball . Whether it is at the school level, collegiate, “minor 

league” or pr ofessional, the area has a variety of sports and are supported by their fans throughout the 

Greater St. Louis area . Some quick highlights are: 

Baseball: 

St. Louis Baseball Cardinals 

StLouisCards -logo.jpg 

The St. Louis Baseball Cardinals is one of the oldest baseball clubs in the U.S. Over the past 30 years, the 

Cardinals have won eight Central Division titles, two National League Pennants and two World Series. In 

total, the Cards have won 11 World Series. In 1995 Anheuser Busch, who had o wned the Cardinals since 

1953, sold the team to a group of Hanser, DeWitt and Bauer. 

In 1998, Mark McGwire hit a home run into “Big Mac Land” at Busch Stadium. Legendary and Hall of 

Fame broadcaster, Jack Buck, died in 2002. In 2003, the Cardinals and Ba ltimore Orioles played at Busch 

Stadium. Why is this series significant? The Orioles used to be the St. Louis Browns and this game was 

the first here since 1953 between the two teams. Busch Stadium II began to be demolished in November 

2005. Busch Stadium (III) opened in 2006 and played host to Baseball’s All Star Game in 2009. David 

Freese, who was raised in Wildwood and is a Lafayette High School grad , was a key Cardinals player in 

the 2011 World Series. Stan Musial, our legacy Hall of Fame Cardinal, died in January 2013. Two other 

legacy Hall of Fame Cardinals, Bob Gibson and Lou Brock, both died in the fall of 2020. 

Due to the COVID -19 crisis and self -quarantine directives, the 2020 MLB Season ended up being one of 

only 60 games with no fans in attendan ce . The St. Louis Cardinals among other teams, had its 60 games 

condensed due to mandatory COVID quarantining due to players and staff contracting the virus. The full 

2021 season started with a restricted number of fans and full attendance was allowed by St. Louis local 

ordinances in June. 

Hall of Fame Cardinal player and broadcaster, Mike Shannon, retired at the end of the 2021 season after 

serving the Club for 50 years. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

9

River City Rascals 

RiverCityRascals.jpg 

O’Fallon was the home of the River City Rascals in Frontier League from 1998 to 2019. In their 21 years 

in the St. Louis area , the Rascals won 5 Division Championships and 3 League Championships. 

O’Fallon Hoots 

Hoots -logo.jpg 

2020 w as the first season of the O’Fallon Hoots baseball team of the Prospect League at the same 

stadium facility that was home to the River City Rascals. The Hoots were originally located in Hannibal, 

Missouri. The Hoots had a 2020 season and a full 2021 season. 

The Hoots were scheduled to host the St. Louis Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SLIAC) baseball 

tournament at the beginning of May 2020. The 2020 tournam ent was cancelled due to the COVID -19 

quarant ine. 

Football: 

St. Louis Rams 

STLRams -logo.jpg 

NFL St. Louis Rams arrived in the St. Louis region and played in the new Trans World Dome. After a rocky 

start, t he Rams “Greatest Show on Tur f” won Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000. In 2016, the Rams left St. Louis 

to return to Los Angeles. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

10 

The Battlehawks 

Battlehawks -logo.jpg 

The Battlehawks of the XFL had its first season in 2020. After just the first few games, the team ha d

already built a supportive fan base , setting attendance records for the league. Unfortunately , in mid -

April 2020, the XFL folded due to the financial pressure s of COVID -19 had on the new league. The XFL ,

under n ew ownership , made plans to return for the 2023 season. At the end of 2021, St. Louis fans were 

waiting to hear if the Battlehawks would be reformed for this new XFL. 

Hockey: 

The St. Louis Arena was imploded in 1999 . The building was also known as The O ld Barn and The 

Checkerdome. It not only was the original home for the St. Louis Blues, but also the minor league hockey 

team, the St. Louis Flyers , from 1944 to 1953. The Arena was also the site for concerts, conventions, 

political events, the Spirits of St. Louis A merican Basketball Association team and the NCAA Final Four .

The St. Louis Blues 

StLouisBlues.jpg 

After 50 seasons, the St. Louis Blues (finally) won the Stanley Cup on June 13, 2019. In those 50 seasons, 

the Blue Note won 1 Conference Championship, 1 President’s T rophy, and 9 Division Championships. 

The COVID -19 crisis caused a suspension of the 2019 -20 Hockey Season which began on March 12, 2020. 

When play resumed it was with a modified Stanley Cup playoff which ran f rom August through 

September. The 2020 -21 season was reduced to 56 games and began in mid -January 2021 through mid -

May. The playoffs ended at the beginning of July 2021. The 2021 -22 Season started in mid -October. 

Basketball 

St. Louis was home to three m en’s professional basketball teams: The St. Louis Bombers (1949 -50), The 

St. Louis Hawks (1955 -1968) and the Spirits of St. Louis (1974 -1976). T hese teams played their St. Louis 

games in the Arena. Since 2011, St. Louis has been the home for the women’s pr ofessional team, the St. 

Louis Surge. 

In collegiate basketball, in the past St. Louis has been the site of the NCAA Final 4. More recently, St. 

Louis has been the site of the Missouri Valley Conference hosting of the First and Second Rounds of the CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

11 

NCAA Ma rch Madness Tournament. Unfortunately , the entire 2020 March Madness Tournament was 

cancelled due to the COVID -19 crisis. The “Arch Madness” resumed in St. Louis in early March 2021. 

Soccer: 

St. Louis Steamers 

STLsteamers.jpg 

The St. Louis Stea mers of the Major Indoor Soccer League played in St. Louis from 1979 to 1988 . During 

their nine seasons, they won three Division Championships. They were a popular team who played at 

the St. Louis Arena. 

MLS Soccer coming to St. Louis : St. Louis City SC 

Stl_mls_1.jpg 

St. Louis MLS stadium, Architectural Rendering, released 3/2020 

Photo courtesy of St. Louis MLS , 3/5/2020 

Due to COVID, the opening season for St. Louis’ new MLS team was delayed until 2023 . Groundbreaking 

for the new stadium near the St. Louis Union Station entertainment complex occur red in Spring 2020. 

The expansion team’s name is St. Louis City SC .

World Wide Technology Soccer Park 

StLouisFootballClub.jpg 

The World Wide Tec hnology Soccer Park in Fenton includes several fields and the West Community 

Stadium. The facility is operated by the St. Louis Scott Gallagher Soccer Club. It is also the home to both 

of Webster University’s soccer teams. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

12 

U.S. Olympic Festival 

STL -OlympicFest.jpg 

The U.S. Olympic Festival was held in St. Louis in 1994 . It was a 10 -day, 37 -sport competition for 

American athletes to get experience of a high -profile athletic event. 

U.S. Olympic Gymnastics Olympic Trials 

These trials were to have occurred early summer 2020 in St. Louis. Due to the COVID -19 international 

crisis, the 2020 Tokyo Summer Olympic Games were rescheduled for July -August 2021. The Gymnastic 

Trials were postponed till late June 2021 and were held in St. L ouis. 

2004 – 100 th Anniversary of St. Louis Olympics 

1904summerolympicsposter.jpg 

1904 Olympic Games , Worlds Fair Advertising Poster 

For 2004, Fair St. Louis was moved to Memorial Day weekend instead of its traditional timing of the 4 th 

of July holiday. It celebrated the 100 th anniversaries of both the 1904 Olympic Games and the Worlds 

Fair. It also celebrated the bicentennials of the L ouisiana Purchase and the Lewis & Clark Expedition. 

It took 15 years after the 100 th anniversary of the 1904 St. Louis Olympics, but in 2019 Washington 

University’s Francis Field was renamed to “Francis Olympic Field.” In 2018 the sculpture, Olympic Rings 

“Spectacular” was unveiled. These two celebrations were a cooperative event of the St. Louis Sports 

Commission’s Olympic Legacy Committee, Washington University, the International Olympic Committee 

and the United States Olympic & Paralympic Committee. [St . Louis Sports] CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

13 

STLSptsCmsm_OlymDay_DWP19 -3485 -768x510.jpg 

Olympic Rings “Spectacular” at Washington University 

Photo credit: St. Louis Sports Authority 

Technology 

Technology drives a large majority of our lives in 202 1: email, smart phones, smart TVs, home networks, 

etc. What is the basis of th at tech wave? The internet . The first plans for this type of communication 

system were developed in the early 1960s. The first prototype was born in the late 1960s as ARPANET 

(Advanced Research Projects Agency Network). In 1983 researchers began to work on the network that 

would become the internet. The world wide web was invented in 1990 which allowed users to access 

web sites and massive amounts of information. The first smart phone (iPhone) wa s introduced in 2007. 

In 202 1 our businesses and governments run on technology that is basically only 30 years old! The 

internet was launched in Missouri in 19 93. The precursor of the laptop, as we know them now, began in 

the early 1980s. 

1993 saw the in troduction of the first Intel Pentium chips which revolutionized computers. Microsoft 

introduced its new operating system, Windows 1995 , that set the stage for more power and smaller 

computers and laptops. 

In April 1990, the Hubble Telescope was placed into orbit by the U.S. Space Shuttle Discovery and was 

still in service at the end of 2021. The next generation of space telescope, The Webb Telescope, was 

launched on December 25, 2021. 

1990 saw the start of the Human Genome Project to sequence human DNA. It was forecasted to take 15 

years. The project was completed in 2003 after only 13 years .

In 2020 , President Donald Trump sign ed the Space Policy Directive 4 to create Space Force under Air 

Force control. 

The unforeseen benefit to these massive technological advances over the past 3 1 years, have allowed 

government and businesses to somehow function at some level during the COVID -19 crisis of the early 

2020 s.

The War on T error 

We often think of the War on Terror beginning with 9/11. In reality , its roots began long before. The 

begin ning of the end of the Cold War was marked with the tearing down of the Berlin Wall (1989 -1990) 

and the ouster of communist regimes in many of the Eastern Bloc countries that followed over the next 

two years. On December 25 th Soviet President Mikhail Gorbac hev resigned and the Union of Soviet 

Socialist Republics (USSR) was dissolved on December 26, 1991. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

14 

Yet the world, as always, was not settled on peace. The Iran -Iraq War ended with a United Nations 

ceasefire in August 1988 but there was no permanent peace treaty in place. In mid -1990 Saddam 

Hussein gave a speech accusing Kuwait of siphoning crude oil along the Kuwait -Iraq border. In August 

Hussein ’s Iraq forces invaded Kuwait. The United Nations Security Council issued Resolution #678 

demanding Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait by mid -January 1991. The Persian Gulf War became known as 

the United Nations Operation Desert Storm which began on January 16, 1991 . “St. Louis radio and TV 

stations suspended regular programming. Nine Missouri National Guard units were called up. The 

Defense Mapping Agency in St. Louis was also critical to the operation.” [Vintage, 1/16/2020] Operation 

Desert Storm lasted 42 days and initially was considered an unqualified success with Hussein’s 

withdrawal to Iraq. But Hussein ’s refusal to comply with the United Nations peace terms caused 

increasing tensions in the region. The United Nations issued a new resolution to allow weapons 

inspectors to enter Iraq. President George W. Bush issued the ultimatum on March 17, 2003 for Hus sein 

to step down and leave Iraq. Hussein refused and the Iraq War began three days later. Hussein was 

captured in 2003 and executed in 2006. [Persian Gulf War] 

On February 26, 1993 a truck bomb in an underground garage was triggered at the North Tower of the 

World Trade Center in New York City. The bombing kil led six , including a woman who was pregnant, and 

in jur ed more than 1,000. The s even suspects were Muslim extremists. Six were convicted and 

sentenced. One of the suspects is still at large 25 years l ater. The mastermind of the 1993 bombing is 

the nephew of the man who would be the architect of the 9/11 attack. “A room in the 9/11 museum is 

devoted to the (1993) bombing.” [P eltz ] On the 2 6th Anniversary of this bombing in 20 19, a bell was 

tolled at the Sept. 11 memorial and relatives read the names of the victims. Though this bombing 

foreshadowed the 9/11 terrorist attack, there were safety upgrades made due to the 1993 event that 

sped the evacuation of the Twin Towers after the 2011 attack. 

1994, Rwan da experienced the genocide of an estimated 800,000. These killings occurred over 100 days. 

June 26 th each year is the United Nations International Day in Support of Victims of Torture. 

July 1995, more than 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys killed by Bosnian Serb troops. St. Louis now is 

the home to a large Bosnian immigrant population who came here to escape this genocide. 

In 1996, Islamic terrorists bombed the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia kill ing 19 U.S. military personnel in 

the six -building apart ment complex which was home to the 440 th Fighter Wing. The U.S. and Britain 

performed air strikes against Iraqi weapon sites in 1998. 

In 1998, O sama Bin Laden and Al -Qaeda attacked two United States embassies (Kenya and Tanzania) in 

Africa kill ing 224 and injur ing 4,500. A week later, the U.S. initiated a cruise missile attack against Al -

Qaeda camps in Afghanistan. In 2020, t he survivors of these embassy attacks are still dealing with the 

physical, emotional and financial repercussions of these attacks .

9/11/2001 attacks in the United States CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

15 

9-11 Post front page -rev.jpg 

St. Louis Post -Dispatch , 9/12/2001 

Photo credit of page: Jill F. VonGruben 

Locally, Lambert Airport was closed to air traffic. The Gateway Arch and Old Courthouse were closed. 

The Eagleton Federal Courthouse was closed. Shopping centers closed. Of the 9/11 victims, five were 

originally from St. Louis, graduating from the followin g local high schools: Horton Watkins (Ladue), 

Nerinx Hall, Kirkwood, McCluer North and Riverview Gardens. 

9-11 post inside -rev.jpg 

St. Louis Post -Dispatch, 9/12/2001 

Photo credit of page: Jill F. VonGruben 

Communication within the New York area was sketchy for many days and loved ones had no way to 

confirm if their family and friends were safe or not. Alm ost everyone knew someone who was in New 

York or Pennsylvania that day. The re was significant concern and worry about not being able to contact 

them . “Are they alive? Are they injured? ” Those questions were often not answered for many days. 

President George W. Bush visited Ground Zero a few days after 9/11 and said in response to a Ground 

Zero w orker stating he could not hear him : “I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you. And the 

people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon.” [Beim -Esche] 

<<< BEGIN PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY SIDEBAR>>> 

“The St. Louis County Police respons e was similar/same as the policing response across the country. 

Prior to 9/11, warfare and policing were two different modes. Post 9/11, policing is now involved in 

warfare and just as the military is often involved in policing when stationed outside the U nited States. In 

other words, the roles have crossed .” CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

16 

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood Precinct 

<<< END PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY SIDEBAR>>> 

<<<BEGIN CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY SIDEBAR>>> 

“The terrorist plot that led to plane hijackings on 9/11 had a peripheral effect on the City of Wildwood. 

This terrorist act did affect the daily lives of all Americans, including all of the residents of the City of 

Wildwood, in different ways. The impacts of this act obviously did not affect everyone the same, except 

the loss of security caused by such a despicable act. The City itself was not unduly impacted in its day -to -

day operations. Domestic terrorism has not been a threat at City Hall, but public off icials are always 

cautious. Several industries the City works with were greatly impacted. Utility providers, namely 

AmerenUE, changed their policies and procedures to improve security at all of their facilities and the 

system of poles and towers throughout its service area. Utility networks throughout the region became 

more secure. 

“The St. Louis County Police Department also changed its approach to domestic terrorism and the 

federal government provided its officers with advanced training and new equipment to combat these 

threats that might occur in the future. Other providers of emergency services, such as the fire districts, 

also began greater training efforts to address a future incident, if ever to occur. Underpinning all of 

these security efforts were n ew authorities granted to many federal agencies to allow for greater access 

to citizen information through all types of surveillance, of which, many of these programs remain 

today. ”

Department of Planning and Parks 

City of Wildwood 

<<< END CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY SIDEBAR>>> 

Another attack against the U.S. was attempted later in 2001 , when the infamous “Shoe Bomber”, 

Richard Reid, attempted to ignite a bomb hidden inside his shoe. The attack was thwarted after 

passengers noticed suspicious behavior and subdued him .

The Patriot Act in 2002 created the Department of Homeland Security. Homeland Security issued 

directives concerning “Real IDs” and increased security at airports , among other national security 

measures implemented over the past 18 years . In one way or another each of these measures affects 

each of us every day. 

In 2003 , the United States i nvaded Iraq in search of Saddam Hussein . The United States authorized a 

tro op surge in Iraq in 2007. 

In 2009 there was a failed bomb attack on a Northwest Airlines plane. 

In 2011 Osama bin Laden was killed by a United States Special Forces team. Also in 2011, the U.S. 

withdrew troops in Iraq and increased levels in Afghanista n. “As President, he (Obama) withdrew U .S.CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

17 

forces from Iraq by the end of 2011. But the Afghanistan struggle did not end – and in 2017, Donald 

Trump took office as a wartime President, facing a conflict that was, by more than three times, the 

longest in American history.” [Beschloss] 

An optimistic step has been taken. Mid -February 2020 saw the United States and the Taliban agreeing to 

a temporary truce, that if successful, would open the way for a deal that would bring American troops 

home from Afghanistan and end 18 yea rs of war .” [Lee and Gannon] On February 29, 2020 the United 

States and the Taliban signed a peace deal. The signing “ceremony also signals the potential end of a 

tremendous investment of blood and treasure. The U.S. spent more than $750 billion, and on all sides 

the war cost tens of thousands of lives, permanently scarred and indelibly interrupted.” [Lee] As the 

world watches, the agreement mandates the Taliban to “meet certain counter -terrorism conditions, 

compliance that will be assessed by the United States.” [Lee] This is not jus t a United States issue but 

one that affects the NATO mission. “In all, 38 NATO countries are contributing forces to Afghanistan. The 

alliance officially concluded its combat mission in 2014 and now provides training and support to Afghan 

forces. ” [Lee; Ga nnon] As always, history will document if this peace deal holds true. 

War on Terror – Aftermath 

The United States has participated in the Global War on Terror for over 20 years . It is the longest armed 

global conflict in which the United States has been involved. U.S. troops are scheduled to complete their 

withdrawal from Afghanistan on August 31, 2021. The withdrawal occurred on August 31 st but dissolved 

into a chaotic event. 

Since the U.S. Military draft ceased in 1973, the men and women who serve in our military are all 

volunteers. There are consequences of this War to our Citizen Soldiers . Our Warriors come home, some 

after one tour of overseas duty, some after multiple tours. Some of our Warriors reintegrate successfully 

into daily life. Some , due to injuries of multiple definitions, are not able to accomplish that reintegration. 

Besides physi cal injured veterans, there are scores more who battle PTSD. Current estimates for the 

occurrence of PTSD for our returning troops run from 9 percent to approximately 30 percent. [Machayo] 

There are now national, regional and local organizations along with the Veterans Administration which 

are there to help our Warriors. 

Wildwood is the home to three specialized built mortgage -free home s for wounded warriors and their 

families. Some of the organizations that work with veterans in our area are: Gary Sinise Foundation’s 

RISE Program (Restore Independence, Supporting Empowerment), Operation Finally Home, Wounded 

Warrior Project, Focus Marines Foundation, The Mission Continues , and the Veterans Administration, 

among others. 

The 21 st Century 

The last centu ry ended with fears of the Y2K Bug destroying computer systems and communications 

beginning on January 1, 2000. Thankfully, for the most part, that crisis did not occur. On October 16, 

2000, Governor Mel Carnahan, his son and advisor died in a small -plane crash. Carnahan won the 

November election and his widow served in his place. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

18 

2000 -2009 

Old School – New School 

The first Pond School was on Fred Essen ’s land near Pond and Manchester Roads . The Dreinhoefer 

Family donated the land for a new Pond School in the 1880s . The school that was built at that time 

burned to the ground sometime after 1910. [Fox, One -Room Schoolhouses ] The school building we now 

refer to as the Old Pond School was a new building in 1914 and sits on that donated property . The Old 

Pond School served as an elementary school for children until 1951 . In December 2001, the then -

abandoned building was donated to the City of Wildwood by Lorraine Conoreaux , a Dreinhoefer Family 

descendant . Over t he following years , the acquisition of grants and donations of funds , artifacts and 

labor allowed the School to be restored to its original condition. The School and its associated 

playground are now available as a small event space through the City of Wil dwood. [City of Wildwood] 

<<<BEGIN G.W. BUSH SIDEBAR>>> 

George W. Bush 

George W. Bush was the 43 rd U.S. President from 2001 to 2009. 

Did you know that President Bush is a dedicated reader favoring histories and biographies and that he 

began painting after he left the Presidency? Find out more at the George W. Bush Library and Museum 

on the campus of Southern Methodist University (SMU) i n Dallas, Texas or online at 

www.georgewbushlibrary.smu.edu 

<<< END G.W. BUSH SIDEBAR>>> 

In 2001 , the former U.S. Senator from Missouri and Missouri State Governor , John Ashcroft, bec ame the 

U.S. Attor ney General. In 2005 , Ameren’s Taum Sauk upper reservoir dam failed, “sending billions of 

gallons of water down Proffit Mountain and into the east fork of the Black River…Jo hnson’s Shut -Ins 

State Park was badly damaged. ” Fortunately, while there were injur ies , there were no deaths. [Vintage, 

12/14/2019] 

Anheuser -Busch sold to Belgium company, InBev , in 2008. St. Louis’ Citygarden opened in 2009. Also i n

2009, the Meramec River bridge at the Route 66 Missouri State Park (old Times Beach) was closed by 

the M issouri Department of Transportation . The deck was removed in 2013. The Missouri State Parks 

took over ownership of the bridge in 2017 . In 2021 a plan was developed for the bridge restoration and 

the necessary fundraising needed to accomplish the project. 

The Affordable Care Act of 2010 was passed and guaranteed medical insurance coverage to Americans .

2010 -2020 CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

19 

<<<BEGIN OBAMA SIDEBAR>>> 

Barack H. Obama II (1961 - )

Barack H. Obama II was the 44 th U.S. President from 2009 to 2017. 

Did you know that President Obama’s favorite baseball team is the Chicago White Sox 

and that he plays basketball? Find out more at the Barack Obama Library online at 

https://obam alibrary.gov . The library will be located in Jackson Park Chicago, Illinois. 

The ground -breaking ceremony occurred on September 27, 2021. 

<<< END OBAMA SIDEBAR>>> 

<<<BEGIN FERGUSON>>> 

Ferguson Civil Unrest 2014 

The City of Ferguson , which developed around a railroad line in 1894, has been in existence for over a 

century. It experienced its greatest housing expansion occurred in the 1950s and 1960s. Yet, i n the last 

several months of 2014, Ferguson experienced widespread episodes of violent civil unrest after the 

death of Michael Brown as the result of a police shooting. The unrest brought the attention of the entire 

country to Ferguson specifically and the St. Louis County and St. Louis City in general. 

Ferguson ’s Assistant City Manager Ma tthew Unrein is quoted, “That’s not what this community is. That’s 

what it was in a moment in time. We have 125 years of history that don’t reflect the imagery of those 

fateful few nights.” “Ferguson’s strengths? I’d say our ability to hope for something b etter. That we have 

space. That we can continue to improve and work together,” stated Fran Griffin, Ferguson City Council 

Member and President of Southeast Ferguson Community Association. Resident Ashley Freeman 

summed up her thoughts, “It’s so negative, I don’t know. I can see they are trying but there’s still a lot to 

be fixed…Ferguson: It’s never too late to fix something. You have to lead by example. You have to start 

somewhere.” [Bogan, Ferguson searches] 

<<<BEGIN FERGUSON PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

“The St. Louis County Police Department is large enough that for any local or regional emergency they 

can take over or assist as needed. An example was the period of the Ferguson Unrest: (St. Louis County 

Police Department) took the lead and sent approximately 300 -400 officers to assist in investigation and 

riot control, while still maintaining services for all unincorporated St. Louis County and municipal 

contracts.” 

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood Precinct 

<<<END FERGUSON PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

<<<BEGIN CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY>>> 

“Although the long -term impact of the Ferguson unrest may have to wait for more time to understand 

its true and full impact on race relations in this region, changes that occurred relative to the manner in 

which cities operate have occurred more quickly. These changes affect the structure and operation CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

20 

parameters of municipal courts, including the City of Wildwood. These changes originated in the 

Missouri Legislature and f rom the Missouri Supreme Court. 

“In many locations, not Wildwood, the court system in municipalities had become a reven ue source for 

declining tax bases and created a lengthy set of issues therein. These issues were addressed in part by 

the Missouri Legislature in terms of new laws and the Missouri State Supreme Court relative to new 

operating parameters for these courts. These laws and parameters have lessened the abuses that had 

be en associated with them in the past. Unfortunately, for Wildwood, these changes modified certain 

needed tools to ensure laws, regulations, and requirements are met by residents within and visitors to 

these communities and made them less effective relative to protecting the public’s health safety, and 

general welfare, while preserving property values. ”

Department of Planning and Parks 

City of Wildwood 

<<< END CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY>>> 

<<< END FERGUSON>>> 

January 2014 saw a 10.8 -inch snowstorm, 9 th heav iest snowfall in St. Louis City history. It was 

accompanied by subzero temperatures. In 2014, the United States restored full diplomatic relations with 

Cuba. 

The St. Louis Gateway Arch celebrated the 50 th anniversary of its completion in 2015. In 2018 the 

Jefferson National Expansion Memorial officially became the Gateway Arch National Park. [Vintage, 

2/22/2020] On July 3, 2018, the completion of a five -year renovated and expanded grounds, museum 

and visitor center opened. This project was a combined effort of the National Park Service, Gateway 

Arch Park Foundation, Bi -State Development Agency, Jefferson National Parks Association and the Great 

Rivers Greenway. The renovation projec t necessitated Fair St. Louis to be moved to Forest Park for four 

years until it returned to the Arch grounds in 2019. 

StLArch -wiki.jpg 

Gateway Arch National Park 

Photo credit: en.wikipedia .com 

<<<BEGIN PRESIDENT TRUMP SIDEBAR>>> CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

21 

Donald J ohn Trump (1946 - )

Donald John Trump was the 45 th U.S. President fro m 2017 to 2021 .

<<< END PRESIDENT TRUMP SIDEBAR>>> 

Monsanto, which began and was always headquartered in St. Louis, was purchased in 2018 by the 

Germany -based corporation, Bayer. 

In 20 18, Missouri Governor Eric Greitens resigned under a cloud of scandal. However, in early 2020 the 

Missouri Ethics Commissions ruled that they “found no evidence of any (personal) wrongdoing” by Eric 

Greitens following a nearly 18 -month investigation. [Buck] 

2019 saw t he return of the landmark Amoco sign at South Skinker and Clayton Roads . The City of St. 

Charles celebrated its 250 th anniversary in 2019. St. Louis County Executive Steve Stenger resign ed in 

2019 after indictment for “Pay to Play .” Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris burned in 2019. 

2019 was the 400 th Anniversary of the first slave ship arriving in what would become the continental 

United States. Why does that matter in our area? Slaves were owned in t his area and in many areas of 

Missouri until the end of the Civil War. Refer to Chapters 2 and 3 of this book for more information. 

In Wildwood, Patrick and Mary Bellrose , who own and manage Fahr Greenhouse, were named the 2019 

St. Louis County’s Farm Fam ily of the Year . Also in 2019, Big Chief Roadhouse turn ed 90! 

On January 6, 2021, insurrectionists attacked and invaded the US Capital Building . Five first responders 

lost their lives due to the attack and the capital building sustained significant damage . It was the worst 

attack on the capital since the British attack during the War of 1812. The January 6 th Commission was 

formed to investigate the causes of the attack. Several hundred arrests were made. 

<<<BEGIN PRESIDENT BIDEN SIDEBAR>>> 

Joseph R. B iden, Jr. (1942 - )

Joseph Biden became the 46 th U.S. President on January 20, 2021. 

<<< END PRESIDENT BIDEN SIDEBAR>>> 

<<<BEGIN ST. LOUIS COUNTY POLICE DEPARTMENT, CITY OF WILDWOOD PRECINCT HISTORY >>> 

STLCPolice.jpg 

Prior to the incorporation of Wildwood in 1995, our area was part of the Second Precinct which basically 

ran from Highway 44 to Highway 70 and from the City Limits of St. Louis to the Franklin County line.  

> Commented [RK1]: The Department recommends adding
> a sentence or two that objectively addresses the theories of
> motivation behind this event.

CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

22 

While there were two officers assigned to our area , the assignment of individual officers w as not 

consistent. 

The first contract between the St. Louis County Police Department and the City of Wildwood covered 10 

officers and no supervisor. Officers were specifically assigned to the City which developed better 

familiarity with roads, residents and problems. If a supervisor w ere needed St. Louis County Police 

Department would send one to Wildwood. After a time, St. Louis County Police Department assigned 

the first supervisor, Sgt. Denny Woodland, but the County Police did not charge the City for the 

sergeant. 

The role of the City Marshall is that of liaison between the City and the Police Department. The first City 

Marshall was Bill Fredericks. He was an integral part in making resources and tools availab le to the 

Wildwood Precinct. Bill facilitated getting funds to obtain policing items needed, assuring that police get 

the best tools to encourage citizen compliance , for example: a radar trailer to encourage obeying the 

speed limits. 

In July 1996, the con tract was amended to officially add 1 sergeant, Denny Woodland, and 1 lieutenant, 

Gary Crews. At that time there were 2 beats, which means 2 cars covered by a total of 10 officers. 

Wildwood is an area of 68 square miles and was covered by 2 cars. 

Between 1996 and 2010, Lt. Crews designed a beat plan to expand it to 3 beats. They were able to take 

advantage of COPS Grant which increased to 4 beats (#officers, supervisor & captain), with an option of 

increasing to 6 beats as necessary. This plan also added 2 neighborhood police officers. Lt. Crews was 

promoted to Captain. The result was a huge reduction in response time. 

The current police staffing for the Wildwood Precinct is a 5 -beat permanently assigned, with an option 

of a 6 th beat. (Prop P Funds paid for the 5 -beat plan to become permanent.) This move to more beats 

significantly reduced response time. 5 -beats equates to 50 patrol, etc. personnel . But we also have 

access to whatever police specialties through St. Louis County P olice: Detectives, criminal ID, abuse 

cases, helicopters, tactical – whatever is needed. 

In 1995, Wildwood was covered by 2 nd Precinct radio system, but had no direct radio access to 

neighboring municipalities’ police dep artments. Lt. Gary Crews worked to have this changed, because 

the Wildwood Precinct need ed to have exchange of info rmation among neighboring police 

departments . Wildwood was then removed from 2 nd Precinct’s Radio Network and now part of West 

County Radio Network which includes Wildwood, Eu reka, Chesterfield and Ellisville. The goal is to work 

as a team to better serve all the residents and to be able to assist our neighboring police departments 

and they help us. 

The sites for our precinct offices have changed over time. In 1995 and for the next 14 years, the 

MetroWest Fire Protection District donated the space for the Wildwood Precinct at their Station #3 

(Grover) . In 2008, the first real police station was located on New College Drive. In 2013, the new City 

Hall incorporated the Police Dep artment within that building. 

The Wildwood Precinct has been served by the following Commanders: Captains Gary Crews, Ken 

Williams, Tim Tanner and the current, James Mundel. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

23 

In summary, the “City of Wildwood’s residents are getting police service today t hat every person in St. 

Louis County should strive for, ” stated former Wildwood Precinct Commander, Captain Gary Crews .

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood Precinct 

(Interview 2/14/2020) 

<<< END ST. LOUIS COUNTY POLICE DEPARTMENT, CITY OF WILDWOOD PRECINCT HISTORY >>> 

<<<BEGIN METRO WEST FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT HISTORY IN WILDWOOD>>> 

MetroWestrevisedlogo.png 

The biggest change in the Metro West Fire Protection District since 1995 is the addition in 1997 of 

Station #5 on Stark Lane o ff Highway 100 (in the western portion of the District). At that point in time 

the station was outfitted with a pumper tanker. In January 2019, an ambulance and manpower were 

added to Station #5. This not o nly added manpower to a call, but improved emergency response 

whether it is for a fire, accident or medical event. 

Another large change has been the education, training and equipment for available to paramedics over 

the past 30 years. ROSC is the acronym for Return of Spontaneous Circulation, in other words – to save a 

patient. In the early 1990s the ROSC for Metro West was 12%. In 2019, the District’s ROSC is over 40%, 

which is an incredible amount of progress. An example of new equipment is the Automatic CPR Machine 

which mechanically takes over CPR which frees up the Paramedics’ hands to further administer aid to 

the patient. Another statistic that shows the growth of the area is that in the early 1990s, the District ran 

2,400 calls per year. In 2019, th e District ran 7,600 calls. 

In 2014, ballistic vests were added to the gear available on calls for Metro West’s personnel. 

Mental health is a much larger issue facing emergency responders today than 30 years ago. The District 

has worked to raise awaren ess in these areas. 

The Metro West Fire Protection District became recognized an Internationally Accredited agency in 

2011. 

G. Michael Krause III 

Chief of Fire & EMS Services 

Metro West Fire Protection District 

(Interview 2/13/2020) 

<<< END METRO WEST FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT HISTORY IN WILDWOOD>>> CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

24 

In Remembrance 

Why is remembering and celebrating these events important? Why revisit these times and themes? 

Because the men and women who fought on our behalf need to be remembered and celebrated . Often 

society has more detailed information tha n what was available at the time of the events. Slowly records 

have been unsealed. Discoveries have been made. Long -lost letters have been found inside old books. 

This new information enriches the stories. (Please refer to both Chapters 3 and 4 of this book for more 

information.) 

2015 – The United States commemorated the 150 th end of the Civil War. 

CivilWar -WHS.jpg 

“150 th Anniversary of the End of the Civil War” 

2015 Calendar, Wildwood Historical Society 

While the country commemorated the sesquicentennial end of armed conflict within our borders , other 

areas of discord became more apparent. One of the new battlegrounds has become the Confederate 

cemeteries. The Department of Veterans Affairs National Cemetery Administration operate s several of 

these cemeteries around the country and the Cemetery Administration has incre ased the security at 

these sites. The increased security is not just to secure the monuments and “to ensure the safety of 

staff, property and visitors paying respect to those interred,” stated the Cemetery Administration’s 

spokeswoman. 

In 2017, an unknow n person “threw paint on a 117 -year -old Confederate memorial at Springfield 

National Cemetery in Missouri…” [Salter] The Confederate cemetery located in the Greater St. Louis 

Region is the North Alton Confederate Cemetery. It served the Alton Confederate p rison. Prisoners who 

died from causes other than smallpox were buried there. The prisoners, who died from smallpox, were 

buried on the Mississippi River Island of Tow Head where they had been quarantined. [National 

Cemetery Adm] In St. Louis the Confederat e Monument in Forest Park was twice defaced in 2017 before 

the decision was made to remove it. The monument is now in the possession and care of the Missouri 

Civil War Museum. The country -wide discussion about this subject is still on -going. [Rankin] It wi ll be up 

to future historians to decide if removing or leaving monuments was the correct decision historically to 

accurately tell the story of our country. 

As there w ere Civil War maneuvers throughout our area, these are topics for knowledgeable and 

respectful discussion in 2020 Wildwood. For further area information, please refer to the Civil War 

section in Chapter 3 of this book. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

25 

World War I – 2018 – 100 th Anniversary of end 

WWI -WHS -use.jpg 

“The End of World War I Centennial” 

2018 Calendar, Wildwood Historical Society 

SoldiersMem -ceiling.jpg 

Gold Star Mothers mosaic ceiling 

Soldiers Memorial Military Museum 

Photo credit: Jill F. VonGruben 

At the time of the 75 th anniversary of the end of WWI, there were veterans still alive to tell their stories. 

The last American WWI veteran died in 2011 at the age of 110. Now at this 100 th anniversary, there was 

no one to tell the stories except the historians. An offshoot of W WI , the American Legion which was 

formed in St. Louis , celebrated its 100 th anniversary in 2019 .

Iran Hostage Crisis – 2019 – 40 th Anniversary 

Sickmann -Lambert -Post.jpg 

Rocky Sickmann’s return at St. Louis Lambert Airport 

St. Louis Post -Dispatch , 2/28/2981, newspapers.com CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

26 

St. Louis area native, Rodney “Rocky” Sickmann was a Marine Sergeant guarding the U.S. Embassy in 

Tehran, Iran in 1979 when the Embassy was seized by Iranian militants. The 52 Americans were captives 

for 444 days . They were freed in 1981. The relationship between the United States and Iran ha s never 

recovered from the Hostage Crisi s. Sickmann spoke of his experiences at the 36 th (2019) Annual St. Louis 

Regional Veterans Day Observance Ceremony at the Soldiers Memorial Military Museum. There is also a 

display inside the Museum featuring Sickmann’s experience and artifacts from his im prisonment. 

Sickmann lives in the west St. Louis County area. 

World War II – 2020 – 75 th Anniversary of end 

WWII -WHS.jpg 

“The End of World War II: 75 th Anniversary” 

2020 Calendar, Wildwood Historical Society 

For the 75 th anniversary, there are veterans alive to tell their stories. There are now two to three more 

generations alive to hear these stories. According to the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs the 

estimate for 20 21 that there are less than 240,300 WWII living v eterans with an estimated 245 American 

veterans d ying every day. [Cronk] By the 100 th anniversary, there will no longer be veterans alive to ask 

the important questions. 

Rusty -soldiers -memorial.jpg 

Winston “Rusty” Pendleton 

Photo courtesy of Soldier’s Memorial and Museum Facebook Page 

April 2, 2020 CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

27 

On April 2, 2020, the nationally recognized Soldier’s Memorial and Museum in St. Louis recognized 

Winston “Rusty” Pendleton on the Memorial's Facebook page. Rusty died in February 2020. Not only 

was Rusty a founder member of the Wildwood Historical Society, he was an active member of the WWII 

Battle of the Bulge Veterans Group (Gateway Chapter). He and his wife, Dot, were well -known 

Wildwood residents. 

Science and technology have advan ced to the point that deep -sea submersibles can explore WWII naval 

sunken battleships and their sea battlefields to give historians more accurate information with which to 

tell the story of the battle and its men. Computer technology now gives historians t he ability to record, 

catalog and share information in ways not imagined even 30 years ago. DNA sequencing was not only 

invented, but has advanced to the point that now, even 75 years later, unidentified remains of American 

veterans are being identified an d are being brought home to their families .

World War II was a unique time period during which the vast majority of the country worked in or for 

the War Effort. “Everybody supported the cause because we knew it would take the whole population 

to win.” [B aime] An example of this dedication of everyone on the home front is a recently discovered 

artifact located in a family Bible . The artifact is a copy of a Wartime Prayer Service from St. Paul’s 

Lutheran Church. For families, here and elsewhere, it is often the physical artifacts that are their 

touchstones to this war. A belt buckle, a letter home, a campaign ribbon, an Honorable Service Lapel 

Bu tton (a.k.a. “Ruptured Duck”), a soldier’s handbook with a father’s handwriting are examples of these 

tangible links. 

SoldiersHandbook.jpg 

Oliver Siebert ’s WWII Soldier’s Souvenir Handybook 

Photo Courtesy of Jill Siebert VonGruben 

NOTE: TO GRAPHIC DESIGNER 

PERHAPS OVERLAY THE “SOLDIER’S PERSONAL RECORD” PAGE WITH THE COVER ON A DIAGONAL, 

RATHER THAN 2 SEPARATE PHOTOS??? 

OWS -SoldiersHandb -edit.jpg 

Page from Oliver Siebert’s CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

28 

WWII Soldier’s Souvenir Handybook 

Photo Courtesy of Jill Siebert VonGruben 

RupturedDuck -edit.jpg 

“Ruptured Duck” Pin 

Honorable Service Lapel Button 

Oliver Siebert 

Photo Courtesy of Jill Siebert VonGruben 

Seventy -five years later, it bec ame the time for governments to apologize for war -time errors, such as 

the internment of Japanese Americans or the atrocities suffered by the residents of Guam .

Seventy -five years later give a perspective to th is World War. Was it worth the sacrifice? Is it worth the 

effort to shar e these stories with younger generations? Once again, it is our veterans who can best 

answer those questions. A D -Day veteran shared on the 75 th anniversary of D -Day, “Oh, yes. Definitely it 

was worth it. It was a rogue regime that was trying to take over the world, and the people had to be 

stopped. ” [Casert] Bernard Dargols was a Frenchman who became an American soldier and landed at 

Omaha Beach on D -Day. His answer to these questions were : “I’m convinced that we have to talk about 

the war to children, so that they understand how much they need to preserve the peace…Never take 

democracy for granted. Dictatorship is always a bad solution. Violence is always a bad solution . Keep 

democracy alive. Fight for democracy, for freedom, for p eace…It could start again, we must be vigilant, 

at all times.” [Charlton, D -Day] 

The Holocaust – 2020 – 75 th Anniversary of end 

The ending battles and the associated Allied troop movements of World War II brought liberation to 

those in the concentration camps. Technology is assisting in documenting, cataloging and sharing the 

records and stories of the victims and survivors . “On the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, 

images and file s originally shot in black and white were colorized to remind us that history should not, 

and will not, fade from memory.” [History Channel] 

Survivors are the best to witness the sacrifices of the Holocaust . Michael Bornstein , a prisoner with his 

grandmoth er, was 4 years old when Auschwitz was liberated. Now on the 75 th anniversary of the 

liberation of that death camp, he stated: “I really dread going back there, but I will have a lot of support 

from other survivors. Those of us who were there need to testi fy to what happens when evil and bigotry 

go ignored…The only way we’re going to stop the divisiveness in this world is to remember what 

happened and realize that we’re all in this together…I think if I found myself face -to -face with a Nazi 

today, I would w ant him to know that evil didn’t win. Hate did not win. I truly believe the best revenge 

has been to live a life of happiness.” [Bornstein] 

Korean War – 2018 – 65 th Anniversary of end CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

29 

2018 marked the 65 th Anniversary of the end of combat of the Korean Co nflict . There is still no formal 

end of th is conflict and that has complicated the repatriation of thousands of U. S. Military remains. 

Recovery operations had begun in 1996 but were discontinued in 2005. “More than 150 individuals have 

been identified fro m the remains that were jointly evacuated and returned through 2005.” Another 55 

boxes of remains were repatriated in 2018. Of th e 2018 repatriations , the remains of Army Master Sgt. 

Charles H. McDaniel of Butler, Missouri were positively identified . For t his Armed Conflict that is often 

referred to as the “Forgotten War,” overshadowed by its bookended larger wars of WWII and Vietnam, 

may we not forget them now. For further information about the Korean War and our area’s men who 

fought there, please refer t o Chapter 4 of this book. 

<<< BEGIN OPIOD CRISIS>>> 

Opioid Crisis 

Th is crisis b egan with a trend of over -prescription of opioids in the 1990s. Whether begun as a 

legitimate therapy for pain alleviation or as a recreational drug choice, the increase of misuse, overdoses 

and overdose deaths have increased every year since the mid -1990s . There are no easy answers to this 

issue, but it strikes everywhere and affects all communities and schools. It affects all families, whether 

directly or indirectly. 

Announced in February 2020, St. Louis County Health Department will begin to “distribut e naloxone 

available for free. The drug can reverse the process of an opioid overdose and has saved thousands of 

lives.” [Kohler] 

<<<BEGIN PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

“The St. Louis County Police Department’s response to this crisis is similar as the policing response 

across the country. There are times when certain drugs become more prevalent. That in turn, causes 

focus initiatives in which the behaviors, persons/groups, etc. are focused upon. There are local police 

initiatives, along with the initiat ives at national level/DEA, State and Regional.” 

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood Precinct 

<<< END PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

<<< END OPIOD CRISIS>>> 

Domestic Terrorism 

From the Unabomber who spread terror through the 70s, 80, and early 90s; the occurrences of domestic 

terrorism ha ve become , while always shocking, not an unexpected occurrence. In 1993 , at the Branch 

Davidian compound in Waco, Texas , f our Federal agents and five members of the cult were killed in the 

rai d to arrest the leader David Koresh on weapons charges. T he 51 -day siege ended with a fire within 

the compound that was set by the cult . The fire killed 75 cult members including Koresh. 

In April 1995, the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma Cit y was bombed by Timothy McVeigh. 

The truck -based bomb killed 168 people including 19 children and injured over 680. McVeigh was 

arrested shortly after the bombing and was executed in 2001. This bombing remains the deadliest act of 

domestic terrorism in U.S . history. The 25 th anniversary of this attack was in 2020. The scheduled CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

30 

Remembrance event was cancelled due to the COVID -19 pandemic. In its stead, the Oklahoma City 

National Memorial and Museum issued a video tribute including the reading of the names o f those who 

died , followed by 168 seconds of silence. The video also included remarks by former President Clinton, 

other dignitaries and victims ’ family members . Oklahoma City Mayor David Holt stated, “that the 25 th 

anniversary of the attack was particularly nota ble because it marked a transition of the event from one 

of personal experience to one of historical significance.” [Murphy and Miller] 

<<<BEGIN OKLAHOM A CITY BOMBING PERSONAL MEMORY>>> 

“Normally on that April day, I would have been at work, but one of my daughters was home ill and the 

television was on. We watched horrified as the news unfolded. My 2020 reflection about that day was a 

loss of perceived safety : If the people in a Federal Building in Oklahoma City weren’t safe, were any of us 

safe anywhere ?”

Jill VonGruben 

Wildwood Resident ; Archivist, Wildwood Historical Society 

<<< END OKLAHOMA CITY PERSONAL MEMORY>>> 

The Summer Olympics bombing at Cen tennial Olympic Park in Atlanta, GA in 1996 killed 2 people and 

injured over 100 . The bomber was Eric Rudolph. He was discovered after two more bombings in 1997. 

He was caught, tried and convicted of his crimes and is serving a life sentence. 

2001 saw letters filled with anthrax being mailed which killed 5 and injured 17. The 2013 Boston 

Marathon bombing killed 3 and injured over 280. In 2018 16 pipe bomb packages were mailed via US 

Postal Service. 

United States School and Mass Killings 

Some names have become part of our daily lexicon signifying horror and fear : Columbine , Virginia Tech, 

Fort Hood, Sandy Hook -Newtown, Las Vegas, Parkland, Oklahoma City and Tree of Life Synagogue. The 

names associated with other mass killings may not be as familiar but signify no less horror. The 

Washington Post generated a database and summary report. Its report lists 1,242 killed during its 

cumulative time period from 1966 to the beginning of 2020. 

<<<BEGIN COLUMBINE SCHOOL SHOOTING PERSONAL MEMORY>>> 

“Upon hearing the news on the radio on my way home from work, my first thought was so glad my 

children were out of high school and in college . I happened to be speaking with a local high school 

administrator later that afternoon and he simply st ated ‘That type of shooting could have been here. It 

can happen anywhere.’ A few days later, I spoke to a retired schoolteacher/administrator whose career 

had been in parochial schools in the Columbine area and she stated that the undercurrent of ‘unease’ 

was pervasive in school systems. But that no one thinks something awful will happen at his/her own 

school. My personal reaction was a great sadness and the loss of safety for our children, parents and 

school communities. This was not just the loss of the f eeling of safety, but the reality of that loss. I knew 

then that school life anywhere in the United States was never going to be the same. ”

Jill VonGruben CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

31 

Wildwood Resident and former Rockwood School District Parent Volunteer 

<<< END COLUMBINE SCHOOL SHOOTING PERSONAL MEMORY>>> 

The listings of school and mass shootings over the past 30 years is unbelievable. For the survivors the 

effects are never -ending. For some families and communities, their recoveries are based in advocacy or 

at tempts to change the legal landscape . Fo r other families and their communities, their recoveries begin 

with educating others. For some, the struggle s are never -ceasing. Questions surround whether the 

physical sites of these tragedies should be removed or l eft as memorials, even twenty to thirty years 

later. “The days surrounding the anniversary [of the Columbine Shooting] remain emotionally fraught 

for survivors of the attack, including hundreds who escaped the building without physical wounds. Some 

describ e their response to the month as ‘April fog,’ dominated by their memories of the sunny Tuesday 

two decades ago that shocked the world.” [Associated Press] As this chapter was being written, the 

most recent mass shooting occurred at Molson Coors in Milwauke e, WI. Five were killed and the shooter 

committed suicide. 

How have these events shaped our lives and the lives of our children and students since then? Our 

schools now have locked remote -controlled entrances , bullet proof glass, cameras and often have 

ass igned police on -si te . This is also the situation at many of our churches and synagogues. Increased 

security plans and active shooter training and drills are now the norm instead of the unusual . The take -

away is that any of these tragic events can happen anywhere, at any time, even here. Our City 

government along with our City’s police precinct and three fire districts , our school district , private 

schools and churches work to not only keep us safe in our day -to -day lives , but plan, train and work t o

also keep us safe in the future. 

<<<BEGIN ROCKWOOD SCHOOL DISTRICT COMMENTARY>>> 

"Rockwood understands the importance of emergency preparedness. We strive to develop a proactive 

safety culture, where feasible measures are in place to ensure we have workable plans for crisis 

situations that may occur in or around our facilities." 

Dr. Mark Miles 

Rockwood School District 

Superintendent 

“The district continues to review all physical safety measures in our schools to ensure all students have a 

secure env ironment to learn and grow. Below is a list of some of those efforts :

Secured Entrances 

All Rockwood schools have secured entrances with door -access technology. The exterior door buzzers 

are controlled with a camera and intercom, thereby requiring visitors to request entrance from trained 

staff who allow access through the locked doors of the school. 

Locked Doors 

External doors to school buildings are locked during the school day. After -school Adventure Club areas 

have locking systems for the protection of students until parents arrive to pick them up from school. 

Barricade Safety Glass Film CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

32 

All school entrances have safety film over glass doors and windows to protect the school from threats of 

break -ins and severe weather events. 

Intern al Classroom Locking Features 

All teachers have doors on their classrooms that can be locked from the inside of the classroom to 

ensure quick -reaction times in case of emergencies. Once an intruder alarm is activated, teachers have 

the ability to lock thei r doors immediately from inside the classroom. 

Supervision of Schools 

All school administrators review student arrival/dismissal procedures in order to minimize the number 

of doors students and staff may access the school. In addition, school administrato rs, SROs and/or 

trusted adults are visible during school start/dismissal/passing times to ensure an added layer of school 

security. ”

Superintendent’s Safety and Security Report 

Quoted with permission , Rockwood School District , Office of the Superintendent 

<<< END ROCKWOOD SCHOOL DISTRICT COMMENTARY>>> 

<<<BEGIN PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

“The St. Louis County Police Department’s response to mass shootings w as similar/same as the policing 

response across the country. At the time of Columbine, the training was that the officer reported shots 

fired and waited for further support and the tactical unit. The training and response time have changed 

over time. Currently, in all our schools, not only are police trained , but so are tactical g roups, school 

administrators and staff. Training is emphasized when to: avoid/prevent is the primary goal; 

barricade/evade; inform how/what police will do. The Police train to work as a team not only with 

schools, but with adjoining municipalities ’ police departments.” 

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood Precinct 

“Over the past couple of years, the MetroWest Fire Protection District has joined the St. Louis County 

Police Department in unified command training which brings ev eryone together to strategize active 

shooter and other emergency situations.” 

G. Michael Krause III 

Chief of Fire & EMS Services 

Metro West Fire Protection District 

<<< END PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

Municipal Building Shootings 

In 2015, there was the San Bernardino attack at the Inland Counties Regional Center which is a 

government -funded site that provides services and programs for individuals with developmental 

disabilities and their families. This was a terrorist attack that killed 24 and injure d 22 .CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

33 

In 2019, Virginia Beach’s Municipal building was the site of a mass shooting with 12 ki lled and 4 

wounded. 

But it can happen much closer to home. Seven years prior to San Bernardino , our local area experienced 

a mass shooting at a Kirkwood City Co uncil Meeting at their City Hall in 2008. The shooter shot two 

police officers, the public works director, two council members, Kirkwood’s Mayor and a reporter. Five 

of these wounded died on scene. Kirkwood’s Mayor died seven months later due to his injuri es. The 

shooter was killed by police .

In late February 2020, Maria Lucas, the on -duty supervisor of the Maryland Heights Community Center 

in St. Louis County, was shot and killed by a disgruntled co -worker. The shooter was shot by a police 

officer. “Ther e were over 150 people, many of them children, sought places to hide…” in the center at 

the time. Active shooter training had been in place soon after the Center opened in 2017. “‘People knew 

how to make themselves safer on the spot thanks to that,’ Police Chief William Carson said.” [Bell, 

Heffernan, Harris] 

The lesson again is that these events can occur anywhere. How has that affected the Wildwood City Hall 

and its employees, elected officials and volunteers? 

<<<BEGIN PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

“Most cities became very aware of how vulnerable City employees are. For Wildwood Court sessions, 

there are now metal detectors and searches. For City Council Meetings, there are two officers in 

attendance. 

“A note on the Kirkwood City Hall incident: The St. Louis County Police came in and covered all of the 

City of Kirkwood’s policing needs so that Kirkwood’s Police Department could go home to deal with 

funerals and have time to heal.” 

PO Jamie Reiter 

St. Louis County Police Department 

City of Wildwood P recinct 

<<< END PROFESSIONAL COMMENTARY>>> 

<<<BEGIN CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY>>> 

“As much as the terrorist acts of 9/11 changed the world, along with the United States, the shooting and 

deaths of innocents at Kirkwood City Hall in the winter of 2008, remains a defining event for all local 

governments in the St. Louis Region. The random loss of life caused many City Halls across the St. Louis 

Region to rethink security plans and the protection of elected and appointed officials, City staff, and 

residents in light of these senseless deaths. Security was paramount in the planning and design of new 

buildings across the region. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

34 

“Wildwood officials are still, 1 3 years later, trying to address security measures at its City Hall based 

upon the incident in Kirkwood. There is a challenge to be transparent and provide an open government, 

which holds public meetings in a building funded by taxpayers. This transparency and openness must be 

balanced against the implementation of solutions to protect the safety and well -being of those within 

the building. Employees are cognizant of the potential dangers and are cautious but face a difficult 

situation in securing open meeting rooms, public spaces, and large crowds at events, even today. ”

Department of Planning and Parks 

City of Wildwood 

Man -Made Disasters 

Space Shuttle Columbia exploded upon reentry killing all seven crew members in 2003. In 2009, the 

“Miracle on the Hudson” occurred when a US Airways plane crashed into the New York’s Hudson River 

with all surviving. The Deepwater Horizon Oil Rig exploded in 2010 in Gulf of Mexico with 11 kill ed, 17 

injured causing major ecological (largest oil spill in US history) and financial damages. BP was ordered to 

provide all cleanup costs, which were in the billions of dollars. In 2010, a West Virginia mine explosion 

killed at least 25. 

Natural Dis asters 

The most well -known natural disasters are Hurricane Andrew in 1992, the 1994 Northridge (LA) 

earthquake , the 1995 Chicago heat wave , Hurricane Sandy in 2012, the 1999 Oklahoma City EF -5

tornado, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the 2011 EF -5 Joplin torna do, the 2013 EF5 tornado in Moore, OK 

and the 2018 California wildfires that completely destroyed the town of Paradise . The most recent were 

the tornados to hit the mid -Tennessee region in early 2020 : a top of the scale EF -3 in Nashville and the 

storm trac k again strengthened to an EF -4 when it hit Cookeville . The damages of these events and the 

hundreds not specifically listed here mount to the hundreds of lives, thousands of injuries, destruction 

of thousands of buildings and billions of dollars in recons truction costs. 

In 2011, the strongest tornado (EF -4) to strike the St. Louis metro area since 1967, hit our area including 

causing damage to Lambert St. Louis International Airport. In 2019 an EF -3 hit Jefferson City which 

caused major damage. 

Whether the catastrophe directly affects our local lives or not, our local first responders are of ten on 

scene at events across the country, just as others come to help the St. Louis region in our times of crisis. 

Local Flooding 

An extraordinarily wet autumn season in 1992 set the stage for the extraordinary flooding conditions of 

1993. The autumn rain was followed by the February 1993 St. Louis 11.7 -inch snowstorm which was the 

sixth deepest snow in the City’s history . That storm was preceded the week before with an 8 -inch 

snow storm. Storms of these types not only hit in the St. Louis Region but throughout the Upper Midwest 

which set the stage for the events of the summer of 1993. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

35 

During the summer of 1993 w hile the St. Louis are a dealt with the Missouri River flooding of Chesterfield 

Valley and the on the lower Meramec due to the backup from the flooded Mississippi River, the rest of 

the Midwest also suffered. “In all, 20 million acres across nine states we re inundated by that su mmer’s 

flooding … it was ‘the most costly non -tropical, inland flood event to affect the United States on records,’ 

according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .” [Gray, “25 years”] The National 

Weather Service has named this time period as “the Great Flood of 1993.” [National Weather] 

By mid -July, t he Missouri River joined the Mississippi River 20 miles upstream from their normal 

confluence. President Clinton came to St. Louis for a flood summit. The Mississippi River was 15 miles 

wide at St. Charles County and the river was 2/3 of the way up the Arch steps. A levee failed in St. Louis 

County , rejoining Creve Coeur Lake with the Missouri River. [Vintage, 7/16 -17/2019] Adding insult to 

injury, the St. Louis area experienced another two inc hes of rain on July 20 th . There was additional 

surface flooding after cleanup had started due to additional heavy rains. Locally, the Monarch Levee in 

Chesterfield Valley failed on August 1, 1993 inundating the majority of the Valley in deep water. 

1993 Flood Spirit Airport.jpg 

Spirit of St. Louis Airport 

1993 Chesterfield Valley Flood 

View looking north from Wild Horse Creek Road 

Photo Courtesy: Jill F. VonGruben 

1993 Flood Chest Valley -rev.jpg 

1993 Chesterfield Valley Flood 

View looking north from Wild Horse Creek Road 

Photo Courtesy: Jill F. VonGruben CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

36 

flood -post.jpg 

St. Louis Post -Dispatch, 7/25/1993 

Photo credit of page: Jill F. VonGruben 

flood -westC -rev.jpg 

West Countian, August 27 -September 9, 1993 

Photo credit of page: Jill F. VonGruben 

2015 and 2017 Meramec River Valley Floods 

Since then , the Wildwood area has suffered along with the rest of the lower Meramec River Valley with 

significant flood events 16 months apart in late 201 5 and 2017. During the 2015 flood, Interstate 44 was 

closed from Bowles Avenue in Fenton and Route 100 in Gray Summit was closed due to flooding. 

Highway 109 near Eureka High School was closed due to flooding. In 2017 Interstate 44 was closed from 

Interstate 270 to Route 100 , a distance of 23 miles. Route 141 was underwater at Interstate 44. Valley 

Park issued evacuation orders for some neighborhoods. 

2015 Flood 

Centaur Road at levee -2015.jpg 

Centuar at levee , 2015 f lood 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

37 

Bluff View – Flood 2015.jpg 

Bluff View, 2015 flood 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks 

In both 2015 and 2017, the “old town area” of Glencoe was under record -setting levels of flood water. 

Glencoe near Al Foster Memorial 

Trailhead – 2015.jpg 

Glencoe near Al Foster Memorial Trailhead, 2015 Flood 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks 

2017 Flood 

Centaur -2017.jpg 

Centaur, 2017 Flood CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

38 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks 

3rd street in Glencoe – 2017.jpg 

3rd Street in Glencoe, 2017 Flood 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks 

Old State at 109(1) -2017.jpg 

Old State at Highway 109, 2017 Flood 

Photo credit: City of Wildwood, Department of Planning and Parks 

Jim Lee, Community Church of God Board Member, said: “We thought we had 8 inches to spare, but the 

flooding projections kept rising and we had no more material or ability to get back in (to the church ).

The water ruined about $50,000 of improvements we had put in after the 2015 flood, such as new 

hardw oo d floors , walls, insulation, carpet, bathrooms, electric equipment, kitchen and classrooms.” 

[Uptergrove] CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

39 

GlencoeChurchflood2.jpg 

The Community Church of God in Glen coe, (2017) Preparing to protect church based on 2015 flood levels 

Photo credit: westnewsmagazine.com 

Glencoe -Church -4.jpg 

The Community Church of God in Glencoe, (2017) Flood waters 

Photo credit: westnewsmagazine.com 

2019 Flash Floods 

After having the Mississippi River above flood stage for 127 days toward the end of July 2019, the St. 

Louis area was ready to dry out. Except that did not occur. During the latter half of 201 9 the Greater St. 

Louis area experienced three episodes of extre me rain events during which several inches of torrential 

rain fell in short time , the first occurring on July 22 nd . Each of these events in Wildwood caused major 

fl ash fl ooding and its associated damage. 

Rockwood School District was in session the morning that the August 26 th rain event occurred. The 

buses were out on their routes to pick up students. The flash flooding was so significant that the busses 

were brought in and classes were cancelled for the day. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

40 

FoxCreekFlood -WHS -

08262019.jpg 

“Rain Dump” flash -flooding: Fox Creek flooding the grounds of the Wildwood Historical Society 

Normally , Fox Creek is within its banks on the far side of tree line and is not visible from this vantage 

point. 

August 26, 2019 

Photo credit: Martha Bunch, WHS Museum Director 

While the grounds of the Wildwood Historical Society suffered some damage (parking lot gravel 

displaced, massive tree trunks moved significant distances and deposited flood mud), the buildings and 

road did not suffer any significant da mage. The same cannot be said for the damage that occurred on 

sections of Highway 109 near LaSalle Middle School and Woods Avenue. The creek that caused the 

damage on Highway 109 also caused damage to some of the trails and roads within the Missouri 

Department of Conservation’s Rockwood Reservation. 

Financial Markets 

Disruption of the financial markets can cause as much destruction to people’s lives as natural disasters 

can. In 2001 Enron , the energy conglomerate , went bankrupt after false accounting was revealed which 

devasted employees, shareholders and had ripple ef fects within the financial markets. 

The “h ousing bubble ” burst and by December 2007 the U .S. entered a significant recession. This set the 

stage for the stock market crash in October of 2008. This b ecame known as the Great Recession. In 

2008 , the f inancia l markets crisis forced Lehman Brothers into bankruptcy which prov ed a company is 

never too big to fail . This failure led to strict financial market regulations . The financial markets situation 

became an issue for the entire world’s markets. The Federal Re serve and the Treasury Department 

invested trillions of dollars into the financial ma rkets. Meanwhile the unemployment rate rose to 10% at 

one point. While the financial markets recovered along with corporate profits, the unemployment rate 

was far slower t o return to acceptable levels. Also in 2008 , Bernard Madoff ’s Ponzi scheme collapsed 

causing investors to lose over $50 billion. “Occupy Wall Street ” demonstrators were in New York City in 

2011. 

The Essen Log Cabin Caper – the 2019 Update 

As described in Chapter 3 of this book, the historic Essen Log Cabin was illegally and carelessly 

dismantled and the logs stolen over Thanksgiving Weekend 2015. The logs were recovered by police 

after just a few days . In 2019 after tagging and laying out t he logs , the architectural firm, Paterhn -Ives, CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

41 

completed the preliminary reconstruction drawings for the cabin. It has been confirmed that the 

reconstruction is possible. 

EssenLogCabin -1.jpg 

Essen Log Cabin, flat reconstruction, 9/18/2019 

Photo credit: Jill F. VonGruben 

EssenLogCabin -2.jpg 

Essen Log Cabin, flat reconstruction, 9/18/2019 

Photo credit: Jill VonGruben 

EssenLogCabin -plan -

pg6.jpg 

Left and front elevations 

Essen Log Cabin Preliminary Reconstruction Drawings 

Patterhn -Ives LLC 

Memorandum, dated 1/23/20 to Wildwood Historic Preservation Commission Members 

City of Wildwood Department of Planning and Parks CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

42 

The next steps are for the City of Wildwood’s Historic Preservation Commission to de termine 

improvements and the use of the building and a location. Once those decisions are made , final 

construction plans can be made and then the City will solicit bids for reconstruction. 

2019 , 2020 , 2021 – Three Years of Celebrations 

(See Chapter s 3 & 4 of this book for more details for each of these signature events.) 

Each of the following anniversaries of key events that occurred within the past 100 years in this country. 

Whether they impacted us personally or not in Wildwood, they were seminal events which affected all 

of us as a society and a nation. Hence, their anniversaries also become key events in their own rights. 

Apollo 11’s Walk on the Moon 

2019 marked the 50 th anniversary of the first man to walk on the moon. “‘Apollo 11 is the only event in 

the 20 th century that stands a chance of being widely remembered in the 30 th century,’ stated Vice 

President Pence.” [Dunn] The summer of 2019 allowed the opportunities to share great memories and 

reliving the awe this event still inspires us to return to the moon and explore beyond. 2019 also brought 

the news that scientists, including those from St. Louis’ Washington University, will begin examining 

lunar samples (a.k.a. m oon rocks) using technology that was not available in the Seventies. [Forrester] 

Fall of Berlin Wall 

2019 marked the 30 th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall. In 2019, the tunnel, which ran under the 

Berlin Wall at Bernauer Strasse, was opened to t he public. “It’s great to see that the battle for freedom 

was also taken underground,” said Berlin Mayor Michael Mueller. [Grieshaber] The fall was a “pivotal 

moment in the events that brought down Communism in eastern Europe.” [Jordans] The effects of 

tho se events are still being felt worldwide in 2020, not only in Europe. This anniversary celebrates the 

freedoms that Americans often take for granted. As recently as 30 years ago, eastern Europe did not 

have a chance at experiencing what Americans have ever y day. 

“Houston, we’ve had a problem here ”

On April 13, 1970, when Apollo 13 had almost arrived at the moon, one of two oxygen tanks burst within 

the service module of the spacecraft . That explosion prompted the now famous call from Jack Swigert, 

the comm and module pilot , to Houston Mission Control. Our nation and the world and the world 

watched and listened for any piece of news regarding the safety of the astronauts. While the Apollo 13 

mission did not reach the moon, the mission was successful in brin ging the crew home safely. The 

mission ’s success “‘showed teamwork, camaraderie and what NASA was really made of,’ said Columbia 

University’s Mike Massimino, a former shuttle astronaut.” [Dunn] 

Earth Day 

Earth Day began as a result of a proposal presented a t the UNESCO Conference in 1969 . It was to be a 

day to honor the earth and peace. The United States Earth Day was celebrated on April 22, 1970 as an 

environmental teach -in day . It has grown into an international awareness day over its 50 years. An 

unusual consequence of the COVID -19 pandemic and the resulting international stay -at -home 

mandates, was that there was a “sharp dip in air pollution across China, Europe and the US…” [Milman] 

Karen O’Neill, professor in the Department of Human Ecology -Rutgers stated, “The pandemic is a 

reminder that there is no separation between humans and the environment.” [Georgiou] CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

43 

Climatron , in Missouri Botanical Garden 

The Climatron is an enclosed geodesic dome within the Missouri Botanical Garden in St. Louis. I t is home 

to a lowland rain forest. The Climatron celebrated its 60 th anniversary in 2020. 

Women Get the Vote 

2020 marked the 100 th anniversary of United States women gaining the right to vote! To be franchised in 

the making of governmental policies, gave a power to women’s voices that had never been felt before. It 

is a right that is often take n for granted in 2020. 

Prohibition 

2020 marked the 100 th anniversary of the beginning of Prohibition, which was established with the 

passage of the 18 th Amendment in 1919. Prohibition lasted through 1933. 

The Great Divorce of St. Louis County and St. Louis Cit y in 1878 was almost reversed 

The group, Better To gether, organized an effort and campaigned for a City -County Merger to occur in 

2019. If successful, the City of St. Louis and the 88 County municipalities and the County of St. Louis 

would have joined into one mega -government. The City of Wildwood was aga inst this merger. For a 

number of reasons, the merger attempt failed shortly after its public outreach campaign. 

<<<B EGIN IMPEACHMENT SIDEBAR >>> 

Impeachment 

The Constitution of the United States gives the U.S. Congress the authority to remove the President in 

case of criminal behavior. There are two phases to the process: the U.S. House of Representatives votes 

to impeach the President, after testimony is given. If the vote is at least a simple majority, the 

impeachment case moves on to the Senate from the House. The U.S. Senate holds the impeachment 

trial. The Senate is required to have a two -thirds majority vote to remove a President from office. 

President Donald John Trump was indicted by the U.S. House of Representatives on December 18, 2019 

an d was ac quitted by the U.S. Senate on February 5, 2020. President Trump was indicted a second time 

by the U.S. House of Representatives on January 13, 2021. The trial ran from February 9 through 

February 13 which was after President had left office. He was again acquitted by the U.S. Senate on 

February 13, 2021. President Trump is the first President to be indicted twice in U.S. history. 

In United States history, there have been four impeachment trials : Andrew Johnson (1868), Bill Clinton 

(1998 -1999) and D onald Trump (2019 -2020) (2021) . Each w as acquitted. The impeachment process was 

initiated against Richard Nixon by the U.S. House of Representatives when they voted on Articles of 

Impeachment in July 1974. The official process was never completed because N ixon resigned in early 

August 1974 in the face of probable conviction by the U.S. Senate. 

<<< END IMPEACHMENT SIDEBAR >>> CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

44 

April 1, 2020 is National Census Day: The United States Census of 2020 was the 24 th United States 

Census. With the national COVID -19 stay -at -home orders in place during the Census -taking period, it 

slowed down the process, but did not stop it. 

September 1, 2020 mark ed the 25 th anniversary of the incorporation of the City of Wildwood was 

delayed to the COVID -19 crisis. The anniversary was recognized at the Celebrate Wildwood event in 

September 2021 .

Financial Markets COVID -19 Pandemic *

//////////// 

NOTE GRAPHIC DESIGNER: 

PLEAS E PLACE THE FOLLOWING NOTE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE PAGE THAT THE HEADING “FINANCIAL 

MARKETS COVID -19 PANDEMIC” APPEARS, SIMILAR TO TRADITIONAL FOOTNOTE PLACEMENT. 

*It is rare that a historian writes about a world -wide crisis occurring as the writing of a boo k is being 

wrapped up. That was the case of the COVID -19 Pandemic Crisis. This section was written without 

knowing the final outcome and without a historical perspective from which to draw. – Jill F. VonGruben, 

Spring , 202 2.

/////////// 

In early 2020, th e Coronavirus -19 not only affected the U.S. financial markets but was also a global 

event. The week -ending February 28 th , the “Dow Jones Index dropped more than 14%, making this the 

market’s worse week since 2008 during that global financial crisis. Jacob Kirkegaard, senior fellow at the 

Peterson Institute for International Economics stated: ‘This is a case where in economic terms the cure is 

almost worse than the disease. When you quarantine cities…you lose economic activity that you’re not 

going to get ba ck.” [Geller, Wiseman, Rugaber] United States businesses, including those who are St. 

Louis based, began to restrict nonessential services and travel. The DOW had its third worst day 

(percentage drop) on March 16 th . The COVID Pandemic Crisis ended the long est economic expansion in 

U.S. financial history. 

By mid -March 2020, COVID -19 was officially identified as a pandemic. In the United States, stay -at -home 

orders were issued at various governmental levels and, in St. Louis County, all non -essential busines ses 

were closed. Those stay -at -home restrictions were lifted and/or modified (depending on a business 

being able to provide space for social distancing) in early May 2020. 

Two major financial stimulus packages were passed by the U.S. Congress in March an d April 2020 (as of 

end -April 2020). Tax -free funds were sent directly to individuals and families. The massive small business CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

45 

loan program, the Paycheck Protection Program, covered companies with less than 500 employees was 

a major component of these pack ages. These loans were forgivable if the small businesses did not 

decrease their number of employees for a specified time period. Funds were sent to support hospitals 

during the Pandemic and more COVID -19 testing. 

The effects on businesses and the econom y, both nationally and locally, were devastating. Economic 

forecasts for the St. Louis Region varied widely from a quick economic and financial turnaround (V -

curve) to a protracted recession (either U -curve or W -curve). Only time determined the economic 

si gnificance this epidemic had on our local economy, as well as the entire country. 

Locally, even essential businesses were affected. Restaurants went to curbside pick -up or delivery only. 

Doctors saw patients, but mostly by video. Hardware stores, grocery stores, pharmacies, laundromats 

and gas stations all remained open, but with shorter hours, the required six -feet social distancing and 

the strong suggestion of wearing face masks. Banks remained open, but often closed their lobbies, 

allowing service via d rive -up windows only. Essential services such as plumbers and electricians were 

allowed to work, with the stipulation of social distancing in mind. These are just a few examples of the 

business limitations. 

Within the City of Wildwood, during the pandemic ’s stay -at -home order, steps were taken to help 

support local businesses. The “Rally for Retail Thursdays” was initiated to encourage customers to 

purchase gift cards for local businesses, which were either closed or had limited customer traffic. “Take 

Out Tuesdays” encouraged customers to support the restaurants who remained open for curb -side or 

delivery by ordering meals. Many of Wildwood’s essential businesses generated creative ideas to work 

with these supportive programs and keep their doors open and employees working. The City also 

maintained an online list of all essential businesses that were open during that time. The City listed the 

businesses participating in these programs on its website and through social media postings. 

The City of Wildwood’s Department of Planning and Parks worked to solve the issue of permitting and 

payment items during the unprecedented time of social distancing and stay -at -home orders due to the 

pandemic. 

These measures instituted by the City of Wil dwood continued throughout the duration of the Pandemic. 

The COVID -induced recession was the shortest on record, with t he U.S. economy be ginning its very slow 

recovery during the 4 th quarter 2020 that was fueled by consumers purchasing goods to improve their 

residences, home offices and yards. The Dow Jones hit progressively new highs several times during 

2021. 

During the entire Pandemic, there were significant supply -chain issues – beginning with the inf amous 

shortage of toilet paper. At one time or another almost every portion of the economy was significantly 

hampered by these shortages. 

As 2022 begins, the Omicron Variant provided a record -setting surg e through the St. Louis Metropolitan 

area causing renewed masking policies, business closures, reduction of hours due to risk and staffing 

issues. Once again, some businesses temporarily suspended hours to have their workspaces/stores deep 

cleaned and sanitized. Omicron’s effect on the businesses and fina ncial markets is unknown at the time 

of this writing.  

> Commented [RK2]: Add that with the Emergency Order,
> the City was able to permit outdoor seating, shelters in the
> winter months, and signage outside the City’s regulations.
> The City’s Economic Development Manager tracked federal
> legislation, providing weekly updates to the local business
> community on available funding opportunities.

CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

46 

<<<BEGIN CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY>>> 

“The intent of all of these efforts was to keep the construction community working, while guaranteeing, 

as best as possible, overall safety and health in th is unique time. It was apparent from the Order by the 

County Executive Page that building trades and other similar trades were considered essential and 

intended to continue to provide their valuable services in Wildwood. These efforts were needed, in a 

tim e of uncertainty.” 

4/13/2020 Memorandum: Availability of NEW On -Line Services during COVID -19 Coronavirus Pandemic 

Department of Planning and Parks 

City of Wildwood 

<<< END CITY OF WILDWOOD COMMENTARY>>> 

The take -away, as in all financial crises, is that the status of the country’s financial markets and economy 

affects residents and governments locally. Whether positive or negative, there is always a local effect in 

attracting and keeping businesses and residents. 

COVID -19: A new threat to our daily lives – a virus ** 

//////////// 

NOTE GRAPHIC DESIGNER: 

PLEASE PLACE THE FOLLOWING NOTE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE PAGE THAT THE HEADING/sidebar “A 

NEW THREAT TO OUR DAILY LIVES – A VIRUS” APPEARS -- SIMILAR TO TRADITIONAL FOOTNOTE 

PLACEMENT. 

**It is rare that a historian writes about a world -wide crisis occurring as the writing of a book is being 

wrapped up. That was the case of the COVID -19 Pandemic Crisis. This section was written without 

knowing the final outcome s and without a historical perspective from which to draw. We have strived to 

give future readers a glimpse into the daily lives of City of Wildwood residents during the 

unprecedented s tay -at -home orders that affected all. – Jill F. VonGru ben, Midsummer 202 1.

/////////// 

coronavirus.jpg CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

47 

December 2019 saw the emergence of a virus hitting Wuhan, China. By January 2020, the virus was 

identified as a novel coronavirus that resulted in the disease COVID -19. Massive quarantines were 

enforced in China , as the seriousness and the threat the virus presented became apparent . Cruise ships 

were quarantined. Tourists returning to the United States from affected countries were quarantined for 

14 days. The United States issued travel bans to countries , in which the transmission rate of COVID -19 

was accel erating. Europe followed China in the catastrophic acceleration of confirmed cases and deaths. 

In order to flatten the curve of new cases, China and the majority of European nations began strict stay -

at -home and social distancing regulations. Wuhan lifted its stay -at -home regulations after 11 weeks. The 

rate of transmission within the United States started out slow ly , but then exploded beginning in the 

State of Washington . At the beginning of the Pandemic, New York City bec ame the almost worst -case 

scenario in the United States .

<<<BEGIN COVID -19 TIMELINE>>> 

2019 

12/31 First grouping of pneumonia cases of unknown origin reported in Wuhan China 

2020 

1/7 Outbreak identified as new coronavirus 

1/11 First death in China 

1/20 First reported cases outside of China in Thailand, Japan and South Korea 

1/21 First reported case in the United States – in the State of Washington 

1/23 Wuhan , China was placed under strict quarantine 

1/30 WHO declared a global emergency with the virus in 18 countries outside China 

1/31 The U.S. banned entry of foreign nationals who traveled to China within past 14 days 

2/1 First death outside China (Philippines) 

2/8 First U.S. citizen death in Wuhan 

2/11 WHO announced name of disease as COVID -19 

2/26 Calif ornia reported first case , with no clear source of exposure 

2/28 U.S. announced further travel restrictions 

2/29 First death within the U.S. 

3/8 Confirmed cases in the U.S. topped 500 

3/11 WHO announced that COVID -19 was pandemic 

3/13 WHO announced Europe current epicenter 

3/13 President Trump declared a national state of emergency 

3/15 Number of confirmed cases in U.S. surpassed 3,000 

3/15 Significant number of states began school closures 

3/15 CDC issued guidelines for the following 8 weeks to limit g athe rings to 50 or less 

3/16 President Trump advised Americans to limit gatherings to 10 or less and reduce unnecessary 

travel. 

3/17 Every state now had confirmed cases and death toll surpassed 100. 

3/22 President Trump activated National Guard to be used in C OVID -19 hot spots 

3/24 Reported cases in U.S. topped 50,000 , with 637 deaths , becoming the world’s new epicenter 

3/26 U.S. deaths passed 1,000 and surpassed China in reported number of cases 

3/27 U.S. reported cases surpassed 100,000 , with more than 1,500 deaths 

4/2 U.S. reported cases rose to 232,837 with over 5,000 deaths 

4/21 U.S. reported cases rose to over 835,000 , with almost 47,000 deaths 

5/21 Total U.S. deaths were projected to exceed 110,000 by June 13 th . [CDC] 

Nov -Dec St. Louis area COVID Hospital Admissions reached its surge peak and stayed relatively high CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

48 

until early 2021. St. Louis area deaths due to COVID followed a similar pattern. 

12 /14 First COVID vaccine (Pfizer) available for distribution in the U.S. 

12/22 Second COVID vaccine (Moderna) available for distribution in the U.S. 

12/31 Total U.S. deaths reported over 340,000 deaths and U.S. cases were over 19,600,000. [CDC] 

2021 

Earl y 2021 

St. Louis area COVID hospital admissions and deaths remained high, but began their steady 

decline as vaccinations became widely available. 

2/27 Third COVID vaccine (J&J) available for distribution in the U.S. 

March Delta Variant of COVID -19 first detected in U.S. 

6/ 15 Total U.S. COVID deaths reached 600,000. 

Summer 

A third vaccine dose was approved for immunocompromised individuals 

Boosters were approved for most individuals 

July Delta Variant became the dominant COVID variant in the U.S. 

July SW Missouri became one of the top U.S. primary COVID hotspots with ICU admissions 

surpassing those of the winter surge. 

July St. Louis area COVID hospital admissions began to rise due to the Delta Variant 

Aug Delta Variant continued to rage throughout the metropolitan area 

Dec The Omicron Variant spread to the St. Louis metropolitan area 

Dec Cases began to spike due to Omicron adding to an already established Delta Variant , setting all -

time COVID -19 Pandemic records for hospital admissions in the St. Lou is Metropolitan area .

Source s: nbcnews.com , cdc.gov , St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force 

<<<END COVID -19 TIMELINE>>> 

It was due to the speed and aggressiveness of this virus , and its resulting disease, that governments at 

all levels across the United States issued stay -at -home orders, group size restrictions and closures of 

non -essential businesses to flatten the curve of new cases. The rationale for flattening the curve was n ot 

only to mitigate disease transmissions and deaths, but to keep our hospitals , medical staff and medical 

supplies from being overwhelmed. All governments, businesses , schools, religious congregations and 

lives were severely affected . Normal day -to -day li fe changed drastically. Church services were either 

live -streamed or broadcast via video -conferencing software . Funeral services were restricted and 

invitations to family and friends were issued for live -streaming attendance , if it was available . Family 

me mbers could not accompany a patient to the hospital for any reason . Parents became teachers 

augmenting their children’s video -conference sessions with classroom teachers. Often those same 

parents were simultaneously attempting to work from home. Going to a store became an adventure of 

6-foot social distancing and masks. The college search process for high school students became more 

complex due to the lack of onsite college visits . Disinfecting all touchable surfaces and 20 -second 

handwashing became the new rule s of the times. 

Gatherings of over 10 people were prohibited , which internationally eliminated spring and summer 

sporting events at all levels, concerts, 4 th of Jul y celebrations, summer programs, etc. The 2020 Tokyo 

Summer Olympics were postponed to 2021 , but without fans in the stands. Imagine a spring without the 

Baseball Cardinals playing at Busch Stadium or the fact that the St. Louis Blues Hockey had to put the ir 

2020 run for another Stanley Cup on hold. When professional sports did come back, it was without fans 

in the stands. Collegiate and K -12 sports were brought to a standstill.  

> Commented [RK3]: It was noted by the Department tha t
> the timeline first starts at the global level, then in 2021,
> includes only very localized data. It is recommended that
> the timeline incorporate all levels of data throughout.

CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

49 

The State of Missouri issued its social distancing, stay -at -home and closure of non -essential businesses 

orders on April 6 th which were lifted on May 4 th . The St. Louis County government issued those orders on 

March 23 rd and the lifting of those restrictions w as re -evaluated in mid -May , with partial re -openings 

beginning on May 18, 2020. 

Dr. Sam Page, St. Louis County Executive, stated “This is a difficult time for St. Louis County and our 

region. We have a good plan to manage our way through this crisis…we went through something simi lar 

100 years ago (Spanish Flu of 1918). We’ve had many challenges in our history. We are a very resilient 

community, and I believe we will find a path through this challenge as well …Public health is something 

that doesn’t know jurisdictional boundaries. W e have a pandemic that’s worldwide and it certainly 

doesn’t stop at county borders or municipality borders …Our hospital systems are managing this 

response well. They’ve gone through a great deal of effort to increase their capacity to work in a 

cooperative and coordinated way. Dr. Garza is doing a great job leading the Metropolitan Pandemic Task 

Force. Our hospital systems can take of people who are sick. But they can’t contr ol who gets sick. That’s 

up to us in the community to make the right decisions with social distancing, limiting crowd sizes, 

washing our hands frequently with soap and water, staying away from people who are sick and staying 

home if they are sick. ” [Bricker] 

St. Louis County also changed the date of Municipal elections from April 7 th to June 2 nd . The St. Louis 

County Board of Election Commissioners also provided expanded ability to at -risk -health voters to use 

Absentee Ballots for the three 2020 elections, including the presidential election in November. 

The City of Wildwood cancelled a ll non -essential meetings , while council meetings wer e held with so cial 

distancing in mind , with Council Members allowed to participate by video conferencing or telephone 

during the COVID -19 crisis. The majority of business at City Hall was handled via email or telephone. 

Person -to -person contact was by appointment only. 

Mayor Jim Bowlin wrote to Wildwood Friends and Neighbors: “You’re our greatest Wildwood asset , so 

please take measures to protect yourself and ot her Wildwood residents through following the six -foot 

social distancing guidelines, staying at home, hand washing, and covering your mouth and nose when 

coughing and sneezing.” [City of Wildwood, COVID -19] 

Wildwood is known for its beautiful hilly topogra phy and greenspaces. The drawback in some of the 

City’s areas was the lack of high -speed internet service due to that topography . With the stay -at -home 

orders making both learning and working from home the norm, the lack of service became a critical 

issue for many residents. “On April 8, Mayor Jim Bowlin announced that he had authorized the purchase 

and installation of small cell technology to provide high -speed internet access on a provisional basis 

(during the COVID -19 crisis) . The purchase was to take pl ace immediately …Eight areas were identified 

for the use of this small cell technology. The first two areas rolled out within a few weeks.” [Meszaros] 

To assist in maintaining social distancing and foster resident safety, the City closed the parking lots a nd 

restrooms near its most popular trailheads. The trails themselves remained open. “Be Mindful on the 

Greenways!” was the social distancing motto of the Great Rivers Greenway organization. Playgrounds, 

pavilions and restrooms were closed at City parks. St . Louis County closed many of their parks , including 

Greensfelder County Park in Wildwood. CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

50 

While most City -sponsored events were cancelled, among t he positive steps the City of Wildwood chose 

to take to assist residents with the social distancing and sta y-at -home orders were to alter the Spring 

competitive run/walk/bike events, initiated its “Fun Is Not Canceled” Campaign giving families weekly 

activities, and providing information regarding availability of technology from a variety of vendors. 

Reliable i nformation and updates became critical during this time of crisis. 

Video -conferencing, social media, tele phone calls and texts were how families and friends stayed 

connected. By definition, it was a time period of isolation , which very easily at times fos tered high levels 

of anxiety. But countering that were the amazing acts of caring that sprang up throughout the region. 

Within the St. Louis community, blue lights and ribbons became a way to thank the medical personnel 

and first responders on the frontlin e of the COVID -19 pandemic. 

2021 COVID -19 update: 

By the end of February 2021, the citizens of St. Louis County had three different vaccines from which to 

choose. Vaccinations made such a difference that the new cases, hospital admissions, etc. had dropped 

to the point that allowed the St. Louis area to lift the mask mandate for vaccinated residents beginning 

in May 2021. 

Unfortunately, the Delta variant of the COVID -19 virus took hold and that by July 2021 became the 

dominant variant in the U.S. The Delta variant was not even more easily transmittable but was hitting 

younger patients and affecting patients more seriously faster than the original strain. Dr. Alex Garza and 

the St. L ouis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force has offered medical guidance to the area’s 

governmental leaders and to its residents throughout the pandemic . In July 2021 Dr. Garza stated that 

the St. Louis area hospital s were in danger of becoming overwhelmed by de lta variant patients if enough 

residents did not get vaccinated. [Messenger, Post, 7/11/2021] 

The far more contagious Omicron variant first appeared in St. Louis in December 2021 and with the 

already -entrenched Delta variant, set daily records for new COV ID hospital admissions and ICU usage. At 

the beginning of 2022, there was no estimate as to when this surge would start to retreat. 

Courtesy of St. Louis Metropolitan Pandemic Task Force, Facebook Page , 1/9/2022 CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

51 

Courtesy of St. Louis Metro politan Pandemic Task Force, Facebook Page , 1/9/2022 

As of the beginning of 2022 , worldwide , there were over 300 million confirmed cases resulting in over 5

million deaths. The United States, for the same period, had over 60.2 million confirmed cases , with over 

830 ,000 deaths. For some perspective, the 1918 -19 influenza pandemic caused an estimated 675,000 

deaths in the U.S. [CDC, 1918 Pandemic] 

As of the end of 2 021, Missouri had over 1.11 million confirmed COVID cases with over 16,500 deaths. 

Within the Missouri statistics are those of St. Louis County , which reported over 179,000 confirmed 

cases resulting in over 2,700 deaths. 

At the beginning of the Pandemic, it was thought that it would burn itself out in just a few weeks. As of 

this writing, the world has begun its third year of Pandemic conditions. With the Omicron Variant, which 

hit the St. Louis Metropolitan area in Decemb er 2021 and took hold, the hospitals which were already 

stressed due to the Delta Variant reached at occupancy levels not seen earlier in the Pandemic. The 

stress on the medical field was immense especially once the vaccines became available because the va st 

majority of the hospital and ICU admissions were patients who, by choice , were unvaccinated. 

Schools started 2022 with less staff due to illness and more children ill. Mask mandates were reinstated 

in St. Louis City and County and in some of our local schools. Universities across the country and locally 

instituted vaccine and booster mandates. Several private schools in our area started 2022 with a return 

to virtual learning from home. Locally, St. Alban Roe Parish School went virtual.   

> Commented [RK4]: The Department is concerned this
> language is too pointed. Taking it out achi eves the same
> message without the bias.
> Commented [RK5]: The Department notes the absence
> of any mention to the mask and vaccine controversies, very
> politicized in the U.S. We feel that it would be appropriate
> to address them objectively from both sides of the issue.

CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

52 

The Unit ed States made great progress with the development of three vaccines and their boosters. 

Distribution was difficult at the beginning of availability, but by the end of 2021 anyone who wanted a 

vaccination could get one. Children five years old and up becam e eligible for COVID vaccines. It was the 

very young who were left at risk. Intravenous and oral anti -viral medications became available. Testing 

ramped up in late 2021 to the point there were massive shortages , not only locally but nationwide. 

When did ou r lives return to “normal”? That is for future historians to share. 

Rockwood School District and the COVID -19 Pandemic 

Rockwood.png 

Rockwood School District logo 

Rockwood School District closed schools beginning the week after spring break on March 18 th . Originally ,

th e plan was to be closed for a few weeks , but was extended state -wide by the Governor through the 

end of the school year. At the same time, the District activated its Alternative Learning Plan (ALP) for 

students. The Distr ict provided Chromebooks for students who did not have technology at home and 

distributed Mobile Internet Hotspots to those District families who live in Internet -deficient areas . Its 

food service department activated a plan to distribute food to those stu dents who relied upon school 

food service for their main source of food during the school year. The District closed all athletic facilities 

to assist in the communities’ social distancing and health. [Rockwood, COVID -19] 

The 2020 -21 academic year began en tirely with virtual learning. Families had the choice of choosing in -

person learning when it became available or to continue with virtual learning. Elementary School 

students were given the opportunity to return to classes on a phased -in basis in October 2 020. Middle 

School students were offered that opportunity beginning in early November on a phased -in basis and 

High School students returned in mid -November if they had so chosen. For the 2021 -22 academic year, 

families again were given the choice of in -pe rson learning or the virtual learning environment. 

Learning that our first responders and front -line medical personnel often did not have the necessary 

amount of personal protection equipment (PPEs) was heart -breaking. Rockwood School District stepped 

up to help fill this need. The District donated protective goggles to St. Louis Area ER workers. Staff 

members , using the District’s 3 -D printers , manufactured face shield pieces and face mask straps to aid 

medical personnel , who were on the front lines of this battle. Students also assisted in the massive 

effort. [Rockwood, COVID -19] CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

53 

Looking Beyond 

2021 

The State of Missouri will be celebrating its Bicentennial in 202 1. The Endorsed Bicentennial celebrations 

began in late 2020 , though all celebrations were delayed and/or modified due to the COVID -19 

Pandemic. Along with the City of Wildwood’s Celebrate Wildwood festivities , this book, Celebrating the 

History of Wildwood, Missouri , has received this designation. The below logo is now incorporated into 

the cover of the book. 

Missouri2021Logo -4-color -300dpi (PRINT) -for Light 

Backgrounds.jpg 

25 th -City of Wildwood MO.jpg 

2026 

The United States of America will celebrate its 250 th anniversary and Route 66 will celebrate its 100 th 

anniversary in 2026. 

Chapter 5 Conclusion 

This chapter covered a dynamic thirty years : end of a century, end of a millennium and two decades into 

the next. There were drastic changes , remembrances, and occurrences. Some of those were incredibly 

positive, while unfortunately there were many that were the opposite. Chapter 5 ended with an event 

not resolved as the book ends – the world -wide COVID -19 Pandemic. Later written histories will be able 

to give perspective to this event an d its consequences. 

But at the core, it is the stories and resiliency of our residents that are the most vital and important to 

preserve. As “Looking Beyond 2020,” the above section, suggests there many wonderful events and 

memories still to celebrate for the citizens of Wildwood , Missouri. Enjoy the future and keep track of 

those stories!     

> Commented [RK6]: Af ter reading Chapter 5, the
> Department suggests a “final epilogue,” at the end of the
> book, no more than just a couple of pages. The purpose of
> the epilogue would be to bring the history of the area that is
> now called “Wildwood” full circle, look “beyond” to future
> events and projects (i.e. Village Green and Town Center),
> and leave the reader with some uplifting commentary. It
> would be an opportunity to become less factual and more
> philosophical and poetic.
> Commented [RK7]: Given this note, the Department
> would like the author to consider reordering the pages
> dedicated to COVID -19 history to end with events around
> local resiliency (i.e. the information found on p.45 -46).
> Furthermore, there is concern that this topic covers too
> much of the chapter. The Department sugges ts looking for
> instances of redundancy and cutting it down to a more
> proportionate amount.

CELEBRATE THE HISTORY OF WILDWOOD, MISSOURI – FINAL DRAFT , UPDATED MID -2021 

Chapter 5: 1990 -202 1, JFV – 1/9/22 

54 

Chapter 6 is about the formation of the City of Wildwood itself . It will pres ent a look back through the 

area’s political history and forward to the future. Enjoy!
