Title: 

URL Source: https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/23/23-1141/307919/20240418144202341_Smith%20_%20Wesson%20Cert%20Petition%20Appendix.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 07 Jul 2025 18:00:33 GMT

Markdown Content:
APPENDIX TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

APPENDIX A: Plaintiff’s Complaint in the United States District Court For the District of Massachusetts (Aug. 4, 2021) ................................ 1a 

APPENDIX B: Memorandum and Order by the United States District Court For the District of Massachusetts (Sept. 30, 2022).......................... 208a 

APPENDIX C: Opinion by the United States First Circuit Court of Appeals (Jan. 22, 2024) ........... 265a 

APPENDIX D: Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA) ............................................. 320a 1a 

APPENDIX A 

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

ESTADOS UNIDOS MEXICANOS, 

Plaintiff, 

vs. 

SMITH & WESSON BRANDS, INC.; BARRETT FIREARMS MANUFACTURING, INC.; BERETTA U.S.A. CORP.; BERETTA HOLDING S.P.A.; CENTURY INTERNATIONAL ARMS, INC.; COLT’S MANUFACTURING COMPANY LLC; GLOCK, INC.; GLOCK GES.M.B.H.; STURM, RUGER & CO., INC.; WITMER PUBLIC SAFETY GROUP, INC. D/B/A INTERSTATE ARMS, 

Defendants. 

Civil Action No. _________________ 

COMPLAINT 2a 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. INTRODUCTION .............................................. 1 

II. PARTIES ............................................................. 8 

III. JURISDICTION AND VENUE ..................... 14 

IV. DEFENDANTS HAVE LEGAL DUTIES TO DISTRIBUTE THEIR GUNS SAFELY AND AVOID ARMING CRIMINALS IN MEXICO ....... 14 

A. Defendants Voluntarily Assumed Duties to Comply with All Relevant Laws and the Highest Standard of Care ....................... 15 

B. Defendants Must Comply with the Gun-Import Laws of Mexico ........................... 15 

C. Defendants Must Comply with the Tort Law of Mexico .......................................... 17 

D. Defendants Must Comply with the Gun-Export Laws of the U.S. . ........................ 17 

E. Defendants Must Comply with Other U.S. Federal Laws Governing Guns ............... 18 

F. Defendants Must Comply with U.S. State Laws Applicable to Guns ........................ 19 

G. Defendants Must Comply with U.S. State Tort Law .................................................. 20 

1. Defendants have a duty to carefully monitor and supervise their down-stream distributors and dealers....... 20 

a. Defendants have a duty to sell guns responsibly......................... 20 3a 

b. Defendants have a duty not to supply the criminal market in Mexico ......................................... 24 

2. Defendants have a duty to design safe guns ................................................... 26 

3. Defendants have a duty to refrain from inflammatory and reckless marketing likely to attract criminal users ........ 27 

H. Defendants Cannot Avoid Their Duties by Being Willfully Blind to the Facts .......... 27 

V. DEFENDANTS ARE FULLY ON NOTICE THAT THEIR CONDUCT CAUSES UNLAWFUL TRAFFICKING TO MEXICO ............................... 29 

A. Defendants Know That Some of Their Dealers Sell Significant Numbers of Crime Guns ........................................................ 29 

B. Government and Media Reports Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Distribution Systems Facilitate Gun Trafficking to Mexico .............................. 34 

C. Specific Incidents Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Distribution Systems Actively Assist Trafficking to Mexico ...................................................... 37 

D. Notorious Violent Incidents Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Guns Are Trafficked to Mexico ............... 51 

VI. DEFENDANTS ACTIVELY ASSIST AND FACILITATE TRAFFICKING OF THEIR GUNS TO DRUG CARTELS IN MEXICO ....................... 56 4a 

A. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Straw Purchasing .............................................. 58 

B. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Multiple and Repeat Sales ........................................................ 61 

C. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Kitchen-Table Sales ........................................................ 63 

D. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through “Missing” Guns ........................................................ 64 

E. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Gun Shows ............ 65 

F. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing and Marketing Their Rifles as Military-Style Assault Weapons .................................................. 67 

1. Defendants design their guns as military-style assault weapons ........ 67 

2. Defendants market their guns as military-style assault weapons ........ 76 

3. Defendants know that their military-style weapons are the cartels’ weapons of choice ............................................. 81 

4. Defendants’ reckless marketing of these weapons is unlawful ............... 84 

G. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing Their Guns to Allow Use by Unauthorized Persons ...... 86 5a 

H. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing Their Guns to Enable Defacement of Serial Numbers .................................................. 88 

I. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Refusing to Implement the Reforms They Know Are Necessary ................................................ 89 

VII. DEFENDANTS ACTIVELY ASSIST AND FACILITATE THE UNLAWFUL TRAFFICKING BECAUSE IT MAXIMIZES THEIR SALES AND PROFITS................................................................ 94 

A. Defendants Intentionally Created and Use a Distribution System that Aids Sales to the Criminal Market ............................... 94 

B. A Substantial Portion of Defendants’ Sales and Profits Come From Guns Trafficked to Mexico ...................................................... 95 

VIII. THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN REASONABLE MEASURES TO TRY TO PROTECT ITSELF FROM DEFENDANTS’ UNLAWFUL CONDUCT ...................................... 98 

A. The Government Has Significantly Restricted the Lawful Ownership and Use of Guns Within Mexico ........................... 98 

B. The Government Has Implemented Many Other Programs to Try to Blunt the Effects of Defendants’ Conduct ......................... 100 

IX. DEFENDANTS CAUSE MASSIVE INJURY TO THE GOVERNMENT ................................... 107 6a 

A. Defendants Have Flooded Mexico with Their Guns ............................................ 107 

B. Defendants’ Unlawful Conduct Has Caused Massive Injury ......................... 112 

1. Death and destruction .................... 113 

2. Economic harm ............................... 116 

3. Not statistics ................................... 118 

X. CLAIMS FOR RELIEF .................................. 125 

XI. DEMAND FOR JUDGMENT ...................... 134 7a 

I. INTRODUCTION 

1. Plaintiff Estados Unidos Mexicanos (the “Government”), a sovereign nation, brings this action to put an end to the massive damage that the Defendants cause by actively facilitating the unlawful trafficking of their guns to drug cartels and other criminals in Mexico. Almost all guns recovered at crime scenes in Mexico—70% to 90% of them— were trafficked from the U.S. The Defendants include the six U.S.-based manufacturers whose guns are most often recovered in Mexico—Smith & Wesson, Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, and Ruger. Another manufacturer defendant is Barrett, whose .50 caliber sniper rifle is a weapon of war prized by the drug cartels. The remaining defendant—Interstate Arms—is a Boston-area wholesaler through which all but one of the defendant manufacturers sell their guns for re-sale to gun dealers throughout the U.S. 

2. For decades the Government and its citizens have been victimized by a deadly flood of military-style and other particularly lethal guns that flows from the U.S. across the border, into criminal hands in Mexico. This flood is not a natural phenomenon or an inevitable consequence of the gun business or of U.S. gun laws. It is the foreseeable result of the Defendants’ deliberate actions and business practices. 

3. Defendants design, market, distribute, and sell guns in ways they know routinely arm the drug cartels in Mexico. Defendants use reckless and corrupt gun dealers and dangerous and illegal sales practices that the cartels rely on to get their guns. 8a 

Defendants design these guns to be easily modified to fire automatically and to be readily transferable on the criminal market in Mexico. Defendants know how to make and sell their guns to prevent this illegal trade; the U.S. government and a U.S. court told them how. Defendants defy those recommendations, and many others, and instead choose to continue supplying the criminal gun market in Mexico—because they profit from it. 

4. The Government has strong domestic laws that make it virtually impossible for criminals to lawfully obtain guns in Mexico. Mexico has one gun store in the entire nation and issues fewer than 50 gun permits per year. 

5. Defendants undermine these stringent laws, and wreak havoc in Mexican society, by persistently supplying a torrent of guns to the drug cartels. It is estimated that more than a half million guns annually are trafficked from the U.S. into Mexico. Defendants produce more than 68% of those U.S.-origin trafficked guns, which means that they annually sell more than 340,000 guns that flow from their plants in Massachusetts and other U.S. states to criminals south of the border. 

6. Defendants are fully on notice of the massive trafficking of their guns into Mexico. It has been extensively documented in news accounts, academic studies, government reports, United Nations inquiries and reviews, and law enforcement “traces” of guns from crime scenes in Mexico to the Defendants’ factories in the U.S. 

7. Despite this abundant notice, Defendants have not implemented any public-safety-related 9a 

monitoring or disciplining controls on their distribution systems— none at all . Their policy is to sell to any distributor or dealer that has a U.S. license to buy and sell the product, regardless of the buyer’s record of flouting the law and despite blazing red flags indicating that a gun dealer is conspiring with straw purchasers or others to traffic Defendants’ guns into Mexico. Defendants use this head-in-the-sand approach to deny responsibility while knowingly profiting from the criminal trade. 

8. Defendants exacerbate their refusal to monitor and discipline their distribution systems by designing military-style assault weapons and marketing them in ways that attract and arm ruthless transnational criminal organizations like the drug cartels. 

9. Defendant Barrett manufactures a .50 caliber sniper rifle that can shoot down helicopters and penetrate lightly armored vehicles and bullet-proof glass. It has become one of the cartels’ guns of choice. Barrett markets its sniper rifle as a weapon of war (“with confirmed hits out to 1800 meters, the Barrett model 82A1 is battle proven”), but nevertheless sells it to the general public without restriction. Barrett knows that its dealers sell these military guns to traffickers, often in bulk, to arm the cartels that use them to battle Mexican military and police who are trying to stop the drug trade. 

10. Defendant Century Arms imports into the U.S. from Romania a version of the AK-47 assault rifle, which it modifies to try to evade U.S. import restrictions on assault weapons, and then sells them into the “civilian” market. Century Arms has long 10a 

known that its WASR assault rifles are among the cartels’ favorites. 

11. Century Arms and the other Manufacturer Defendants specifically design their semi-automatic rifles for the battlefield rather than for sport, and make them easily convertible into fully automatic machine guns. Defendants are well aware that the drug cartels in fact routinely convert Defendants’ assault rifles to fire automatically, with devastating effect in Mexico. 

12. The link between Defendants’ design, distribution, and marketing practices and the destruction wrought in Mexico is undeniable. During the period 1999 to 2004—when Defendants were prohibited from selling assault weapons because they were banned in the U.S.—gun production in the U.S. declined appreciably. With the ban’s expiration in 2004, Defendants exploited the opening to vastly increase production, particularly of the military-style assault weapons favored by the drug cartels. 

13. In a mirror image of that gun-production data, from 1999 to 2004 homicides in Mexico were declining. But they then increased dramatically beginning in 2004 exactly contemporaneously with Defendants’ increased production, distribution, and marketing of their military-grade weapons: 11a 12a 

14. The consequences in Mexico have been dire. In addition to causing the exponential growth in the homicide rate, Defendants’ conduct has had an overall destabilizing effect on Mexican society. Late 2004 saw the drug cartels’ first assassination of a Mexican Mayor, followed in later years by their use of Defendants’ military-style weapons to attack the Mexican military and police, and by rampant increases in other gun-related crimes such as extortion and kidnapping. 

15. Defendants’ willfully blind, standardless distribution practices aid and abet the killing and maiming of children, judges, journalists, police, and ordinary citizens throughout Mexico. Defendants’ unlawful conduct has substantially reduced the life expectancy of Mexican citizens and cost the Government billions of dollars a year. And armed with Defendants’ guns, the cartels have aggressively marketed drugs such as fentanyl, destroying and ending lives in and outside of Mexico, including in the U.S. Defendants’ guns are the venom in the snakes that are the drug cartels; without those guns, they could be controlled and stopped. 

16. Defendants are not accidental or unintentional players in this tragedy; they are deliberate and willing participants, reaping profits from the criminal market they knowingly supply— heedless of the shattering consequences to the Government and its citizens. 

17. This need not happen. In a 2003 domestic public nuisance case against U.S. gun manufacturers and distributors—including Defendants Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, 13a 

Smith & Wesson, Ruger, and Interstate—the late United States District Court Judge Jack B. Weinstein found as a fact after a trial that “each manufacturer should implement readily available reforms,” including “imposing liability insurance standards; limiting sales at gun shows; limiting multiple sales; limiting how the consumer gun transaction can be conducted to insure security; education and training of dealers; and monitoring dealers through visitation and other regular interaction.” NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 523 (E.D.N.Y. 2003). Gun industry insiders have urged Defendants to make similar reforms. 

18. In 2001, the U.S. federal government similarly called on Defendants to monitor, supervise, and set reasonable conditions for their distribution systems to prevent supplying criminals. Defendants refused. Defendant Smith & Wesson entered into a settlement agreement with the United States and several U.S. cities, committing to specific distribution-system reforms designed to prevent supplying guns to the criminal market. Under pressure from others in the industry, Smith &Wesson reneged on the agreement. 

19. Defendants instead closed ranks with other industry participants to lobby the U.S. Congress for legislation to protect them in certain instances from liability for domestic injuries resulting from their conduct. Congress responded by enacting the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (“PLCAA”) in 2005, which protects gun companies from some liability for harm solely caused by the unlawful misuse of guns in the U.S. resulting in injury in the U.S. 14a 

20. The United States is, of course, free to choose its social policy reflecting a balance between the financial interests of the gun industry and the rights of victims within its jurisdiction. By the same token, however, the Government of Mexico is entitled to choose a different social policy that reflects adifferent balance between the interests of victims in Mexico and the interests of gun manufacturers that foreseeably and deliberately cause trafficking of their guns into Mexico. 

21. Defendants know that their porous distribution systems cause guns to be routinely trafficked over the border into Mexico, resulting in vast and continual harm to the Government and its people. They therefore must monitor and discipline those distribution systems to comply with not only U.S. law, but also the substantive law of Mexico, including its tort law. 

22. The Supreme Court of the United States has repeatedly held that, where conduct in one nation causes injury in another the “default rule for tort cases” is that “the local law of the state where the injury occurred determines the rights and liabilities of the parties,” Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain , 542 U.S. 692 (2004), and that “a court will ordinarily apply foreign law to determine the tortfeasor’s liability to a plaintiff injured in a foreign country,” RJR Nabisco, Inc. v. European Community , 136 S. Ct. 2090, 2109 (2016). And RJR Nabisco emphasized that where U.S.-based corporations cause injury abroad to foreign sovereigns, the U.S. Constitution and statutes allow those sovereigns to sue for “violations of their own laws and to invoke federal 15a 

diversity jurisdiction as a basis for proceeding in U.S. courts.” Id. 

23. The U.S. Congress honored this principle of trans-national torts when it enacted PLCAA. Even if applied, PLCAA would not bar the Government’s case. But it does not apply because it bars certain claims against gun manufacturers and distributors only when the injury occurred in the U.S. and the criminal’s misuse of the gun was unlawful under U.S. domestic law. The Government’s injuries here occur in Mexico, and its claims result from unlawful misuse of guns in Mexico, not in the U.S. Every aspect of PLCAA confirms that the U.S. Congress enacted that statute with only U.S. domestic concerns in mind. 

24. Just as Defendants may not dump toxic waste or other pollutants to poison Mexicans across the border, they may not send their weapons of war into the hands of the cartels, causing repeated and grievous harm, and then claim immunity from accountability. 

25. To be clear, this lawsuit does not challenge or question the law, policy, or actions of the United States; the Government seeks to hold accountable and stop the reckless actions of private companies that foreseeably send their guns into Mexico. 

26. Likewise, this case has nothing to do with the Second Amendment right of law-abiding, responsible U.S. citizens to keep and bear arms within the U.S. This case involves Defendants’ supplying their guns to law-breaking Mexican nationals and others in Mexico. The cartels have no 16a 

Second Amendment rights, and the Defendants have no right to supply them. 

27. The Government comes to this Court because, while the actionable harm occurs south of the U.S. border, it is caused by Defendants’ conduct north of the border. 

28. Defendant Smith & Wesson, for example, makes decisions in Massachusetts to design, market, and distribute its guns in the reckless, dangerous ways that supply traffickers and cartels. Smith & Wesson’s decisions to renege on the reforms to which it had agreed with the U.S. government, and to use corrupt dealers and high-risk business practices that it knows arm the cartels, all occur in the U.S. This Court can stop the flow of guns into Mexico at its source in Massachusetts by requiring Smith &Wesson to stop actively facilitating the criminal gun trade into Mexico. The same is true for the other Defendants. 

29. The Government is entitled to that relief under the substantive law of Mexico as well as under U.S. law. 

II. PARTIES 

30. Plaintiff Estados Unidos Mexicanos (the “Government”) is a sovereign nation that shares a border with the United States. The Government brings this action in its own behalf. In addition, it raises, to preserve for appellate review, its right also to bring these and similar claims as parens patriae 

on behalf of its citizens. 

31. Defendant Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc. (“Smith & Wesson”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Nevada, with its principal 17a 

place of business at 2100 Roosevelt Avenue, Springfield, Massachusetts. Smith & Wesson is at home in Massachusetts and resides here. Smith & Wesson is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Smith & Wesson’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

32. Defendant Barrett Firearms Manufacturing, Inc. (“Barrett”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Tennessee, with its principal place of business at 5926 Miller Lane, Christiana, Tennessee. Barrett is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales here. Natick Outdoor Store, located in Middlesex County, is Barrett’s authorized dealer in Massachusetts. Barrett’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to distributors and dealers being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

33. Defendant Beretta U.S.A. Corp. (“Beretta U.S.A.”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Maryland, with its principal place of business at 17601 Beretta Drive, Accokeek, Maryland. Beretta U.S.A. is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial 18a 

sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Beretta U.S.A.’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

34. Defendant Beretta Holding S.p.A. (“Beretta Holding Group”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Italy, with its principal place of business in Gardone Val Trompia, Italy. Beretta Holding Group is the parent corporation of Defendant Beretta U.S.A. and participated with Beretta U.S.A. in the design, manufacturing, marketing, advertising, distribution, and sales at issue in this case. Beretta Holding Group and Beretta U.S.A. are hereafter collectively referred to as “Beretta.” 

35. Defendant Century International Arms, Inc. (“Century Arms”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Vermont, with its principal place of business at 430 S. Congress Avenue, Suite 1A, Delray Beach, Florida. Century Arms is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Century Arms’ unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 19a 

36. Defendant Colt’s Manufacturing Company LLC (“Colt”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Delaware, with its principal place of business at 545 New Park Avenue, West Hartford, Connecticut. Colt is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Colt’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

37. Defendant Glock, Inc. (“Glock”) is acorporation organized and existing under the laws of Georgia, with its principal place of business at 6000 Highlands Parkway, Smyrna, Georgia. Glock is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Glock’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

38. Defendant Glock Ges.m.b.H. (“Glock Limited”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Austria, with its principal place of business in Deutsch-Wagram, Austria. Glock Limited is the parent corporation of Defendant Glock, Inc. and participated with Glock, Inc. in the 20a 

design, manufacturing, marketing, advertising, distribution, and sales at issue in this case. Glock Limited and Glock, Inc. are hereafter collectively referred to as “Glock.” 

39. Defendant Sturm, Ruger & Co., Inc. (“Ruger”) is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Delaware, with its principal place of business at 1 Lacey Place, Southport, Connecticut. Ruger is a manufacturer and seller of guns. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County. Ruger’s unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County, and to other distributors and dealers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

40. Defendant Witmer Public Safety Group, Inc. is a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Pennsylvania, with its principal place of business at 311 Creese Street, Ambridge, Pennsylvania. In 2018 Witmer acquired Interstate Arms Corp., which was the U.S.’s oldest gun wholesaler and was incorporated in Massachusetts and had its principal place of business in Middlesex County. Upon the acquisition, Witmer dissolved Interstate Arms Corp. and continued in the wholesaling business in Middlesex County, at the same location and with the same key executives, under the registered fictitious name “Interstate Arms.” 21a 

41. Witmer (hereafter “Interstate Arms”) is a distributor of guns, billing itself as a distributor of, among other guns, “military-style weapons.” Interstate Arms has conducted its gun-wholesaling business in Massachusetts for more than 40 years and was incorporated in Massachusetts until 2018. It continues to conduct its business through its location in Middlesex County. It regularly conducts business in this district, including by making substantial purchases from Defendants Smith & Wesson, Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, and Ruger, and reselling those guns to a system of gun dealers located throughout the U.S. Interstate Arms is at home in Massachusetts and resides in Middlesex County. In addition, Interstate Arms’ unlawful conduct as alleged below resulted in guns that it bought from the other Defendants, and from other gun manufacturers, being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

42. Smith & Wesson, Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, and Ruger each has purposefully availed itself of the privilege of conducting activities within Massachusetts, including by systematically serving the gun market here; regularly marketing and advertising its products here; regularly making substantial sales to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County; and imposing the policies and practices by which it sells its guns to Interstate Arms in Middlesex County and by which Interstate Arms must sell those guns to dealers throughout the U.S. Each of these Defendants’ unlawful conduct as alleged throughout this Complaint—including the sales, marketing, advertising, and distribution 22a 

policies and practices that occurred in Middlesex County—resulted in guns that each of them sold to Defendant Interstate Arms in Middlesex County being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. 

43. In addition to Defendant Interstate Arms, at least 10 gun dealers in the Boston area (Barnstable, Bristol, Dukes, Essex, Middlesex, Nantucket, Norfolk, Plymouth, and Suffolk counties) sold guns that were traced to crimes in Mexico. Each of these 10 dealers sold guns manufactured and distributed by some or all of the Defendants and were, and some still are, subject to those Defendants’ distribution policies and procedures. 

44. The Government’s claims arise out of Defendants’ contacts with Massachusetts; the Government’s claims relate to those contacts; and those contacts give rise to the Government’s claims. This Court has specific personal jurisdiction over each of Smith & Wesson, Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, and Ruger, as well as both general and specific jurisdiction over Smith & Wesson and Interstate Arms. 

45. Barrett has purposefully availed itself of the privilege of conducting activities within Massachusetts, including by systematically serving the gun market here; regularly marketing and advertising its products here; regularly making substantial sales to its authorized Massachusetts dealer, Natick Outdoor Sales, in Middlesex County; and imposing the policies and practices by which it sells its guns to Natick Outdoor Sales in Middlesex 23a 

County and by which Natick Outdoor Sales must sell those guns to consumers in Middlesex County and elsewhere. Barrett’s unlawful conduct as alleged throughout this Complaint—including the sales, marketing, advertising, and distribution policies and practices that occurred in Middlesex County— resulted in guns that its dealers sold being trafficked into Mexico and used in criminal activities there, causing the harm about which the Government complains. The Government’s claims arise out of Barrett’s contacts with Massachusetts; the Government’s claims relate to those contacts; and those contacts give rise to the Government’s claims. This Court has specific personal jurisdiction over Barrett. 

46. All of the Defendants’ wrongful actions described in this complaint are part of, and in furtherance of, the unlawful conduct alleged herein, and were authorized, ordered, and undertaken by the Defendants’ various officers, agents, employees, or other representatives while actively engaged in the management of the Defendants’ affairs (or that of their predecessors-in-interest) within the course and scope of their duties and employment, and with the Defendants’ actual, apparent, and ostensible authority. 

III. JURISDICTION AND VENUE 

47. This action is between a foreign state as plaintiff and citizens of a State or of different States, and the matter in controversy exceeds the sum or value of $75,000.00. The Court therefore has subject matter jurisdiction under U.S. Const., Art. III, § 2, cl. 1, and 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(4). 24a 

48. Venue is appropriate in this district under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2) & (3), in that multiple Defendants reside in this district, each Defendant regularly transacts business in this district, and a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred in this district. 

IV. DEFENDANTS HAVE LEGAL DUTIES TO DISTRIBUTE THEIR GUNS SAFELY AND AVOID ARMING CRIMINALS IN MEXICO. 

49. The flow of guns from Defendants’ U.S. manufacturing plants and stores to the streets of Mexico is not an inevitable, natural phenomenon like the migration of monarch butterflies. Nor is it a necessary consequence of selling a lethal product or of U.S. gun laws. 

50. The flow of guns into Mexico is a foreseeable result of Defendants’ deliberate and knowing decisions to design, market, distribute, and sell guns in ways they know with virtual certainty will supply criminals in Mexico. 

51. Defendants know they have an obligation to help enforce the gun laws, and not to circumvent them. But Defendants continually violate and actively undermine these laws in order to profit from the criminal market in Mexico. 

52. The cartels that cause such bloodshed and terror may fire Defendants’ guns in Mexico, but they are able to do so only because of deliberate decisions made in Massachusetts and in the other Defendants’ domestic corporate offices. 

A. Defendants Voluntarily Assumed Duties to Comply with All Relevant Laws and the Highest Standard of Care. 25a 

53. Guns are restricted, lethal weapons, sought after by persons who cannot legally possess them. Therefore U.S. law allows only persons who commit to fully comply with all applicable laws, and to act as agents of law enforcement, to engage in the gun business at any level. Defendants know this. 

54. Defendants chose to apply for and obtain a U.S. federal license to engage in the gun business. When they did so, they effectively took an oath to the United States that, to obtain the privilege of selling guns, they would fully comply with and help enforce the law to prevent their guns from being obtained by criminals. Defendants voluntarily assumed a duty to design, market, distribute, sell, export, and import guns while carefully adhering to all relevant law in the U.S., as well as the law in Mexico where they know their guns are routinely trafficked, to minimize gun violence. 

B. Defendants Must Comply with the Gun-Import Laws of Mexico. 

55. The statutory law of Mexico prohibits gun traffickers—and those aiding and abetting them— from bringing any of Defendants’ guns into the country. 

56. Mexico’s Federal Law on Firearms and Explosives of 1972, as amended February 19, 2021 (“LFAFE”), prohibits the possession of specific guns including those classified as exclusively for military use. 

57. LFAFE, Article 11 reserves for the exclusive use of the Army, Navy, and Air Force numerous types of handguns, rifles, and shotguns. 26a 

58. LFAFE, Article 55 provides that importing 

any gun into Mexico without a permit is unlawful and carries a prison term of up to 10 years. LFAFE, Article 84 bis. And importing guns classified as exclusively for military use without a permit carries a prison term of up to 30 years. LFAFE, Article 84(I). 

59. Gun traffickers do not have the required permits, and Defendants are prohibited from aiding and abetting their importing guns into Mexico. 

(A border crossing sign upon entry into Mexico) 

C. Defendants Must Comply with the Tort Law of Mexico. 

60. Mexico’s Federal Civil Code regulates tort liability (responsabilidad civil extra-contractual) and wrongful acts, in articles 1910 to 1934. Under the Code, Defendants have a duty not to create any risk that harms a person or entity in Mexico. 

61. The Code imposes on Defendants an obligation not to engage in any unlawful, negligent, 27a 

or harmful conduct that causes injury to another. Specifically, Article 1910 of the Code provides: 

Whoever acting illicitly or against good customs causes damage to another, is obliged to repair it, unless they prove that the damage was produced as a consequence of inexcusable fault or negligence of the victim. 

62. The principles of tort liability stemming from Article 1910 require Defendants to act with the greatest possible skill and care, taking necessary precautions to avoid causing any damage to others. 

D. Defendants Must Comply with the Gun-Export Laws of the U.S. 

63. Defendants have a duty to comply with various U.S. export regulations—including, but not limited to, the Export Administration Regulations— so as to minimize the risk that their guns will be misused by malicious actors in Mexico. 

64. Under 15 C.F.R. § 738.4, any exporter of an item with a so-called “ECCN” designation and where there are one or more reasons for special control/oversight of the product must acquire alicense to export the product to certain countries designated on a table contained in Supp. No. 1 to 15 C.F.R. § 738. 

65. Semi-automatic guns (other than shotguns), such as the Smith & Wesson M&P 15 and the Century Arms WASR-10, are designated under ECCN 0502.a and flagged as requiring the exporter to apply for a license to transport them to Mexico. Supp. No.1 to 15 C.F.R. 774; Supp. No. 1 to 15 C.F.R. 738. 28a 

E. Defendants Must Comply with Other U.S. Federal Laws Governing Guns. 

66. The Defendants also have a duty to comply with all other U.S. federal laws, including various provisions of the Gun Control Act of 1968 (“GCA,” 18 U.S.C. §§ 921 et seq.), and the National Firearms Act of 1934 (“NFA,” 26 U.S.C. Ch. 53). 

67. The GCA prohibits anyone, including, of course, gun traffickers, from engaging in the sale of guns without a license. 18 U.S.C. § 923(a). Defendants are prohibited from aiding and abetting the sale of guns by anyone who does not have the required license. 

68. Other relevant GCA provisions include: 

a. a prohibition on assembling “from imported parts any semi-automatic rifle or any shotgun which is . . . not particularly suitable for or readily adapted to sporting purposes” for resale to the general public (see § 922(r)); 

b. a prohibition on selling “machinegun[s]” to members of the general public (§ 922(b)(4)); 

c. various provisions that ensure that a gun is bought by only its actual intended purchaser, criminalizing false, deceptive or inaccurate statements, records or practices associated with “straw purchases,” including, but not limited to, §§ 922(a)(6), 922(m), 922(t)(1), 923(g), 924(a)(1)(A), 924(a)(3)(A) (see also relevant non-GCA provisions at §§ 3, 4); and 

d. various provisions prohibiting the sale of guns to or possession of guns by various 29a 

categories of prohibited persons (e.g., § 922(d), 922(g)). 

69. A “straw purchaser” is a person who buys a gun on someone else’s behalf. Straw purchases violate a number of federal and, in some cases, state gun laws including, but not limited to, provisions of the GCA. Gun sellers who knowingly supply straw purchasers also violate those laws. 

70. The NFA and related provisions of the GCA mandate that machine guns and certain other weapons may be made, sold, and possessed only subject to strict regulation and registration, and may not be sold to the general public. The statute prohibits the sale of a “machinegun” to any person except those specifically authorized by the U.S. Attorney General. 18 U.S.C. § 922(b)(4). 

71. This provision incorporates the NFA’s definition of “machinegun” as: 

“any weapon which shoots, is designed to shoot ,or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. The term shall also include [parts] designed and intended, for use in converting a weapon into a machinegun , and any combination of parts from which a machinegun can be assembled if such parts are in the possession or under the control of a person.” 26 U.S.C. § 5845(b) (emphasis added). 

72. A gun is “designed to shoot” automatically if it is designed so that it can be simply or easily modified to fire automatically. The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (“ATF”) 30a 

has recognized that the NFA’s definition of “machinegun[s]” “includes those weapons which have not previously functioned as machineguns but possess design features which facilitate full automatic fire by a simple modification or elimination of existing component parts. ” ATF Rul. 82-8 at 1. 

F. Defendants Must Comply with U.S. State Laws Applicable to Guns. 

73. Defendants likewise assumed a duty to comply with the laws of relevant U.S. states that prohibit dangerous conduct such as straw purchases, and state laws, including public-nuisance statutes, that prohibit supplying criminal gun markets. 

74. Defendants must also comply with other U.S. state laws applicable to guns, including state unfair business practices statutes that prohibit unfair and deceptive advertising, including advertising that induces the unlawful and reckless use of dangerous products like guns. 

75. These laws include, but are not limited to, laws from the home states of the Defendants such as the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act (Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 42-110a et seq.) (for Colt), and the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act (Mass. Gen. Laws c. 93A) (for Smith & Wesson). 

76. These and similar laws prohibit Defendants from encouraging the unlawful or dangerous use of guns. They apply to such reckless marketing even where the resulting harm occurs outside of the state but the marketing originated from within the state. 

G. Defendants Must Comply with U.S. State Tort Law. 31a 

1. Defendants have a duty to carefully monitor and supervise their downstream distributors and dealers. 

a. Defendants have a duty to sell guns responsibly. 

77. By designing, distributing, selling, and marketing highly dangerous products, Defendants assumed a duty to ensure that their guns are sold lawfully and carefully, in full compliance with all applicable laws, and not to circumvent those laws through their business practices. 

78. Part of the duty Defendants assumed was to carefully sell and distribute their guns. This duty is violated when Defendants sell guns without standards, conditions, or monitoring, through downstream dealers and distributors some of whom Defendants know will recklessly or illegally sell guns. 

79. The existence and contours of this duty have been known for decades. 

80. The fact that selling guns without standards or conditions supplies criminals has also been known. For example, a congressional report in 1976, supported by the U.S. Departments of Justice and Treasury, highlighted that large-volume sales were a major source of illegal gun supply, and that the multiple-sale reporting requirement (that requires reporting to ATF of sales of more than one handgun by a dealer to a purchaser within five business days) was not enough to stop it. In public Congressional hearings in 1993, ATF’s director described how criminals obtain guns through corrupt dealers, 32a 

noting that 6,000 to 10,000 handguns were diverted to the illegal market by one dealer alone. 

81. Voices within the gun industry have long recognized that Defendants have a duty to control their distribution networks to prevent the supply of guns to criminals. 

82. For example, a then-top gun industry trade association official, Robert Ricker, stated under oath that gun manufacturers and distributors have long known that their gun distribution system “encourages and rewards illegal activity by a few corrupt dealers and distributors,” but they choose “a see-no-evil, hear-no-evil, speak-no-evil approach” and “hide behind the fiction that as long as a retail dealer has a valid federal firearms license to sell guns, no attention to the dealer’s business practices is required by its suppliers.” Declaration of Robert A. Ricker filed in People v. Arcadia Mach. & Tool, Inc. ,Judicial Council Coordination Proceedings No. 4095 (Cal. Super. Ct. Feb. 3, 2003) (“ Ricker Declaration ”) ¶¶ 9, 11, 12. 

83. Mr. Ricker also stated that “Leaders in the industry [including some of Defendants], have long known that greater industry action to prevent illegal transactions is possible and would curb the supply of firearms to the illegal market,” but they “have consistently resisted taking constructive voluntary action to prevent firearms from ending up in the illegal gun market and have sought to silence others within the industry who have advocated reform.” 

Ricker Declaration , ¶8. 

84. In 1993, a National Alliance of Stocking Gun Dealers (“NASGD”) publication recognized that 33a 

“children and felons are being sold guns by licensed firearm dealers,” “[w]e as an industry have failed to ‘police’ ourselves in the past” and “[w]e must do so now.” The Alliance Voice , July 1993. 

85. In 1994, NASGD joined then-U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen and others in astatement recognizing that “within the firearms industry are elements who divert the flow of firearms from the legitimate trade into the more lucrative firearms black market.” The Alliance Voice ,Apr. 1994. 

86. In 1999, a column by a former Gun Dealer of the Year called on manufacturers and distributors to “wake-up” and control their distribution systems, including requiring that dealers “adhere to some strict guidelines,” writing that: 

IF YOU DO NOT KNOW WHERE AND HOW YOUR PRODUCTS ARE ULTIMATELY BEING SOLD – YOU CHOOSE TO BE WILLFULLY BLIND TO THE FACT OR ANTICIPATED THAT THEY WOULD BE ILLEGALLY SOLD AND SUBSEQUENTLY MISUSED. 

Paul M. Barrett, “Loaded Words: A Dealer Breaks Rank, Blaming Gun Makers,” Wall Street Journal 

(June 22, 1999). 

87. Over twenty years ago, a former Senior Vice-President for Defendant Smith & Wesson stated under oath that the gun industry is aware “that the black market in firearms” is in part supplied by “multiple thousands of unsupervised federal firearms licensees,” but “[i]n spite of their knowledge, however, the industry’s position has 34a 

consistently been to take no independent action to insure responsible distribution practices.” Affidavit of Robert Hass filed in Hamilton v. Accu-Tek , No. 95CV0049 (E.D.N.Y.) ¶ 20. 

88. Dating at least to the 1990s, officials in several gun industry trade associations proposed that manufacturers regulate their distribution by selling through authorized dealers and requiring standards and safe practices to sell guns. Those proposals were all rejected, and some of their proponents were forced out of industry positions in response. 

89. Defendants have received similar calls for reform from U.S. federal law enforcement in the U.S., but have refused to heed them. For example, ATF’s strategic plan issued in 2000 stated that its “[e]nforcement efforts would benefit if the firearms industry takes affirmative steps to track weapons and encourage proper operation of Federal Firearms Licensees to ensure compliance with all applicable laws.” ATF, 2000-2005 Strategic Plan 11 (2000). 

90. In 2001, the U.S. Department of Justice stated in a public report that “[g]un manufacturers and importers could substantially reduce the illegal supply of guns by taking . . . steps to control the chain of distribution for guns.” DOJ, Gun Violence Reduction: National Integrated Guns Violence Reduction Strategy § IV (2001). 

91. The Department of Justice then listed several recommended steps that Defendants should take to avoid supplying criminal gun markets: 

The firearms industry can make a significant contribution to public safety by adopting 35a 

measures to police its own distribution chain. In many industries, such as the fertilizer and explosives industries, manufacturers impose extensive controls on their dealers and distributors. Gun manufacturers and importers could substantially reduce the illegal supply of guns by taking similar steps to control the chain of distribution for guns. To properly control the distribution of guns, gun manufacturers and importers should: identify and refuse to supply dealers and distributors that have a pattern of selling guns to criminals and straw purchasers; develop a continual training program for dealers and distributors covering compliance with guns laws, identifying straw purchase scenarios and securing inventory; and develop a code of conduct for dealers and distributors, requiring them to implement inventory, store security, policy and record keeping measures to keep guns out of the wrong hands, including policies to postpone all gun transfers until [background] checks are completed. Id. 

92. The Justice Department offered Defendants information to help them identify which of their dealers were supplying crime guns, including trace data—the data obtained by ATF when it contacts the manufacturer and others in the distribution chain to identify a gun’s entire commercial history: 

To assist industry efforts to keep guns from falling into the wrong hands, ATF will supply manufacturers and importers that request it with information about crime gun traces of the manufacturer’s or importer’s guns. The Department of Treasury and the Department of 36a 

Justice are continuing to work with responsible members of the firearms industry to encourage voluntary measures, such as a code of conduct and comprehensive training for dealers, to ensure that guns are not stolen or sold to criminals or straw purchasers. Id. 

93. After a gun is recovered at a crime scene, the ATF’s first step in tracing it is to contact the gun’s manufacturer. See ATF, Commerce in Firearms in the United States 20 (2000) (describing trace procedure). Defendants could use these trace requests to monitor and discipline their distribution systems. 

94. In a March 17, 2000 settlement agreement with the U.S. government and various cities (the “2000 Agreement”), Defendant Smith & Wesson accepted an obligation to sell to only “authorized distributors and authorized dealers” who abided by a code of conduct, including the requirement that the distributors and dealers store all trace requests and report them to Smith & Wesson. Under pressure from other industry players, Smith & Wesson later reneged on the 2000 Agreement. But its existence and terms-including the use of trace data to monitor and discipline the distribution system-help to define the duty that Defendants assumed when designing and marketing their guns. 

b. Defendants have a duty not to supply the criminal market in Mexico. 

95. Defendants assumed an obligation to ensure that their distributors and dealers do not recklessly or illicitly supply the criminal market in Mexico. 37a 

96. Aspects of this duty include, but are not limited to: 

a. providing guns only to downstream distributors and dealers that abide by protocols and safety standards to prevent the unlawful or negligent diversion of guns to bad actors in Mexico; 

b. terminating business relationships, refusing to supply or otherwise disciplining any downstream distributor or seller of a Defendant’s products where trace data or other indicators suggest that the party is likely engaging in reckless or unlawful practices supplying the criminal market; 

c. where it appears that a Defendant’s guns are being trafficked from a certain source jurisdiction into Mexico, limiting the supply of guns or certain classes of guns to retailers in the source jurisdiction or creating special point-of-sale restrictions on any relevant classes of guns; 

d. requiring all retail sellers to employ safe and reasonable business practices to enforce and adhere to their obligations, including but not limited to asking screening questions of customers to identify purchasers likely to illegally sell or misuse guns or transport them into Mexico; 

e. requiring that purchasers show multiple forms of state identification beyond those necessitated by federal or state law; 38a 

f. limiting bulk, multiple, and repeat sales or imposing other limitations designed to prevent illicit gun trafficking into Mexico; 

g. obtaining, retaining, and analyzing relevant information to determine if their business practices are supplying criminals in Mexico with guns, and taking appropriate responsive action to prevent that continued supply, including but not limited to: 

• requiring downstream sellers to provide timely information regarding their business practices including alleged or proven violations of law, straw purchasing or trafficking incidents at their stores, “missing” guns, trace requests, inspections and audits, sales of assault weapons and sniper rifles, multiple and bulk sales, and repeat purchasers; 

• noting and recording all instances of federal or state law enforcement officials tracing guns recovered during criminal investigations in Mexico back to each Defendant or to any downstream distributors or dealers selling the Defendant’s guns; 

• noting and recording all connections between any Defendant’s guns and criminal misuse in Mexico identified in the media or other sources; 

• conducting continuous, routine analyses of trace or other data so as to 39a 

determine, among other things, whether certain distributor and dealer networks are associated with abnormally high rates of diversion of guns to the criminal market in Mexico; whether certain types of a Defendant’s guns (such as semi-automatic assault rifles and sniper rifles) appear to be disproportionately used by criminals in Mexico; and whether there are any geographic or other patterns in the manner in which a Defendant’s guns are being diverted to the criminal market in Mexico. 

2. Defendants have a duty to design safe guns. 

97. The common law of U.S. states, like the applicable civil law of Mexico, requires Defendants to exercise a high degree of caution in the design, distribution, sale, and marketing of their exceedingly dangerous products. 

98. This includes a duty not to include features making guns more attractive to and useful for malicious actors and to include safety features reducing their susceptibility to theft and diversion to the criminal market in Mexico. 

99. These affirmative design safeguards include, but are not limited to, personalized or authorized-user features, such as internal locks or “smart gun” technology, that inhibit all but a gun’s authorized user from discharging it. These safety features have been technologically feasible for many years. Internal locks, and other features less sophisticated 40a 

than smart guns, have been used in some guns sold to the public. Guns with authorized-user features are less likely to be attractive targets for theft and misuse by criminals because they cannot be fired by anyone except the authorized user. 

100. Defendants also assumed a duty to make guns that could not easily have their serial numbers defaced or obliterated, which criminals and traffickers often do to evade law enforcement. 

101. Defendants have long had the commercial and technological capability to install these safeguards in their guns. And they have been well aware of the need for this technology. For example, Defendant Smith & Wesson undertook in the 2000 Agreement to install smart-gun technology in all of its new handgun designs by 2003. Smith & Wesson recognized that this would be an important step to “reduce the criminal misuse of guns [and to] combat the illegal acquisition, possession and trafficking of guns.” 

102. Smith & Wesson further vowed to invest 2% of its annual gun sales revenue to the development of this smart-gun technology. It filed multiple patent applications for specific embodiments of smart-gun technology between approximately 1998 and 2001. 

103. Smith & Wesson further committed to include a second, hidden serial number on all guns, so that law enforcement could still fully investigate the commercial history of the gun in a criminal investigation, even if the criminal or trafficker defaced or obliterated one serial number. 41a 

3. Defendants have a duty to refrain from inflammatory and reckless marketing likely to attract criminal users. 

104. Independent of any state unfair trade practices statutes, all Defendants have an obligation to avoid inflammatory or reckless marketing tactics likely to attract and motivate criminals or other dangerous users of their guns. 

105. The Smith & Wesson 2000 Agreement reflects this duty, acknowledging an obligation to “[n]ot market any gun in a way that would make the gun particularly appealing to juveniles or criminals.” 

H. Defendants Cannot Avoid Their Duties by Being Willfully Blind to the Facts. 

106. The statutes, regulations, and law identified above reflect a standard of conduct and care below which reasonably prudent manufacturers and distributors may not lawfully fall. Together, these requirements make clear that Defendants are required to possess and exercise specialized and sophisticated knowledge, skill, information, and understanding of the market for guns. They must also be aware of, and prevent, the risks and dangers of gun trafficking that arise when Defendants choose to sell guns through standardless sales and distribution without proper monitoring and discipline. 

107. Further, these proscriptions make clear that Defendants have a duty and responsibility to exercise their specialized and sophisticated knowledge, information, skill, and understanding to prevent the diversion of their guns into Mexico. 42a 

108. Prominent among Defendants’ obligations is the duty to be aware of the reality of how their guns are sold and used, to take that reality into account when they decide how to design, sell, and distribute their guns, and not to be willfully blind to the facts. 

109. Defendants also have, and are required to have, access to specialized and detailed knowledge of suspicious sales activities. ATF traces, extensive public reports of unlawful trafficking activity, and sophisticated sales data allow Defendants to monitor the volume and type of sales that would alert them to suspicious sales activity and problematic dealers. This information enabled and required Defendants to play a decisive role in stopping the supply of their guns to the cartels in Mexico. 

110. A manufacturer of a dangerous product is an accessory or co-conspirator to illicit conduct by downstream actors where it continues to supply, support, or assist the downstream parties and has knowledge— actual or constructive —of the illicit conduct. 

111. “Willful blindness” to clear indicators of unlawful conduct constitutes constructive knowledge of that conduct. 

112. “Red flags,” when assessed in the aggregate, can render it obvious that a downstream seller is engaging in criminal or unlawful activity. Amanufacturer or supplier that continues to supply, support, or assist that seller, after the red flags are raised, is a culpable and intentional participant in that unlawful conduct. 

113. The flags that put Defendants on notice that they were facilitating unlawful trafficking of guns 43a 

into Mexico were blazingly red and astoundingly numerous. Defendants cannot shield themselves from responsibility by claiming to be ignorant of the fact that they routinely supply, and profit from, trafficking to criminals in Mexico. 

114. Defendants knowingly violated all of the aforementioned duties and responsibilities. Their knowing violations of those obligations caused harm, and continues to cause harm, to the Government and its people. 

V. DEFENDANTS ARE FULLY ON NOTICE THAT THEIR CONDUCT CAUSES UNLAWFUL TRAFFICKING TO MEXICO. 

115. For years Defendants have been confronted with a mountain of facts that make clear that their chosen business practices routinely arm the cartels in Mexico with massive and lethal arsenals. 

116. The U.S. federal government has determined that Defendants’ guns are the overwhelming source of the cartels’ arsenals, and that the trafficking of Defendants’ guns across the border into Mexico is a crisis of extraordinary proportions. Media reports, trafficking prosecutions, reported cases, articles, trace data, and other information confirm the same facts. 

117. Defendants’ response to this mountain of information has been to double down on their unlawful practices and fight law enforcement efforts to stop the trafficking. 

A. Defendants Know That Some of Their Dealers Sell Significant Numbers of Crime Guns. 44a 

118. Defendants have long been aware that some of the dealers they use to sell their guns at retail supply significant numbers of guns to the criminal market in Mexico. Defendants know that these dealers engage in straw sales, multiple sales, repeat sales, and other business practices that supply traffickers who arm the drug cartels. 

119. It is well known that the overwhelming majority of gun dealers—more than 85%—sell zero crime guns, while a small minority of dealers—fewer than 10%—sell about 90% of crime guns. Defendants know that a fairly small percentage of their dealers sell virtually all crime guns recovered in Mexico. Public reports and articles have identified some of those dealers by name. 

120. For example, a 2010 Washington Post article identified by name 12 dealers that sold the most guns recovered in Mexico and even included agraphic that made the point even more clear: 45a 46a 

121. Even when the U.S. national media spoon fed this information to Defendants they continued to use these dealers and did not cut off supplies or begin monitoring and supervising them. And as noted above distributors such as Defendant Interstate Sales, which has sold guns traced to crime scenes in Mexico, distribute guns throughout the U.S., including to dealers like these that traffic them to the cartels. 

122. Defendants regularly receive even more direct information about problem dealers. Trace requests from ATF and other agencies alert Defendants that guns they sell to specific distributors and dealers are being recovered at crime scenes in Mexico (the ATF tracing program extends to crime guns recovered in Mexico). Industry participants know that a high volume of crime-gun traces is a trafficking indicator, suggesting that a dealer is engaged in unlawful sales such as straw purchases. ATF, Commerce in Firearms in the United States at 25 (2000). 

123. Defendants can get trace data from ATF, and they can require that their dealers forward all trace requests to them. But rather than taking these steps to determine which dealers and distributors are supplying the cartels in Mexico, Defendants choose to remain willfully blind to the specific facts. 

124. In the 2003 trial, Judge Weinstein found as a fact that “relatively excessive numbers of traces to specific retailers or first purchasers is ... cause for alarm by Manufacturer Defendants,” and that no U.S. law “foreclosed [them] from closing off illegal 47a 

flows of their guns to such retailers.” NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 504 (E.D.N.Y. 2003). The Court of Appeals dismissed the defendants’ appeal and refused to vacate Judge Weinstein’s findings of fact even though defendants had prevailed on technical grounds. NAACP v. A.A. Arms, Inc. , No. 03-9354-cv Doc. 1537 (2d Cir. Aug. 30, 2004). 

125. Judge Weinstein further found that “the guns in the trace database are overwhelmingly crime guns (that is, recovered in connection with a crime),” that “sufficient information in the trace database has been made available to defendants and would have been made more extensively available to any that sought information,” and that “trace information provides to each manufacturer, distributor and dealer—with some technical assistance—information that could be used to improve their distribution system to protect against criminals obtaining their guns.” 271 F. Supp. 2d at 522. 

126. Defendants know that the ATF alone, without Defendants’ own monitoring and disciplining their distribution systems, can barely make a start on preventing gun trafficking to Mexico. A 2013 report from the U.S. Department of Justice Office of Inspector General (OIG) found that ATF inspected about only 11,000 of the 135,000 licensees each year. In 2019, ATF inspected about 10% of all licensees. Although 2020 posed novel challenges, ATF inspected a mere 5,827 licensees during this past fiscal year despite record-high gun sales. And the 2013 OIG report suggested that ATF had not implemented a mechanism to track and 48a 

prioritize for inspection retail dealers it considers to be “high-risk.” 

127. Judge Weinstein found, based on the testimony of former ATF officials, that “ATF lacked the ability to adequately regulate firearms transactions,” including “particularly the retail dealers, which are a primary conduit of guns from the legal to the illegal market.” 271 F. Supp. 2d at 521. He further found as fact that “the ATF is incapable of inspecting all but a tiny percentage of dealers, is restricted to one routine compliance inspection per year and cannot close corrupt dealers for many years even after notice of revocation, indictment and conviction.” Id. 

128. Even in rare cases where ATF inspects a licensed retail dealer, licenses are rarely revoked, even when flagrant violations of U.S. federal law are uncovered. For example, USA Today and The Trace 

reported on an Illinois retail dealer that was allowed to stay in business after it received two warnings following inspections in 2009 and 2013 for repeatedly failing to conduct background checks or to comply with U.S. federal record-keeping requirements, and illegally selling to out-of-state residents. Court records tied that dealer to at least 12 guns traced to a trafficking ring suspected of smuggling narcotics into the U.S. from Mexico between 2013 and 2015. It was only after those guns were trafficked, and numerous other violations, that the dealer’s license was finally revoked. “There’s really no teeth to the laws, and gun dealers know that,” a former ATF agent explained in the article. Brian Freskos et al, “After Repeated ATF Warnings, Gun Dealers Can Count on Agency to Back Off; 49a 

Sometimes Firearms Flow to Criminals,” USA Today (May 26, 2021). 

129. Gun industry insider Robert Ricker confirmed that Defendants know that corrupt dealers retain their licenses because ATF is unable to effectively and promptly weed them out and revoke their licenses: 

The firearm industry ... has long known that ATF is hampered in its enforcement efforts by inadequate resources and constraints in federal law on its ability to enforce current law against illegal and corrupt dealers. … Without independent action by all segments of the industry to address the flow of guns from corrupt dealers and gun shows into the illegal market, ATF will continue to fight a losing battle against illegal gun traffickers. Ricker Declaration , ¶13. 

130. This is not meant to criticize ATF or other U.S. government policies or activities. But it does demonstrate that Defendants know—or choose to be willfully blind to the fact—that some of their dealers violate the law, recklessly sell guns, and supply the cartels with guns. And Defendants exploit this lack of adequate enforcement to supply and profit from the criminal market. 

131. Defendants know that having a federal firearms license does not mean that the licensee obeys the law. Pretending otherwise is a fiction that Defendants use to falsely claim plausible deniability about their obligation to monitor and discipline their distribution chains. 50a 

132. Judge Weinstein found as fact that “the industry knows that crime gun traces are indicators of problems at the dealer level and are adequate notice to all up-stream distribution partners of these problems,” and that “the reason industry members gave for not addressing the clear dangers posed by unsupervised dealers causing widespread harm to communities was: ‘if the industry took voluntary action, it would be admitting responsibility, and ‘the concept that if you are proactive and take steps to remedy the problem, then you have recognized that you are responsible partially for the problem.’” 271 F. Supp. 2d at 521-522. 

133. Defendants know that ATF enforcement is not sufficient to stem the tide of their guns into Mexico. Their policies of supplying any licensed dealer ensure that they knowingly assist and facilitate those dealers’ unlawful trafficking to Mexico. 

B. Government and Media Reports Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Distribution Systems Facilitate Gun Trafficking to Mexico. 

134. Even without information from trace requests from law enforcement, Defendants are aware that they are routinely supplying guns trafficked to Mexico. 

135. In just the past ten years the problem of gun trafficking from the U.S. to Mexico has been documented in more than 3,000 news articles published in the U.S., in more than 100 academic studies, and in a multitude of government reports. These and other sources provide Defendants with 51a 

compelling notice that their unlawful business practices continue to fuel gun violence in Mexico. 

136. “Cartels need guns to support their business,” explained Scott Brown, special agent in charge of Homeland Security Investigations in Phoenix, in one published article. “When they find people that are either willing to flagrantly violate the law or skirt the law or not practice due diligence, that is enabling the cartels to be armed and to have a destructive impact both in Mexico and the U.S.” Beth Warren, “DEA Supervisor Turned ‘Pariah’ Sold Assault Rifles to Sinaloa Cartel Associates,” 

Louisville Courier Journal (Feb. 24, 2021). 

137. Among the U.S. Congressional and governmental reports documenting and publicizing the persistent problem of gun trafficking to Mexico are: 

• House Committee on Homeland Security, 

Combating Border Violence: The Role of Interagency Coordination in Investigations 

(2009). 

• Congressional Research Service, Mexico’s 

Drug-Related Violence , R40582 (2009). 

• Gov’t Accountability Office, Guns and Trafficking: U.S. Efforts to Combat Arms Trafficking to Mexico Face Planning Coordination Challenges (2009). 

138. United Nations and NGO reports similarly document and publicize the rampant trafficking of Defendants’ guns into Mexico. See, for example: 

Global Study on Firearms Trafficking 2020 , United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (2020); Violence 52a 

Policy Center, Cross Border Gun Trafficking, http://vpc.org/indicted/ (Nov. 10, 2020). 

139. So do numerous media studies and reports, such as: 

• James C. McKinley, Jr., “U.S. Is Arms Bazaar for Mexican Cartels,” New York Times (Feb. 25, 2009); 

• Chris Baltimore, “Mexico Cartels Go Bargain Gun Shopping in Houston,” Reuters (May 28, 2009); 

• Chris McGreal, “How Mexico’s Drug Cartels Profit from Flow of Guns Across the Border,” The Guardian (Dec. 8, 2011); 

• Seth Harp, “Arming the Cartels: The Inside Story of a Texas Gun-Smuggling Ring,” 

Rolling Stone (Aug. 7, 2019); 

• Kevin Sieff & Nick Miroff, “The Sniper Rifles Flowing to Mexican Cartels Show a Decade of U.S. Failure,” Washington Post 

(Nov. 19, 2020), which noted that the trafficked weapons are being used to kill “record numbers of [Mexican] police officers—464 in the first nine months of 2020 alone.” 

140. Gun trafficking from the U.S. into Mexico and into the hands of the drug cartels was a well-publicized problem even before 2005. See, for example, “U.S. Mother Lode of Firepower for World,” Associated Press (March 31, 1994). At Mexico’s urging, in 1997 the Organization of American States adopted a treaty designed to try to slow this trafficking. That same year President Clinton 53a 

further acknowledged and publicized the problem by asking the U.S. Congress to increase military aid to the Government so it could buy guns to combat the drug cartels that were armed with Defendants’ guns. 

141. Defendants demonstrated their awareness of the problem by fighting U.S. federal efforts to address it. Retailer customers buying multiple guns may well be trafficking, so U.S. federal law requires dealers to timely inform ATF of multiple sales (sales of more than one gun over 5 business days) of handguns, by completing and submitting a multiple-sale reporting form. This provides ATF with timely information to investigate potential trafficking. But this requirement generally did not apply to long guns. 

142. A November 2010 report from the U.S. Department of Justice OIG, reviewing ATF’s efforts to reduce the flow of illegal guns into Mexico, found that the then-existing multiple-sales reporting requirements for handguns “produce timely, actionable investigative leads for ATF” but noted that cartels operating in Mexico preferred military-style rifles not then subject to the U.S. federal reporting requirement. The OIG report concluded that this omission “hinders ATF’s ability to disrupt the flow of illegal weapons to Mexico.” U.S. Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General, Review of ATF’s Project Gunrunner at 31 (Nov. 2010). 

143. ATF issued notice of an emergency rule that required licensed dealers operating in California, Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico to report multiple sales of certain assault rifles. FR Doc. 2010-31761. 54a 

The proposed rule would not prohibit multiple sales of assault rifles, but would merely require the same 

reporting of multiple sales that already existed for handguns. 

144. The gun industry nevertheless tried to keep that information from law enforcement and to enable the trafficking to continue. Defendants’ trade association sued to prevent enforcement of the rule. Its lawsuit was unsuccessful in blocking the reporting requirement. But the episode confirms Defendants’ knowledge of the systematic gun trafficking to Mexico and of traffickers’ preference for multiple sales. It also confirms that the gun industry prefers to supply and profit from that trafficking rather than help law enforcement put an end to it. 

145. Despite all this notice, Defendants continue to use their unmonitored and undisciplined distribution systems to supply military-grade assault weapons in the U.S., causing them to be smuggled across the border and used to arm criminal organizations and drug cartels in Mexico. The problem of Defendants’ guns flowing into Mexico and arming the cartels only gains more attention, and becomes more lethal, every year. 

C. Specific Incidents Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Distribution Systems Actively Assist Trafficking to Mexico. 

146. Authorities have repeatedly identified and recovered Defendants’ guns in connection with notorious gun-trafficking rings in which Defendants’ dealers supplied cartel traffickers. Defendants 55a 

received notice of these incidents through ATF trace requests, news reports, and court filings. They are fully aware of their contribution to the epidemic of gun violence in Mexico and the scale of the problem they have created. Following are some illustrative examples. 

147. From March 2016 to December 2018 gun dealers sold to a trafficker 37,200 rounds of ammunition, 2,649 high-capacity rifle magazines, 120 body-armor plates, and 3 handguns—including 2 Colt pistols. He then smuggled them into Mexico during 87 border-crossings. “The defendant was directly involved with high level members of the Sinaloa cartel in Mexico... [His] offenses in this case are very serious,” prosecutors stressed in court filings. United States of America v. Marco Antonio Peralta-Vega , No. 4:19-cr-00338 (D. Ariz.), Government’s Sentencing Memorandum at 3, filed June 4, 2021. 

148. In October 2017 gun dealers sold to another trafficker Defendants’ assault rifles that are coveted by criminals and drug organizations in Mexico. These included a Smith & Wesson rifle and two Century Arms rifles—all destined for Mexico. 

149. From 2007 to 2008 Phoenix gun shop X-Caliber Guns sold more than 650 guns, mostly assault weapons including AK-47s, to straw purchasers recruited by a drug cartel. X-Caliber sold the guns after being told that the purchasers planned to sell them in Mexico, and even advised one purchaser to break up the purchases to avoid drawing suspicion. Several crime guns recovered in Mexico were traced back to X-Caliber, including: an 56a 

assault rifle recovered after a Government raid of a drug-dealer safe house that left eight Mexican agents dead; three assault rifles recovered after members of a drug gang fired on Mexican authorities; a Century Arms WASR-10 and adiamond-encrusted Colt Super pistol recovered after the Nov. 2, 2008 killing of the Sonora police chief near the Arizona border; a Colt Super pistol seized in 2008 when Mexican special forces captured a top Sinaloa Cartel lieutenant; and three assault rifles recovered after federal police officers were fired on by the Beltran Leyva drug gang on July 2, 2008. 

150. From October 2015 to May 2016 dealer Ballistic Guns conspired with a former Tucson police officer to straw purchase and traffic guns into Mexico. They trafficked 35 guns, including 2Barrett .50 caliber rifles, a Ruger rifle, and 9 Colt Super pistols. ATF agents intercepted one of the .50 caliber rifles at the border. Authorities stated that “evidence from the investigation established that these guns were sold to members from Mexico drug cartels and that the guns were intended for Mexico.” Dylan Smith, “Tucson Firearms Dealer Gets 6.5 Years for Trafficking Guns to Mexican Cartels,” 

Tuscon Sentinel (Mar. 19, 2018). 

151. From January to November 2003 a Mesquite, Texas dealer sold more than 150 guns to another trafficker for drug gangs in Mexico. In just a few weeks, the dealer sold to the trafficker a 9mm pistol, an AK-47, and nine AR-15 assault weapons. One of the guns was connected to the shooting of a police officer in Reynosa, Mexico. 57a 

152. From 2006 to 2007 dealer Carter’s Country in Spring, Texas supplied a trafficker with guns, including two Smith & Wesson rifles. One of the trafficked guns was reportedly used in the “Acapulco massacre” in 2006, when more than a dozen armed assailants stormed two offices of the state attorney general and executed four police officers and three secretaries. Years earlier a former employee of Carter’s Country testified under oath that Carter’s management repeatedly directed its employees to encourage straw purchases in order to avoid losing sales. The Washington Post later identified Carter’s Country as a top supplier of crime guns to Mexico, with 2 of the top 12 stores in the U.S. selling the most crime guns recovered in Mexico. 

153. From July 2012 to September 2012 a dealer sold 19 guns to straw purchasers who were conspiring with a trafficker—a member of the “Duffle Bag Mafia.” The guns included a Century Arms rifle. The trafficker’s vehicle had 46 rifles hidden inside an auxiliary gas tank. He was part of a large-scale scheme to use straw purchasers to traffic the weapons into Mexico for use by Los Zetas. 

154. From August 2007 to September 2008 dealers sold 25 guns to a trafficker for a man known to her only as “ El Mano .” The majority of these guns were military-style AK-47 and AR-15 assault rifles, including a Century Arms WASR-10 rifle and a Colt pistol later found in the possession of gang members in Mexico. 

155. In 2007 Barry Clint Stuart, a federally licensed gun dealer, attended gun shows and sold guns “off paper” or “second hand.” These guns, and 58a 

others bought by straw purchasers, were then trafficked to Nazario Cavazos-Deluna’s drug cartel. The trafficker was linked to 74 guns sold to the cartel. Stuart also helped the traffickers convert guns to fully automatic. 

156. On April 14, 2010 a U.S. federal jury convicted former F.B.I Special Agent John Thomas Shipley of dealing guns without a license, causing a gun dealer to maintain false records, and making a false statement to federal authorities. The investigation that led to these charges began when ATF traced back to Shipley a Barrett .50 caliber rifle that was used during a shootout in Chihuahua, Mexico that resulted in the death of a Mexican Army captain and six drug cartel members. 

157. On February 15, 2011, Los Zetas hitmen in San Luis Potosí Mexico attacked two U.S. ICE agents, one of whom was killed. ATF traced the weapon used in the assault to a trafficker who had bought it and 39 other guns—including a Century Arms shotgun—in the Dallas/Fort Worth area. 

158. On November 9, 2010, a trafficker and another man in a Wal-Mart parking lot in the Dallas area transferred two duffle bags containing 40 high-powered guns, including a Smith & Wesson revolver, a Century Arms pistol, and a Century Arms WASR rifle. The guns were destined for Los Zetas. 

159. Another prolific straw purchaser armed cartels with Glock pistols and AK-47s, buying specific guns in demand by the drug cartels. Several New Mexico dealers sold guns to this trafficker, including seven Glock pistols and a Ruger rifle. Two 59a 

of the Glocks were later seized from Los Zetas in Mexico. 

160. From March 2006 to June 2007 10 gun dealers in Houston, Texas sold 336 weapons to straw purchasers acting on behalf of the Gulf Cartel in Mexico. Mexican authorities eventually recovered 88 of these guns, some at crimes scenes and others during narcotics searches. They had been used to kill 18 Mexican law enforcement officers and civilians. 

161. From February to November 2008 gun dealers sold to a ring of 10 straw purchasers in Mesa, Arizona. The straw sales of more than 100 assault rifles and other weapons included 26 Colt Super pistols, 4 Colt pistols, a Smith & Wesson pistol, and 3 Century Arms rifles. The guns were trafficked to the Sinaloa Cartel in Mexico. 

162. From September 2009 to December 2010 dealers sold more than 700 guns to other straw purchasers in Arizona. A third of the recovered guns were found in Mexico. In 2011 the Center for Public Integrity reported that at least six Century Arms WASR-10 assault rifles acquired in straw purchases from a single Arizona gun dealer were recovered after gun battles between drug traffickers and police in Sinaloa in May 2008. 

163. In 2016 U.S. authorities busted another trafficking ring that operated in Laredo, Texas. Local gun dealers sold 36 military-style weapons to straw purchasers, including Beretta semi-automatic handguns and five Century Arms rifles. The guns were then trafficked into Mexico. 60a 

164. In 2015 dealers throughout the Rio Grande Valley sold more than 100 guns, in straw purchases, to a trafficking ring in McAllen, Texas. The guns, all of which were trafficked to the cartels in Mexico, included a Colt Super pistol and 2 Century Arms rifles. 

165. A California ring was broken up in 2015 while trafficking guns to the Sinaloa Cartel. Their purchases included AK-47s, .50 caliber rifles, AR-15s, and Glock pistols. The cartel’s gun broker was heard on wiretaps telling a co-conspirator that obtaining the guns in the U.S. was easy. 

166. To get a closer look at how the iron river of guns flows into Mexico, the Arizona Daily Star 

analyzed 32 weapons-smuggling criminal cases in federal courts in Tucson and Phoenix in 2018. The narratives included what some commentators call an “ operación hormiga ,” or “ant operation,” of quietly buying relatively small quantities of guns at a time and then smuggling them across the border. 

167. From June to January 2018 Tucson-area gun dealers sold 50 guns to 2 people who bought them on behalf of their heroin dealer. The guns included 13 Century Arms assault weapons (WASR-10 rifles and AK-type pistols). A Century Arms assault rifle that one of the traffickers had bought in October 2017 was recovered in Mexico after a shootout between Mexican law enforcement and a cartel in La Paz, Baja California Sur. Another person bought a Colt rifle for one of the traffickers’ heroin dealer in March 2017, and that rifle was later recovered in Culiacan, Mexico. 61a 

168. The Arizona Daily Star also documented that in December 2017 a Tucson dealer sold a Century Arms pistol to a 23-year-old woman who bought it at the request of her boyfriend. Hours later, he smuggled it through Nogales, Arizona into Mexico. It was used in a crime in Sinaloa less than two months later. 

169. From October 2017 to September 2018 large-box stores in Tucson and Green Valley, Arizona sold 108 high-powered rifles and pistols, in straw purchases, to another trafficker. Every few days for 11 months he cycled through different big-box stores, including 45 separate visits to 4 Walmart stores, to make the purchases. Criminals in Mexico gave him the purchase money and paid him $100 per purchase. The sales included 19 Ruger rifles and pistols, a Smith & Wesson pistol, 8 Beretta rifles and pistols, and 5 Glock pistols. 

170. In several months spanning 2017 and 2018, gun dealers sold 225 AK-47 and AR-15 style assault rifles to a trafficker and six accomplices. The guns were trafficked to the Cartel del Noreste, a faction of Los Zetas. The $300,000 worth of guns included: 

• 14 Century Arms rifles; 

• At least 6 Smith & Wesson rifles; 

• At least 5 Ruger rifles; 

• At least 4 Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifles; and 

• At least 3 Colt rifles. 

ATF agents emphasized that AK- and AR-style rifles are “weapons of choice” of the cartels in Mexico and are “found to be destined for Mexico when purchased in bulk.” United States of America v. Jose J. Soto, et 62a 

al , No. 6:18-cr-00145-1 (S.D. Tex.), ECF 1 at 3-4, filed Dec. 5, 2018. ATF agents additionally spotlighted the Barrett 50-caliber rifle as a primary “weapon of choice” for the cartels in Mexico. 

171. From April to November 2018 Zeroed In Armory, a Houston-area dealer, sold to a trafficking ring’s primary buyer more than 170 guns, including 76 AK-style rifles, 86 AR-style rifles, and 6 .50-caliber rifles, at least 2 of which were Barretts. He paid approximately $7,450 for each Barrett .50 caliber rifle and re-sold them for a $4,000 profit. In August 2018 Zeroed In Armory sold two Colt rifles to the trafficker in a multiple-sale transaction, and they were recovered two months later in connection with a crime in Nuevo Laredo. 

172. From April to August 2018 a Gonzales, Texas gun dealer sold to a trafficker 14 Century Arms rifles, a Barrett .50 caliber rifle, and 3 Ruger rifles. In November 2018, one of the Century Arms rifles was recovered in connection with a crime in Ciudad Mier, Tamaulipas, Mexico. In July 2018 a Dallas-area dealer sold to the trafficker a Barrett .50-caliber rifle and six Smith & Wesson rifles. A few months later he re-sold the Barrett rifle to a drug cartel for a $3,600 profit. 

173. In January 2018 an Academy Sports & Outdoors store in Victoria, Texas sold to the same trafficker a Colt rifle, which was recovered in July 2018 in connection with a crime in Miguel Aleman, Tamaulipas, Mexico. It was part of a 17-gun seizure by Mexican law enforcement, the other guns being AR- and AK- style rifles. 63a 

174. In July 2018 an Academy Sports & Outdoors store in San Antonio, Texas made what the ATF termed “suspicious multiple sale transactions” with another trafficker. The trafficker bought two Ruger rifles. 

175. From December 2015 to March 2016 gun dealers sold 27 guns to a trafficker who bought them for the drug cartels in Mexico. On December 15, 2015 an Academy Sports & Outdoors store in Laredo, Texas sold to him two Beretta pistols. He returned to the store on February 24, 2016 for another Beretta purchase. On March 2, 2016, he was back at Academy Sports to buy two Smith & Wesson rifles. He returned to the store yet again two days later to buy two more Smith &Wesson rifles. 

176. A former employee of another Academy Sports & Outdoors store claimed that a supervisor directed him to create false gun transaction records by forging information on ATF forms. He asserts that he was wrongfully terminated when he refused and reported the unethical and criminal conduct up Academy’s chain of command. These claims were summarized in a reported court decision, Cleland v. Acad. Sports & Outdoors , 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 121012 (S.D. Miss. Aug. 26, 2013), vacated 2015 U.S. App. LEXIS 23492 (5th Cir. Jan. 15, 2015). Reports have identified Academy as one of the top 12 dealers selling the most crime guns recovered in Mexico. 

177. From April to August 2017 a Texas dealer sold 66 guns to another trafficker, including 13 Ruger pistols and 12 Smith & Wesson pistols. The trafficker made the purchases during five visits to various San Antonio gun shows, buying as many as 64a 

15 guns in a single transaction. Five of the semi-automatic pistols were recovered in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico just 17 days after the trafficker bought them. 

178. In February 2017 a criminal was indicted for trafficking guns into Mexico, including a Smith & Wesson rifle, a Century Arms rifle, and three Colt rifles. 

179. Another trafficker was recruited to transport multiple guns and large-capacity ammunition magazines into Mexico through Nogales, Arizona, including: 

• One Smith & Wesson rifle; 

• Three Colt rifles; and 

• Two Century Arms rifles. 

A U.S. prosecutor aptly wrote: “Mexico is relentlessly scarred by the violence of the illegal drug industry. . . . The kinds of weapons that the defendant intended to deliver to Mexico had zero purpose other than to facilitate the intimidation upon which this black market thrives. . . .” Government’s Sentencing Memorandum, United States v. Campos-Flores , No. 4:17-cr-00159 (D. Ariz.), ECF No. 31 at 2, filed Oct. 12, 2017. Another U.S. attorney later stated at the sentencing hearing that “these are not hunting guns . . . . This was to kill people.” Id. , Transcript of Sentencing Proceedings, ECF No. 45 at 11, filed Nov. 20, 2017. 

180. In February 2016 another trafficker was indicted in Arizona for attempting to smuggle into Mexico multiple guns, including two Ruger pistols. 65a 

181. A Laredo, Texas dealer sold five Beretta pistols to a trafficker during four separate trips to the store in a three-month period and two Colt Super pistols during separate visits less than a month apart. He continued to frequent the store for other gun buys, including two Smith & Wesson rifles in a same-day multiple purchase in March 2016. Another Laredo dealer had sold him two Smith & Wesson rifles and three Beretta pistols in same-day multiple purchases two days earlier. And yet another Laredo dealer had previously sold him three Beretta pistols, two of them in the same purchase. 

182. From Spring 2015 to Winter 2016 gun dealers sold 68 assault rifles and 2 semi-automatic pistols to a 21-person trafficking ring that used straw purchases. Some of the guns were later recovered in Mexico and others were seized by authorities, including: 

• At least 30 Century Arms guns in various models, including more than 10 rifles; 

• 3 Smith & Wesson rifles; and 

• A Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle. 

183. In 2006 a Dallas-area trafficker was convicted of buying more than 100 assault rifles, 9mm handguns, and other high-powered weapons from U.S. gun dealers over several months. A pistol he bought in Dallas was used in a cartel gunfight near Reynosa, Mexico in which two Mexican federal police officers were shot. 

184. In just one month—from August to September 2011—Houston-area gun dealers sold 55 assault weapons to a trafficking ring using straw purchases. The sales included 44 Century Arms 66a 

rifles and 3 Smith & Wesson rifles. The group often bought multiple assault weapons in same-day transactions, an obvious red flag indicating a gun trafficking scheme. A number of the guns were later recovered in Mexico. 

185. From 2009 through mid-2011 Texas gun dealers sold more than 50 guns—mostly AR-15 style assault rifles—to a Zapata, Texas-based trafficking ring. The weapons were smuggled to Los Zetas. 

186. In December 2011 two other traffickers were sentenced for recruiting straw purchasers to buy approximately 40 guns, particularly Colt “El Grito” Super pistols, which have gold engravings and commemorate Mexico’s independence from Spain on September 16, 1810. At least one of the straw-purchased guns was recovered in Mexico. 

187. A San Ygnacio, Texas dealer sold straw purchasers two Century Arms rifles, among other assault weapons. The same dealer sold another straw purchaser a Smith & Wesson rifle and a Colt rifle (in addition to two other guns) on a single day in March 2010. 

188. A dealer in Roma, Texas sold a straw buyer four weapons on February 20, 2010, including a Smith & Wesson rifle, a Colt rifle, and a Ruger rifle. 

189. From June 2006 through at least October 2009 another trafficker masterminded the arming of La Familia, a drug cartel in Mexico. La Familia was at that time fighting the Gulf Cartel, rivals that used Los Zetas’ organization to control narcotics supply routes. Among the guns that the trafficker successfully bought in the U.S. and sent into Mexico were a Barrett .50 caliber rifle, five Century Arms 67a 

rifles, a Colt “El Jefe” Super pistol (“for the purpose of giving it as a gift to a boss in the La Familia”); six Colt rifles, and at least two Smith & Wesson handguns. 

190. In May 2020 U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers seized several hundred rounds of ammunition and a number of guns, including aSmith & Wesson pistol, as smugglers attempted to move them across the border in a pickup truck traveling from Del Rio, Texas into Mexico. 

191. From 2006 to 2009 a massive trafficking ring operated in California, moving the guns into Oaxaca, Mexico. A single gun dealer in Madera, California sold the group more than 400 guns, mostly Ruger rifles. They frequented the store dozens of times buying upwards of 26 Ruger rifles in a single transaction. 

192. Other examples include: 

• In October 2018 a man in Kleberg County, Texas was apprehended taking to the U.S.-Mexico border a Century Arms rifle and aRuger revolver; 

• In April 2013 several dealers collectively sold 40 AK-47 assault-type guns to straw purchasers in the San Antonio area for transport to Mexico; 

• In October 2020 three criminals were indicted for making multiple straw purchases in El Paso, Texas with intent to smuggle the guns into Mexico; 

• In July 2019 three criminals were caught trafficking guns to Mexico after a gun dealer sold them a Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle and 68a 

four AK-47 assault rifles, and accepted adeposit for another Barrett rifle, in eight days; 

• In August 2018 a Texas man was convicted of arranging for straw purchasers to buy 10 guns, 5 of which were later recovered in Mexico. 

193. Many of the dealers that supplied these guns were willing participants in the illegal trafficking. As Defendants well know, however, at most the traffickers would be prosecuted while the gun dealers would almost certainly remain free to sell more guns to more traffickers another day. 

194. Defendants’ dealers that supply criminals in Mexico are not limited to states on the U.S.-Mexico border, or even the Southwest. One study found that from 2014 to 2018 more than 25% of U.S.-origin guns recovered in Mexico were traced to a state other than Texas, California, or Arizona. 

195. As noted at the outset of this Complaint, the Boston area has more than its fair share of distributors and dealers whose guns have been traced to crime scenes in Mexico. Defendant Interstate has had significant numbers of its guns traced to Mexico. At least 10 other Boston-area dealers had such traces. And traces reflect only a tiny fraction of guns that are trafficked into Mexico; authorities never recover or trace the vast majority of trafficked guns. 

196. Following are a few additional illustrative examples of Defendants’ dealers outside of the border area that have supplied guns for use by criminals in Mexico. 

197. In 2020 a Kentucky man admitted that, while working as a DEA supervisor, he helped arm 69a 

the Sinaloa Cartel with guns, including Colt rifles. He bought the assault rifles online from a licensed gun store in Lexington, Kentucky, then shipped them to Arizona where they were being amassed with other guns for trafficking into Mexico. One of the guns was seized by border agents, but another made it into Mexico, where it was later seized. 

198. In 2018 police in suburban Illinois discovered an arsenal of guns in a storage locker, which turned out to be connected to a scheme to move hundreds of kilograms of cocaine across the border from Mexico. A dealer in Zion, Illinois had sold 20 Beretta pistols and a .50 caliber rifle to one of the conspirators. The gun shop owner noted to reporters, “If somebody walks in with a big pile of cash and all the stuff checks out and he passes the background checks it’s like ‘oh, this is cool!’ I just made a huge sale you know?” 

199. Two Ohio gun dealers were charged with a conspiracy to resell Barrett sniper rifles to gangs in Mexico. 

200. In 2008 and 2009 two out-of-state traffickers bought 27 guns from 7 Nevada dealers, including types frequently used by drug cartels in Mexico such as civilian versions of military rifles and a .50 caliber sniper rifle. 

201. In a reported decision, United States v. Carranza , No. 2:10-CR-0532-RLH-GWF, 2011 WL 4007579, at *11 (D. Nev. Aug. 5, 2011), the court found that a suspected straw purchaser was properly arrested because of his 

cash purchase of eleven assault rifles within a period of six days, plus his inquiry about 70a 

purchasing a $10,000 sniper rifle. . . . Five of the rifles were Century Arms ‘AK-47’ type rifles. [The agent] . . . knew . . . that assault style rifles are in high demand by drug trafficking organizations in Mexico and also by persons in California where the sale of assault style rifles is prohibited. 

202. In May 2012 an Alabama trafficker pleaded guilty to scheming to buy military-grade weapons for Los Zetas. He had attempted to buy 20 Beretta 9mm pistols, 5 Colt rifles, and various AK-47 type rifles, to be smuggled across the Rio Grande. 

203. Criminals in other parts of the U.S. have also been linked to trafficking guns to Mexico, including for example: 

a. A Colorado man with 50 rifles (30 AR-15s and 20 AK-47s) was arrested while on his way to sell the guns to a conspirator who would smuggle them into Mexico. 

b. An Alaska man was part of a network that trafficked guns into Mexico. 

204. These are provided simply as illustrative examples; they do not purport to catalogue all trafficking cases, but merely identify a small fraction of the public information that put Defendants on notice of the trafficking of their guns into Mexico. 

205. Each of these (and other) traffickers were supplied by dealers that the Defendants choose to use to sell their guns at retail, without any monitoring or standards to ensure that they are selling guns legally and responsibly. 71a 

206. Each of these (and other) traffickers were supplied through business practices that Defendants choose to use when their guns are sold at retail, such as not employing screening to prevent straw sales, not limiting multiple sales, not limiting repeat sales, not screening before selling military-style weapons, not monitoring to prevent supplying traffickers and straw buyers, and not imposing any discipline or sanctions after violations are established. 

207. If Defendants used reasonable care or chose to fully comply with and enforce the law, Defendants would not sell their guns without reasonable measures, and the trafficking of Defendants’ guns into Mexico would be significantly reduced or largely eliminated. But Defendants’ response to this knowledge has been to continue to use these dealers and sales practices. 

208. Under the United States Supreme Court decision, Direct Sales Co. v. United States , 319 U.S. 703 (1943), and numerous other precedents and law, Defendants knowingly violated the import laws of Mexico, the U.S. Gun Control Act, and other laws in acting as willful accessories to the unlawful sale, possession, and use of guns to, for, and by criminals in Mexico. 

209. They choose to continue to unlawfully supply the criminal market in Mexico—because it makes them sales and profit. 

D. Notorious Violent Incidents Give Defendants Continual Notice That Their Guns Are Trafficked to Mexico. 

210. Notorious incidents of gun violence in Mexico have provided yet further notice to Defendants that 72a 

their deliberately chosen distribution practices arm the drug cartels and other criminals in Mexico. Defendants receive notice of these incidents through media reports and ATF trace requests. 

211. The media drew it plainly for them again in an easy-to-read graphic: 73a 74a 

212. A few examples make the point. In an event that made international news, on June 26, 2020 assassins disguised as road workers attacked Mexico City’s police chief, Omar García-Harfuch. Mr. García-Harfuch was wounded but survived; two bodyguards and a bystander were killed. Among the weapons used by the assassins were three Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifles, a Smith & Wesson 9mm pistol, a Smith & Wesson 5.56mm caliber carbine, a Ruger 5.56mm caliber rifle, and a Colt 5.56mm caliber carbine. This is a photo of the damage done to Mr. García-Harfuch’s car by these guns: 

213. A December 5, 2016 gun battle in Veracruz left 14 dead after armed criminals ambushed state police officers. Police recovered a number of weapons at the scene, including at least 12 AK-47s and a .50-caliber Barrett rifle. 

214. In September 2016 gunmen apparently linked to the Knights Templar cartel shot down a helicopter belonging to a state attorney general’s office using a Barrett .50 caliber rifle in the Tierra 75a 

Caliente region of Michoacan. The helicopter’s pilot was killed along with three officers. 

215. More than 2,000 of the assault weapons recovered in Mexico between 2006 and March 2018 were produced and distributed by Defendant Colt, more than any other manufacturer. Colt does not even try to hide its pandering to the criminal market in Mexico. Colt produces three models of guns that it specifically targets to the Mexican market. These are the .38 caliber Super “El Jefe” pistol; the .38-caliber Super “El Grito” pistol; and the .38-caliber “Emiliano Zapata 1911” pistol. These models are status symbols and coveted by the drug cartels; they are smuggled into Mexico from the U.S. in volume. 

216. Colt’s special edition .38 Super pistol is engraved with an image of the Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata on one side of the barrel and a phrase attributed to him on the other: “It is better to die standing than to live on your knees.” One of those pistols was used in 2017 to assassinate the well-known investigative journalist Miroslava Breach Velducea, who made it her life’s work to uncover corruption, drug trafficking rings, and human rights violations. 

217. Ioan Grillo, author of Blood Gun Money: How America Arms Gangs and Cartels (2021), wrote that “[i]t was a cruel irony: An American gun embellished with an image of a Mexican freedom fighter was used to silence Mexico’s freedom of speech.” Ioan Grillo, “Slow the Iron River of Guns to Mexico,” New York Times (2021). This is a photo of the gun: 76a 

218. The Gulf Cartel’s Jose Luis Zuniga-Hernandez, aka “El Wicho,” who had an extensive criminal past dating back to 1990, was arrested in October 2011 trying to flee Mexico with cocaine and money. Authorities seized from him a gold-plated, diamond-and-ruby-encrusted Colt .38 Super handgun that he had paid $57,000 to have custom made. 

219. In February 2021 the alleged recruiter of the Jalisco Nueva Generatión Cartel (CJNG), one of the most dangerous criminal organizations in Mexico, was arrested in Mexico City. The recruiter, described by authorities as one of the main operators of the CJNG, was found armed with a Colt gun. 

220. April 2014, Jesus Alejandro “Comandante Simple” Leal, a long-time foot soldier of the Gulf Cartel, was captured in Reynosa. During his capture, authorities seized a Colt handgun and an AK-47. The capture set off a series of violent firefights and roadblocks throughout the city. In one 77a 

of the firefights, Arnulfo Gomez Hernandez, aMexican Federal Police officer, was shot and killed. 

221. Defendant Ruger’s weapons have likewise figured in notorious incidents. Ignacio “Nachito” Villalobos was a member of La Linea , the enforcement wing of the Juarez Drug Cartel. He set up a gun-trafficking operation in the small village of Columbus, New Mexico across the border from Puerto Palomas, Chihuahua, Mexico. He had the cooperation of certain local Columbus officials, including the town’s mayor and police chief. They operated as co-conspirators in straw purchasing 400 guns to be smuggled into Mexico. These included nearly 200 AK-47 type pistols and at least 4Ruger .45 caliber pistols. Two of those pistols were later recovered in Mexico, one of them at a murder scene in the Mexican state of Chihuahua. 

222. Several of Defendants’ guns were used by Cartel sicarios (hitmen) in a shootout with the Mexican National Guard, the Mexican Army, and police officers engaged in a joint operation in Culiacán, Mexico to arrest Ovidio Guzmán López, son of Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzmán, the now-imprisoned former leader of the Sinaloa drug cartel. The authorities briefly took Ovidio into custody. 

223. But cartel members arrived on the scene and achieved fire superiority having vehicles mounted with heavy machine guns and a number of Defendants’ weapons. Cartel sicarios used one or more Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifles, a number of AK and AR-15 style assault rifles, and Beretta and Glock handguns. 78a 

224. The heavily armed cartel blocked highways with armed convoys, set up roadblocks, and engineered a prison break in which 49 prisoners escaped. They also positioned gunmen outside the Mexican soldiers’ homes and threatened to execute family members unless Guzmán was released. Violent attacks erupted throughout the city, causing many residents to either flee or lock themselves inside their homes. Eight people were killed and twenty wounded. 

225. Other high-profile incidents gave further notice to all of the Manufacturer Defendants that their guns are routinely trafficked into Mexico and used in violent episodes that kill, maim, terrorize, and degrade the quality of life for everyone in Mexico. 

226. Tragically, gun violence begets more gun violence as some private citizens take extreme measures to protect themselves and their communities. Defendants’ guns are prominent players in this two-way private gun violence. In an interview, one Mexican man involved in the violence pointed to the words stamped on the barrel of a Colt Match Target assault rifle slung across the chest of a teenage fighter: “HARTFORD, CONN, U.S.A,” and told the reporter, “We kill each other, and you send the bullets.” Kate Linthicum, “Mexicans are killing each other at record rates. The U.S. provides the guns.,” Los Angeles Times (Oct. 6, 2019). 79a 

VI. DEFENDANTS ACTIVELY ASSIST AND FACILITATE TRAFFICKING OF THEIR GUNS TO DRUG CARTELS IN MEXICO. 

227. Despite this voluminous notice, Defendants have not instituted a single public-safety protocol in their distribution systems to detect and deter gun trafficking to Mexico. Defendants’ choice to use distribution and sales policies that supply the cartels violates all of the obligations and duties they have undertaken as manufacturers and distributors of these weapons. 

228. Each Defendant’s policy is to sell its guns to any and all Federal Firearms Licensees—anyone with a U.S. federal license to sell guns. The only other restrictions that Defendants have put on their distribution systems are financial requirements— strictures such as good credit and a prompt-payment history designed to safeguard the Defendants’ bottom lines. 

229. Defendants have not implemented any 

public-safety requirements designed to safeguard the lives or quality of life of the millions of affected Mexican nationals. Defendants know that, without such restrictions, they are supplying, supporting, and assisting straw purchases and other unlawful transactions by which some gun dealers supply gun traffickers and other criminals in Mexico. 

230. Defendants know that military-style weapons, such as assault rifles and sniper rifles, are particularly sought after by the drug cartels who use them to devastating effect in Mexico. Defendants know that these guns are frequently supplied to the cartels through corrupt or irresponsible sellers and 80a 

in bulk or repeat sales. Defendants’ response to these facts has been to double down on the exact practices that they know supply the cartels with military-style arsenals. Defendants’ choices have had the effect of maximizing rather than minimizing sales to the criminal markets. 

231. On July 16, 2009, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee on Border, Maritime, and Global Counterterrorism held a hearing concerning “Combating Border Violence: The Role of Interagency Coordination in Investigations.” Testimony provided during the hearing by Special Agent Bill Newell established that “analysis of aggregate [crime gun] trace data can reveal trafficking trends and networks, showing where guns are being purchased, who is purchasing them, and how they flow across the border.” 

232. Defendants long had access to this trace data and other information indicating that specific networks of distributors and dealers they were supplying were consistently channeling their guns— including, in particular, non-sporting assault rifles and machineguns—to the drug cartels in Mexico. 

233. Take, for example, Defendant Century Arms. Reports from ATF reveal that in a four-year period in the mid-2000s more than 500 Century Arms WASR-10 rifles initially purchased in the U.S. were recovered from crime scenes in Mexico. Century Arms received communications from the ATF or other law enforcement agencies with respect to trace requests on all or the overwhelming majority of those incidents. Those trace requests revealed that 81a 

specific distributor and dealer networks were disproportionately associated with those guns. Century Arms nevertheless has continued to supply its guns to those distributors and dealers. 

234. All of the other Defendants have had access to trace data like that available to Century Arms, and those traces illustrated both a) the recovery of large quantities of Defendants’ guns from crime scenes in Mexico and b) a disproportionate concentration of crime gun sales among specific distributor and dealer networks likely to be engaging in illicit transactions. The other Defendants, just like Century Arms, nevertheless continue to supply those distributors and dealers. 

235. All of the Defendants, as alleged below, knowingly violated their legal obligations, directly and as culpable accessories to the violations committed by downstream dealers and traffickers when selling guns to obvious straw purchasers or otherwise ineligible purchasers. 

236. By continuing to supply those sellers, and choosing to use and profit from reckless and unlawful sales practices without monitoring or discipline, Defendants participate with those sellers in the unlawful trafficking of Defendants’ guns into Mexico. 

A. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Straw Purchasing. 

237. For many years, Defendants have sold tens of thousands of guns that have been obtained by unauthorized and irresponsible persons in Mexico through straw purchasing. In one law enforcement study, more than half of the guns subject to gun 82a 

trafficking investigations had been acquired as part of a straw purchase. 

238. Many of these purchases have occurred in circumstances that clearly indicated to the gun dealer that the transaction was a straw purchase. Those purchases would not have been made if Defendants required that their dealers be well-trained and committed to following the law and their obligations to safely and responsibly sell guns. As a result, unauthorized and irresponsible persons, including convicted felons, have obtained thousands of guns from these sources, some of which thereafter have been used or will be used to injure the Government and its citizens. 

239. Gun industry insider Robert Ricker explained almost 20 years ago that the gun industry was well aware both that straw sales significantly supplied the criminal gun market and that responsible sales practices could stop many of those sales, but the industry repeatedly refused to implement those reasonable practices. 

240. Mr. Ricker explained: 

During the entire time I represented gun industry through my work for the [trade association], it was widely recognized within the industry that straw purchases, often of large volumes of guns, were a primary avenue by which a relatively small number of federally licensed gun dealers supplied the criminal market. ... It has long been known in the industry that many straw purchases or other questionable sales could be stopped by dealers who are adequately trained and schooled in 83a 

preventing illegal activity. However, without the proper training and a commitment to responsible business practices some dealers allow many straw sales to go forward, undetected by law enforcement authorities. 

Ricker Declaration , ¶ 9. 

241. Judge Weinstein concluded as fact in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 509 (E.D.N.Y. 2003), that “[a] substantial number of guns manufactured, imported or distributed by defendants were acquired by a straw purchase, [and] diverted to the illegal market.” 

242. Straw purchasing is the most common method of trafficking guns into Mexico. Illegal diversion through straw purchasing has been common knowledge in the industry, and known by Defendants, for many years. It has been the subject of many ATF reports and newsletters and congressional hearings. 

243. Traffickers rely on licensed dealers. Traffickers prefer to buy guns in bulk, buying 2, or 10, or even 20 or more guns at one time. Licensed dealers have the desired inventory. 

244. A licensed dealer that knowingly makes a sale to a straw purchaser for trafficking into Mexico violates the law of Mexico on imports, the U.S. law on exports, and specific U.S. law on straw purchases, among other provisions. Defendants are aware that these laws do not deter a substantial number of sellers from engaging in straw purchases for trafficking into Mexico. 

245. Defendants could sharply limit straw sales by regulating their own distribution systems 84a 

through prudent practices, as Judge Weinstein found. Four principal ways to stop trafficking into Mexico are: (1) limiting sales of multiple guns; (2) mandatory background checks for secondary gun sales; (3) curbs on straw purchasers; and (4) arestriction on assault weapons sales. 

246. Defendants do not need legislation in order to make these reforms to their distribution systems. They could do it themselves; they choose not to. 

247. Defendants supply dealers with all the guns they can pay for, without any public-safety conditions, even if a gun dealer has been repeatedly found to have violated gun laws, has been indicted or its employees have had federal gun licenses revoked, or has repeatedly supplied cartels in suspicious and obvious sales to traffickers, including repeated bulk sales of assault rifles and sniper rifles. 

248. In addition to participating in violations of import and export laws, Defendants’ failures to curb straw purchases bound for Mexico also encourages the violation of specific strictures on straw purchases. The straw purchaser fraudulently certifies on the ATF Form 4473, required for almost all guns purchases at a licensed dealer, that he or she is the actual purchaser of the gun. 

249. The dealer then separately, and falsely, certifies the sale as lawful on ATF Form 4473. Alicensed dealer that falsely certifies sales to straw purchasers as lawful despite knowing that the buyers have falsely represented themselves on ATF Form 4473 violates various provisions of federal law (primarily, but not exclusively, of the GCA) either directly or by acting as an accessory to the straw 85a 

purchaser. These provisions include, but are not limited to: 

a. 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(m), 924(a)(3)(A), which prohibit a dealer from making false entries in gun transaction records required by law. See also § 923(g) (records to be kept in accordance with regulations); 

b. § 922(t)(1), which requires the dealer to verify the identity of the “transferee” ( i.e. the actual intended recipient of the gun, rather than the straw purchaser) and to conduct a background check on that person ( see id. ); 

c. §§ 3, 4, which prohibit anyone from affirmatively concealing a felony by a third party. See also § 924(a) (listing violations of the GCA as felonies); 

d. §§ 922(a)(6), 924(a)(1)(A), which prohibit buyers from making false statements as to facts material to the lawfulness of the sale— such as the identity of the actual purchaser of the gun. 

250. Defendants chose to use dealers that engage in these statutory violations and to supply them with the guns that they transfer to criminals via unlawful transactions. Defendants did so despite, at minimum, willful blindness to red flags like those described above. Defendants thereby became culpable participants in these statutory violations. And they continue to do so. 

B. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Multiple and Repeat Sales. 86a 

251. Guns are diverted to the illegal market in Mexico after being sold as part of a “multiple sale” in which the purchaser buys more than one gun at once over a limited period of time from a dealer. The buyer later transfers the guns to others who do not want to submit to a background check. Large multiple sales to one person by a single dealer are a further source of guns for the illegal market in Mexico, as are repeat sales in which traffickers return to stores for multiple purchases. 

252. Defendants regularly allow their guns to be sold by their dealers as part of multiple purchases and then diverted to the illegal market and subsequently trafficked into Mexico. Many of the multiple sales have occurred under circumstances that indicated or should have indicated to the dealers that the guns were destined for the unlawful market. As a result, unauthorized and irresponsible persons have obtained thousands of guns from these sources, some of which thereafter have been used or will be used to injure the Government and its citizens. 

253. The U.S. Congress and ATF for years have warned that making large volume sales is a high-risk practice and a means by which traffickers obtain guns to sell in illegal markets, including in Mexico. Defendants’ response has been to rely more and more on repeat and bulk customers. 

254. Defendants have long known that they are supplying these traffickers, and they can stop it. For example, Ugo Beretta, president of the gun manufacturer that bears his name, concedes that it is “common sense” that dealers should not sell 87a 

unlimited quantities of guns to individual customers. He had been under the impression that his company’s management in America makes sure it does not allow dealers to engage in bulk sales because, he said, “the logic of the matter requires that this is what should be done.” Allen K. Rostron, “Smoking Guns: Exposing the Gun Industry’s Complicity in the Illegal Gun Market,” Legal Action Project, Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence (2003). 

255. Similarly, gun industry insider Robert Ricker explained: 

The gun industry has long known that gun traffickers often acquire guns through multiple or large-volume purchases from licensed dealers. Because of the inherently suspicious nature of such sales a special federal reporting requirement at the dealer level for multiple sales exists. Although the industry knows of the special reporting requirements, and that unscrupulous dealers fail to report many multiple sales, it has long been industry policy not to question or monitor such sales. ... To my knowledge, however, the industry has taken no voluntary action to address this issue and more fully monitor large volume sales to individual buyers. Ricker Declaration , ¶8. 

256. Judge Weinstein concluded as fact in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 509 (E.D.N.Y. 2003), that “[f]irearms manufactured, imported or distributed by defendants were acquired as part of a multiple purchase, [and] diverted to the illegal market.” 88a 

257. Defendants continue to use unrestricted multiple sales to sell their guns. The trafficking of Defendants’ assault weapons and other guns into Mexico, having been acquired through multiple purchases in the U.S., continues unabated. 

C. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Kitchen-Table Sales. 

258. For many years, Defendants have sold thousands of guns to so-called “kitchen table” dealers (i.e., licensed dealers that do not sell guns from a retail store). These dealers sell guns from their homes—or unlawfully from parking lots or out-of-state gun shows—and do not invest in inventory tracking or security measures. 

259. Kitchen table dealers often operate via an online presence or virtual storefront. After receiving an order from a customer, the dealer in turn places an order with the manufacturer or distributor, who then ships the guns to the dealer’s home. The dealer then sells from his house directly or ships the gun in the mail to another licensed dealer, where the customer picks up the gun. 

260. Through this process, kitchen table dealers simultaneously avoid the regulations and restrictions involved in storefront selling while still enjoying lower, wholesale prices. To receive alicense to sell guns, they need only undergo the same process as any other dealer: pay the $200 fee, attach a photo, and submit to a fingerprint and background check. 

261. ATF found in 2000 that nearly a quarter (23%) of their licensed-dealer trafficking investigations involved kitchen table dealers. Many 89a 

of these dealers, although federally licensed, are corrupt and sell guns without completing buyer background checks or complying with other reporting requirements. As a result, unauthorized and irresponsible persons have obtained thousands of guns from these sources, some of which thereafter have been used or will be used to injure the Government and its residents. 

262. More than a decade ago, Ruger’s dealers asked it to stop supplying non-storefront dealers. Thus, Ruger knew that its own law-abiding, responsible gun dealers recognize that these dealers tarnish the reputation of gun sellers by irresponsibly and illegally supplying criminals. But Ruger chose to cater to the irresponsible and law-breaking dealers, and continued to supply them, over the objections of the “good guys.” 

263. The other Defendants know what Ruger knew. 

264. Despite this sordid record, Defendants have continued to provide a steady source of guns to these “kitchen table” dealers without attempting to control, monitor, or supervise their sales practices, thereby enabling the consistent flow of guns into Mexico. 

D. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through “Missing” Guns. 

265. In the U.S. a gun is stolen every two minutes. ATF and congressional reports have repeatedly warned the gun industry that thefts from manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and shipping companies are a source of supply for criminals. Yet for many years gun dealers have failed to provide 90a 

adequate security for their premises, which has allowed criminals to steal weapons, some of which are then trafficked into Mexico and used to commit crimes. 

266. Defendants have failed to ensure that persons distributing their dangerous products have implemented adequate security to prevent these foreseeable thefts. A law enforcement study found that 25% of the guns in illegal gun trafficking investigations in the western U.S. had been stolen from licensed dealers. 

267. Defendants are aware that dealers are prime targets for burglaries and robberies. Between 2012 and 2016, burglaries of licensed gun dealers increased by 48% and robberies of licensed gun dealers increased a staggering 175%. 

268. In addition to actual stolen guns, dealers also “lose” guns. It has been reported that between 2004 and 2011 ATF discovered nearly 175,000 guns missing from dealer inventories just during compliance inspections . These weapons could be stolen, illegally sold “off the books” without proper documentation, misplaced, or sold to the black market. Some of these weapons are then trafficked into Mexico. 

269. Unscrupulous dealers choose not to implement simple anti-theft measures because their absence enables the dealers to falsely claim that guns that are unaccounted for were stolen, when the dealers actually sold them off the books. 

270. In 2017 ATF reported that around 18,700 guns are stolen or definitively lost from licensed dealers each year. Dealers have failed to take the 91a 

necessary precautions and safety measures, so unauthorized and irresponsible persons have obtained thousands of guns from these sources, some of which thereafter have been used or will be used to injure the Government and its residents. 

271. Judge Weinstein concluded as fact in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 509 (E.D.N.Y. 2003), that “[f]irearms manufactured, imported or distributed by defendants were diverted into the illegal market through theft from a retailer, [and] diverted to the illegal market.” 

E. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking Through Gun Shows. 

272. Gun shows are a significant source of guns for criminals, who in turn traffic these guns directly or indirectly to Mexico. 

273. Gun show sales by non-licensed sellers to private citizens constitute a loophole for guns to be sold without a Brady background check; they are therefore a ready source of supply to criminals. Defendants are fully aware of this loophole. 

274. Although a licensed dealer selling at a gun show must comply with the same regulations that apply to a sale at a business establishment, sellers at gun shows are known to sometimes evade or violate laws and supply gun traffickers. ATF and the U.S. Department of Justice have advised the gun industry that gun shows are an important source of guns for criminals. 

275. ATF officials have found that gun shows are a source of a sizeable number of guns smuggled into Mexico, as they are virtually unregulated and occur 4,000 times per year across the U.S., with an average 92a 

of 2,500 to 5,000 people attending each. One study showed that the prevalence of gun shows in a state has a strong relationship to the number of guns trafficked from that state to Mexico. If the state does not require background checks at gun shows, it is over 2.5 times more likely to export crime guns than states that do have this requirement. 

276. “Gun-show cowboy” dealers purchase large quantities of guns from distributors and then re-sell them at gun shows on a “cash and carry” basis. They accomplish this by pretending to be an unlicensed seller who is not subject to the background check requirements and other legal rules that apply to licensed dealers. This phenomena has been chronicled in Congressional hearings as far back as 1993 when the head of a gun-dealer trade association testified that purchasers at gun shows “include the entire spectrum of the criminal element,” including felons, gangs, underage youth, buyers for underage youth, and multi-state gun runners, and that “[t]here are very few in this country who want a gun for illicit purposes who do not know that they can get anything they want at the gun shows.” Federal Firearms Licensing: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Crime and Criminal Justice of the Committee on the Judiciary House of Representatives, 103rd Cong., 1st Sess. 99 (June 17, 1993). 

277. Judge Weinstein concluded as fact in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435, 504 (E.D.N.Y. 2003), that “[f]irearms manufactured, imported or distributed by defendants were acquired at a gun show, [and] diverted to the illegal market.” 93a 

F. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing and Marketing Their Rifles as Military-Style Assault Weapons. 

278. Defendants’ design and marketing of their weapons exacerbate their reckless and unlawful distribution policies. Defendants design and market their guns as weapons of war, making them particularly susceptible to being trafficked into Mexico. 

279. It has long been foreseeable and expected that Defendants’ marketing of their guns as weapons of war would lead to their trafficking to the cartels in Mexico and to increased homicides and other massive damage to the Government. The Government’s injury is the foreseeable result of Defendants’ conduct. 

1. Defendants design their guns as military-style assault weapons. 

280. Military-style weapons are useful for killing large numbers of people in a short amount of time, taking on well-armed military or police forces, and intimidating and terrorizing people. The Manufacturer Defendants designed their assault weapons to be effective people-killing machines. 

281. For more than 25 years law enforcement has called for the Defendants to curtail and strictly oversee the sales of military-style weapons to civilians, including calls from: 

a. the Chief of Police of the Los Angeles, who decried the “proliferation of military assault weapons in the hands of criminals and crazies;” 94a 

b. the National Association of Police Organizations, which noted that “the availability of, and access to, assault weapons by criminals has become so substantial that police forces are being forced to upgrade the weapons supplied to police officers merely as a matter of self-defense and self-preservation;” 

c. the International Brotherhood of Police Officers, which asked for “curb[s] [on] proliferation of military-style assault weapons that have no legitimate sporting purpose;” 

d. the then-Chief of the Milwaukee Police Department—a member of the Police Executive Research Forum, the International Association of Chiefs of Police, and the Major City Chiefs Association—who noted that “[a]ssault weapons are not built for sportsmen . . . . They are designed to quickly, easily, and efficiently cause lethal wounds to human beings;” 

e. the International Association of Chiefs of Police which concluded that “Semi-Automatic assault weapons are routinely the weapons of choice for gang members and drug dealers . . . and, are all too often used against police officers;” and 

f. numerous other police organizations. 

282. The civilian assault weapons that Defendants make and sell originated from military weapons developed in the mid-20th century. In the 1950s, in response to the U.S. military’s determination that it wanted a lighter weapon that was more lethal and had a larger ammunition 95a 

capacity, the AR-15 was developed. The AR-15 allowed for rapid fire and reloading. The U.S. military adopted it for use in the Vietnam War and dubbed it the M-16. ArmaLite sold the rights to the weapon to Colt. 

283. Colt designed the version that it sells in the non-military commercial market to look and feel like a genuine military weapon. Colt’s civilian version, the “ArmaLite Rifle-15 Sporter,” can fire in only semi-automatic mode, but otherwise it is physically identical to the M-16. 

284. Once Colt’s patent expired, other gun manufacturers produced and sold their own AR-style weapons. Defendants’ marketing has made these weapons proliferate in civilian markets today. Predictably, because they look and function so similarly to the M16, they are one of the popular weapons trafficked to Mexico. 

285. Assault weapons have key features that distinguish them from traditional sporting rifles, such as the capacity to lay down a high volume of fire over a wide killing zone. This “hosing down” of an area is better suited for military combat than sporting guns. And civilian assault weapons have much less recoil than traditional sporting guns, facilitating quicker pulls of the trigger. 

286. Law enforcement has consistently noted the danger that assault weapons pose to public safety: 

• ATF: assault weapons “are not generally recognized as particularly suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes;” 

• U.S. Department of Justice expert: “attacks with semi-automatics – including assault 96a 

weapons – result in more shots fired, more persons hit, and more wounds per victim than do attacks with other guns;” 

• Boston Police Commissioner: “This [weapon] can lay down a lot of fire in an urban area where there is basically no cover from it. You can conceal yourself from these weapons, but they’ll rip through your car. They’ll rip through a telephone pole. They can rip through just about anything in an urban environment;” 

• Montgomery, Alabama Sheriff: “[T]here’s only one reason for owning a gun like that—killing people. There’s no other use other than to kill people. That’s all they’re made for.” 

287. The danger posed by these weapons is compounded by the criminals using them. Numerous officials noted that assault weapons are the “weapon of choice” for drug traffickers, gangs, and terrorists. An ATF analysis of guns traced to crime showed assault weapons “are preferred by criminals over law abiding citizens eight to one.” ATF, Assault Weapons Profile 19-20 (1994). This criminal preference for assault weapons shifts the balance of power to the lawless, exposing law enforcement officers to far greater danger. 

288. Defendants design their assault rifles so they can accept large-capacity ammunition magazines that can hold 20, 30, even 75 or 100 rounds that can then be fired without reloading. Defendants’ assault rifles, especially when coupled with large capacity magazines, enable military-style assaults in which many rounds can be fired in seconds. 97a 

289. Even when not modified to fire automatically, the assault weapons that Defendants market to civilians can approach the rate of fire of automatic weapons. Comparing the rate of fire between automatic and semi-automatic weapons, one court stated, “[T]he automatic firing of all the ammunition in a large-capacity thirty-round magazine takes about two seconds, whereas a semi-automatic rifle can empty the same magazine in as little as five seconds.” Kolbe v. Hogan , 849 F.3d 114, 125 (4th Cir. 2017). The court described this difference in rate of fire as “nearly identical.” Id. at 136. Another court concurred, noting that “semi-automatics still fire almost as rapidly as automatics.” Heller v. D.C. , 670 F.3d 1244, 1263 (D.C. Cir. 2011). 

290. As Defendants know (or choose to willfully ignore), there are several readily available ways for an assault weapon user to achieve even greater rates of fire. Methods include, but are not limited to: 

a. A “gat crank” bolted to an AR-15’s trigger well, which allows a shooter to fire multiple shots with each turn of the crank; 

b. A bump stock that replaces the stock (these accessories were banned during the Trump administration, but the ban is being challenged in courts and at least one court has struck it down); 

c. “Hell-fire” triggers; 

d. “Pull and release” triggers; and 

e. Bump firing, which uses the recoil of the gun to fire automatically or virtually automatically without modification 98a 

(explanations for how to use this technique are easily available on You Tube and elsewhere). 

291. An AR-15 can be modified by drilling a few holes and widening the inside of its frame to accept an M-16 auto-sear. M-16 auto-sears are available for sale online. Once the auto-sear is installed, the AR-15 is capable of automatic firing. Although this modification is outlawed, Defendants’ chosen design nevertheless makes it feasible. 

292. Defendant Barrett’s .50 caliber sniper rifle is a weapon of war. Barrett touts itself as the world leader in large-caliber rifle design and manufacturing. The company was established when Ronnie Barrett designed a .50 caliber shoulder-fired rifle, which he patented as an anti-armor gun in 1987. He described the rifle in his patent claim as a “shoulder-fireable, armor-penetrating gun.” 

293. In 1999, the U.S. Government Accountability Office reported that Barrett’s .50 caliber rifles were linked to criminal misuse “with a nexus to terrorism, outlaw motorcycle gangs, international and domestic drug trafficking, and violent crime.” Gov’t Accountability Office, Criminal Activity Associated with .50 Caliber Semiautomatic Rifles 2 (1999). 

294. Unsurprisingly, the exceptionally lethal .50 caliber rifle is regularly trafficked into Mexico to arm violent drug cartels. 

295. According to a 1985 Secret Service report, “large caliber long range weapons pose a significant threat for U.S. National Command Authority figures.” The report warned that .50 caliber rifles are more accurate than shoulder-fired antitank rockets 99a 

and, if used against aircraft, are immune to electronic counter measures. They also can be used effectively from places of concealment, outside the scope of normal security measures, against personnel, aircraft, lightly armored vehicles, and buildings. 

296. Defendant Barrett’s .50 caliber sniper rifle shoots rounds that are 5 to 10 times larger than those fired by semi-automatic models, including the AR-15 and AK-47. Given the range and power of a .50 caliber Browning Machine Gun round, a rifle chambered to fire this round can be used to take down slow- or low-flying aircraft, punch holes in pressurized chemical tanks, or penetrate lightly armored vehicles—such as those used by law enforcement and protective limousine services. 

297. A U.S. Army News Service article summarized the capabilities of the Barrett .50 caliber long range sniper rifle: “The M-107 enables Army snipers to accurately engage personnel and material [sic] targets out to a distance of 1,500 to 2,000 meters respectively. . . . The weapon is designed to effectively engage and defeat materiel targets at extended ranges including parked aircraft, computers, intelligence sites, radar sites, ammunition, petroleum, oil and lubricant sites, various lightly armored targets and command, control and communications.” Violence Policy Center, Clear and Present Danger: National Security Experts Worry About the Danger of Unrestricted Sales of 50 Caliber Anti-Armor Sniper Rifles to Civilians (2005). 100a 

298. A 2003 U.S. Army handbook, A Military Guide to Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century, specifically identifies Barrett’s .50 caliber sniper rifle as a potential terrorist weapon. Its buyers have included representatives of Osama bin Laden, the Irish Republican Army, and assorted militia groups. An ATF agent acknowledged that Barrett’s .50 caliber sniper rifle has become one of the drug cartels’ “guns of choice.” 

299. For example, the cartels have used Barrett rifles to shoot down helicopters, such as in this scene: 

300. Defendant Century Arms designs its WASR-10 assault rifles as military weapons, knowing that they are a preferred gun for drug cartels in Mexico. Century Arms’ WASR-10 is a variant of the Romanian AK-47 assault weapon. 

301. Romarm, S.A. manufactures and exports from Romania, for shipment to Century Arms in the U.S., stripped-down versions of WASR-10 assault rifles that lack features that might bar them under 18 U.S.C. § 925(d)(3), which prohibits the importation into the U.S. of weapons that are not “suitable for or readily adaptable to sporting purposes.” 101a 

302. Romarm, S.A. ships the rifles to Century Arms with the intention that Century Arms will disassemble the imported guns and then reassemble them while (1) reintroducing a number of non-sporting features with primarily military applications but also (2) replacing a number of the foreign-manufactured parts with American-made parts. 

303. Century Arms performs the disassembly and reassembly before distributing WASR-10 rifles, either directly or through intermediary distributors, to gun dealers throughout the U.S., including to dealers with a history of trafficking the military-style weapons into Mexico. 

304. Defendant Century Arms’ disassembly and reassembly process tries to undermine U.S. federal gun importation laws by exploiting an ATF regulation that suggests that the “sporting purposes” test of 18 U.S.C. § 925(d)(3) does not apply if the completed guns have ten or fewer imported parts. See 27 C.F.R. § 478.39(a). 

305. Under the plain language of 18 U.S.C. § 922(r), however, it is illegal to assemble any semi-automatic rifle that (a) incorporates any foreign-made parts and (b) includes features rendering it not suitable for “sporting purposes.” Century Arms knowingly violates § 922(r) by supplying WASR-10 rifles to the public after modifying them in accordance with the scheme described above. 

306. Regardless of the violation of the U.S. importation statute, Century Arms engages in these practices with full awareness that its WASR-10 is one of the preferred weapons of the cartels in Mexico 102a 

in part because of the non-sporting features and attributes that Century Arms incorporates into the weapons. 

307. Defendants Colt, Smith & Wesson, and Ruger, with respect to their AR-15 style weapons, and Century Arms with respect to its AK-47 style weapon, violate another U.S. federal statute—a ban on the sale of machine guns. 

308. Defendants’ AR-15 and AK-47 style guns are illicit “machinegun[s]” even if sold to initially fire semi-automatically. In ATF’s language, they “possess design features which facilitate full automatic fire by a simple modification or elimination of existing component parts.” 

309. Defendants specifically design these weapons so that persons with minimal financial resources and little-to-no technical expertise can easily modify them to be fully automatic, including by simply: 

a. replacing the manufacturer-installed sear system inside the gun (which enables semi-automatic fire) with a third-party sear system which enables automatic fire; 

b. shaving down part of the manufacturer-installed sear system to change the way it functions; or 

c. attaching an external device such as a “bump stock” or trigger crank to the gun. 

310. Defendants sold guns susceptible to these or similar modifications to the general public and thereby either directly or through intermediaries violated § 922(b)(4). 103a 

311. A significant number of Defendants’ guns are modified to fire fully automatically for use by criminals in Mexico. Mexican authorities estimated in 2009 that 30% of seized AK-47 assault rifles had been modified to be fully automatic. A 2010 ATF analysis confirmed that conclusion. And a U.S. Government Accounting Office report found that “the guns of choice for drug traffickers are high caliber assault rifles, such as AK type and AR 15 type, which are available for purchase in the United States and which can be converted to fully automatic fire (i.e., converted into machine guns).” Gov’t Accountability Office, Firearms Trafficking: U.S. Efforts to Combat Firearms Trafficking to Mexico Have Improved, but Some Collaboration Challenges Remain (2016). 

312. Defendants’ design and sale of guns that can be easily modified to fire automatically causes them to be sought after by, and trafficked to, the cartels. The cartels then use them in Mexico with maximum killing efficiency, at a rate of fire that does not belong outside of a battlefield. 

313. Defendants knowingly violated U.S. federal guns laws by selling and marketing machine guns— guns that can be easily modified to fire automatically—to the general public, without complying with the strictures of the National Firearms Act and § 922(b)(4). Defendants commit these violations with full awareness that their weapons’ susceptibility to being modified to fire automatically makes them particularly attractive to the drug cartels in Mexico. 104a 

314. Defendants could limit their sales of these military-style assault weapons to military and perhaps some law enforcement units. They do not. 

315. Defendants could restrict the sale of these weapons to purchasers with a legitimate need for them. They do not. 

316. Defendants could prevent the multiple or repeat sales of these weapons, to prevent trafficking to the drug cartels. They do not. 

317. Defendants could make guns to not accept high-capacity magazines that exacerbate the danger of assault weapons. They do not. 

318. Instead, Defendants indiscriminately supply the civilian market, knowing that they are supplying these weapons of war to gun traffickers who will use them for criminal and destructive purposes in Mexico. 

2. Defendants market their guns as military-style assault weapons. 

319. Defendants have refused to heed law enforcement’s warnings of the heightened dangers of assault weapons. They have instead increased production of military-style weapons, advertised their usefulness in battling the police and military, sold them unrestrictedly to the general public, and implemented no measures to prevent trafficking to drug cartels and other criminals in Mexico. 

320. Defendants have vastly increased production and sales of assault weapons. In 1990, before the U.S. federal ban on sales of assault weapons, 74,000 assault rifles were produced or imported annually for sale in the U.S.; in 2006, two years after the ban 105a 

expired, the number of these rifles sold annually in the U.S. jumped to 398,000; by 2016, more than 2.3 million new weapons in the style of the AR-15 were sold annually to the U.S. civilian market. 

321. Defendants have aggressively promoted the sale of assault weapons in an unsafe manner. In its Annual “How to Sell Issue” in 2013, gun-industry trade magazine Shooting Sports Retailer noted that experienced hunters would “likely be put off by the military-esque attitude and marketing” of tactical assault weapons. But the magazine explained that “the tactical coolness factor does, on the other hand, attract a lot of first-time gun buyers . . . Unlike many of the hunting demographic, these potential buyers will likely be interested only in tactical guns, and the military-ish looks and features will be a big selling point with them. . . .” “Selling Tactical,” Shooting Sports Retailer (July/August 2013). 

322. Manufacturer Defendants’ marketing materials routinely show their assault weapons being used by military personnel or positioned near individuals wearing what appear to be military or law enforcement uniforms or gear. The accompanying text often resembles oaths taken by military or law enforcement personnel, implying that Defendants’ products are selected or chosen by these groups; Defendants reinforce this association with pictures of American flags. 

323. Smith & Wesson’s then-CEO candidly discussed in an investor call the importance of capitalizing on this “halo effect,” by which the company attempts to leverage police and military 106a 

associations to enhance the credibility and thus the sales of its guns to the civilian market. 

324. Defendant Smith & Wesson’s marketing campaign falsely and misleadingly associates its “civilian” products with the U.S. military and law enforcement. Its advertisements repeatedly emphasize its weapons’ ability to function in combat-like scenarios and quickly dispatch a large number of perceived enemies with a torrent of fire. Examples of Smith & Wesson’s marketing to the general public include: 107a 108a 109a 

325. Defendant Colt similarly markets its “civilian” products as military weapons. It markets a “civilian” assault rifle as the “Trooper” and touts that another “shares many features of its combat-proven brother” and enables the consumer to “accomplish any mission.” Examples of Colt’s marketing to the general public include: 110a 111a 

326. Defendant Barrett markets its “civilian” .50 caliber rifle as a weapon of war. In a promotional brochure, Barrett states: “With confirmed hits out to 1800 meters, the Barrett model 82A1 is battle proven.” 

327. Barrett routinely emphasizes the military utility and applications of its weapons, intentionally appealing to buyers like the drug cartels that want them for exactly the military-style assaults depicted in Barrett’s ads. In marketing its MRAD sniper rifle, Barrett touts, “Crushing force that adapts to a wide range of needs without sacrificing performance, the Barrett MRAD is a real monster in every sense.” By labeling its MRAD SMR a “Single Mission Rifle” and emphasizing that it “transforms the military platform” for civilian use, Barrett is clearly appealing to buyers interested in engaging in offensive, military-style combat “missions.” Examples of Barrett’s marketing to the general public include: 112a 113a 114a 

328. Similarly, Defendant Century Arms emphasizes that its WASR-10 gun is based on a design used by “Romanian ranger teams” and even markets one model of the WASR-10 gun with the word “Paratrooper” included in the gun’s name. In using the phrase “Eat more ammo!” to market its weapons to the general public, Century Arms highlights the ability of its rifles to fire ammunition quickly. This marketing approach would have no appeal to lawful civilian users, for whom burning through ammunition quickly would be wasteful and expensive. It does, however, appeal to those with violent, criminal intent, like drug traffickers. Examples of Century Arms’ marketing to the general public include: 115a 116a 117a 

329. Defendant Glock also routinely markets the military-like applications for the guns that it markets to the general public. It often advertises the “tactical” use of its guns by people clad in military dress and associates its guns with use by the police. Examples of Glock’s marketing to the general public include: 118a 119a 

330. On its webpage designed to sell to the general public, Defendant Interstate Arms expressly markets itself as selling “military-style” weapons: 120a 121a 

331. Defendants know that these marketing techniques are disproportionately likely to motivate and attract dangerous individuals who harbor militaristic ambitions or want to attack large numbers of people. It is the perfect message for drug cartels and other criminals who want to do battle with the military and police in Mexico. 

332. Defendants allow their military guns to be sold to any “legal” purchaser 18 years or older, in any quantity they can pay for, knowing that their distribution policies enable the guns to be easily trafficked to Mexico. 

3. Defendants know that their military-style weapons are the cartels’ weapons of choice. 

333. Defendants are well aware that assault rifles and sniper rifles are the weapons of choice for violent cartels in Mexico, that they are routinely trafficked over the U.S. border into Mexico, and that both the Mexican and U.S. governments struggle to prevent the diversion. 

334. Military-style weapons are widely known as the drug cartels’ weapons of choice, even though they are not lawfully sold anywhere in Mexico. AR-15 rifles, AK-47 rifles, and .50 caliber sniper rifles are among the most sought-after guns by traffickers. According to both Mexican and U.S. officials, the popularity of AK-47s and AR-15s has greatly increased among cartels since the expiration of the U.S. federal assault-weapons ban in 2004. 

335. Defendants have known for decades that they were supplying the cartels with these police-killing and people-killing machines. As early as 122a 

1999, a U.S. federal investigation was targeting the movement of .50 caliber semi-automatic rifles from the U.S. to Mexico for use by drug cartels. Similarly, the Assistant Director of ATF’s Office of Field Operations testified in the U.S. Congress on February 7, 2008 that “drug trafficking organizations have aggressively turned to the U.S. as a source of guns . . . includ[ing] the Barrett 50-caliber rifle, the Colt AR-15 .223-caliber assault rifle, [and] the AK-47 7.62-caliber assault rifle and its variants,” among others. Money, Guns, and Drugs: Are U.S. Inputs Fueling Violence on the U.S.-Mexico Border? , Hearing before the Subcommittee on National Security and Foreign Affairs of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, 111th Congress (2009). A 2009 Government Accountability Office report found “a large proportion of the guns fueling Mexican drug violence originated in the United States, including a growing number of increasingly lethal weapons.” Gov’t Accountability Office, Firearms and Trafficking: U.S. Efforts to Combat Arms Trafficking to Mexico Face Planning Coordination Challenges at 38 (2009). 

336. The cartels covet these assault weapons because Defendants have designed them to be particularly lethal and easily modified into machine guns. Predictably, many of Defendants’ guns recovered at crime scenes in Mexico had in fact been modified to fire in a fully automatic mode. 

337. ATF also reported in 2009 that the cartels seek pistols able to accommodate magazines that hold over 10 rounds and large cartridges that can pierce bulletproof vests. All of the Manufacturer Defendants make guns that can hold large capacity 123a 

magazines of over 10 rounds, and most or all make guns that can use cartridges that can pierce body armor, including Defendant Barrett’s .50 sniper rifle, and guns made by Beretta, Colt, Century Arms, Smith & Wesson, and Ruger. 

338. It has been evident for decades that Defendants’ distribution policies deliver a consistent flood of assault weapons to the cartels. For example: 

a. In 2008, about one-quarter of guns found to have been trafficked from the U.S. were a type of AR-15 or AK-47. 

b. Defendants Barrett and Colt topped the list in a 2008 ATF presentation identifying drug cartels’ weapons of choice in Mexico. The list included Barrett’s .50 caliber rifles and Colt’s .38 Super pistols and its .45 pistols. 

c. In 2009, Mexican officials seized more than 4,400 AK-47 and AR-15 rifles. 

d. A 2009 report cited an independent investigation listing the six most sought-after guns by drug cartels in Mexico, including Defendant Colt’s AR-15 .223 caliber assault rifle. 

e. For the period December 2006 -August 2010, the top two U.S.-sourced guns recovered in Mexico were the AK-47 and AR-15. These two types of guns comprised 50,000 of the 85,000 crime guns recovered during that period in Mexico. 124a 

f. The AK-47 and the AR-15 remained the first and second-most commonly trafficked guns recovered in Mexico from 2009–2012. 

g. In 2011 Hearst conducted a study of 44 U.S. gun trafficking cases involving 165 criminal defendants and 1,585 guns trafficked to Mexico. The most common types of guns found included Defendant Colt’s Super .38 pistol and Defendant Century Arms’ Draco 7 pistol. 

h. Another study examined 21 U.S. prosecutions from February 2006 to February 2009 for gun trafficking to Mexico, accounting for 1,700 guns. Of these, the makes and models of 492 guns were revealed in court documents. Defendant Barrett’s .50 caliber armor-piercing sniper rifle again made the top of the list. 

339. The same trends continue today. Hundreds of high-caliber weapons have turned up at crime scenes in Mexico throughout the past decade. The Mexican Army recovered 554 .50-caliber guns from 2010 to 2018. Of those, 496 were rifles, 227 of which were made by Barrett. 

340. Between 2006 and March 2018 the Mexican military recovered some 66,000 guns at crime scenes. Of those for which the make and caliber were recorded, more than 12,000 were assault weapons. More than 2,000 of those were manufactured by Defendant Colt—the most of any manufacturer. Notably, these military-style 125a 

weapons represent a much smaller percentage of crime guns in the U.S. 

4. Defendants’ reckless marketing of these weapons is unlawful. 

341. Defendants’ design and marketing of these weapons of war, combined with their refusal to monitor and discipline their distribution systems, violates the many strictures alleged above. Defendants’ design and marketing of these weapons is also independently unlawful under certain U.S. states’ laws. 

342. By way of example only: Smith & Wesson violated the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws c. 93A (“Chapter 93A”), through marketing that emphasized the ability of civilians to misuse Smith & Wesson assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks and encouraged such misuse. 

343. Smith & Wesson primarily manufactures, markets, and distributes AR-15-style assault rifles like the Smith & Wesson M&P 15 from a base of operations in Massachusetts. It is thus subject to Chapter 93A, which prohibits immoral or reckless advertising inducing unlawful or dangerous misuse of products, even when harms resulting from the unlawful marketing are felt outside of Massachusetts. 

344. Smith & Wesson knowingly violated Chapter 93A by marketing products, including AR-15 style rifles like the Smith & Wesson M&P 15, to the civilian market in ways that highlighted their efficacy for civilians wanting to carry out unlawful 126a 

military-style combat missions and that encouraged and promoted the misuse. 

345. Smith & Wesson did so knowing that its marketing would motivate and attract criminal users—including the cartels—to select and misuse its products in unlawful acts of violence. Smith & Wesson intentionally emphasized the ability of its products to rapidly dispatch large numbers of opponents in armed combat, appealing especially to criminals like the cartels who want to outgun and defeat law enforcement or military forces. 

346. For example, Smith & Wesson uploaded onto its YouTube channel a video endorsement of its M&P 15 T model rifle from a professional shooter who described using the weapon to establish a “world record” in speed shooting involving ten shots fired into four different targets in 1.59 seconds. 

347. Smith & Wesson published the advertisement noted above for an M&P 15 rifle and emphasized that it lets you “[k]ick [b]rass” by “[b]urn[ing] through all the ammunition you want.” Smith & Wesson repeatedly emphasized through branding, including the “M&P” or “Military and Police” designation, that its products are capable of being deployed in combat-like scenarios. 

348. Similarly, Colt violated the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 42-110a et seq. (“CUTPA”), through marketing that emphasized the ability of civilians to misuse Colt assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks. 

349. Colt primarily manufactures, markets, and distributes semi-automatic assault rifles like its Colt M4 Carbines from a base of operations in 127a 

Connecticut. It is thus subject to CUTPA, which prohibits immoral or reckless advertising inducing unlawful or dangerous misuse of products, including when the harms resulting from the unlawful marketing are felt outside of Connecticut. 

350. Colt knowingly violated CUTPA by marketing products like its semi-automatic assault rifles to the civilian market in ways that highlighted their efficacy for civilians wanting to carry out unlawful military-style combat missions and that encouraged and promoted the misuse. 

351. For example, as noted above Colt specifically labels its products with militaristic terms like “Trooper” and “Patrol” to increase the viewer’s association of its products with military-style combat. As also noted above, Colt’s advertising emphasizes that its assault rifles have many features identical to Colt weapons used by military forces. 

352. It was economically feasible for Defendants to market their products in ways that did not unreasonably emphasize features, functions, and applications that were likely to especially attract and motivate criminal users, including the cartels. Defendants flagrantly breached their duty to avoid this dangerous and inflammatory marketing. 

G. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing Their Guns to Allow Use by Unauthorized Persons. 

353. Defendants magnify the dangers that their distribution and marketing systems create by designing guns that are easily transferrable to the criminal market in Mexico. Defendants have known 128a 

for decades that they could include safety features to prevent the unauthorized use of their guns. 

354. Using these safety features would not diminish the utility of their guns for law-abiding, authorized users, but it would make them less attractive to criminals and gun traffickers in Mexico and protect law enforcement and Mexican families. It was both commercially and technologically feasible for Defendants to install these design safeguards in their guns. 

355. Defendants’ guns are defective and unreasonably dangerous in that, among other things, they enable any person who gains access to them to fire them. The absence of safety features precluding unauthorized users facilitates unlawful transfers and trafficking of these guns to Mexico where they have been used to perpetrate tens of thousands of homicides. 

356. Defendants were, at all relevant times, aware of the inherent and unreasonable dangers in the design of their guns and knew that they could be made and sold with the means to prevent firing by unauthorized users. Defendants knew of the need for design features to inhibit the trafficking of guns, straw purchases, the reuse of stolen weapons, and other access by unauthorized users. They further knew that, without the aid of additional safety features, it was reasonably foreseeable that their guns would fall into the hands of unintended users resulting in tragic, preventable shootings— including shootings with guns trafficked into Mexico. 129a 

357. The technology for safety features that permit only authorized users to operate a gun has long been available to Defendants. One manufacturer, Taurus, has been selling handguns with integral locks since 1997. As touted on the manufacturer’s website, the Taurus Security System is “[for] those with concerns about unauthorized use of their Taurus gun,” and “renders the gun inoperable by the use of a special key.” 

358. Defendants could also have developed and used more sophisticated safety features that employ biometric, radio frequency, or magnetic technologies that would enable only recognized users to fire the gun. Inventors have created such devices since at least the 1970’s. A 17-year-old from Boulder, Colorado developed a smart handgun in 2016 that fires only when a finger it recognizes is on the grip. 

359. Defendant Smith & Wesson agreed to include these safety features in its guns. In the 2000 Agreement, Smith & Wesson promised to the U.S. government and several U.S. cities to, among other reforms, develop “smart guns” that could be fired only by the owner. But Smith & Wesson reneged on that promise. 

360. Defendants are fully aware that these safety features could, and would, prevent shootings that cause injury and death. This includes preventing instances where weapons are stolen by thieves or are sold in the criminal market in Mexico. Smith & Wesson’s chief executive officer at the time of the 2000 Agreement admitted that these safety measures could save lives. 130a 

361. The Government and its citizens are continually put at risk and victimized by Defendants’ unreasonably dangerous products. People in Mexico have been grievously injured or killed because Defendants sell their guns without safety features that would prevent shootings by unauthorized users and the trafficking of those unsafe guns into Mexico. 

362. Defendants purposefully and intentionally engage in this conduct knowing full well that Mexican residents, police officers, and military personnel will foreseeably fall victim to death or serious injuries caused by the actions of unauthorized users of Defendants’ guns. It was reasonably foreseeable that the Government would be forced to bear substantial expenses as a result of Defendants’ conduct. 

H. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Designing Their Guns to Enable Defacement of Serial Numbers. 

363. To evade detection and investigation by law enforcement, criminals and the traffickers who supply them often obliterate or deface the serial numbers on guns. 

364. Guns without serial numbers cannot be effectively traced to the last retail purchaser, and therefore can create a “cold trail” when law enforcement recovers a gun at the crime scene. Guns without serial numbers are therefore more attractive and marketable on the criminal market. Defendants know or choose to be willfully blind to these facts. 131a 

365. Defendants can make guns whose serial numbers cannot be obliterated or defaced, or guns in which a hidden serial number will be hard or impossible for the criminal to detect. For example, years ago Beemiller d/b/a Hi Point Guns began including a second hidden serial number on some guns. In the 2000 Agreement, Smith & Wesson committed to the U.S. federal government that it would likewise include these features. 

366. Many of Defendants’ guns have been trafficked to Mexico and recovered with obliterated or defaced serial numbers. Defendants nevertheless refuse to include non-defaceable or hidden serial numbers on all of their guns. This deliberate decision further facilitates, enables, and assists in the trafficking of their guns to Mexico. 

I. Defendants Actively Assist and Facilitate Trafficking by Refusing to Implement the Reforms They Know Are Necessary. 

367. Defendants well know what reforms to their distribution systems are needed to prevent trafficking of their guns into Mexico. They simply choose to repudiate the reforms, and to continue supplying the cartels, in order to maximize their sales and profits. 

368. For example, in 1999 Ruger adopted a policy prohibiting its distributors from selling to any dealers not selling “exclusively” from their retail stores. The policy prevented Ruger dealers from selling at gun shows, which Ruger stated “will help ensure compliance with laws.” But after a laudatory 

Denver Post editorial generated criticism, Ruger issued a “clarification” that repudiated the new 132a 

policy and claimed it was not meant to affect dealers selling at gun shows. 

369. In the 2000 Agreement Defendant Smith & Wesson agreed to reform its distribution practices by selling only through authorized distributors and authorized dealers that: 

a. Commit to a standard of conduct to make every effort to eliminate sales of guns that might lead to illegal gun possession or misuse by criminals and other prohibited persons (“suspect guns sales”). Suspect gun sales include sales made to straw purchasers, multiple sales of handguns without reasonable explanation (excluding sales to licensed dealers), and sales made to any purchaser without a completed background check. 

b. Make no sales at gun shows unless all sales by any seller at the gun show are conducted only upon completion of abackground check. 

c. Maintain an inventory tracking plan. 

d. Implement a security plan for securing guns, including guns in shipment. 

e. Not sell ammunition magazines that are able to accept more than 10 rounds. 

f. Require all employees to attend annual training that includes how to recognize straw purchasers and other attempts to purchase guns illegally; how to recognize indicators that guns may be diverted for later sale or transfer to those not legally 133a 

entitled to purchase them; how to respond to those attempts; and the safe handling and storage of guns. 

g. Not complete any transfer of a gun before receiving notice from the National Instant Check System that the transferee is not a prohibited person under the Gun Control Act. 

h. Verify the validity of a licensee’s federal firearms license before transferring a gun to that licensee. 

i. Forgo any transfer of a gun to a licensee if the dealer or distributor knows the licensee to be under indictment for violations of the Gun Control Act or any violent felony or serious drug offense as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 924(e)(2). 

j. Transfer guns only to individuals who have demonstrated that they can safely handle and store guns. 

k. Limit multiple handgun sales. 

l. Not market any gun in a way that would make the gun particularly appealing to criminals, such as advertising a gun as “fingerprint resistant.” 

m. Refrain from selling any modified or sporterized semi-automatic assault pistol of a type that cannot be imported into the U.S. 

n. Terminate dealers that sell adisproportionate number of crime guns 134a 

unless there is a satisfactory explanation and proposal. 

o. Cooperate fully with law enforcement and regulators to eliminate illegal guns sales and possession. 

p. Dedicate one percent of annual gun revenues to a trust fund for a public information campaign about the risk of gun misuse, safe storage, and the need to dispose of guns responsibly. 

q. Make safer guns, including a second “hidden” serial number and an internal locking device (to prevent unauthorized use), and to invest in “smart” authorized-user technology. 

r. Stop selling large capacity magazines, or pistols that can accept them. 

s. Include prominent warnings about the risks of guns and accidental shootings when guns are improperly stored. 

t. Not sell guns that can be readily converted to an illegal gun or that are resistant to fingerprints. 

370. The Smith & Wesson 2000 Agreement was an acknowledgement that gun manufacturers can and should sell, market, distribute, and design guns to prevent their trafficking to criminal markets. 

371. Then Smith & Wesson—alone against the rest of the industry—faced a boycott. Smith & Wesson received the message that it would be financially punished if it strayed from the industry line of selling guns without standards, restrictions, 135a 

or any measures to prevent supplying the criminal market. So Smith & Wesson ultimately disregarded its obligations under the 2000 Agreement. 

372. In the years since the 2000 Agreement, no gun manufacturer or distributor has adopted any of the terms or practices in it. In the years since the U.S. Department of Justice specifically called on gun manufacturers and distributors to implement similar reforms to fulfill their legal responsibilities, no gun manufacturer or distributor has heeded those requests. 

373. Gun industry insider Robert Ricker explained in 2003: “It would greatly reduce gun crime if the companies, the manufacturers and distributors could take the information that ATF is willing to share with them [gun trace data] and zero in on those problem areas. . . . You would be able to weed out the bad apples.” 

374. Defendants are also aware of the findings made against them by Judge Weinstein in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. , 271 F. Supp. 2d 435 (E.D.N.Y. 2003). The court concluded that “[p]rivate manufacturers and distributors of handguns have failed to take minimum circumspect steps to limit leakage of their guns into criminal hands.” Id. at 453. He concluded as fact that “[p]laintiff’s proposals for changes in the marketing and distribution of guns would reduce the illegal market in guns and the [consequent] injuries.” Id. at 510. In particular: 

“Manufacturing and distribution agreements that are readily entered into by defendants 136a 

would have a substantial effect in reducing the illegal flow of firearms. . . .” Id. 

“If some defendant had provided employee training for employees and others in the primary legitimate merchandising chain, many guns would not have found their way illegally into” the illegal secondary market. Id. 

“If defendants had studied available trace request data and acted upon it to better control its downstream customers, they could have used the information to prevent fear and injury to [the affected population]. This information was and is available to defendants.” Id. 

“[T]here was a statistically significant relationship between the number of certain distribution oversight practices followed by a manufacturer and its ratio of trace share to market share...” Id. at 513. 

“[T]here is a significant relationship between certain characteristics of dealers—e.g., selling guns later recovered with an obliterated serial number—and dealer’s trace rate (traces divided by sales).” Id. at 514. 

“[M]anufacturers that have the following practices have smaller crime gun ratios: requiring evidence of a storefront, having an authorized dealer program, maintaining records of sales to individual dealers, visiting dealers frequently, commissioning market studies, maintaining distributor agreements, imposing controls over how the product is advertised and inquiring about inventory level of distributors.” Id. at 522. 137a 

“There are indicators other than amount of sales which lead to the conclusion that aparticular dealer’s guns would be more likely to be in the hands of criminals. The dealer indicators related to crime gun flows are: (1) out of state traces; (2) obliterated serial number traces; (3) multiple traces for the same purchaser; (4) multiple traces for the same purchaser and the same dealer; (4) multiple sales forms; (5) traces from multiple sales form guns; (6) record keeping problems; (7) multiple licenses at same location; and (8) bypassed geographically closer dealers to seller—i.e., the purchaser for illegal use goes out of his way geographically to buy from retailers with a poor record for crime gun traces.” Id. at 522-523. 

The “mechanisms that could have been employed by defendants—using their existing marketing infrastructures—to prevent ‘diversion’ or guns being acquired by persons prohibited from owning or possessing guns” include “requiring dealers and distributors to report the number of trace requests upstream to manufacturers and distributors; development of a management code that would establish standards of conduct on the part of members of the distribution system, including guidelines regarding sales to types of dealers, such as stocking dealers with storefront establishments; requiring minimum inventory; imposing liability insurance standards; limiting sales at gun shows; limiting multiple sales; limiting how the consumer gun transaction can be conducted to insure security; 138a 

education and training of dealers; and monitoring dealers through visitation and other regular interaction.” Id. at 523 

“Relatively excessive numbers of traces to specific retailers or first purchasers is ... cause for alarm by Manufacturer Defendants who are not foreclosed from closing off illegal flows of their guns to such retailers.” Id. at 504. 

“The likelihood of wrongdoing is substantially enhanced when certain practices by Manufacturer Defendants are followed and certain precautions not taken by Manufacturer Defendants.” Id. at 504-505. 

“It is appropriate for a manufacturer to undertake to control its customers by contract and supervision to reduce the probability that they will be sources of guns for criminals.” Id. 

at 506. 

“ATF lacks sufficient resources to conduct focused inspections and investigations of many dealers who may be violating gun laws.” Id. 

“Analysis of the [tracing] data demonstrated that more prudent merchandising programs by Manufacturer Defendants could have substantially reduced guns flowing into criminal hands, used in many murders and injuries which could have been avoided by Manufacturer Defendants’ more prudent merchandising.” Id. at 504. 

“When a relatively large number of traces are determined by Manufacturer Defendants to be attributable to particular retailers, prudent Manufacturer Defendants can take steps to 139a 

ensure that their guns are not too easily falling into criminals’ hands.” Id. 

375. Defendants have done the opposite of what they know is needed to minimize the flow of guns to criminals in Mexico. Among other things, they have increased production and sales of military-style assault weapons and high-capacity magazines; increased marketing attractive to criminals; continued to use dealers and practices that arm criminals in Mexico; and fought to evade accountability for supplying criminals and facilitating gun violence. 

376. For decades, Defendants knew or choose to be willfully blind to the fact that their business practices supply the unlawful market in guns in Mexico. As a direct and foreseeable result of Defendants’ irresponsible conduct, Defendants arm unauthorized and irresponsible persons who wreak havoc and injure and kill people and cause other substantial harm in Mexico. 

VII. DEFENDANTS ACTIVELY ASSIST AND FACILITATE THE UNLAWFUL TRAFFICKING BECAUSE IT MAXIMIZES THEIR SALES AND PROFITS. 

A. Defendants Intentionally Created and Use a Distribution System that Aids Sales to the Criminal Market. 

377. Manufacturer Defendants enjoy exclusive discretion in their methods of distribution and choice of the distributors and dealers to which they sell. They can limit product access to responsible dealers and consumers. They can implement appropriate 140a 

and prudent distribution practices. They simply choose not to do so. 

378. Manufacturer Defendants generally use a three-tier distribution: (1) manufacturers sell guns to distributors, (2) distributors then sell guns to retailers, and (3) retailers sell guns to civilian purchasers. This system is not required by law. Manufacturers could sell guns through their own dealerships (and they sometimes have) or maintain in-house distribution departments that sell to dealers (some do, for some sales). But they choose not to. 

379. Manufacturer Defendants could alternatively use a three-tier distribution system while allowing their guns to be sold by only authorized dealers that maintain minimum standards of responsible conduct and provide information to the manufacturers that would enable them to assess if their guns are being sold legally and carefully. But they choose not to. 

380. When responsible, law-abiding industries are concerned about problems in the sales or distribution of their products, they do something about it. Defendants can monitor and control their distribution system—and they do, when it makes them money. 

381. One example: years ago, Defendant Beretta sought to protect its foreign sales representatives’ business by discouraging U.S. dealers from selling guns abroad. So Beretta wrote to at least one of its distributors with a list of factors that would indicate that a dealer might be making unauthorized international sales, such as “the size 141a 

of the order, past history of the particular dealer, the size and nature of the order relative to normal buying practices of the dealer, et cetera.” Beretta admitted this was done to “control the distribution process.” 

382. Defendants have long known they can impose similar controls to prevent dealers from supplying the criminal market. They choose not to. 

383. Defendants do not live on another planet in which they are sheltered from news of their corrupt dealers, the trafficking of their guns into Mexico, and the devastating damage suffered by the Government and its people. They simply choose to act as if they are blind—willfully blind—to those facts. 

384. Defendants have affirmatively and deliberately chosen to maintain their supply chain to the cartels, and refused calls for reform, because, from the perspective of their bottom lines, their distribution systems are huge successes. Their supply of guns to the criminal market in Mexico is a feature, not a bug. 

B. A Substantial Portion of Defendants’ Sales and Profits Come From Guns Trafficked to Mexico. 

385. Defendants have long known that the criminal market in Mexico is a significant source of revenue and profit for them. 

386. In 2003, Northeastern University criminologist James Fox estimated that 9.55% of handguns produced in 1997 and 25.51% of handguns produced in 1991 were used in crimes by the end of 2001 (the study was not limited to crimes in Mexico). 142a 

That is a conservative estimate, as it does not include the thousands of crimes of illegal gun possession. Other analyses have shown that 18% of handguns sold in 1990 were in the hands of violent criminals or used in violent crimes by 2000. 

387. Defendants know that many of their guns are headed for the criminal market, either immediately or after some time, and they know that means significant money for them. And they act accordingly to maximize that revenue and profit. 

388. Visiting Mexico City while campaigning for president in 2016, U.S. President Donald Trump stated that “[n]o one wins in either country” when “illegal weapons and cash flow from the United States into Mexico.” But that is not true—illicit weapons trafficking to Mexico creates immense profit for Defendants and other gun manufacturers and dealers. 

389. Based on the estimates described above, the value of guns trafficked from the U.S. into Mexico is now well more than $250 million annually (calculated at the original sales price). The annual value of these Defendants’ guns trafficked into Mexico is well more than $170 million. 

390. These are estimates; the actual profits and revenues reaped by Defendants from supplying criminals in Mexico may be even greater. What is certain is that criminals in Mexico are a significant market for Defendants, which explains Defendants’ business decisions to keep supplying them. 

391. The illicit trafficking to Mexico and the immense profits to be made have resulted in asubstantial increase in the number of gun stores 143a 

populating the border areas. In 2010, there were 8,354 licensed dealers in California, Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona. By 2019 more than 1,569 new licensed dealers had set up shop in those states, while nationwide the number of dealers is declining. Border-state gun dealers now sell twice as many guns as dealers in other areas of the country. 

392. The Government has long recognized and long criticized the build-up of gun dealers along the border. In January 2008, Mexican Ambassador Arturo Sarukhán criticized the availability of weapons along the border: “Between Texas and Arizona alone, you’ve got 12,000 gun shops along that border with Mexico.” 

393. Thirteen years later, Fabian Medina Hernandez, former chief of the Office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mexico echoed the same outrage: “I don’t know that they have as many McDonald’s restaurants as they have gun stores there.” (As of 2017 there were approximately 50,271 more gun stores than McDonald’s in the United States.) A chart showing the change in licensed dealers from 2010 to 2019 is reproduced here: 144a 

(Source: ATF Data) 145a 

394. This black-market financial boon is not limited to Defendants’ sales to dealers along the southwestern border. Research from the University of San Diego estimates that nearly half of all U.S. gun dealers profit from illegal arms trafficking from the U.S. into Mexico. Defendants and other gun manufacturers and dealers managed to grow this segment of the gun market even while the number of gun owners (not guns) in the U.S. decreased. 

395. For many dealers, the unlawful flow of arms into Mexico has been their economic lifeblood. The University of San Diego researchers estimate that, without the demand for weapons trafficking into Mexico, roughly 47% of licensed gun dealers would go out of business. The spillover effect on the Manufacturer Defendants would be substantial because they would lose significant legitimate sales and profits in addition to those generated by the trafficked products. 

VIII. THE GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN REASONABLE MEASURES TO TRY TO PROTECT ITSELF FROM DEFENDANTS’ UNLAWFUL CONDUCT. 

396. The Government has—for decades—enacted numerous laws and policies aimed at limiting the number of both legal and illegal gun ownership within the nation. Defendants’ conduct directly undermines these efforts and the Government’s ability to structure and govern Mexican society. 

A. The Government Has Significantly Restricted the Lawful Ownership and Use of Guns Within Mexico. 146a 

397. Mexico has stringent gun laws, enacted solely at the federal level, in which private gun ownership is closely monitored, regulated, and restricted. See Ley Federal de Armas de Fuego y Explosivos [LFAFE] Articulo 2°, Diario Oficial de la Federation [DOF] 11-1-1972, ultimas reformas DOF 12-11-2015 (Mex.). The United Nations has called these laws among the most restrictive in the world. And Mexico remains an insignificant player in the manufacturing and production of guns. 

398. The Ministries of Internal Affairs and National Defense control all guns nationwide. The LFAFE mandates that all guns in the nation be registered with the Federal Arms Registry. LFAFE significantly limits the private possession of guns, prohibiting, for example, semi-automatic pistols with a caliber greater than .380 and all guns using the .223 caliber round, commonly used in AR-style rifles. 

399. Applicants for gun permits must prove their need to carry weapons as well as their prior history of honesty and prudence, with the testimony of five persons well known to the authority. A photo of a Mexican Gun Registration Card is reproduced here: 147a 148a 

400. Citizens who pass the background check receive a one-year permit. Applicants must be members of a “shooting club” and are limited to purchasing and owning one handgun. This handgun is available for self-defense only and must be kept inside the home. 

401. Moreover, guns are available from only one dealer and store in the entire country—the UCAM (Unidad de Comercialización de Armamento yMuniciones ). The store is located in Mexico City and is owned, operated, and heavily guarded by the Mexican military. The store sells on average just 38 guns a day to civilians. 

402. Again, the media has provided Defendants with this information in easy-to-read graphics, reproduced here: 149a 150a 

403. Lawful civilian gun ownership in Mexico is therefore extremely rare. In 2013 only 3,140 private citizens in Mexico (2.6 per 100,000 population) possessed a valid weapon permit. In the five-year period between 2013 and 2018, the Government issued only 218 additional gun licenses. 

B. The Government Has Implemented Many Other Programs to Try to Blunt the Effects of Defendants’ Conduct. 

404. Both the United States and Mexico have undertaken measures to try to stem the flow of illegal weapons into Mexico, some of them at the highest levels of government. In 2007, for example, the United States and Mexico announced the Merida Initiative, a package of U.S. assistance for Mexico and Central America. As part of the emphasis on “shared responsibility” the Government pledged to tackle crime and corruption, and the U.S. government pledged to address domestic drug demand and the illicit trafficking of guns to Mexico. 

405. Among its objectives, the Mérida Initiative set out to develop a secure and competitive “21st Century Border” that would ensure the efficient and legitimate flow of goods and people, while guaranteeing the safety of citizens and interrupting the flow of drugs, weapons, and other contraband. 

406. From March 31 to April 3, 2009, the “Binational Conference on Arms Trafficking between Mexico and the United States” was held, with the participation of the heads of the Attorney General’s Office and the Secretary of the Interior for Mexico; and on behalf of the U.S. Government, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney 151a 

General. Among the agreements reached at the meeting in Mexico was the creation of a working group called “Subgroup on Attention to Arms Trafficking within the framework of the Merida Initiative,” which worked within the Interagency Coordination Group for the Prevention and Control of Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition and Explosives. 

407. Other joint Mexico/U.S. efforts have included: (1) investigating individuals responsible for illicit guns trafficking; (2) coordinating law enforcement efforts in gun cases and violent crime; (3) training U.S. and Mexican law enforcement officials to identify gun traffickers; and (4) tracing all guns to identify traffickers, trends, patterns, and networks. Among the results have been increases in ATF traces of guns recovered in Mexico, cases initiated and referred to prosecutor to the U.S. Attorneys’ Offices, and inspections of U.S. gun dealers. 

408. For decades, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, the Mexican Federal Police and the Secretary of National Defense, have performed “mirror operations,” through which Mexican and American authorities patrol the border. Although their main purpose is to tackle human smuggling, these operations are useful to dissuade the illegal activities of organized crime at the border, including gun trafficking. 

409. In 2010, the Mexican Attorney General’s Office and the U.S. agreed to allow Mexico access to the e-Trace Firearms Tracing System, which provides information on firearms secured in Mexico 152a 

(model and serial number), as well as the first purchaser (name, date, and place of birth) and the place where it was acquired (city, state, and gun shop). 

410. Mexico has also worked with U.S. state governments to curb arms trafficking. In March 2013, a working meeting was held with five U.S. state attorneys general (California, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, and New Mexico), in which the issue of arms trafficking, among others, was discussed. 

411. In May 2019, the Government spoke with U.S. authorities, such as U.S. Customs and Border Protection, on ways to reduce arms trafficking, among other border security issues. 

412. The Government’s officials regularly meet with representatives from ATF, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, the U.S. Department of State, and the International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Bureau, within the framework of the Arms Trafficking Subgroup of the U.S.-Mexico High-Level Security Group. 

413. On January 30, 2020, a joint strategy between Mexico and the United States to seal the borders and reduce arms trafficking was made public; the Government highlighted the participation of the Mexican Ministry of Public Administration, through its Internal Control Bodies, to provide permanent support to its anti-corruption program. 

414. At the multilateral level, at the II Session of the Group of Governmental Experts of the Multilateral Evaluation Mechanism held from 153a 

September 24 to October 5, 2007, in Washington, D.C., and at the 42nd Session of the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission, held from November 27 to 30, 2007 in Santa Marta, Colombia, the Government urged greater international attention to the links between illicit arms trafficking and illicit drug trafficking. 

415. Within the United Nations, the Government continued the work of the United Nations Program of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, including at the Latin American and Caribbean Preparatory Meeting for the III Biennial Meeting of States (Bogota, Colombia, June 2008). At the 51st Regular Session, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs adopted a resolution presented by Mexico on “Links between drug trafficking and firearms trafficking,” with the purpose of promoting recognition by the international community of the growth of this phenomenon, as well as the importance of improving controls on the manufacture, import and export of firearms and ammunition. 

416. The Government ratified the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing and Trafficking of Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials (CIFTA) of the Organization of American States, the purpose of which is to prevent the illicit production and trafficking of arms in the region. By proposal of Mexico, an Advisory Committee for CIFTA was created in which experts study and present proposed approaches to the illicit trafficking of weapons in the region. 154a 

417. Between September 2008 and June 2009, the Attorney General’s Office, through the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE) and CIFTA, promoted the creation of a Hemispheric Firearms Registry and participated in the preparation of the CIFTA Model Legislation Project. 

418. In March 2015, Mexico and the Government of the Republic of Guatemala signed the Protocol on Cooperation to Prevent and Combat the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, their Parts and Components, Ammunition and Explosives. 

419. In 2019 and 2020, the Government promoted the security cooperation agenda with the U.S. and Canada, which includes combating arms trafficking. During the two years, the Government held 19 high-level bilateral meetings, which included meetings with the U.S. Attorney General on December 5, 2019, and January 16, 2020. 

420. Mexico is also part of the United Nations Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). The treaty’s goals are to establish common international standards to better regulate the international trade of conventional weapons, eliminate the illicit trafficking of conventional arms, and prevent their diversion. In 2015, Mexico hosted the First Conference of the Parties. 

421. In August 2020, Mexico participated in the Sixth Conference of the States Parties to ATT, and as a result of the Government’s proposal, the parties established a forum for the exchange of information on cases of arms diversion. 155a 

422. On May 16, 2019, at the tenth edition of the Mechanism for Consultations on New and Traditional Security Issues Mexico-Canada held in Ottawa, Canada, arms trafficking was addressed. 

423. On December 5 and 6, 2019, officials from the Mexican Ministry of the Navy participated in the IV Meeting of the North American Drug Policy Dialogue, held in Washington, D.C. and attended by delegations from the governments of Mexico, the U.S. and Canada. The participants addressed cooperation agreements to combat drug and arms trafficking affecting the region, as well as its illicit financing. 

424. Mexico is also a party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Palermo Convention) and its three protocols. In July 2020, Mexico chaired the Working Group on Firearms of the Protocol. Based on the work carried out in the Working Group, Mexico presented aResolution during the Conference of the Parties of the Palermo Convention held in October 2020 in Vienna, Austria. The document seeks to strengthen the capacity to respond to emerging threats, including arms trafficking on the deep web, in addition to strengthening the inclusion of databases, marking, and registration of weapons. 

425. Also, the Office of the General Attorney has a cooperation agreement with Eurojust to receive assistance and technical-legal support on matters related to gun trafficking. It also has a cooperation agreement with Europol that provides assistance to State Attorneys and Public Safety Authorities at the federal, state, and municipal level. 156a 

426. Mexico participates in the cooperation programs that the European Union offers to 18 Latin American countries to provide training and assistance of experts in order to combat organized crime. 

427. The Government’s unilateral strategic initiatives are also ongoing. During the Administration of President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, the Government deployed its Joint Action Strategy to Curb the Illicit Flow of Arms on the Northern Border, coordinated by the Secretary of Security and Citizen Protection, with the participation of other federal law enforcement agencies—the Attorney General’s Office, the Tax Administration Service, the Secretary of National Defense, the Secretary of the Navy, and the National Guard. Its main objectives are to curtail the capabilities of organized crime groups and strengthen Mexico’s technological capabilities to deal with arms trafficking. 

428. The Strategy also includes a scheme to fight arms trafficking on the northern border, based on inspections carried out by the Tax Administration System (SAT) at six customs crossings (Tijuana, Baja California; Nogales, Sonora; Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua; Nuevo Laredo, Tamaulipas; Reynosa, Tamaulipas; and Matamoros, Tamaulipas), through peripheral security. In addition, the Ministry of National Defense participates in joint inspections with SAT in 15 other customs offices. 

429. To further improve national security, on July 17, 2020, President Lopez Obrador instructed the Armed Forces to take over the country’s border and 157a 

interior customs. The Secretary of National Defense, the Mexican Army, will have a presence in the 21 border customs, the Secretary of the Navy in the 17 maritime customs, and in the future it will be defined who will guard the 11 inland customs. This initiative, in addition to reducing tax evasion, seeks to combat the illicit trafficking of arms, ammunition, explosives, drugs, and hydrocarbons. The activities carried out by the military in customs include their integral administration, the security of the facilities, and vehicle and merchandise inspections, among others. 

430. Periodically, the Government carries out Firearms Exchange campaigns through which the federal, state, and local governments, together with the private sector, purchase firearms from citizens in exchange for economic incentives or household items. Likewise, the Government carries out Federal Firearms Registration campaigns through which it verifies the registration of firearms and carries out extraordinary inspections in Military Zones. 

431. To stop arms trafficking, the Government created the Inter-Institutional Coordination Group for the Prevention and Control of Firearms, Ammunition and Explosives Trafficking, which met several times a year: for example, between September 2007 and June 2008, the Technical Subcommittee held 128 inter-secretariat meetings with national and international agencies; from September 2010 to June 2011, it held 15 meetings; between September 2011 and June 2012, it held 16 meetings. 158a 

432. On several occasions, the Group carried out actions in collaboration with the United States: in November 2016 and March 2017, the Binational Meetings of the Interagency Group for the Prevention and Control of Firearms Trafficking were held in Mexico City to review cooperation issues between Mexico and the United States; on October 5, 2019, in coordination with the U.S. government, the Group held the Mexico-US Bilateral Workshop entitled “Dismantling the Tools of Transnational Crime-Arms Trafficking and Money Laundering.” 

433. These efforts and many more—those of the Government and of the U.S. authorities—have been unable to stem the flood of guns resulting from Defendants’ persistent, deliberate, and continual conduct. The Defendants, not the Government, have the authority to structure and monitor Defendants’ distribution chains. The Defendants, not the Government, have the ability to use real-time sales data and other indicia to detect sales patterns reflecting suspect sales. The Defendants, not the Government, have the authority to discipline distributors and dealers that sell to straw purchasers and otherwise supply traffickers. The Government will continue to do all that it can. But the Defendants must act on the information and authority that only they have. 

IX. DEFENDANTS CAUSE MASSIVE INJURY TO THE GOVERNMENT. 

A. Defendants Have Flooded Mexico with Their Guns. 

434. Defendants collectively account for nearly half of all crime guns recovered in Mexico. From 159a 

January through May 2020, Defendants accounted for the following percentages of all recovered guns: Smith & Wesson 9.9%; Barrett 2.3%; Beretta 5.8%; Century Arms 6.2%; Colt 10.8%; Glock 6.7%; and Ruger 6.2%. 

435. While Defendants collectively account for 47.9% of all crime guns recovered in Mexico, they account for about 68.4% of the recovered crime guns that originated in the U.S. (A relatively small number of crime guns come from outside the U.S.). 

436. The number of Defendants’ guns annually 

recovered at crime scenes in Mexico vastly understates the number that are trafficked into Mexico; authorities recover only a small fraction of trafficked guns. 

437. Researchers have estimated that nearly 2.2% of all guns manufactured in the U.S. are trafficked into Mexico. At the current gun-production rate in the U.S.—39,695,315 in 2020—this would equate to a staggering 873,000 guns currently trafficked annually into Mexico from the U.S. A more conservative estimate of a half million guns trafficked from the U.S. into Mexico every year is still massive. 

438. A fair estimate of the number of Defendants’ guns annually trafficked into Mexico is given by applying their percentage of U.S.-origin recovered guns (about 68.4% collectively) to the conservative and higher figures for total U.S.-origin trafficked guns (500,000 and 873,000 respectively). Thus, between 342,000 and 597,000 of Defendants’ guns are likely trafficked into Mexico every year. 160a 

439. Mexico and the United Kingdom have similar regulations on legal gun ownership. Both countries keep a centralized record of gun owners, require character references for gun purchasers, and mandate some interaction with police in the license-application process. Despite these similar regulations, however, the nations have vastly different numbers of illegal guns. According to one analysis, in 2017 the UK had about one million unregistered guns; Mexico had more than 13.5 million. 

440. The connection between Defendants’ unlawfully trafficked guns and the predictable but horrendous consequences in Mexico is undeniable. Defendants and other U.S.-based gun manufacturers took advantage of the expiration of the U.S. assault-weapons ban in 2004 to significantly increase their output of guns, particularly of assault weapons. Contemporaneously, illegal gun ownership per capita in Mexico increased tenfold and the homicide rate increased accordingly. From 2004 to 2008 the homicide rate in Mexico increased by 45%. 

441. The chart below shows these two intertwined trends—Defendants’ increased gun production and the concomitant increased gun-homicide rate in Mexico—as assault weapons like Defendants’ WASR-10 and AR-15s became more prevalent. 161a 162a 

442. No nation other than Mexico experienced a similar homicide surge during this period. 

443. The connection between gun trafficking from the U.S. and gun homicides in Mexico is further evidenced by the correlation between the increase in gun production in the U.S. and the percentage of homicides in Mexico committed with a gun. The percentage of homicides in Mexico committed with a gun rose from 25% in 2004 to more than 69% in 2018. The increased percentage of homicides by gun was contemporaneous with the increased gun production in the U.S. beginning in 2005 with the expiration of the U.S. assault-weapons ban, as this chart shows: 163a 164a 

444. The increased homicides in Mexico were driven in large part by the increased production in the U.S. specifically of assault weapons—and the trafficking of them into Mexico. This chart shows the relationship between the number of rifles manufactured in the U.S. and the number of homicides in Mexico: 165a 166a 

445. The empirical connection between Defendants’ trafficked guns and the devastating effects in Mexico is confirmed by many qualitative measures. For example, in the mid-2000s Mexico experienced: 

a. an increase in gun-related crimes such as extortion and kidnapping; 

b. the assassination of the first Mexican mayor killed—gunned down in northern Mexico—by a drug cartel; 

c. the advent of cartels using high-caliber weapons; 

d. the first killing of a member of the Mexican army by cartels, with the number of such attacks quickly accelerating (for example, northern Tamaulipas (bordering Texas), reporting one attack in 2007 but a total of 42 by 2011); 

e. a dramatic increase in mass shootings and criminal attacks on public figures, with 90 attacks in 2011. 

B. Defendants’ Unlawful Conduct Has Caused Massive Injury. 

446. The nature and magnitude of Defendants’ unlawful conduct has inevitably inflicted massive injury on the Government. It was foreseeable to Defendants that choosing to recklessly and unlawfully distribute and market their guns, without monitoring or discipline, would harm the Government by facilitating the trafficking of guns into Mexico. 167a 

447. The Government has had to spend vast funds on a wide range of services to fight the effects of Defendants’ unlawful conduct. The epidemic of violence that Defendants have created has strained the Government’s resources, including by causing the Government to incur substantial and unusual costs for providing, for example, extraordinary health care, law enforcement and military and services, criminal justice administration, public assistance, and other social services and public programs. 

448. The Government’s injuries include, but are not limited to: 

a. Losses caused by the decrease in funding available for other public services because the funds were diverted to services designed to address the effects of Defendants’ conduct; 

b. Costs of providing healthcare and medical care; 

c. Costs of additional and specialized training for military and police; 

d. Costs associated with the deaths of and substantial injuries to police and military personnel; 

e. Costs of mental-health services, treatment, counseling, rehabilitation services, and social services to victims and their families; 

f. Costs of law enforcement and public safety relating to the gun-violence epidemic, including but not limited to attempts to 168a 

stop the flow of trafficked guns, to arrest and prosecute the criminals who use those guns, to prevent the epidemic from spreading and worsening, and to deal with the escalating levels of crimes caused by the increased availability of trafficked guns; 

g. Costs of the increased burden on the Government’s judicial system, including increased security, increased staff, and the increased cost of adjudicating criminal matters due to the escalating levels of crime caused by Defendants’ conduct; 

h. Costs of providing care for children whose parents were victims of Defendants’ conduct; 

i. Losses from the decreased efficiency and size of the working population in Mexico; 

j. Losses from the diminished property values in the communities affected by Defendants’ conduct; 

k. Losses from decreased business investment and economic activity; 

l. Losses incurred by the Government acting in its commercial capacity, including from armed attacks on employees of state-owned enterprises and compensation paid to such victims. 

449. The Government has been forced to expend massive amounts of resources to address the foreseeable and widespread epidemic of gun violence 169a 

flowing from Defendants’ unlawful misconduct. Examples of these losses follow. 

1. Death and destruction 

450. Mexico is experiencing growing levels of gun violence and suffering from civilian gun deaths at one of the highest rates in the world. Before the dramatic increase in gun production in the U.S (including by Defendants) beginning in late 2004, the annual number of homicides in Mexico had been on the decline, including fewer than 2,500 committed with a gun in 2003. 

451. But the sharp increase in gun sales in the U.S. resulted in a 10-fold increase in gun-related homicides in Mexico, rising to about 23,000 in 2019. In 1997 only 15% of homicides were committed with a gun; by 2021 that figure had increased to 69%. 

452. Despite the Government’s rigorous gun control laws and policies, and despite having only one gun store in the entire nation, the years from 2007 to 2019 saw more than 180,000 homicides committed with guns in Mexico. 

453. Mexico has the third most gun-related deaths in the world. Murders are the leading cause of death in Mexico among teenagers and young adults between 15 and 19 years of age. 

454. The Council on Foreign Relations estimates that as many as half of homicides in Mexico are attributable to the drug cartels and other organized gangs. Two-thirds of crime guns recovered in Mexico belonged to two of the most pitiless cartels, the Gulf Cartel and Los Zetas. Leading up to Mexico’s 2018 presidential elections the drug cartels killed at least 130 candidates and politicians. 170a 

455. The overwhelming majority of these deaths were caused by guns trafficked from the U.S.— including many weapons designed, marketed, distributed, and sold by Defendants. A gun manufactured in the U.S. is more likely to be used to murder a Mexican citizen (17,000 in 2019) than an American citizen (14,000 in 2019). And Mexico has only 40% of the population of the U.S. and only one gun store. 

456. The magnitude of these deaths is so extensive that, beginning in 2005, it significantly affected the life expectancy of all Mexicans. While life expectancy increased by approximately .5 years throughout Mexico from 2000 to 2005, it decreased by about the same amount from 2005 to 2010, as reflected in this chart: 171a 172a 

457. Since 2010, in this age of technical and medical progress, life expectancy in Mexico has continued to decrease. 

458. The federal police and military in Mexico have been among the victims in the horror story that Defendants have written. From 2006 to 2021, guns were used to kill at least 415 members of the Mexican Federal Police or National Guard, and to wound at least 840 more. The vast majority of these guns were trafficked from the U.S. 

459. From March 2009 to March 2021, U.S.-origin guns were used to kill 25 members of the Mexican military and to wound another 84. 

460. Some of the incidents involving the military in the last four years are all-too representative. May 20, 2017: a Smith & Wesson AR-15 was used to kill one soldier. December 10, 2017: four Barrett rifles were used to kill one soldier and wound three others. 

461. August 15, 2018: eight Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifles were used to wound one soldier. August 24, 2018: a Colt AR-15 was used to kill one soldier. October 28, 2018: a Beretta pistol was used to wound one soldier. 

462. January 9, 2019: three Century Arms rifles were used to kill a soldier. February 21, 2019: two Colt pistols were used to kill one soldier and wound another. March 5, 2019: a Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle was used to wound one soldier. March 9, 2019: a Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle was used to wound one soldier. April 2, 2019: a Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle was used to wound two soldiers. November 14, 2019: three Barrett .50 caliber sniper 173a 

rifles were used to kill two soldiers and wound two others. 

463. July 19, 2020: a Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle was used to wound one soldier. September 14, 2020: a Colt AR-15 was used to wound a soldier. 

464. Defendants’ conduct has visited destruction on property as well as lives. For example, from 2013 to 2020 U.S.-origin guns were used to cause more than $41 million in damage to fifteen Mexican military aircraft. In just two years from 2019 to 2021 the Mexican Federal Police and National Guard incurred damage to an aircraft and 30 vehicles in armed assaults with guns. In the last decade they incurred additional millions of dollars in damage to security equipment. 

2. Economic harm 

465. Defendants’ conduct has also inflicted enormous economic harm on the Government. In 2019 more than 3.9 million crimes in Mexico were committed with a U.S.-origin gun. About 161,000 of those crimes were committed against businesses. 

466. The Institute for Economics & Peace’s Mexico Peace Index 2020 estimates that the economic impact of violence in Mexico in 2019 was 4.7 trillion pesos, or $238 billion. This is equivalent to 21.3% of Mexico’s gross domestic product (GDP); on a per capita basis, it is approximately five times the average monthly salary in Mexico. 

467. These costs include: direct costs incurred by the victim, the government, and the perpetrator; indirect costs, including physical and psychological trauma, lost future income, and the impact of fear; and a multiplier effect that calculates the additional 174a 

economic activity that would have accrued if the direct costs of violence had been avoided. 

468. Homicides comprised 48% of this impact ($114 billion), the vast majority of which (69.3%) were due to gun violence; violent assaults with a firearm imposed significant additional costs. The report documents that “[t]he rise in gun violence has . . . been driven by the illegal import and sale of firearms from the United States.” 

469. Another study estimates the Government’s costs of trying to prevent the escalating gun violence to be more than 1.5% of GDP. 

470. In addition, although immigration from Mexico to the U.S. has declined substantially over the last decade, the drug violence perpetrated with trafficked weapons nevertheless causes Mexicans to leave their homes to seek out security in the U.S. 

471. From 2006 to 2010 an estimated 264,000 Mexican citizens fled their homes as a result of drug-cartel violence. Migration outflow was higher in border cities where homicide rates were highest and drug-related violence most prevalent. Juarez, for example, lost about 11% of its population while Reynosa lost 9%, Tijuana 6%, and Matamoros 4%. According to one study, each one-point increase in the rate of drug-related homicides per 100,000 inhabitants is correlated with 6.34 Mexicans fleeing their county of residence. 

472. Another study found a similar correlation between homicides rates and migration outflow. Looking at the outflow of migrants from the Mexico to the U.S between 2007 and 2012, the study concluded that, while migration decisions are 175a 

sensitive to both local violence and transit violence, “the net effect of the drug violence in Mexico has been to increase migration to the United States.” Sandra Orozco-Aleman & Heriberto Gonzalez-Lozano, Drug Violence and Migration Flows: Lessons from the Mexican Drug War , 52 J. Human Res. 717 (Summer 2018). 

473. Even beyond all of these losses, Defendants’ unlawful conduct has substantially reduced the overall quality of life in Mexico. Living with the fear of fire from Defendants’ guns, and hearing and experiencing that gun violence, diminishes countless aspects of Mexican life—psychological, educational, social, and cultural, as well as economic. To take only one example, in 2020 more than 40% of people in Mexico under the age of 18 heard or saw frequent gunfire. 

474. Defendants have undermined the social policy, in addition to the aspirations, of the Government of Mexico and its people. The Government bears many direct and indirect costs from these harms, including those identified above. Given their share of guns trafficked into Mexico, the Defendants are responsible for close to half of these losses. 

3. Not statistics 

475. Defendants’ deliberate conduct that floods Mexico with their guns causes untold harm to the Government. Some of those damages are outlined above. Were it not for Defendants’ wrongful conduct, there would be far fewer guns in Mexico, and far fewer guns in the hands of the cartels. There might still be snakes—in the form of criminal 176a 

organizations—but they would have far less venom to inflict harm. 

476. Life in Mexico would be a far different place if that were so—a safer place, a place in which fewer tax dollars would be spent on preventing and responding to violence and drug trafficking, and more could be spent on education, social services, and other efforts to positively improve lives. 

477. Everyday existence for the Mexican people would be far different if life could be led without dangers and threats from the armed cartels—less fear, more freedom to gather together and enjoy life. 

478. And without the Defendants’ supply of crime guns, the less-armed cartels could be controlled and stopped far more easily and effectively. That would help stem the drug trade that kills not only Mexicans but people in other nations, including the United States. And it would reduce the violence that the cartels spread north of the border. 

479. Defendants’ wrongful conduct also ends lives, extraordinary and wonderful lives of Mexicans from every walk of life, as illustrated by a small sampling of the tens of thousands of lives lost as a result of Defendants’ deliberate conduct. 

480. Cristina Roman’s husband owned a small used-car dealership in Ciudad Juarez. He and his wife had three young sons. In May 2010, he was assaulted in his home and kidnapped by individuals, assumed to be in either Los Zetas or the Sinaloa Cartel, while Cristina and her sons hid. Despite Cristina and her husband’s brother paying aransom, her husband was killed and his body thrown into the street. 177a 

481. Manuel, Cristina’s father, also lived in Ciudad Juarez. After gunmen showed up at his door to ask for Cristina’s whereabouts in 2011, Manuel was kidnapped, never seen again, and is presumed dead. 

482. Gerardo Heath was a 15-year-old football player living in Allende, Mexico, a small ranching town near the border with Texas. On Friday, March 18, 2011, he was hanging out with friends near his home while his mother, Claudia Sanchez, packed for his football game in San Antonio the next morning. Gerardo asked his mother if he could go out with his friends; after initially refusing, she told him yes, but not to be back late. He put on the new clothes his family had recently given him for his birthday. 

483. But Gerardo never came back, having been swept up in a spree of killings in Allende that were carried out by Los Zetas during several weeks in March 2011. 

484. Noé Isauro Beltrán was a 39-year-old man living in Culiacán, Mexico. He had three daughters with his wife Rocío and worked at an auto repair shop. In October 2019, during an attack in Culiacán conducted by the Sinaloa Cartel to free the son of “El Chapo,” Beltrán was killed as he tried to close the repair shop’s shutters to protect himself and others. 

485. During the same incident, José Arturo and José Nicolás, two young workers at a furniture store, were returning from a furniture delivery when they were caught in the gunfire. Both died at the scene. Eduardo, a 32-year-old policeman, died after 100 bullets hit his car. 178a 

486. Christina Marie Langford Johnson, Dawna Langford, and Rhonita Miller were Americans living in Mexico in 2019. They were all members of the Mormon church and had moved to Mexico many years before. They each had children and lived in the state of Sonora. 

487. On the morning of November 4, 2019, the women were driving in separate vehicles with their children to meet relatives in the neighboring state and Phoenix, Arizona. Gunfire ripped into each of the vehicles, killing Johnson, Langford, and Miller, along with six of their children. Authorities suspect that members of the Juarez Cartel, engaged in a dispute with the rival Sinaloa Cartel, were responsible for the killings. 

488. Fernando Ruiz was a 19-year-old plumber and bricklayer living in the Mexican border city of Reynosa. He was working to pay for his studies. In June 2021 he was outside fixing a drain when members of the Gulf Cartel began a city-wide shooting spree. Fernando and his companions were shot just as they tried to take cover in somebody’s home. 

489. In December 2016, in the municipality of Jesús Carranza, there were several armed clashes between criminal groups and the Army, Navy, and state police over three days, which left 20 dead. 

490. On March 9, 2019, an armed commando of the Santa Rosa de Lima Cartel attacked a bar in Salamanca, Guanajuato. Neighbors described it as a “massacre,” as the attackers fired indiscriminately against customers, waiters, and workers. According to witnesses, the attack took less than two minutes. 179a 

Some media linked the attack to the launch, two weeks earlier, of an operation of the Federal Government to combat fuel theft with the support of the Navy, Federal Police, and state police. After the attack, the inhabitants of Salamanca reportedly started a self-imposed curfew. 

491. On October 14, 2019, a commando of 37 police officers was serving a warrant. Around 30 members of the New Generation Jalisco Cartel—one of the deadliest in the country—ambushed them. An officer who survived explained that the criminals had automatic weapons and that their firepower was far superior to that of the police. The media described the images as Dantesque: two police vehicles set on fire, the others left with threatening messages by the cartel, dead police officers lying on the ground, some of them burned, shell casings everywhere. 

492. In November 2019, in Villa Union, Coahuila, four municipal, state, and federal law enforcement officers were killed during a confrontation with the Noreste Cartel. Seventeen other people were also killed. 

493. During the June 26, 2020 attempt to assassinate Mexico City’s police chief, referred to above, bystander Gabriela Gomez was killed. Gaby, as she was called, was a 26-year-old mother of two daughters, a wife, a sister, and daughter. She had been traveling with her husband, sister, and sister-in-law in her car, on their way to their food stand at a subway station. 

494. At six o’clock in the evening on July 1, 2020, a commando of ten vehicles arrived at the 180a 

“Recuperando mi Vida ” rehabilitation center in Irapuato, Guanajuato. After threatening the workers and telling them to leave, the intruders forced 30 residents to the floor. According to the state Attorney General’s Office, seven men with long guns perpetrated the massacre. The mothers of the residents were among the first to arrive. Marina, Rodrigo’s mother, kept shouting “I brought you here so you could get fixed, not die.” She asked the police to let her in to find her son, not yet certain that he was one of the deceased. From December 2019 to July 2020, six armed attacks were registered against rehabilitation centers in Irapuato. 

495. On the night of September 1, 2020, in Cuernavaca, Morelos, an armed group opened fire on those attending the funeral of a motorcyclist. The attackers used high-caliber weapons. The attack left 9 dead, including several minors, as well as 13 wounded. Diego Miranda, 15, one of the deceased, was considered a promising young soccer player; he had been invited to a tryout for the basic forces of the popular team Cruz Azul. 

496. On March 1, 2021, a commando of armed men killed 10 construction workers while they were waiting for their wages on the sidewalk in Tonala, Jalisco. Subsequently, a minor was found dead, hit by bullets inside his home. Additionally, a woman and a 14-year-old minor were seriously wounded. “Why did they do this to us?” asked a boy lying on the floor, bleeding and waiting for the ambulance to arrive. The attack was carried out with long weapons; at the crime scene, authorities found more than 70 spent cartridges. 181a 

497. On March 18, 2021, eight state police officers—Alejandro Lovera Hernandez, Guillermo Torres Mixteco, David Pedroza Guadarrama, Martin Solares Morales, Ernesto Mondragon Ramfrez, Juan Dario Mesas Morales, Victor Manuel Garcia Vazquez, and Mauricio Rodriguez Zarate—were killed in an attack by the Familia Michoacana. They were ambushed in the municipality of Coatepec de Harinas. 

498. On April 22, 2021, in the port of Acapulco, Guerrero, a group of men armed with AK-47 rifles broke into a public bus depot. They shot and murdered a 70-year-old security guard. The other guard, Francisco Gerardo Estrada Cruz, 24 years old, died a day later at the hospital. 

499. On May 10, 2021, at a local restaurant-bar in Jocotepec, Jalisco, in broad daylight, an armed group descended from a van and opened fire without saying a word. It took them a couple of minutes to kill five people, two of them minors, a 16-year-old, and a boy between 12 and 13 years old. 

500. On July 2, 2021, in Omealca, Veracruz, two minors were killed in a shooting between police forces and a group of criminals, allegedly belonging to the New Generation Jalisco Cartel. The young men, aged 13 and 15, were washing a car in their front yard during the confrontation. 

501. On July 17, 2021, an armed group shot at people gathered at a family reunion in Panuco, Zacatecas. The attack killed eight and wounded seven. The Colegio de Bachilleres high school published the obituary of its student Jesus 182a 

Velazquez Miranda, 16, who was killed along with his parents, Adan and Rosario. 

502. For six days, from July 21 to 27, 2021, residents of the town of Magdalena de Kino, Sonora, reported gunshots in different parts of the town. Many of them posted videos on social networks: in one, gunshots are heard while people pray, lying on the floor of a church; in another, with the caption “Magdalena, no man’s land,” people in the street start running when they hear the gunshots. The siege ended after members of the state police, the National Guard, and the Secretary of National Defense intervened. 

503. Several shootings and violent clashes on Friday July 23, 2021, left 16 dead across different areas in the state of Zacatecas. An armed group shot at a car several times, murdering the three people inside, a man and two minors. Another attack was reported in the same area; another car had been shot, killing a man and a child. On the same day, a man was taken out of his home and murdered on the road. Armed violence reached the state’s capital too, as at least four young men were shot inside a barber shop. Simultaneously, two other men were being shot a few blocks away. 

504. On July 26, 2021, in Salto, Jalisco, police officer Maricruz Pérez Partida, 32 years old, was shot and killed along with her father, her uncle, and a neighbor, as they were leaving her house and walking to a car. Pérez served as sector chief at the local police station. She was a mother of three. 

505. Shortly after noon, on June 18, 2021, in Reynosa, Tamaulipas, armed individuals in several 183a 

vehicles shot at pedestrians in several neighborhoods of the city. The authorities considered it an indiscriminate attack against civilians, which killed at least 15 people, including a bus driver, a nursing student, a family, and a group of construction workers. Fernando Ruiz was one of them. He agreed with his stepdad to work on construction to pay for his studies; he wanted to become a nurse. Olga Ruiz described how after hearing gunshots, her stepdad told her brother and his co-workers to take refuge inside a house, but the bullets hit them before they could hide. After news of the attack spread, Pope Francis sent prayers and his condolences to the families of the deceased. 

X. CLAIMS FOR RELIEF 

“Why are deadly weapons being sold to those who plan to inflict untold suffering on individuals and society? Sadly, the answer, as we all know, is simply for money: money that is drenched in blood, often innocent blood. In the face of this shameful and culpable silence, it is our duty to confront the problem and to stop the arms trade.” 

— Pope Francis 

COUNT ONE (NEGLIGENCE) 

506. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

507. Defendants had a duty to exercise ordinary and reasonable care in designing, manufacturing, marketing, advertising, promoting, distributing, 184a 

supplying, and selling their guns in order to reduce the risk that their guns would be trafficked into Mexico. 

508. Defendants knew or chose to be willfully blind to the fact that their design, marketing, and distribution of guns posed a serious risk of harm to people in Mexico and to the Government, but they nevertheless continued to sell their guns without exercising reasonable care. 

509. Defendants’ negligence caused the actual injuries alleged above. That negligence is the proximate cause of the epidemic of gun-trafficking into, and gun violence within, Mexico. 

510. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ negligence, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT TWO (PUBLIC NUISANCE) 

511. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

512. In 2003, Judge Weinstein in NAACP v. AcuSport, Inc. concluded that there is “reliable evidence of an industry-wide connection between the legal market and the illicit market that constitutes a public nuisance nationally and in New York State and City. Diversion from the legal to the illegal markets through imprudent marketing cause[s] a 185a 

large part of this diversion.” 271 F. Supp. 2d at 521. The same is true here. Defendants cause a public nuisance under applicable law. 

513. Defendants’ conduct arms criminals, constituting a dangerous threat to the public. 

514. Defendants design, market, distribute, promote, and sell guns with reckless disregard for human life and for the peace, tranquility, and economic well-being of the Mexican public. They have knowingly refused to monitor and discipline their distribution systems, making their guns easily available to anyone intent on crime. Defendants knew or chose to be willfully blind to the fact that they facilitate and encourage easy access by persons intent on murder, mayhem, or other crimes, including illegal purchasers who foreseeably traffic the guns into Mexico. Defendants’ conduct has thereby created and contributed to a public nuisance by unreasonably interfering with public safety and health and undermining Mexico’s gun laws, resulting in the specific and particularized injuries suffered by the Government. 

515. The Government and its residents have a common right to be free from conduct that creates unreasonable risk to the public health, welfare, and safety, and to be free from conduct that creates a disturbance and reasonable apprehension of danger to person and property. 

516. Defendants intentionally and recklessly design, market, distribute, and sell guns that Defendants know, or reasonably should know, will be obtained by persons for criminal purposes, causing tens of thousands of their guns to be 186a 

possessed and used in Mexico illegally. Defendants cause an elevated level of crime, death, and injuries to Mexican residents, and a higher level of fear, discomfort, and inconvenience to the residents of Mexico. 

517. As a result of the continued use and possession of many of these guns, residents of Mexico will continue to be killed and injured by these guns, and the public will continue to fear for their health, safety, and welfare, and will be subjected to conduct that creates a disturbance and reasonable apprehension of danger to person and property. 

518. Defendants’ conduct constitutes a public nuisance and, if unabated, will continue to threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Mexico, creating an atmosphere of fear that tears at the residents’ sense of well-being and security. The Government has a clearly ascertainable right to abate conduct that perpetuates this nuisance. 

519. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT THREE (DEFECTIVE CONDITION— UNREASONABLY DANGEROUS) 

520. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 187a 

521. The guns manufactured and supplied by Manufacturer Defendants were defective in design or formulation in that, at the time they left the Manufacturer Defendants’ control: 

a. they were unreasonably dangerous to the purchasers and to others against whom they were likely to be used; 

b. the foreseeable risks to the purchasers exceeded the benefits associated with their design or formulation; 

c. they were more dangerous than an ordinary consumer would expect when used in their intended or reasonably foreseeable manner; 

d. a reasonably prudent manufacturer or distributor, being fully aware of the risks posed, would not have placed the product on the market; 

e. they did not conform to the representations of Manufacturer Defendants that the guns, when distributed by Defendants, were safe for use by purchasers; 

f. they failed to employ alternative designs, which were readily available and feasible, that would prevent the weapons from being fired by unauthorized users; 

g. they were designed to be readily converted into machineguns operable in fully automatic mode; 

h. they were designed to try to evade U.S. restrictions on military-style assault weapons; and 188a 

i. they were designed to enable the obliteration or defacement of serial numbers. 

522. As a foreseeable and proximate result of the defective condition of the guns manufactured and supplied by Manufacturer Defendants, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT FOUR (NEGLIGENCE PER SE) 

523. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

524. Defendants violated statutory duties, the Government is within the class intended to be protected by the statutes, the statutory violations are a proximate cause of the Government’s injury, and the Government’s injuries are of the type against which the statutes are designed to protect. 

525. Defendants breached the duties they owe to the Government by, among other things, failing to monitor and discipline their distribution systems so as to prevent or reduce the trafficking of their guns into Mexico. In so doing, all Defendants acted with actual malice. 

526. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, 189a 

health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT FIVE (GROSS NEGLIGENCE) 

527. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

528. Defendants were negligent as described in detail above. 

529. Defendants’ active facilitation of the trafficking of guns into Mexico, and their other reckless and unlawful conduct described in detail above, led to the epidemic of gun violence in Mexico and has strengthened the cartels. Defendants’ reckless and unlawful conduct has caused tens of thousands of deaths and cost many billions of dollars in harm—circumstances that constituted an imminent or clear and present danger amounting to more than normal and usual peril. 

530. Defendants in fact knew of the imminent danger that their conduct posed to the Government. 

531. Defendants were aware of the devastating and dangerous consequences of failing to monitor and discipline their distribution systems, of facilitating the unlawful trafficking of guns into Mexico, and of engaging in the other unlawful conduct described in detail above. Defendants nevertheless continued, and continue today, to engage in all of that conduct, demonstrating their conscious disregard of the consequences of their actions. Defendants’ conduct was so reckless and wanting in care that it constituted a conscious 190a 

disregard of and indifference to the life, safety, and rights of persons in Mexico and of the Government. 

532. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ gross negligence, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT SIX (UNJUST ENRICHMENT AND RESTITUTION) 

533. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

534. Manufacturer Defendants have reaped enormous profits and gains from the sale of their guns that have foreseeably been trafficked into Mexico. 

535. Those sales have resulted in enormous increases in the Government’s expenditures, including but not limited to the following areas: medical care, police investigations, emergency personnel, public health resources, human services, courts, prisons, and related expenses. 

536. The Government has also been negatively affected by Defendants’ sales due to the decrease in property values throughout Mexico, loss of businesses, difficulty in developing the economy and society of Mexico, and loss of substantial productivity. 191a 

537. Defendants undertook the wrongful conduct for the purpose of increasing the sales and profits, while at the same time avoiding responsibility for the massive costs caused by those sales, shifting those costs to the Government and its citizens. 

538. Defendants have, without justification, unjustly refused and failed to pay for the consequences of their unreasonable conduct and, as a result, the Government has been required to pay for the associated costs resulting from Defendants’ reckless and unlawful conduct. 

539. The Government’s expenditure of substantial sums to pay for the associated costs resulting from the use of guns that Defendants sold for enormous profit by Defendants has unjustly benefited and enriched Defendants at the Government’s expense, to its detriment. 

540. By virtue of the foregoing, the Government has incurred expenses that, in law, equity and fairness, ought to have been borne by Defendants. Defendants have unjustly enriched themselves at the Government’s expense. 

541. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT SEVEN 

(VIOLATION OF CUTPA) 

542. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and 192a 

succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

543. Defendant Colt violated the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 42-110a et seq. (“CUTPA”), by marketing that emphasized the ability of civilians to use Colt assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks. 

544. Colt knowingly violated CUTPA by marketing products like its semi-automatic assault rifles to the civilian market in ways that highlighted their efficacy for civilians wanting to carry out unlawful military-style combat missions and that encouraged and promoted that misuse. For example, as noted above Colt specifically labels its products with militaristic terms like “Trooper” and “Patrol” to increase the viewer’s association of Colt’s products with military-style combat. 

545. Colt knew that its marketing and advertising would attract persons and organizations that intended to use Colt’s products to battle against the military and police, including the military and police in Mexico. 

546. Colt further knew that its products would be trafficked into Mexico for use by the drug cartels there. Colt knew that its products, and its marketing of those products, created an unreasonable risk of physical injury to persons in Mexico. 

547. Colt’s conduct in producing and marketing its military-style assault weapons is a knowing violation of CUTPA, and those violations were a substantial factor in causing the injuries that the Government has sustained. 193a 

548. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT EIGHT (VIOLATION OF MASS. G. L. c. 93A) 

549. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 

550. Defendant Smith & Wesson violated the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws c. 93A (“Chapter 93A”), by marketing that emphasized the ability of civilians to use Smith & Wesson assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks. 

551. Smith & Wesson knowingly violated Chapter 93A by marketing products like its semi-automatic assault rifles to the civilian market in ways that highlighted their efficacy for civilians wanting to carry out unlawful military-style combat missions and that encouraged and promoted that misuse. For example, as noted above Smith & Wesson uses the “M&P” or “Military and Police” designation, emphasizing that its products are capable of being deployed in combat-like scenarios. And its marketing highlights the ability of its products to rapidly dispatch large numbers of opponents in armed combat, appealing especially to criminals like the cartels. 194a 

552. Smith & Wesson knew that its marketing and advertising would attract persons and organizations that intended to use Smith &Wesson’s products to battle against the military and police, including the military and police in Mexico. 

553. Smith & Wesson further knew that its products would be trafficked into Mexico for use by the drug cartels there. Smith & Wesson knew that its products, and its marketing of those products, created an unreasonable risk of physical injury to persons in Mexico. 

554. Smith & Wesson’s conduct in producing and marketing its military-style assault weapons is a knowing violation of Chapter 93A, and those violations were a substantial factor in causing the injuries that the Government has sustained. 

555. The Government engages in trade or commerce and therefore may recover its losses under Section 11 of Chapter 93A. 

556. As a foreseeable and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered a loss of money or property, including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

COUNT NINE (PUNITIVE DAMAGES) 

557. The Government hereby repeats and incorporates by reference each preceding and succeeding paragraph as though fully set forth herein. 195a 

558. All of Defendants’ acts and omissions stated above were willful and malicious, evidenced a conscious disregard for the rights and safety of other persons, and had a great probability of causing substantial harm. 

559. As a direct and proximate result of Defendants’ conduct, the Government has suffered actual injury and damages including, but not limited to, significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections, and other services, as well as other extensive economic losses. 

560. Defendants’ unconscionable conduct warrants an assessment of exemplary and punitive damages in an amount appropriate to punish Defendants and set an example that will deter similar conduct in the future. 

XI. DEMAND FOR JUDGMENT 

WHEREFORE, the Government respectfully demands that this Court: 

a. Enter joint and several judgments against the Defendants and in favor of the Government; 

b. Enter injunctive and equitable relief against the Defendants requiring them to: 

1. Abate and remedy the public nuisance they have created in Mexico; 

2. Create and implement standards sufficient to reasonably monitor and discipline their distribution systems; 

3. Incorporate all reasonably available safety mechanisms into their guns, 196a 

including devices to prevent use of those guns by unauthorized users; and 

4. Fund studies, programs, advertising campaigns, and other events focused on preventing unlawful trafficking of guns; 

c. Enter an injunction against the Defendants requiring them to take all necessary action to abate the current and future harm that their conduct is causing and would otherwise cause in the future in Mexico; 

d. Award damages to the Government in an amount to be determined at trial; 

e. Award civil penalties to the Government as permitted by law; 

f. Award to the Government restitution and disgorgement of Defendants’ profits. 

g. Award punitive damages to the Government in an amount to be determined at trial, and sufficient to punish Defendants or deter them and others from continuing or repeating their unlawful conduct; 

h. Award to the Government pre-and post-judgment interest as permitted by law; 

i. Award the Government its costs of suit, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, as provided by law; and 

j. Award such further and additional relief as the case may require and the Court may deem just and proper. 197a 

Dated: August 4, 2021 

s/ Steve D. Shadowen 

Steve D. Shadowen ( pro hac vice pending) 

Nicholas W. Shadowen ( pro hac vice pending) 

SHADOWEN PLLC 

1135 W. 6th Street, Suite 125 

Austin, TX 78703 

Phone: 855-344-3298 

sshadowen@shadowenpllc.co m

nshadowen@shadowenpllc.co m

s/ Richard M. Brunell 

Richard M. Brunell (BBO# 544236) 

SHADOWEN PLLC 

1135 W. 6th Street, Suite 125 

Austin, TX 78703 

Phone: 855-344-3298 

rbrunell@shadowenpllc.com 

Respectfully submitted, 

s/ Jonathan E. Lowy 

Jonathan E. Lowy (pro hac vice 

pending) 

BRADY 

840 First Street, N.E. Suite 400 

Washington, DC 20002 

Phone: 202-370-8104 

jlowy@bradyunited.o rg 198a 

JS 44 (Rev. 10/20)  CIVIL COVER SHEET 

The JS 44 civil cover sheet and the information contained herein neither replace nor supplement the filing and service of pleadings or other papers as required by law, except as provided by local rules of court. This form, approved by the Judicial Conference of the United States in September 1974, is required for the use of the Clerk of Court for the purpose of initiating the civil docket sheet. (SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON NEXT PAGE OF THIS FORM.) 

I. (a) PLAINTIFFS 

Estados Unidos Mexicanos 

(b) County of Residence of First Listed Plaintiff Mexico 

(EXCEPT IN U.S. PLAINTIFF CASES) 

(c) Attorneys 

(Firm Name, Address, and Telephone Number) 

Steve D. Shadowen, Shadowen PLLC 1135 W. Street, Suite 125 Austin, Texas 78703, 855-344-3298 

DEFENDANTS 

Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc., Barrett Firearms Mfg., Inc., Beretta USA Corp., Beretta Holdings, SPA, Century Arms, 

County of Residence of First Listed Defendant Springfield, MA 

(IN U.S. PLAINTIFF CASES ONLY) 

NOTE: IN LAND CONDEMNATION CASES, USE THE LOCATION OF THE TRACT OF LAND INVOLVED. 

Attorneys (If Known) 199a 

II. BASIS OF JURISDICTION  III. CITIZENSHIP OF PRINCIPAL PARTIES 

(Place an “X” in One Box Only)  (For Diversity Cases Only)  (Place an “X” in One Box for 

Plaintiff and One Box for Defendant) 

PTF  DEF  PTF  DEF 

☐ 1 U.S. 

Government Plaintiff 

☐ 3 Federal Question 

(U.S. Government Not a Party) 

Citizen of This 

State 

☐ 1 ☐ 1 Incorporated or 

Principal Place of Business In This State 

☐ 4  4

☐ 2 U.S. Government Defendant 

 4 Diversity 

(Indicate Citizenship of Parties in Item III) 

Citizen of Another State 

☐ 2 ☐ 2 Incorporated and 

Principal Place of Business In Another State 

☐ 5 ☐ 5

Citizen or Subject of a Foreign Country 

☐ 3 ☐ 3 Foreign Nation   6 ☐ 6200a 

IV. NATURE OF SUIT (Place an “X” in One Box Only)  Click here for: Nature of Suit Code Descriptions .

CONTRACT 

☐ 110 Insurance 

☐ 120 Marine 

☐ 130 Miller Act 

☐ 140 Negotiable Instrument 

☐ 150 Recovery of Overpayment & Enforcement of Judgment 

☐ 151 Medicare Act 

☐ 152 Recovery of Defaulted Student Loans (Excludes Veterans) 

☐ 153 Recovery of Overpayment of Veteran’s Benefits 

☐ 160 Stockholders’ Suits 

☐ 190 Other Contract 

☐ 195 Contract Product Liability 

☐ 196 Franchise 

REAL PROPERTY 

☐ 210 Land Condemnation 

☐ 220 Foreclosure 

☐ 230 Rent Lease & Ejectment 

☐ 240 Torts to Land 

☐ 245 Tort Product Liability 

☐ 290 All Other Real Property 201a 

TORTS 

PERSONAL INJURY  PERSONAL INJURY 

☐ 310 Airplane  ☐ 365 Personal Injury - Product Liability 

☐ 315 Airplane Product Liability  ☐ 367 Health Care/Pharmaceutical Personal Injury Product Liability 

☐ 320 Assault, Libel & Slander  ☐ 368 Asbestos Personal Injury Product Liability 

☐ 330 Federal Employers’ Liability  PERSONAL PROPERTY 

☐ 340 Marine  ☐ 370 Other Fraud 

☐ 345 Marine Product Liability  ☐ 371 Truth in Lending 

☐ 350 Motor Vehicle  ☐ 380 Other Personal Property Damage 

☐ 355 Motor Vehicle Product Liability  ☐ 385 Property Damage 

 360 Other Personal Injury 

☐ 362 Personal Injury - Medical Malpractice 202a 

CIVIL RIGHTS  PRISONER PETITIONS 

☐ 440 Other Civil Rights  Habeas Corpus: 

☐ 441 Voting  ☐ 463 Alien Detainee 

☐ 442 Employment  ☐ 510 Motions to Vacate Sentence 

☐ 443 Housing/Accommodations  ☐ 530 General 

☐ 445 Amer. w/Disabilities - Employment  ☐ 535 Death Penalty 

☐ 446 Amer. w/Disabilities - Other  Other: 

☐ 448 Education  ☐ 540 Mandamus & Other 

☐ 550 Civil Rights 

☐ 555 Prison Condition 

☐ 560 Civil Detainee - Conditions of Confinement 203a 

FORFEITURE/PENALTY  BANKRUPTCY 

☐ 625 Drug Related Seizure of Property 21 USC 881 

☐ 422 Appeal 28 USC 158 

☐ 690 Other  ☐ 423 Withdrawal 28 USC 157 

PROPERTY RIGHTS 

☐ 820 Copyrights 

☐ 830 Patent 

☐ 835 Patent - Abbreviated New Drug Application 

LABOR  ☐ 840 Trademark 

☐ 710 Fair Labor Standards Act  ☐ 880 Defend Trade Secrets Act of 2016 

☐ 720 Labor/Management Relations  SOCIAL SECURITY 

☐ 740 Railway Labor Act  ☐ 861 HIA (1395ff) 

☐ 751 Family and Medical Leave Act  ☐ 862 Black Lung (923) 

☐ 790 Other Labor Litigation  ☐ 863 DIWC/DIWW (405(g)) 

☐ 791 Employee Retirement Income Security Act 

☐ 864 SSID Title XVI 

☐ 865 RSI (405(g)) 

IMMIGRATION  FEDERAL TAX SUITS 

☐ 462 Naturalization Application  ☐ 870 Taxes (U.S. Plaintiff or Defendant) 

☐ 465 Other Immigration Actions  ☐ 871 IRS—Third Party 26 USC 7609 204a 

OTHER STATUTES 

☐ 375 False Claims Act 

☐ 376 Qui Tam (31 USC 3729(a)) 

☐ 400 State Reapportionment 

☐ 410 Antitrust 

☐ 430 Banks and Banking 

☐ 450 Commerce 

☐ 460 Deportation 

☐ 470 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 

☐ 480 Consumer Credit (15 USC 1681 or 1692) 

☐ 485 Telephone Consumer Protection Act 

☐ 490 Cable/Sat TV 

☐ 850 Securities/Commodities/Exchange 

☐ 890 Other Statutory Actions 

☐ 891 Agricultural Acts 

☐ 893 Environmental Matters 

☐ 895 Freedom of Information Act 

☐ 896 Arbitration 

☐ 899 Administrative Procedure Act/Review or Appeal of Agency Decision 

☐ 950 Constitutionality of State Statutes 205a 

V. ORIGIN (Place an “X” in One Box Only) 

1 Original Proceeding 

☐ 2 Removed from State Court 

☐ 3 Remanded from Appellate Court 

☐ 4 Reinstated or Reopened 

☐ 5 Transferred from Another District 

(specify) 

☐ 6 Multi-district Litigation - Transfer 

☐ 8 Multi-district Litigation -Direct File 

VI. CAUSE OF ACTION 

Cite the U.S. Civil Statute under which you are filing 

(Do not cite jurisdictional statutes unless diversity ):17 USC 1332(a)(4) 

Brief description of cause: Unlawful gun sales practices 

VII. REQUESTED 

IN COMPLAINT 

☐CHECK IF THIS IS A CLASS ACTION UNDER RULE 23, F.R.Cv.P. 

DEMAND  $ CHECK YES only if demanded in complaint: 

JURY DEMAND : ☐Yes No 

VIII. RELATED CASE(S) 

IF ANY 

(See 

instructions):  JUDGE 

DOCKET NUMBER 

DATE  SIGNATURE OF ATTORNEY OF RECORD 

August 4, 2021  /s Richard Brunell 

FOR OFFICE USE ONLY 

RECEIPT #  AMOUNT  APPLYING IFP  JUDGE  MAG. JUDGE 206a 

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

1.  Title of case (name of first party on each side only) 

Estados Unidos Mexicanos v. Smith & Wesson 

Brands, Inc., et al. 

2.  Category in which the case belongs based upon the numbered nature of suit code listed on the civil cover sheet. (See local rule. 40.1(a)(1)). 

☐ I.  160, 400, 410, 441, 535, 830*, 835*, 850, 880, 891, 893, R.23, REGARDLESS OF NATURE OF SUIT. 

☐ II.  110, 130, 190, 196, 370, 375, 376, 440, 442, 443, 445, 446, 448, 470, 751,820*, 840*, 895, 896, 899. 

☒ III  120, 140, 150, 151, 152, 153, 195, 210, 220, 230, 240, 245, 290, 310, 315, 320, 330, 340, 345, 350, 355, 360, 362, 365, 367, 368, 371, 380, 385, 422, 423, 430, 450, 460, 462, 463, 465, 480, 485, 490, 510, 530, 540, 550, 555, 560, 625, 690, 710, 720, 740, 790, 791, 861-865, 870, 871, 890, 950. 

*Also complete AO 120 or AO 121. for patent, trademark or copyright cases. 

3.  Title and number, if any, of related cases. (See local rule 40.1(g)). If more than one prior related case has been filed in this district please indicate the title and number of the first filed case in this court. 

4.  Has a prior action between the same parties and based on the same claim ever been filed in this court? 

YES ☐ NO ☒

5.  Does the complaint in this case question the constitutionality of an act of congress affecting the public interest? (See 28 USC §2403) 

YES ☐ NO ☒207a 

If so, is the U.S.A. or an officer, agent or employee of the U.S. a party? 

YES ☐ NO ☐

6.  Is this case required to be heard and determined by a district court of three judges pursuant to title 28 USC §2284? 

YES ☐ NO ☐

7.  Do all of the parties in this action, excluding governmental agencies of the United States and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (“governmental agencies”), residing in Massachusetts reside in the same division? - (See, Local Rule 40.1(d)). 

YES ☐ NO ☒

A.  If yes, in which division do all of the non-governmental parties reside? 

Eastern Division ☐ Central Division ☐ Western Division ☐

B.  If no, in which division do the majority of the plaintiffs or the only parties, excluding governmental agencies, residing in Massachusetts reside? 

Eastern Division ☒ Central Division ☐ Western Division ☐

8.  If filing a Notice of Removal - are there any motions pending in the state court requiring the attention of this Court? (If yes, submit a separate sheet identifying the motions) 

YES ☐ NO ☐

(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT) 

ATTORNEY’S OR PRO SE’S NAME Steve D. Shadowen 

ADDRESS 1135 W. 6th Street, Suite 125, Austin, Texas 

78703 

TELEPHONE NO. 855-344-3298 

EMAIL ADDRESS sshadowen@shadowenpllc.com 208a 

APPENDIX B 

UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

> ESTADOS UNIDOS MEXICANOS,
> Plaintiff
> v.
> SMITH & WESSON BRANDS, INC.; BARRETT FIREARMS MANUFACTURING, INC.; BERETTA USA CORP.; CENTURY INTERNATIONAL ARMS, INC.; COLT’S MANUFACTURING COMPANY, LLC; GLOCK, INC.; STURM, RUGER & CO., INC.; and WITMER PUBLIC SAFETY GROUP, INC. d/b/a INTERSTATE ARMS,
> Defendants.
> )))))))))))))))
> Civil Action No. 21-11269-FDS

MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON 

DEFENDANTS’ MOTIONS TO DISMISS 

SAYLOR, C.J. 

This lawsuit involves claims against seven gun manufacturers and one wholesaler alleging the illegal trafficking of guns into Mexico. The plaintiff is the government of Mexico. The principal issue is whether the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (“PLCAA”), 15 U.S.C. §§ 7901-7903 et seq. —a statute passed with the express purpose of protecting the firearm industry from civil liability for the criminal misuse of its products—requires dismissal of the complaint. 209a 

Mexico’s domestic gun laws are strict. There is only one gun store in the entire nation, and it issues fewer than 50 permits per year. Nonetheless, Mexico is suffering from an epidemic of gun-related violence. In 2003, it had fewer than 2,500 gun-related homicides per year. By 2019, that number had risen to 23,000. In 2019 alone, there were more than 3.9 million crimes committed in Mexico with U.S.-manufactured guns. 

The direct causes of that increase are, of course, the decisions of individual actors in Mexico to commit violent crimes. The indirect causes are no doubt many, but surely a substantial portion of the blame rests with American citizens. The rise of Mexican criminal organizations has been fueled by the unrelenting demand of Americans for illegal drugs, and those same organizations now play an ever-increasing role in the smuggling of illegal migrants across the border. The complaint here focuses on an additional indirect cause of that violence: the marketing and sales practices of American gun manufacturers and distributors. 

According to the complaint, the increase in gun-related violence in Mexico is directly linked to the expiration of the U.S. ban on assault rifles in 2004. It alleges that when that ban expired, the production and manufacturing of firearms in the United States increased dramatically. In particular, gun manufacturers increased the production of military-style assault weapons, which are the type favored by criminal organizations. The complaint alleges that the manufacturers are aware of this and are “deliberate and willing participants, reaping profits from the criminal market they knowingly supply.” (Compl. ¶ 16). 210a 

The complaint alleges that 70 to 90 percent of guns recovered at crime scenes in Mexico were trafficked from the United States, with defendants producing more than 68 percent of those guns. It further alleges that defendants are “fully on notice of the massive trafficking of their guns into Mexico” because it has been extensively documented in government reports and throughout the media. ( Id. ¶ 6). According to the complaint, defendants have been nonetheless unwilling to implement any public-safety monitoring of their distribution systems to limit that illegal trafficking. 

The complaint asserts claims against eight defendants. Seven are gun manufacturers—Smith & Wesson, Beretta, Century Arms, Colt, Glock, Ruger, and Barrett. The eighth defendant is Interstate Arms, a gun wholesaler and distributor. All claims arise under state law, and include, among other things, claims for negligence, public nuisance, defective design, unjust enrichment, and violation of Connecticut and Massachusetts state consumer-protection statutes. 

Defendants have moved to dismiss all claims pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. In addition, defendants have moved to dismiss based on lack of Article III standing pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1). Certain defendants have also moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2). 

Unfortunately for the government of Mexico, all of its claims are either barred by federal law or fail for other reasons. The PLCAA unequivocally bars 211a 

lawsuits seeking to hold gun manufacturers responsible for the acts of individuals using guns for their intended purpose. And while the statute contains several narrow exceptions, none are applicable here. 

This Court does not have the authority to ignore an act of Congress. Nor is its proper role to devise stratagems to avoid statutory commands, even where the allegations of the complaint may evoke asympathetic response. And while the Court has considerable sympathy for the people of Mexico, and none whatsoever for those who traffic guns to Mexican criminal organizations, it is duty-bound to follow the law. 

Accordingly, and for the reasons set forth below, the motions to dismiss will be granted. 

I. Background 

A. Factual Background 

1. Parties 

Estados Unidos Mexicanos (“Mexico”) is a foreign nation. (Compl. ¶ 30). 

Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc.; Barrett Firearms Manufacturing, Inc.; Beretta U.S.A. Corp.; Century International Arms, Inc.; Colt’s Manufacturing Company, LLC; Glock, Inc.; and Sturm, Ruger & Co., Inc. are manufacturers and sellers of firearms. (Id. 

¶¶ 31-39). 

Witmer Public Safety Group, Inc., currently doing business as “Interstate Arms,” is a Boston-area wholesaler of firearms. (Id. ¶ 40). All defendant manufacturers, except Barrett, use Interstate Arms to sell their guns for resale to gun dealers throughout the 212a 

United States. ( Id. ¶¶ 1, 31-40). Barrett’s authorized dealer in Massachusetts is the Natick Outdoor Store. (Id. ¶ 32). 

2. Defendants’ Alleged Knowledge of Unlawful Trafficking of Guns to Mexico 

According to the complaint, defendants are aware of the harmful effects their actions have in Mexico. (Id. 

¶¶ 115-226). Specifically, the complaint alleges that gun dealers utilize a variety of practices that enable them to traffic guns to Mexico and that defendants are aware of those practices. ( Id. ¶ 118). 

For example, the complaint alleges that defendants know that the gun dealers they sell to engage in conduct such as “straw sales, multiple sales, repeat sales, and other business practices that supply traffickers who arm the drug cartels.” (Id. ). It also alleges that both the public news and government sources put defendants on notice of those practices and of the specific dealers that routinely cross guns into Mexico utilizing those tactics. (Id. ¶¶ 119-22). That information has been allegedly “spoon fed” to defendants because of its public nature. (Id. ¶ 121). According to the complaint, news sources have published more than 3,000 articles since 2011 in the United States alone that explain how defendants’ products contribute to violence in Mexico. ( Id. ¶¶ 135, 139). Allegedly, those sources have also provided the names of particular dealers whose guns are most commonly found in the hands of Mexican cartels. ( Id. 

¶¶ 119-20). The complaint also details congressional, other governmental, and NGO data that is publicly available. ( Id. ¶¶ 137-40). 213a 

According to the complaint, defendants willfully refuse to utilize the resources available to them that would make the distribution and sale of firearms safer. (Id. ¶¶ 121-23). For example, it alleges that defendants could use ATF trace data to obtain more detailed information as to which dealers contribute to the illegal Mexican gun market, but choose not to. ( Id. 

¶¶ 123, 125). Instead, defendants allegedly capitalize on ATF’s inability to monitor the entire industry and sell to dealers whose licenses should be revoked. (Id. 

¶¶ 126-30). According to the complaint, defendants have resisted governmental efforts to address the public safety issues caused by the sale of their firearms. ( Id. ¶¶ 141-44). 

The complaint alleges that defendants intentionally allow the continued unlawful trafficking of guns into Mexico. (Id. ¶¶ 209; 377-95). Specifically, it alleges that the flow of guns into the illegal market is a “feature” and not a “bug.” ( Id. ¶ 384). According to the complaint, defendants have received at least $170 million annually from such sales. (Id. ¶ 389). It further alleges that research from the University of San Diego suggests that almost half of all licensed gun dealers would be forced to close shop if not for gun trafficking into Mexico. ( Id. ¶ 395). 

3. Defendants’ Alleged Conduct 

The complaint alleges that defendants engage in multiple practices that are contrary to their obligations as manufacturers or sellers of dangerous goods. ( Id. ¶¶ 227-376). 

a. General Distribution Practices 

Defendants use three-tier distribution systems. ( Id. 

¶ 378). Defendants, as manufacturers, sell to 214a 

distributors, who sell to retailers, who then sell to civilian end-users. (Id. ). According to the complaint, defendants’ distribution practices enable the unlawful trafficking of guns to Mexico for multiple reasons. ( Id. 

¶¶ 227-376). 

First, the complaint alleges that defendants sell to “any and all” distributors with federal licenses, ignoring potential “irresponsible” actors and the possible effects on public safety. (Id. ¶¶ 228-30). Second, it alleges that defendants’ distribution and sales practices enable straw purchases, multiple and repeat sales, “kitchen-table sales,” and unlawful sales at gun shows. ( Id. ¶¶ 237-77). 

A straw purchaser is someone who purchases a gun on behalf of the final intended recipients, who often are not lawfully permitted to purchase a gun themselves. (Id. ¶ 69). According to the complaint, straw purchasers are involved in the movement of the majority of the guns that end up illegally in Mexico. (Id. ¶ 237). Allegedly, straw purchases often occur in situations where defendants should have known they were dealing with such a purchaser and where additional training and diligence could have prevented the gun from being passed to criminals or other downstream users. (Id. ¶¶ 238-39). According to the complaint, defendants have taken no action to implement such training and diligence. ( Id. ). 

Multiple sales occur when someone clusters gun purchases to buy multiple guns at the same time from the same dealer, which is further exacerbated by repeat sales to those customers. ( Id. ¶ 251). According to the complaint, the multiple-sale buyer “transfers the guns to [persons] who do not want to submit to a 215a 

background check.” ( Id. ). The guns are then diverted to the criminal market and then trafficked illegally into Mexico. ( Id. ¶ 252). The complaint further alleges that multiple sales often occur under circumstances that “indicate[] or should have indicated” that the guns “were destined for the unlawful market.” (Id. ). Defendants allegedly know the likely consequences of their actions, but still choose to “regularly allow their guns to be sold . . . as part of multiple purchases.” ( Id. ). Congress and ATF have also acknowledged the “high-risk practice” of multiple sales because it is a common way that traffickers purchase guns to sell in the illegal market. (Id. ¶ 253). Various sources within the gun manufacturing community have also allegedly acknowledged the role such sales play in fueling the illegal market. ( Id. ¶¶ 253-55). 

The term “kitchen-table sales” refers to gun sales that occur outside of stores, such as at a dealer’s home or a parking lot. (Id. ¶ 258). According to the complaint, defendants allegedly sell to dealers who make such sales, and who use the Internet to manage customer orders. (Id. ¶¶ 258-59). This allows the dealer to act as a conduit between a manufacturer or distributor and the ultimate purchasers without the legal restrictions placed on sellers at brick-and-mortar stores. (Id. ¶¶ 259-60). Those types of sales result in almost a quarter of all ATF licensed-dealer trafficking investigations, because many of those dealers allegedly capitalize on their relative freedom to circumvent federal gun sale and reporting laws. (Id. 

¶ 261). Despite awareness in the industry about the effects of selling to dealers engaged in this practice, defendants allegedly ignore the danger and continue 216a 

their practice of selling to them without proper scrutiny. ( Id. ¶¶ 262-64). 

Gun show sales occur when dealers purchase guns from other dealers and then sell them at gun shows for cash without adhering to legal requirements. (Id. 

¶ 276). Defendants are also allegedly aware of and nonetheless ignore the industry “loophole” that gun shows represent. (Id. ¶ 273). This “virtually unregulated” process leads to a considerable number of guns being illegally trafficked. ( Id. ¶ 275). 

b. Gun Design 

The complaint highlights a variety of ways in which defendants allegedly design their guns against the interest of public safety. ( Id. ¶¶ 283-318). 

(1) Semi-Automatic Weapons 

Semi-automatic weapons that are available for civilian purchase were originally designed to mirror the efficient and lightweight military weapons of the 1950s. (Id. ¶¶ 282-84). Those guns utilize the same design as military weapons and permit rapid-fire emptying of magazines only slightly slower than fully automated weapons. (Id. ¶¶ 285, 288, 289). 1 The complaint alleges that defendants know, or otherwise remain willfully blind to the fact, that their civilian semi-automatic weapons are easily converted into automatic weapons. (Id. ¶¶ 290-91). Allegedly, they   

> 1According to the complaint, it takes two seconds to empty a large-capacity ammunition magazine in an automatic weapon and only five seconds to empty the same size magazine in a semi-automatic weapon. ( Id. ¶ 289).

217a 

choose designs that facilitate such illegal modification. (Id. ¶ 291). 

(2) Military-Style Weapons 

The complaint alleges that Barrett’s .50 caliber sniper rifle “is a weapon of war.” ( Id. ¶ 292). The gun was designed and marketed as “armor-penetrating” and employs ammunition five to ten times larger than that found in semi-automatic guns. (Id. ¶¶ 292, 296). That ammunition, and the power the gun must possess to fire it, allows the rifle to hit a variety of non-civilian targets, such as aircraft, which it can do from up to 2,000 meters away. (Id. ¶¶ 296-97). 2 For that reason, according to the complaint, the weapon is favored among a variety of criminal organizations, including Mexican drug cartels. ( Id. ¶ 298). 

The complaint further alleges that the Century Arms WASR-10 assault rifle is a military weapon because it is a “variant” of an AK-47 assault weapon. (Id. ¶ 300). Allegedly, a Romanian company ships weapons to Century Arms in the United States, where the company modifies them with military-type features. ( Id. ¶¶ 301-02). 

(3) Machine Guns 

Defendants Colt, Smith & Wesson, Ruger, and Century Arms allegedly sell AR-15 and AK-47 guns as semi-automatic weapons that can be easily modified to allow for automatic firing. (Id. ¶¶ 307-10). The complaint alleges that this design feature is   

> 2The complaint includes a photograph of a helicopter allegedly shot down in Mexico by a criminal cartel member using the Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle. ( Id. ¶ 299).

218a 

intentional and attractive to criminal organizations. (Id. ¶ 312). The complaint alleges that defendants “indiscriminately supply the civilian market” with semi-automatic guns that they know will be used by criminals in Mexico. ( Id. ¶ 318). 

(4) Alterable Serial Numbers 

Criminals often destroy or otherwise remove the serial numbers on guns to make them more difficult to track and detect. (Id. ¶¶ 363-64). Guns whose serial numbers are easily altered or removed are favored by Mexican criminal organizations because without aserial number, investigators often hit a dead end in retracing a gun’s movements. (Id. ¶ 364). It is possible to create serial numbers that are impossible to remove or alter or to include an additional serial number hidden elsewhere on the gun. (Id. ¶ 365). According to the complaint, this was a stipulated portion of an agreement in 2000 between Smith & Wesson and the government. (Id. ). 3 The complaint alleges that because defendants benefit from the unlawful trafficking of guns, they do not implement strategies to avoid the destruction of serial numbers. (Id. ¶ 366).                 

> 3According to the complaint, on March 17, 2000, the federal government and various cities entered into asettlement agreement with Smith & Wesson in which the company accepted an obligation to sell to only “authorized distributors and authorized dealers” who abided by a code of conduct, including the requirement that the distributors and dealers store all trace requests and report them to the company. (Compl. ¶ 94).

219a 

(5) Potential Safety Improvements 

The complaint alleges that defendants exacerbate existing public-safety issues by failing to incorporate reasonable safety measures in their design, marketing, and distribution practices. (Id. ¶ 353). It also alleges that there are practical steps defendants can take to improve the design of guns that would prevent them from being used improperly. (Id. 

¶¶ 356-59). Moreover, according to the complaint, there would be no downside to defendants incorporating such features into their designs, as they would not prohibit lawful users from using the guns, and such features are technologically feasible. (Id. 

¶¶ 354, 357). For example, according to the complaint, the Smith & Wesson 2000 Agreement included aprovision under which the company agreed to develop guns that only a particular, intended user could fire. (Id. ¶ 359). Defendants have allegedly refused to take such measures and therefore, according to the complaint, sell guns that are “defective and unreasonably dangerous.” ( Id. ¶¶ 355-56). 

c. Marketing Practices 

According to the complaint, defendants have marketed and advertised their guns in an unsafe manner. ( Id. ¶¶ 319-22). 

The complaint alleges that defendants “routinely” market their guns with military and law-enforcement images and language. (Id. ¶ 322). This has been referred to as the “halo effect” and allegedly allows defendants to “leverage” affiliations with military or police to increase civilian interest. (Id. ¶ 323). The complaint also alleges that the use of explicit military and law enforcement references, as well as references 220a 

to a weapon’s ability to function in “combat-like scenarios,” attracts dangerous users or criminals. ( Id. 

¶¶ 321-30). 

There are several examples of these types of marketing practices in the complaint. Smith & Wesson advertisements display “combat-like scenarios” and include statements such as “authentic Military & Police . . . design.” (Id. ¶ 324). Colt advertisements market its “Trooper” assault rifle, discuss missions, and liken a civilian gun to its “combat-proven brother.” (Id. ¶ 325). Barrett advertises its .50 caliber rifle as “battle proven” and capable of hitting targets 1800 meters away. (Id. 

¶ 326). It also advertises its MRAD sniper rifle as “transform[ing] the military platform to fit civilian precision shooters.” (Id. ¶¶ 326-27). Century Arms “emphasizes that its WASR-10 gun is based on a design used by ‘Romanian ranger teams,’” includes “Paratrooper” in a civilian gun name, and highlights their gun’s ability to “eat more ammo.” (Id. ¶ 328). 4

Glock uses military uniforms, associates with police, and discusses “tactical” uses to advertise its guns. ( Id. 

¶ 329). Interstate Arms refers to itself as a seller of “military-style” guns. ( Id. ¶ 330). 

In addition, according to the complaint, Colt specifically markets its guns in ways that specifically entice Mexican criminal cartels. ( Id. ¶¶ 215-21). Colt sells three guns that it intends for Mexican buyers:        

> 4According to the complaint, “eat more ammo” indicates the gun’s capacity for rapid-pace, high-output shooting that, allegedly, would be neither necessary nor desired for the average civilian buyer. ( Id. ¶ 328).

221a 

the “El Jefe” pistol, the “El Grito” pistol, and the “Emiliano Zapata 1911” pistol. ( Id. ¶ 215). Allegedly, these “models are status symbols and coveted by the drug cartels.” ( Id. ). 

According to the complaint, defendants utilize these marketing tactics while knowing that they are “disproportionately” attractive to criminal organizations. ( Id. ¶ 331). 

4. Alleged Injuries to the Mexican Government 

The complaint alleges “massive” injury to the Mexican government as a result of defendants’ conduct. ( Id. ¶ 446). 

a. General Harm 

The complaint alleges that an estimated 342,000-597,000 guns sold by defendants are smuggled illegally into Mexico from the United States each year. (Id. ¶¶ 437-38). It also states that Mexico now ranks third in the world for number of gun-related deaths. (Id. ¶ 453). 

The complaint alleges a direct link between the increasing violence in Mexico and defendants’ conduct. (Id. ¶¶ 434-45). It specifically shows a correlation between the increase in gun manufacturing in the United States, after the ban on assault-weapons expired in 2004, and (1) the number of illegal guns within Mexico, (2) the Mexican homicide rate, and (3) the increased use of guns for homicide. ( Id. ¶¶ 440-44). 

b. Specific Claimed Injuries 

According to the complaint, the Mexican government “has had to spend vast funds on a wide 222a 

range of services to fight the effects of Defendants’ unlawful conduct,” including “substantial and unusual costs for providing, for example, extraordinary health care, law enforcement and military services, criminal justice administration, public assistance, and other social services and public programs.” ( Id. ¶ 447). 

Specifically, the complaint alleges that the Mexican government has suffered the following injuries: 

a. Losses caused by the decrease in funding available for other public services because the funds were diverted to services designed to address the effects of Defendants’ conduct; 

b. Costs of providing healthcare and medical care; 

c. Costs of additional and specialized training for military and police; 

d. Costs associated with the deaths of and substantial injuries to police and military personnel; 

e. Costs of mental-health services, treatment, counseling, rehabilitation services, and social services to victims and their families; 

f. Costs of law enforcement and public safety . . . ; 

g. Costs of the increased burden on the Government’s judicial system, including increased security, increased staff, and the increased cost of adjudicating criminal matters due to the escalating levels of crime caused by Defendants’ conduct; 

h. Costs of providing care for children whose parents were victims of Defendants’ conduct; 

i. Losses from the decreased efficiency and size of the working population in Mexico; 223a 

j. Losses from the diminished property values in the communities affected by Defendants’ conduct; 

k. Losses from decreased business investment and economic activity; 

l. Losses incurred by the Government acting in its commercial capacity, including from armed attacks on employees of state-owned enterprises and compensation paid to such victims. 

(Id. ¶ 448). 

B. Procedural Background 

The complaint asserts nine counts, seven of which are against all defendants. Count 1 asserts a claim for negligence based on gun design, marketing, and distribution. ( Id. ¶¶ 506-10). Count 2 asserts a claim for public nuisance based on the increase in violence tied to defendants’ alleged behavior. (Id. ¶¶ 511-19). Count 3 asserts a claim for defective design based on the allegedly unreasonably dangerous design of defendants’ guns. (Id. ¶¶ 520-22). Count 4 asserts a claim for negligence per se involving defendants’ gun-distribution systems. ( Id. ¶¶ 523-26). Count 5 asserts a claim for gross negligence. ( Id. ¶¶ 527-32). Count 6 asserts a claim for unjust enrichment and restitution, based on defendants’ profits and gains from the sale of illegally trafficked guns. (Id. ¶¶ 533-41). Count 7 asserts a claim against defendant Colt for violation of the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110a, et seq. (Id. ¶¶ 542-48). Count 8 asserts a claim against defendant Smith & Wesson for violation of the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A. (Id. ¶¶ 549-56). Count 9 asserts a claim for punitive damages against all defendants. ( Id. ¶¶ 557-60). 224a 

Defendants have filed multiple motions to dismiss. All defendants have moved to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6) for lack of Article III standing and failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Interstate Arms and Smith & Wesson have separately moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim. Ruger, Century Arms, Glock, and Beretta have moved to dismiss pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2) for lack of personal jurisdiction. Barrett and Colt have moved to dismiss for both lack of personal jurisdiction and failure to state a claim. 5

For the reasons set forth below, although plaintiff has made a sufficient showing of standing for the complaint to survive a motion to dismiss, all counts will be dismissed for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. The court need not reach the motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. 

See Johnson v. Andrews , 1994 WL 455013, at *4 (D. Mass. Aug. 17, 1994); In re Vitamins Antitrust Litig. ,2001 WL 849928, at *11 (D.D.C. Apr. 11, 2001); see also 4 C HARLES ALAN WRIGHT & ARTHUR R. MILLER ,F EDERAL P RACTICE & P ROCEDURE § 1067.6 (4th ed.) (stating that a court can “resolv[e] the suit on the merits when they clearly must be decided in favor of the party challenging [personal] jurisdiction, thereby obviating any need to decide the [jurisdictional] question”).  

> 5On December 31, 2021, plaintiff voluntarily dismissed its claims against two foreign corporations named as defendants (Beretta Holding S.p.A and Glock Ges.m.b.H).

225a 

II. Standard of Review 

A. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) 

On a motion to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction, “the party invoking the jurisdiction of a federal court carries the burden of proving its existence.” Johansen v. United States , 506 F.3d 65, 68 (1st Cir. 2007) (quoting Murphy v. United States , 45 F.3d 520, 522 (1st Cir. 1995)). If the party seeking to invoke federal jurisdiction “fails to demonstrate abasis for jurisdiction,” the motion to dismiss must be granted. Id. When ruling on a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(1), the court “must credit the plaintiff’s well-[pleaded] factual allegations and draw all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor.” 

Merlonghi v. United States , 620 F.3d 50, 54 (1st Cir. 2010). 

B. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) 

To survive a motion to dismiss under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), the complaint must state a claim that is plausible on its face. See Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly ,550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007). For a claim to be plausible, the “[f]actual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level . . . .” Id. at 555 (cleaned up). “The plausibility standard is not akin to a ‘probability requirement,’ but it asks for more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully.” Ashcroft v. Iqbal , 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Twombly , 550 U.S. at 556). When determining whether a complaint satisfies that standard, a court must assume the truth of all well-pleaded facts and give the plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable inferences. See Ruiz v. Bally Total Fitness Holding Corp. , 496 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 2007) (citing 226a 

Rogan v. Menino , 175 F.3d 75, 77 (1st Cir. 1999)). Dismissal is appropriate if the complaint fails to set forth “factual allegations, either direct or inferential, respecting each material element necessary to sustain recovery under some actionable legal theory.” 

Gagliardi v. Sullivan , 513 F.3d 301, 305 (1st Cir. 2008) (quoting Centro Medico del Turabo, Inc. v. Feliciano de Melecio , 406 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 2005)). 

III. Analysis 

A. Article III Standing 

Standing is a threshold question in every case; “[i]f a party lacks standing to bring a matter before the court, the court lacks jurisdiction to decide the merits of the underlying case.” United States v. AVX Corp. ,962 F.2d 108, 113 (1st Cir. 1992). To satisfy the case-or-controversy requirement of Article III of the Constitution, plaintiffs bear the burden of establishing that they (1) have suffered an “injury-in-fact” that is “concrete and particularized” and “actual or imminent;” (2) that the injury is “‘fairly traceable’ to the actions of the defendant;” and (3) that the injury will likely be redressed by a favorable decision. 

Bennett v. Spear , 520 U.S. 154, 167 (1997) (quoting 

Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife , 504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992)); Katz v. Pershing, LLC , 672 F.3d 64, 71 (1st Cir. 2012). Those elements must be proved “with the manner and degree of evidence required at the successive stages of the litigation.” Lujan , 504 U.S. at 561. 

Defendants only contest the second requirement: they contend that the harms alleged are not “fairly traceable” to their actions. 227a 

The “fairly traceable” component of constitutional standing examines the causal connection between the assertedly unlawful conduct and the alleged injury. 

See California v. Texas , 141 S. Ct. 2104, 2113-14 (2021) (explaining that plaintiff failed to show how defendant’s “action or conduct has caused or will cause the injury” for which they seek redress). One critical question is whether the “causal relation between [the] injury and challenged action depends upon the decision of an independent third party.” California v. Texas , 141 S. Ct. at 2117; see also Clapper v. Amnesty Int’l USA , 568 U.S. 398, 413 (explaining that the Court has been “reluctant to endorse standing theories that require guesswork as to how independent decisionmakers will exercise their judgment”). However, even if the causal relation depends on the actions of independent third parties, “standing is not precluded,” but rather is “substantially more difficult to establish.” Lujan , 504 U.S. at 562 (cleaned up). To satisfy the element of causation, the plaintiff must at least show “that third parties will likely react in predictable ways,” even where such actions are unlawful. Department of Commerce v. New York , 139 S. Ct. 2551, 2566 (2019). 

Here, plaintiff contends that the Mexican government and its citizens “have been victimized by a deadly flood” of firearms from the United States “into criminal hands in Mexico” as a consequence of defendants’ “deliberate actions and business practices.” (Compl. ¶ 2). According to the complaint, defendants “design, market, distribute, and sell guns in ways they know routinely arm the drug cartels in Mexico.” (Id. ¶ 3). Specifically, the complaint alleges that the trafficking of firearms into Mexico, and the 228a 

resulting violence, are the direct product of the intentional sales practices of defendants. ( Id. ¶ 3). 

The causal relation between the harm alleged and defendants’ conduct depends upon the decisions of multiple independent parties—that is, the decisions of distributors to sell to retailers; the decisions of those retailers to sell to straw purchasers or similar persons; the decisions of those purchasers to transfer weapons to cartel members or other criminal actors; and the independent choices of those individuals to engage in criminal behavior. And the chain of causality does not stop there. The plaintiff is not an individual victim of gun violence; it is the Mexican government, which alleges a series of consequential harms arising out of that violence, such as increased costs for health care and law enforcement. 

Nonetheless, the complaint sufficiently alleges—at least for standing purposes—that those third parties “will likely react in predictable ways,” even if unlawfully. Department of Commerce , 139 S. Ct. at 2556. The complaint alleges that 70 to 90 percent of guns that are recovered at crime scenes in Mexico were trafficked from the United States, and that defendants produce more than 68 percent of those trafficked guns. (Compl. ¶¶ 1,5). It further alleges that defendants’ policy is “to sell to any distributor or dealer that has a U.S. license to buy and sell the product, regardless of the buyer’s record of flouting the law and despite blazing red flags indicating that a gun dealer is conspiring with straw purchasers or others to traffic Defendants’ guns into Mexico.” ( Id. ¶ 7). 

Furthermore, the complaint alleges throughout that violence in Mexico is a predictable, or “foreseeable,” 229a 

result of defendants’ actions. (See , e.g. , id. ¶¶ 2, 50, 80, 87, 356). For example, section five of the complaint—titled “DEFENDANTS ARE FULLY ON NOTICE THAT THEIR CONDUCT CAUSES UNLAWFUL TRAFFICKING TO MEXICO”— provides examples of reports and articles that publicly revealed which gun dealers were the biggest contributors to the illegal gun market in Mexico. (Id. 

¶ 120). (See also id. ¶ 122 (“Defendants regularly receive even more direct information about problem dealers. Trace requests from ATF and other agencies alert Defendants that guns they sell to specific distributors and dealers are being recovered at crime scenes in Mexico.”)). 

The causation requirement of Article III standing “requires no more than de facto causality.” 

Department of Commerce , 139 S.Ct. at 2566 (quoting 

Block v. Meese , 793 F.2d 1303, 1309 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (Scalia, J.)); Bennett v. Spear , 520 U.S. at 167-68. At the pleading stage, “general factual allegations of injury resulting from the defendant’s conduct may suffice, for on a motion to dismiss we presume that general allegations embrace those specific facts that are necessary to support the claim.” Bennett v. Spear ,520 U.S. at 168 (cleaned up). Under the circumstances, the requirement of de facto causation is satisfied here. 

Accordingly, the complaint plausibly alleges that Mexico’s injuries are “fairly traceable” to defendants’ conduct for purposes of Article III standing. 230a 

B. The Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act 

The PLCAA was enacted in 2005. (Pub. L. No. 109-92, 119 Stat. 2095). The statute contains a lengthy preamble setting forth various congressional findings and statutory purposes. 15 U.S.C. § 7901. Among those findings is the following: 

(5) Businesses in the United States that are engaged in interstate and foreign commerce through the lawful design, manufacture, marketing, distribution, importation, or sale to the public of firearms or ammunition products that have been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce are not and should not be liable for the harm caused by those who criminally or unlawfully misuse firearm products or ammunition products that function as designed and intended. 

(6 The possibility of imposing liability on an entire industry for harm that is solely caused by others is an abuse of the legal system, erodes public confidence in our Nation’s laws, threatens the diminution of a basic constitutional right and civil liberty, invites the disassembly and destabilization of other industries and economic sectors lawfully competing in the free enterprise system of the United States, and constitutes an unreasonable burden on interstate and foreign commerce of the United States. 

(7) The liability actions commenced or contemplated by the Federal Government . . . and others are based on theories without foundation in hundreds of years of the common law and jurisprudence of the United States and do not 231a 

represent a bona fide expansion of the common law. The possible sustaining of these actions by amaverick judicial officer or petit jury would expand civil liability in a manner never contemplated by the framers of the Constitution, by Congress, or by the legislatures of the several States. 

Id. § 7901(a)(5)-(7). 

Among the stated purposes of the statute is to “prohibit causes of action against manufacturers [and] distributors . . . of firearms . . . for the harm solely caused by the criminal or unlawful misuse of firearm products . . . by others when the product functioned as designed and intended.” Id. § 7901(b)(1). 

As relevant here, the statute provides that a“qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any Federal or State court.” Id. § 7902(a). The term “qualified civil liability action” is defined to mean “a civil action or proceeding . . . brought by any person against a manufacturer or seller” of a firearm “for damages, punitive damages, injunctive or declaratory relief,” or other relief, “resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse” of a firearm by the person or a third party,” subject to certain exceptions. Id. § 7903(5)(A). 

For the following reasons, the Court finds that the PLCAA applies to this case and therefore, at aminimum, Counts 1-6 and Count 9 must be dismissed. 

1. Choice-of Law Analysis 

Plaintiff first contends that under choice-of-law principles, tort claims are generally governed by the law of the place where the injury occurred, and therefore Mexican law, not the PLCAA, should apply to this dispute. That argument may be disposed of summarily: because the PLCAA is a jurisdiction-232a 

stripping statute, no choice-of-law analysis is necessary. 

Statutes that “completely prohibit” certain types of actions or that “address[] ‘a court’s competence to adjudicate a particular category of cases’” are “best read as jurisdiction-stripping statute[s].” Patchak v. Zinke , 138 S. Ct. 897, 906 (2018) (quoting Wachovia Bank, N.A. v. Schmidt , 546 U.S. 303, 316 (2006)). To determine whether a statute is jurisdictional, the court must look to the language used and whether the statute “imposes jurisdictional consequences.” 

Patchak , 138 S. Ct. at 905. A statute can be jurisdictional even if it does not use the word “jurisdiction.” See id. (“Although § 2(b) does not use the word ‘jurisdiction,’ this Court does not require jurisdictional statutes to ‘incant magic words.’” (citation omitted)). Examples of jurisdictional language include: “an action shall not be filed or maintained in a Federal court;” “an appeal may not be taken;” “no person shall file or prosecute;” and “no action shall be brought under.” See Patchak , 138 S. Ct. at 905-06 (collecting cases). An example of “jurisdictional consequences” includes a directive by Congress, in the statute, that pending actions concerning the statute’s scope “shall be promptly dismissed.” Id. at 905. 

By its plain terms, the PLCAA limits the types of lawsuits that can be brought against gun manufacturers and distributors in federal and state court. Specifically, the PLCAA states that a “qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any Federal or State court.” 15 U.S.C. § 7902(a) (emphasis added). The PLCAA also provides that any such pending action, as of the date of enactment, must be 233a 

“immediately dismissed by the court.” 15 U.S.C. § 7902(b). 6 The PLCAA, therefore, is a jurisdictional statute. And because it bars exactly this type of action from being brought in federal and state courts, no choice-of-law analysis is necessary. 

2. Presumption Against Extraterritoriality 

Plaintiff further contends that the PLCAA does not apply when the lawsuit is brought by a foreign government for harms that primarily occurred in a foreign country. To resolve that question, the Court must consider whether the presumption against extraterritoriality applies. 

“It is a longstanding principle of American law ‘that legislation of Congress, unless a contrary intent appears, is meant to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.’” E.E.O.C. v. Arabian Am. Oil Co. , 499 U.S. 244, 248 (1991) (quoting 

Foley Bros., Inc. v. Filardo , 336 U.S. 281, 285 (1949)). “This principle finds expression in a canon of statutory construction known as the presumption against extraterritoriality: Absent clearly expressed congressional intent to the contrary, federal laws will be construed to have only domestic application.” RJR                     

> 6The Court recognizes that the Second Circuit reached an opposite conclusion in City of New York v. Mickalis Pawn Shop, LLC , 645 F.3d 114, 127 (2d Cir. 2011). However, since that opinion, the Supreme Court clarified in Patchak that a statute employing language such as “no action shall be brought under,” and instructing that all covered pending actions must be dismissed upon enactment, is jurisdictional in nature. As noted, the PLCAA has both jurisdictional language and jurisdictional consequences.

234a 

Nabisco, Inc. v. European Cmty. , 579 U.S. 325, 335 (2016) (citation omitted). The main objective of the presumption against extraterritoriality is “to protect against unintended clashes between our laws and those of other nations which could result in international discord.” Arabian Am. Oil Co. , 499 U.S. at 248. 

The Supreme Court has developed a two-step test to examine whether a given statute applies extraterritorially. See RJR Nabisco , 579 U.S. at 337. The first step examines whether Congress included explicit language in the statute that allows it to be applicable to conduct in foreign nations. See id. at 337. If a court does not find “affirmative and unmistakable” language in the statute that makes it applicable extraterritorially, see id. at 335, then, at the second step, the courts must determine the statute’s “focus” and “whether the conduct relevant to that focus occurred in United States territory,” WesternGeco LLC v. ION Geophysical Corp. , 138 S. Ct. 2129, 2136 (2018). If the relevant conduct occurred within United States territory, then the “case involves a permissible domestic application of the statute” and the presumption does not apply. WesternGeco LLC , 138 S. Ct. at 2136. 

a. Step One 

As to the first step, “the question is not whether we think Congress would have wanted a statute to apply to foreign conduct . . . but whether Congress has affirmatively and unmistakably instructed that the statute will do so. When a statute gives no clear indication of an extraterritorial application, it has none.” RJR Nabisco , 579 U.S. at 335 (quoting 235a 

Morrison v. National Australia Bank Ltd. , 561 U.S. 247, 255, 261 (2010)) (cleaned up). General references to “foreign commerce” or the use of generic terms such as “any” are not sufficient to defeat the presumption against extraterritoriality. See Morrison , 561 U.S. at 262-63; Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co. , 569 U.S. 108, 118 (2013). 

The relevant portions of the PLCAA are §§ 7902 and 7903. As noted, § 7902 of the PLCAA bars any “qualified civil liability action” in any United States court. A “qualified civil liability action” includes “a civil action or proceeding” brought by “any person” against gun manufacturers or sellers. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(a). “Person” is defined as “any individual, corporation, . . . or any other entity, including any governmental entity .” § 7903(3) (emphasis added). 

The PLCAA thus explicitly bars any governmental entity from bringing a civil action in any United States court against gun manufacturers or sellers. Nonetheless, “it is well established that generic terms like ‘any’ . . . do not rebut the presumption against extraterritoriality.” Kiobel , 569 U.S. at 118; see also 

id. (explaining that “the fact that the text [of the statute] reaches ‘ any civil action’” does not suggest application to torts committed abroad). Accordingly, the use of the word “any” throughout the PLCAA is not sufficient to rebut the presumption. 

Similarly, the PLCAA also contains numerous references to “foreign commerce.” For example, both the congressional findings and purposes set out in § 7901 use the term, and one of the explicit statutory purposes is to “prevent the use of such lawsuits to impose unreasonable burdens on interstate and 236a 

foreign commerce.” § 7901(b)(4) (emphasis added); see also § 7903(2) (defining “manufacturer” to include “a person who is engaged in the business of manufacturing the product in interstate or foreign 

commerce” (emphasis added)). Again, however, such general references are not sufficient to overcome the presumption. See Morrison , 561 U.S. at 262-63 (explaining that “we have repeatedly held that even statutes that contain broad language in their definitions of ‘commerce’ that expressly refer to ‘foreign commerce’ do not apply abroad” (cleaned up)). 

Thus, there are insufficient indications in the text of the PLCAA to overcome the presumption against extraterritoriality. The Court will therefore turn to step two of the analysis. 

b. Step Two 

At the second step, the court must examine “whether the case involves a domestic application of the statute;” this is done by “looking to the statute’s ‘focus.’” RJR Nabisco , 579 U.S. at 337. “The focus of a statute is the object of its solicitude, which can include the conduct it seeks to regulate, as well as the parties and interests it seeks to protect or vindicate.” 

WesternGeco LLC , 138 S. Ct. at 2137 (cleaned up). “If the conduct relevant to the statute’s focus occurred in the United States, then the case involves a permissible domestic application even if other conduct occurred abroad . . . .” RJR Nabisco , 579 U.S. at 337. That is, “[e]ven where the significant effects of the regulated conduct are felt outside U.S. borders, the statute itself does not present a problem of extraterritoriality, so long as the conduct which Congress seeks to regulate occurs largely within the United States.” 237a 

Environmental Def. Fund, Inc. v. Massey , 986 F.2d 528, 531 (D.C. Cir. 1993). Thus, when the conduct regulated by the statute occurs within the United States, the presumption against extraterritoriality does not apply. See Massey , 986 F.2d at 531. 

In WesternGeco LLC v. ION Geophysical Corp. , the Supreme Court examined the Patent Act, which provides damages for patent infringement. 138 S.Ct. 2129 at 2137-39. The court found that patent infringement was “plainly the focus” of that statute. 

Id. at 2137. And it determined that the specific conduct that constituted the infringement was the act of exporting components from the United States. See 

id. at 2138 (“[I]t was ION’s domestic act of supplying the components that infringed WesternGeco’s patents.”). Because the “conduct [] that is relevant to [the statute’s] focus clearly occurred in the United States,” it found that this was a domestic application of the Patent Act and the presumption did not apply. 

Id. at 2138-2139. It did not matter that there were other “incidental” “overseas events” or that the profits lost were “foreign profits.” Id. at 2138-39. 

Similarly, in Environmental Defense Fund, Inc. v. Massey , the D.C. Circuit determined that the statute at issue in that case was not subject to the presumption against extraterritoriality because the decision-making processes that it regulated took place “almost exclusively in this country” and “involve[d] the workings of the United States government.” 986 F.2d at 532. In other words, because the statute regulated a “particular process” that was “uniquely domestic,” the presumption did not apply. Id. 238a 

The focus of the PLCAA is both the civil actions that it “seeks to regulate” and the commercial activity and constitutional rights it “seeks to protect.” See 

Morrison , 561 U.S. at 267; WesternGeco , 138 S. Ct. at 2137; 15 U.S.C. § 7901(b)(1), (6). That is, the PLCAA seeks to regulate the types of claims that can be asserted against firearm manufacturers and sellers and seeks to protect the interests of the United States firearms industry and the rights of gun owners. Indeed, the statute seeks to prohibit exactly the type of claim that is currently before this Court. 

The PLCAA therefore seeks to regulate a “particular process” of government that is “uniquely domestic”: the types of cases that can be brought in United States courts against domestic gun manufacturers and distributors. See Massey , 986 F.2d at 532; 15 U.S.C. §§ 7902(a), 7903(5)(A). The regulation of the types of cases that can be brought in federal and state courts against domestic defendants is unquestionably adomestic matter. It is the type of conduct that “touch[es] and concern[s] the territory of the United States . . . with sufficient force to displace the presumption against extraterritorial application.” 

Kiobel , 569 U.S. at 124-25. 

Furthermore, the conduct of defendants for which plaintiff seeks to hold defendants liable occurred in the United States. The complained-of practices—such as the manufacture of certain types of guns, the marketing of guns in a manner intended to appeal to criminal organizations, and the sale of guns through distribution networks that facilitate the transfer to such organizations—all occurred entirely within the borders of the United States. Mexico is seeking to hold 239a 

defendants liable for practices that occurred within the United States and only resulted in harm in Mexico. 

In short, “the conduct relevant to the statute’s focus occurred in the United States.” RJR Nabisco , 579 U.S. at 337. Therefore, this case “involve[s] a permissible domestic application” of the PLCAA, “even if other conduct occurred abroad,” id. , and even if the “significant effects of the regulated conduct are felt outside U.S. borders,” Massey , 986 F.2d at 531. 

This case thus represents a valid domestic application of the PLCAA, and the presumption against extraterritoriality does not apply. 7 

> 7

In determining whether the presumption applied, the D.C. Circuit in Massey also considered whether “the failure to extend the scope of the statute to a foreign setting [would] result in adverse effects within the United States.” Massey , 986 F.2d at 531. In particular, the court discussed the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1-7 (1976), and the Lanham Trademark Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1051 et. seq. (1976), as “prime examples” of when avoiding “negative economic consequences within the United States” was sufficient reason to extend a statute extraterritorially. Massey , 986 F.2d at 531. If the PLCAA did not apply to the claims by Mexico, and this lawsuit were to succeed, there would be economic consequences within the United States, which would clearly undermine the intent of Congress. See 15 U.S.C. § 7901(a)(6) (stating that lawsuits against firearm manufacturers “invite[] the disassembly and destabilization of other industries and economic sectors lawfully competing in the free enterprise system of the United States, and constitute[] an unreasonable burden on interstate and foreign commerce of the United States”). 240a 

3. Application of General Prohibition of the PLCAA 

There is no doubt that the general prohibition of the PLCAA applies to this lawsuit. It is unquestionably a “qualified civil liability action”—that is, “a civil action or proceeding . . . brought by any person against a manufacturer or seller” of a firearm “for damages, punitive damages, injunctive or declaratory relief,” or other relief, “resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse” of a firearm by the person or a third party.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A). Such a lawsuit “may not be brought in any Federal or State court.” Id. § 7902(a). Accordingly, for the claims to survive a motion to dismiss, an exception to the statute must apply. 

4. Statutory Exceptions 

The PLCAA contains six exceptions that permit civil actions against gun manufacturers and distributors. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(i)-(vi). Of those six, three are potentially applicable here. 

a. Predicate Exception 

The first potentially applicable exception is the so-called “predicate exception.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii). 8 That exception excludes from the definition of “qualified civil liability action” any              

> 8Courts refer to § 7903(5)(A)(iii) as the “predicate exception” because it requires “proof of a knowing violation of a ‘predicate statute.’” Phillips v. Lucky Gunner, LLC , 84 F. Supp. 3d 1216, 1224 (D. Colo. 2015) (quoting Ileto v. Glock , 565 F.3d 1126, 1132 (9th Cir. 2009)). See also City of New York v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp. , 524 F.3d 384, 390 (2d Cir. 2008); District of Columbia v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp. , 940 A.2d 163, 168 (D.C. 2008) (“[O]ther courts construing [the section’s] language, have referred to

241a 

action in which a manufacturer or seller of aqualified product knowingly violated a State or Federal statute applicable to the sale or marketing of the product , and the violation was a proximate cause of the harm for which relief is sought, including – 

(I) any case in which the manufacturer or seller knowingly made any false entry in, or failed to make appropriate entry in, any record required to be kept under Federal or State law with respect to the qualified product, or aided, abetted, or conspired with any person in making any false or fictitious oral or written statement with respect to any fact material to the lawfulness of the sale or other disposition of a qualified product; or 

(II) any case in which the manufacturer or seller aided, abetted, or conspired with any other person to sell or otherwise dispose of a qualified product, knowing, or having reasonable cause to believe, that the actual buyer of the qualified product was prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm or ammunition under subsection (g) or (n) of section 922 of Title 18 . . . . 

15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii)(I)-(II) (emphasis added). The term “qualified product,” as applied here, means a firearm. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(4).       

> subsection (5)(A)(iii) as the ‘predicate exception’ to the PLCAA because, to take effect, it requires that the manufacturer or seller have committed an underlying (or predicate) statutory violation.”).

242a 

The predicate exception applies only to “statutes,” not common-law causes of action. To the extent, therefore, that the complaint asserts claims for negligence or other causes of action arising under common law, the exception does not apply. Indeed, the claims asserted in Counts 1 through 6 and Count 9 are not claimed to arise under any federal or state statute. The only statutory claims asserted are set forth in Count 7, which alleges a claim against Colt under the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110a, et seq. , and Count 8, which alleges a claim against Smith & Wesson under the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A. 

Both CUTPA and Chapter 93A are consumer-protection statutes that generally prohibit unfair and deceptive acts or practices. The question is thus whether those statutes should be considered “applicable” to the sale or marketing of firearms, and thus fall within the predicate exception. 

The Second Circuit interpreted the predicate exception in City of New York v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp. ,524 F.3d 384 (2d Cir. 2008). The court began by noting that the general language in § 7903(5)(A) is followed by more specific language that refers to statutes that regulate the firearms industry in specific ways (for example, requiring recordkeeping and prohibiting the sale of firearms to certain purchasers). Beretta , 524 F.3d at 402. Because of that, the court concluded that the “general term—’applicable to’—should be construed to embrace only objects similar to those enumerated by sections 7903(5)(A)(iii)(I) and (II)” and therefore “to mean statutes that clearly can be said to regulate the firearms industry,” as opposed to any 243a 

federal or state statute that is “capable of being applied” to the sale or marketing of firearms. Id. at 402-03 (cleaned up). The court explained that such a reading would also “more accurately reflect[] the intent of Congress.” Id. at 402. 

The court further observed that reading the predicate exception to include any law “capable of being applied to” the sale or marketing of firearms would “allow the predicate exception to swallow the statute.” Id. at 403. And such a reading would go against the “interpretive principle that statutory exceptions are to be construed narrowly in order to preserve the primary operation of the general rule.” 

Id. at 403 (cleaned up) (citing Commissioner v. Clark ,489 U.S. 726, 739 (1989)). 

The court then held that the New York criminal-nuisance statute was a statute of general applicability that had never been applied to firearms suppliers, and therefore did not fall within the exception. Id. at 400, 404. It went on to hold, however, that the predicate exception encompasses not only those statutes that “expressly regulate firearms,” but also those that “courts have applied to the sale and marketing of firearms” or that “do not expressly regulate firearms but that clearly can be said to implicate the purchase and sale of firearms.” Id. at 404. 

As the dissent in Beretta pointed out, the court’s approach creates a number of ambiguities and other issues that (in the dissenting judge’s view) would have been better resolved by certifying a question to the New York Court of Appeals whether the statute at issue is “applicable to the sale and marketing of firearms.” Id. at 408 (Katzmann, J., dissenting). 244a 

In any event, there are reasons to conclude that Congress did not intend the predicate exception of the PLCAA to permit lawsuits based on violations of generally applicable state statutes that do not specifically address firearms. See Soto v. Bushmaster Firearms Int’l, LLC , 331 Conn. 53, 162 (2019) (Robinson, J., dissenting) (concluding that the predicate exception does not apply to consumer-protection statutes of general applicability). There are also reasons to conclude, as the Beretta court did, that generally applicable statutes that “have [been] applied” in the past to the sale or marketing of firearms, or that “clearly can be said to implicate the purchase and sale of firearms,” fall within the exception. Beretta , 524 F.3d at 404. Indeed, the Connecticut Supreme Court has held that CUTPA qualifies as a “sale or marketing” statute that falls within the exception. Soto , 331 Conn. at 125, 129. 9

Rather than resolve the issue, the Court will assume, for present purposes, that the predicate exception applies to the two state statutory claims. However, because Count 1 (negligence), Count 2                

> 9Soto involved a lawsuit by victims of gun violence, rather than a governmental entity alleging that it suffered indirect harms from such acts. Cf. Ganim v. Smith & Wesson Corp. , 258 Conn. 313 (2001). The predicate exception also requires that “the violation [of the statute]” must be “a proximate cause of the harm for which relief is sought.” § 7903(5)(A)(iii). As set forth below, the Connecticut Supreme Court held in Ganim that agovernmental entity does not have statutory standing under CUTPA to assert relief for injuries to citizens caused by gun violence. It is therefore doubtful whether the proximate-cause requirement could be satisfied even if CUTPA falls within the predicate exception.

245a 

(public nuisance), Count 3 (defective design), Count 4 (negligence per se ), Count 5 (gross negligence), Count 6 (unjust enrichment and restitution), and Count 9 (punitive damages) all involve common-law, not statutory, claims, they do not fall within the predicate exception set forth in § 7903(5)(A)(iii). 

b. Negligence Per Se Exception 

The second potentially applicable exception to the general prohibition is set forth in § 7903(5)(A)(ii), which (as relevant here) permits an action “against a seller for . . . negligence per se .” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(ii). That exception, however, is inapplicable for at least three reasons. 

First, the exception clearly does not apply to the seven defendants who are manufacturers of firearms. The exception applies only to claims against “a seller,” which is a defined term; by contrast, the predicate exception applies to claims against “a manufacturer or seller.” Id. §§ 7903(5)(A)(ii), (iii). That distinction must be presumed to be meaningful, and to reflect a deliberate intent on the part of Congress that the exception should not apply to “manufacturers.” See 

Duncan v. Walker , 533 U.S. 167, 173 (2001) (stating that “where Congress includes particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it is generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion” (cleaned up)); see also 

15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(C) (“The exceptions [in the PLCAA] shall be construed so as not to be in conflict . . . .”). 

The PLCCA defines a “seller,” as relevant here, to mean “a dealer (as defined in section 921(a)(11) of Title 246a 

18) who is engaged in the business as such a dealer in interstate or foreign commerce and who is licensed to engage in the business as such a dealer under chapter 44 of Title 18.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(6)(B). Section 921(a)(11), in turn, defines “dealer” in part as “any person engaged in the business of selling firearms at wholesale or retail.” 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(11) The same statute defines “manufacturer” in part as “any person engaged in the business of manufacturing firearms or ammunition for purposes of sale or distribution.” Id .§ 921(a)(10). Again, that demonstrates acongressional intent to distinguish between “sellers” and “manufacturers.” 

It is true, of course, that manufacturers sell products, and that therefore in a general sense all manufacturers are sellers. But if the statute were interpreted so that all manufacturers were included in the statutory definition of “seller,” the statutory distinction between “manufacturers” and “sellers” would be meaningless, and render the definition of “manufacturer” in § 921(a)(11) entirely redundant. 

See Corley v. United States , 556 U.S. 303, 314 (2009) (explaining that a “statute should be construed so that effect is given to all its provisions, so that no part will be inoperative or superfluous, void or insignificant” (cleaned up)). 

It is also true that a “manufacturer” may also be a “seller.” But there is nothing in the complaint—other than the general allegation that each of the seven manufacturers is a “manufacturer and seller” of firearms, see Compl. ¶¶ 31-39—that plausibly suggests that those manufacturers satisfy the statutory definition of “seller.” In particular, none of the seven is alleged to be “engaged in the business of 247a 

selling firearms at wholesale or retail,” or to possess the necessary licenses to do so. To the contrary, a central focus of the complaint is the allegation that the manufacturers use a three-tier distribution system to 

avoid being in the business of wholesaling or retailing firearms. For example, the complaint alleges the following: 

Manufacturer Defendants generally use a three-tier distribution: (1) manufacturers sell guns to distributors, (2) distributors then sell guns to retailers, and (3) retailers sell guns to civilian purchasers. This system is not required by law. Manufacturers could sell guns through their own dealerships (and they sometimes have) or maintain in-house distribution departments that sell to dealers (some do, for some sales). But they choose not to. 

(Compl. ¶ 378). 

In short, the complaint does not plausibly allege that any of the seven manufacturers are “sellers” within the meaning of the “negligence per se ”exception of § 7903(A)(5)(ii). At most, Interstate Arms (which is alleged to be a wholesaler and distributor of firearms, see Compl. ¶¶ 40-41) could qualify as a “seller” within the meaning of the exception. 

Second, the exception applies to actions for negligence per se . Count 4 alleges such a cause of action in general terms, without identifying the law of any particular jurisdiction. There is no federal common law, and the statute itself creates no cause of action; therefore, such a cause of action must arise under the law of one or more states. See 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(C) (“no provision of this chapter shall be 248a 

construed to create a public or private cause of action or remedy”); Phillips v. Lucky Gunner, LLC , 84 F. Supp. 3d 1216, 1225 (D. Colo. 2015) (stating that any claim that falls within the exception must arise under state law). Neither the complaint nor plaintiff’s opposition to the motion to dismiss identifies what state (or states) that might be. Because plaintiff filed this action in Massachusetts, and because no party has argued for the application of the law of any other jurisdiction, the Court will apply Massachusetts law. 10 

Under Massachusetts law, negligence per se is not an independent cause of action. See Deutsche Lufthansa AG v. Massachusetts Port Auth. , 2018 WL 3466938, at *2 (D. Mass. July 18, 2018) (“The Supreme Judicial Court has repeatedly reaffirmed the principle that negligence per se does not exist as a cause of action independent from a general negligence action ….”). Rather, under Massachusetts law, astatutory violation “can only be some evidence of the defendant’s negligence.” Deutsche , 2018 WL 3466938, at *2. Thus, as to any statutory violations that plaintiff contends constitutes negligence per se , the exception is not applicable under Massachusetts law.           

> 10 Interstate Arms, which is the only defendant that is alleged to be a wholesaler or distributor, and therefore a “seller” within the meaning of the exception, is alleged to have “conducted its gun-wholesaling business in Massachusetts for more than 40 years.” (Compl. ¶41). The complaint further alleges that it “was incorporated in Massachusetts until 2018,” that it “continues to conduct its business through its location in Middlesex County,” and that it “is at home in Massachusetts and resides in Middlesex County.” (Id.). It seems likely, therefore, that Massachusetts law would apply to a claim against it in any event.

249a 

Finally, and in any event, even if the Court considers negligence per se as an abstract principle, disconnected from the law of any state, the exception still would not apply. Generally, a claim for negligence 

per se applies only where an actor “violates a statute that is designed to protect against the type of accident the actor’s conduct causes, and if the accident victim is within the class of persons the statute is designed to protect.” RESTATEMENT (T HIRD ) OF T ORTS § 14 (2010). Here, the complaint asserts a claim for negligence per 

se alleging that defendants’ conduct violates various federal criminal firearm statutes. (Compl. ¶¶ 66-68, 305, 310, 313). Congress enacted federal firearms laws to protect against unlawful gun violence in the United States, and therefore to protect the victims of that violence. However, Congress did not enact those laws to protect foreign governments—and in particular, not to protect foreign governments from increases in health care and law-enforcement expenses incurred as a result of acts of violence perpetrated against foreign citizens in foreign nations. The citizens of Mexico might conceivably fall within the class of persons that the statute was intended to protect, but the Mexican government certainly does not. 11            

> 11 See, e.g., Town of Plainville v. Almost Home Animal Rescue & Shelter, Inc. ,182 Conn. App. 55, 67 (2018) (concluding, in considering a claim for negligence per se , that a municipality was not within the class of persons or things that a criminal statute addressing animal cruelty was intended to protect, even if the municipality incurred increased expenses for care provided to animals that were abused or neglected).

250a 

Accordingly, and for those reasons, the negligence 

per se exception set forth in § 7903(5)(A)(ii) does not apply to Count 4. 

c. Design-Defect Exception 

The third potentially applicable exception concerns claims for design or manufacturing defects. Section 7903(5)(A)(v) of the PLCAA provides as follows: 

an action for death, physical injuries or property damage resulting directly from a defect in design or manufacture of the product, when used as intended or in a reasonably foreseeable manner, except that where the discharge of the product was caused by a volitional act that constituted a criminal offense, then such act shall be considered the sole proximate cause of any resulting death, personal injuries or property damage. 

That section thus contains an exception to an exception—that is, if the discharge of a firearm is caused by a volitional criminal act, then the design-defect exception does not apply. 12 

The complaint alleges in multiple places that the harm for which Mexico seeks redress is perpetrated by drug cartels and “other criminals.” (See , e.g ., Compl. ¶¶ 1, 480-505). That is a sufficient basis from which to conclude that the claims are based on volitional acts perpetrated by drug cartels and “other criminals” and   

> 12 Moreover, the Court notes that the exception does not require a criminal conviction, but rather a volitional criminal act. See
> Ryan v. Hughes-Ortiz , 81 Mass. App. Ct. 90, 100 (2012) (citing
> Adames v. Sheahan , 233 Ill. 2d 276, 311 (2009)).

251a 

thus constitute intervening criminal offenses that “shall be the sole proximate cause” of the resulting injuries and property damage. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(v). 

Accordingly, the design-defect exception set forth in § 7903(5)(A)(v) does not apply to Count 3. 

5. Conclusion 

In summary, the application of the PLCAA under the circumstances presented here is not an impermissible extraterritorial application of United States law; the general prohibition of the statute applies to this lawsuit; and none of the statutory exceptions apply to Counts 1 through 6 and 9. Those claims are accordingly barred by the PLCAA, and will be dismissed. The Court does not reach the issue of whether Counts 7 or 8, which are generally applicable consumer-protection statutes, fall under the predicate exception to the PLCAA. However, for other reasons, and as set forth below, both of those claims fail to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. 13 

C. State Statutory Claims Against Colt and Smith & Wesson 

Counts 7 and 8 allege claims under the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110a, et seq ., and the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act, Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A, respectively.  

> 13 Because all nine counts fail for other reasons, the Court need not address defendants’ remaining arguments, which are based on lack of proximate cause, absence of a legal duty to plaintiff, and failure to state a claim for public nuisance.

252a 

1. Count 7: Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act 

Count 7 alleges a claim against defendant Colt under the CUTPA, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110a, et seq .Even assuming that the predicate exception to the PLCAA applies, Mexico lacks standing under Connecticut law to assert such a claim. 

CUTPA provides that “[n]o person shall engage in unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce.” Conn. Gen. Stat. § 42-110b(a). To be entitled to relief under CUTPA, a plaintiff must “establish both that the defendant has engaged in a prohibited act and that, as a result of this act, the plaintiff suffered an injury.” Sticht v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. , 2022 WL 267470, at *3 (D. Conn. Jan. 28, 2022) (cleaned up). “The language ‘as a result of’ requires a showing that the prohibited act was the proximate cause of a harm to the plaintiff. Mere ‘but for’ causation is not sufficient to support a CUTPA claim.” Id . (cleaned up). 

A plaintiff must also have statutory standing under CUTPA in order to assert a claim. “[S]tanding to bring a CUTPA claim will lie only when the purportedly unfair trade practice is alleged to have directly and proximately caused the plaintiff’s injuries.” Tyus v. Bertera Subaru , 2021 WL 4993058, at *8 (D. Conn. Oct. 27, 2021) (quoting Soto v. Bushmaster Firearms Int’l, LLC , 331 Conn. 53, 94 (2019), cert. denied sub nom . Remington Arms Co., LLC, et al. v. Soto , 140 S. Ct. 513 (2019)). The standing inquiry focuses on the directness or remoteness of a plaintiff’s claimed injuries. Ganim v. Smith & Wesson Corp ., 258 Conn. 253a 

313, 372-73 (2001). See also Gilbert v. Zablauskas ,2022 WL 1404219, at *1 (Conn. Super. Ct. Apr. 29, 2022) (explaining that Connecticut courts “have applied traditional common-law principles of remoteness and proximate causation to determine whether a party has standing to bring an action under CUTPA” (quoting Soto , 331 Conn. at 93-94)). 14 

In Ganim , the city and mayor of Bridgeport brought claims under CUTPA against various firearm manufacturers, trade associations, and retail sellers. 258 Conn. at 316. The facts in Ganim are clearly analogous to those here. Like Mexico, the city and mayor of Bridgeport claimed that because of defendants’ conduct they had incurred increased expenses for police services, emergency services, health care, and social services. Ganim , 258 Conn. at 345. In addition, they sought damages for the harm caused to their citizens who were injured or killed by firearms. Id .

The Supreme Court of Connecticut determined that the city and mayor did not have standing to bring such a claim. Id . at 373. Specifically, the court concluded that there were too many links in the causal chain connecting the defendants’ conduct to the plaintiffs’     

> 14 A plaintiff may have Article III standing and yet still lack statutory standing under CUTPA. See Gibson v. Bartlett Dairy, Inc., 2022 WL 784746, at *9 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 15, 2022) (finding that plaintiff has Article III standing but that “[p]laintiff does, however, lack statutory standing” under CUTPA); see also Gale v. Chicago Title Ins. Co ., 2008 WL 4000477, at *2-3 (D. Conn. Aug. 21, 2008) (determining, at the motion to dismiss stage, whether plaintiff has Article III standing and also whether plaintiff has “standing under CUTPA”).

254a 

harm. See id . at 354 (explaining that the manufacturers lawfully sell handguns to distributors or wholesalers who then lawfully sell them to retailers, who then sell to legitimate consumers or “straw man” purchasers, and it is not until then that they could enter the illegal market, and even then, a future intervening act by an unauthorized user must occur that results in injury to another). 

Moreover, the Ganim court explained that the harms that plaintiffs ultimately suffered were derivative of the injuries suffered by the “primary victims”—the persons who have been actually assaulted or killed by the misuse of the handguns. Id .at 358-60. Because of that, the court determined that the city and mayor lacked standing to bring a CUTPA claim because the “harms they claim[ed] [were] too remote from the defendants’ misconduct” and “too derivative of the injuries of others.” Id . at 365, 373. 

The Supreme Court of Connecticut applied that same standing inquiry to the CUTPA claims asserted in Soto v. Bushmaster Firearms Int’l, LLC , 331 Conn. 53 (2019). Plaintiffs in Soto were administrators of the estates of elementary school students and faculty who died in the school shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School. Id . at 66 n.2. The court held that those plaintiffs, unlike the Ganim plaintiffs, did have standing under CUTPA. Id . at 100. The court explained that “in this case, unlike in Ganim , it is the direct victims of gun violence who are challenging the defendants’ conduct [and] no private party is better situated than the plaintiffs to bring the action.” Id . at 98-99. The court noted that “ Ganim , in fact, provides an instructive contrast to the present case” because the harms claimed by the “municipal plaintiffs” were 255a 

too “indirect, remote, and derivative” as compared to those who are more “directly harmed by the [gun manufacturers’] alleged misconduct,” such as those “who have been assaulted or killed by the misuse of handguns.” Id . at 97-98. 

Here, plaintiff is the Mexican government, which seeks redress for harms that are derivative of the injuries suffered by its citizens. And, as in Ganim ,“there are numerous steps between the conduct of the various defendants and the harms suffered by the plaintiffs.” Ganim , 258 Conn. at 355. Where the causal link is “too remote” from defendants’ conduct and a plaintiff’s harms are “too derivative of the injuries of others” a plaintiff lacks standing to assert a claim under CUTPA. Ganim , 258 Conn. at 365; Soto ,331 Conn. at 97-99. 

The government of Mexico here is in essentially the same position as the city government of Bridgeport was in Ganim , and it therefore lacks standing to assert a claim under CUTPA. Accordingly, Count 7 will be dismissed. 

2. Count 8: Massachusetts Gen. Laws ch. 93A 

Count 8 alleges a violation of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A, the Massachusetts consumer-protection statute, against defendant Smith & Wesson. Specifically, it alleges that Smith & Wesson violated Chapter 93A by marketing its guns in ways that “emphasize[] the ability of civilians to misuse Smith & Wesson assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks.” (Compl. ¶ 342). 

a. Deceptive Acts 

Chapter 93A prohibits unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 256a 

Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A, §§ 2, 11. A violation of Chapter 93A requires that the conduct in question fall within “ ‘the penumbra of some common-law, statutory, or other established concept of unfairness’ or be ‘immoral, unethical, oppressive or unscrupulous.’” Commercial Union Ins. Co. v. Seven Provinces Ins. Co ., 217 F.3d 33, 40 (1st Cir. 2000) (quoting Cambridge Plating Co. v. Napco, Inc. , 85 F.3d 752, 769 (1st Cir. 1996)) (cleaned up). 

“To plausibly state a Chapter 93A claim premised on a deceptive act, the plaintiff must allege ‘(1) a deceptive act or practice on the part of the seller; (2) an injury or loss suffered by the consumer; and (3) a causal connection between the seller’s deceptive act or practice and the consumer’s injury.’” Tomasella v. Nestlé USA, Inc ., 962 F.3d 60, 71 (1st Cir. 2020) (quoting Casavant v. Norwegian Cruise Line, Ltd. , 76 Mass. App. Ct. 73, 76 (2009)). “[A]n advertisement is deceptive when it has the capacity to mislead consumers, acting reasonably under the circumstances, to act differently from the way they otherwise would have acted (i.e., to entice a reasonable consumer to purchase the product).” Aspinall v. Philip Morris Companies, Inc. , 442 Mass. 381, 396 (2004). “The spectrum of liability for deceptive acts or practices spans from affirmative misrepresentations to certain kinds of nondisclosures, such as advertising [that] may consist of a half truth, or even may be true as a literal matter, but still create[s] an over-all misleading impression through failure to disclose material information.” Tomasella , 962 F.3d at 71 (cleaned up). 

Here, the complaint alleges that the marketing campaign of Smith & Wesson is false and misleading 257a 

because it “associates its ‘civilian’ products with the U.S. military and law enforcement” and its advertisements “repeatedly emphasize its weapons’ ability to function in combat-like scenarios and quickly dispatch a large number of perceived enemies with a torrent of fire.” (Compl. ¶ 324). 15 15 Chapter 93A, however, prohibits statements that are actually false or misleading. See Aspinall , 442 Mass. at 396. But the complaint alleges that the violation by Smith & Wesson is that its firearms do exactly what they are advertised to do. 

The complaint does not allege that the firearm cannot in fact “quickly dispatch” bullets. Rather, it alleges that the violation by Smith & Wesson is that the firearm functions exactly as it is advertised to, and in doing so it has caused harm in Mexico. Such advertising is perhaps distasteful, but it is not false, misleading, or deceptive within the meaning of the statute. 

b. Unfair Acts 

The complaint further alleges that the conduct of Smith & Wesson is “unfair” within the meaning of Chapter 93A. The challenged advertisements may be “unfair” if they “1) [are] within the penumbra of some common law, statutory or other established concept of                 

> 15 The complaint specifically includes two Smith & Wesson advertisements. (Compl. ¶ 324). One of the advertisements states, “[b]urn through all the ammunition you want with the new M&P 15-22.” ( Id .). The other advertisement contains an image of someone who appears to be in military or law enforcement gear using a sniper rifle. ( Id .)

258a 

unfairness, 2) [are] immoral, unethical, oppressive or unscrupulous and 3) cause[ ] substantial injury to consumers, competitors or other business entities.” 

Tomasella , 962 F.3d at 79 (citations omitted). While “Massachusetts leaves the determination of what constitutes an unfair trade practice to the finder of fact,” that determination is “subject to the court’s performance of a legal gate-keeping function.” Mass. 

Eye & Ear Infirmary v. QLT Phototherapeutics, Inc. ,552 F.3d 47, 69 (1st Cir. 2009) (citation omitted). 

The crux of Mexico’s claim is that Smith & Wesson engaged in unfair conduct by marketing their firearms in such a way that “emphasized the ability of civilians to use Smith & Wesson assault rifles in unlawful, military-style attacks.” (Compl. ¶ 550). Specifically, the complaint alleges that by placing “M&P” on their ads, which signifies “Military and Police,” the advertisements “attract persons and organizations that intend[] to use Smith & Wesson’s products to battle against the military and police” and “carry out unlawful military-style combat missions.” ( Id . ¶¶ 551-52). 

Mexico has, however, failed to identify any common-law or statutory authority that the advertisements violate. Again, while the defendant’s conduct may be distasteful, nothing about the advertisement is unlawful or “immoral, unethical, oppressive or unscrupulous.” See Tomasella , 962 F.3d at 80-81. The public is fully aware that the police and military use firearms. An image depicting an officer’s lawful use of a firearm does not suggest to the reasonable consumer that they should engage in criminal, “combat-like” conduct. And the Court is unwilling to hold that the advertising of lawful conduct to sell a lawful product, 259a 

without more, constitutes an “unfair” act. See , e.g. ,

McCarthy v. Sturm, Ruger & Co ., 916 F. Supp. 366, 369 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 5, 1996), aff’d sub nom . McCarthy v. Olin Corp. , 119 F.3d 148 (2d Cir. 1997) (refusing to find advertisements to be negligent because they highlighted the ammunition’s “destructive capabilities” which could make it “attractive to criminals” because the advertisements were not in any way false or misleading). 

Accordingly, the complaint fails to allege that the marketing practices of Smith & Wesson violate any common-law, statutory, or other established concept of unfairness. 

c. Occurring Primarily and Substantially within the Commonwealth 

Chapter 93A provides that an action under § 11 can only be brought if “the actions and transactions constituting the alleged unfair method of competition or the unfair or deceptive act or practice occurred primarily and substantially within the commonwealth.” Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A, § 11. 

In considering whether the unfair or deceptive act “occurred primarily and substantially within the commonwealth,” Massachusetts courts consider three factors: (1) “where the defendant committed the deception,” (2) “where the plaintiff was deceived and acted upon the deception,” and (3) “the situs of plaintiff’s losses due to the deception.” Garshman Co. v. General Elec. Co. , 176 F.3d 1, 6-7 (1st Cir. 1999) (citing Clinton Hosp. Ass’n v. Corson Grp., Inc. , 907 F.2d 1260, 1265-66 (1st Cir. 1990)). However, “[w]hether the ‘actions and transactions [constituting the sec. 11 claim] occurred primarily and substantially 260a 

within the commonwealth’ is not a determination that can be reduced to any precise formula.” Stoneridge Control Devices, Inc. v. Teleflex, Inc ., 2004 WL 389105, at *7 (Mass. Super. Feb. 17, 2004). Rather, it is a “pragmatic, functional analysis,” with the “first factor [being] the least weighty of the three factors.” Roche v. Royal Bank of Canada , 109 F.3d 820, 827, 829 (1st Cir. 1997); see also Kuwaiti Danish Comput. Co. v. Digital Equip. Corp ., 438 Mass. 459, 473 (2003) (instructing courts to look to “whether the center of gravity of the circumstances that give rise to the claim is primarily and substantially within the Commonwealth”). 

For example, in Bushkin Associates, Inc. v. Raytheon Co ., a New York corporation brought aChapter 93A claim against Raytheon, aMassachusetts corporation. 393 Mass. 622 (1985). The plaintiff based his Chapter 93A claim on allegedly false statements that were made in a telephone conversation by a Raytheon officer. Bushkin , 393 Mass. at 672. The plaintiff contended that those statements caused it to disclose sensitive business information and suffer economic losses. Id . The Supreme Judicial Court held that Chapter 93A was inapplicable because the majority of the conduct occurred outside of Massachusetts. Id . Specifically, the SJC explained that although the statements were “made in Massachusetts,” they were “received and acted on in New York,” and “[a]ny loss was incurred in New York.” Id .

The First Circuit followed the reasoning of Bushkin 

in Compagnie De Reassurance D’Ile de France v. New England Reinsurance Corp. , 57 F.3d 56 (1st Cir. 1995). There, the court explained that, as in Bushkin , “non-261a 

Massachusetts residents [were] attempting to recover for the allegedly unfair trade practices” of aMassachusetts corporation. New England Reinsurance Corp. , 57 F.3d at 90. Although the allegedly deceptive acts originated in Massachusetts, the deceptive information was “intended to be, and was, circulated abroad, and plaintiffs received and acted upon it there.” Id . And the “situs of plaintiffs’ losses was also in Europe.” Id . The court determined that because Chapter 93A is designed to “protect against in-state frauds” and the bulk of defendants’ conduct occurred elsewhere, their “fraudulent conduct did not occur primarily and substantially in Massachusetts.” Id .

Here, a foreign nation is attempting to recover for the allegedly unfair trade practices of a Massachusetts corporation. Even assuming that the advertisements and marketing originated in Massachusetts, the complaint clearly suggests that its advertisements and marketing practices were “intended to be [] circulated abroad” and were “received and acted upon [] there.” New England Reinsurance Corp. , 57 F.3d at 90. ( See also Compl. ¶¶ 551-52 (explaining that Smith & Wesson knew its marketing practices would attract persons and organizations to use their products against the military and police, “including the military and police in Mexico” and would be “appealing especially to criminals like the cartels”)); ( id . ¶ 384 (“Defendants have affirmatively and deliberately chosen to maintain their supply chain to cartels . . . Their supply of guns to the criminal market in Mexico is a feature, not a bug.”)). Furthermore, the situs of plaintiff’s losses is entirely in Mexico. ( See Compl. ¶¶ 262a 

450-64); New England Reinsurance Corp. , 57 F.3d at 90. 

In short, this matter did not occur primarily and substantially in the Commonwealth. For that reason, Chapter 93A does not apply. 

Accordingly, Count 8 fails to state a claim under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A. 

IV. Conclusion 

For the foregoing reasons: 

The motion of all defendants to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) and to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 66) is DENIED as to Rule 12(b)(1) and GRANTED as to Rule 12(b)(6); 

The motion of defendant Sturm, Ruger & Company to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2) (Docket No. 56) is DENIED without prejudice as moot; 

The motion of defendant Barrett Firearms Manufacturing, Inc., to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2), and to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 58) is DENIED as to Rule 12(b)(1), GRANTED as to Rule 12(b)(6), and otherwise DENIED without prejudice as moot; 

The motion of defendant Witmer Public Safety Group, Inc., d/b/a Interstate Arms to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be 263a 

granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 60) is GRANTED; 

The motion of defendant Glock Inc. to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2), and to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 62) is DENIED as to Rule 12(b)(1), GRANTED as to Rule 12(b)(6), and otherwise DENIED without prejudice as moot; 

The motion of defendant Colt’s Manufacturing Company LLC to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1), to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2), and to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 64) is DENIED as to Rule 12(b)(1), GRANTED as to Rule 12(b)(6), and otherwise DENIED without prejudice as moot; 

The motion of defendant Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc. to dismiss for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(1) and to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) (Docket No. 69) is DENIED as to Rule 12(b)(1) and GRANTED as to Rule 12(b)(6); 

The motion of defendant Century International Arms, Inc. to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2) (Docket No. 70) is DENIED without prejudice as moot; and 264a 

The motion of defendant Beretta U.S.A. Corp. to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(2) (Docket No. 73) is DENIED without prejudice as moot. 

So Ordered. 

/s/ F. Dennis Saylor IV 

Dated: September 30, 2022 F. Dennis Saylor IV 

Chief Judge, 

United States District Court 265a 

APPENDIX C 

United States Court of Appeals 

For the First Circuit 

_____________________ 

No. 22-1823 

ESTADOS UNIDOS MEXICANOS, 

Plaintiff, Appellant, 

v. 

SMITH & WESSON BRANDS, INC.; BARRETT FIREARMS MANUFACTURING, INC.; BERETTA U.S.A. CORP.; GLOCK, INC.; STURM, RUGER & COMPANY, INC.; WITMER PUBLIC SAFETY GROUP, INC., d/b/a Interstate Arms; CENTURY INTERNATIONAL ARMS, INC.; BARETTA HOLDINGS SPA; GLOCK GES . M.B.H.; COLT’S MANUFACTURING COMPANY, LLC, 

Defendants, Appellees. 

_____________________ 

APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

[Hon. F. Dennis Saylor, IV, U.S. District Judge ]

_____________________ 

Before 

Kayatta, Gelpi, and Montecalvo, 

Circuit Judges .

_____________________ 266a 

Steve D. Shadowen and Jonathan E. Lowy, with whom Richard M. Brunell, Nicholas W. Shadowen, 

Shadowen PLLC, and Global Action on Gun Violence 

were on brief, for appellant. 

Sameer Advani, James C. Dugan, Gabrielle K. Antonello, Ferdinand G. Suba, Jr., Willkie Farr & Gallagher LLP, Zainab Ali, and Benita Yu on brief for 

Jorge Sanchez Cordero Davila and Raul Contreras Bustamante, amici curiae. 

Thomas M. Sobol and Hagens Berman Sobol Shapiro LLP on brief for Scholars of International Law, amici curiae. 

Lawson E. Fite, Michael B. Smith, and Marten Law LLP on brief for Gun Violence Prevention Groups, 

amici curiae. 

Roberta L. Horton, Lucy S. McMillan, and Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP on brief for Mexican Activists, Scholars, and Victims, amici curiae. 

Donna M. Evans, Julie G. Reiser, Molly J. Bowen, 

Zachary R. Glubiak, and Cohen Milstein Sellers & Toll PLLC on brief for Law Enforcement Officers, amici curiae. 

Andrea Joy Campbell, Attorney General of Massachusetts, Elizabeth N. Dewar, State Solicitor, 

Rob Bonta, Attorney General of California, William Tong, Attorney General of Connecticut, Kathleen Jennings, Attorney General of Delaware, Brian L. Schwalb, Attorney General for the District of Columbia, Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General of Hawai’i, Kwame Raoul, Attorney General of Illinois, 

Anthony G. Brown, Attorney General of Maryland, 

Dana Nessel, Attorney General of Michigan, Keith Ellison, Attorney General of Minnesota, Matthew J. 267a 

Platkin, Attorney General of New Jersey, Raul Torrez, 

Attorney General of New Mexico, Letitia James, 

Attorney General of New York, Ellen F. Rosenblum, 

Attorney General of Oregon, Michelle A. Henry, 

Attorney General of Pennsylvania, Peter F. Neronha, 

Attorney General of Rhode Island, and Charity R. Clark, Attorney General of Vermont, on brief for 

Massachusetts, California, Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Hawai’i, Illinois, Maryland, 

Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and 

Vermont, amici curiae. 

Roberto J. Gonzalez, Jacob A. Braly, and Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP on brief for 

Latin American and Caribbean Nations and NGO, 

amici curiae. 

Ellen V. Leonida, Matthew Borden, Kory J. DeClark, 

and Braunhagey & Borden LLP on brief for District Attorneys, amici curiae. 

Edward V. Colbert III, Scott Harshbarger, and 

Casner & Edwards, LLP on brief for Professors of Transnational Litigation, amici curiae. 

Noel J. Francisco, with whom Anthony J. Dick, 

Harry S. Graver, Andrew E. Lelling, Jones Day, James M. Campbell, Campbell Conroy & O’Neil, P.C., James W. Porter, II, Porter & Hassinger, P.C., Mark D. Sheridan, Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP, Patricia A. Hartnett, Peter M. Durney, Smith Duggan Cornell & Gollub, Christopher Renzulli, Jeffrey Malsch, Renzulli Law Firm LLC, Jonathan I. Handler, Day Pitney LLP, 

James Vogts, Andrew A. Lothson, Swanson, Martin & Bell LLP, Nora R. Adukonis, S. Jan Hueber, Litchfield Cavo LLP, Joseph G. Yannetti, Morrison Mahoney 268a 

LLP, Anthony M. Pisciotti, Danny C. Lallis, Ryan L. Erdreich, Pisciotti Lallis Erdreich, John G. O’Neill, 

Sugarman, Rogers, Barshak & Cohen, P.C., Michael L. Rice, Katie J. Colopy, and Harrison Law LLC were on brief, for appellees. 

Peter M. Torstensen, Jr., Assistant Solicitor General, Austin Knudsen, Montana Attorney General, 

Christian B. Corrigan, Solicitor General, Brent Mead, 

Deputy Solicitor General, Tanner Baird, Solicitor’s Fellow, Steve Marshall, Attorney General of Alabama, 

Treg Taylor, Attorney General of Alaska, Tim Griffin, 

Attorney General of Arkansas, Ashley Moody, 

Attorney General of Florida, Christopher M. Carr, 

Attorney General of Georgia, Theodore E. Rokita, 

Attorney General of Indiana, Brenna Bird, Attorney General of Iowa, Daniel Cameron, Attorney General of Kentucky, Jeff Landry, Attorney General of Louisiana, 

Lynn Fitch, Attorney General of Mississippi, Andrew Bailey, Attorney General of Missouri, John M. Formella, Attorney General of New Hampshire, Alan Wilson, Attorney General of South Carolina, Marty J. Jackley, Attorney General of South Dakota, Ken Paxton, Attorney General of Texas, Sean D. Reyes, 

Attorney General of Utah, Jason Miyares, Attorney General of Virginia, Patrick Morrisey, Attorney General of West Virginia, and Bridget Hill, Attorney General of Wyoming, on brief for State of Montana and 

19 Other States, amici curiae. 

H. Christopher Bartolomucci, Kenneth A. Klukowski, and Schaerr Jaffe LLP on brief for U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, U.S. Representative Mike Johnson, 

and 37 other members of Congress, amici curiae. 269a 

Christopher A. Kenney, Kenney & Sams, P.C., and 

Paul B. Stephan on brief for National Shooting Sports Foundation, Inc., amicus curiae. 

_____________________ 

January 22, 2024 

_____________________ 270a 

KAYATTA , Circuit Judge. The government of Mexico brings this lawsuit against seven U.S. gun manufacturers and one gun distributor. 1 The district court dismissed Mexico’s complaint because it concluded that Mexico’s common law claims were barred by the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA). That act prohibits the bringing of certain types of lawsuits against manufacturers and sellers of firearms in federal and state courts. We agree that the PLCAA’s limitations on the types of lawsuits that may be maintained in the United States apply to lawsuits initiated by foreign governments for harm suffered outside the United States. However, we also hold that Mexico’s complaint plausibly alleges a type of claim that is statutorily exempt from the PLCAA’s general prohibition. We therefore reverse the district court’s holding that the PLCAA bars Mexico’s common law claims, and we remand for further proceedings. Our reasoning follows. 

I. 

“Because this appeal flows from the district court’s order granting a motion to dismiss, we draw the relevant facts from the complaint, accepting all well-pleaded factual allegations as true.” Foisie v.         

> 1Defendants are Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc.; Barrett Firearms Manufacturing, Inc.; Beretta U.S.A. Corp.; Century International Arms, Inc.; Colt’s Manufacturing Company, LLC; Glock, Inc.; and Sturm, Ruger & Co., Inc. and Witmer Public Safety Group, Inc., doing business as Interstate Arms. Mexico also initially named two foreign holding companies as defendants, but later voluntarily dismissed its claims against those companies.

271a 

Worcester Polytechnic Inst., 967 F.3d 27, 32 (1st Cir. 2020). 

Mexico has strict gun laws that make it “virtually impossible” for criminals to obtain firearms legally sourced in the country. It has one gun store in the entire nation and issues fewer than fifty gun permits a year. Despite these strong domestic regulations, Mexico has the third-most gun-related deaths in the world. The number of gun-related homicides in Mexico grew from fewer than 2,500 in 2003 to approximately 23,000 in 2019. The percentage of homicides committed with a gun similarly rose from fifteen percent in 1997 to sixty-nine percent in 2021. 

The increase in gun violence in Mexico correlates with the increase of gun production in the United States, beginning with the end of the United States’ assault-weapon ban in 2004. 2 The complaint details a steady and growing stream of illegal gun trafficking from the United States into Mexico, motivated in large part by the demand of the Mexican drug cartels for military-style weapons. For example, Mexico claims that between seventy and ninety percent of the guns recovered at crime scenes in Mexico were trafficked into the country from the United States. 

Mexico’s government has borne a variety of harms as a result of this gun-violence epidemic, including but not limited to: costs of additional medical, mental-health, and other services for victims and their families; costs of increased law enforcement, including  

> 2Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103-222, 108 Stat. 1796, 1996-1998(expired 2004).

272a 

specialized training for military and police; costs of the increased burden on Mexico’s judicial system; diminished property values; and decreased revenues from business investment and economic activity. 

In an attempt to redress these harms, Mexico brought this lawsuit in federal district court in Massachusetts, seeking both damages and injunctive relief. Combined, defendants produce more than sixty-eight percent of the U.S. guns trafficked into Mexico, which comes out to between 342,000 and 597,000 guns each year. Mexico alleges that defendants know that their guns are trafficked into Mexico and make deliberate design, marketing, and distribution choices to retain and grow that illegal market and the substantial profits that it produces. 

Mexico alleges that one way defendants deliberately facilitate gun trafficking into Mexico is by designing their guns as military-style weapons, knowing that such weapons are particularly sought after by the drug cartels in Mexico. For instance, defendants make assault rifles with high rates of fire, low recoil, and the capacity to hold large amounts of ammunition. The guns can be easily converted into fully automatic weapons. Some of defendants’ guns are “weapons of war,” such as the “armor-penetrating” Barrett .50 caliber sniper rifle, which can be (and has been) used to take down aircrafts and armored vehicles. Such weapons are especially attractive to Mexican drug cartels, which frequently engage in military-style combat against Mexican military and police personnel. Defendants also choose to forgo safety features (such as allowing only recognized users to fire the weapon) that might decrease the guns’ attractiveness to wrongdoers without diminishing their utility for law-273a 

abiding citizens. Similarly, Mexico alleges that defendants intentionally design their guns to have easily removable serial numbers, making them much more attractive to criminals both in the United States and abroad. 

Mexico alleges that defendants not only design their guns as military-grade weapons; they also market them as such. Defendants’ marketing materials depict their weapons in use by or in proximity to military and law enforcement personnel and contain other references to military and law enforcement. Advertisements include statements like “authentic Military & Police . . . design,” “battle proven,” and “transforms the military platform to fit civilian precision shooters.” Mexico alleges that defendants engage in these marketing techniques knowing that they are disproportionately likely to attract groups harboring militaristic ambitions, like the Mexican cartels. 

Mexico also alleges that defendants’ distribution system facilitates illegal trafficking to Mexico. Defendants generally use a three-tier distribution system. Manufacturers (most defendants) sell to distributors; distributors (one defendant) sell to dealers; and dealers sell to consumers. Guns flow from this distribution system into Mexico in multiple ways. The most common method of trafficking is through “straw sales”—sales made to a buyer purchasing on behalf of somebody else who is not lawfully permitted to buy a gun. Often, straw sales occur in circumstances that clearly indicate to the dealer that the transaction is a straw sale and could be prevented if defendants required their dealers to be well-trained and follow the law. 274a 

Other types of transactions that pose a particularly high risk of trafficking include sales of multiple guns to the same buyer over a limited period of time; sales by “kitchen-table” dealers who deal online or in locations that make it easy to avoid regulations; and sales by non-licensed sellers at gun shows without background checks. In addition, many guns are stolen or simply “lost” from firearm companies’ inventory, and frequently thereafter end up in Mexico. According to the complaint, some of these “lost” guns are actually sold off the books, with dealers choosing not to implement anti-theft measures to allow them to falsely claim the guns were stolen. 

Mexico alleges that defendants are aware of these practices and the resulting trafficking of guns into Mexico, yet deliberately maintain a distribution system that facilitates illegal sales, resisting calls for reform by the U.S. government and prominent gun industry insiders, among others. Not only that, but defendants are aware that specific distributor and dealer networks are disproportionately associated with gun trafficking into Mexico. Mexico alleges that defendants are on notice as to which dealers are responsible for the lion’s share of gun trafficking. Mexico points to data collected by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) and a 2010 news article naming twelve dealers that sold the most guns recovered in Mexico. Despite having access to this information, defendants continue supplying guns to those same dealers. 

Importantly, according to the complaint, the aspects of defendants’ businesses that facilitate trafficking are not unfortunate and unintended byproducts of alawful enterprise. Rather, they are the result of 275a 

defendants’ affirmative and deliberate efforts to create and maintain an illegal market for their weapons in Mexico. Says Mexico, supplying guns to the illegal market in Mexico is “a feature, not a bug,” of defendants’ businesses. And the motivation behind this feature is money. Mexico estimates that defendants collectively receive over $170 million a year from sales of guns trafficked into Mexico. As a result of the profit potential of the Mexican market, gun dealers along the border have proliferated while elsewhere in the nation their numbers have decreased. Gun dealers in border states now sell twice as many guns as dealers in other parts of the country. As stated succinctly by Mexico, defendants “are not accidental or unintentional players in this tragedy; they are deliberate and willing participants, reaping profits from the criminal market they knowingly supply— heedless of the shattering consequences to [Mexico] and its citizens.” 

II. 

Defendants filed multiple motions to dismiss Mexico’s complaint. All defendants moved to dismiss for lack of Article III standing under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6). Some defendants also moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction under Rule 12(b)(2). The district court held that Mexico had Article III standing, but it dismissed two counts for failure to state a claim on which relief could be granted. 3 It also found that litigation of the remaining          

> 3The two counts were state statutory claims under the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act and the Massachusetts

276a 

counts was barred by the PLCAA, which prohibits the filing of a “qualified civil liability action”—defined as “a civil action or proceeding . . . against amanufacturer or seller of a qualified product . . . for damages . . . resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product by the person or a third party”—in “any Federal or State court.” 15 U.S.C. §§ 7902(a), 7903(5)(A). It therefore dismissed the complaint without addressing the motions to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. Mexico timely appealed, raising multiple challenges to the district court’s application of the PLCAA to this lawsuit. 

III. 

Mexico first contends that the PLCAA does not apply to lawsuits brought by foreign governments for harm suffered outside the United States. It raises three arguments in support of this contention: first, that applying the PLCAA to such a lawsuit is an impermissible extraterritorial application of the statute; second, that the PLCAA’s substantive terms must be interpreted to have only domestic scope; and third, that principles of international comity support Mexico’s reading of the statute. We address these arguments in turn, finding them ultimately unavailing. 

A. 

“Courts presume that federal statutes ‘apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.’” WesternGeco LLC v. ION Geophysical Corp.,        

> Consumer Protection Act, respectively. Mexico does not, on appeal, challenge the dismissal of those counts.

277a 

138 S. Ct. 2129, 2136 (2018) (quoting Foley Bros. v. 

Filardo, 336 U.S. 281, 285 (1949)). This rule, commonly called the presumption against extraterritoriality, is a “canon of construction” that guides our interpretation of federal statutes .Yegiazaryan v. Smagin, 599 U.S. 533, 541 (2023) (quoting Morrison v. Nat’l Austl. Bank Ltd., 561 U.S. 247, 255 (2010)). Under the presumption, we construe federal laws “to have only domestic application” unless we find “clearly expressed congressional intent to the contrary.” Id. (quoting RJR Nabisco, Inc. v. European Cmty., 579 U.S. 325, 335 (2016)). The presumption “reflects concerns of international comity insofar as it ‘serves to protect against unintended clashes between our laws and those of other nations which could result in international discord.’” Id. (quoting Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 569 U.S. 108, 115 (2013)). And it also embodies “the commonsense notion that Congress generally legislates with domestic concerns in mind.” Id. (quoting Smith v. United States, 507 U.S. 197, 204 n.5 (1993)). 

A two-step framework applies to questions of extraterritoriality . RJR Nabisco, 579 U.S. at 337. “At the first step, we ask whether the presumption against extraterritoriality has been rebutted—that is, whether the statute gives a clear, affirmative indication that it applies extraterritorially.” Id. If so, then an extraterritorial application of the statute is permissible . Id. If not, we proceed to the second step and ask if the statute’s application in the case at hand is truly extraterritorial or if, instead, “the case involves a domestic application of the statute.” Id. 

The district court concluded that the PLCAA’s prohibition of lawsuits by “any governmental entity” 278a 

and various references to “foreign commerce” fell short of a clear expression of congressional intent that the statute applies extraterritorially. It therefore held that the presumption against extraterritoriality had not been overcome at step one. Defendants do not object to this holding on appeal. Nor do we see any need to question it, given that we agree with the district court’s conclusion at step two: that the application of the PLCAA in this case is permissibly domestic, not impermissibly extraterritorial. 

Determining whether an application of a statute is domestic or extraterritorial requires us to 

look[] to the statute’s “focus.” If the conduct relevant to the statute’s focus occurred in the United States, then the case involves apermissible domestic application even if other conduct occurred abroad; but if the conduct relevant to the focus occurred in a foreign country, then the case involves an impermissible extraterritorial application regardless of any other conduct that occurred in U.S. territory. 

Id. “The ultimate question regarding permissible domestic application turns on the location of the conduct relevant to the focus.” Abitron Austria GmbH 

v. Hetronic Int’l, Inc., 600 U.S. 412, 422 (2023). We therefore first ascertain the focus of the PLCAA and then determine where the conduct relevant to that focus occurred. 

“The focus of a statute is the object of its solicitude, which can include the conduct it seeks to regulate, as well as the parties and interests it seeks to protect or vindicate.” Id. at 418 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting WesternGeco, 138 S. Ct. at 2136). 279a 

The “conduct” that the PLCAA “seeks to regulate” is the filing and adjudication of certain lawsuits in domestic courts . See 15 U.S.C. § 7901(b)(1), (4) (stated purposes include “prohibit[ing] causes of action” and “prevent[ing] the use of such lawsuits to impose unreasonable burdens on interstate and foreign commerce”). Its operative provision states that “[a] qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any Federal or State court,” and that any such pending actions “shall be immediately dismissed by the court.” 

Id. § 7902. That is the only “conduct” that the statute “regulate[s].” 

The PLCAA is also explicit about “the parties and interests it seeks to protect.” Its stated “purposes” are, among other things, “[t]o prohibit causes of action against manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of firearms . . . for the harm solely caused by the criminal or unlawful misuse of firearm products,” and “[t]o preserve a citizen’s access to a supply of firearms and ammunition for all lawful purposes.” Id. 

§ 7901(b)(1), (2); see also id. § 7901(a)(5) - (8) (finding that the firearm industry should not be liable for third parties’ unlawful acts and that lawsuits seeking to impose such liability abuse the legal system); id. 

§ 7901(a)(1) - (2) (invoking the Second Amendment). In short, it seeks to protect (1) U.S. firearm companies and their interests in manufacturing, marketing, and selling guns to the public; and (2) U.S. citizens and their interests in having access to guns. 

We therefore agree with the district court’s conclusion that the PLCAA’s focus is “regulat[ing] the types of claims that can be asserted against firearm manufacturers and sellers . . . to protect the interests of the United States firearms industry and the rights 280a 

of gun owners.” Estados Unidos Mexicanos v. Smith & Wesson Brands, Inc., 633 F. Supp. 3d 425, 444 (D. Mass. 2022). 

Mexico resists this conclusion by proposing adifferent focus of the PLCAA: “gun misuse and the resulting injury.” It argues that the district court erred by looking only at the PLCAA’s operative provision—which prohibits “qualified civil liability action[s],” 15 U.S.C. § 7902—and not its definitions section—which defines such actions as “civil action[s] or proceeding[s] or . . . administrative proceeding[s]” for harm “resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product by the person or a third party,” id. § 7903(5)(A). 

We agree that statutory provisions do not exist “in a vacuum” and “must be assessed in concert with . . . other provisions.” WesternGeco, 138 S. Ct. at 2137. In 

WesternGeco, for example, the Supreme Court determined that the focus of a statute providing a remedy for patent infringement was “the infringement.” Id. (quoting 35 U.S.C. § 284). But because the statute identified several types of infringement, the Court looked to a separate provision to determine what “the infringement” was in the case at hand . Id. That provision “provide[d] that acompany ‘shall be liable as an infringer’ if it ‘supplies’ certain components of a patented invention ‘in or from the United States’ with the intent that they ‘will be combined outside of the United States in a manner that would infringe the patent if such combination occurred within the United States.’” Id. at 2137-38 (quoting 35 U.S.C. § 271(f)(2)). From this definition, the Court gleaned that the regulated conduct—that is, “the infringement”—was “the domestic act of 281a 

‘suppl[ying] in or from the United States.’” Id. at 2138 (alteration in original) (quoting 35 U.S.C. § 271(f)(2)). So, because it was that domestic act “that infringed [the] patents,” the “conduct . . . relevant to [the] focus clearly occurred in the United States.” Id. 

Mexico contends that we should follow what it sees as a similar approach: treat the command of section 7902(a) (precluding “qualified civil liability action[s]” in any U.S. court) as insufficient to determine the focus; look at the definition of “qualified civil liability action” in section 7903(5)(A) (as meaning suits against defendants for damages resulting from unlawful use of certain firearms); and then declare that the statute’s focus is actually on certain elements of that definition (damages and misuse). 

But while WesternGeco makes clear that it is sometimes necessary to turn to a secondary provision to help give meaning to the statute’s focus, it does not stand for the proposition that whenever a term is defined in a separate provision, all parts of that definition become the focus of the statute. In 

WesternGeco , the portion of the secondary provision on which the Court concentrated was the very “infringement” that was the focus of the primary provision. Other parts of the definition—such as the requirement that the components be “especially made or especially adapted for use in the invention,” id . at 2135 (quoting 35 U.S.C. § 271(f)(2))—were not the statute’s focus because they did not constitute the act of infringement, which was the focus of the primary provision. Here, “qualified civil liability action[s]” are the focus and we look to section 7903(5)(A) simply to define the scope of that term, not to find in the elements of that definition some other focus. 282a 

To drive this point home, imagine a law stating that “a qualified shirt may not be worn in any Federal or State court” and defining “qualified shirt” as “a collarless shirt made from cotton.” Under Mexico’s logic, a focus of that statute would be the cotton industry. And therefore the law would not prohibit the wearing of collarless shirts made from cotton grown outside the United States. But no reasonable person would think that the statute would not apply with equal force regardless of the origin of the cotton in a court attendee’s shirt. So too, here; Mexico cannot shift the focus of the PLCAA from “qualified civil liability action[s]” to something else merely because that term—which Mexico concedes is the focus of the PLCAA’s operative provision—is defined in a separate provision. 

At a more fundamental level, Mexico’s argument that the statute’s focus is “gun misuse and the resulting injury” has too little connection to the PLCAA’s purpose or effect. While curtailing gun misuse is a laudable goal (and one that may be the focus of other statutes), it is not the goal of the PLCAA. That statute’s purpose, and effect, is to insulate U.S. gun industry actors from certain types of lawsuits in domestic courts. And that conduct is inherently domestic. 

Mexico also argues that to say that the focus of the PLCAA is on regulating the types of claims that can be brought against U.S. gun industry actors “is so broad as to be tautological” because “ [a]ll statutes ‘regulate the type’ of activity to which they are directed, and all 

such ‘regulat[ion]’ by definition occurs in the United States—in the U.S. Courts that apply the statutes.” But this argument confuses the effect of a regulation 283a 

with its focus; not all statutes are directed toward regulating lawsuits in the way the PLCAA is. For example, the statute in WesternGeco in some sense “regulated” the conduct of U.S. courts by creating a cause of action that those courts can adjudicate. But the focus of that statute was clearly on regulating patent infringement, e.g., infringement said to occur by shipping components overseas for assembly. 138 S. Ct. at 2137-38. Here, by contrast, the PLCAA seeks to regulate the lawsuits themselves. 

Having thus determined the PLCAA’s focus, we find it evident that the conduct relevant to that focus occurs domestically. Both the conduct that the statute seeks to regulate—the filing and adjudication of lawsuits—as well as the conduct that it seeks to protect—defendants’ manufacturing, marketing, and selling of guns—take place entirely within the United States. 

Mexico argues finally, and mostly in passing, that defendants “engage in conduct in Mexico when they aid and abet trafficking guns into Mexico.” The Supreme Court has held that “suppl[ying] in or from the United States” components of a patented invention with the intent that they be assembled abroad is a “domestic act.” Id. (alteration in original). Mexico develops no reason why selling guns in the United States with the intent that they be resold to persons in Mexico should not similarly be considered a domestic act. 

For all these reasons, the presumption against extraterritoriality does not bar application of the PLCAA to this case. 284a 

B. 

We now turn to Mexico’s argument that the PLCAA nonetheless by its terms does not apply to a lawsuit brought by a foreign government based on damages occurring outside the United States caused by misuse outside the United States. Recall that the PLCAA prohibits lawsuits “brought by any person” (including “any governmental entity”) “against a manufacturer or seller of a [firearm] . . . for damages . . . or other relief, resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a [firearm] by the person or a third party.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(3), (5)(A). Mexico argues that (1) “criminal or unlawful misuse” means only misuse that occurs in the United States and is unlawful under U.S. law; (2) “damages . . . or other relief” covers only injury incurred in the United States; and (3) “any governmental entity” encompasses only domestic governmental entities. 

The Supreme Court recently rejected a similar contention in Turkiye Halk Bankasi A.S. v. United States, which involved a section of the U.S. Criminal Code granting federal district courts exclusive jurisdiction over “all offenses against the laws of the United States.” 598 U.S. 264, 268-69 (2023) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 3231). The defendant, a bank owned by the Turkish government, argued that because the statute “refers generically to ‘all’ federal criminal offenses without specifically mentioning foreign states or their instrumentalities, . . . foreign states and their instrumentalities do not fall within [the statute’s] scope.” Id. a t 269. The Court observed that the “text as written” “plainly encompasses” the defendant’s offenses . Id. It therefore “decline[d] to graft an atextual limitation onto [the statute’s] broad 285a 

jurisdictional grant over ‘all offenses,’” or to “create a new clear-statement rule requiring Congress to ‘clearly indicat[e] its intent’ to include foreign states and their instrumentalities.” Id. 

Similarly, in Pfizer, Inc. v. Government of India, the Supreme Court considered a provision of the Clayton Act allowing “any person” injured by a violation of U.S. antitrust laws to sue in U.S. district court. 434 U.S. 308, 311-12 (1978) (quoting 15 U.S.C. § 15(a)). The Court held that “any person” includes foreign governments, in part because that interpretation furthered the “two purposes” of the provision: “to deter violators and deprive them of ‘the fruits of their illegality,’ and ‘to compensate victims of antitrust violations for their injuries.’” Id. at 314 (quoting Ill. Brick Co. v. Illinois, 431 U.S. 720, 746 (1977)). The Court reasoned that “[t]o deny a foreign plaintiff injured by an antitrust violation the right to sue would defeat these purposes” because “[i]t would permit a price fixer or a monopolist to escape full liability for his illegal actions and would deny compensation to certain of his victims, merely because he happens to deal with foreign customers.” Id. at 314-15. 

Taken together, Turkiye and Pfizer guide our approach to interpreting the PLCAA. Here, as in 

Turkiye, the “text as written” does not contain the exceptions Mexico proposes. Nothing in the text of the PLCAA limits its scope to misuse or injury that occurs in the United States, or to U.S. plaintiffs. And, as in 

Pfizer, the context and purpose of the PLCAA weigh against such a limitation. Congress quite clearly enacted the PLCAA to insulate the U.S. gun industry from certain lawsuits . See 15 U.S.C. § 7901(a)(5)-(8); 

id. § 7901(b)(1), (4). Limiting that protection to 286a 

lawsuits brought for harm occurring in the United States, thereby exposing the U.S. gun industry to identical lawsuits for harm suffered abroad, would run directly contrary to that purpose. We also think it unlikely that Congress intended to allow recovery for victims of gun violence occurring abroad but preclude that same recovery for victims of gun violence occurring within U.S. borders. 

Nevertheless, Mexico urges us to read into the PLCAA an implicit domestic restriction on the statute’s scope. It likens this case to Small v. United States, which involved a statute criminalizing possession of a firearm by “any person . . . who has been convicted in any court of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year.” 544 U.S. 385, 387 (2005) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1)). There the Supreme Court held that the phrase “convicted in any court” encompasses only domestic, not foreign, convictions . Id. But at the same time the Court made clear that its conclusion would be different “should statutory language, context, history, or purpose show the contrary.” Id. at 391. Finding “no convincing indication to the contrary” in the statute, the Court applied an assumption “similar” to the presumption against extraterritoriality because “Congress generally legislates with domestic concerns in mind.” Id. at 388, 391 (quoting Smith v. United States, 507 U.S. 197, 204 n.5 (1993)). 

The holding in Small provides no succor to Mexico. As we have explained, the PLCAA was also undoubtedly enacted with domestic concerns in mind; i.e., the impact of certain types of lawsuits filed in domestic courts against domestic firearm companies. So prohibiting all such lawsuits regardless of who 287a 

brings them perfectly aligns with that domestic concern. The fact that a statute is focused on domestic concerns (here, lawsuits in U.S. courts) does not mean that every term in the statute need be read as somehow domestically limited . See, e.g., Turkiye, 598 U.S. at 269; Pfizer, 434 U.S. at 314-15. And that is especially so where, as here, limiting the statute in this way would run directly contrary to its stated purposes. 

Mexico begs to differ. It points to four “clues” that the PLCAA does not apply to lawsuits arising out of the use of guns in violation of foreign laws. We address each in turn. 

First, Mexico points out that the definition of the term “seller” in the PLCAA explicitly includes “importer[s]” but does not explicitly mention “exporters.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(6)(A). Similarly, “importers,” but not “exporters,” are specifically identified as a category of business that the PLCAA seeks to protect . Id. § 7901(b)(1). Mexico argues that this “confirms” that Congress only intended the PLCAA to be domestic in scope. But this is too slender a reed on which to support the interpretation Mexico seeks to advance. Even assuming Congress intended to exclude from the PLCAA’s coverage the export of guns (an issue we do not decide here), that does not alter our conclusion that Congress certainly intended to include all lawful domestic sales of guns—even when those domestically sold guns end up causing harm abroad. There are plausible reasons why Congress might have wanted to protect domestic sellers more than exporters, including Congress’s stated purpose of “preserv[ing] a citizen’s access to a supply of firearms and ammunition for all lawful 288a 

purposes.” 15 U.S.C. § 7901(b)(2) (emphasis added). If a domestic seller goes out of business, that hampers U.S. citizens’ access to guns more than if an exporter goes out of business. Thus, the lack of any express mention of “exporters” does not mean that the PLCAA does not apply to actions against domestic manufacturers and sellers for harm suffered in another country. 

Second, Mexico points out that the PLCAA applies only to actions “resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse” of a firearm, and excludes any action in which the manufacturer or seller knowingly violated a “State or Federal statute” applicable to gun sales or marketing. Mexico argues that “criminal or unlawful misuse” should be read as referring only to violations of domestic laws, just as “convicted in any court” was read to encompass only domestic convictions in Small. Otherwise, Mexico says, the exception for knowing violations of law would presumably not be limited to state and federal statutes. We disagree. Given the basic concern motivating Congress, it makes perfect sense to read “criminal or unlawful misuse” broadly as including the violation of any law. Otherwise, Congress would have favored foreign plaintiffs over domestic plaintiffs and left a gaping hole in the shield that was the object of the legislation. 

Mexico replies that Congress would not have required U.S. courts to interpret foreign criminal law in determining whether the use of a gun was “criminal or unlawful.” Again, we disagree. Courts in the United States are capable of interpreting foreign law, and commonly do so . See, e.g., Piper Aircraft Co. v. 

Reyno, 454 U.S. 235, 245 (1981) (“[T]he mere fact that 289a 

the court is called upon to determine and apply foreign law does not present a legal problem of the sort which would justify the dismissal of a case otherwise properly before the court.” (internal quotations omitted)). Indeed, Mexico asks the court to interpret foreign law in this very case by arguing that Mexican law applies. To the extent Mexico is concerned that incorporating foreign law into the meaning of “criminal or unlawful use” will introduce “extreme” variations, the phrase already reflects the varied laws of fifty different states . See, e.g., Cynthia V. Ward, 

“Stand Your Ground” and Self-Defense, 42 Am. J. Crim. L. 89, 90 (2015) (describing contrasting state approaches to “stand your ground” laws). The PLCAA precludes certain lawsuits against firearm companies premised only on others’ unlawful use of firearms— regardless of which jurisdiction’s law determines that the use was unlawful. 

It also makes perfect sense that in crafting a specific and defined exception for knowing violations of law by a defendant, Congress would limit the exception to instances in which the defendant knowingly violated a “State or Federal statute.” To do otherwise and except from the limitations of the PLCAA cases in which a manufacturer violated a law of a foreign country would grant foreign governments the ability to define the scope of that exception . See Small, 544 U.S. at 389— 90 (finding Congress not to have granted foreign governments the ability to determine who could not own a gun in the United States). The PLCAA is designed to protect domestic firearm companies that operate lawfully in the United States under the numerous federal and state laws regulating their operations . See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 7901(a)(4) (finding 290a 

that the U.S. gun industry is “heavily regulated by Federal, State, and local laws”). That goal would be hampered if the PLCAA’s protections fell away whenever a plaintiff alleged a violation of only foreign laws—which may be significantly more restrictive than domestic regulations. 

Third, Mexico argues that RJR Nabisco supports its claim that “damages . . . or other relief” covers only injury in the United States . RJR Nabisco involved the private right of action for “[a]ny person injured . . . by reason of a violation of” the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). 579 U.S. at 346 (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 1964(c)). The Supreme Court held that the presumption against extraterritoriality precluded RICO’s private right of action from applying to injuries suffered abroad . Id. But here, as discussed above, the focus of the PLCAA is not on redressing injury but rather on preventing certain lawsuits against U.S. firearm companies. So it is not an extraterritorial application of the PLCAA to bar a lawsuit in a U.S. court against a U.S. company for harm suffered abroad . See also WesternGeco, 138 S. Ct. at 2138 (distinguishing “injury,” a “substantive element of a cause of action” in RJR Nabisco, from “damages—a separate legal concept”). 

Finally, Mexico argues that the term “any governmental entity” excludes foreign governmental entities because the PLCAA’s factual findings refer to actions “commenced or contemplated by the Federal Government, States, municipalities, private interest groups and others,” and do not expressly mention foreign governments. 15 U.S.C. § 7901(a)(8); id. 

§ 7901(a)(7). This argument stumbles at the starting line. The statements in the findings of fact merely 291a 

reflect that Congress enacted the PLCAA in response to actions that had been “commenced or contemplated” by the listed entities. They do not suggest that Congress did not intend for the PLCAA to apply to identical lawsuits by others that would have the same impact on the U.S. firearm industry. 

In sum, the text, context, and purpose of the PLCAA all point toward a conclusion that “[q]ualified civil liability action[s]” include those filed in United States’ federal and state courts by foreign governments for injury incurred abroad. 

C. 

The foregoing brings us to Mexico’s last extraterritoriality argument: Its contention that our reading of the statute should give way to Mexico’s invocation of international comity. Mexico argues that it is for Congress, not the courts, to decide whether to preclude a foreign-law claim for injuries incurred abroad—especially when the plaintiff is a foreign sovereign. It therefore urges application of a clear-statement rule before reading a statute like the PLCAA to bar such lawsuits. 

In making its comity argument, Mexico turns again to RJR Nabisco and its holding that RICO did not create a private cause of action for injuries suffered abroad. 579 U.S. at 346. In so holding, the Supreme Court reasoned that “providing a private civil remedy for foreign conduct creates a potential for international friction” because it risks “upsetting a balance of competing considerations that [foreign countries’] own . . . laws embody.” Id. at 346-47 (quoting F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. v. Empagran S.A., 542 U.S. 155, 167 (2004)). Mexico contends that 292a 

this case is the “mirror image” of RJR Nabisco: 

“[P]recluding a claim under [foreign] law for injury incurred [abroad]” interferes with foreign sovereigns’ application of their laws just as much as “granting a claim under U.S. law for injury incurred abroad.” Cf. Nestle USA, Inc. v. Doe , 141 S. Ct. 1931, 1948 (2021) (Sotomayor, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (“Closing the courthouse doors . . . gives rise to foreign-policy concerns just as invariably as leaving them open.” (cleaned up)). Therefore, Mexico argues, absent a clear statement from Congress, courts should not apply the PLCAA to claims arising under foreign law for conduct that occurs in the United States but causes injuries abroad. 

We decline to adopt this clear-statement rule for the PLCAA. As should be abundantly clear by now, the PLCAA’s focus is on protecting U.S. firearm companies from certain costly lawsuits, thereby also preserving U.S. citizens’ access to firearms. Creating an atextual exception for lawsuits by foreign governments would expose U.S. firearm companies to the very type of lawsuit the PLCAA seeks to prohibit, thereby running contrary to its stated goals. In at least this respect, this case is different from RJR 

Nabisco, in which limiting RICO’s private cause of action to exclude injuries suffered abroad did not undermine any stated purposes of the statute. 

The practical consequence of applying the PLCAA to this case is not lost on us. It may be that Mexico, as it claims, would be unable to pursue its lawsuit in the only forum that could provide effective injunctive relief. But that is a necessary consequence of Congress’s decision to protect the U.S. firearm industry by regulating the types of lawsuits that can 293a 

be adjudicated by U.S. courts. And the prohibition applies to lawsuits filed by domestic entities and individuals on an equal basis . Cf. Pfizer, 434 U.S. at 318-19 (“[A] foreign nation is generally entitled to prosecute any civil claim in the courts of the United States upon the same basis as a domestic corporation or individual might do.”). 

In sum, we hold that the PLCAA applies to lawsuits by foreign governmental entities for harm suffered outside this country, just as it applies to lawsuits by domestic governmental entities for harm suffered in this country. We turn next to Mexico’s contention that, even if the PLCAA applies generally to suits by foreign governments for foreign harms, it also excepts from its ban claims of the type presented in Mexico’s complaint. 

IV. 

As the title of the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act suggests, the statute is designed to protect only “lawful” commerce in arms. It contains various exceptions to ensure that it does not insulate firearm companies against lawsuits resulting from their unlawful behavior. One of those exceptions, known as the predicate exception, exempts from the PLCAA’s clutches “an action in which a manufacturer or seller of a qualified product knowingly violated a State or Federal statute applicable to the sale or marketing of the product, and the violation was a proximate cause of the harm for which relief is sought.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii). Mexico contends that its lawsuit meets this description. 

Defendants advance three arguments for rejecting Mexico’s contention: first, defendants say that 294a 

Mexico’s claims are not for violations of “statute[s]”; second, they contend that Mexico’s complaint does not adequately plead violations of predicate statutes; and third, they assert that Mexico has not adequately alleged proximate cause. We conclude that Mexico survives each of these threshold challenges at this stage of the litigation. We therefore hold that the PLCAA does not prevent this case from moving forward. Our reasoning follows. 

A. 

The district court held that Mexico’s common law claims did not qualify for the predicate exception because, it thought, the exception applies only to “statutory claims,” not “common-law causes of action.” 

Estados Unidos Mexicanos, 633 F. Supp. 3d at 446. Said differently, the district court thought that the “State or Federal statute” that the defendant violated, rather than the common law, must also provide the private right of action under which the plaintiff sues. 

Mexico tells us that no other court has construed the PLCAA this way, and points to a variety of decisions applying the predicate exception to common law claims alleging knowing violations of statutes. 4                             

> 4See, e.g., Brady v. Walmart Inc., No. 8:21-cv-1412-AAQ, 2022 WL 2987078, at *6-10 (D. Md. July 28, 2022) ; Prescott v. Slide Fire Sols., LP, 410 F. Supp. 3d 1123, 1139-40 & 1139 n.9 (D. Nev. 2019) ; Corporan v. Wal-Mart Stores E., LP, No. 16-2305-JWL, 2016 WL 3881341, at *3-4 & *4 n.4 (D. Kan. July 18, 2016) ; City of New York v. A-1 Jewelry & Pawn, Inc., 247 F.R.D. 296, 353 (E.D.N.Y. 2007) ; King v. Klocek, 187 A.D.3d 1614, 1616 (N.Y. App. Div. 2020) ;Englund v. World Pawn Exch., LLC, No. 16CV00598, 2017 WL 7518923, at *4 (Or. Cir. Ct. June 30, 2017) ;
> Chiapperini v. Gander Mountain Co. , 13 N.Y.S.3d 777, 787 (N.Y.

295a 

Defendants do not contest this assertion, nor do they cite any cases construing the PLCAA as the district court did in this case. 

We, too, conclude that the predicate exception encompasses common law claims in addition to statutory claims, as long as there is a predicate statutory violation that proximately causes the harm. The text of the PLCAA compels this conclusion. While other PLCAA exceptions exempt suits “for” specific causes of action, 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(ii), (iv), (v) (“an action . . . for negligent entrustment or negligence per se”; “an action for breach of contract or warranty”; “an action for [harm arising from a product defect]”), the predicate exception more broadly exempts actions “in which” the manufacturer or seller violated a statute, 

id. § 7903(5)(A)(iii). If Congress had wanted to limit the predicate exception to claims for violating apredicate statute, it could have simply phrased this exception the same as the others . See Keene Corp. v. 

United States, 508 U.S. 200, 208 (1993) (“[W]here Congress includes particular language in one section of a statute but omits it in another . . ., it is generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion.” (omission in original) (quoting Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983))). 

Defendants reply that “in which” means that the statutory violation must be contained “in” the cause of         

> Sup. Ct 2014) ; Williams v. Beemiller, Inc., 100 A.D.3d 143, 150-51 (N.Y. App. Div. 2012), amended by 103 A.D.3d 1191 (N.Y. App. Div. 2013) ; Smith & Wesson Corp . v. City of Gary , 875 N.E.2d 422, 434-35 (Ind. Ct. App. 2007).

296a 

action, such that it must be an element of the claim. Certainly to prevail Mexico would need to prove a manufacturer or seller liable for the knowing violation of a statute applicable to the sale or marketing of a qualified product. So proof of a statutory violation is a condition to prevailing on, for example, a cause of action for negligence. But that does not mean that a lawsuit for negligence cannot be “an action in which . . . a seller . . . knowingly violated” a requisite statute. 

The predicate exception’s proximate cause requirement harmonizes well with this understanding. The requisite proximate cause serves as a nexus between the predicate statutory violation and common law claims that otherwise might bear no relation to a seller’s transgression of firearm statutes. This ensures that—contrary to defendants’ protestations—our reading of the predicate exception does not allow any claim at all to proceed merely because it is alleged in the same case as an unrelated statutory violation. 

The proximate cause requirement makes less sense under the district court’s reading. Courts “generally presume that a statutory cause of action is limited to plaintiffs whose injuries are proximately caused by violations of the statute.” Lexmark Int’l, Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 572 U.S. 118, 132 (2014). And for any statutory cause of action containing a proximate cause requirement (as most do), the district court’s reading would render the identical requirement of the predicate exception entirely superfluous . See Consumer Data Indus. Ass’n v. Frey ,26 F.4th 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2022) (“A statute . . . ought to be construed in a way that ‘no clause, sentence, or word 297a 

shall be superfluous, void, or insignificant.’” (quoting 

Duncan v. Walker, 533 U.S. 167, 174 (2001))). Of course, as defendants point out, not all statutory causes of action have a built-in proximate cause requirement. But even with this caveat, proximate cause makes far more sense as a nexus between a predicate statutory violation and other causes of action than as a catchall designed to graft a proximate cause requirement onto rare statutory causes of action with alternative causation frameworks. 

The examples Congress provided of lawsuits that fit within the exception dispel any doubt that the exception allows for more than purely statutory causes of action. The predicate exception expressly encompasses, as an example of allowed lawsuits, “any case in which the manufacturer or seller aided, abetted, or conspired with any other person to sell or otherwise dispose of a qualified product, knowing, or having reasonable cause to believe, that the actual buyer of the qualified product was prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm or ammunition under subsection (g) or (n) of section 922 of title 18, United States Code”—conduct made unlawful by the Gun Control Act, 18 U.S.C. § 922(d). 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii)(II). Yet, nothing in section 922 seems to create any private right of action. Nor does any party suggest that it does. To the contrary, Mexico cites various cases holding that the Gun Control Act contains no statutory private right of action, and defendants do not dispute this characterization. 5 And     

> 5The cases that Mexico cites are not from this circuit. See Bannerman v. Mountain State Pawn, Inc. , No. 3:10-CV-46, 2010

298a 

given that agreed-upon reading, it would make no sense for Congress to have listed such a case as an example if only statutory actions could survive under the predicate exception. 

Defendants argue that, read to include non-statutory causes of action, the predicate exception would “wholly subsume” a different exception in the PLCAA for “action[s] brought against a seller for . . . negligence per se.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(ii). Generally speaking, negligence per se requires violation of “a statute that is designed to protect against the type of accident the actor’s conduct causes” and that the “victim is within the class of persons the statute is designed to protect.” Restatement (Third) of Torts § 14. Defendants complain that our reading of the predicate exception would allow plaintiffs to bring any common law claim based on any statutory violation, thereby rendering these restrictions superfluous. 

Defendants’ argument glosses over the heightened mens rea requirement in the predicate exception, which applies only when the defendant “knowingly” violates a statute. So there are statutory violations— i.e., those that are not “knowing”—that may be actionable under the doctrine of negligence per se but do not serve as predicate violations. So, there is no          

> WL 9103469 (N.D. W. Va. Nov. 5, 2010), aff’d , 436 F. App’x 151 (4th Cir. 2011) ; Est. of Pemberton v. John’s Sports Ctr., Inc. , 135 P.3d 174 (Kan. Ct. App. 2006) ; T & M Jewelry, Inc. v. Hicks ex rel. Hicks , 189 S.W.3d 526 (Ky. 2006) . We do not decide here whether the Gun Control Act provides a private right of action. For purposes of the present case, we merely accept the parties’ apparent agreement that it does not.

299a 

superfluousness in our reading of the statute. And it is perfectly sensible for Congress to allow claims satisfying the negligence per se standard to proceed, while at the same time creating a separate exception for knowing violations of statutes regulating the sale or marketing of firearms. 6

For these reasons, we conclude that the predicate exception allows common law claims for injury proximately caused by a defendant’s knowing violation of a predicate statute. We turn next to defendants’ contention that Mexico has not adequately alleged such a violation. 

B. 

Mexico alleges that defendants knowingly violated predicate statutes in two ways: by aiding and abetting illegal downstream sales, and by selling unlawful “machineguns.” 

1. 

First, Mexico reasons that by deliberately facilitating the unlawful trafficking of their guns into Mexico, defendants aid and abet violations of various federal statutes that prohibit selling guns without a license, exporting guns without a license, and selling to straw purchasers. Resting on their position that the predicate exception is limited to statutory causes of action (which we have rejected), defendants do not contend that the complaint fails to allege widespread   

> 6In fact, the district court in this very case found the negligence per se exception inapplicable because Massachusetts does not recognize the negligence per se doctrine. See Estados Unidos Mexicanos , F. Supp. 3d at 449.

300a 

sales of firearms by dealers in knowing violation of several state and federal statutes. Nor do defendants dispute that the predicate exception of section 7903(5)(A)(iii) would apply if Mexico were to prove that a defendant aided and abetted any such violation. Instead, defendants contend that even for pleading purposes the complaint fails to allege facts plausibly supporting the theory that defendants have aided and abetted such unlawful sales. 

We disagree, finding instead that Mexico’s complaint adequately alleges that defendants have been aiding and abetting the sale of firearms by dealers in knowing violation of relevant state and federal laws. “[T]he essence of aiding and abetting” is “participation in another’s wrongdoing that is both significant and culpable enough to justify attributing the principal wrongdoing to the aider and abettor.” 

Twitter, Inc. v. Taamneh, 598 U.S. 471, 504 (2023). 

Reduced to its essence, aiding-and-abetting liability rests on “twin requirements” that the assistance provided to the principal wrong-doer be both (1) “knowing” and (2) “substantial.” Id. at 491-92. These requirements “work[] in tandem, with a lesser showing of one demanding a greater showing of the other.” Id. They “‘should be considered relative to one another’ as part of a single inquiry designed to capture conscious and culpable conduct.” Id. at 504 (quoting 

Camp v. Dema, 948 F.2d 455, 459 (8th Cir. 1991)). 

Defendants argue that Mexico has at best alleged defendants’ knowing indifference to the downstream illegal trafficking of their guns into Mexico. They argue that “because Defendants themselves are not alleged to ‘participate’ in this wrongful conduct at all, 301a 

much less with any plausible intent of facilitating it, they cannot be deemed accomplices.” 

This argument reflects a fundamental misunderstanding of the complaint. Fairly read, the complaint alleges that defendants are aware of the significant demand for their guns among the Mexican drug cartels, that they can identify which of their dealers are responsible for the illegal sales that give the cartels the guns, and that they know the unlawful sales practices those dealers engage in to get the guns to the cartels. The complaint further alleges that even with all this knowledge, and even after warnings from the U.S. government, defendants continue to supply the very dealers that they know engage in straw sales and large-volume sales to traffic guns into Mexico, that they design military-style weapons and market them as such knowing that this makes them more desirable to the cartels, and that they place serial numbers on their weapons in a manner that facilitates their removal, as is preferred by cartels. And the complaint alleges that as a result of this conduct, defendants collectively reap $170 million per year in revenue from this illegal market. It is therefore not implausible that, as the complaint alleges, defendants engage in all this conduct in order to maintain the unlawful market in Mexico, and not merely in spite of it. 

Notionally, imagine a dealer, a distributor, and a manufacturer standing abreast of one another at the border. The manufacturer hands the distributor ten guns, the distributor hands them to the dealer, and the dealer then hands them to a group of ten customers, among whom there are eight well-known agents of the cartel acting as straw purchasers. Rather than 302a 

refusing to fill an order for ten more guns by that dealer, the manufacturer tweaks its advertisements to better appeal to the cartel, supplies them more guns, and so on over and over again. We think it clear that by passing along guns knowing that the purchasers include unlawful buyers, and making design and marketing decisions targeted towards those exact individuals, the manufacturer is aiding and abetting illegal sales. And this scenario, in substance, is fairly analogous to what Mexico alleges. 

The allegations here are also remarkably analogous to the facts in Direct Sales Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 703 (1943). In that case, the defendant company conducted from New York a business providing mail-order prescription drugs to doctors around the country . Id. at 704-06. One customer was a doctor in South Carolina who was illegally reselling morphine sulfate supplied to him by the defendant . Id. at 704. The defendant was convicted of criminally conspiring with the doctor . Id. at 704-05. In affirming the conviction, the Supreme Court pointed to evidence that the doctor was ordering the product in large volumes incompatible with lawful use by legitimate patients, that the defendant facilitated this behavior through mass advertising and offering bulk sales at steep discounts (even after the U.S. government warned it that it was a source of supply for an illegal market), and that the company had a “stake in the venture” in the form of profits from the illegally sold drugs . Id. at 706-07, 712-13. From this evidence, the Court concluded, the jury could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant supplier “not only kn[ew] and acquiesce[d]” in the illegal enterprise, but 303a 

also “join[ed] both mind and hand . . . to make its accomplishment possible.” Id. at 713. 

Here, similarly, the complaint alleges that defendants have resisted taking measures that would make it more difficult for their firearms to fall into the cartels’ hands (despite warnings from the U.S. government), that they design and market their guns in such a way as to make them attractive to the illegal market, and that they benefit financially as a result. And unlike in Direct Sales, the defendants here are alleged to know that they supply dealers who sell illegally, making the inference that they are working in concert with these unlawful actors even stronger. Neither must we determine whether there is evidence of these facts sufficient to support a criminal conviction as in Direct Sales; we ask only whether the facts alleged in the complaint plausibly support an aiding-and-abetting theory of liability in this civil case . Direct Sales strongly supports our conclusion that they do. 

Defendants attempt to distinguish Direct Sales by relying on the Court’s observation that given the quantities sold the drugs could not have all been used for any lawful purpose . Id. at 710-12. In contrast, they assert, the “vast majority of retailers” are law-abiding and “only 2%” of U.S. firearms end up in Mexico. But in Direct Sales the Court distinguished morphine—a product “incapable of further legal use except by compliance with rigid regulations”—from other commodities “not restricted as to sale by order form, registration, or other requirements. Id. at 710. The defendant’s sales methods and volumes, which might be perfectly innocuous for everyday items, were evidence of illicit intent when employed to sell a304a 

dangerous item whose legitimate market is highly restricted . Id. at 711-12. “The difference,” the Court said, “is like that between toy pistols or hunting rifles and machine guns.” Id. at 710. 

And so in Direct Sales the defendant must have known that the sales volume meant there were likely illegal sales, and by encouraging volume sales, the defendant could have been found to have intended to supply the products for the illegal sales. Here we also have a highly regulated product 7 allegedly being sold in an illegal manner, and an allegation that defendants know what is going on and take steps to facilitate it. In this important respect, Direct Sales 

again provides a close and instructive analogy. 

Defendants also point out that Direct Sales rejected the proposition that a seller could be held liable for a buyer’s illegal acts based merely on their knowledge or lack of concern as to the buyer’s unlawful plans. But for all the reasons described above, the complaint adequately alleges that defendants make deliberate design and distribution choices to facilitate the illegal trafficking of their guns to Mexico. Thus they are not mere passive observers of the buyer’s illegal activity, but more akin to a calculated and willing participant in the supply chain that ends with a profitable illegal firearm market in Mexico. 

Defendants argue that the Supreme Court’s recent opinion in Twitter calls for a different result. We         

> 7As Congress observed in enacting the PLCAA, “[t]he manufacture, importation, possession, sale, and use of firearms and ammunition in the United States are heavily regulated.” 15 U.S.C. § 7901(a)(4).

305a 

disagree. In Twitter, the Supreme Court held that major social media platforms used by ISIS to enlist recruits and raise funds were not liable under the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act for aiding and abetting an ISIS terrorist attack on a nightclub in Turkey. 598 U.S. at 505-07. The defendants in 

Twitter had no meaningful stake in ISIS’s use of their platforms and had an undisputed lack of intent to support ISIS . Id. The only affirmative conduct that the defendants engaged in was creating their platforms and making them available to the public, which was not alleged to have been done with ISIS in mind or to support terrorism . Id. at 498. There was also no allegation that ISIS even used the platforms to plan or coordinate the attack . Id. 

Here, by contrast, Mexico alleges that defendants engage in conduct—design decisions, marketing tactics, and repeated supplying of dealers known to sell guns that cross the border—with the intent of growing and maintaining an illegal market in Mexico from which they receive substantial revenues. And for Rule 12(b)(6) purposes we assume that defendants’ conduct in fact helped incite the unlawful sales . See, e.g., SBT Holdings, LLC v. Town of Westminster, 547 F.3d 28, 35 (1st Cir. 2008) (“[W]e draw all rational inferences from the facts alleged in favor of the plaintiffs.”). Defendants are therefore alleged to be much more active participants in the alleged activity than were the Twitter defendants, and the holding in that case does not compel a different result in this one. 

Of course, the complaint does not allege defendants’ awareness of any particular unlawful sale. But neither did the convicted mail-order company in Direct Sales have such specific knowledge. The Supreme 306a 

Court clarified in Twitter that such a “strict nexus” is not always required. 598 U.S. at 497. “[I]n appropriate circumstances, a secondary defendant’s role in an illicit enterprise can be so systemic that the secondary defendant is aiding and abetting every wrongful act committed by that enterprise.” Id. at 496. Here, defendants operate at a systemic level, allegedly designing, marketing, and distributing their guns so that demand by the cartels continues to boost sales. In these circumstances, defendants need not know about any particular unlawful sale that funnels their guns into Mexico. 

In sum, we conclude that the complaint adequately alleges that defendants aided and abetted the knowingly unlawful downstream trafficking of their guns into Mexico. Defendants’ arguments to the contrary are premised either on an inaccurate reading of the complaint or on a misapplication of the standard of review on a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6). Whether plaintiff will be able to support those allegations with evidence at summary judgment or at trial remains to be seen. At this stage, though, we must “accept all well-pleaded allegations of [Mexico] as true and afford all inferences in [Mexico’s] favor.” 

Vazquez- Ramos v. Triple-S Salud, Inc., 55 F.4th 286, 291 (1st Cir. 2022) (cleaned up) (quoting Arroyo-Melecio v. P.R. Am. Ins. Co. , 398 F.3d 56, 65 (1st Cir. 2005)). 

2. 

Mexico’s argument that defendants unlawfully sold “machineguns” fares less well. The Gun Control Act prohibits selling a “machinegun” without specific 307a 

authorization. 18 U.S.C. § 922(b)(4). “Machinegun” is defined as follows: 

The term “machinegun” means any weapon which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. The term shall also include the frame or receiver of any such weapon, any part designed and intended solely and exclusively, or combination of parts designed and intended, for use in converting a weapon into a machinegun, and any combination of parts from which a machinegun can be assembled if such parts are in the possession or under the control of a person. 

26 U.S.C. § 5845(b). 

Mexico claims that defendants’ semiautomatic weapons meet this definition because they can easily be modified to fire automatically. It cites a 1982 ATF administrative ruling stating that this definition “includes those weapons which have not previously functioned as machineguns but possess design features which facilitate full automatic fire by a simple modification or elimination of existing component parts.” ATF Rul. 82-8, 1982-2 A.T.F.Q.B. 49 (1982). 

Binding precedent from the Supreme Court and this court forecloses Mexico’s interpretation. In Staples v. 

United States, the Supreme Court held that the National Firearms Act—which prohibits possession of an unregistered “machinegun” (as defined above)— requires that the defendant knew that the possessed weapon “had the characteristics that brought it within the statutory definition of a machinegun.” 511 U.S. 308a 

600, 602 (1994). The defendant in that case possessed an AR-15 rifle, in which certain components had been swapped out or filed down to enable automatic firing .Id. at 603. The Supreme Court held that to be properly convicted the defendant must have known that his rifle had been so modified . Id. at 619. It rejected a reading of the statute under which “any person who has purchased what he believes to be a semiautomatic rifle or handgun . . . can be subject to imprisonment, despite absolute ignorance of the gun’s firing capabilities, if the gun turns out to be an automatic.” 

Id. a t 615. And the majority also rejected the dissent’s argument based on a class of “readily convertible semiautomatics” because “that class bears no relation to the definitions in the Act.” Id. at 612 n.6. 

Similarly, in United States v. Nieves-Castaño, we reversed the conviction of a defendant who knew that she possessed an AK-47 but did not know that it had been modified to allow automatic firing. 480 F.3d 597, 602 (1st Cir. 2007). We stated that “[w]hile an automatic weapon meets the definition of a machine gun, a semi-automatic weapon does not.” Id. at 600 (citing Staples, 511 U.S. at 602 & n.1). 

Mexico argues that Staples and Nieves-Castaño are inapposite because those cases were about the mens rea requirement for a possession crime, not the definition of “machinegun.” It cites a district court case from Nevada distinguishing Staples on this basis .See Parsons v. Colt’s Mfg. Co., No. 19-cv-01189, 2020 WL 1821306, at *5 (D. Nev. Apr. 10, 2020), modified on reconsideration, No. 19-cv-01189, 2020 WL 2309259 (D. Nev. May 8, 2020). But critical to the holdings of both Staples and Nieves- Castaño was that knowing possession of a readily convertible 309a 

semiautomatic weapon does not constitute de facto knowing possession of a “machinegun.” In other words, a readily convertible semiautomatic weapon is not, without more, the same as an automatic weapon. Mexico’s reading would erase this distinction— creating an equivalency that the holdings of Staples and Nieves-Castaño do not allow. It would also effectively outlaw the knowing possession of any semiautomatic weapon, since “virtually any semiautomatic weapon may be converted . . . into a machinegun within the meaning of the Act.” See Staples, 511 U.S. at 615. Whether convertible semiautomatic weapons are to be prohibited in their entirety is not an issue presented by this appeal. 

C. 

The final hurdle that Mexico must clear is the predicate exception’s proximate cause requirement. A violation of a predicate statute allows a lawsuit to proceed only if “the violation was a proximate cause of the harm for which relief is sought.” 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii). 

Proximate cause “demand[s] ‘some direct relation between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.’” United States v. Kilmartin, 944 F.3d 315, 330 (1st Cir. 2019) (quoting Paroline v. United States, 572 U.S. 434, 444 (2014)). “Proximate cause is commonly understood as a function of the foreseeability of the harm,” id. at 331, although in certain contexts foreseeability alone may be insufficient, see, e.g., Bank 310a 

of Am. Corp. v. City of Miami, 581 U.S. 189, 202 (2017) (Fair Housing Act). 8

Mexico’s claim of proximate cause is straightforward: defendants aid and abet the trafficking of guns to the Mexican drug cartels, and this trafficking has foreseeably required the Mexican government to incur significant costs in response to the increased threats and violence accompanying drug cartels armed with an arsenal of military-grade weapons. 

Defendants attempt to complicate this causal theory. They maintain that the chain of causation actually has eight steps: (1) manufacturers sell guns to distributors; (2) distributors sell the guns to dealers; (3) dealers sell the guns to buyers with illegal intentions; (4) those buyers sell the guns to smugglers or smuggle them into Mexico themselves; (5) the cartels buy the guns; (6) the cartels use the guns; (7) the cartels’ use of the guns injures people and property in Mexico; and (8) the Mexican government suffers derivative financial harm from those injuries. There are at least two fatal flaws in this argument. 

First, the starting point for the predicate exception’s causation analysis is the “violation” of “a State or Federal statute applicable to the sale or marketing” of firearms. We ask whether “the violation” proximately caused the plaintiff’s harm. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A)(iii). Here, the violation that defendants        

> 8Neither party proposes a definition of proximate cause specific to the predicate exception of the PLCAA. In the absence of any such suggestions, we apply traditional understandings of proximate cause.

311a 

allegedly aid and abet occurs when a dealer knowingly violates the law in selling guns intended for cartels. Viewed in this light, the relevant chain of causation starts at step 3 of the defendants’ list. And from that point, the Mexican government’s expenditure of funds to parry the cartels is a foreseeable and direct consequence. 

Second, the fact that one can fashion a multi-step description of the causal chain does not mean that the injurious conduct and the injury alleged are insufficiently connected. Consider a defendant who falls asleep at the helm of a large ship, leaning on the helm, so as to move the tiller, which turns the rudder, which then turns the ship off course, hitting and weakening a dike, and thereby causing a reasonably cautious downstream farmer to build a levee. Surely the ability to describe this causation in multiple steps would not mean that, as a matter of law, the negligent helmsperson did not foreseeably cause the farmer compensable harm. Rather, one would more reasonably say that negligently steering the ship foreseeably caused the need to shore-up flood defenses. So, too, here, the complaint plausibly alleges that aiding and abetting the illegal sale of a large volume of assault weapons to the cartels foreseeably caused the Mexican government to shore-up its defenses. 

Defendants nevertheless claim that the Third Circuit adopted their view of proximate cause in City of Philadelphia v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 277 F.3d 415, 312a 

423-24 (3d Cir. 2002). 9 In that case, though, Philadelphia alleged “[a]t most . . . awareness of the means by which prohibited purchasers end up possessing handguns.” Id. at 424 & n.14. The “trace request information” available at that time “d[id] not put a gun manufacturer on notice that a specific distributor or dealer [wa]s engaged in unlawful firearm trafficking.” Id. at 424 n.14. Thus all gun manufacturers knew was that “some handguns reach prohibited purchasers.” Id. And without more, the plaintiffs could not show “intent on the part of the gun manufacturers.” Id. Here, by contrast, Mexico expressly alleges that the defendants did know which dealers were making illegal sales. 

Defendants further contend that there is no proximate cause because the causal chain contains multiple criminal acts by third parties. They argue that “an ‘intervening criminal act of a third party’ is 

the textbook intervening act,” Copithorne v. 

Framingham Union Hosp., 520 N.E.2d 139, 141 (Mass. 1988). But the complete sentence in 

Copithorne from which defendants’ brief cherry-picks actually states: “The intervening criminal act of a third party is a superseding cause which breaks the chain of proximate causation only where the original wrongdoer reasonably could not have foreseen such act.” Id.; see also, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Torts § 448 (intervening crime is superseding cause “unless the actor at the time of his negligent conduct realized            

> 9The Third Circuit decided City of Philadelphia before Congress enacted the PLCAA, so it analyzed proximate cause under negligence law, not the PLCAA. 277 F.3d at 422-26.

313a 

or should have realized the likelihood . . . that a third person might avail himself of the opportunity to commit such a . . . crime”); id. § 449 (“If the likelihood that a third person may act in a particular manner is the hazard or one of the hazards which makes the actor negligent, such an act whether innocent, negligent, intentionally tortious, or criminal does not prevent the actor from being liable for harm caused thereby.”). Here, the complaint alleges not only that it was foreseeable that defendants’ guns would end up in the hands of Mexican cartels, but also that defendants actually intended to bring about that result. And it is certainly foreseeable that Mexican drug cartels—armed with defendants’ weapons— would use those weapons to commit violent crimes. The acts of these third parties are therefore properly considered as part of the proximate causation chain. 

Defendants’ superseding-criminal-act argument is especially unconvincing in the context of the PLCAA, which precludes only those claims “resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product” by someone other than the defendant. 15 U.S.C. § 7903(5)(A). If a third party’s unlawful act always undercuts proximate cause, the predicate exception would be meaningless . See Abramski v. United States, 

573 U.S. 169, 183 n.8 (2014) (rejecting an interpretation of a gun-control statute that “would render the statute all but useless”). 

Defendants then shift focus from the conduct to the injury. They argue that the Mexican government’s alleged harms are wholly derivative of injuries suffered by the direct victims of cartel violence, citing a “general tendency of the law” not to stretch proximate causation “beyond [its] first step” to reach 314a 

indirect victims . Holmes v. Sec. Inv. Prot. Corp., 503 U.S. 258, 271 (1992) (quoting Associated Gen. Contractors v. Cal. State Council of Carpenters, 459 U.S. 519, 534 (1983)). Under this principle, “a plaintiff who complained of harm flowing merely from the misfortunes visited upon a third person by the defendant’s acts was generally said to stand at too remote a distance to recover.” Id. at 268-69; see also Lexmark, 572 U.S. at 133. 

Some courts have applied this principle to bar similar lawsuits by cities against gun manufacturers. For example, the Third Circuit held that Philadelphia had not alleged proximate cause because it sought “reimbursement for expenses that arise only because of the use of firearms to injure or threaten City residents,” even though some of the alleged damages were “different from the damages suffered by direct victims of gun violence”—like costs to “investigate and prosecute gun trafficking [and] to patrol gun infested neighborhoods.” City of Philadelphia, 277 F.3d at 425; 

see also Ganim v. Smith & Wesson Corp., 780 A.2d 98, 124 (Conn. 2001) (applying similar reasoning). 

On the other hand, some courts have recognized that selling guns into an illegal market may cause direct harm to a governmental entity that is not derivative of harm to its residents. A court in Massachusetts allowed the city of Boston to proceed in its lawsuit against firearm companies where the city alleged various direct harms resulting from the defendants’ “fueling an illicit market” of guns . City of Boston v. Smith & Wesson Corp., No. 199902590, 2000 WL 1473568, at *6 (Mass. Super. July 13, 2000). Such harms included costs of increased security at public schools, costs of increased law enforcement, lower 315a 

property values, and diminished tax revenues . Id. 

The Supreme Court of Ohio adopted this reasoning, finding direct injuries in the form of “significant expenses for police, emergency, health, prosecution, corrections and other services.” Cincinnati v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 768 N.E.2d 1136, 1148 (Ohio 2002). Similarly, a New Jersey court rejected a remoteness argument with respect to expenditures associated with “deterrence, investigation of gun crimes, and other related services.” James v. Arms Tech., Inc., 820 A.2d 27, 41 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2003); see also In re JUUL Labs, Inc., Mktg., Sales Practices & Prods. 

Liab. Litig., 497 F. Supp. 3d 552, 664-65 (N.D. Cal. 2020) (finding proximate cause where government entities “do not seek to recover costs expended by . . . any other third party”). 

We find the reasoning of the latter cases persuasive. When faced with an epidemic of unlawful gun trafficking into its country, a government will foreseeably—indeed inexorably—incur costs of its own that are not merely derivative of those borne by the direct victims of gun violence. One obvious example is the cost of increased law enforcement personnel and training to mitigate the flow of illegal weapons and to combat drug cartels that—armed with defendants’ weapons—are essentially hostile military operations. The government directly and uniquely bears these costs as a direct result of defendants’ alleged facilitation of gun trafficking to the Mexican cartels. 

Imagine that a U.S. company sent a mercenary unit of combat troops to attack people in Mexico City. Such an attack would directly cause Mexico itself the expense of paying soldiers to defend the city. Proximate cause would be quite clear. So, too, here, 316a 

where the defendants are alleged to have armed the attackers for their continuing assaults. 

Mexico may also be able to show that other of its alleged harms are proximately caused by defendants’ actions, and not merely derivative of harms to its citizens. For example, if Mexico can prove that it had to proactively spend more funds to bolster its healthcare facilities, social services, and judicial system in response to the cartels’ accumulation of defendants’ guns, these expenses might also not be merely derivative of the injuries suffered by individual victims. On the other hand, other alleged harms, such as lower economic efficiency due to the decreased size of the working population, are derivative because the harm to the government flows only from prior harm inflicted upon its citizens. The bottom line is that Mexico has plausibly alleged at least some injuries that it has suffered directly from the illegal trafficking of guns into Mexico, and that are not merely derivative of the harm suffered by the victims of gun violence. 

This conclusion is consistent with Supreme Court precedent. In Holmes (a RICO case), the Court held that there was no proximate cause linking the defendants’ manipulation of stock prices, which caused broker-dealers who purchased the stock to experience financial distress, to the harm suffered by the broker-dealers’ customers when the broker-dealers could not pay the customers’ claims. 503 U.S. at 271-74. In that case, the only path from the stock manipulation to the customers’ harm was through the broker-dealers’ harm . Id. at 271 (“[T]he conspirators have allegedly injured these customers only insofar as the stock manipulation first injured the broker-dealers 317a 

and left them without the wherewithal to pay customers’ claims.”). 

Contrast the situation in Holmes from one contemplated by the Court in Lexmark: 

Consider two rival carmakers who purchase airbags for their cars from different third-party manufacturers. If the first carmaker, hoping to divert sales from the second, falsely proclaims that the airbags used by the second carmaker are defective, both the second carmaker and its airbag supplier may suffer reputational injury, and their sales may decline as a result. In those circumstances, there is no reason to regard either party’s injury as derivative of the other’s; each is directly and independently harmed by the attack on its merchandise. 

572 U.S. at 138-39. 

This case is more like the airbag example in 

Lexmark than the stock manipulation in Holmes. 

Unlike in Holmes, the causal path from the gun trafficking to the Mexican government’s expenditures does not flow solely through the harm suffered by victims of gun violence. Rather, like in the airbag example, the harm caused by the trafficking goes in multiple directions—both directly to the victims of gun violence and directly to the Mexican government. Admittedly, the government’s expenditures are presumably in large part for the purpose of preventing and mitigating the harm from gun violence to its citizens. But that does not make it “purely derivative” in the sense that sometimes defeats proximate cause .See id. at 133. 318a 

Defendants’ final attack on proximate cause is a pragmatic one. Defendants point to two “functional factors” that courts apply while analyzing proximate cause under RICO: the feasibility of “ascertain[ing] the amount of a plaintiff’s damages attributable to the violation, as distinct from other, independent, factors”; and the “administrability” of apportioning damages without “multiple recoveries.” Sterling Suffolk Racecourse, LLC v. Wynn Resorts, Ltd., 990 F.3d 31, 35-36 (1st Cir. 2021) (quoting In re Neurontin Mktg. & Sales Pracs. Litig., 712 F.3d 21, 35-36 (1st Cir. 2013)). 

Assuming these considerations apply outside of the RICO context, they would not require the dismissal of the complaint in this case. The foregoing discussion concerning Mexico’s non-derivative harm disposes of defendants’ concern about multiple recoveries. We are also not persuaded that determining the damages attributable to each defendant will be as difficult as defendants suggest. And in this case any such difficulties are best resolved once Mexico has had an opportunity to engage in discovery and submit expert reports bearing on damages . Accord City of Boston, 

2000 WL 1473568, at *7 n.33 (“The difficulty in ascertaining damages in this case is best assessed when the case has gone beyond the pleading stage.”). In any event, Mexico seeks injunctive relief in addition to damages, and defendants’ concerns about double recoveries and apportioning damages do not apply to injunctive relief . Cf. Lexmark, 572 U.S. at 135 (“Even when a plaintiff cannot quantify its losses with sufficient certainty to recover damages, it may still be entitled to injunctive relief . . . .”). 

We conclude that Mexico has adequately alleged proximate causation, thereby satisfying the final 319a 

demand of the predicate exception. Of course, our holding at this stage is based on the allegations in the complaint, construed favorably to Mexico. Mexico will have to support its theory of proximate causation with evidence later in the proceedings. 

V. 

The parties’ briefing touches on certain issues beyond the PLCAA, including which jurisdiction’s law governs Mexico’s tort claims and whether defendants owe a duty to Mexico under whichever tort law does apply. The district court did not reach these issues because it found the PLCAA dispositive. Having concluded that the PLCAA does not bar Mexico’s lawsuit at this stage of the proceedings, we think it prudent to allow the district court to address the remaining issues in the first instance, rather than deciding them ourselves without the benefit of the district court’s analysis or focused briefing from the parties. 

VI. 

For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the district court’s conclusion that the PLCAA bars Mexico’s tort claims and remand to the district court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. 320a 

APPENDIX D 

15 U.S.C. Ch. 105: PROTECTION OF LAWFUL COMMERCE IN ARMS 

From Title 15—COMMERCE AND TRADE 

Chapter 105—Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms 

Sec. 

7901.  Findings; purposes. 

7902.  Prohibition on bringing of qualified civil 

liability actions in Federal or State court. 

7903.  Definitions. 

§7901. Findings; purposes 

(a) Findings 

Congress finds the following: 

(1) The Second Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed. 

(2) The Second Amendment to the United States Constitution protects the rights of individuals, including those who are not members of a militia or engaged in military service or training, to keep and bear arms. 

(3) Lawsuits have been commenced against manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of firearms that operate as designed and intended, which seek money damages and other relief for the harm caused by the misuse of firearms by third parties, including criminals. 321a 

(4) The manufacture, importation, possession, sale, and use of firearms and ammunition in the United States are heavily regulated by Federal, State, and local laws. Such Federal laws include the Gun Control Act of 1968, the National Firearms Act [26 U.S.C. 5801 et seq.], and the Arms Export Control Act [22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.]. 

(5) Businesses in the United States that are engaged in interstate and foreign commerce through the lawful design, manufacture, marketing, distribution, importation, or sale to the public of firearms or ammunition products that have been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce are not, and should not, be liable for the harm caused by those who criminally or unlawfully misuse firearm products or ammunition products that function as designed and intended. 

(6) The possibility of imposing liability on an entire industry for harm that is solely caused by others is an abuse of the legal system, erodes public confidence in our Nation’s laws, threatens the diminution of a basic constitutional right and civil liberty, invites the disassembly and destabilization of other industries and economic sectors lawfully competing in the free enterprise system of the United States, and constitutes an unreasonable burden on interstate and foreign commerce of the United States. 

(7) The liability actions commenced or contemplated by the Federal Government, States, municipalities, and private interest groups and others are based on theories without foundation in hundreds of years of the common law and 322a 

jurisprudence of the United States and do not represent a bona fide expansion of the common law. The possible sustaining of these actions by amaverick judicial officer or petit jury would expand civil liability in a manner never contemplated by the framers of the Constitution, by Congress, or by the legislatures of the several States. Such an expansion of liability would constitute a deprivation of the rights, privileges, and immunities guaranteed to a citizen of the United States under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 

(8) The liability actions commenced or contemplated by the Federal Government, States, municipalities, private interest groups and others attempt to use the judicial branch to circumvent the Legislative branch of government to regulate interstate and foreign commerce through judgments and judicial decrees thereby threatening the Separation of Powers doctrine and weakening and undermining important principles of federalism, State sovereignty and comity between the sister States. 

(b) Purposes 

The purposes of this chapter are as follows: 

(1) To prohibit causes of action against manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of firearms or ammunition products, and their trade associations, for the harm solely caused by the criminal or unlawful misuse of firearm products or ammunition products by others when the product functioned as designed and intended. 

(2) To preserve a citizen’s access to a supply of firearms and ammunition for all lawful purposes, 323a 

including hunting, self-defense, collecting, and competitive or recreational shooting. 

(3) To guarantee a citizen’s rights, privileges, and immunities, as applied to the States, under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, pursuant to section 5 of that Amendment. 

(4) To prevent the use of such lawsuits to impose unreasonable burdens on interstate and foreign commerce. 

(5) To protect the right, under the First Amendment to the Constitution, of manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and importers of firearms or ammunition products, and trade associations, to speak freely, to assemble peaceably, and to petition the Government for a redress of their grievances. 

(6) To preserve and protect the Separation of Powers doctrine and important principles of federalism, State sovereignty and comity between sister States. 

(7) To exercise congressional power under article IV, section 1 (the Full Faith and Credit Clause) of the United States Constitution. 

(Pub. L. 109–92,  §2, Oct. 26, 2005,  119 Stat. 2095 .) 

E DITORIAL NOTES 

R EFERENCES IN TEXT 

The Gun Control Act of 1968, referred to in subsec. (a)(4), is  Pub. L. 90–618, Oct. 22, 1968, 82 Stat. 1213 .For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out under section 921 of Title 18, Crimes and Criminal Procedure, and Tables. 324a 

The National Firearms Act, referred to in subsec. (a)(4), is classified generally to chapter 53 (§5801 et seq.) of Title 26, Internal Revenue Code. See section 5849 of Title 26. 

The Arms Export Control Act, referred to in subsec. (a)(4), is  Pub. L. 90–629, Oct. 22, 1968, 82 Stat. 1320 ,which is classified principally to chapter 39 (§2751 et seq.) of Title 22, Foreign Relations and Intercourse. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out under section 2751 of Title 22 and Tables. 

This chapter, referred to in subsec. (b), was in the original “this Act”, meaning  Pub. L. 109–92, Oct. 26, 

2005, 119 Stat. 2095 , known as the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out below and Tables. 

S TATUTORY NOTES AND R ELATED S UBSIDIARIES 

S HORT TITLE 

Pub. L. 109–92, §1, Oct. 26, 2005, 119 Stat. 2095 ,provided that: “This Act [enacting this chapter, amending sections 922 and 924 of Title 18, Crimes and Criminal Procedure, and enacting provisions set out as notes under sections 921 and 922 of Title 18] may be cited as the ‘Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act’.” 

§7902. Prohibition on bringing of qualified civil liability actions in Federal or State court 

(a) In general 

A qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any Federal or State court. 325a 

(b) Dismissal of pending actions 

A qualified civil liability action that is pending on October 26, 2005, shall be immediately dismissed by the court in which the action was brought or is currently pending. 

(Pub. L. 109–92,  §3, Oct. 26, 2005,  119 Stat. 2096 .) 

§7903. Definitions 

In this chapter: 

(1) Engaged in the business 

The term “engaged in the business” has the meaning given that term in section 921(a)(21) of title 18, and, as applied to a seller of ammunition, means a person who devotes time, attention, and labor to the sale of ammunition as a regular course of trade or business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit through the sale or distribution of ammunition. 

(2) Manufacturer 

The term “manufacturer” means, with respect to a qualified product, a person who is engaged in the business of manufacturing the product in interstate or foreign commerce and who is licensed to engage in business as such a manufacturer under chapter 44 of title 18. 

(3) Person 

The term “person” means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity, including any governmental entity. 

(4) Qualified product 

The term “qualified product” means a firearm (as defined in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 921(a)(3) 326a 

of title 18), including any antique firearm (as defined in section 921(a)(16) of such title), or ammunition (as defined in section 921(a)(17)(A) of such title), or a component part of a firearm or ammunition, that has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce. 

(5) Qualified civil liability action 

(A) In general 

The term “qualified civil liability action” means a civil action or proceeding or an administrative proceeding brought by any person against amanufacturer or seller of a qualified product, or a trade association, for damages, punitive damages, injunctive or declaratory relief, abatement, restitution, fines, or penalties, or other relief, resulting from the criminal or unlawful misuse of a qualified product by the person or a third party, but shall not include— 

(i) an action brought against a transferor convicted under section 924(h) of title 18, or a comparable or identical State felony law, by a party directly harmed by the conduct of which the transferee is so convicted; 

(ii) an action brought against a seller for negligent entrustment or negligence per se; 

(iii) an action in which a manufacturer or seller of a qualified product knowingly violated a State or Federal statute applicable to the sale or marketing of the product, and the violation was a proximate cause of the harm for which relief is sought, including— 327a 

(I) any case in which the manufacturer or seller knowingly made any false entry in, or failed to make appropriate entry in, any record required to be kept under Federal or State law with respect to the qualified product, or aided, abetted, or conspired with any person in making any false or fictitious oral or written statement with respect to any fact material to the lawfulness of the sale or other disposition of a qualified product; or 

(II) any case in which the manufacturer or seller aided, abetted, or conspired with any other person to sell or otherwise dispose of a qualified product, knowing, or having reasonable cause to believe, that the actual buyer of the qualified product was prohibited from possessing or receiving a firearm or ammunition under subsection (g) or (n) of section 922 of title 18; 

(iv) an action for breach of contract or warranty in connection with the purchase of the product; 

(v) an action for death, physical injuries or property damage resulting directly from a defect in design or manufacture of the product, when used as intended or in a reasonably foreseeable manner, except that where the discharge of the product was caused by a volitional act that constituted a criminal offense, then such act shall be considered the sole proximate cause of any resulting death, personal injuries or property damage; or 

(vi) an action or proceeding commenced by the Attorney General to enforce the provisions of chapter 44 of title 18 or chapter 53 of title 26. 328a 

(B) Negligent entrustment 

As used in subparagraph (A)(ii), the term “negligent entrustment” means the supplying of a qualified product by a seller for use by another person when the seller knows, or reasonably should know, the person to whom the product is supplied is likely to, and does, use the product in a manner involving unreasonable risk of physical injury to the person or others. 

(C) Rule of construction 

The exceptions enumerated under clauses (i) through (v) of subparagraph (A) shall be construed so as not to be in conflict, and no provision of this chapter shall be construed to create a public or private cause of action or remedy. 

(D) Minor child exception 

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the right of a person under 17 years of age to recover damages authorized under Federal or State law in a civil action that meets 1 of the requirements under clauses (i) through (v) of subparagraph (A). 

(6) Seller 

The term “seller” means, with respect to a qualified product— 

(A) an importer (as defined in section 921(a)(9) of title 18) who is engaged in the business as such an importer in interstate or foreign commerce and who is licensed to engage in business as such an importer under chapter 44 of title 18; 

(B) a dealer (as defined in section 921(a)(11) of title 18) who is engaged in the business as such a dealer in interstate or foreign commerce and who is licensed 329a 

to engage in business as such a dealer under chapter 44 of title 18; or 

(C) a person engaged in the business of selling ammunition (as defined in section 921(a)(17)(A) of title 18) in interstate or foreign commerce at the wholesale or retail level. 

(7) State 

The term “State” includes each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States, and any political subdivision of any such place. 

(8) Trade association 

The term “trade association” means— 

(A) any corporation, unincorporated association, federation, business league, professional or business organization not organized or operated for profit and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 

(B) that is an organization described in section 501(c)(6) of title 26 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such title; and 

(C) 2 or more members of which are manufacturers or sellers of a qualified product. 

(9) Unlawful misuse 

The term “unlawful misuse” means conduct that violates a statute, ordinance, or regulation as it relates to the use of a qualified product. 

(Pub. L. 109–92,  §4, Oct. 26, 2005,  119 Stat. 2097 .) 330a 

E DITORIAL NOTES 

R EFERENCES IN TEXT 

This chapter, referred to in text, was in the original “this Act”, meaning  Pub. L. 109–92, Oct. 26, 2005, 119 

Stat. 2095 , known as the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act. For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out under section 7901 of this title and Tables.
