Title: News Flash • Maui County

URL Source: https://www.mauicounty.gov/CivicAlerts.aspx?CID=6

Published Time: Mon, 12 Jan 2026 11:43:59 GMT

Markdown Content:
News Flash • Maui County
===============

Skip to Main Content

EMERGENCY ALERT MEMA Alert: Information Update - Brush Fire On Maui Island Contained Read On...

1.   Home
2.   My Account
3.   Printer Friendly
4.   Email Page
5.   Contact Us
6.   RSS
7.   Site Map
8.   Translate Page
9.   Notifications
10.   Documents

1.   Facebook
2.   Twitter
3.   Pinterest
4.   Delicious
5.   Blogger
6.   LinkedIn

Search 

1.   Government
2.   Services
3.   Community
4.   Business
5.   How Do I?

1.   Home
2.   NewsFlash

View Archive

RSS Feed

Notify Me More Tools 
*   View Archive
*   RSS Feed

News Flash
==========

Press Releases
--------------

100 of 436  news items 

*   ### County DPR announces temporary impacts to three locations in Waiehu, Waihe'e and Wailuku

The County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) announced temporary impacts to three of its locations in Waiehu, Waiheʻe and Wailuku in coming weeks.

Impacts include the following:

• Waiehu: Intermittent, brief play delays at Waiehu Golf Course will occur as construction vehicles access the south end of the course during irrigation pond liner replacement work from Jan. 19, 2026, through mid- to late February. Irrigation will be reduced during this time and users may experience drier ground conditions. For more information, contact the DPR Maintenance Division at (808) 270-7382.

• Waiheʻe: Due to the nearby Waiehu Municipal Golf course project, irrigation will be reduced at Waiheʻe Beach Park from Jan. 19 through mid- to late February. Drier ground conditions are expected. For more information, contact the DPR Maintenance Division at (808) 270-7382.

• Wailuku: Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool at the War Memorial Complex will be temporarily closed on Wednesday, Jan. 14, 2026, due to a scheduled power shutdown required for the ongoing construction work at the complex gymnasium. The pool will reopen for regular hours Thursday, Jan. 15. For updates on pool hours, call the County pool hotline at (808) 270-8208.

For general County DPR information, visit mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on January 09, 2026      
*    ### Hot Kupuna Nights returns to Lahaina on Jan. 17

The County of Maui Office of Recovery, in collaboration with Hawaiian Music Perpetuation Society (HMPS), is hosting Hot Kūpuna Nights on Saturday, Jan. 17, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. at the Royal Lahaina Resort Ballroom.

The afternoon will feature live music by Kuʻuipo Kumukahi and Friends and will be hosted by Alakaʻi Paleka. Light dinner and refreshments will be provided. The event is free and family-friendly, with free parking available. Doors open at 2:30 p.m.

HMPS, a statewide organization dedicated to preserving mele Hawaiʻi and fostering intergenerational connection, has successfully hosted Hot Kūpuna Nights on Oʻahu and Hawaiʻi Island.

Building on the success of November’s inaugural event on Maui, Hot Kūpuna Nights offers Lahaina kūpuna and their ʻohana a welcoming space to connect with wildfire recovery resources while enjoying live Hawaiian music, dance and fellowship.

Program specialists and representatives from the Office of Recovery and its Hoʻokumu Hou program, as well as local nonprofit organizations such as Pono Legal and Na Hoaloha, will be on site to answer questions and connect with kūpuna and their families.

Those planning to attend are encouraged to RSVP at https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdYouQQy3Qcn8-mLIjRSwKrxTtXzWGI2lywhakrde3ZWq5i9w/viewform?usp=sharing&ouid=109578874769836406847

or at www.mauirecovers.org/events; however, walk-ins are welcome.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on January 07, 2026      
*   ### County of Maui DWS launches 2026 student water conservation contests

The County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is inviting Maui County students to participate in its 14th Annual Water Conservation Poster Contest for kindergarten through grade 6 and its 8th Annual Water Source Protection Video Contest for grades 7 through 12. Entries are due by March 27, 2026, and prizes will be given for top submissions.

The contests encourage students to learn about conserving water and protecting Maui County’s drinking water sources while showcasing creativity. Each entry must incorporate this year’s theme, “Ola I Wai – Water is Life,” and meet other contest guidelines.

The 14th Annual Water Conservation Poster Contest should focus on water conservation practices. Posters must be horizontal on 11-by-17-inch white paper and include the official entry form on the back. Entries must be original, and each student may submit only one poster.

The 8th Annual Water Source Protection Video Contest should showcase the importance of protecting water sources and water quality. Videos must be three to five minutes long in .mp4 format and include the theme and student name or names, with up to four students per group. Students should plan scripts, camera and audio placement, and give credit for any resources used.

Entries will be judged on creativity, originality, adherence to the theme, accuracy, and, for videos, production quality.

Gift card prizes range from $125 to $350 for the poster and video contests, with a $500 gift card awarded to the school with the most poster entries.

All entries must be received by 4:30 p.m. Friday, March 27. They may be mailed or dropped off at One Main Plaza, 2200 Main St., Suite 102, Wailuku, HI 96793.

If uploading video entries via Microsoft 365, the email to be used for access must be submitted by 4:30 p.m. Thursday, March 26.

For more information, including contest rules, guidelines and entry forms, visit waterresources.mauicounty.gov or contact the Water Resources & Planning Division at [email protected] or (808) 463-3101.   Press Releases   Posted on January 07, 2026      
*    ### Restoration completed at temporary wildfire debris storage site at Olowalu

Fulfilling a promise that Mayor Richard Bissen made to the community, the closure and restoration of the Temporary Debris Storage site (TDS) in Olowalu was completed recently and honored with a pule ceremony on Monday, Jan. 5, 2026.

“When the colossal debris removal project began, we promised the community that we would restore Olowalu to its pre-use state, and I’m grateful that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of Hawai’i helped us make good on that commitment to our people,” Mayor Bissen said. “Mahalo especially to West Maui community members – we could not have expedited the rebuild without your support of this temporary debris site. Wildfire-impacted Lahaina residents have been able to return home faster thanks to this major mission, and its completion marks a key achievement that required many hands and hearts from all levels of government and an array of private partnerships. This project represents an important example of government transparency and rebuilding trust.”

As of Dec. 19, 2025, all hauling operations and restoration activities at the former TDS site were successfully completed. Now, the site has been restored to its original contours, with key infrastructure improvements made. Data collected during the restoration process, including monitoring well samples and soil tests, is available to the public via the County of Maui’s recovery website at www.mauirecovers.org.

“We are proud to have successfully completed the restoration of the Olowalu TDS site, fulfilling our commitment to the people of Maui,” said Lt. Col. Adrian Biggerstaff, USACE Honolulu District Commander. “Through close collaboration with FEMA, the County of Maui and local stakeholders, we’ve ensured that the restoration process was carried out with the utmost respect for the environment and the community.”

Under the oversight of FEMA and with the collaboration of the State of Hawai’i and County of Maui, USACE led the major operation requiring clearance of roughly 400,000 tons of wildfire debris. Debris transfer to the temporary Olowalu site, adjacent to a former landfill, from the devastating 2023 wildfires began in January 2024. The transfer from the TDS to the Permanent Disposal Site in Central Maui began June 16, 2025.

Restoration Highlights:

• The cane haul road has been fully restored and is no longer in use.

• Roadway improvements to affected sections of Honoapi‘ilani Highway and the Lahaina Bypass road have been completed, including the removal of all temporary traffic signage and lights, effectively returning the roadways to their pre-use state.

• Significant best management practices were installed, including improved drainage features, which are designed to reduce the risk of runoff and further protect the surrounding ecosystem.

• Monitoring wells have been properly closed, and all soil testing requirements—both pre- and post-restoration—have been met. These actions were taken in accordance with Maui County Council’s Bill 120, ensuring that no contamination from the debris operations has impacted the land or water.

For more information on the restoration of the TDS site, visit www.mauirecovers.org/debris-containment.   Press Releases   Posted on January 06, 2026      
*   ### Next Lahaina Community Meeting set for Wednesday, Jan. 14

Residents are encouraged to attend the County of Maui’s Lahaina Community Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, Jan. 14, 2026, at the Lahaina Intermediate School cafeteria.

The meeting will include updates on wildfire recovery efforts from the County’s Office of Recovery and other departments and agencies.

In order to provide residents more individual assistance from various agencies, representatives from several departments and agencies will be available to offer support at resource tables following a question-and-answer session to close the meeting. They include: County of Maui’s Office of Recovery, 4LEAF and Department of Environmental Management; Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); Hawaiian Electric Co.; Hoʻōla iā Mauiakama Disaster Long Term Recovery Group; and Native Hawaiian Legal Corp.

The meeting will be livestreamed on the County of Maui’s Facebook page; no account is needed to view. A live broadcast of the meeting will also be shown on Akakū: Maui Community Media, Channel 53.

Impacted residents and homeowners are encouraged to sign up for email and text notifications at www.mauirecovers.org/sign-up.

For more information and to view past community meetings, visit www.mauirecovers.org/events.   Press Releases   Posted on January 05, 2026      
*   ### Section of Ha'iku Road to be closed for repair work starting Monday, Jan. 5

_Work expected to last four to six weeks_

Starting Monday, Jan. 5, 2026, a section of Haʻikū Road between Hamana Place and Līhau Place will be closed from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday while work is underway to repair the eroding slope embankment and replace damaged guardrails, according to the County of Maui Department of Public Works.

Motorists are advised to follow detour signs at the intersections of Haʻikū Road and West Kuiaha Road and at Haʻikū Road and Kauhikoa Road.

During hours when work is not being done, one lane of the roadway will be open to alternating traffic with yield signs and markings to direct motorists.

Motorists and pedestrians are advised to adhere to all traffic control flaggers, signage and traffic devices.

Maui Kupono Builders is doing the work to repair the eroding slope embankment, including clearing vegetation, installing reinforced shotcrete with grouted soil nails and installing erosion control matting, as well as replacing damaged guardrails.

The work is expected to be completed in four to six weeks.

For general information, visit www.mauicounty.gov/highways.   Press Releases   Posted on December 31, 2025      
*   
### County of Maui offices to be closed Thursday on New Year’s Day

_County p_ _ools closed;_ _shortened hours at_ _Central Maui L_ _andfill_

County of Maui offices, facilities and services will be closed or modified on Thursday, Jan. 1, 2026, on New Year’s Day.

County closures include the following:

    *   All County of Maui offices
    *   All County of Maui pools
    *   Lahaina Resource Center at Lahaina Gateway
    *   Recovery Permit Center at the County of Maui Service Center in Kahului
    *   Kākoʻo Maui Relief & Aid Services Center at Maui Mall Village in Kahului (Hoʻokumu Hou applications)
    *   Hāna, Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi landfills
    *   Olowalu Recycling & Refuse Convenience Center

Modified schedule includes the following services:

    *   Condensed holiday hours from 6 a.m. to noon for the Central Maui Landfill and Maui EKO Compost.

Unchanged schedule includes the following services:

    *   Residential trash pickup
    *   Maui Bus

Following the holiday closure, regular business hours for County offices and services will resume on Friday, Jan. 2.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 26, 2025 

*   
 

### Adjustments underway for access to Lahaina Historic District

Following one week of operations at the State of Hawaiʻi’s Lahaina Small Boat Harbor, some adjustments are being made to the public access plan for the Lahaina Historic District. Working in partnership with members of the community and tour boat operators, the County of Maui is making the following changes:

    *   While public access remains permitted within the Historic District between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m., vehicles may drive in from the Shaw Street Access Point on Front Street only.
    *   For those taking a boat tour, staff from the boat company will meet guests at either the County’s 116 Prison St. lot or the Lahaina Restoration Foundation’s Baldwin Home parking lot at 691 Luakini St. and escort them to the harbor. Guests should check their reservation confirmations for directions. Kūpuna and those with mobility difficulties are welcomed to be dropped off at the Wharf Street loading zone at the harbor.There are currently no booking facilities at the harbor, so any reservations to take a tour should be made online or through a hotel concierge.
    *   The County’s Office of Recovery has contracted a security and outreach team to provide directions, assistance and guidance for the proper way for everyone entering the area to conduct themselves, as needed for the safety and integrity of the district.
    *   The security and outreach team and parking ambassadors will be located at two stations: at the Prison Street parking lot and at the corner of Hotel Street and Front Street on the Banyan Tree corner. Visitors must pass one of these stations to access the harbor.
    *   Speed limit signs indicating 10 miles per hour will be placed throughout the district. Sidewalk repairs have not been completed, so there are some areas where pedestrians and vehicles share space. For safety, very slow speeds are required and expected of all entering the district.Motorists are asked to observe the new signage and parking rules in the area. 

As a reminder, no Lahaina town businesses or historic sites, including Banyan Tree Park, are currently open to the public due to ongoing repairs. The town’s electrical grid is still being restored, and streetlights have not yet been replaced. For public safety, the area will close at 6 p.m. until infrastructure restoration is complete – to ensure a timely closure, those utilizing the parking lots should plan to be out of the area no later than 6 p.m.

The following guidance remains in effect:

    *   There is no thru traffic on Front Street – Front Street remains closed from Papelekane Street to Lahainaluna Road due to ongoing construction.
    *   Free three-hour parking is available in two County lots at 116 Prison St. (corner of Prison and Front streets) and off 500 Front St. (corner of Shaw and Front streets).
    *   Street parking along Front Street remains prohibited.
    *   Fifteen-minute active loading and unloading zones are allowed along Wharf Street.
    *   Pedestrian and ADA-compliant pathways lead to the loading dock and ferry terminal.

For more information on recovery efforts, visit www.mauirecovers.org.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 24, 2025 

*   ### County DOT meeting on microtransit options for Waihe'e, Kula now online

Microtransit may be a solution for Maui’s low-ridership bus areas, and a recent County of Maui Department of Transportation (DOT) public meeting on the topic rolled out several details of the proposal.

The online meeting Dec. 10, 2025, is now posted on the County Department of Transportation website at https://www.mauicounty.gov/605/Bus-Service-Schedule-Information.

Microtransit is being proposed for two Maui Bus fixed-route areas with the lowest ridership on the island: Waihe‘e and Kula. Considered a hybrid between Lyft/Uber and a fixed-route bus, the transportation option is not yet used in Hawai‘i, but it is in effect in Washington state and other US Mainland areas.

An on-demand, technology-enabled shared transportation service, microtransit uses smaller vehicles to provide more frequent, flexible rides that are more responsive to passenger needs than traditional buses.

Initially recommended in a 2022 Maui Bus System study, microtransit is being studied further by County contractor Nelson Nygaard.

Additional public outreach will tentatively be held this spring. Residents during previous events have asked what microtransit is, how it works, how to book a ride and how much it would cost.

County DOT oversees the Maui Bus fixed-route service, commuter service and ADA paratransit service. Find bus schedule information at https://mauicounty.gov/bus. Download the Maui Bus app on iOS, Android or https://mauibus.org to track a bus in real time and get arrival predictions.

For general information on County DOT, visit https://mauicounty.gov/transporation or call (808) 270-7511.   Press Releases   Posted on December 23, 2025      
*   ### County of Maui to launch four new, all-electric transit buses in January

Four new, all-electric transit buses will be rolling out for driver training next week and for official Maui Bus passenger service starting the week of Jan. 5, 2026, the County of Maui Department of Transportation announced.

“These zero-emission buses represent a major milepost in the County of Maui’s efforts to reduce local air pollution and modernize the Maui Bus fleet with quieter, cleaner technology,” said County Transportation Director Marc Takamori. “Our new buses help drive a more sustainable future for transportation not just on Maui, but across the entire state of Hawai’i.”

Initially, the new buses will be part of the Maui Bus Kahului Loop #5 and the Upcountry Islander #40 routes and will eventually expand to other routes.

Manufactured by GILLIG LLC, the green-energy buses were made possible through a partnership with the Hawai’i Department of Transportation. The vehicles are supported by funds from the Federal Transit Administration, the Hawai’i State Energy Office and the County of Maui.

A blessing for the new buses was held last month at the Velma McWayne Santos Community Center in Wailuku.

Passengers can track the new buses in real-time and view arrival predictions using the Maui Bus app (available on iOS and Android) or at mauibus.org.

General schedule information is also available at www.mauicounty.gov/bus.

For more information, contact the County Department of Transportation at (808) 270-7511.   Press Releases   Posted on December 23, 2025      
*   
### Water department to implement new water-use and meter-sizing method beginning January 2026

_New method will apply to applications for building permits and new or additional water use_

Beginning Jan. 1, 2026,in accordance with Ordinance 5759 adopted by the Maui County Council, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) will implement a new method for projecting water demand and sizing water meters that focuses on daily water usage instead of the Hunter Curve Method, which was based on the number of plumbing fixtures—such as toilets or showers—in a building. The new method will apply to building permit applications and applications for new or additional water use.

The new approach is a form of the water demand equivalent method, establishes a unit of daily water demand called the Equivalent Single Dwelling (ESD), and estimates daily water consumption based established patterns of human habitation correlating to the number of bedrooms and bathrooms in a home, counting any room that is, or could reasonably be, used for sleeping as a bedroom. In addition to the total ESDs associated with a service, each service will be allocated an additional 0.5 ESD to account for outdoor water use.

Analyzing empirical local meter data, per-capita usage and national per person daily use averages, DWS developed a model for daily water usage based on a range of bedroom and bathroom combinations accounting for typical household activities such as dishwashing, laundry, bathing and general human consumption. From this analysis, the department established a fixed daily usage unit of 300 gallons per day for one ESD, based on a four-bed, two-bath home**.**

The new method provides a more accurate way to measure water demand, which may show additional available capacity under the 300 gallons per day per ESD standard, but it does not increase the total water supply on Maui. This approach helps DWS plan and manage water resources more realistically while continuing to address the island’s ongoing water challenges.

“This new methodology allows DWS to more accurately measure water demand and ensure properties are appropriately sized for safe and reliable water service,” said DWS Director John Stufflebean. “It supports Maui’s long-term water management goals, helps make the process more straightforward, and reinforces our commitment to serving the community reliably.”

**Single-Family Homes**

For single-family residences, DWS has established standard meter capacities to simplify the process:

·  5/8-inch meter: up to 2.5 ESDs

·  3/4-inch meter: up to 3.5 ESDs

·  1-inch meter: up to 6 ESDs

**Multi-Family Homes**

Multi-family projects use the same bedroom-and-bathroom methodology as single-family homes, with outdoor water use estimated separately; however, because multifamily buildings have different water-use patterns than single-family homes, meter sizing is based on modeling using the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) Water Demand Calculator (WDC), reflecting their unique water-use patterns. Models of different multifamily projects with varying unit counts were used to develop a sizing curve, which informs DWS’s standard meter table:

For multi-family residences, DWS has established standard meter capacities as:

·  1-inch meter: up to 16 ESD

    
        *   1.5-inch meter: up to 60 ESD
        *   2-inch meter: up to 120 ESDs
        *   3-inch meter: up to 240 ESDs

Developers may use the standard table or submit custom WDC calculations for meter sizing.

**Non-Residential Properties**

For non-residential properties, water demand is based on custom calculations prepared and signed by a licensed professional. Developers must provide indoor water-use estimates as well as landscape irrigation calculations, including plant types, the area covered by each type, and anticipated daily or monthly water use. Developers may use the EPA WaterSense Water Budget Calculator to assist with outdoor water estimates. DWS will convert all information into ESDs for permitting and meter sizing, and custom calculations also determine the meter issued along with any associated storage and transmission fees.

**Implementation and Transition**

Existing multifamily and non-residential meters retain ESD entitlements based on their current approved use or the FY2026 source fee equivalent of $2,316 per ESD, whichever is greater. DWS will not reduce existing entitlements or require reconciliation for customers whose entitlements exceed fees paid.

To assist with the application process, the updated ESD Methodology and a Materials Submission Checklist will be available at www.mauicounty.gov/214/Engineering-Division.

Applications submitted on or before Dec. 31, 2025, will continue under the current fixture-based method. Applications submitted on or after Jan. 1, 2026, will use the new unit demand methodology. Additional fixtures or ESDs will not be available for purchase under the new rules.

For more information, contact the DWS Engineering Division at (808) 270-7835, option 5.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 18, 2025 

*   ### After upgrades, Lana'i Fifth Street Courts to reopen as multipurpose courts facility Dec. 18

After undergoing extensive repairs and renovations, Lānaʻi Fifth Street Courts will reopen Thursday, Dec. 18, as a multipurpose courts facility that includes pickleball, tennis, volleyball and basketball, the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) announced.

“The reopening of the Lānaʻi Fifth Street Courts represents more than just upgraded courts — it reflects our commitment to ensuring residents of Lānaʻi have access to safe, welcoming and high-quality recreational spaces,” County DPR Director Patrick McCall said. “From new lighting to resurfaced courts and ADA-accessible amenities, these improvements support health, connection and quality of life for the community now and for generations to come.”

Renovations and repairs include the following:

• Main play area received a court resurfacing. The multipurpose courts can now be used for volleyball, basketball, pickleball, tennis, a basketball half-court and a practice tennis backboard. The previous resurface occurred in 2003.

• New lighting system that allows evening and early-morning play. The original court lighting became inoperable and needed full restoration after 2014. The new system utilized the existing utility poles with new conduit lines and fixtures.

• New fencing for play courts and updated windscreens.

• ADA water fountain with a water bottle fill station.

• New nets for pickleball and tennis.

• New hoops and backboards for basketball.

DPR renovations and repairs began in late January of this year.

For information on the upgrades, call the DPR Planning and Development Division at (808) 270-7931.

For general information on DPR, visit www.mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on December 17, 2025 | Last Updated on December 17, 2025      
*    ### Mayor Richard Bissen appoints Kauanoe Batangan as Kahului’s Maui County Councilmember

Emphasizing that his goal was to choose a leader who aligns with Maui district voters, Mayor Richard Bissen today announced that he is appointing Kauanoe Batangan to fill the Maui County Council Kahului residency area seat vacancy. Batangan will assume office as of Jan. 1, 2026, due to transitional time over the holidays.

“It was important to select someone who reflects the voter’s choice and honor their intent for this term,” Mayor Bissen said. “Kauanoe Batangan’s legislative experience, professional background, and education position him well to serve the community through the rest of the Council session.”

Mayor Bissen interviewed candidates at length over weeks leading up to the decision.

“All of the candidates were qualified and willing to serve in this role, and I am deeply appreciative of their willingness to take on this incredible responsibility,” Mayor Bissen added. “Each demonstrated admirable qualities and a genuine dedication to serving their community.”

The vacancy on the nine-member Maui County Council for the remainder of the 2025-27 term was left by the passing of Councilmember Natalie “Tasha” Kama on Oct. 26, 2025. Council was unable to reach an agreement on a successor Nov. 25, 2025, and per County Charter, the decision then went to Mayor Bissen.

“I am humbled and grateful to be appointed to the Maui County Council. I deeply appreciate the support of Mayor Bissen and Councilmember Kama for trusting me to serve the people of Maui County for the rest of this term,” Batangan said. “I come to this role with an unwavering commitment to listen to our community, work collaboratively, and prioritize the well-being of our ʻāina and kamaʻāina. I look forward to working diligently with my colleagues on the tough issues in front of the Council and to carry out the vision that voters supported by electing the late Councilmember.”

Batangan currently serves as the Executive Director of the Maui Metropolitan Planning Organization (Maui MPO), a public agency that conducts transportation planning and coordinates federal highway and transit investments on Maui island. Previously, he was the County of Maui Department of Transportation Deputy Director. In the aftermath of the devastating 2023 Maui wildfires, he served as a manager in the County of Maui Office of Recovery.

Batangan is an aliʻi in the Royal Order of Kamehameha I and founder of the Daniel K. Akaka Congressional Fellowship. He has served on a range of boards and commissions including Common Cause Hawaiʻi, the Maui County Charter Commission and the Maui Historical Society.

The Maui native has two master’s degrees – one in public administration from Columbia University and one in public policy from the University of Tokyo. He graduated from Kamehameha Schools Maui in 2008 and went on to obtain his bachelor’s degree in political science from Stanford University.

Batangan lives in Kahului with his wife and two young children.   Press Releases   Posted on December 16, 2025      
*   
 

### Mayor Richard Bissen signs historic Bill 9 into law after Maui County Council vote today

Mayor Richard Bissen today signed Bill 9 into law after Maui County Council approved the measure on second and final reading, marking a historic step toward restoring housing availability for residents and realigning zoning policy with its original residential purpose.

“Mahalo to Maui County Council members and staff for their extensive work on Bill 9 and for taking crucial and courageous steps to improve life for Maui’s most important resource – our people,” Mayor Bissen said. “Thank you especially to every community member who testified, engaged in the democratic process respectfully and showed up to change the course of history.”

Mayor Bissen emphasized that he supports the Maui County Council’s Temporary Investigative Group (TIG), which recommends that 4,519 units be reclassified under the new H-3 or H-4 Hotel zoning designation.

Bill 9 was introduced by Mayor Richard Bissen in May 2024 in the wake of the Maui wildfires, which exacerbated Maui County’s longstanding housing crisis. Today, he emphasized that Bill 9 is about restoring balance and prioritizing the needs of people who live in Maui County.

“Bill 9 has consistently stood out as the most immediate way to bring thousands of units back online and expand housing inventory in Maui County,” Mayor Bissen said.

“Today, transient vacation rentals make up 21% of Maui County’s overall housing stock — more than any other county in Hawaiʻi. For far too long, short-term rentals, offshore investors, and private interests have overwhelmed our housing inventory.

“We knew taking on powerful interests in the short-term rental industry was never going to be easy. We’ve seen an influx of outside messaging driven by special interests attempting to influence our community through fear. But the facts matter. Ninety-four percent of the units affected are owned by people who don’t live in Maui County, and most don’t even live in Hawaiʻi. Decisions about Maui’s housing should be guided by the needs of the people who live here—not by outside interests trying to protect profits.

Rebalancing our housing market means we must return apartment-zoned housing to local families and residents—and that principle has guided our approach to Bill 9 from the very beginning.”

Bill 9 corrects a long-standing zoning exemption that allowed transient vacation rentals (TVRs) to operate in apartment-zoned districts — areas originally intended to provide long-term housing for local families.

By phasing out so-called Minatoya TVRs in these districts, the legislation is expected to return more than **6,000 units** to long-term residential use, significantly expanding Maui County’s housing inventory without the need for new construction. Importantly, Bill 9 does **not eliminate tourism or short-term rentals** in Maui County. Approximately 6,500**TVR parcels**, along with thousands of units in hotels, and more than 2,400 timeshares and bed-and-breakfast operations, will continue to operate.

The passage of Bill 9 follows nearly two years of extensive public engagement, policy review, amendments and deliberation. County leaders acknowledged the tension surrounding the issue, while emphasizing that the bill represents a necessary course correction in response to the evolution of the short-term rental industry.

“When the zoning loophole that allowed short-term vacation rentals in apartment districts was created, short-term rentals were not an industry,” said Edward Codella, who testified today in support of the bill. “There were no platforms, no institutional investors, and no global capital chasing returns on Maui housing. Today, that reality has changed completely.”

County officials emphasized that Bill 9 is **one part of a broader, multipronged housing strategy**. In addition to correcting zoning policy, the administration has committed to working with the County Council to support the recommendations of the TIG, explore pathways to homeownership, and consider tax and policy tools that complement the intent of the legislation.

County leaders also addressed fiscal concerns, noting that while the bill may result in an estimated **$60 million reduction in revenue**, this represents a return to prior-year budget levels and is considered manageable. Over time, many returned units are expected to transition to long-term residential tax classifications, helping stabilize revenues while delivering housing capacity that would otherwise cost **billions of dollars** to build.

**Additional Facts About Bill 9**

**Geographic distribution of affected units**

    *   Approximately 60% of Minatoya units are located in South Maui, where 2,700+ vacation rentals will remain unaffected.
    *   About 36% of Minatoya units are located in West Maui, where 3,300+ vacation rentals will remain unaffected.
    *   Roughly 4% of Minatoya units are located in Hāna, Pāʻia, and Molokaʻi.

**Short-term rentals will continue countywide**

    *   According to the County’s Real Property Tax Division, approximately 6,500 TVR parcels, along with thousands of units in hotels, and over 2,400 timeshares and bed-and-breakfast operations, will continue to operate.

**Scope of units affected**

• Bill 9 applies specifically to apartment-zoned properties operating as short-term rentals.• As of May 29, 2024, 6,208 Minatoya-listed units were actively operating as short-term rentals, according to the Department of Finance.

**Zoning pathways remain available**

• Long-term residential use is already permitted in apartment districts and does not require rezoning.• Owners seeking to continue short-term rental operations may pursue rezoning into existing hotel districts or future H-3 / H-4 hotel districts, should the County Council adopt the Temporary Investigative Group’s recommendations.

**TIG recommendations and potential hotel transitions**

• The TIG recommendation identifies approximately 4,519 units recommended for transition into proposed H-3 or H-4 hotel districts, subject to Council action and regulatory approval.• This aligns with estimates that roughly 4,500 of the approximately 6,100 Minatoya units could pursue this pathway if the H-3 / H-4 districts are established.

**Tourism impacts**

• Evidence from major tourist destinations shows that when short-term rentals are restricted, tourism does not decline — it shifts to hotels and regulated accommodations.

**Amsterdam**• Implemented STR restrictions in 2018, including a 30-night annual cap on primary residences.• STR guest nights declined 52% (2019–2023).• During the same period, overall tourism increased by 2.4 million guest nights across all accommodation types.• Hotels absorbed 93% of new visitor growth.

**Barcelona**• Enacted a moratorium on new STR licenses in 2014 and plans to eliminate STRs by 2029.• STR activity declined sharply.• Overall tourism increased by 4.8 million guest nights (2018–2024) as visitors shifted to hotels.• The primary challenge is now managing overtourism, not declining visitation.

**New York City**• Implemented Local Law 18 in 2023, significantly restricting STRs.• Legal STR listings dropped 80%, from 22,246 to 2,276 by June 2024.• During the same period, hotel RevPAR increased 15.6%, indicating strong visitor demand shifted to hotels rather than disappearing.

**Housing suitability**

• Post-fire surveys conducted by FEMA, CNHA and Maui Hale Match identified one- and two-bedroom units as the highest-demand housing type.• According to the 2023 American Community Survey (5-year estimates), 72% of Maui households consist of one to three people, closely aligning with the unit sizes affected by Bill 9.

**Affordability reach**

• Approximately 11,600 households in Maui County could afford these units at 30% of income.• An additional 15,500 households in Maui County could stretch affordability to 30–50% of income, a range already experienced by 27% of Maui renters.• Combined, these units could be attainable to nearly half of all households on Maui.

**Water, infrastructure and workforce impacts**

    *   Long-term residential use consumes less water than short-term visitor accommodations, supporting County efforts to manage limited water and infrastructure capacity.
    *   Maui County will continue to support a strong visitor industry, with approximately 6,500 TVR parcels, thousands of hotel units, and more than 2,400 timeshare and bed-and-breakfast operations continuing to provide visitor accommodations.
    *   Workers currently servicing short-term rentals will continue to have opportunities in hospitality, property management, and related sectors with transferable skill sets.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 15, 2025 

*   ### Curbside trash pickup routes in Kula and Ha'iku/Pauwela to resume Tuesday, Dec. 16

Curbside trash pickup routes in Kula and Haʻikū/Pauwela areas will resume Tuesday, Dec. 16, 2025, after missed routes Friday, according to the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management Solid Waste Division.

• Affected Kula areas: On or surrounding Upper and Lower Kimo Road, Kula Highway, Copp Road, Haleakalā Highway, Kekaulike Avenue and Lower Kula Road.

• Affected Haʻikū/Pauwela areas: On or surrounding Haʻikū Road, Kokomo Road, Kuiaha Road, Holokai Road, Kauhikoa Road, Kaupakalua Road and Ulumalu Road.

Mechanical problems with equipment and a staff shortage led to the missed curbside trash pickup route Friday, Dec. 12, in Kula and Haʻikū / Pauwela areas. Also, the missed trash pickup hotline number is now updated.

For the missed trash pickup hotline audio recording, call (808) 270-4444. For general information on the County Department of Environmental Management Solid Waste Division, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/1017/Solid-Waste-Refuse-Services-and-Informat.   Press Releases   Posted on December 15, 2025 | Last Updated on December 15, 2025      
*   ### 12-12-25 UPDATE - County wastewater system usage restrictions in South Maui lifted; repairs continue

**SYSTEM USE RESTRICTIONS LIFTED**

County of Maui Department of Environmental Management (DEM) today, Dec. 12, 2025, said that properties connected to the County’s wastewater (sewer) system in South Maui (Sugar Beach, Kīhei, Wailea/Makena) no longer need to restrict usage due to repairs to Kīhei Wastewater Pump Station No. 6. As always, customers are asked to use water as necessary and to conserve where possible to eliminate waste and minimize flows into the system, DEM added.

**REPAIRS CONTINUE**

Work to repair the damage to Kīhei Wastewater Pump Station No. 6. will continue through early next week with no further disruptions in service anticipated.

**PORTION OF PARK CLOSURE**

The parking lot at the north end of Kalama Park will remain closed until early next week due to ongoing work.

**BACKGROUND**

A wastewater overflow on Thursday morning, Dec. 11, at Kalama Park in Kīhei did not enter storm drains or the ocean, and was cleaned up, with the area sanitized and cordoned off as of 1 p.m. that day, according to DEM. A mechanical failure in the force main at the pump station caused an estimated 202,000 gallons in wastewater overflow. Water ponded at the north end of Kalama Park, including the parking lot, basketball courts and grass areas near the tennis courts. The spill also affected the rear lot area of the Kīhei Fire Station. DEM said the spill was cleaned up and the area sanitized as of Thursday, Dec. 11.

For general information on the County DEM, visit https://mauicounty.gov/DEM.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on December 12, 2025      
*   
### County reminds residents to submit Circuit Breaker, Home Exemption applications by Dec. 31

Eligible homeowners are reminded to apply for the Circuit Breaker Tax Credit or Home Exemption before the end of this year, the County of Maui Department of Finance Real Property Tax Assessment Division said. The County Real Property Assessment Division applications are due by Dec. 31, 2025.

Applications for the Circuit Breaker Tax Credit and the Home Exemption may be found on the County Real Property Tax website, www.mauipropertytax.com, by clicking the “Forms” link.

The Circuit Breaker Tax Credit is available to taxpayers who apply by the deadline and meet criteria, including:

    *   Own and occupy their property as their principal residence with a home exemption
    *   Real property taxes exceed 2% of their adjusted gross income

The Home Exemption is available to taxpayers who apply by the deadline and meet criteria, including:

    *   Own and occupy their property as their principal residence
    *   Filed a State of Hawaiʻi resident income tax return with a reported address in the County prior to Jan. 1, 2026

Circuit Breaker Tax Credit and Home Exemption application hard copies may be picked up from the County Real Property Assessment Division at the County of Maui Service Center, 110 ʻAlaʻihi St., Suite 110, Kahului, during office hours, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday (excluding holidays).

For general information on the County Department of Finance, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/finance.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 12, 2025 

*    ### County of Maui seeks proposals to expand local food at kupuna dining sites

The County of Maui is seeking contractors who can help expand healthy, locally sourced food at senior congregate dining sites throughout Maui County.

In partnership with the County Department of Human Concerns, the County Department of Agriculture recently issued a Request for Proposals (RFP) for the Locally Grown Healthy Food for the Kūpuna program. Bid proposals opened Dec. 3, 2025, and are due by Jan. 30, 2026.

The RFP asks contractors to provide locally sourced food to supplement existing County senior congregate dining services. The County Department of Human Concerns Congregate Dining Program provides nutritious meals and social engagement opportunities for older adults on Maui, Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi.

"These County of Maui services are crucial to support healthy aging, reduce social isolation and promote food security," County Department of Agriculture Director Rogerene “Kali” Arce said. “As the County advances its priorities in local sustainability, food system resilience and economic recovery, the County Department of Agriculture aims to involve more farmer participation to increase locally grown foods that are used in congregate meal preparation.”

For more information on the County Department of Agriculture RFP, visit the County Department of Finance Purchasing Division website at https://www.mauicounty.gov/bids.aspx?bidID=3813.

For general information on the County Department of Agriculture, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/agriculture.   Press Releases   Posted on December 12, 2025 | Last Updated on December 16, 2025      
*   ### County wastewater overflow in Kihei did not enter storm drains, ocean; repair work continues

A wastewater overflow this morning at Kalama Park in Kihei did not enter storm drains or the ocean, and has been cleaned up, with the area sanitized and cordoned off, according to the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management (DEM).

However, work to repair damage to Kihei Wastewater Pump Station No. 6 is expected to occur through Friday afternoon, Dec. 12, 2025. Because of this, DEM requests that all properties connected to the County’s wastewater (sewer) system in South Maui (Sugar Beach, Kihei, Wailea/Makena) minimize the amount of toilet flushing, bathing, clothes washing and dishwashing to reduce the amount of raw wastewater within the County wastewater collection system during this time.

A mechanical failure in the force main at the Kihei Wastewater Pump Station No. 6 between approximately 6 and 10:30 a.m. today, Dec. 11, caused an estimated 202,000 gallons in wastewater overflow. Water ponded at the north end of Kalama Park, including the parking lot, basketball courts and grass areas near the tennis courts. The spill also affected the rear lot area of the Kihei Fire Station. DEM said that as of 1 p.m. this afternoon, the spill was cleaned up and the area sanitized. It will remain cordoned off as work continues Friday.

For general information on the County DEM, visit https://mauicounty.gov/DEM.   Press Releases   Posted on December 11, 2025 | Last Updated on December 11, 2025      
*   ### County invites community to upcoming meetings on draft commercial design guidelines for Lahaina

The County of Maui Department of Planning invites community members, property owners and other stakeholders to an online meeting Wednesday, Dec. 17, 2025, from 5:30 to 6:30 p.m. to discuss draft commercial design guidelines for rebuilding commercial properties in Lahaina. Also, meetings next month will hold opportunities for written and oral testimony on the topic.

Meetings include the following:

• Dec. 17, 2025, 5:30 to 6:30 p.m. Department of Planning webinar with consultants Opticos Design on draft commercial design guidelines, their purpose, scope and other key details, via Microsoft Teams. Join the meeting by registering at https://events.gcc.teams.microsoft.com/event/6d3ae9d0-045f-4b0e-b1ee-009f0f6ad076@34eeab25-8035-4064-b154-7b5fa295796f.

• Jan. 6, 2026, 10 a.m., Urban Design Review Board Meeting in person (Planning Conference Room, Kalana Pakui Building, 250 S. High St., Wailuku) and online on draft commercial design guidelines. Agenda will be posted at least six days before meeting date. For details once agenda is posted, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/1128/Supported-Boards-Commissions.

• Jan. 8, 2026, 9 a.m., Maui County Cultural Resources Commission Meeting in person (Planning Conference Room, Kalana Pakui Building, 250 S. High St., Wailuku) and online on draft commercial design guidelines. Agenda will be posted at least six days before meeting date. For details once agenda is posted, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/1128/Supported-Boards-Commissions.

The purpose of these gatherings is to help shape Lahaina’s rebuilding in a way that respects its historic character and meets the needs of local businesses and residents, according to the County Department of Planning.

“These new commercial design guidelines are intended to honor Lahaina's rich history while giving property owners clear guidance on key aspects of rebuilding,” County Planning Director Kate Blystone said. “The guidelines are designed to help property owners restore the character of Front Street while supporting the community’s broader rebuilding efforts.”

For general information on the County Planning Department, visit https://mauicounty.gov/planning.   Press Releases   Posted on December 11, 2025      
*   ### Wastewater overflow closes Kalama Park, impacts nearby Kihei areas

_Affected properties asked to minimize water use_

Crews are working on repairs after a wastewater overflow was reported at 7:30 a.m. today at Kīhei Wastewater Pump Station No. 6 at Kalama Park in Kīhei, according to the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management (DEM). The overflow is due to mechanical failure in the force main at the pump station, according to DEM.

The sewer spill has potential health impacts and is affecting the park, the Kīhei Fire Station and surrounding properties. While crews are on the scene assessing the situation and conducting repairs throughout the day, the County asks that all properties connected to the County wastewater (sewer) system in the South Maui area (Sugar Beach, Kīhei, Wailea/Makena) eliminate or minimize the amount of toilet flushing, bathing, laundry and dishwashing to reduce the amount of raw wastewater within the County wastewater collection system during this emergency.

The County Department of Parks and Recreation reports that a portion of Kalama Park affected by the spill is currently blocked off with barriers and caution tape and will need to remain closed until further notice.

The County also asks that people avoid traveling into the area.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on December 11, 2025      
*   
### County of Maui departments announce brief facility closures for training

County of Maui departments announced brief facility closures this month for staff training.

Closures include the following:

    *   County Department of Liquor Control offices, 110 Alaʻihi St., Room 212, Kahului, will be closed Friday, Dec. 12, 2025, for staff training. It will reopen for normal hours from 7:45 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday, Dec. 15. Licensees are asked to schedule appointments before or after the closure by calling the department Licensing and Permits Division at (808) 243-7063 or the Enforcement Division at (808) 243-7101. For general information about the department, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/667/Liquor-Control
    *   County Department of Parks and Recreation Aquatics Section said that all pools on Maui island –Upcountry Pool, Kīhei Aquatic Center, Lahaina Aquatic Center, Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool, Wailuku Pool, Kōkua Pool and Coach Spencer Shiraishi Memorial Pool – will close Friday, Dec. 19, 2025, for staff training. The Maui island pools will reopen Saturday, Dec. 20, during regular hours. For updates on pool hours, call the County pool hotline at (808) 270-8208. For general information about the department, visit www.mauicounty.gov/parks.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 10, 2025 | Last Updated on December 10, 2025 

*    ### Maui County Committee on the Status of Women 2025 excellence awards announced

During a recent ceremony, Maui County Committee on the Status of Women announced recipients of the 2025 Women of Excellence Awards – a biennial celebration recognizing wāhine whose leadership and service uplift Maui Nui.

The 2025 Women of Excellence Awards honorees are:

• Honorary Historical Awards (Posthumous): Natalie “Tasha” Kama, Suzanne O

• Woman of Promise (ages 14–21): Keolaonākai‘elua Mather

• Women of Excellence (ages 22–59): Charlene Arnold, Charlene Naomi Crozier, Ki‘inaniokalani Kaho‘ohanohano, Wailani Tanaka

• Unsung Heroes (ages 60 and older): Angie Haramoto, Minoʻaka Kapuaahiwalani-Fitzsimmons, Kadi Mourningstar

Mayor Richard Bissen, who nominated Maui County Council Presiding Officer Pro Tempore Natalie “Tasha” Kama, thanked the commission for recognizing the outstanding female leader, who passed away Oct. 26, 2025, after serving the community for decades.

“Mahalo to the Maui County Committee on the Status of Women for highlighting females who have made our islands a better place,” Mayor Bissen said. “Tasha Kama led with humility and strength, always guided by her belief in doing what was just and right for our community. Her wisdom, warmth and unwavering faith touched countless lives and will continue to guide us long after her passing.”

Mayor Bissen, Maui Police Department (MPD) Chief John Pelletier and the committee recognized the immeasurable sacrifice of MPD Officer Suzanne O, who was tragically killed in the line of duty in Paia on Aug. 15, 2025. Officer O was awarded with the committee’s Honorary Historical Award.

The committee offered a special recognition to Joy Medeiros, who made MPD history Oct. 10 when she became the first female to be promoted to assistant chief.

“Tonight, we are here to honor a woman whose strength, courage and heart have changed Maui County in ways that will be felt for generations -- our first female assistant chief of police,” MPD Chief Pelletier said during the ceremony. “She was promoted not because she's a woman, but because she is the best for the position.”

This year’s theme, Ka Holomua Laulima! Nā Wāhine Hoʻoulu Hanauna (Moving Forward Together: Women Educating and Inspiring Generations), honors women whose leadership, mentorship and dedication create a lasting impact for future generations.

Maui County Committee on the Status of Women held the 2025 Women of Excellence Awards on Friday evening at the University of Hawaiʻi Maui College. The program included a brief Women in Leadership Panel featuring distinguished wāhine speaking on their leadership journeys and the importance of uplifting future generations. Nominations for the awards process opened in October.

For information on the committee, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/178/Committee-on-the-Status-of-Women.   Press Releases   Posted on December 10, 2025      
*   
 

### County of Maui Board of Ethics sees major advancements in first 100 days

_Executive Director and Legal Counsel Lauren Akitake leads new office_

County of Maui Board of Ethics Executive Director and Legal Counsel Lauren Akitake presented her “First 100 Days: Voices & Views”report, highlighting significant progress in building the County’s first Office of the Board of Ethics. The report details major accomplishments during the office’s formative months and outlines goals for 2026 and the coming years.

At the Board’s December meeting, Vice Chair Michael Lilly praised the change that has occurred in a short period.

“Anyone who was here in June and July and looks at where we are today realizes we have already undergone a transformation,” Lilly said. “This leap forward, just in four months, is enormous. Under the capable leadership of our Executive Director and Legal Counsel Lauren Akitake and her staff, we’re poised to fulfill all of our noblest dreams about the effectiveness of this Board of Ethics.”

Lilly highlighted the office’s strengthened capacity in oversight, training, enforcement and public confidence. “We want the public to have confidence that we’re here to faithfully, on their behalf, provide oversight of ethics rules so they can trust that Maui’s public employees are doing a good job,” he said.

Lilly emphasized how rule changes made this year—combined with Akitake’s leadership—have transformed how quickly County of Maui employees can receive ethics advice. “We changed the rules that allowed for informal opinions by legal counsel,” he said. “Before that, someone would have to file a formal request and wait two or three months for an answer. Now, they call Director Akitake and get an immediate response.”

In just four months, Akitake issued 52 informal advisory opinions, compared with one the month before, reflecting both increased need and increased trust from County personnel.

The “Voices & Views”report describes extensive work to establish the office: hiring staff, creating secure systems, coordinating department outreach, and collaborating with the Hawai‘i State Ethics Commission and Honolulu Ethics Commission to implement decades of tested best practices.

Board Secretary Scott Parker commended Akitake for the depth and transparency of her work.

“I know it’s not been an easy lift—it’s been significantly uphill,” Parker said. “Her updates give insight into all of the work being done and save us, as a board, time to process significant items that otherwise would have been on our table.”

Akitake also emphasized the importance of educating and guiding the public. “I receive calls from community members—some emotional, some frustrated and some simply confused about our role,” she said. “Often my job is to educate, clarify expectations and direct matters outside of our jurisdiction. I commonly explain that complaints must meet foundational requirements such as: being timely filed within the one-year statute of limitations; not being litigated in a criminal or civil action; being within the board’s jurisdiction; not identical to allegations previously decided by the Board; not speculative, hypothetical, or frivolous; naming a County employee; and alleging a violation of the ethics code. We also do not intervene in decisions made by County departments.”

As part of the office’s strategic plan, the board highlighted a commitment to continued public engagement. Lilly encouraged board members and the public to actively contribute ideas as the plan continues to evolve.

The report outlines key goals for 2026, including:

    *   Expanded community outreach and ethics education
    *   Improved public communications and regular updates
    *   Countywide ethics training for employees and board members
    *   Updating gift rules and lobbyist rules
    *   Working on a countywide nepotism policy and extending board jurisdiction over former employees
    *   Website updates aligned with the County’s redesign initiative

Long-term goals (18 months to 5 years) include recurring ethics training, evaluation of office effectiveness and continued progress on major policy initiatives.

“Our approach will be fair but firm,” Akitake said. “Principled, consistent decision-making is essential to strengthening public trust in County government. I’m grateful for the Board’s support as we build an office that will serve our community for decades.”

**About the County of Maui Board of Ethics**

The Board of Ethics administers and enforces the Maui County Code of Ethics, issues advisory opinions, reviews financial disclosures statements and lobbyist registrations and terminations, investigates and prosecutes complaints against County employees and boards and commissions members, and promotes integrity and the highest ethical standards across County government.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 09, 2025 

*   ### County of Maui offers free, temporary Christmas tree recycling sites in Kihei and Makawao

The County of Maui Department of Environmental Management (DEM) Environmental Protection & Sustainability Recycling Section is offering free, temporary Christmas tree recycling sites in Kīhei and Makawao for just over two weeks after the holiday. Also, trees may also be dropped off at existing green waste drop-off locations throughout Maui County.

The temporary Christmas tree recycling sites – at Kīhei Recycling Center and Makawao Recycling Center -- will open daily from 8:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. from Saturday, Dec. 27, 2025, through Sunday, Jan. 11, 2026.

At all green waste sites, including the temporary Christmas tree drop-offs, residential drop-off is free and commercial has a cost. Please remove all tinsel, ornaments and any other decorations before dropping off a tree.

DEM thanks residents for using drop-off recycling for their Christmas trees. Illegal dumping can create safety hazards, and dried-out trees pose a serious fire risk, making proper disposal essential for both public safety and the environment.

Existing green waste drop-off services around Maui County include:

• Central Maui Landfill: Open Monday - Saturday from 6 a.m. to 3 p.m.

• Hāna Landfill: Open Tuesday - Saturday from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.

• Olowalu Recycling & Refuse Convenience Center: Open Monday - Sunday from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.

• Lānaʻi Landfill: Open Tuesday - Saturday from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.

• Molokaʻi Landfill: Open Tuesday - Saturday from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m.

For more information, call the County DEM Environmental Protection & Sustainability Recycling Section at (808) 270-7880 or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/recycle.   Press Releases   Posted on December 08, 2025      
*    ### County DWS lifts Stage 1 Water Shortage for Central and South Maui

Following recent rainfall and ongoing community water conservation, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is suspending the Stage 1 Central and South Maui water shortage, effective immediately and until further notice.

The Central and South Maui service area covers Waihe‘e, Waiehu, Wailuku, Kahului, Spreckelsville, Pā‘ia, Kū‘au, Mā‘alaea, Kīhei, Wailea and Mākena.

Recent rainfall events, improved surface water flow and decreased demand supports the decision to lift the Stage 1 water shortage. DWS will continue to monitor water supply levels, demand and weather to determine if Stage 1 measures need to be reinstated.

“While recent rains have helped, this suspension reflects the community’s commitment to responsible water use,” DWS Director John Stufflebean said. “Maintaining careful water management is essential for a reliable and sustainable supply for Maui, and we commend residents for their continued vigilance.”

While the shortage declaration has been lifted, DWS encourages residents to continue to conserve water by watering plants and landscaped areas responsibly, reusing towels and linens and running dishwashers and laundry machines only with full loads to help protect water supply.

DWS provides free items to help the public conserve water, including faucet aerators for kitchens and bathrooms, leak detection dye tablets to check toilets, moisture meters, shower heads, hose nozzles, toilet tank bags and hose timers. Items are available from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday at 2200 Main St., Suite 102, Wailuku.

For more information, contact DWS at (808) 463-3110 or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/water.   Press Releases   Posted on December 05, 2025 | Last Updated on December 05, 2025      
*    ### County streets near Lahaina harbor to reopen for daytime public access starting Dec. 15

In coordination with state updates to its Lahaina Small Boat Harbor, certain County of Maui streets in Lahaina town near the harbor will reopen for daytime (8 a.m. to 6 p.m.) access starting Dec. 15, 2025, according to the County Office of Recovery. These streets have been closed and under repair since the 2023 Maui wildfires.

Motorists are asked to observe new signage and parking rules in the area. Also, no Lahaina town businesses or historic sites, including Banyan Tree Park, are currently open to the public due to ongoing repairs. The town’s electrical grid is still being restored, and streetlights have not yet been replaced. For public safety, the area will close at 6 p.m. until infrastructure restoration is complete.

Public access (no parking) will resume 8 a.m.-6 p.m. starting Dec. 15 for the following Lahaina Harbor streets:

• Canal Street

• Wharf Street

• Hotel Street

Parking near Lahaina harbor will be managed by Park Maui in coordination with the County Office of Recovery. Park Maui ambassadors will open the following intersection barricades during the daytime hours:

• Front and Dickenson streets

• Prison and Luakini streets

• Front and Shaw streets

The following parking guidance will be effective starting Dec. 15:

• Free, three-hour parking in two County lots off 500 Front St. (corner of Shaw and Front streets) and 116 Prison St. (corner of Prison and Front streets)

• Street parking along Front Street remains prohibited

• Fifteen-minute active loading and unloading zones allowed along Wharf Street

• Pedestrian and ADA-compliant pathways lead to the loading dock and ferry terminal

Currently accessible amenities include:

• Select public sidewalks (closed sidewalks will be barricaded and marked)

• The fueling station, loading dock and ferry terminal at Lahaina Small Boat Harbor

• Harbor-front trellis, benches and planting area

• State public restrooms at Lahaina Small Boat Harbor

For updates on the state Lahaina Small Boat Harbor, visit https://dlnr.hawaii.gov/blog/2025/12/02/nr25-138/. For the latest information on Lahaina town access and recovery efforts, visit www.MauiRecovers.org.   Press Releases   Posted on December 04, 2025      
*   ### County Immigrant Services Division office to close briefly Dec. 10 for staff training

The County of Maui Department of Human Concerns Immigrant Services Division offices on Maui, Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi will have an adjusted schedule Wednesday, Dec. 10, 2025, due to staff training. All three offices will resume normal hours from 7:45 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on Thursday, Dec. 11.

Adjusted schedules for Dec. 10 are as follows:

• Maui: Office will close from 9 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Appointments for services are encouraged and will be accepted between 7:45 and 9 a.m. and 2:30 to 4:30 p.m. Call the office at (808) 270-7791 to schedule an appointment.

• Molokaʻi: Closed

• Lānaʻi: Closed

For general information about the Immigrant Services Division, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/253/Immigrant-Services-Division.   Press Releases   Posted on December 03, 2025 | Last Updated on December 03, 2025      
*   
 

### MEMA completes wildfire risk reduction project in Ukumehame

The County’s Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) completed its Ukumehame Mile Marker 13.5 Wildfire Risk Reduction Project to remove hazardous wildfire fuel on approximately 42 acres of County of Maui property off Honoapiʻilani Highway that experienced a dozen fires in the last two years.

MEMA Administrator Amos Lonokailua-Hewett said the project significantly reduces wildfire hazards and removes major public safety risks along a vital route in and out of Lahaina.

“The completion of the Ukumehame Mile Marker 13.5 Wildfire Risk Reduction Project marks a significant step toward safeguarding our community,” Administrator Lonokailua-Hewett said. “We commend the dedication and teamwork that made this effort possible, and we extend our sincere gratitude to our Maui, state, federal and private partners whose collaboration and support were essential to restoring and protecting this vulnerable area. Their commitment reflects the shared responsibility we all carry in building a more resilient Maui.”

The project established a defensible wildfire space by clearing and mulching invasive vegetation and removing extensive hazardous fuels and debris from the area. In total, crews removed the following:

    *   176.17 tons of solid waste
    *   76.38 tons of scrap metal
    *   2.51 tons of recycled metal
    *   13 tons of damaged EV batteries
    *   1,226 tires
    *   34 Freon and non-Freon appliances
    *   123 vehicles
    *   35 non-EV batteries
    *   10 drums of waste oil
    *   Two boats
    *   A front-end loader
    *   An excavator 

Administrator Lonokailua-Hewett recognized that the monumental project could not have been completed Nov. 28, 2025, without the many county, state and federal governmental partners, along with the help of key private contractors. The project started Aug. 4, 2025.

Now, MEMA is in the process of developing a maintenance plan. Also, the state Department of Land and Natural Resources Division of Forestry and Wildlife is scheduled to start a wetland restoration project at the site in summer 2026.

For more information on MEMA’s hazard mitigation efforts, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/mema.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on December 03, 2025 

*    ### Rebuilding benchmark: 100th completed structure in wildfire-affected areas

Maui County reached a significant benchmark in its recovery from the 2023 wildfires this week as rebuilding of the 100 th structure was completed, the County of Maui Department of Public Works Development Services Administration announced Tuesday.

In its weekly update of permitting numbers Monday, County-contracted 4Leaf Inc. reported 96 permits completed in Lahaina (88 residential, eight nonresidential) and four completed in Kula (all residential). A completed permit means the structure has completed final inspection and is ready to be inhabited.

“Reaching the 100th completed structure is more than a statistic — it represents families finally returning home and a community steadily rebuilding its foundation,” said Mayor Richard Bissen. “This moment reflects the determination of our survivors and the tireless work of our County teams and partners who have supported them every step of the way. One hundred rebuilt structures means one hundred families who are no longer waiting — they are home. We remain focused on accelerating this progress, and we will not stop until every survivor who wishes to come home has that opportunity.”

To expedite the permitting process, the County initiated Disaster Recovery Building Permits for those rebuilding in the Lahaina and Kula burn zones. With a high number of permits anticipated, the County also contracted 4Leaf to oversee the permitting process, from application processing through final inspection.

Since the opening of the Recovery Permit Center and launch of the expedited permitting process in late April 2024, 4Leaf has issued a total of 629 building permits, of which 579 are permits for residential rebuilding in the Lahaina burn zone.

Among the eight completed permits classified as “nonresidential,” four are Kahoma Village multifamily residential buildings.

There are approximately 295 homes currently under construction, with an additional 350 applications for permits being processed.

The County celebrated the first rebuilt homes in the burn zones in late November 2024, with Mau and Ariel Ah Hee bringing their two young sons home to Komo Mai Street in Lahaina, and Thomas Liu taking residence in his two-bedroom cottage as he worked to complete his main house on Kulalani Drive in Kula.

A little more than a year later, they are joined by more than 100 families who are also back home.

“Every week, we’re seeing a handful of homes rebuilt, families who are able to cross that finish line and return home,” County of Maui Recovery Administrator John Smith said. “A hundred structures over the last year is a great milestone to reach. But with nearly 300 homes under construction right now and the launch of various assistance programs such as Hoʻokumu Hou, we’re looking forward to seeing a significant bump.”

To view the Rebuilding Dashboard, visit www.mauirecovers.org/recoverydashboard.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on December 02, 2025      
*   ### County DOT will hold community meeting online Dec. 10 to explore microtransit options for Maui

Community members are invited to a County of Maui Department of Transportation (DOT) virtual meeting from 6 to 7 p.m. Wednesday, Dec. 10, 2025, to offer feedback on a proposed public transportation option called microtransit for Kula-Upcountry and Waiheʻe-Kahului areas.

Microtransit is an on-demand, technology-enabled shared transportation service that uses smaller vehicles to provide flexible rides that are more responsive to passenger needs than traditional buses. The more frequent, flexible service would enhance fixed Maui Bus routes.

County DOT, in partnership with consultant Nelson Nygaard, will hold the community meeting to offer microtransit information and gather feedback from residents. Register via Microsoft Teams at https://tinyurl.com/mauimicrotransit.

Stemming from the “Getting on Board Maui Bus Route Study,” a transportation study on the Maui Bus system completed in 2022, microtransit explores ways to supplement or replace Maui Bus fixed routes, especially ones that have low ridership.

County DOT oversees the Maui Bus fixed-route service, commuter service and ADA paratransit service. Find bus schedule information at https://mauicounty.gov/bus. Download the Maui Bus app on iOS, Android or https://mauibus.org to track a bus in real time and get arrival predictions.

For general information on County DOT, visit https://mauicounty.gov/transporation or call (808) 270-7511.   Press Releases   Posted on December 01, 2025 | Last Updated on December 01, 2025      
*   
### Lahaina Community Meeting set for Wednesday, Dec. 3

_Updates on TDS site restoration, Lahaina Harbor access, Wahikuli Gravity Sewer project to be discussed_

Residents are encouraged to attend the County of Maui’s Lahaina Community Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, Dec. 3, 2025, at the Lahaina Intermediate School cafeteria.

Topics to be discussed include:

    *   An update from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) on the restoration of the Temporary Debris Storage site at Olowalu
    *   A County Office of Economic Development presentation on the proposed Nāpili Enterprise Zone
    *   A U.S. Environmental Protection Agency update on the Wahikuli Gravity Sewer Project design and requested changes to lateral placement
    *   An update on Maui Emergency Management Agency’s Wildfire Risk Reduction project and hazard mitigation efforts
    *   Support resources for owner-builders
    *   Updates from the County Office of Recovery, including information on Hoʻokumu Hou programs and Lahaina Harbor access

In order to provide residents more individual assistance from various agencies, representatives from several departments and agencies will be available to offer support at resource tables following a question-and-answer session to close the meeting. They include: County of Maui’s Office of Recovery, 4LEAF and Department of Environmental Management; Federal Emergency Management Agency, USACE, Hawaiian Electric Co., Hoʻōla iā Mauiakama Disaster Long Term Recovery Group, and Native Hawaiian Legal Corp.

Held every first Wednesday of the month, except on holidays, the in-person Lahaina Community Meeting also will be livestreamed on the County of Maui’s Facebook page; no account is needed to view. A live broadcast of the meeting will also be shown on Akakū: Maui Community Media, Channel 53.

Impacted residents and homeowners are encouraged to sign up for email and text notifications at www.mauirecovers.org/sign-up.

For more information and to view past community meetings, visit www.mauirecovers.org/events.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 28, 2025 

*   ### Brief closures for County of Maui offices, facilities slated in coming weeks

Various County of Maui offices and facilities will be closed briefly in upcoming weeks, departments announced.

The closures include the following:

• The Lahaina Aquatic Center of the County Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) Aquatics Section will be closed from noon Friday, Nov. 28, 2025, until 9 a.m. Monday, Dec. 1, for pool maintenance.

• The Kalana O Maui building office of the County Department of Personnel Services will be closed Tuesday, Dec. 2, for staff training. It will reopen Wednesday, Dec. 3, for regular hours.

• All Maui district and permit offices (Central Maui, East Maui, Kīhei, Lahaina and Wailuku District Offices), along with Maui pools (Kīhei Aquatic Center, Lahaina Aquatic Center, Upcountry Pool, Sakamoto Pool, Shiraishi Pool, Kōkua Pool and Wailuku Pool), of DPR will close Friday, Dec. 5, for staff training. Pools will reopen Saturday, Dec. 6, for regular hours. Offices will reopen Monday, Dec. 8, at 8 a.m.

• The ʻĪao Theater parking lot will be closed from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 6, while the County Department of Public Works completes restriping and signage upgrades. The lot will reopen with two-hour, time-parking rules. Alternative parking is available at the nearby Wailuku Garage.

For general information on County departments and to find contact information, visit www.mauicounty.gov.   Press Releases   Posted on November 26, 2025 | Last Updated on November 26, 2025      
*   
### Hana metals and electronics recycling event to be held Dec. 5 and 6

_Residents can make drop-offs at Hāna Recycling Center_

East Maui residents can drop off appliances, automobile batteries, tires, propane tanks, scrap metal and electronics during a Hāna metals and electronics recycling event on Friday, Dec. 5, and Saturday, Dec. 6, 2025, the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management’s Environmental Protection & Sustainability Division announced.

Items will be accepted from 8 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. each day at the Hāna Recycling Center across from the Hāna Landfill on Waikoloa Road.

Items accepted for drop-off include:

    *   E-waste (computers, televisions, printers, monitors)
    *   Large appliances (refrigerators, freezers, air-conditioning units, water coolers, washers, dryers, stoves, dishwashers, water heaters)
    *   Automobile batteries
    *   Tires
    *   Propane tanks
    *   Scrap metal

Small machines must be drained of all liquids. Commercial drop-offs will not be accepted.

Staff from Hammerhead Metals and Hāna Landfill will help remove items from residents’ vehicles.

For more information, call the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management’s Abandoned Vehicles office at (808) 270-6102. For information about large-metals recycling, call Hammerhead Metals at (808) 280-8844. For information regarding electronics recycling, call E-Cycling Maui at (808) 280-6460. To report a vehicle abandoned, call the Maui Police Department nonemergency number at (808) 244-6400 and select option 0.

The next Hāna recycling event is set for March 6 and 7, 2026.

For more information about the Environmental Protection & Sustainability Division, visit www.mauicounty.gov/dem and click on Environmental Protection & Sustainability.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 26, 2025 

*   
### County of Maui offices to be closed Thursday for Thanksgiving holiday

_County p_ _ools closed;_ _shortened hours at_ _Central Maui L_ _andfill_

County of Maui offices, facilities and services will be closed or modified on Thursday, Nov. 27, 2025, for the Thanksgiving Day holiday.

County closures include the following:

    *   All County of Maui offices
    *   All County of Maui pools
    *   Lahaina Resource Center at Lahaina Gateway
    *   Recovery Permit Center at the County of Maui Service Center in Kahului
    *   Kākoʻo Maui Relief & Aid Services Center at Maui Mall Village in Kahului (Hoʻokumu Hou applications)
    *   Hāna, Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi landfills

Modified schedule includes the following services:

    *   Condensed holiday hours from 6 a.m. to noon for the Central Maui Landfill and Maui EKO Compost and from 8 a.m. to noon for Olowalu Recycling & Refuse Convenience Center.

Unchanged schedule includes the following services:

    *   Residential trash pickup
    *   Maui Bus

Following the holiday closure, regular business hours for County offices and services will resume on Friday, Nov. 28.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 25, 2025 

*   ### Register soon for County’s free Residential Household Hazardous Waste Collection in Central Maui

Maui residents may start making appointments Monday, Dec. 8, 2025, for the County of Maui Department of Environmental Management’s (DEM) free Residential Household Hazardous Waste Collection on Sunday, Jan. 18, 2026, in Central Maui. Appointments close Jan. 6, 2026.

The DEM event is by appointment only. Residents must call EnviroServices & Training Center at (808) 456-3494 to schedule a time and receive the drop-off address and other instructions (remain in vehicle as staff members unload items). The Oʻahu-based company asks for calls earlier rather than later so sufficient equipment and supplies can be brought to Maui.

Acceptable household hazardous waste items include:

• Aerosols

• Antifreeze

• Vehicle and household batteries

• Fire extinguishers

• Fluorescent bulbs and tubes

• Oil-based paint

• Pesticides

• Solvents

• Thermometers

• If item is not listed, inquire about it when calling EnviroServices

The free service for residents only is sponsored by DEM Environmental Protection & Sustainability Department Recycling Section. Businesses with hazardous waste may call Cameron Chemical Corp., (808) 695-2999; EnviroServices, (808) 839-7222; Pacific Commercial Services, (808) 545-4599; or Pacific Environmental Corp. (808) 545-5195.

Event dates for Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi will be posted soon at https://mauicounty.gov/recycle.

For general information about the DEM Recycling Section, visit https://mauicounty.gov/recycle or call (808) 270-7880.   Press Releases   Posted on November 24, 2025      
*    ### Debris call center to close; Temporary Debris Storage site restoration continues

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), in partnership with Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the County of Maui, announced the recent closure of the debris call center, the removal of Temporary Debris Storage site infrastructure and debris transfer traffic signals – marking distinct chapters in the ongoing recovery efforts after the 2023 wildfires.

The closure of the call center, effective Friday, Nov. 14, 2025, follows more than two years of dedicated efforts to remove wildfire debris and restore community spaces. Residents seeking information are now encouraged to visit https://www.mauirecovers.org/debriscleanup for updated details and points of contact. USACE will continue supporting the island’s recovery, with the final stages of the Temporary Debris Storage (TDS) site restoration in Olowalu nearing completion.

On Nov. 10, 2025, USACE successfully completed the removal of all TDS infrastructure, including liners, leachate systems and operations layer. The temporary traffic signals along Honoapi‘ilani Highway and Pūlehu Road, which were used to ensure the safe transport of debris, are no longer in service and have been removed. This marks a key step toward the final closure of the TDS site.

“We’ve made incredible strides in restoring our community, and while the TDS restoration is nearing completion, our work is far from done,” said County of Maui Mayor Richard Bissen. “We are grateful for the continued support from USACE, FEMA and all our partners, who have worked tirelessly alongside us every step of the way to help Maui rebuild and recover.”

USACE will also participate in the monthly Lahaina community meeting on Dec. 3, 2025, to provide the public with updates on the TDS restoration. This will be the final USACE attendance at the community meetings for the debris removal mission.

“We’re proud of the progress we’ve made alongside the County of Maui, FEMA and all our partners,” said LTC Adrian Biggerstaff, USACE Honolulu District Commander. “This collaboration highlights the strength of our federal, state and local partnerships, and we remain dedicated to supporting Maui’s continued recovery as it rebuilds and reimagines its future.”

For more information and the latest progress of the TDS restoration, residents are encouraged to visit https://www.mauirecovers.org/debris-containment.   Press Releases   Posted on November 21, 2025      
*   ### Two County facilities in Wailuku schedule brief, partial-day closures

Two County of Maui departments announced brief, partial-day closures for their facilities in coming weeks.

• The County Department of Parks and Recreation’s Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool at 700 Halia Nakoa St., Wailuku, will close from 9 a.m. to noon Thursday, Dec. 4, for pool guard recruit testing. The facility will reopen at noon that day.

• The County Department of Housing office at 2065 Main St., Suite 108, Wailuku, will close from 2 to 4 p.m. Monday, Nov. 24, for an all-staff meeting. The office will reopen at 4 p.m. that day.

For general information on the County Housing department, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/housing.

For updates on County pool hours, call the pool hotline at (808) 270-8208. For general information on the County Parks and Recreation department, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on November 21, 2025      
*    ### Forty volunteers help Maui’s coastline during recent DPR native planting day in Pa'ia

Residents and visitors helped grow a healthier future for Maui’s coastline during a recent County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) native planting day to restore shoreline adjacent to the Pāʻia Youth and Cultural Center at Lower Pāʻia Park.

In collaboration with the University of Hawaiʻi Sea Grant College Program, the planting day drew 40 volunteers who completed 900 native plantings. Plantings encourage natural accumulation of sand that eventually form dunes. All plants were grown at the County DPR Maintenance Division Beatification Section native plant nursery and included pōhuehue, ʻakiʻaki and ʻākulikuli, with supplements of nanea and Pāʻū o Hiʻiaka.

“Mahalo to all the volunteers whose hands and hearts made this work possible. Hosting a volunteer day increases community engagement, nourishes the relationship between people and the land, and reflects the county’s strong commitment to sustainability,” DPR Director Patrick McCall said. “Together, we’re doing more than shoreline restoration work — we’re growing a healthier, more connected community.”

The two-hour event Oct. 20 began with pule and a brief educational session. Volunteers comprised both tourists and residents and included the County’s Department of Corporation Counsel.

This planting is part of a long-term shoreline restoration project designed to make the island more resilient and sustainable. By returning native plants to their natural shoreline habitat, the plants help sand collect and form dunes. These dunes act as a natural buffer between the ocean and the land, strengthening the island’s protection against rising sea levels.

DPR’s native plant nursery is cultivating more than 30 native plant species and has propagated more than 4,000 native plants, with approximately 2,000 of those being used for the County of Maui’s dune restoration efforts in partnership with the University of Hawai‘i Sea Grant Program and the Surfrider Foundation Maui Chapter.

The nursery is dedicated to researching and cultivating native plant species, particularly those adapted to thrive in Maui County’s coastal environments.

For general information on County DPR, visit https://mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on November 21, 2025 | Last Updated on November 21, 2025      
*    ### County of Maui receives Distinguished Budget Presentation Award

The County of Maui was recently honored with the Government Finance Officers Association’s Distinguished Budget Presentation Award for its Fiscal Year 2026 budget.

“The award represents a significant achievement by the entity,” the association said in a news release on Nov. 4, 2025. “It reflects the commitment of the governing body and staff to meeting the highest principles of governmental budgeting.”

To receive the award, a government entity had to satisfy nationally recognized guidelines for effective budget presentation. The guidelines are designed to assess how well the entity’s budget serves as a policy document; a financial plan; an operations guide; and a communication device, among other criteria. There are more than 1,900 participants in the association’s budget awards program.

“This award showcases our County of Maui Budget Office’s commitment to excellence, integrity and transparency,” Bissen said. “Mahalo to Budget Director Lesley Milner and the entire Budget Office for serving our community well.”

Award recipients have pioneered efforts to improve the quality of budgeting and provide an excellent example for other governments throughout North America, according to the Government Finance Officers Association. This is the County of Maui’s 33rd award of its kind.

Founded in 1906 and based in Chicago, the Government Finance Officers Association advances excellence in government finance by providing best practices, professional development, resources and practical research for more than 25,000 members and their communities. For information on the association, visit www.gfoa.org.   Press Releases   Posted on November 20, 2025      
*    ### Community invited to Dec. 2 reopening, blessing of Hale Hawai'i at Kepaniwai park

Community members are invited to celebrate the restoration of an ʻĪao Valley cultural facility with the blessing and grand reopening of Hale Hawaiʻi at Kepaniwai Heritage Gardens (below the state park) on Tuesday, Dec. 2, at 10 a.m., the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) announced.

The new Hawaiian hale is 25-feet wide by 40-feet long and constructed on the existing rock and concrete platform to feature the Hale Halawai open-ended style. The DPR project required that construction of the indigenous Hawaiian architectural structure had to be supervised by a certified Hawaiian hale builder.

“Restoring this hale represents more than rebuilding a structure — it honors the people, traditions and stories of Hawaiian history,” DPR Director Patrick McCall said. “We are deeply grateful to the builders, cultural practitioners and community members who guided this project with such care. We welcome everyone back to this space to learn, connect and celebrate the rich heritage that continues to shape Maui.”

A fire destroyed the original Hale Hawaiʻi in 2003. When the reconstructed building needed repair in 2019, it was closed that year for upgrades.

Constructed in the 1960s and early 1970s, Kepaniwai Heritage Gardens is a 7.2-acre County-owned park at 870 ʻĪao Valley Road. The well-known area features ethnic displays, including buildings, gates and gardens, that honor cultural groups significant to Hawaiʻi and Maui history.

Kepaniwai Heritage Gardens holds Hawaiian, Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese and early American areas, along with picnic pavilions and restrooms.

For general County DPR information, visit www.mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on November 20, 2025      
*   
 

### Maui County Senior Fair draws more than 1,000 to learn about services, programs

More than 1,000 kūpuna, caregivers and community members were welcomed at the 52 nd annual Maui County Senior Fair at Queen Kaʻahumanu Center on Saturday, with nonprofit organizations, businesses and government agencies providing resources to support the health, wellness and independence of older adults across Maui County.

Attendees enjoyed entertainment and door prizes and engaged with more than 60 organizations that set up informational tables for the event.

Since 1973, the County of Maui through its Office on Aging and longtime partner Maui Economic Opportunity (MEO) has provided Maui seniors the opportunity to participate in this longstanding community event.

The Senior Fair serves to:

    *   Connect kūpuna and caregivers with essential resources and support in the community

    *   Promote health awareness through education and screenings

    *   Share information about programs and services available throughout Maui County

“A heartfelt mahalo to our longtime partners at MEO for their continued collaboration in making the Senior Fair an engaging and community-centered experience each year,” said Rowena Dagdag-Andaya, Maui County executive on aging. “We also extend our gratitude to the Queen Kaʻahumanu Center for being this year’s venue sponsor, as well as every participant, vendor, volunteer, performer and supporter who contributed to another meaningful and successful Senior Fair.”

Debbie Cabebe, MEO chief executive officer, said the agency was honored to support the fair. “MEO and the Office on Aging share a long history of working collaboratively on this and other initiatives that uplift and support our kūpuna,” she said. “For more than 60 years, MEO has administered senior programs in alignment with its mission to strengthen the community, help people in need, and empower them to reach their potential and enrich their lives.”

For more information on the County Office on Aging, visit www.mauicounty.gov/aging. To learn more about MEO, visit www.meoinc.org.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 18, 2025 

*   ### DWS West Maui system’s Maximum Reliable Capacity, 3-Year Water Usage Forecast released

The County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) on Friday, Nov. 14, 2025, released its Maximum Reliable Capacity and 3-Year Water Usage Forecast Projection for the West Maui System, which analyzes how much water the system is expected to reliably deliver to Nāpili and Lahaina service areas over the next three years.

The study can be found on the DWS Engineering Division’s page at www.mauicounty.gov/214/Engineering-Division.

The Maximum Reliable Capacity and 3-Year Water Usage Forecast Projection examined well-pumping capacity, regulatory pumping limits and recent production data. It also accounted for uncertainties and assumptions related to mechanical failure, human error and weather events. Researchers assessed the likelihood and duration of various system disruptions, including downed well pumps and periods of low or no intake flow at treatment plants.

The report found that peak demand exceeds the system’s reliable supply by 41.8%. With the addition of the Kahana Well, expected to come online in early 2026, the shortfall would be reduced but demand would still exceed reliable capacity by 15.7%. The Kahana Well still requires permits from the state Commission on Water Resource Management before it can become fully operational.

“Even with the Kahana Well in operation, additional supply will be needed to fully meet current demand and support future growth,” DWS Director John Stufflebean said. “We are exploring every option for finding new water sources and expanding existing supplies, but ongoing conservation and careful management remain critical as demand continues to grow.”

For more information, contact DWS Engineering Division at (808) 270-7835.   Press Releases   Posted on November 17, 2025 | Last Updated on November 17, 2025      
*    ### First eight families receive County of Maui’s First-Time Homebuyer Program shopping letters

Marking a significant chapter in rebuilding, the County of Maui Office of Recovery announced that eight families received First-Time Homebuyer Opportunity Program shopping letters today, which allow them to begin shopping for a house within their approved price range.

Five families gathered at the Kākoʻo Maui Relief & Aid Services Center in Kahului this morning to receive and sign the letters from County of Maui leaders. Another three recently signed the documents.

“Today marks an important step for our community, as eight families begin their pathway to homeownership as first-time buyers following the 2023 wildfires,” Mayor Richard Bissen said. “Thanks to the incredible work of our County Office of Recovery and CDBG-DR program, we’ve developed innovative pathways like Hoʻokumu Hou to connect survivors with real resources and help them secure a place to call home. Seeing these families take this step brings a deep sense of gratitude and hope for all of us.”

Once families receive a shopping letter, they have six months to identify and secure a home that meets program guidelines. Hoʻokumu Hou program specialists continue to support applicants through this process — from identifying eligible properties to coordinating with lenders and title companies.

Although First-Time Homebuyer Opportunity Program applications are no longer being accepted, program specialists continue to review applications daily. Each application is sorted by priority phase:

● Phase I: Households whose primary residence on Aug. 8, 2023, was within the burn zone and whose annual income is equal to or less than 80% AMI.

● Phase II: Households within the burn zone with income between 80% and 120% AMI.

● Phase III: Households outside the burn zone with income equal to or less than 80% AMI.

● Phase IV: Remaining applicants with verified eligibility once prior phases have been served.

Within each priority phase, applications are reviewed and awarded using a “first come, first ready” approach, meaning that applications advance as soon as they are complete and verified. A “first ready” date is recorded once all required documentation is submitted, securing each applicant’s place in the queue. This approach ensures assistance is distributed equitably while prioritizing those most impacted by the fires. As more applicants become “first-ready,” the County anticipates a steady increase in shopping letters issued through the end of this year and into 2026.

Hoʻokumu Hou offers Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery (CDBG-DR) funding to individuals and families who meet eligibility criteria, including income limits and loss of property during the 2023 Maui wildfires. Hoʻokumu Hou continues to accept applications for its Single-Family Homeowner Reimbursement and Reconstruction programs. For more information, visit https://hookumuhou.mauicounty.gov/   Press Releases   Posted on November 17, 2025      
*   ### Trace levels of selenium detected in Lahaina Water System; amounts far below safety limits

Trace levels of selenium have been detected for the first time in water samples during routine water testing of the Lahaina Water System, which services Lahaina, Honokōwai and Nāpili, according to the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS).

Samples collected Sept. 29 and Oct. 23, 2025, at the point where treated water enters the distribution system detected selenium levels ranging from 6 micrograms to 7.4 micrograms per liter. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Hawai‘i Department of Health (DOH), the Maximum Contaminant Level for selenium in drinking water is 50 micrograms per liter -- the highest concentration considered safe for lifelong consumption based on known health risks.

“The levels of selenium detected are very small and far below safety limits,” DWS Director John Stufflebean said. “Our community’s health and well-being are at the heart of everything we do, and we will continue monitoring water quality to ensure it remains safe for daily use.”

Selenium is a naturally occurring mineral found in soil, rocks and certain mineral deposits. It can enter drinking water resources naturally through erosion, and human activities, such as irrigated agriculture, can also contribute to its presence.

By law, DWS is required to notify DOH if any selenium is initially discovered within its sample. Once selenium detection has been assessed by DOH, DOH is required to release detection information.

For more information, contact DWS at (808) 270-7550.   Press Releases   Posted on November 17, 2025      
*   ### County setting up temporary parking ahead of upgrades to Lower Pa'ia Beach Park main lot

Ahead of a project to upgrade the main parking lot at Lower Pāʻia Beach Park near Pāʻia Youth and Cultural Center, the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation is beginning to construct a temporary parking area west of the existing beach park lot.

The beach park will remain open during the main parking lot closure and upgrades, which will begin Jan. 4, 2026, at 19 Hana Highway, Pāʻia. During main parking lot closure, the public may use the temporary parking lot to the west of the main lot.

The main parking lot is in need of extensive repair. Reconstruction is anticipated to be completed in summer of 2026. Work will be done by a contractor.

For general County Parks and Recreation information, visit www.mauicounty.gov/parks.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on November 14, 2025 | Last Updated on November 24, 2025      
*    ### County’s Adopt-a-Street Program kicks off in Pa'ia with Roselani Scoop Shop

The new County of Maui Department of Public Works (DPW) program to protect local waters by adopting a street kicked off in Pāʻia with Roselani Scoop Shop.

The ice cream shop at 115 Hana Highway is the first on Maui to adopt a street -- a half mile of Baldwin Avenue beginning at Hāna Highway -- and hold a volunteer cleanup event to remove litter and debris from the roadway. To recognize the community service, DPW set up “Adopted By” signs in both directions of Baldwin Avenue.

“Mahalo to Roselani Scoop Shop for being the first to adopt a street in the new DPW program,” DPW Director Jordan Molina said. “When our community works together to keep litter and debris out of storm drains, gutters and waterways, we protect more than just the street — we preserve Maui’s clean, natural stream and ocean waters for everyone to enjoy, today and for generations to come.”

Volunteers who want to help keep trash and debris out of Maui streams and surrounding ocean water are encouraged to participate in the DPW Adopt-A-Street pilot program in Pāʻia, Kahului and Wailuku. DPW provides supplies for volunteers and assists in planning the first cleanup and other special events.

At Roselani Scoop Shop’s first cleanup event Oct. 25, 2025, volunteers met at 7 a.m. at the Pāʻia location to cover the day’s objectives, distribute safety vests, gloves and trash pickers, review safety protocols and discuss how keeping streets clean helps protect Maui’s waters.

Approximately 15 volunteers in two groups cleaned both sides of the half-mile section of Baldwin Avenue to collect cigarette butts, slippers, clothing, food containers, tires and other trash. Collection bags and oversized litter were staged along Baldwin Avenue for DPW crews to remove that day.

After about an hour and a half of cleanup, volunteers returned to Roselani Scoop Shop for musubi, ice cream and talk story. Participants discussed the most surprising items they found and said they were able to remove a large amount of litter in a short time.

Individuals, businesses, organizations, scout groups, civic clubs and others are encouraged to help the environment through the Adopt-A-Street program, which is part of the County DPW Stormwater Management Program. For information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/stormwater, scroll to the “Adopt-a-Street Pilot Program” section, complete the application forms and email them to [email protected].

For general DPW information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/publicworks.   Press Releases   Posted on November 14, 2025      
*    ### Previously on Oahu and Big Island, Hot Kupuna Nights a first for Lahaina on Nov. 20

County of Maui Office of Recovery, in collaboration with Hawaiian Music Perpetuation Society (HMPS), is hosting Hot Kūpuna Nights on Thursday, Nov. 20, from 4 to 7 p.m. at the Royal Lahaina Resort Ballroom.

The free evening will feature live music by Kuʻuipo Kumukahi and Friends and will be hosted by Alakaʻi Paleka. Light dinner and refreshments will be provided. Free parking is available. Doors open at 3:30 p.m.

HMPS, a statewide organization dedicated to preserving mele Hawaiʻi and fostering intergenerational connection, has successfully hosted Hot Kūpuna Nights on Oʻahu and Hawaiʻi Island. This will be the first Hot Kūpuna Nights in Lahaina, creating a welcoming pathway for Lahaina’s kūpuna to access recovery resources in a setting that feels familiar, trusted and filled with aloha.

“Our kūpuna are the foundation of our community. They carry the stories, strength and wisdom that continue to guide us through recovery. Bringing comfort through music is one way that we can honor them — and ensure they feel seen and supported,” said Mayor Richard Bissen.

“It is with great honor and love for Maui we humbly accept the invitation to share Hot Kūpuna Nights with our ʻohana in Lahaina. Holu a Hoʻomau, Kūkui ʻaʻā mau pioʻole i Kauaʻula, Iesū pū me ʻoukou pākahi a pau,” said Kuʻuipo Kumukahi, HMPS co-founder and creative director.

The family-friendly gathering is designed to celebrate Lahaina’s kūpuna and provide a welcoming space to access wildfire recovery resources.

Program specialists and representatives from Office of Recovery programs and local nonprofit organizations, including Hoʻokumu Hou, Pono Legal, Na Hoaloha and others, will be on site to answer questions and connect with Lahaina kūpuna and their families.

Participants are encouraged to RSVP through this link, https://tinyurl.com/hotkupunanightslahaina; however, walk-ins are welcome.   Press Releases   Posted on November 13, 2025      
*    ### Upcountry water shortage downgraded to Stage 1

Following recent rainfall that improved surface water flows and replenished reservoirs, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is suspending the Stage 2 Upcountry water shortage and downgrading it to a Stage 1, effective immediately and until further notice.

The Upcountry service area includes Makawao, Upper and Lower Kula, Haʻikū, Hāliʻimaile, Pukalani, Kokomo, Kaupakalua, Ulumalu, Keōkea, ʻUlupalakua and Kanaio.

Recent rains have provided much-needed relief to the Upcountry area, according to DWS. Reservoir and surface water levels, along with decreased water demand, support the decision to downgrade to a Stage 1 water shortage. DWS will continue to monitor water supply levels, demand and weather to determine when Stage 1 restrictions may be lifted or if Stage 2 measures must be reinstated.

Under the Stage 1 water shortage, the following mandatory water conservation measures are in effect to preserve water supplies and ensure continued access to water for essential public health and safety needs:

1. Irrigation is allowed for no more than two days per week according to the following schedule:

• Monday and Friday for even residential addresses.

• Tuesday and Saturday for odd residential addresses.

• Wednesday and Sunday for even commercial facilities and multifamily units.

• Monday and Thursday for odd commercial facilities and multifamily units.

2. Customers must repair any leaks, breaks or faulty sprinklers within five days of notice or notification to the extent feasible.

3. Existing pools shall not be emptied and refilled using potable water unless required for public health and safety purposes.

4. Filling or refilling ornamental ponds is prohibited. Ornamental ponds that sustain aquatic life and were actively managed prior to the storage declaration are exempt.

At this time, there are no changes to the water shortage rates; however, rates may be increased as set forth in the annual budget if a Stage 1 shortage continues or a Stage 2 water shortage must be declared.

Agricultural water customers are subject to the same restrictions as other water users following the conclusion of the 180-day grace period that began with the Stage 1 declaration on April 17, 2025.

The director of Water Supply, with the mayor’s approval, may declare a water shortage whenever the water supply becomes inadequate due to drought, infrastructure or mechanical failure, natural disaster or other causes. A Stage 1 shortage exists when anticipated demand is projected to exceed available supply by 1% to 15%.

DWS provides free items to help the public conserve water, including faucet aerators for kitchens and bathrooms, leak detection dye tablets to check toilets, moisture meters, shower heads, hose nozzles, toilet tank bags and hose timers. Items are available from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, at Suite 102, 2200 Main St., Wailuku. For more information, contact DWS at (808) 463-3110 or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/water.   Press Releases   Posted on November 12, 2025      
*   ### County DOT office to temporarily close Friday morning for staff training

The County of Maui Department of Transportation (DOT) office at the Kahului Service Center will be temporarily closed from7:45 to 11 a.m. Friday, Nov. 14, 2025, for staff training. The DOT office will reopen at 11 a.m. the same day.

Maui Bus service will operate on its regular schedule and is not impacted by the office closure. Customers with questions may call the County DOT at (808) 270-7511. For general County DOT information, visit www.mauicounty.gov/Transportation.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on November 12, 2025      
*   
### County of Maui offices to be closed Tuesday in observance of Veterans Day

_County p_ _ools closed;_ _shortened hours at_ _Central Maui L_ _andfill_

County of Maui offices, facilities and services will be closed or modified on Tuesday, Nov. 11, 2025, in observance of Veterans Day.

County closures include the following:

    *   All County of Maui offices
    *   All County of Maui pools
    *   Lahaina Resource Center at Lahaina Gateway
    *   Recovery Permit Center at the County of Maui Service Center in Kahului
    *   Kākoʻo Maui Relief & Aid Services Center at Maui Mall Village in Kahului (Hoʻokumu Hou applications)
    *   Hāna, Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi landfills

Modified schedule includes the following services:

    *   Condensed holiday hours from 6 a.m. to noon for the Central Maui Landfill and Maui EKO Compost and from 8 a.m. to noon for Olowalu Recycling & Refuse Convenience Center.

Unchanged schedule includes the following services:

    *   Residential trash pickup
    *   Maui Bus

Following the holiday closure, regular business hours for County offices and services will resume on Wednesday, Nov. 12.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 06, 2025 

*    ### Wildfire Risk Reduction Project set to start Nov. 12 off Wai'ale Road in Wailuku

The County’s Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA), in coordination with County staff and contracted partners, will begin removing hazardous wildfire risks from County-owned parcels near a public school and a church in Wailuku on Wednesday, Nov. 12, 2025. The Waiʻale Road area has had 13 fires so far this year, according to the County of Maui Department of Fire and Public Safety.

As part of its ongoing Wildfire Risk Reduction program, the project on approximately 52 acres near Maui Lani Parkway and Waiʻale Road intersection is anticipated to be completed by the end of this month. The parcels have been identified as high-risk wildfire areas due to kiawe, haole koa and grasses, which are susceptible to ignition and rapid fire spread. The accumulation of derelict vehicles, automotive fluids and other flammable materials increases the danger of wildfire and environmental hazards.

Calls for service in the mapped area (attached) have increased over the last year by 174% (43 calls from Jan. 1 to Oct. 9, 2024, versus 118 calls from Jan. 1 to Oct. 9, 2025), according to Maui Police Department. Reports include terroristic threatening, theft, suspicious activity, warrant arrests, criminal property damage and promoting dangerous drugs, among others.

“The safety of our students, staff and families is always our top priority,” Pōmaikaʻi Elementary School Principal Timothy Shim said. “We are grateful to Maui Emergency Management Agency for helping make the area around Pōmaikaʻi Elementary safer for everyone. Over the past year, we’ve seen multiple fire incidents near our campus, as well as theft, which has raised real concerns for our school community. We appreciate the County of Maui for not only taking steps to reduce these risks but also for offering resources and support to help the involved individuals.”

“The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Maui Lani supports the County’s Wildfire Risk Reduction Project on the land behind our meetinghouse,” a local church leader said. “Protecting the health and safety of everyone in our community is very important to us.”

The County and its partners have been frequenting the site to offer services to area houseless individuals since July 2025. Services provided include access to, or assistance in, obtaining the following: shelter, behavioral health services, medical insurance, SNAP food assistance, ID access and reunification with family. Service providers on site include Family Life Center, Mental Health Kōkua, Aloha House and Maui Humane Society.

The area contains culturally and environmentally sensitive sites with known iwi kūpuna. Under the guidance of cultural monitors and archaeologists, County staff, partners and contractors will remove hazardous debris by hand and with equipment to minimize impact on sensitive areas. The continued fire mitigation efforts will also protect the sanctity of the wahi pana, according to cultural experts.

For more information on MEMA’s Wildfire Risk Reduction efforts, visit mauicounty.gov/MEMA or call (808) 270-7285.   Press Releases   Posted on November 05, 2025 | Last Updated on November 05, 2025      
*    ### Residents provide key East Maui water priorities at three County EMWA meetings

Residents emphasized key East Maui water priorities – such as the acquisition of the East Maui water system, infrastructure upgrades, the creation of a new East Maui base yard and watershed health initiatives – during three County of Maui East Maui Water Authority (EMWA) community workshops.

The workshops by EMWA and its community board, ʻAha Wai O Maui Hikina, were held in partnership with the nonprofit Public Finance Initiative in Keʻanae, Wailuku and Haʻikū on Oct. 28 and 29, 2025.

EMWA Director Gina Young thanked residents for participating in East Maui water meetings during this pivotal time.

“East Maui stands at a crossroads amid a historic drought, climate risks and competing needs for water,” Director Young said. “This moment calls not only for investment in infrastructure and watershed restoration, but also for innovative financing approaches that empower Maui County and community-led resource management — rooted in fairness and equity — to ensure long-term water access, sustainability and community well-being.”

Last week’s meetings featured breakout sessions where participants identified priorities to help shape the future direction of EMWA. Ideas were summarized, placed in groups and ranked by participants on significance. Input will guide community-driven projects that EMWA can advance, target for funding to implement and incorporate into its strategic planning.

Across the three workshops, several priorities with strong community support emerged:

• County acquisition and management of the East Maui water system to strengthen local management and stewardship of water resources. Attendees pointed to issues affecting the proposed County acquisition and management of the East Maui water system that will be discussed at the state Board of Land and Natural Resources meeting slated Nov. 14, 2025.

• Creation of an East Maui base yard. Residents said the facility would maintain and improve the water system, support watershed restoration and provide educational opportunities for local students and residents. Attendees asked that the base yard be staffed primarily by East Maui residents.

• Upgrades to existing infrastructure needed. Participants emphasized adding more reservoirs and lining existing reservoirs and ditches to ensure efficient water capture and retention.

• More stream-monitoring equipment and programs sought. Attendees shared the need for more stream monitoring to better understand current environmental conditions and strengthen watershed health. They suggested community involvement to bolster monitoring efforts and the addition of educational programs, including hydrology and environmental science community educational training; informational signage and mapping programs identifying stream locations, history and characteristics; and the development of monitoring and watershed work-training programs for college students. A community Adopt-A-Stream monitoring program was also suggested and was a top priority for meeting participants.

In addition to discussions on potential programs, Public Finance Initiative staff provided educational sessions on public finance strategies that can be integrated with philanthropic social investments to expand resources for the East Maui

water system and offered steps to gain greater local control.

Recent workshops were held in collaboration with Haʻikū Community Association, Kula Community Association and Nā Moku Aupuni O Koʻolau Hui. The workshops were supported through the Public Finance Initiative’s Rural and Small Cities Program. The Rural and Small Cities Program is supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

A presentation on input from the three meetings will be provided at the ʻAha Wai O Maui Hikina board meeting at 9 a.m. Dec. 5, 2025, in the Kalana Pakui Building, 200 S. High St., Wailuku.

Contact EMWA at [email protected] or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/EMWA.   Press Releases   Posted on November 05, 2025 | Last Updated on November 05, 2025      
*   
### Lahaina Community Meeting set for Wednesday, Nov. 5

_Updates on debris transfer, Hoʻokumu Hou, Lahaina Harbor to be discussed_

Residents are encouraged to attend the County of Maui’s Lahaina Community Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, Nov. 5, 2025, at the Lahaina Intermediate School cafeteria.

Topics to be discussed include:

    *   Updates by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) on the transfer of wildfire debris and transition to restoration of the Temporary Debris Storage site at Olowalu.
    *   Updates from the Hoʻōla iā Mauiakama Disaster Long Term Recovery Group, including on the Mennonite Disaster Service, grants and rebuild applications.
    *   Updates from the County Office of Recovery, including information on Hoʻokumu Hou programs, as well as upcoming projects and Lahaina Harbor.

In order to provide residents with more individual assistance from various agencies, representatives from several departments and agencies will be available to offer support at resource tables at the community meeting. They include: County of Maui’s Office of Recovery, 4LEAF, Department of Planning; Federal Emergency Management Agency, USACE, Hawaiian Electric Co., Hoʻōla iā Mauiakama Disaster Long Term Recovery Group and Native Hawaiian Legal Corp.

Held every first Wednesday of the month, except on holidays, the in-person Lahaina Community Meeting also will be livestreamed on the County of Maui’s Facebook page; no account is needed to view. A live broadcast of the meeting will be shown on Akakū: Maui Community Media, Channel 53.

Impacted residents and homeowners are encouraged to sign up for email and text notifications at www.mauirecovers.org/sign-up.

For more information and to view past community meetings, visit www.mauirecovers.org/events.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on November 03, 2025 

*    ### County of Maui seeking volunteers to serve on Boards and Commissions

Maui County boards and commissions need volunteers for more than 30 panels, including Liquor Control Commission, Maui Planning Commission, Police Commission, Salary Commission, Urban Design Review Board, Fire and Public Safety Commission and others.

"Volunteers are the heart of our County’s progress,” Mayor Richard Bissen said. “Our boards and commissions depend on dedicated community members who share their time, knowledge and aloha to guide decisions that shape Maui County’s future. The impact that board members and commissioners make is truly invaluable — strengthening services, supporting our residents and ensuring our islands thrive for generations to come.”

The deadline to submit applications for the next term is Nov. 14, 2025. Also, applications are accepted year-round to fill vacancies.

Responsibilities include hearing public testimony, reviewing policies and standards and making recommendations. Positions are not financially compensated and are appointed by the mayor, confirmed by Maui County Council and have terms lasting three to five years.

For a full list of vacancies, descriptions of the boards and commissions, and to apply online, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/Boards-Commissions.

Paper applications are available at the Maui County Business and Resource Center, 110 ‘Ala ‘ihi St., Suite 209, Kahului, and at the County’s Kalana O Maui Building, 200 S. High St., Wailuku (information desk, second floor).

For more information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/Boards-Commissions, email [email protected] or call (808) 270-7855.   Press Releases   Posted on November 03, 2025      
*    ### Part of Vevau Street near Kahului Transit Center will close to public traffic 9 a.m.-2 p.m. Nov. 7

A portion of Vevau Street in Kahului – between Kane and School streets – will temporarily close to public vehicular traffic from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Friday, Nov. 7, 2025, due to an electrical project at Kahului Transit Center, according to the County of Maui Department of Transportation (DOT). Maui Bus and pedestrians will still be allowed to utilize the roadway during this time.

County DOT is overseeing the weather-pending project, which will upgrade electrical services at Kahului Transit Center, a hub for Maui Bus services at 18 Vevau St., Kahului.

The Maui Bus schedule is not anticipated to be impacted, and the Kahului Transit Center ticket office will remain open. During the electrical project, bus boardings will only occur along Vevau Street fronting the transit center. Also, riders can still use the transit center waiting area and restroom facilities.

Maui Bus is a service provided by the County DOT and operated by Roberts Hawaiʻi.

Schedule information for all County buses is available online at https://www.mauicounty.gov/bus.

Riders can track their bus in real-time and get arrival predictions using the free Maui Bus app, available on the County bus website, iOS and Android app stores. For more Maui Bus information, contact Roberts Hawaiʻi at (808) 871-4838 or the County DOT at (808) 270-7511.   Press Releases   Posted on October 31, 2025      
*   ### Upcountry Pool to close Nov. 3-7 for maintenance

The Upcountry Pool will temporarily close Monday, Nov. 3, through Friday, Nov. 7, 2025, for maintenance, according to the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation.

The facility will reopen for lap and recreational swimming on Saturday, Nov. 8, during normal hours, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. It is located at 90 Pukalani St., Pukalani.

For updates on pool hours, call the County pool hotline at (808) 270-8208. For general pool information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/aquatics.   Press Releases   Posted on October 31, 2025      
*    ### County Committee on the Status of Women opens nominations for 2025 Women of Excellence Awards

Nominations are open for the 2025 Women of Excellence Awards, according to the Maui County Committee on the Status of Women. The annual recognition celebrates outstanding women across Maui County who uplift, inspire and strengthen their communities.

This year’s theme, Ka Holomua Laulima! Nā Wāhine Hoʻoulu Hanauna (Moving Foward Together: Women Educating and Inspiring Generations), honors women whose leadership, mentorship and dedication create a lasting impact for future generations.

Exceptional women will be recognized in the following categories:

• Young Woman of Promise (ages 14–21)

• Woman of Excellence (ages 22–59)

• Unsung Hero (ages 60 and older)

• Honorary Historical Award (Posthumous)

Nomination forms are available at the Kalana O Maui County building, 200 S. High St. in Wailuku, at the information booth in the main lobby or at the Office of the Mayor on the 9 th floor. Forms are also available online at https://www.mauicounty.gov/CSW. The nomination deadline is Nov. 11, 2025.

Completed nomination forms may be submitted by email to [email protected], by Fax to (808) 270-7870 or by mail to Committee on the Status of Women, Office of the Mayor, 200 S. High Street, Wailuku, HI 96793.   Press Releases   Posted on October 30, 2025      
*    ### County invites resident feedback to help shape community forest plan for Maui island

The County of Maui Department of Management encourages residents to help shape an urban forest management plan for Maui island -- titled He Nohona ʻUlu: Maui’s Community Forest Plan -- by attending in-person events in Kahului and completing an online survey at www.henohonaulu.org.

Community pop-up events are as follows:

• Nov. 8, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m.: Arbor Day Garden Expo and Tree Giveaway at Maui Nui Botanical Gardens, Kahului

• Nov. 15, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.: County of Maui Senior Fair at Queen Kaʻahumanu Center, Kahului

• Nov. 15, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.: Mālama the Trees at University of Hawaiʻi Maui College, Kahului

Events will offer more information on the project, time to talk story with planners and opportunities to complete the survey. The survey covers what trees mean to residents, where more trees should be planted and what benefits and concerns should guide the project. Events and survey responses will help shape recommendations to ensure that Maui’s community forests reflect local values and priorities.

The pop-ups kick off public engagement for He Nohona ʻUlu: Maui’s Community Forest Plan. Over the next year, the County and its project team will host listening sessions and open houses across the island to gather additional ideas and feedback.

Rooted in the ʻulu grove model, He Nohona ʻUlu: Maui’s Community Forest Plan aims to cultivate thriving communities where trees provide food, cultural resources, shade, aquifer recharge, climate resilience and other benefits. Once completed, the urban forest management plan will combine community manaʻo with technical expertise to assess current conditions and advance recommendations for policy changes, staffing and budgets, tree planting projects and long-term stewardship.

The County of Maui project launched in May 2025; a draft plan is anticipated in late 2026; and a final plan is estimated to be completed in early 2027.

The state Department of Land and Natural Resources Division of Forestry and Wildlife’s Kaulunani Urban and Community Forestry Program and the federal Department of Agriculture Urban and Community Forestry are funding the County project.

For more information on He Nohona ʻUlu: Maui’s Community Forest Plan, visit www.henohonaulu.org or email [email protected].   Press Releases   Posted on October 30, 2025      
*   
### Upcountry water shortage downgraded to Stage 2

_Once weekly irrigation allowed on set days_

Following recent rainfall that improved surface water flows and replenished reservoirs, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is suspending the Stage 3 Upcountry water shortage alert and downgrading it to Stage 2, effective immediately and until further notice.

The Upcountry service area includes Makawao, Upper and Lower Kula, Haʻikū, Hāliʻimaile, Pukalani, Kokomo, Kaupakalua, Ulumalu, Keōkea, ʻUlupalakua and Kanaio.

Recent rains have provided much-needed relief to the Upcountry area, according to DWS. Reservoir and surface water levels, along with decreased water demand, support the decision to downgrade to a Stage 2 water shortage. DWS will continue to monitor water supply levels, demand and weather to determine when Stage 2 restrictions may be lifted or if Stage 3 measures must be reinstated.

“Mahalo to our community for your continued commitment to conserving water,” said DWS Director John Stufflebean. “Thanks to your efforts, combined with recent rainfall, we have been able to move from a Stage 3 to a Stage 2 water shortage. We encourage everyone to continue using water wisely as we continue to monitor weather patterns and water levels."

Under the Stage 2 water shortage, the following mandatory water conservation measures are being implemented to preserve water supplies and ensure continued access to water for essential public health and safety needs:

    1.   Irrigation is allowed one day per week according to the schedule below, with plant containers, trees, shrubs and vegetable gardens allowed one additional day using drip irrigation or hand watering only.

    *   Monday – Makawao and Hāliʻimaile
    *   Tuesday – Haʻikū, Kokomo, and Ulumalu
    *   Wednesday – Pukalani
    *   Thursday – Upper Kula
    *   Friday – Lower Kula
    *   Saturday – ʻUlupalakua, Kanaio and Keōkea
    *   Sunday – Kaupakalua

    1.   Parks, school grounds and recreation fields adhere to the one-day-a-week irrigation schedule.
    2.   All nonessential water use for commercial and industrial use should cease.
    3.   Customers must repair leaks, breaks or faulty sprinklers within three days of notice or notification to the extent feasible.
    4.   The use of potable water at temporary construction meters is prohibited. 
    5.   Personal washing of vehicles is prohibited. 

At this time, there are no changes to the water shortage rates; however, rates may be increased as set forth in the annual budget if a Stage 2 shortage continues or a Stage 3 water shortage must be declared.

Agricultural water customers are subject to the same restrictions as other water users following the conclusion of the 180-day grace period that began with the Stage 1 declaration on April 17, 2025.

The Stage 1 water shortage took effect April 17, 2025; Stage 2 on Sept. 11, 2025; Stage 3 on Oct. 17, 2025; and the Stage 2 downgrade is effective Oct. 28, 2025, until further notice.

The director of Water Supply, with the mayor’s approval, may declare a water shortage whenever the water supply becomes inadequate due to drought, infrastructure or mechanical failure, natural disaster or other causes. A Stage 2 shortage exists when anticipated demand is projected to exceed available supply by 16% to 30%.

DWS provides several free items to help the public conserve water, including faucet aerators for kitchens and bathrooms, leak detection dye tablets to check toilets, moisture meters, shower heads, hose nozzles, toilet tank bags and hose timers. Items are available from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, at Suite 102, 2200 Main St., Wailuku.

For more information, contact DWS at (808) 463-3110 or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/water.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on October 28, 2025 

*   
### Holiday gifts for kupuna sought for Kaunoa Senior Services Giving Tree

The County of Maui’s Kaunoa Senior Services is seeking community support for this year’s Giving Tree campaign to provide holiday gifts to homebound seniors.

The goal is to provide one personalized holiday gift to each of the 700 homebound seniors served by Kaunoa’s Meals on Wheels, Assisted Transportation and Congregate Nutrition programs.

To help:

    *   Visit Kaunoa Senior Center in Spreckelsville at 401 Alakapa Place between Nov. 3 and 28 Mondays through Fridays from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. and select a wish from the Giving Tree.
    *   Purchase the requested gift and bring it unwrapped to Kaunoa Senior Center by Dec. 3.

For more information, call Kaunoa Senior Services at (808) 270-7308 and select option 3.

Kaunoa Senior Services is a division of the County Department of Human Concerns.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on October 28, 2025 

*   ### Statement from Mayor Bissen on passing of Maui County Council's Tasha Kama

Mayor Richard Bissen today, Oct. 27, 2025, issued the following statement on the passing of Maui County Council Presiding Officer Pro Tempore Tasha Kama:

“It is with deep sadness that we learn of the passing of Maui County Council Presiding Officer Pro Tempore Tasha Kama. She was a woman of deep faith, compassion and aloha — a leader whose every action reflected her love for our people and her commitment to service.

“Tasha led with humility and strength, always guided by her belief in doing what was just and right for our community. Her wisdom, warmth and unwavering faith touched countless lives and will continue to guide us long after her passing.

“On behalf of the County of Maui, Kaʻihi and I extend our heartfelt condolences to the Kama ʻohana, her colleagues on the Maui County Council, and all who were blessed to know and serve alongside her.”

The ‘ohana of Natalie “Tasha” Kama announced late Sunday that she passed away at 9:25 p.m. Oct. 26, 2025. Flags at the County of Maui Kalana O Maui building in Wailuku will be lowered this week in her honor.   Press Releases   Posted on October 27, 2025 | Last Updated on October 27, 2025      
*   ### County’s HandsOn Maui to hold Nov. 13 workshop for nonprofits on using AI to recruit, retain volunte

The County of Maui Volunteer Center, HandsOn Maui, invites nonprofit leaders and volunteer managers across Maui County to a free, virtual workshop titled, “Recruit, Retain, Repeat: AI Tools for Volunteer Success,” on Thursday, Nov. 13, 2025, from 9:30 to 11 a.m. via Zoom.

This beginner-friendly session, led by Miller Media Management founder Danielle Miller, will introduce nonprofits to the power of artificial intelligence (AI) tools ChatGPT, Canva Magic Studio and custom Generative Pre-trained Transformers (GPTs) to strengthen volunteer engagement and streamline marketing tasks.

Space is limited to 25 participants; reserve a spot by going to County of Maui Department of Human Concerns, https://mauicounty.gov/humanconcerns and clicking on “Volunteer Center.”

This practical workshop is designed for nonprofit professionals of all experience levels — especially those new to AI. Participants will learn:

● Beginner: Discover how to use ChatGPT and Canva Magic Studio to create engaging, on-brand messages, emails and social media posts.

● Intermediate: Understand how to integrate AI into standard operating procedures for consistent communications and faster volunteer onboarding.

● All: See how building a GPT tailored to your nonprofit can help volunteers and staff create content that stays true to your brand — no matter who’s helping.

Participants will leave the training with actionable tools to save time, improve communication and strengthen volunteer impact.

As an educator and digital strategist, Miller has helped hundreds of Hawaiʻi-based organizations and nonprofits use technology to communicate more effectively and build community engagement.

HandsOn Maui is part of the County of Maui Department of Human Concerns. The volunteer center supports volunteers and nonprofits by strengthening community engagement. For more information, visit https://mauicounty.gov/humanconcerns and click on “Volunteer Center.”   Press Releases   Posted on October 24, 2025 | Last Updated on October 24, 2025      
*   ### County DWS accepting proposals for FY 2027 Watershed Protection Grants

The County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is accepting proposals now through Nov. 30, 2025, for its Fiscal Year (FY) 2027 Watershed Protection Grants Program, aimed at conserving, protecting and restoring watersheds that provide critical drinking water sources for the island.

Watersheds in Hawaiʻi are areas where rain and streams flow downhill into rivers, streams or the ocean. Healthy watersheds are vital to supporting clean water supplies and native plants and animals.

The grants program also includes projects focused on wildfire risk reduction in wildland-urban interface zones, helping safeguard both natural resources and nearby communities.

“Protecting and restoring our watersheds requires a strong partnership between the Department of Water Supply and local organizations,” DWS Director John Stufflebean said. “We’re proud to lead this effort by providing support and funding through the grants program, and we encourage community groups to bring forward innovative projects that help secure Maui’s clean water for today and the future.”

Key points of the FY 2027 program:

• Funding scope: Projects must protect or restore watersheds that replenish Maui’s surface and groundwater sources used by the department. Priority goes to projects with measurable public benefits and those that include matching funds or leveraged resources.

• Application process: Proposals must be submitted through the Amplifund online platform by 4:30 p.m. Nov. 30, 2025. First-time applicants are encouraged to review guidelines and contact the department for eligibility consultations.

• Grant period: Awards typically cover a one-year project from Jan. 1 to Dec. 31, 2027, with possible multiyear funding for ongoing projects in good standing.

• Evaluation: Applications will be reviewed based on public benefit, cost-effectiveness, applicant capacity, deliverables schedule, past performance and matching funds availability.

DWS plans to allocate about 4% of its operating budget to the program, with grants ranging from tens of thousands to over $1 million, depending on project scope and impact.

The full request for proposals and program details are available at https://waterresources.mauicounty.gov/31/Watershed-Protection.

For more information, contact DWS at (808) 463-3113.   Press Releases   Posted on October 23, 2025 | Last Updated on October 23, 2025      
*   ### Temporary closures slated at two Central Maui pools

The County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) announced temporary closures at two pools in Central Maui.

• Kōkua Pool, Kahului. Due to pool maintenance, Kōkua Pool will be temporarily closed starting Monday, Oct. 27, 2025, until further notice. The pool is in Kahului Community Center Park at 275 Uhu St.

• Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool, Wailuku. Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool will close for half a day from 9 a.m. to noon on Thursday, Oct. 30, 2025, for pool guard recruitment testing. The facility at 700 Halia Nakoa St. will reopen from noon to 4 p.m. Thursday for lap and recreational swimming.

For updates on pool hours, call the County pool hotline at (808) 270-8208. For general DPR pool information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/aquatics.   Press Releases   Posted on October 22, 2025      
*    ### Lahaina wildfire debris transitions to restoration phase in Olowalu

_Reduced number of trucks will be transporting restoration materials and debris for approximately 10 weeks_

The remaining truckloads of wildfire debris have been transported from the Temporary Debris Storage (TDS) site in Olowalu to the Permanent Disposal Site (PDS) at the Central Maui Landfill.

This milestone marks the transition to the restoration phase of the debris mission. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), the Environmental Protection Agency, County of Maui, State of Hawai‘i and local partners extend sincere thanks to the people of Maui for their patience and support during the debris transfer phase.

“From day one, our mission has been clear: protect the health of the community and the environment while moving debris safely and respectfully,” said Lt. Col. Adrian Biggerstaff, commander of USACE Honolulu District. “This milestone shows what is possible when local, state, federal and community partners work together with urgency and care.”

Mayor Richard Bissen said, “This milestone holds deep meaning for our community. The debris from Lahaina represents more than the physical remnants of what was lost — it carries the memory and spirit of a place and its people. With this transfer complete, the debris now rests in a protected area that will remain undisturbed, as we promised. As we begin the final phase to restore the Olowalu site, our focus remains on caring for our ʻāina, honoring our commitments, and moving forward with the same respect and diligence that have guided this effort from the beginning.”

As part of the restoration work, USACE and its contractor, Environmental Chemical Corporation (ECC), will begin to remove the liner, leachate system and other temporary infrastructure at the TDS site.

Residents will continue to see trucks hauling restoration materials and debris for approximately 10 weeks; however, the blue-and-white “Maui Wildfire Debris” identification stickers that were placed on the trucks will be removed or covered.

Restoration work will include efforts to restore the TDS site to its original state as closely as possible, as well as making road repairs and installing drainage and safety features. USACE and ECC also will remove temporary infrastructure that was installed along portions of the haul route.

A TDS restoration tracker has been added to the Maui Recovers website to monitor the progress of site restoration efforts; visit www.mauirecovers.org/debris-containment to view.

The Olowalu TDS site was completed in early 2024 as an interim holding site to safely contain Lahaina wildfire debris while the PDS was being developed. It was engineered with extensive environmental safeguards, including geotextile layers, a welded liner, leachate collection systems and groundwater monitoring wells.

USACE and ECC will conduct soil and groundwater testing to confirm that the protective systems functioned as designed, and that no contamination reached the surrounding environment.

The TDS facility received approximately 400,000 tons of ash, soil and fire-related material from approximately 1,390 residential and 149 commercial properties in Lahaina. To reduce dust, the wildfire debris was covered with clean soil while stored at the TDS site.

Debris transport to the PDS began in June 2025. On average, roughly 50 local trucks made an average of four trips daily during daylight hours.

For more information on the transfer of Lahaina’s wildfire debris and the restoration of the TDS, visit www.mauirecovers.org/debristransfer.   Press Releases   Posted on October 22, 2025      
*   
### Department of Water Supply offers additional information on the Upcountry Stage 3 water shortage

With a Stage 3 water shortage in effect for Upcountry areas, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) is providing the following information:

**1. What areas are affected?**The Upcountry service area includes Makawao, Upper and Lower Kula, Haʻikū, Hāliʻimaile, Pukalani, Kokomo, Kaupakalua, Ulumalu, Keōkea, ʻUlupalakua, and Kanaio.

**2. What are the mandatory water restrictions?**

    *   All nonessential commercial and industrial water use must stop.
    *   Irrigation of turf grass is prohibited.
    *   Plants, trees and gardens may be watered once a week using drip irrigation or hand-watering only.
    *   Leaks or faulty sprinklers must be repaired within two days of notice.
    *   Potable water use at temporary construction meters is prohibited.
    *   Personal vehicle washing is not allowed.
    *   Irrigation of parks, school grounds and recreation fields is prohibited.

**3. Do restrictions apply to agriculture users?**Yes. Agricultural customers must follow the same water restrictions, as the 180-day exemption period has ended.

**4.****Hasn’t recent rainfall affected the water shortage?**No. Recent rainfall hasn’t significantly affected flows in streams and levels in reservoirs supplying the Upcountry service area.

**5. Where does Upcountry water come from?**Water is sourced from East Maui streams (via ditch systems) and County-operated groundwater wells.

**6. Why was Stage 3 declared?**A prolonged drought has drastically reduced stream flow in East Maui. The ditches that carry surface water (not owned or operated by the County) are delivering far less water than needed. County wells are already operating at full capacity.

**7. How much water does Upcountry use?**Upcountry typically uses up to 10 million gallons per day (MGD):

    *   3 MGD from County wells
    *   7 MGD from East Maui surface water

**8. Why not use other sources?**The Upcountry water system is isolated and cannot be connected to other County systems.

**9. A Stage 3 water shortage has not been issued before. Where did all the water go?**Historically, up to 300 million gallons per day (MGD) flowed through the ditch system. The volume was adjusted to leave more water in the streams and meet the interim instream flow standards. The volume in the ditch is usually between 20-30 MGD. The lack of significant rainfall and prolonged drought has reduced that to less than 5 MGD.

**10.****Will my water rates increase?**No. DWS is not raising rates at this time due to the water shortage.

**11. When will this end?**The County is currently relying on reservoir storage. If water use exceeds available supply, reservoirs are depleted. Restrictions may be eased when stream flows increase and reservoir levels are restored.

**12. Does DWS provide anything to help the public conserve water?**

The DWS provides the following free items to the public:

    *   Faucet aerators for the kitchen and bathroom
    *   Leak detection dye tablets (to check toilets for leaks)
    *   Moisture meters
    *   Shower heads
    *   Hose nozzles
    *   Toilet tank bag
    *   Hose timers

The free water conservation devices are available from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Mondays through Fridays at Suite 102, 2200 Main St., Wailuku.

**13. What can residents do to reduce household water usage?**Residents can take several simple and effective steps to conserve water at home, such as:

    *   Fixing leaks promptly to prevent water waste
    *   Taking shorter showers instead of baths
    *   Plugging the sink when washing dishes by hand
    *   Running only full loads of laundry or adjusting the water level for smaller loads
    *   Using drought-tolerant plants and xeriscaping to reduce outdoor water use

For more water conservation tips and to learn about our water shortage and conservation plan, visit https://mauicounty.gov/waterconservation.

For more information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/water.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on October 21, 2025 

*    ### Community invited to help shape the future of East Maui Water Authority at October workshops

The County of Maui East Maui Water Authority (EMWA) and its community board, ‘Aha Wai O Maui Hikina, are holding three community workshops on Oct. 28 and 29, 2025, in Keʻanae, Wailuku and Haʻikū that will help shape the future of EMWA.

Join meetings to identify key projects, such as infrastructure upgrades, a new East Maui baseyard and watershed health initiatives. Input will help guide community-driven projects that EMWA can advance and seek funding to implement.

The free workshops are:

• Keʻanae: 4:45-8 p.m., Tuesday, Oct. 28, Keʻanae-Uka.

• Wailuku (and online): 1-3 p.m., Wednesday, Oct. 29, at J. Walter Cameron Center; online via Microsoft Teams by registering at https://www.mauicounty.gov/EMWA. Nonprofit Public Finance Initiative will offer an education session titled, “From Vision to Action: Funding the East Maui Water Authority’s Priorities,” on how funding sources, such as bonds, grants and philanthropy, can support community-identified projects and lead a discussion with public officials on next steps. Participants will explore the question -- “What will it take to move from vision to action?” -- and consider practical ways to implement EMWA priorities.

• Haʻikū: 6-9 p.m. Wednesday, Oct. 29, at Haʻikū Community Center.

This month’s workshops will build on ideas and priorities shared during watershed and resource-planning EMWA gatherings held over the summer in Keʻanae, Haʻikū and Kula.

“The summer gatherings gave us a real sense of what our communities want and need,” EMWA Director Gina Young said. “This month, we’re taking the next step — working side by side to turn community priorities into real action plans for water in East Maui. We’re making sure local voices continue to lead every conversation.”

At the June meetings, community members toured local streams, met with experts and shared priorities, including fairness in water systems, modernized infrastructure, transparency, food security and stronger community decision-making. Each region voiced unique needs: reconnecting youth and kūpuna in Keʻanae and Wailuanui; addressing water meters in Kula; and promoting fairness and cultural respect in Haʻikū-Huelo.

October EMWA meetings are held in collaboration with Public Finance Initiative, Haʻikū Community Association, Kula Community Association and Nā Moku Aupuni o Koʻolau Hui. These workshops are supported through Public Finance Initiative’s Rural and Small Cities Program with support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

ABOUT EMWA

In November 2022, Maui County residents voted to amend the Maui County Charter to establish the Department of the East Maui Water Authority. Guided by the department’s community board, the ‘Aha Wai O Maui Hikina Board, which represents the Nāhiku, Keʻanae, Honomanū and Huelo communities, EMWA launched in November 2024. The department is tasked with developing watershed management plans and acquiring and managing water systems to ensure efficient and sustainable distribution of local water resources. Its work to steward East Maui water resources centers on environmentally sustainable practices, local expertise and Hawaiian cultural and generational knowledge. Contact EMWA at [email protected] or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/EMWA.   Press Releases   Posted on October 17, 2025      
*   ### Stage 3 water shortage in effect for Upcountry

Due to decreasing water levels from prolonged drought, the County of Maui Department of Water Supply (DWS) has declared a Stage 3 water shortage in the Upcountry service area -- effective immediately until further notice.

The Upcountry service area covers Makawao, Upper and Lower Kula, Haʻikū, Hāliʻimaile, Pukalani, Kokomo, Kaupakalua, Ulumalu, Keōkea, ʻUlupalakua and Kanaio. Agricultural water customers are subject to the same water restrictions as other customers as the 180-day initial publication notice has passed.

Under the Stage 3 water shortage, the following mandatory water conservation measures are being implemented to preserve remaining water supplies and ensure continued access to water for essential public health and safety needs, such as drinking water and sanitation:

• All nonessential water use for commercial and industrial use should cease. All irrigation of turf grass is prohibited. Plant containers, trees, shrubs and vegetable gardens may be watered one day per week using only drip irrigation or hand watering.

• Customers must repair leaks, breaks or faulty sprinklers within two days of notice or notification to the extent feasible.

• The use of potable water at temporary construction meters is prohibited.

• Personal washing of vehicles is prohibited.

• Irrigation of parks, school grounds and recreation fields is prohibited.

Failure to comply with any mandated water restriction may result in penalties, including a $500 fine for each violation and removal of the water meter for subsequent violations.

A Stage 3 water shortage exists if the Director of Water Supply determines that anticipated water demand in an area is projected to exceed available water supply by 31% or higher. Water storage reservoir levels, lack of adequate source water and the U.S. Drought Monitor forecast of severe drought conditions all support the decision to upgrade to a Stage 3 water shortage for Upcountry.

The Director of Water Supply, with the approval of the Mayor, is authorized to declare a water shortage whenever the water supply becomes inadequate in any County area due to a period of drought, an infrastructure or mechanical malfunction, a natural disaster or other event causing a water shortage.

The Stage 1 water shortage was effective April 17, 2025. The Stage 2 water shortage was effective Sept. 11, 2025. The Stage 3 water shortage is effective Oct. 17, 2025, and will remain until further notice. DWS will continue to monitor water supply levels, demand and weather conditions to assess when the Stage 3 water shortage may be lifted or downgraded.

For more information, contact DWS at (808) 463-3110.   Press Releases   Posted on October 17, 2025      
*   
### Reminder - Central Maui, Upcountry, Paia-Haiku community budget meetings scheduled next week

_Residents invited to share priorities_

Community budget meetings are scheduled next week in Central Maui, Upcountry and Pāʻia-Haʻikū for residents to share their priorities and provide input on the County budget for Fiscal Year 2027, which begins July 1, 2026.

The meetings are among eight community budget meetings hosted by Mayor Richard Bissen and his administration throughout Maui County.

Upcoming community budget meetings are scheduled for 5 to 7 p.m. as follows:

    *   **Central Maui -**Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2025, at Velma McWayne Santos Community Center in Wailuku
    *   **Upcountry**- Wednesday, Oct. 15, 2025, at Mayor Hannibal Tavares Community Center in Pukalani
    *   **Pāʻia-Haʻikū**- Thursday, Oct. 16, 2025, at Pāʻia Community Center.
    *   **Molokaʻi**- Tuesday, Oct. 21, 2025, at Mitchell Pauʻole Community Center in Kaunakakai.

Written and verbal comments will be accepted at the meetings. Budget requests also may be submitted by using a Budget Request Form, which is available on the County of Maui website at https://www.mauicounty.gov/budget.

Residents unable to attend the meetings in person can view the meetings on the County of Maui Facebook page. No account is required.

Budget meetings were held last month on Lānaʻi and in West Maui, South Maui and East Maui – Hāna.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on October 10, 2025 

*    ### County DPR invites community to help restore sand dunes at Baldwin Beach on Oct. 20

County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR), in partnership with the University of Hawaiʻi Sea Grant Program, will host a dune restoration event at Baldwin Beach, also known as Kapukaʻulua, on Monday, Oct. 20, 2025, from 8 to 10 a.m. at Lower Pāʻia Park.

Volunteers will help plant 750 native coastal plants, including pōhuehue vine, ʻakiʻaki grass and ʻākulikuli. The effort is part of the Kapukaʻulua Dune Restoration Project, which aims to reduce erosion, improve habitat for native wildlife and enhance shoreline resilience against sea level rise.

Gloves, tools and a water refill station will be provided. Participants are encouraged to bring a reusable water bottle, sun protection, a hat and a garden trowel if available.

The Kapukaʻulua Dune Restoration Project is a collaboration between the County of Maui and the University of Hawaiʻi Sea Grant Program, with funding from the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation’s National Coastal Resilience Fund. The project focuses on restoring dune ecosystems along the shoreline between Lower Pāʻia Park and Wawau Point, also known as Baby Beach.

The restoration work is part of a long-term plan outlined in the Baldwin Beach Park Master Plan. Seven restoration zones have been identified, each with site-specific strategies to guide ongoing conservation and management efforts.

“Healthy dunes help protect our parks, wildlife and coastal communities from the impacts of erosion and sea level rise,” County DPR nursery worker Jenna Spellman said. “This event is a chance for people to be part of that recovery and help protect one of Maui’s most dynamic shorelines.”

Dunes serve as natural barriers by trapping windblown sand, providing habitat for coastal species and buffering inland areas from storm waves and flooding. They also can migrate landward over time, maintaining their protective function as sea levels rise.

For information on the Kapukaʻulua Dune Restoration Project, visit https://tinyurl.com/kapukauluaproject.

For general information about County DPR, visit www.mauicounty.gov/parks.   Press Releases   Posted on October 09, 2025      
*   ### Office on Aging invites community to free Alzheimer’s and related dementias meetings Oct. 14, 16

The County of Maui Department of Human Concerns Office on Aging is inviting the community to two free meetings this month in Wailuku that will offer information on Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias.

• 12:30 to 2 p.m. Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2025, at J. Walter Cameron Center, Conference Room 1, Wailuku (to watch the meeting online, visit https://tinyurl.com/msvshj5s): The Maui County Council on Aging will feature Tani Salazar, Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Services Coordinator with the State Executive Office on Aging, who will provide an overview of the Hawaiʻi Dementia Initiative and the Dementia Champion Campaign. Salazar will share how community partners can support, participate in and amplify these statewide efforts to build dementia-friendly communities. For details on the Hawaiʻi Dementia Initiative, visit https://hawaiidementia.org.

• 6 to 7:30 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 16, 2025, at the J. Walter Cameron Center Auditorium, Wailuku: The Alzheimer’s Association will host a “Listen & Learn” session featuring Dr. Gina Fujikami, geriatrician with The Queen’s Health System. Fujikami’s presentation, “The Future of Brain Health: Hope, Research & Prevention,” will highlight practical steps that individuals and families can take to protect cognitive health across the lifespan, covering lifestyle changes that can lower dementia risk, the latest research on brain resilience and prevention, and ways to take charge of cognitive health at any age. To register, visit tinyurl.com/brainhealthmaui or email [email protected].

County Executive on Aging Rowena Dagdag-Andaya said the events highlight the importance of partnerships and promoting awareness, compassion and support for those affected by dementia.

“The County’s Office on Aging is committed to empowering Maui’s residents, especially those whose lives are touched by Alzheimer’s and other dementias,” Dagdag-Andaya said. “By working together and sharing credible, up-to-date information, we can help families face these challenges with hope and confidence.”

For information about either event or to request an accommodation, contact the County Office on Aging at (808) 270-7774 at least 48 hours in advance.

A division of the County Department of Human Concerns, the Office on Aging works to promote and protect the well-being of older adults in Maui County. For general information on the Office on Aging, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/aging.   Press Releases   Posted on October 09, 2025 | Last Updated on October 09, 2025      
*   ### County Board of Ethics meeting Oct. 8 canceled due to technical issues

The County of Maui Board of Ethics meeting scheduled for 12:30 p.m. Oct. 8, 2025, has been canceled because of technical issues with the distribution of the meeting agenda.

Board of Ethics Executive Director Legal Counsel Lauren Akitake said automated email notifications were not sent when the meeting agenda was posted as required by the state Sunshine Law.

“Board of Ethics staff is working with our agenda distribution vendor to prevent future technical issues,” Akitake said. “We appreciate the public’s patience.”

The next scheduled Board of Ethics meeting is Oct. 22, 2025. The agenda for the meeting will be posted pursuant to the Sunshine Law. To view meeting agendas, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/170/Board-of-Ethics.

For more information, contact the Board of Ethics staff at [email protected] or (808) 270-8078.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on October 07, 2025      
*    ### Maui County Fair celebrates community spirit, creativity with contests; committee thanked

The 98th Maui County Fair proudly celebrated the heart and talent of the local community with a variety of beloved contests, showcasing everything from healthy keiki to agricultural excellence — and even a digital competition.

“These contests are more than ribbons and trophies -- they represent Maui Nui’s unique blend of culture, creativity and community pride, from our keiki to our kūpuna,” Mayor Richard Bissen said. “With the close of the historic 98th Maui County Fair, we at the County of Maui extend a heartfelt mahalo to all participants, judges, volunteers and sponsors who made this local tradition possible.”

County of Maui extended mahalo to 2025 Maui County Fair Director Daryl Fujiwara of Festivals of Aloha, along with the rest of the 2025 Maui County Fair committee, comprising Jasmine Ryan, finance manager; Jaydon Isobe, logistics; Kanani Dutro & Shane Dutro, project managers; Aaron Souza & Amy Kahula, security; Tambara Garrick, food vendors; Matthew Erickson, P&S vendors; Raysha Mamala, transport and travel; Alboy Kuehu and Ikaika Blackburn, entertainment; Kaiani Nae‘ole, social media; Gabrielle Berce, livestock; Jaime Cardoza, parade; Toni Rojas, Special Fair Day; Trisha Jardine, parking; and Tara Sabado, ADA.

The Maui County Fair drew more than 115,000 fairgoers to the War Memorial Stadium Complex in Wailuku over four days.

This year's fair featured a diverse lineup of competitions including the popular Baby of the Year, Orchid Show, Livestock and Poultry, Student Art, Fiber Arts, E-Sports and Student Horticulture.

More than 175 keiki entered and 50 were preselected to debut on the fairgrounds’ main entertainment stage for the Maui County Baby of the Year contest, previously known as the Healthy Baby Contest. Exhibits for Student Art, Student Horticulture, Fiber Arts and Orchid shows were on display at Queen Ka‘ahumanu Center. The Livestock and Poultry competition was held in a fairgrounds tent near War Memorial Stadium. The E-Sports competition: Mario Kart World Tournament was in Baldwin High School Gym.

Results for Baby of the Year, Orchid Show, Livestock, Student Art, Fiber Arts, E-Sports and Student Horticulture competitions are as follows (Names and event details were provided by Fair organizers to the County of Maui, and while every effort was made by staff and volunteers to ensure accuracy, some information may contain inconsistencies.):

**BABY OF THE YEAR**

• First Place: Kililau Rodrigues Parents: Lindsay and Kely Rodrigues Prize package that includes: Four roundtrip tickets on Hawaiian Airlines or Alaska Airlines to

destinations in Hawai‘i or the U.S. Mainland; a two-night stay at The Ritz-Carlton Maui, Kapalua; passes to the Maui Ocean Center; Maui Oil Car Wash gift certificate; gift card from Makena Golf & Club; swag bag and pineapple from Maui Gold Pineapple and The Pineapple Store.

• Second Place: Hope Akiko Fukushima Parents: Clinton and Serena Fukushima Prize package that includes: Olakino for two, Wailea Beach Resort; Maui Ocean Center passes; Maui Oil Car Wash gift certificate; Makena Golf & Club gift card; swag bag and pineapple from Maui Gold Pineapple and The Pineapple Store; one-month supply of diapers from Aloha Diaper Bank.

• Third Place: Maylee Maxwell Parents: Charles Maxwell and Mindy Montalvo Prize package that includes: Dinner for two from Cane and Canoe; Maui Ocean Center passes; Maui Oil Car Wash gift certificate; Makena Golf & Club gift card; swag bag and pineapple from Maui Gold Pineapple and The Pineapple Store.

Contest details

Presented by: Healthy Mothers Healthy Babies Coalition of Hawai‘i and Aloha Diaper Bank

Babies were divided into three age groups: 0–12 months; 12–24 months; or 24–36 months.

Contestants were judged in the following categories: Health and Development; Personality and Interaction; Appearance and Presentation; and Family Involvement.

Panel of judges

• Jordan Soon

• Kalani Ahpuck

• Cynthia Damo

• Dr. Casandra Simonson

• Lauren Akitake

• Samantha Kramer

• Alyssa Nava-Vergara

• Cherry Respicio Urias

• Leslie Viloria Garo

• Hawaiʻi U.S. Rep. Jill Tokuda

Special mahalo: Maui County Council Member Yuki Lei Sugimura

**ORCHID SHOW**

Judging by: Maui Orchid Society

Best in Show Plant

Plant: Cattleya Portia Owner: Rose Payba

Reserve Champion

Plant: Vanda Deep Blue Seas 'Valley Isle' AM/AOS Owner: Exotic Orchids of Maui

American Orchid Society Merit Awards

• Rlc. Spotted Magic — Martha Suzuki

• C. (Lavender Ice x Caudebac) 'Pink Panther' — Exotic Orchids of Maui

• Rlc. Maui Dots — Anne Miller

• Den. Blue Seas — Exotic Orchids of Maui

Flower Category / Ribbon Awards

Cattleya – Clusters Bowringiana Species – Lavender/Hybrids

1. C. Portia — Rose Payba

2. C. bowringiana 'Wolfe' — Tropical Orchid Farm

3. C. bowringiana 'Wolfe' — Tropical Orchid Farm

4. C. bowringiana 'One in a million' — Tropical Orchid Farm

Cattleya – Clusters Small and Encyclia-Splash/Yellow/Spots/Enc Intergeneric

1. Brassavola nodosa — Rosie Tavares

2. Evy. Mini Spotted Elf 'Pauwela' — Exotic Orchids of Maui

3. Ctna. Why Not 'Makena Ke akua' HCC/AOS — Exotic Orchids of Maui

4. Prosthechea ionocentra — Maryetta Sciuto

Dendrobium Phalaenopsis

1. Den. Pop Eye — Andrew Okada

2. Den. Serendipity 'Mothers Joy' — April Sakahara

3. Den. Enobi Splash — Rosy Tavares

4. Den. King Dragon (green & white) — Steffen Yamada

Dendrobium – Antelope Type

1. Den. Blue Seas — Exotic Orchids of Maui

2. Den. Enchantment Lea — April Sakahara

3. Den. Enchantment Lea — Martha Suzuki

Paphiopedilum & Phragmipedium

1. Paph. Vanguard (Paph. glaucophyllum × rothschildianum) — Andrew Okada

2. Paph. Skelton — Andrew Okada

3. Paph. Charlesworthii — Andrew Okada

4. Phrag. Apple Pie — Andrew Okada

Vandaceous – Blue & Red

1. V. Deep Blue Seas 'Valley Isle' AM/AOS — Exotic Orchids of Maui

2. V. Jungle Lord 'Leopard' — Efren Delos Reyes

3. V. (Taveesuksa × Lena Kamoiphan) — Rose Payba

Vandaceous – All Others

1. V. lamellata — Exotic Orchids of Maui

2. V. tessellata semi alba — Exotic Orchids of Maui

3. V. Arjuna × V. Sandra Gail Hatos — Exotic Orchids of Maui

4. Prra. Bangkok Sunset 'Honey Bee' AM/AOS — Alene Farner

Cattleya - Art Shade, Orange, Yellow, Green

1. Rlc. Waianae Starburst ‘Volcano Queen’ – Steffen Yamada

2. Blc. Hippelean ‘Maui’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

3. Blc. Maui Chameleon ‘Bright Star’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

4. Rly. Wow ‘Exotic Accent’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

Cattleya - Standard - Yellow, Green, Semi Alba

1. Rlc. Golden Emperor ‘Valley Isle’ AM/AOS – Exotic Orchids of Maui

2. C. labiata ‘Princess Rubra’ ‘Shearer’s Forest’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

3. Blc. Bill Teoh ‘Eternal Dream’ AM/AOS – Exotic Orchids of Maui

4. C. labiata var coerulea – Tropical Orchid Farm

Spotted Cluster - Large

1. C. (Lavender Ice x caudebec) ‘Pink Panther’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

2. Hc. Spotlite – Anne Miller

3. Hc. Spotlite – Marita Sesula

4. Hc. Spotlite – Exotic Orchids of Maui

5. C. (Lavender Ice x caudebec) ‘Pink Panther’ – Exotic Orchids of Maui

Dendrobium - New Guinea

1. Den. speciosum – Andrew Okada

2. Den. alexandrae ‘Prolific’ – Andrew Okada

3. Den. andreanum – Jeff Parker

Dendrobium Nigrohirsute

1. Den. formosale ‘Yukiko’ AM/AOS – Andrew Okada

2. Den. Roongkamol Vejayan ‘Exotic’ – Andrew Okada

Miltonia - Species and Hybrids

1. Miltonia Anne Warne – Tropical Orchid Farm

2. Miltoniopsis vexillaria ‘Panama’ – Tropical Orchid Farm

3. Miltonia Belle Glade ‘Everglades Waterfall’ – Alene Farner

4. Miltonia clowesii – Anne Farner

Oncidium - Species and Hybrids, Dendrochilum

1. Dendrochilum magnum – Andrew Okada

2. Oncidium Lemon Heart – Rose Payba

Habenaria and Spathoglottis

1. Spathoglottis plicata ‘Cabaret’ – Beka Merrifield

2. Habenaria dentata – Andrew Okada

3. Habenaria rhodocheila ‘Nora’ – Andrew Okada

4. Habenaria rhodocheila ‘Nora’ – Andrew Okada

Species - all

1. Dendrochilum magnum – Andrew Okada

2. V. lamellata – Exotic Orchids of Maui

3. C. aurantiaca – Tropical Orchid Farm

4. Oncidium leucochilum inflexus – Maryetta Sciuto

5. Stan. graveolens ‘Rainbow Mist’ – Maryetta Sciuto

Displays

1. Small Display – Maryetta Sciuto

2. Small Display – Maryetta Sciuto

3. Small Display – Martha Sesula

Small-flower size

1. Sigmatostylix radicans – Andrew Okada

2. Epi. polyanthum – Andrew Okada

3. Den. Bracteosum x tanii – Maryetta Sciuto

4. Platystele reflexa – Maryetta Sciuto

**LIVESTOCK COMPETITION**

• Youth Miniature Rabbit: Alohilani of 96732 Bunnies, New Zealand-Holland Lop Mix

• Open Miniature Rabbit: Jerrilyn De Cambra, Netherland Dwarf

• Youth Fancy Rabbit: Aubrie Manlansing, Checkered Black

• Adult Fancy Rabbit: Ronald Morreira, New Zealand White

• Youth Commercial Rabbit: Wyatt Carvalho, Champagne d’ Argenté

• Open Commercial Rabbit: Darrell De Cambra, New Zealand Red

• Best in Show Rabbit: Cianne De Cambra & her rabbit “Oreo”

• Youth Fancy Pigeon: Talon Pimentel, Birmingham Roller

• Open: Fancy Pigeon: Honi Berce, West of England Tumbler

• Youth Homing Pigeon a) Maecyn Mendoza

• Youth Homing Pigeon b) Dylan Martins

• Best in Show Pigeon a) Bryson Pimentel, Blue Bar Chex

• Best in Show Pigeon b) Akela Martins

• Youth Duck: Noelle Moniz, Call

• Open Duck: Akamai Animals, Call

• Best in Show Duck: Akamai Animals, Cayuga

• Pheasant: Kehau Andrade, Silver Tail Pair

• Turkey: Akela & Dylan Martins, Royal Palm

• Youth Commercial Rooster: Nathan Mawae, Easter Egger

• Open Commercial Rooster: Francisco Gonzalez, Black Australorp

• Youth Commercial Hen: Teia-Ann Purdy of Shirota-Purdy Ranch, Plymouth Rock

• Open Commercial Hen: Camilla’s Coop, Silver Laced Wyandotte

• Youth Fancy Rooster: Daxtyn Asami-Shirota of Shirota-Purdy Ranch, Silkie

• Open Fancy Rooster: Akamai Animals, Ayam Cemani

• Open Fancy Hen: Camilla’s Coop, Silkie

• Best in Show (Commercial/Fancy): Nathan Mawae, Easter Egger

• Youth Bantam Rooster: Nathan Mawae, Serama

• Open Bantam Rooster: Jeric Bautista, Table Top

• Youth Bantam Hen: Carter Sato, Splash Old English Game Bantam

• Open Bantam Hen: B&B Bantams, Old English Game Bantam

• Youth Best in Show Bantam: Olivia Mawae, Serama

• Open Best in Show Bantam: B&B Bantams, Old English Game Bantam

• Open Game Bird Hen: Braezlee Kahalekai, Kelso Pumpkin

• Best in Show Game Bird Hen: Tru Fam Game Farm

• Open Game Bird Stag: Red Eye Game Farm, Red Eye Sweater

• Best in Show Game Bird Stag: Stassi & Beauden Mahelona, Sardinha Golden

• Open Game Bird Cock: Sticky P Game Farm, Edow

• Best in Show Game Bird Cock: Shaelee Iiams, Black

• Grand Prize: Jeric Bautista, Sweater Albany

• 1st Place Goat: Taylor Bellhouse, Nigerian Dwarf

• Best in Show Goat: Kaua’ula Farm, Nubian

• 1st Place Pig: Pasture Pork Hawai’i, Hereford Duroc Landrace

• Best In Show Pig: Maui Kunekune Pigs, Kunekune

• 1st Place Steer: Joey Cardoza, Simmental

• 1st Place Bull: Joey Cardoza, Angus

• People’s Choice: Breanna Doke, Valais Blacknose Sheep

• Best in Show: Kaipo Kekiwi, Gray Appendix Horse

• Livestock Exhibit Lifetime Achievement Award: Joey Cardoza

• Livestock Exhibit Outstanding Partner Recognition Award: Harry Cambra

• Livestock Exhibit Innovation Recognition Award: Alex Kaea-Pimentel

**FIBER ARTS**

• Best in Show: Shawna Campbell – Crochet

• Best in Show: Marion Johnson – Crochet

• Best in Show: Shawna Johnson - Needlework

• Best in Show: Bernie Duarte Adair - Sewing

• Best in Show: Bernie Duarte Adair - Quilts

• Best in Show: Kaumakani Quipotla - Weaving

• Best in Show: Samantha Vincent - Yarn

• Best in Show: Anna Ribucan - Quilts

• Best in Show: Amy Fulmer - Knit

• Grand Prize: Anna Ribucan - Quilts

• People's Choice Award: Bianca Datiles

**STUDENT ART**

Grades K–2

• Best in Show: Kailea Fujii (Puʻu Kukui, Kindergarten)

• 1st Place: Karley Rasos (St. Anthony, Grade 1)

• 2nd Place: Tyla Agtaguem (Puʻu Kukui, Kindergarten)

• 3rd Place: Puʻuwai Pihana (Pōmaika‘i, Grade 2)

• Honorable Mention: Lani DaProza (Maui Preparatory, Kindergarten)

Grades 3–5

• Best in Show: Amadea Roos (Pukalani, Grade 5)

• 1st Place: Violet Kapua‘āla (Pōmaika‘i, Grade 4)

• 2nd Place: Karisa Rasos (St. Anthony, Grade 3)

• 3rd Place: Sedona-Kai Moseley (Pūnana Leo o Pi‘ilani, Grade 3)

• Honorable Mentions: Jupiter Sawalmeh (Kula, Grade 3) and Maliyah Deguzman (Pukalani, Grade 5)

Grades 6–8

• Best in Show: Erica Barut (Maui Waena, Grade 8)

• 1st Place: Aliyah Varde (Kamehameha Maui, Grade 6)

• 2nd Place: Isabella Song (Kamehameha Maui, Grade 7)

• 3rd Place: Mia Steinger (Haleakalā Waldorf, Grade 6)

• Honorable Mention: Severine Panaligan (Maui Waena, Grade 6)

Grades 9–10

• Best in Show: Isaiah Monteiro (Kīhei, Grade 10)

• 1st Place: Levi Boyle (Haleakalā Waldorf, Grade 10)

• 2nd Place: Ava Rakestraw (Kīhei Charter, Grade 9)

• 3rd Place: Eon Meyers (Kīhei Charter, Grade 9)

• Honorable Mention: Maggie R. Stanley (King Kekaulike, Grade 9)

Grades 11–12

• Best in Show: Kaylee Yagi (Maui High, Grade 12)

• 1st Place: Brayden Martin (Maui High, Grade 12)

• 2nd Place: Myka Gurule-Arensdorf (Kīhei Charter, Grade 12)

• 3rd Place: Tobie Silva (Maui High, Grade 12)

• Honorable Mention: Isabella Kusch (Kīhei, Grade 11)

**E-SPORTS**

Elementary Division

1st Place - Sullivan Givnish

2nd Place - Zayden Cabalo

3rd Place - Phin Halfen

4th Place - Keaton Givnish

Intermediate Division

1st Place - Zion James Della

2nd Place - Temoc Fuentes

3rd Place - Vaitea Hosino

4th Place - Jayden Wago

High School Division

1st Place - Trevor Reed

2nd Place - Jai Kuraoka

3rd Place - Gideon Kaneshiro

Open Division

1st Place - Gabriel Givnish

2nd Place - Reese Young

3rd Place - Isaiah Anakalea

4th Place - Vaitea Hosino

**STUDENT HORTICULTURE**

Fruit

1. Starfruit: Mahealani Kumau, Grade 2 Haʻikū Elementary

2. Tangerine: Lucas Dodson, Kindergarten Emmanuel Lutheran School

3. Papaya: Matthan Rabanal, Grade 3 Haʻikū Elementary

Honorable Mention - Pomelo: Brillon Fukagawa, Grade 2 Kahului Elementary

Vegetable

“Pāʻia Twilight” chili pepper: Santi Hetrick, Grade 11 homeschool

Tuber/Root

1. Kalo lehua: Benjamin Komine, Grade 10 Kamehameha Schools

2. Kalo lehua: Kingston Komine, Grade 10 Kamehameha Schools

3. Carrots: Henry Dodson, Pre-Kindergarten Emmanuel Lutheran School

Flower/Herb

1. Hibiscus: Mahealani Kamau, Grade 2 Haʻikū Elementary

2. Lemongrass: Mahealani Kumau, Grade 2 Haʻikū Elementary

Best in Show - Kalo lehua: Benjamin Komine, Grade 10 Kamehameha Schools

For more information on the Maui County Fair, visit https://themauifair.com.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on October 07, 2025 | Last Updated on October 07, 2025      
*   ### Online registration to be held Nov. 1 to 15 for PALS Winter Program

_Session runs from Dec. 23 to Jan. 2_

Online registration for the Play and Learning Sessions (PALS) Winter 2025 session will be open from Nov. 1 to 15, 2025, according to the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation.

The PALS winter session runs from Dec. 23, 2025, to Jan. 2, 2026, and is open to children ages 5 to 12.

PALS provides quality recreational activities designed to support a child’s physical, social, cultural and educational needs in a fun, safe and nurturing environment.

Registration is not on a first-come, first-served basis. PALS sites will be filled based upon first-, second- and third-choice selections identified in registration. Applicants not receiving a confirmed site spot through the registration process will be placed on a waitlist for their first-choice selection.

Visit the PALS website at https://www.mauicounty.gov/PALS and sign up for PALS program alerts or, for more information, call the Parks Department PALS office at (808) 270-7404.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on October 07, 2025      
*    ### After long break, historic 98th Maui County Fair draws more than 100,000 to Wailuku

After six years without the fair, the community came together to celebrate the historic return of the Maui County Fair in Wailuku from Oct. 2-5, 2025.

More than 115,000 fairgoers attended the festival over four days to enjoy E.K. Fernandez rides, games, booths, contests, food and entertainment. Attendance breakdown from fair organizers is: day one - 28,588; day two - 26,538; day three - 27,997; day four - 33,491 (total - 116,614).

Mayor Richard Bissen, who spearheaded the fair’s revival, praised the historic community event.

“Sponsored by the County of Maui and brought to life by Festivals of Aloha, key sponsors and countless community partners, this year’s fair wasn’t just an event — it was a homecoming,” Mayor Bissen said. “Mahalo to the many hands that made the 98th Maui County Fair and Parade possible, along with the tens of thousands of residents who made new memories together. The well-being of our people remains one of my top priorities, and we look forward to a hana hou for the fair in 2026.”

Under clear skies and with hearts full, residents gathered to reconnect through shared traditions, delicious food, thrilling rides and unforgettable memories.

“This year’s fair was about more than fun — it was about healing and remembering who we are,” said 2025 fair organizer Daryl Fujiwara, Festivals of Aloha executive director. “We came together as one ‘ohana to celebrate what makes Maui Nui special.”

A taste of Maui

With more than 40 nonprofit food booths lining the fairgrounds, flavors ranged from local classics like chow fun, garlic noodles with teriyaki chicken and nachos to sweet favorites like waffle cake, slushy POG, kūlolo sundae and shave ice. Fair staples such as cotton candy and candied apple could also be found.

Scores of local vendors brought clothing, accessories, fishing supplies, food goods and other products and services. Fairgoers also surveyed the array of contests, including Baby of the Year, Orchids, Student Art, Fiber Art, Livestock and E-Sports.

Entertainment for all ages

Entertainment stages lit up with award-winning musicians and performers, live bands and dancers. Highlights included Grammy Award-winning Kalani Peʻa, Hālau Ke‘alaokamaile with Nā Kumu Hula Keali‘i Reichel, Hālau o ka Hanu Lehua with Kumu Hula Kamaka Kukona, ‘Āinaty, Jordan Soon, Da Braddahs, Kaʻikena Scanlan, Hālau Nā Lei Kaumaka O Uka with Kumu Hula Nāpua Silva, Henohea Kāne, Nā Leo Pilimehana and Nuff Sedd.

Thanks to the return of E.K. Fernandez rides, the fairgrounds buzzed with excitement. Fairgoers experienced a variety of attractions including the new Wacky Worm mini coaster, along with longtime favorites, such as Pharaoh’s Fury, Super Sizzler and Lolli Swings. Dozens of games lined the fair, with prizes for winners.

Former Mayor Michael Victorino, who worked tirelessly on the Maui County Fair over the years, served as Grand Marshal of the 98th Maui County Fair Parade, which kicked off the festivities Thursday. The parade down Kaʻahumanu Avenue on opening day showcased scores of colorful floats, school bands and cultural displays. The number of parade entrants was approximately 3,500. For a full video of the parade, visit the County of Maui Facebook page.

A County of Maui-driven comeback

Mayor Richard Bissen spearheaded the return of the Maui County Fair at War Memorial Stadium Complex, which did not continue after 2019 due to pandemic, financial and other challenges. Earlier this year, Mayor Bissen proposed and Maui County Council approved the appropriation of $1.5 million from the General Fund to revive this year’s fair through contractor Festivals of Aloha. Hundreds of volunteers, local businesses and nonprofits came together to ensure the event’s success. For a list of sponsors, visit themauifair.com.

For more information on the fair, visit https://www.themauifair.com/.   Press Releases   Posted on October 06, 2025      
*   
 

### Historic return of Maui County Fair draws 30,000 fair entrants on opening night

The historic return of the Maui County Fair came alive Thursday with a colorful, vibrant parade and strong fair attendance on opening night.

The 98th Maui County Fair continues today through Sunday at the War Memorial Stadium Complex.

Details on the opening night include the following:

    *   Mayor Richard Bissen spearheaded the revival of the fair after six years without it. He said the fair is not just an event, it is a chance to heal, to connect with one another and to celebrate a beloved tradition. “Driving down Kaʻahumanu Avenue and seeing thousands of people turn out for the parade and the long-awaited return of a 98-year tradition made it all worth it,” Mayor Bissen said. “It was all aloha, watching the joy and excitement on people’s faces. This celebration is exactly what our community needs right now — a chance to come together, make new memories and enjoy being with one another.”
    *   Fair organizer Daryl Fujiwara, Festivals of Aloha executive director, said: “We did it, Maui County! The fair is back, and it was incredible to see our community gather again to enjoy the music, shopping, rides, games and, of course, the ʻono food. This is what makes our fair so special, and I’m grateful to everyone who helped bring it to life.”
    *   Opening-day fair attendance was approximately 30,000 people, according to fair organizers.
    *   More than 3,000 participated in the Maui County Fair Parade, led by Grand Marshal and former Mayor Michael Victorino.
    *   A large group entering the fair after the parade caused a slowdown in Kanaloa Avenue fair entry. Participants are reminded that there are three points of entry to the fairgrounds: Kanaloa Avenue, War Memorial stadium and Baldwin High School.
    *   There have been reports of red ants, which occur in most outdoor areas of Maui County, often intensifying during drought seasons. As a precaution, the grounds were treated before the event, and crews resumed treatments early this morning.
    *   For Maui County Fair paid and free parking sites; drop-off, pickup and rideshare locations; entry prices; entertainment; food; E.K. Fernandez rides; activities; contests; and hours, visit https://www.themauifair.com/parking.html.

 Press Releases 

 Posted on October 03, 2025 

*   ### Mayor Richard Bissen temporarily out of state Oct. 3-9, 2025

Mayor Richard Bissen will travel out of the state from the late morning of Friday, Oct. 3, 2025, until the evening of Thursday, Oct. 9, 2025.

During his absence, County of Maui Managing Director Josiah Nishita will serve as acting mayor in accordance with the County Charter.

For general information on the County of Maui Office of the Mayor, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/65/Office-of-the-Mayor.   Press Releases   Posted on October 03, 2025      
*   ### Keopuolani Regional Park recreational use closed for 98th Maui County Fair activities

Recreational use at Keōpūolani Regional Park closed at noon today, Oct. 2, 2025, and will close again at noon on Friday, Oct. 3, to accommodate 98th Maui County Fair activities, according to the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation.

The park will remain closed all day Saturday, Oct. 4, and Sunday, Oct.5. Regular hours will resume on Monday, Oct. 6.

Parking at Keōpūolani Regional Park for the Maui County Fair is $5, according to fair organizers. Starting today, the park is one-way – entering via Kanaloa Avenue and exiting from Wahinepio Avenue. There is a free shuttle loop in the park.

For other Maui County Fair paid and free parking sites, along with drop-off, pickup and rideshare locations, visit https://www.themauifair.com/parking.html.

For general Department of Parks and Recreation information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/parks   Press Releases   Posted on October 02, 2025      
*   ### Resident input sought to update Central Maui Community Plan

County of Maui Department of Planning is inviting Central Maui residents to participate in an important online workshop to help update the Central Maui Community Plan, which guides future development and preservation of the area. The interactive platform is live now through Oct. 18, 2025, at https://centralmaui.wearemaui.org/.

Click the link titled “NEW | Online Community Design Workshop: Map Activity” to participate and pinpoint important locations, see feedback from other community members and add individual ideas. No account is needed to participate.

Central Maui residents in the online workshop are asked to consider the following:

• What are areas of stability in Central Maui?

• Are there places that should be protected or restored?

• Where do we need changes or improvements?

• Are there locations for new development or repurposing?

Residents are asked to share input on neighborhoods, commuting, shopping, workplaces and recreational areas and other needs and visions to help shape a well-rounded community plan.

For more information, visit https://centralmaui.wearemaui.org   Press Releases   Posted on October 01, 2025      
*   ### County Corner to feature about 15 County booths at 98th Maui County Fair

During the 98th Maui County Fair, approximately 15 County of Maui departments will offer surveys, community outreach and education, a keiki drawing station, giveaways and other activities in the County Corner tents fronting Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool at War Memorial Stadium Complex.

Community members and visitors are welcomed to visit the following departments and agencies:

• Maui Police Department

• Department of Fire and Public Safety

• Maui Emergency Management Agency

• Office of Recovery

• Department of Water Supply

• Department of Planning

• Department of Public Works

• Department of Transportation

• Boards and Commissions

• Department of Environmental Management

• East Maui Water Authority

• Department of Finance

• Department of Housing

• Department of Human Concerns

Supported by the County of Maui, the Maui County Fair is returning after six years and will feature E.K. Fernandez rides, contests, food booths and other activities from Oct. 2-5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex.

For information, visit https://www.themauifair.com.   Press Releases   Posted on October 01, 2025      
*   ### County Planning Department issues request for proposals to evaluate Maui island’s SMA Boundary

The County of Maui Planning Department has issued a Request for Proposals (RFP) for professional services to assess and provide recommendations on a potential update to the Maui Island Special Management Area (SMA) Boundary.

The SMA Boundary, first adopted in 1975, establishes the larger area of Maui subject to special management review to protect coastal resources. While the SMA shoreline boundary was most recently updated on Aug. 25, 2024, to reflect erosion hazard rates, the broader SMA Boundary has not been comprehensively reevaluated in decades.

“With last year’s shoreline boundary update now in place, we believe it is timely to analyze whether adjustments to the overall SMA Boundary are warranted,” said Planning Director Kate Blystone. “The shoreline boundary is a narrower, site-specific line, while the SMA Boundary covers a much larger area. This evaluation will help ensure that Maui’s coastal management policies remain current and responsive to changing shoreline conditions.”

The project will include technical analysis and public engagement to determine whether a revised SMA Boundary would more precisely safeguard Maui’s coastal environment, cultural resources and community resilience.

For more information to bid on the professional services RFP, visit the County of Maui Department of Finance Purchasing Division website at https://tinyurl.com/y27tfjfu.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 30, 2025      
*    ### County Director of Human Concerns Lori Tsuhako retiring Dec. 31

_Applicants sought to fill leadership position_

County of Maui Director of Human Concerns Lori Tsuhako, who has served as a director under three different administrations, announced she is retiring at the end of the year.

“It’s been an honor to serve the community for so many years in a place where I was born and raised,” Tsuhako said. “Retirement will allow me to focus on other activities like traveling and spending more time with my family and friends.”

Tsuhako was appointed by Mayor Richard Bissen and confirmed by the Maui County Council to be director of the Department of Human Concerns, which launched July 1, 2024. The department has programs focusing on early childhood, homelessness, immigrant services and seniors, as well as a volunteer center and a grants management division. The department was created when Maui County residents voted to pass a ballot measure in November 2022 that called for bifurcating the Department of Housing and Human Concerns.

Before then, Tsuhako had served as the director of the County Department of Housing and Human Concerns under three different administrations.

“Director Tsuhako’s years of service have benefitted many across our community,” Mayor Bissen said. “She approaches her work with professionalism and commitment, helping to support programs for housing, homelessness, our keiki and kūpuna. We mahalo her for her leadership and wish her well in this next chapter of life.”

Tsuhako has 40 years of experience as a professional social worker in the fields of child welfare, criminal justice, substance abuse education and prevention, and homelessness. She was previously an administrator of the State of Hawaiʻi’s Homeless Programs Office. Tsuhako also is a licensed social worker in the State of Hawaiʻi and received certification from the National Academy of Certified Social Workers. She earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees in social work from the University of Hawai’i at Mānoa.

Applications will be accepted starting Wednesday, Oct. 1, 2025, to fill the County Director of Human Concerns position, which will be vacant after Tsuhako’s retirement takes effect Dec. 31, 2025.

The director is appointed by the mayor with the approval of the County Council. The Director of Human Concerns must have a minimum of five years of experience in an administrative capacity in public service, private business or both and be a citizen of the United States.

Top of Form

Interested applicants who meet the required minimum qualifications should submit a cover letter, resume, three reference letters and other supporting materials or documentation by email only to[email protected].

In the cover letter, applicants should briefly describe how their education, skills and experience relate to the position and meet the minimum qualification requirements.

Applicants have until the end of day Oct. 21, 2025,to submit the required materials for consideration.

For questions, contact the Department of Management at[email protected].

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 30, 2025      
*    ### Talking is Teaching awareness campaign launched with posters on County buses

The County of Maui Commission on Children & Youth is collaborating with community partners Hoʻoikaika Partnership and Kākou for Keiki to place posters on County buses to increase public awareness in helping parents and caregivers boost children’s early brain and language development.

The “Talking is Teaching” posters are a way to learn about resources that help parents and caregivers talk, read and sing with children every day. These simple, everyday actions can help prepare keiki for success in school and beyond.

For more information about this national campaign, contact Hoʻoikaika Partnership at (808) 765-7254.

# # #

**County of Maui photo****-**Commission on Children & Youth members, community partners and County of Maui staff mark the launch of the Talking is Teaching campaign.   Press Releases   Posted on September 30, 2025      
*   ### Maui County Fair announces shuttle service, parking, traffic updates

To ensure safety and efficiency for 98th Maui County Fair participants and area motorists, the County of Maui has coordinated free shuttle services, free and paid parking areas, rideshare sites and traffic impacts for the event from Oct. 2-5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex in Wailuku.

The Maui Bus will have modified routes in the area during the parade and the fair, according to the County Department of Transportation. For updated routes, visit www.mauibus.org or the Maui Bus app.

The County’s Maui Emergency Management Agency encourages the community to download the Genasys Protect app from Google Play or Apple Store to receive evacuation information in the event of an emergency. Sign up for MEMA Alerts by texting Mauialerts to 38276 for real-time emergency notifications. Visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/MEMA for information.

FOR MOTORISTS

Area traffic impacts:

• Ka‘ahumanu Avenue from Liholiho Street to Kahului Beach Road will be closed during parade hours from 4 to 6:30 p.m. Thursday, Oct. 2, 2025.

• Halia Nakoa Street and parking stalls along Kanaloa Avenue will be closed from 8 a.m. Sept. 29 to 8 a.m. Oct. 8 due to fair setup and breakdown.

• Kanaloa Avenue will have traffic restrictions from 8 a.m. Oct. 2 to 8 a.m. Oct. 5. Traffic flow will be divided. Crossing Kanaloa Avenue will be prohibited. Access to parking areas will be limited to the side of the street that matches your direction of travel.

FOR FAIRGOERS

Free parking:

• Wailuku Garage

• Queen Ka‘ahumanu Center

Free shuttle service during fair days:

• One shuttle every 30 minutes from 6 p.m. to close; two shuttles every 15 minutes during peak hours.

• Pickup locations: Queen Ka‘ahumanu Center; Keōpūolani Park; North Market Street at the Historic Iao Theater

• Drop-off location: Kanaloa Avenue, Field 2 (fairgrounds)

Paid parking ($5 per vehicle):

• Baldwin High School

• Boys & Girls Club

• War Memorial Stadium

• Keōpūolani Park

• J.W. Cameron Center

• Kaiser Wailuku Medical Office

‘Ohana and rideshare drop-offs:

• Active loading and uploading for fair guests near Baseball Field 3 along Kanaloa Avenue.

Supported by the County of Maui, the Maui County Fair is returning after six years and will feature E.K. Fernandez rides, contests, food booths and other activities from Oct. 2-5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex.

For information, visit www.themauifair.com.   Press Releases   Posted on September 29, 2025 | Last Updated on September 29, 2025      
*    ### New Lana'i Farmers Market on first Saturday of month will offer local food, fish, plants, more

The long-anticipated Lānaʻi Farmers Market – a collaboration among County of Maui and nonprofit partners – will kick off this Saturday from 7 a.m. to noon at Lāna‘i Entry Park (next to the fire station) and continue every first Saturday of the month.

The new farmers market will offer local produce, fish, eggs, flowers and plant seedlings, among other items, and provide Lāna‘i residents with locally grown food and business opportunities for island producers.

The market is a collaborative effort among County of Maui Department of Agriculture, Maui County Council Member Gabe Johnson, County Department of Parks and Recreation and the nonprofit Hawai‘i Farmers Union (HFU) Lāna‘i Chapter, which will manage the market.

County Department of Agriculture Director Kali Arce said the Lāna‘i Farmers Market will complement the existing Saturday market at Dole Park by offering additional options for Lāna‘i produce and products.

“The community will be able to purchase Lāna‘i-grown produce and Lāna‘i-made hot foods that will be made with at least 50% Lāna‘i-grown ingredients,” Director Arce added. “Also, the market will improve the local economy by supporting Lāna‘i agriculture producers. Importantly, agriculture lands are being put into food production and can incentivize others to grow more food. Any amount of food locally grown or harvested -- be it produce, eggs, meat, or fish -- will reduce the amount of food needed to be imported.”

Council Member Johnson, whose residency seat covers Lāna‘i, praised the first-ever farmers market on County park land.

“Iʻm so happy to have the first-ever farmers market on a County park happen on Lāna‘I,” he said. “With the costs of food rising with inflation it's important that our communities gain access to healthy locally produced food. It's a win for our farmers. It's a win for our families.”

“Markets like this create space for farmers, ranchers and fishers to connect directly with neighbors, and that keeps more of our food grown, caught and sold here at home,” said Kirsten Ham, HFU Chief Operating Officer. “Covering vendor fees for the first six months is one way HFU is glad to support, and we’re excited to see how this market strengthens food security and opportunity on Lāna‘i.”

As the market grows, it will expand its food access programs, including the Maui County-supported Lāna‘i Food Stimulus Program, the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), and the statewide DA BUX program, which doubles the spending power of SNAP customers purchasing local produce.

Lāna‘i food producers interested in joining the market are invited to complete the vendor application, which can be found on the County’s Agriculture department page, https://www.mauicounty.gov/agriculture.

For questions, contact [email protected] or call (808) 270-8276.   Press Releases   Posted on September 29, 2025 | Last Updated on September 29, 2025      
*   ### Grant applications sought for the County’s Kihei Clean & Safe Program

Grant applications are now available for Fiscal Year 2026 for the Kīhei Clean & Safe Program, which is designed to support the community with a clean and safe environment, the County of Maui Office of Economic Development (OED) announced. The application deadline is Oct. 3, 2025.

Nonprofit and for-profit organizations may submit their applications using Submittable Inc. software platform on the County OED page https://mauioed.submittable.com/submit.

Detailed guidelines, eligibility criteria and information on required documents can be found in the FY26 Grants Handbook at https://mauioed.submittable.com/submit. Potential applicants are advised to review the handbook thoroughly to ensure a complete and competitive application.

For more information, contact OED, which is a branch of the Office of the Mayor, at (808) 270-6223.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 26, 2025 | Last Updated on September 26, 2025      
*   ### East Maui Water Authority grants available for community and watershed stewardship

The County of Maui Department of the East Maui Water Authority (EMWA) is launching its inaugural grant program and inviting applications from individuals, nonprofits and for-profit businesses for projects that support watershed restoration, education, research and cultural knowledge-sharing in Nāhiku, Keʻanae, Honomanū and Huelo. The grant period will run from Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 2026.

Applications will be accepted Oct. 1 through 5 p.m. Nov. 5, 2025.

To help guide residents through the application process and answer questions, two free EMWA sessions will be held, including an in-person workshop Oct. 1, 2025, from 6 to 7 p.m. at Haʻikū Community Center and an online meeting Oct. 8, 2025, from 4 to 5 p.m. via Microsoft Teams (visit mauicounty.gov/2859/EMWA-Grants-Program for link; no registration needed).

Grants Program guidelines and requirements will be listed on the EMWA grants webpage. Activities eligible for support include, but are not limited to, the following:

• Watershed restoration and stewardship (care of ʻauwai, loʻi kalo, invasive species control and other forms of mālama ʻāina)

• Community education and cultural knowledge-sharing (e.g., documenting, sharing and amplifying ʻike kupuna)

• Data collection and research (streamflow monitoring, rainfall monitoring and related studies)

More information, including grant application forms, can be found on the EMWA webpage by Oct. 1: mauicounty.gov/2859/EMWA-Grants-Program. Forms and information may be requested by calling (808) 793-9785 or emailing [email protected].

Applications submitted by email or by hand delivery must be received by 5 p.m. Nov. 5, 2025. The grant program is unable to accept late applications and extension requests. Contact EMWA staff in advance to schedule an appointment to hand deliver a completed application. Mailed applications must be postmarked by Nov. 5, 2025. Applicants are encouraged to confirm with EMWA staff that their application has been received.

About EMWA

In November 2022, Maui County residents voted to amend the Maui County Charter to establish the Department of the East Maui Water Authority. Guided by the department’s community board, the ‘Aha Wai O Maui Hikina Board, which represents the Nāhiku, Keʻanae, Honomanū and Huelo communities, EMWA launched in November 2024.

The department is tasked with developing watershed management plans and acquiring and managing water systems to ensure efficient and sustainable distribution of local water resources. Its work to steward East Maui water resources centers on environmentally sustainable practices, local expertise and Hawaiian cultural and generational knowledge.

For information, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/emwa.   Press Releases   Posted on September 26, 2025      
*   ### Maui County Fair offers special boat rides, shuttles for Lanai and Molokai residents

With support from the County of Maui, the Maui County Fair is offering special boat rides and shuttle services to help residents of Lāna‘i and Moloka‘i join in this year’s festivities.

The special boat rides and shuttle services can accommodate a limited number of residents and are being offered on a first-come, first-served basis.

“Along with the rides, food and contests, our Maui County Fair is about being together and celebrating the spirit of our community,” said Mayor Richard Bissen. “By providing these special boats and shuttles, we’re ensuring our Lāna‘i and Moloka‘i ‘ohana are connected, included and able to enjoy the fun and fellowship of Maui County’s biggest event together.”

**Lāna‘i residents:**

Residents are responsible for their own transportation from Lānaʻi to the fair.

On Saturday, Oct. 4, and Sunday, Oct. 5, 2025, residents of Lāna‘i will have access to a special return shuttle departing the fairgrounds at 8 p.m. and connecting to a late-night ferry back to Lāna‘i.

**Moloka‘i residents:**

Two round-trip boat rides will be available, with bus service provided between the harbor and fair and back.

On Sunday, Oct. 5, 2025, departures will be available from Kaunakakai Harbor at 5 a.m**.** and 8 a.m**.** Return shuttles from the fairgrounds will leave at 1 p.m. and 3 p.m**.,**respectively.

Molokaʻi and Lānaʻi residents can sign up by going to https://www.themauifair.com/lanaimolokai.

Supported by the County of Maui, the Maui County Fair is returning after six years and will feature E.K. Fernandez rides, contests, food booths and other activities from Oct. 2-5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex.

For more information, visit www.themauifair.com**.**

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 25, 2025      
*   
### Lahaina Community Meeting to be held online Wednesday, Oct. 1

_State to provide King Kamehameha III School update_

The County of Maui’s monthly Lahaina Community Meeting, usually held in-person, will instead be held online at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, Oct. 1, 2025, via Zoom.

Topics to be discussed during the Oct. 1 webinar include:

    *   King Kamehameha III Elementary School update provided by the State of Hawaiʻi.
    *   A status update by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on the transfer of wildfire debris from the Temporary Debris Storage site (TDS) at Olowalu to the Permanent Disposal Site in Central Maui, as well as information on the TDS restoration plan.
    *   Results from the latest TDS environmental monitoring quarterly report.
    *   Updates from the County Office of Recovery, including an update on the Hoʻokumu Hou housing programs funded by Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery.

A question-and-answer session will follow the presentations, with officials from the above-mentioned agencies as well as the County’s Department of Planning and Department of Environmental Management, Hawaiian Electric Co. and 4Leaf.

Registration for the webinar is required; to register, visit www.mauirecovers.org/events. A live broadcast of the webinar also will be shown on Akakū: Maui Community Media, Channel 53.

The decision to move the meeting online was made in consideration of the community’s time during a busy week, which includes the much-anticipated return of the Maui County Fair on Oct. 2-5.

Residents are also encouraged to attend the Lahaina Town Commercial Area Open House, scheduled for 3 to 7 p.m. on Tuesday, Sept. 30, at the Lahaina Cannery Mall. The open house -- a follow-up to the workshops and open houses on commercial area street connectivity and mobility hosted by the Office of Recovery in June -- will give the community the opportunity to view design options for the Lahaina commercial core, talk with the project team and provide feedback. The public is welcome to drop in at any time during the open house.

For more information on the open house, visit https://www.mauirecovers.org/recover/rebuild-lahaina-plan.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on September 25, 2025 

*   ### Temporary closures slated for County park facilities in Kihei, Upcountry and Wailuku

Temporary closures will occur this month into next month at County of Maui park facilities in Kīhei, Upcountry and Wailuku, according to the County of Maui Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR).

The closures include the following:

• War Memorial Complex tennis courts and Coach Soichi Sakamoto Pool in Wailuku will close from Saturday, Sept. 27, to Monday, Oct. 6, 2025, to ensure safety during final setup and operations for the Maui Fair. The facilities are expected to reopen for regular hours on Tuesday, Oct. 7. For more information, contact DPR Permits Division at (808) 270-7389.

• Kīhei Aquatic Center training pool will close for maintenance from Monday, Sept. 29, to Friday, Oct 3, 2025. The 50-meter and keiki pools will remain open during this time. The facility will reopen in its entirety on Saturday, Oct. 4, 2025. For updates on pool hours, call the County pool hotline at (808) 270-8208.

• Hāliʻimaile Park baseball field in Makawao closed today and will remain closed until further notice for assessment and pest control. The field will undergo evaluation and treatment as needed. It will reopen once all treatments and follow-up assessments are completed. For more information, call DPR Recreation and Support Services Division at (808) 270-7383.

• Eddie Tam Memorial Park fields numbers 4, 8 and 9 in Makawao remain closed until further notice for assessment and pest control. The fields continue to undergo evaluation and treatment. They will reopen once all treatments and follow-up assessments are completed. For more information, call DPR Recreation and Support Services Division at (808) 270-7383.   Press Releases   Posted on September 25, 2025      
*    ### Pa'ia-Ha'iku community budget meeting rescheduled to Oct. 16; other meetings slated

A Pāʻia-Haʻikū community budget meeting that was canceled Tuesday due to a brush fire in Pāʻia is rescheduled for Thursday, Oct. 16, 2025, from 5 to 7 p.m. at Pāʻia Community Center.

The meeting is among eight community budget meetings hosted by Mayor Richard Bissen and his administration throughout Maui County for residents to share their priorities and provide input on the budget for Fiscal Year 2027, which begins July 1, 2026.

This week, community budget meetings are scheduled in West Maui today, Sept. 24, 2025, at Lahaina Civic Center Social Hall, and in South Maui on Thursday, Sept. 25, 2025, at Kīhei Community Center. Both meetings are from 5 to 7 p.m.

Written and verbal comments will be accepted at the meetings.

Budget requests also may be submitted by using a Budget Request Form, which is available on the County of Maui website at https://www.mauicounty.gov/budget.

Residents unable to attend the meetings in person can view the meetings on the County of Maui Facebook page. No account is required.

A budget meeting was held Sept. 16 on Lānaʻi. Upcoming meetings include:

East Maui - Hāna

Tuesday, Sept. 30, 2025, 5 to 7 p.m. at Helene Hall Community Center, Hāna

Central Maui

Tuesday, Oct. 14, 2025, 5 to 7 p.m. at Velma McWayne Santos Community Center, Wailuku

Upcountry

Wednesday, Oct. 15, 2025, 5 to 7 p.m. at Mayor Hannibal Tavares Community Center, Pukalani

Pāʻia-Haʻikū

Thursday, Oct. 16, 2025, 5 to 7 p.m. at Pāʻia Community Center

Molokaʻi

Tuesday, Oct. 21, 2025, 5 to 7 p.m. at Mitchell Pauʻole Community Center, Kaunakakai   Press Releases   Posted on September 24, 2025 | Last Updated on September 24, 2025      
*   ### EVACUATIONS LIFTED - HOLOMUA FIRE UPDATE AS OF 6 P.M. 9-23-25

EVACUATION ORDERS LIFTED

Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) lifted all evacuation orders and warnings for the Holomua fire, allowing people to return to zones. However, advisories remain in effect due to smoke impacts. MEMA issued evacuation orders just after 2 p.m. today for multiple areas in Paia via EAS, WEA, Genasys, MEMA Alerts and a siren; Maui Police Department had conducted door-to-door evacuations prior to MEMA’s evacuations. For specific zone locations, visit https://protect.genasys.com/search or download the Genasys Protect app.

EVACUATION SITES

Evacuation sites are in the process of closing. Haiku Community Center has closed.

TRAFFIC ADVISORY AND ROAD CLOSURES

Non-local traffic is asked to avoid Paia.

Closures include:

• Baldwin Avenue grom Paia Gym to Haliimaile Road

• Holomua Road

FIRE UPDATE

MFD estimated the Holomua fire to be 300 acres as of approximately 5:30 p.m. Fire progress has been stopped. Containment estimates are not available. The brush fire of about four acres was first reported near Holomua Road and Baldwin Avenue at 1:30 p.m.

BUDGET MEETING CANCELED

The County Budget meeting slated for tonight in Paia has been canceled due to the fire.

INFO

MEMA is in full activation. Sign up for Genasys Protect and MEMA Alerts at www.mauicounty.gov/MEMA and follow County of Maui and MEMA on Facebook and Instagram.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*   ### HOLOMUA FIRE UPDATE AS OF 4:30 P.M. 9-23-25

EVACUATION SITES OPENED

As of 4:30 p.m. today, American Red Cross had opened evacuation sites at Haliimaile and Pukalani’s Hannibal Tavares community centers. Makawao’s Eddie Tam and Haiku community centers are still being prepped and not yet open. Bring food, water and supplies. Pets may be leashed and in crates.

EVACUATION ORDERS, WARNINGS

Evacuation orders and warnings remain in effect. Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) issued around 2:09 p.m. today, Sept. 23, 2025, evacuation orders and warnings for multiple areas in Paia due to smoke and proximity amid the Holomua fire. Door-to-door evacuations, along with evacuations via EAS, WEA, Genasys, MEMA Alerts and a siren, have occurred. For specific zone locations, visit https://protect.genasys.com/search or download the Genasys Protect app.

TRAFFIC ADVISORY AND ROAD CLOSURE

Non-local traffic is asked to avoid Paia.

Closures include:

• Baldwin Avenue at Makawao Union Church

• Baldwin Avenue at Haliimaile Road

• Hana Highway at Baldwin Avenue

• Hana Highway at Holomua Road

• Paia-bound lane of North Firebreak Road

• Hana Highway Paia-bound lane at Haleakala Highway

BUDGET MEETING CANCELED

The County Budget meeting slated for tonight in Paia has been canceled due to the fire.

RESOURCES

Maui Fire Department (MFD) has two helicopters, a battalion chief, four engines, one tanker, along with other assets. A state ARFF unit is onsite. Multiple private dozers, tankers and other assets are also responding.

FIRE UPDATE

The brush fire of about four acres was first reported near Holomua Road and Baldwin Avenue at 1:30 p.m. Since then, fire spotting has occurred, and the fire is estimated at more than 100 acres.

INFO

MEMA is in full activation and its call center has been opened at (808) 270-7285. Sign up for Genasys Protect and MEMA Alerts at -www.mauicounty.gov/MEMA and follow County of Maui and MEMA on Facebook and Instagram.   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*   ### HOLOMUA FIRE UPDATE AS OF 3:30 P.M. 9-23-25

EVACUATION SITES

American Red Cross is setting up evacuation sites at Haliimaile, Makawao’s Eddie Tam, Pukalani’s Hannibal Tavares and Haiku community centers. Bring food, water and supplies. Pets may be leashed and in crates.

EVACUATION ORDERS, WARNINGS

Evacuation orders and warnings remain in effect. Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) issued around 2:09 p.m. today, Sept. 23, 2025, evacuation orders and warnings for multiple areas in Paia due to smoke and proximity amid the Holomua fire. Door-to-door evacuations, along with evacuations via EAS, WEA, Genasys, MEMA Alerts and a siren, have occurred. For specific zone locations, visit https://protect.genasys.com/search or download the Genasys Protect app.

TRAFFIC ADVISORY AND ROAD CLOSURE

Non-local traffic is asked to avoid Paia.

Closures include:

• Baldwin Avenue from Paia Elementary School to Holomua Road

• Hana Highway Paia-bound lane at Haleakala Highway

• Baldwin Avenue at Haliimaile

BUDGET MEETING CANCELED

The County Budget meeting slated for tonight in Paia has been canceled due to the fire.

RESOURCES

Maui Fire Department (MFD) has two helicopters, a battalion chief, four engines, one tanker, along with other assets, responding. A state ARFF unit is onsite. Multiple private dozers, tankers and other assets are also responding.

FIRE UPDATE

The brush fire of about four acres was first reported near Holomua Road and Baldwin Avenue at 1:30 p.m. Since then, fire spotting has occurred and there are no set acreage or containment estimates at this time.

INFO

MEMA is in full activation and its call center has been opened at (808) 270-7285. Sign up for Genasys Protect and MEMA Alerts at -www.mauicounty.gov/MEMA and follow County of Maui and MEMA on Facebook and Instagram.

# # #   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*   ### Tonight’s Paia-Haiku budget meeting canceled due to brush fire in Paia

Mayor Bissen’s Community Budget Meeting that had been scheduled for tonight at Pāʻia Community Center Sept. 23, 2025, is canceled due to a brush fire in Pāʻia that resulted in evacuation orders and warnings for multiple areas this afternoon.

A rescheduled date will be announced.

Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) issued evacuation orders shortly after 2 p.m. today. A portion of Baldwin Avenue and Holomua Road are closed due to firefighting efforts. Motorists are asked to avoid the area.   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*   ### MEMA issues Paia evacuations for zones due to smoke, proximity amid Holomua fire

Maui Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) issued around 2:09 p.m. today, Sept. 23, 2025, evacuation orders and warnings for multiple areas in Paia due to smoke and proximity amid the Holomua fire.

For specific zone locations, visit https://protect.genasys.com/search or download the Genasys Protect app.

 
Door-to-door evacuations, along with evacuations via EAS, WEA, Genasys, MEMA Alerts and sirens, have occurred or are occurring.

A portion of Baldwin Avenue and Holomua Road are closed due to firefighting efforts. Motorists are asked to avoid the area.

The Holomua fire was reported at 1:30 p.m.

No brush fire size estimates or other details are available at this time.   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*    ### Mayor Bissen appoints Jade P. Rojas-Letisi as new Director of County Office of Economic Development

Mayor Richard Bissen appointed Jade P. Rojas-Letisi as the director of the County of Maui Office of Economic Development (OED), which is tasked with strengthening kama‘āina industries, supporting small businesses and advancing economic diversification across Maui Nui.

“As we welcome our new Director of Economic Development Jade P. Rojas-Letisi, we celebrate a Maui native whose passion for creating opportunity is matched only by her deep respect for the cultural values that shape us,” Mayor Bissen said. “OED’s collective vision will help Maui’s local businesses thrive, while honoring the heritage that makes our islands unlike any other.”

A former Office of the Mayor executive assistant focusing on economic development, Rojas-Letisi assumed the position on Sept. 16, 2025.

“This is more than a role for me — it’s a responsibility to give back to the place that raised me,” Rojas-Letisi said. “I look forward to building on our strengths, supporting local businesses, and creating opportunities that keep our local businesses and families rooted here in Maui Nui.”

While Rojas-Letisi will oversee the entire OED section, she will be prioritizing economic development activities and implementing the new strategic framework. The OED grants team will now be supported by two team leads, with continued collaboration from County Finance, Corporation Counsel and Budget, along with additional support from the Office of the Mayor.

As an Office of the Mayor executive assistant, Rojas-Letisi played a key role in workforce development, industry partnerships and post-wildfire recovery planning. Prior to that, she served as a council aide to Councilmember Nohelani U‘u-Hodgins, where she worked to support legislative efforts that address housing, infrastructure and economic resilience. Rojas-Letisi’s private-sector background includes serving as Queen Ka‘ahumanu Center marketing coordinator.

Rojas-Letisi is a graduate of St. Anthony Jr.-Sr. High School and studied International Business at Linfield University before continuing her education at the University of Hawai‘i. She is an alumna of the Ka Ipu Kukui Fellows leadership program, a mentor in the Chamber of Commerce Hawai‘i Young Professionals Mentorship Program and serves as a board member of St. Anthony High School.

OED is a branch of the Office of the Mayor. Since August 2024, the director position has been filled on an interim basis by Office of the Mayor Chief of Staff Cynthia Lallo. For more information on OED, visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/oed.   Press Releases   Posted on September 23, 2025      
*   
### Lana'i White Goods, Metals, E-waste Collection set Oct. 11

The County of Maui Department of Environmental Management (DEM) is hosting a White Goods, Metals and E-waste Collection event on Lānaʻi on Saturday, Oct. 11, 2025, from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. at the Pulama Lānaʻi Fleet Yard.

This one-day event provides an opportunity for residents to drop off unwanted items for recycling and disposal. Accepted items include:

    *   Refrigerators
    *   Freezers
    *   Stoves
    *   Washers and dryers
    *   Water heaters
    *   Air-conditioning units
    *   Tires
    *   Auto batteries
    *   Scrap metals
    *   Propane tanks
    *   Household appliances
    *   TVs, computers, printers, copiers, monitors

Residents should be prepared to unload their items. Staff will be available to assist with large items requiring a forklift.

Businesses and commercial accounts will be charged a fee by County contractor Refrigerant Recycling.

For more information about recycling on Lānaʻi, call Refrigerant Recycling at (808) 351-3504. For more information about electronics recycling, call E-Cycling Maui at (808) 280-6460. For more information about collection events, call Pulama Lānaʻi at (808) 565-3974 or visit https://www.mauicounty.gov/2525/Lnai-Metals-and-E-Waste-Recycling-Event.

For other questions, call the County DEM Abandoned Vehicles and Metals office at (808) 270-6102.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on September 22, 2025 

*   
### Maui County Fair announces presale ticket locations, entertainment lineup

_Live music, hula, comedy on tap Oct. 2 to 5_

Four days of live music, hula and comedy by local performers will be part of the entertainment lineup for the Maui County Fair, which will be held Thursday, Oct. 2, to Sunday, Oct. 5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex in Wailuku.

Pre-sale tickets are now available for the Fair. Admission is $10 for adults (ages 12 and up), $5 for children ages 5–11 and free for keiki ages 4 and under. Tickets can be purchased at these locations:

    *   Restaurant Matsu, 161 Alamaha St., Kahului; 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday to Wednesday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Thursday and Friday
    *   West Maui Sports and Fishing Supply, 3445 Lower Honoapiʻilani Road, Lahaina; 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday to Saturday, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Sunday
    *   Maui Historical Society at the Bailey House, 2375 Main St., Wailuku; 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Tuesday through Friday

The entertainment kicks off after the opening parade on Thursday evening, Oct. 2, with each night hosted by a presenting sponsor.

The entertainment schedule is as follows:

**Thursday, Oct. 2, 2025**_Presented by Hawai‘i Powder Coating_

    *   6 p.m. — Hālau o ka Hanu Lehua with Kumu Hula Kamaka Kukona
    *   7:30 p.m. — Wehilei
    *   9 p.m. — ‘Āinaty

**Friday, Oct. 3, 2025**_Presented by HMSA_

    *   6 p.m. — Jordan Soon
    *   7:30 p.m. — Kalani Pe‘a, four-time Grammy Award winner
    *   9 p.m. —_A Fiji Tribute_ featuring Damon Williams, Pi‘ilani Arias, Loeka Longakit and friends

**Saturday, Oct. 4, 2025**_Presented by Hawaiian Airlines_

    *   12:30 p.m. — Kaina Kountry
    *   2 p.m. — Hawaiian Airlines Serenaders
    *   3:30 p.m. — Mikey Mina
    *   5 p.m. — Da Braddahs
    *   6:30 p.m. — Hawaiian Time
    *   8 p.m. — Ka‘ikena Scanlan
    *   9:30 p.m. — Redmelo

**Sunday, Oct. 5, 2025**_Presented by Makena Golf & Beach Club_

    *   12:30 p.m. — Mark Yamanaka
    *   2 p.m. — Hālau Nā Lei Kaumaka O Uka with Kumu Hula Nāpua Silva
    *   3:30 p.m. — Ku‘uipo Kumukahi
    *   5 p.m. — Keali‘i Reichel and Hālau Ke‘alaokamaile with Nā Kumu Hula Kealiʻi Reichel and Henohea Kāne
    *   6:30 p.m. — Nā Leo Pilimehana
    *   8 p.m. — Nuff Sedd

Supported by the County of Maui, the Maui County Fair is returning after six years and will feature E.K. Fernandez rides, contests, food booths and other activities from Oct. 2-5, 2025, at the War Memorial Special Events Complex.

Other supporters include:

    *   **Gold Sponsors:** Akamai Broadcasting, Alpha Electric Supply, HPM Building Supply, Makena Golf & Beach Club, Maui Now, Mahi Pono, Maui Soda and Ice Works, Maui United Way, Pacific Media Group
    *   **Silver Sponsors:**All Aloha Plumbing, Hawaiian Council, Maui Diagnostic Imaging, Maui Emergency Management Agency, Maui Oil
    *   **Bronze Sponsors:**Certified Welding, Maui Federal Credit Union, Maui Health, Maui Toyota, Norman’s Mortuary

For more information, visit https://themauifair.com.

# # #

 Press Releases 

 Posted on September 19, 2025 

1.   2025 State of the County Address
2.   Emergency Management Agency Notifications
3.   Road Closure Notifications
4.   Subscribe to Road Closure Notifications
5.   Bid Postings
6.   Boards and Commissions
7.   Calendar
8.   County Directory
9.   COVID-19 Resources
10.   Dept. of Motor Vehicles & Licensing
11.   Document Center
12.   Facilities
13.   FAQs
14.   MAPPS - Maui's Automated Planning and Permitting System
15.   Notify Me - Subscription Services
16.   Resource Directory
17.   Quick Links
18.   Social Media Center
19.   UIPA Public Records Request

*   COM Connect Report Concerns or Request Information 

*   Emergency Preparedness Stay Prepared & Connected 

*   Employment Opportunities View Current Openings 

*   Email Notifications Sign-up to Receive Updates 

*   MAPPS Maui’s Automated Planning and Permitting System 

*   SOCIAL MEDIA 

*   CONTACT 

*   BACK TO TOP 

### Contact Us

1.   **County of Maui**

 200 S. High St.

 Kalana O Maui Bldg,

 Wailuku, HI 96793

 Information Desk located: 

 2nd floor lobby

### Helpful Links

1.   Maui Emergency Management Agency 
2.   Visitor Services 
3.   Language Translation 
4.   Using Renewable Energy 
5.   Photo Credits 

/QuickLinks.aspx

### FAQs

1.   Where is the County building located?
2.   Where can I get help to plan a wedding on Maui?
3.   What are the requirements to perform a wedding?

/FAQ.aspx

### Site Links

1.   Site Map 
2.   Accessibility 
3.   Privacy Policy 
4.   COM Website Policies 
5.   Copyright Notices 

/QuickLinks.aspx

Loading

 Loading 

Do Not Show Again Close

[]
