Title: Survivor Frontman is Outraged That Kim Davis Used ‘Eye of the Tiger’

URL Source: https://time.com/4026187/survivor-frontman-is-outraged-that-kim-davis-used-eye-of-the-tiger

Published Time: 2015-09-09T11:57:23.000Z

Markdown Content:
Presented By

*   U.S.
*   Gay Marriage
*   Survivor Frontman is Outraged That Kim Davis Used ‘Eye of the Tiger’

2

minute read

September 9, 2015 7:57 AM EDT

I t seems that the Kentucky clerk who refused to issue gay marriage licenses is a fan of the Survivor song ‘Eye of the Tiger’– but Survivor frontman Frankie Sullivan is not a fan of hers.

When Kim Davis was released from jail after a judge held her in contempt of court for refusing to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, she came out and greeted the crowd to the tune of Survivor’s 1982 hit ‘Eye of the Tiger,’ with former governor of Arkansas and presidential hopeful Mike Huckabee by her side. “I just want to give God the glory,” she told the crowd, speaking over the Oscar-winning song made famous from the _Rocky III_ soundtrack. “His people have rallied, and you are a strong people. We serve a living God who knows exactly where each and every one of us is at. Just keep on pressing. Don’t let down, because he is here. He’s worthy.”

But Frankie Sullivan is not pleased.

“NO! We did not grant Kim Davis any rights to use My Tune -‘The Eye Of The Tiger,'” Sullivan wrote on Facebook Tuesday. “C’mom Mike, you are not The Donald but you can do better than that.”

The judge released Davis from jail on the condition that she would not interfere with her deputies issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples. After Davis was held in contempt, five of her deputies agreed to start issuing licenses to gay couples. During the rally, Davis did not comment on whether she plans to continue preventing same-sex couples from marrying once she returns to work. She has no plans to resign, her lawyer told CNN.

Meanwhile, presidential hopefuls are attempting to capitalize on Davis’s sudden popularity with opponents of gay marriage. “If you have to put someone in jail, I volunteer to go. Let me go. Lock me up if you think that’s how freedom is best served,” Mike Huckabee told the cheering crowd at the rally. “Because folks, I am willing to spend the next eight years in the White House leading in this country. But I want you to know I’m willing to spend the next eight years in jail, but I’m not willing to spend the next years in tyranny under people who think they can take our freedom and conscience away.”

Know Right Now: Kentucky Clerk Released from Jail

0 seconds of 1 minute, 1 second Volume 0%

Press shift question mark to access a list of keyboard shortcuts

Know Right Now: Kentucky Clerk Going to Jail

01:01

00:00

01:01

01:01

More Must-Reads from TIME
-------------------------

*   Cybersecurity Experts Are Sounding the Alarm on DOGE
*   Meet the 2025 Women of the Year
*   The Harsh Truth About Disability Inclusion
*   Why Do More Young Adults Have Cancer?
*   Colman Domingo Leads With Radical Love
*   How to Get Better at Doing Things Alone
*   Michelle Zauner Stares Down the Darkness
