Title: 

URL Source: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/23272/1/The%20Pandemic%20Century-ver3.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 26 Nov 2019 16:46:16 GMT

Markdown Content:
THE PANDEMIC CENTURY MARK HONIGSBAUM 

# The Pandemic Century 

# One Hundred Years of Panic, 

# Hysteria and Hubris 

# HURST & COMPANY, LONDON First published in the United Kingdom in 2019 by 

C.  Hurst & Co. (Publishers) Ltd., 

41 Great Russell Street, London, WC1B 3PL 

© Mark Honigsbaum, 2019 

All rights reserved. 

Printed in the United Kingdom 

The right of Mark Honigsbaum to be identified as the author 

of this publication is asserted by him in accordance with the 

Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988. 

A Cataloguing-in-Publication data record for this book 

is available from the British Library. 

ISBN: 9781787381216 

The epigraph taken from René Dubos’ ‘Despairing Optimist’ 

is reproduced with kind permission of  The American Scholar 

(Vol.  48, No.  2, Spring 1949). © The Phi Beta Kappa Society, 1949. 

This book is printed using paper from registered sustainable 

and managed sources. 

www.hurstpublishers.com For Mary-Lee “Everybody knows that pestilences have a way of recurring in the world; yet somehow we find it 

hard to believe in ones that crash down on our heads from a blue sky.There have been as many 

plagues as wars in history; yet plagues and wars always take people by surprise.” 

Albert Camus,  The Plague  (1947) ix 

# CONTENTS 

Prologue: Sharks and Other Predators  xi 

1. The Blue Death  1

2. Plague in the City of Angels  37 

3. The Great Parrot Fever Pandemic  67 

4. The “Philly Killer”  99 

5. Legionnaires’ Redux  121 

6. AIDS in America, AIDS in Africa  135 

7. SARS: “Super Spreader”  167 

8. Ebola at the Borders  197 

9. Z is for Zika  227 

Epilogue: The Pandemic Century  261 

Notes  267 

Abbreviations  301 

Acknowledgments  303 

Index  305 xi 

# PROLOGUE 

SHARKS AND OTHER PREDATORS 

Sharks never attac k bathers in the temperate waters of the North Atlantic. 

Nor can a shark sever a swimmer’s leg with a single bite. That’s what most 

shark experts thought in the blisteringly hot summer of 1916 as New Yorkers 

and Philadelphians flocked to the beaches of northern New Jersey in search 

of relief from the sweltering inland temperatures. That same summer the East 

Coast had been gripped by a polio epidemic, leading to the posting of warn -

ings about the risk of catching “infantile paralysis” at municipal pools. The 

Jersey shore was considered a predator-free zone, however. 

“The danger of being attacked by a shark,” declared Frederic Lucas, direc -

tor of the American Museum of Natural History, in July 1916, “is infinitely 

less than that of being struck by lightning and … there is practically  no  danger 

of an attack from a shark about our coasts.” As proof, Lucas pointed to the 

reward of $500 that had been offered by the millionaire banker Hermann 

Oerlichs “for an authenticated case of a man having being attacked by a shark 

in temperate waters [in the United States, north of Cape Hatteras, North 

Carolina]”—a sum that had gone unclaimed since Oerlichs had posted the 

challenge in the  New York Sun  in 1891. 1

But Oerlichs and Lucas were wrong, and so were Dr  Henry Fowler and 

Dr  Henry Skinner, the curators of Philadelphia’s Academy of Natural Science 

who had categorically stated, also in 1916, that a shark lacked the power to 

sever a man’s leg. The first exception to these  known  facts had come on the 

evening of 1  July 1916, when Charles Epting Vansant, a wealthy young broker 

holidaying in New Jersey with his wife and family, decided to go for a pre-din -

ner swim near his hotel at Beach Haven. A graduate of the University of 

Pennsylvania’s class of 1914, Vansant, or “Van” to his chums, was a scion of one 

of the oldest families in the country—Dutch immigrants who had settled in the 

United States in 1647—and famed for his athleticism. If he had any concerns 

about entering the cool Atlantic waters that evening, they would have been 

offset by the familiar sight of the beach lifeguard, Ale xander Ott, a member of PROLOGUE 

xii 

the American Olympic swimming team, and a friendly Chesape ake Bay retriever 

that ran up to him as he slid into the surf. In the fashion of young Edwardian 

men of the time,Vansant swam straight out beyond the lifelines, before turning 

to tread water and call to the dog. By now his father, Dr  Vansant, and his sister, 

Louise, had arrived on the beach and were admiring his form from the lifeguard 

station. Much to their amusement, the hound refused to follow. Moments later, 

the reason became apparent—a black fin appeared in the water, bearing down 

on Vansant from the east. Frantically, his father waved for his son to swim to 

shore, but Vansant spotted the danger too late and when he was fifty yards from 

the beach he felt a sudden tug and an agonizing pain. As the sea around him 

turned the colour of wine, Vansant reached down to discover that his left leg 

was gone, severed neatly at the thigh bone. 

By now Ott was at his side and dragging him through the water to the 

safety of the Engelside Hotel where his father desperately tried to stem the 

bleeding. But it was no use—the wound was too deep—and to his father and 

young wife’s horror Vansant died then and there, the first known victim of a 

shark attack in the North Atlantic. From that moment on, neither would be 

able to look at Jersey’s Atlantic seaboard without imagining the jaws lurking 

beneath the surface. 

They were not alone. Within fourteen days, four more bathers would also 

be attacked on the Jersey shore and three would be killed, sparking an obses -

sive fear of “man-eating” sharks * that persists to this day. 2 It makes little differ -

ence that sightings of great whites and other large sharks in the North Atlantic 

are rare and attacks on swimmers rarer still. Beachgoers now  know  better than 

to swim too far from shore, and should they become blasé about the risks and 

dismissive of the menace, there is always a rerun of  Jaws  or an episode of the 

Discovery channel’s  Shark Week  to set them straight. The result is that many 

children and a fair number of adults are now terrified of playing in the surf, 

and even those brave enough to venture beyond the breakers  know  to keep a 

wary eye on the horizon for the tell-tale sight of a dorsal fin. 

* * * 

At firs t glance, the New Jersey shark attacks would seem to have little to do 

with the Ebola epidemic that engulfed West Africa in 2014 or the Zika   

> *The species of shark or sharks responsible for the attacks has never been identified.
> Some experts believe they were the work of a juvenile great white, Carcharodon
> carcharias ; others that they are consistent with the feeding pattern of bull sharks,
> which are known to favour shallow coastal waters.

PROLOGUE 

xiii 

epidem ic that broke out in Brazil the following year, but they do, for just as 

in the summer of 1916 most naturalists could not conceive of a shark attack 

in the cool waters of the North Atlantic, so in the summer of 2014 most 

infectious disease experts could not imagine that Ebola, a virus previously 

confined to remote forested regions of Central Africa, might spark an epi -

demic in a major city in Sierra Leone or Liberia, much less cross the Atlantic 

to threaten citizens of Europe or the United States. But that is precisely what 

happened when, shortly before January 2014, Ebola emerged from an 

unknown animal reservoir and infected a two-year-old boy in the village of 

Meliandou, in south-eastern Guinea, from whence the virus travelled by road 

to Conakry, Freetown, and Monrovia, and onward by air to Brussels, London, 

Madrid, New York and Dallas. 

And something very similar happened in 1997 when a hitherto obscure strain 

of avian influenza, known as H5N1, which had previously circulated in ducks 

and other wild waterfowl, suddenly began killing large numbers of poultry in 

Hong Kong, triggering a worldwide panic about bird flu. The great bird flu 

scare, of course, was followed by the panic about Severe Acute Respiratory 

Syndrome (SARS) in 2003, which was followed, in turn, by the 2009 swine 

flu—an outbreak that began in Mexico and set off an alarm about the threat of 

a global influenza pandemic that saw the drawdown of stockpiles of antiviral 

drugs and the production of billions of dollars’ worth of vaccines. 

Swine flu did not turn into a man-eater—the pandemic killed fewer people 

globally than common or garden strains of flu have in the United States and 

the United Kingdom most years—but in the spring of 2009 no one knew that 

would be the case. Indeed, with disease experts focused on the re-emergence 

of bird flu in Southeast Asia, no one had anticipated the emergence of a novel 

swine flu virus in Mexico, let alone one with a genetic profile similar to that 

of the virus of the 1918 “Spanish flu”—a pandemic that is estimated to have 

killed at least 50 million people worldwide and is considered a byword for 

viral Armageddon. *

* * *    

> *An epidemic is the rapid spread of infectious disease to a large number of people
> in a given population within a short period of time. By contrast, a pandemic is an
> epidemic that has spread across a large region, for instance, multiple countries
> and continents. This spread may be rapid or may take many months or years. The
> World Health Organization defines a pandemic simply as the “worldwide spread
> of a new disease.”

PROLOGUE 

xiv 

In the ninetee nth century, medical experts thought that better knowledge of 

the social and environmental conditions that bred infectious disease would 

enable them to predict epidemics and, as the Victorian epidemiologist and 

sanitarian William Farr put it in 1847, “banish panic.” But as advances in bac -

teriology led to the development of vaccines against typhoid, cholera, and 

plague, and fear of the great epidemic scourges of the past gradually receded, 

so other diseases became more visible and new fears developed. A good 

example is polio. The month before sharks began attacking bathers on the 

Jersey shore, a polio epidemic had broken out near the waterfront in South 

Brooklyn. Investigators from New York’s Board of Health immediately blamed 

the outbreak on recent Italian immigrants from Naples living in crowded, 

unsanitary tenements in a district known as “Pigtown.” As cases of polio mul -

tiplied and the papers filled with heart-breaking accounts of dead or paralyzed 

infants, the publicity prompted hysteria and the flight of wealthy residents 

(many New Yorkers headed for the Jersey shore). Within weeks, the panic had 

spread to neighbouring states along the eastern seaboard, leading to quaran -

tines, travel bans, and enforced hospitalizations. 3 These hysterical responses 

partly reflected the then-prevalent medical conviction that polio was a respira -

tory disease spread by coughs and sneezes and by flies breeding in rubbish. *

In his history of poliomyelitis, the epidemiologist John R.  Paul describes 

the epidemic of 1916 as “the high-water mark in attempts at enforcement of 

isolation and quarantine measures.” By the time the epidemic petered out 

with the cooler weather in December 1916, 27,000 cases and 6,000 deaths 

had been recorded in twenty-six states, making it the world’s then-largest 

polio outbreak. In New York alone there had been 8,900 cases and 2,400 

deaths, a mortality rate of around one child in four. 4

The scale of the outbreak made polio appear a peculiarly American prob -

lem. But what most Americans did not realize is that a similarly devastating 

outbreak had visited Sweden five years earlier. During that outbreak, Swedish 

scientists had repeatedly recovered polio virus from the small intestine of 

victims—an important step in explicating the true aetiology and pathology 

of the disease. The Swedes also succeeded in culturing the virus in monkeys 

who had been exposed to secretions from asymptomatic human cases, fuel -

ling suspicion about the role of “healthy carriers” in the preservation of the 

virus between  epidemics. However, these insights were ignored by leading  

> *In fact, polio is spread principally via the oral-faecal route and nonparalytic polio
> had been endemic to the United States for several decades prior to 1916.

PROLOGUE 

xv 

polio experts. The result is that it was not until 1938 that researchers at Yale 

University would take up the Swedish studies and confirm that asymptomatic 

carriers frequently excreted the polio virus in their stools and that the virus 

could survive for up to ten weeks in untreated sewage. 

Today, it is recognized that in an era before polio vaccines, the best hope of 

avoiding the crippling effects of the virus was to contract an immunizing 

infection in early childhood when polio is less likely to cause severe complica -

tions. In this respect, dirt was a mother’s friend and exposing babies to water 

and food contaminated with polio could be considered a rational strategy. By 

the turn of the nineteenth century, most children from poor immigrant 

neighbourhoods had become immunized in exactly this way. It was children 

from pristine, middle-class homes that were at the greatest risk of developing 

the paralytic form of the disease—people like Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the 

thirty-second president of the United States, who escaped polio as a teen only 

to contract the disease in 1921 at the age of thirty-nine while holidaying at 

Campobello Island, New Brunswick. 

* * * 

This is a book about the way that advances in the scientific knowledge of 

viruses and other infectious pathogens can blind medical researchers to these 

ecological and immunological insights and the epidemic lurking just around 

the corner. Ever since the German bacteriologist Robert Koch and his French 

counterpart, Louis Pasteur, inaugurated the “germ theory” of disease in the 

1880s by showing that tuberculosis was a bacterial infection and manufacturing 

vaccines against anthrax, cholera and rabies, scientists—and the public health 

officials who depend on their technologies—have dreamed of defeating the 

microbes of infectious disease. However, while medical microbiology and the 

allied sciences of epidemiology, parasitology, zoology, and, more recently, 

molecular biology, provide new ways of understanding the transmission and 

spread of novel pathogens and making them visible to clinicians, all too often 

these sciences and technologies have been found wanting. This is not simply 

because, as is sometimes argued, microbes are constantly mutating and evolv -

ing, outstripping our ability to keep pace with their shifting genetics and trans -

mission patterns. It is also because of the tendency of medical researchers to 

become prisoners of particular paradigms and theories of disease causation, 

blinding them to the threats posed by pathogens both known and unknown. 

Take influenza, the subject of the first chapter. When the so-called “Spanish 

flu” emerged in the summer of 1918, during the closing stages of World War PROLOGUE 

xvi 

I, most physicians assumed it would behave in a similar way to previous flu 

epidemics and dismissed it as a nuisance. Few thought the pathogen might 

pose a mortal threat to young adults, much less to soldiers en route to the 

Allied lines in northern France. This was partly because they had been 

informed by no less an authority than Koch’s protégé, Richard Pfeiffer, that 

flu was transmitted by a tiny Gram-negative bacterium, and that it would only 

be a matter of time before bacteriologists trained in German laboratory 

methods had manufactured a vaccine against the influenza bacillus, just as they 

had against cholera, diphtheria, and typhoid. But Pfeiffer and those who put 

their faith in his experimental methods were wrong: influenza is not a bacte -

rium but a virus that is too small to be seen through the lens of an ordinary 

optical microscope. Moreover, the virus passed straight through the porcelain 

filters then used to isolate bacteria commonly found in the nose and throat of 

influenza sufferers. Although some British and American researchers had 

begun to suspect that flu might be a “filter-passer,” it would be many years 

before Pfeiffer’s misconception would be corrected and influenza’s viral aeti -

ology divined. In the meantime, many research hours were wasted and mil -

lions of young people perished. 

However, it would be a mistake to think that simply knowing the identity of 

a pathogen and the aetiology of a disease is sufficient to bring an epidemic 

under control, for though the presence of an infectious microbe may be a 

necessary condition for ill health, it is rarely sufficient. Microbes interact with 

our immune systems in various ways, and a pathogen that causes disease in one 

person may leave another unaffected or only mildly inconvenienced. Indeed, 

many bacterial and viral infections can lie dormant in tissue and cells for 

decades before being reactivated by some extrinsic event or process, whether 

it be coinfection with another microbe, a sudden shock to the system due to 

an external stress, or the waning of immunity with old age. More importantly, 

by taking specific microbial predators as our focus we risk missing the bigger 

picture. For instance, the Ebola virus may be one of the deadliest pathogens 

known to humankind, but it is only when tropical rain forests are degraded by 

clear-cutting, dislodging from their roosts the bats in which the virus is pre -

sumed to reside between epidemics, or when people hunt chimpanzees 

infected with the virus and butcher them for the table, that Ebola risks spilling 

over into humans. And it is only when the blood-borne infection is amplified 

by poor hospital hygiene practices that it is likely to spread to the wider com -

munity and have a chance of reaching urban areas. In such circumstances, it is 

worth keeping in mind the view expressed by George Bernard Shaw in  The 

Doctor’s Dilemma , namely that “The characteristic microbe of a disease might be PROLOGUE 

xvii 

a symptom instead of a cause.” Indeed, updating Shaw’s axiom for the present 

day, we might say that infectious diseases nearly always have wider environ -

mental and social causes. Unless and until we take account of the ecological, 

immunological, and behavioural factors that govern the emergence and spread 

of novel pathogens, our knowledge of such microbes and their connection to 

disease is bound to be partial and incomplete. 

In fairness, there have always been medical researchers prepared to take a 

more nuanced view of our complex interactions with microbes. For instance, 

in 1959 at the height of the antibiotics revolution, the Rockefeller researcher 

René Dubos railed against short-term technological fixes for medical prob -

lems. At a time when most of his colleagues took the conquest of infectious 

disease for granted and assumed that the eradication of the common bacterial 

causes of infections was just around the corner, Dubos, who had isolated the 

first commercial antibiotic in 1939 and knew what he was talking about, 

sounded a note of caution against the prevailing medical hubris. Comparing 

man to the “sorcerer’s apprentice,” he argued that medical science had set in 

motion “potentially destructive forces” that might one day usurp the dreams 

of a medical utopia. “Modern man believes that he has achieved almost com -

pletely mastery over the natural forces which molded his evolution in the past 

and that he can now control his own biological and cultural destiny,” wrote 

Dubos. “But this may be an illusion. Like all other living things, he is part of 

an immensely complex ecological system and is bound to all its components 

by innumerable links.” Instead, Dubos argued that complete freedom from 

disease was a “mirage” and that “at some unpredictable time and in some 

unforeseeable manner nature will strike back.” 5

Yet for all that Dubos’s writings were hugely popular with the American 

public in the 1960s, his warnings of a coming disease Armageddon were 

largely ignored by his scientific colleagues. The result was that when, shortly 

after Dubos’s death in 1982, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

(CDC) coined the acronym AIDS, to describe an unusual autoimmune condi -

tion that had suddenly appeared in the homosexual community in Los Angeles 

and was now spreading to other segments of the population, it took the medi -

cal world by surprise. But really the CDC shouldn’t have been surprised 

because something very similar had happened just eight years earlier when an 

outbreak of atypical pneumonia among a group of war veterans who had 

attended an American Legion convention at a luxury hotel in Philadelphia 

sparked widespread hysteria as epidemiologists scrambled to identify the 

“Philly Killer” (the outbreak initially flummoxed the CDC’s disease detectives 

and it took a microbiologist to identify the pathogen,  Legionella pneumophila ,PROLOGUE 

xviii 

a tiny bacterium that thrives in aqu atic environments, including the cooling 

towers of hotels). That year, 1976, saw not only a panic over Legionnaires’ 

disease, but a panic over the sudden emergence of a new strain of swine flu at 

a US Army base in New Jersey—an emergence event for which the CDC and 

public health officials were likewise unprepared and that would eventually 

result in the needless vaccination of millions of Americans. And something 

very similar happened again in 2003 when an elderly Chinese professor of 

nephrology checked into the Metropole Hotel in Hong Kong, igniting cross-

border outbreaks of a severe respiratory illness that was initially blamed on 

the H5N1 avian influenza virus but which we now know to have been due to 

a novel coronavirus * associated with SARS.  In that case, a pandemic was 

averted by some nifty microbiological detective work and unprecedented 

cooperation between networks of scientists sharing information, but it was a 

close call, and since then we have seen several more unanticipated—and ini -

tially misdiagnosed—emergence events. 

This is a book about these events and processes, and the reasons why, 

despite our best efforts to predict and prepare for them, they continue to take 

us by surprise. Some of these epidemic histories, such as the panic over the 

2014–16 Ebola epidemic or the hysteria over AIDS in the 1980s, will be 

familiar to readers; others, such as the pneumonic plague outbreak that 

erupted in the Mexican quarter of Los Angeles in 1924, or the great “parrot 

fever” panic that swept the United States a few months after the Wall Street 

Crash, less so. Whether familiar or not, however, each of these epidemics 

illustrates how quickly the received medical wisdom can be overturned by the 

emergence of new pathogens and how, in the absence of laboratory know -

ledge and effective vaccines and treatment drugs, such epidemics have an 

unusual power to provoke panic, hysteria, and dread. 

Far from banishing panic, better medical knowledge and surveillance of 

infectious disease can also sow new fears, making people hyperaware of epi -

demic threats of which they had previously been ignorant. The result is that 

just as lifeguards now scan the sea for dorsal fins in the hope of forewarning 

bathers, so the World Health Organization (WHO) routinely scans the inter -

net for reports of unusual disease outbreaks and tests for mutations that might 

signal the emergence of the next pandemic virus. To some extent this hyper -

vigilanc e makes sense. But the price we pay is a permanent state of anxiety  

> *Coronaviruses primarily infect the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts of
> mammals and are thought to be the cause of up to one-third of common colds.

PROLOGUE 

xix 

abou t the next Big One. It’s not a question of  if  the Apocalypse will occur, 

we’re repeatedly told, but  when . In this febrile atmosphere it is not surprising 

that public health experts sometimes get it wrong and press the panic button 

when, in reality, no panic is warranted. Or, as in the case of the West African 

Ebola epidemic, misread the threat entirely. 

To be sure, the media plays its part in these processes—after all, nothing 

sells like fear—but while 24/7 cable news channels and social media help to 

fuel the panic, hysteria, and stigma associated with infectious disease out -

breaks, journalists and bloggers are, for the most part, merely messengers. I 

argue that by alerting us to new sources of infection and framing particular 

behaviours as “risky,” it is medical science—and the science of epidemiology 

in particular—that is the ultimate source of these irrational and often preju -

dicial judgments. No one would wish to deny that better knowledge of the 

epidemiology and causes of infectious diseases has led to huge advances in 

preparedness for epidemics, or that technological advances in medicine have 

brought about immense improvements in health and well-being; nevertheless, 

we should recognize that this knowledge is constantly giving birth to new 

fears and anxieties. 

Each epidemic canvassed in this book illustrates a different aspect of this 

process, showing how in each case the outbreak undermined confidence in 

the dominant medical and scientific paradigm, highlighting the dangers of 

overreliance on particular technologies at the expense of wider ecological 

insights into disease causation. Drawing on sociological and philosophical 

insights into the construction of scientific knowledge, I argue that what was 

“known” before the emergence event—that water towers and air condition -

ing systems  don’t  present a risk to hotel guests and the occupants of hospitals, 

that Ebola  doesn’t  circulate in West Africa and  can’t  reach a major city, that 

Zika is a relatively harmless mosquito-borne illness—was shown to be false; 

and I explain how, in each case, the epidemics would spark much retrospec -

tive soul-searching about “known knowns” and “unknown unknowns” * and 

what scientists and public health experts should do to avoid such epistemo -

logical blind spots in the future. 6

The epidemics canvassed in this book also underline the key role played by 

environmental, social, and cultural factors in changing patterns of  disease  

> *The concepts of “known knowns” and “unknown unknowns” were infamously
> introduced into public discourse by the former US secretary of defense Donald
> Rumsfeld at a Pentagon news conference in 2002 (see endnotes for further
> discussion).

PROLOGUE 

xx 

prevalence and emergence. Recalling Dubos’s insights into the ecology of 

pathogens, I argue that most cases of disease emergence can be traced to the 

disturbance of ecological equilibriums or alterations to the environments in 

which pathogens habitually reside. This is especially true of animal origin or 

zoonotic viruses such as Ebola, but it is also true of commensal bacteria such 

as streptococci, the main cause of community-acquired pneumonias. The 

natural host of Ebola is thought to be a fruit bat. However, though antibodies 

to Ebola have been found in various species of bats indigenous to Africa, live 

virus has never been recovered from any of them. The reason, most likely, is 

that as with other viruses that are adapted to their hosts as a result of long 

evolutionary association, the Ebola virus is quickly cleared from the blood -

stream by the bat’s immune system, but not before, presumably, it has been 

transmitted to another bat. The result is that the virus circulates continually 

in bat populations, without leading to the destruction of either. A similar 

process occurs with pathogens that have evolved so as to infect only humans, 

such as measles and polio, with a first infection in childhood usually resulting 

in a mild illness, after which the subject recovers and enjoys lifelong immu -

nity. However, every now and again these states of immunological balance are 

disrupted. This may occur naturally if, for instance, sufficient numbers of 

children escape infection in childhood to cause herd immunity to wane, or if 

the virus suddenly mutates, as occurs frequently with influenza, leading to the 

circulation of a new strain against which people have little or no immunity. 

But it can also occur when we accidentally interpose ourselves between the 

virus and its natural host. This is presumably what happened with Ebola in 

2014 when children in Meliandou began taunting long-tailed bats roosting in 

a tree stump in the middle of their village. And it is thought that something 

very similar may have prompted the spillover * of the HIV progenitor virus 

from chimpanzees to humans in the Congo in the 1950s. Tracing the precise 

genesis of these epidemics is the subject of ongoing research. In the case of 

AIDS, there is little doubt that the inauguration of steamship travel on the 

Congo River at the turn of the twentieth century and the construction of new 

roads and railways in the colonial period were important contributing factors, 

as was the greed of loggers and timber companies. However, social and cul -

tural factors also played a part: were it not for the practice of consuming 

bushmeat and widespread prostitution near the camps supplying labour to the    

> *A term popularized by David Quammen’s 2012 book Spillover: Animal Infections and
> the Next Human Pandemic . See further discussion in Chapter 6.

PROLOGUE 

xxi 

rail and timber companies, the virus would probably not have spread so 

widely or been amplified so rapidly. Similarly, were it not for entrenched 

cultural beliefs and customs in West Africa—in particular, people’s adherence 

to traditional burial rituals and their distrust of scientific medicine—it is 

unlikely that Ebola would have morphed into a major regional epidemic, let 

alone a global health crisis. 

However, perhaps the most important insight medical history can bring is 

the long association between epidemics and war. Ever since Pericles ordered 

Athenians to sit out the Spartan siege of their harbour city in 430 BC, wars 

have been seen as progenitors of deadly outbreaks of infectious disease (this 

was certainly the case in West Africa in 2014, where decades of civil war and 

armed conflict had left Liberia and Sierra Leone with weak and under-

resourced health systems). Though the pathogen responsible for the plague of 

Athens has never been identified and perhaps never will be (candidates 

include anthrax, smallpox, typhus, and malaria), there is little doubt that the 

decisive factor was the crowding of upwards of 300,000 Athenians and refu -

gees from Attica behind the Long Walls of the Greek city. That confinement 

created the ideal conditions for the amplification of the virus—if virus it 

was—turning Athens into a charnel house (as Thucydides informs us, as there 

were no houses to receive the refugees from the countryside “they had to be 

lodged at the hot season of the year in stifling cabins, where the mortality 

raged without restraint”). The result was that by the third wave of the disease 

in 426 BC, Athens’s population had been reduced by between one-quarter 

and one-third. 7

In the case of the Athenian plague, for reasons that are unclear, the disease 

does not appear to have affected the Spartans, or spread far beyond the bor -

ders of Attica. But 2,000 years ago, towns and cities were more isolated and 

there was far less passage of people and pathogens between countries and 

continents. Unfortunately, this is not the case today. Thanks to global trade 

and travel, novel viruses and their vectors are continually crossing borders 

and international time zones, and in each place they encounter a different mix 

of ecological and immunological conditions. This was nowhere more true 

than during World War I, when the congregation of tens of thousands of 

young American recruits in training camps on the eastern seaboard of the 

United States and their subsequent passage to and from Europe provided the 

ideal conditions for the deadliest outbreak of pandemic disease in history. 1

# 1

# THE BLUE DEATH   

> “Ordinariness is what strikes one first about the town of Oran.”
> Albert Camus, The Plague (1947)

It was an unassuming village, much like any you would have encountered on 

a rural tour of New England in 1917. Blink and you might have missed it. Set 

in drab scrubland thirty-five miles northwest of Boston, Ayer comprised 

fewer than three hundred cottage-like dwellings, plus a church and a couple 

of stores. Indeed, were it not for the fact that the village sat at the junction of 

the Boston and Maine and Worcester and Nashua railroads and boasted two 

stations, there would have been little to recommend it. But in the spring of 

1917, as America prepared to go to war and military planners began looking 

for suitable sites to train thousands of men responding to the draft, those 

railroad stations and empty fields marked Ayer out as special, unusual even. 

Perhaps that is why in May 1917 someone in Washington, DC stuck a pin with 

a red flag in a map of Lowell County, Massachusetts, and designated Ayer as 

the site of the cantonment of the new Seventy-Sixth Division of the US Army. 

In early June leases were signed with owners of some 9,000 acres of tree -

less “sprout” land adjacent to the Nashua River, and two weeks later engineers 

arrived to transform the site into a camp fit for Major General John Pershing’s 

doughboys. In the space of just ten weeks, engineers constructed 1,400 build -

ings, installed 2,200 shower baths, and laid sixty miles of heating pipes. 

Measuring seven miles by two, the cantonment contained its own restaurant, 

bakery, theatre, and fourteen huts for reading and fraternizing, plus a post and 

telegraph office. Arriving from Ayer—a short half-mile walk that led across 

the tracks of the Fitchburg railroad—the first sight to greet newly drafted 

men was the huge YMCA auditorium and the barracks of the 301st engineers. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

2

To the right lay the barracks of the 301st, 302nd, and 303rd infantry divi -

sions, and nearby, those for the field artillery, depot brigade, and machine-gun 

brigade. Beyond that lay fields for practicing drill and bayoneting skills, and 

an eight-hundred-bed hospital, also run by the YMCA.  In all, the cantonment 

was capable of housing 30,000 men. But over the next few weeks, as raw 

recruits arrived from Maine, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, 

Minnesota, and as far south as Florida, the rough wooden barracks would be 

filled with in excess of 40,000 men, forcing engineers to erect tents for the 

overflow. In recognition of its importance to the north-eastern military com -

mand, the cantonment was named Camp Devens in honour of General 

Charles Devens, a Boston lawyer turned Civil War commander whose Union 

troops were the first to occupy Richmond after its fall in 1865. As Roger 

Batchelder, a propagandist for the War Department, put it, admiring Camp 

Devens from a hill outside Ayer in December 1917, the cantonment resem -

bled nothing so much as a “huge city of soldiers.” 1 What the observer did not 

say was that Devens also represented an unprecedented immunological 

experiment. Never before had so many men from so many different walks of 

life—factory workers and farmhands, machinists and college graduates— 

been brought together in such numbers and forced to live cheek by jowl. 

Camp Devens was not the only camp to be hastily constructed that sum -

mer, nor was it the biggest. In all, draftees destined for the American 

Expeditionary Force would be sent for training to forty large camps across 

the United States. Some, such as Camp Funston, built on the site of a former 

cavalry station at Fort Riley, Kansas, accommodated as many as 55,000 men. 

Meanwhile, on the opposite side of the Atlantic at Étaples in northern France, 

the British had constructed an even larger facility. Built on low-lying mead -

ows adjoining the railway line from Boulogne to Paris, Étaples had bunks for 

up to 100,000 British and Imperial troops and hospital beds for 22,000. In 

the course of the war, it is estimated that one million soldiers passed through 

Étaples en route to the Somme and other battlegrounds. 

Nor were the facilities at many of these camps always as good as war sup -

porters suggested. Indeed, in many cases mobilization had been so swift that 

engineers had been unable to complete the construction of hospitals and 

other medical facilities in time, and barracks were often so drafty that men 

were forced to huddle around stoves in the evening to keep warm and to 

sleep in extra layers of clothing at night. Some, such as Batchelder, saw this as 

a way of toughening recruits and preparing them for the hardships of trench 

warfare in northern France. “At Ayer it is cold, but … the cold weather is 

exhilarating; it inures the men who have always lived in hot houses to the THE BLUE DEATH 

3

out-door life.” 2 However, others criticized the War Department for selecting 

a site so far north, saying it would have been better if Devens had been located 

in the South where the weather was more hospitable. 

In truth, the principal danger was not the cold so much as the overcrowd -

ing. By bringing together men from so many different immunological back -

grounds and forcing them to live at close quarters for weeks on end, the 

mobilization greatly increased the risk of communicable diseases being spread 

from one to another. Wars have always been incubators of disease, of course. 

What was different in 1917 was the scale of the call-up and the intermixing 

of men raised in very different ecological settings. In urban areas, where 

populations are denser, the chances of being exposed to measles or common 

respiratory pathogens, such as  Streptococcus pneumoniae  and  Staphylococcus 

aureus , is far higher and usually occurs in childhood. By contrast, in an era 

before cars and buses, when children raised in rural areas tended to be edu -

cated at primary schools close to their homes, many avoided exposure to 

measles. Nor would many have been exposed to  Streptococcus pyrogenes  and 

other haemolyticus bacteria that cause “strep throat.” The result was that as 

the US Army grew from 378,000 in April 1917 to a force of 1.5 million by 

the turn of 1918 (by the war’s end, in November 1918, the combined 

strength of the US Army and Navy would be 4.7 million), epidemics of 

measles and pneumonia erupted at camps all along the eastern seaboard, as 

well as in several southern states. 3

Prior to the introduction of antibiotics, pneumonia accounted for roughly 

one-quarter of all deaths in the United States. These pneumonias could be 

triggered by bacteria, viruses, fungi, or parasites, but by far the largest source 

of community-acquired outbreaks were pneumococcal bacteria ( Streptococcus 

pneumoniae ). Under the microscope these pneumococcal bacteria resemble 

any other streptococcus. However, one of  S. pneumoniae ’s unusual features is 

that it possesses a polysaccharide (sugar) capsule that protects it from drying 

out in air or being ingested by phagocytes, one of the immune system’s prin -

cipal cellular defences. Indeed, in moist sputum in a darkened room, pneu -

mococci can survive on surfaces for up to ten days 

Worldwide, there are more than eighty subtypes of pneumococcal bacte -

ria, each one differing from the others in terms of the constitution of its 

capsule. For the most part, these bacteria reside in the nose and throat with -

out causing illness, but if a person’s immune system is impaired or compro -

mised by another disease, such as measles or influenza, the bacteria can get 

the upper hand, triggering potentially fatal lung infections. Typically, such 

infections begin as an inflammation of the alveoli, the microscopic sacs that THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

4

absorb oxygen in the lungs. As the bacteria invad e the alveoli, they are pur -

sued by leukocytes and other immune cells, as well as fluids containing pro -

teins and enzymes. As the air sacs fill they become “consolidated” with mate -

rial, making it harder for them to transfer oxygen to the blood. Usually, this 

consolidation appears in patches surrounding the bronchi—the passages 

which branch from the bronchus, the tube that carries air from the trachea 

into the right and left lungs. When this consolidation is localized it is known 

as bronchopneumonia. However, in more severe infections, this consolidation 

can spread across entire lobes (the right lung has three, the left two) turning 

the lungs into a solid, liverlike mass. The effect on lung tissue is dramatic. A 

healthy lung is spongy and porous and a good conductor of sound. When a 

doctor listens to the breathing of a healthy patient through a stethoscope he 

or she should hear very little. By contrast, a congested lung conducts breath -

ing sounds to the wall of the chest, resulting in rattling or cracking sounds 

known as rales. 

In the late Victorian and Edwardian period, pneumonia was perhaps the 

most feared disease after tuberculosis and nearly always fatal, particularly in 

the elderly or those whose immune systems were compromised by other 

diseases. Prominent victims included the ninth president of the United States, 

William Henry Harrison, who died one month after his inauguration in 1841, 

and the Confederate general Thomas Jonathan “Stonewall” Jackson, who died 

of complications of pneumonia eight days after being wounded at the Battle 

of Chancellorsville in 1863. Another victim was Queen Victoria’s grandson, 

the Duke of Clarence, who suffered a fatal case of double lobar pneumonia 

after contracting “Russian influenza” at Sandringham in the winter of 1892. 

Little wonder then that Sir William Osler, the so-called father of modern 

medicine, dubbed pneumonia the “Captain of the Men of Death.” 4

When contracted in childhood measles usually results in a rash and high 

fever accompanied by a violent cough and sensitivity to light, but in the case 

of the camp-acquired measles cases the symptoms were far more severe. The 

outbreaks produced the highest infection rates the army had seen in ninety-

seven years and were often accompanied by an aggressive bronchopneumo -

nia. The result was that between September 1917 and March 1918, more than 

30,000 American troops were hospitalized with pneumonia, nearly all as a 

result of complications of measles, and some 5,700 died. The extent of the 

outbreaks astonished even battle-hardened doctors, such as Victor Vaughan, 

the dean of the University of Michigan’s School of Medicine and a veteran of 

the Spanish-American War. “Not a troop train came into Camp Wheeler (near 

Macon, Georgia) in the fall of 1917 without bringing one to six cases of 

measles already in  the eruptive stage,” he wrote. “These men had brought the THE BLUE DEATH 

5

infection from their homes and had distributed its seed at the state encamp -

ment and on the train. No power on earth could stop the spread of measles 

through a camp under these conditions. Cases developed, from one hundred 

to five hundred a day, and the infection continued as long as there was suscep -

tible material in the camp.” 5

By the spring of 1918 the War Department was being lambasted by Congress 

for shipping recruits to training camps before facilities were fully ready and 

under conditions that failed to meet basic standards of public health, and by July 

the department had appointed a pneumonia commission to investigate the 

unusual prevalence of the disease in the large cantonments. The commission 

read like a future who’s who of American medicine, and included Eugenie 

L.  Opie, the future dean of Washington University School of Medicine; Francis 

G.  Blake, who would go on to become professor of internal medicine at Yale 

University; and Thomas Rivers, who would become one of the world’s leading 

virologists and director of the Rockefeller University hospital in New York. 

Assisting them in the surgeon general’s office with the rank of commanders 

were Victor Vaughan and William H.  Welch, the dean of the Johns Hopkins 

School of Medicine and then the most famous pathologist and bacteriologist in 

America, and Rufus Cole, the first director of the Rockefeller University 

Hospital and a specialist in pneumococcal disease. Together with his assistant 

Oswald Avery, Cole would direct laboratory investigations of the pneumonia 

outbreaks and train medical officers in the correct techniques for culturing the 

bacteria and making serums and vaccines. Meanwhile, keeping a watch over 

their endeavours would be Simon Flexner, the head of the Rockefeller Institute 

and a former student and protégé of Welch. 

* * * 

While American physicians were worrying about camp-acquired measles and 

pneumonia cases, medics in the British Army were becoming concerned 

about another respiratory disease. Labelled “purulent bronchitis” for want of 

a better term, the disease had broken out at Étaples in the bitterly cold winter 

of 1917, and by February 156 soldiers were dead. The initial stages resembled 

ordinary lobar pneumonia—a high fever and the expectoration of blood-

streaked sputum. But these symptoms soon gave way to a racing pulse accom -

panied by the discharge of thick pale yellow dollops of pus, suggesting bron -

chitis. In half of these cases death from “lung block” followed soon after. 

Another striking feature was cyanosis. This condition occurs when a patient 

becomes breathless because the lungs can no longer transfer oxygen  efficiently THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

6

to the blood and is characterized by a dusky purple-blue discolouration of the 

face, lips, and ears (it is oxygen that turns blood in the arteries red). However, 

in the case of the Étaples patients, their breathlessness was so acute that they 

tore off their bedclothes in distress. At autopsy, the pathologist, William 

Rolland, was shocked to find a thick, yellowish pus blocking the bronchi. In 

the larger bronchi, the pus was mixed with air, but when he cut a section 

through the smaller tubes he wrote, “the pus exudes spontaneously … with 

little or no admixture of air.” 6 This explained why the attempt to relieve 

patients’ symptoms by giving them piped oxygen had been of little use. 

Étaples was not the only army camp where this peculiar disease appeared. In 

March 1917 a similar outbreak had occurred at Aldershot, “The Home of the 

British Army,” in southern England. Once again the disease proved fatal to half 

to those it infected, the signature feature being the exudation of a yellowish 

pus followed by breathlessness and cyanosis. Of the cyanosed patients, physi -

cians noted, “no treatment that we have been able to devise appears to do any 

good.” To some, the short shallow breathing recalled the “effects of gas poi -

soning,” 7 but later the bacteriologists and pathologists who examined the 

Aldershot and Étaples cases became convinced it had been a type of influ -

enza. 8 Flu had long been recognized as a trigger for bronchial infections. 

During influenza epidemics and the seasonal outbreaks of the disease which 

occurred every fall and winter, epidemiologists were accustomed to seeing a 

spike in respiratory deaths, particularly among the very young or elderly 

sections of the population. But for young adults and those below the age of 

seventy, flu was considered more of a nuisance than a mortal threat to life, 

and convalescents were frequently viewed with suspicion. 

* * * 

We may never know whether the outbreaks at Étaples and Aldershot were flu, 

but in March 1918 another unusual respiratory outbreak visited a large army 

camp—this time at Camp Funston in Kansas. Initially, physicians thought they 

were seeing another wave of camp-acquired pneumonias, but they soon 

revised their opinion. 

The first casualty was supposedly the camp cook. On 4  March, he woke 

with a splitting headache and aches in his neck and back and reported to the 

base hospital. Soon, one hundred other members of the 164th Depot Brigade 

had joined him, and by the third week in March more than 1,200 men were 

on the sick list, forcing Fort Riley’s chief medical officer to requisition a 

hangar adjacent to the hospital for the overflow. The illness resembled classic THE BLUE DEATH 

7

influenza: chills followed by high fever, sore throat, headache, and abdominal 

pains. However, many patients were so incapacitated that they found it impos -

sible to stand up; hence the malady’s nickname, “knock-me-down fever.” Most 

of the men recovered within three to five days, but, disturbingly, several went 

on to develop severe pneumonias. Unlike the pneumonias after measles, 

which tended to localize in the bronchi, these post-influenzal pneumonias 

frequently extended to the entire lobe of a lung. In all, such lobar pneumonias 

had developed in 237 men, roughly one-fifth of those hospitalized, and by 

May there had been 75 deaths. As Opie and Rivers discovered the following 

July when the pneumonia commission eventually arrived to conduct an inves -

tigation, there were other disturbing features, too: after the initial epidemic 

had petered out in March there had been further outbreaks in April and May, 

each one corresponding to the arrival of a new group of draftees. 9 Not only 

that, but men transferred to camps in the East appeared to carry the disease 

with them, and when many of these same men joined the American 

Expeditionary Force and mingled freely with soldiers sailing for Europe, they 

sparked further outbreaks on board Atlantic troopships. The pattern contin -

ued when the transports arrived at Brest, the main disembarkation point for 

American troops, and disgorged their cargo. “Epidemic of acute infectious 

fever, nature unknown,” reported a medical officer at a US Army hospital in 

Bordeaux on 15  April. By May, “grippe” had broken out in the French lines 

and scores of British soldiers at Étaples were sick with PUO—“pyrexia of 

unknown origin.” As at Funston, the initial cases were mild but by June thou -

sands of Allied troops were being hospitalized, and by August alarm was 

mounting. “These successive outbreaks tended to be progressively more 

severe both in character and extent, which would speak for an increasing 

virulence of the causative agent,” observed Alan M.  Chesney, a medical officer 

at an AEF artillery training camp in Valdahon. 10 

Chesney’s was a rare example of concern. In the summer of 1918 no one had 

experienced a pandemic of influenza for twenty-eight years. Compared to 

typhus, a deadly blood-borne disease spread by lice that lived in soldiers’ cloth -

ing, or the septicaemia that bred in gunshot and shrapnel wounds, influenza was 

a trifling infection from the point of view of army medical officers. Civilian 

physicians regarded flu with similar disdain, particularly the British, who had 

long considered influenza a suspect Italian word for a bad cold or catarrh. *   

> *Influenza derives from the Latinate Italian phrase influenza coeli , meaning “influence
> of the heavens.”

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

8

Besides, after nearly five years of brutal trench warfare which had already 

claimed the lives of tens of thousands of Europeans, and with two million 

Allied troops now dug in in northern France and Flanders, officers had more 

pressing issues on their minds. “Quite 1/3 of the Batt. and about 30 officers 

are smitten with the Spanish Flu,” the poet Wilfred Owen informed his 

mother, Susan, disdainfully in a letter from a British Army camp in 

Scarborough, North Yorkshire, in June. “The thing is much too common for 

me to take part in. I have quite decided not to! Imagine the work that falls on 

unaffected officers.” 11 

Owen was wrong to be so complacent. Between the summer of 1918 and 

the spring of 1919, tens of thousands of soldiers and millions of civilians 

would be mown down by Spanish flu (so-called because Spain was the only 

country not to censor reports of the spreading epidemic) as the disease rico -

cheted between America and northern Europe before engulfing the entire 

globe. In the United States alone, some 675,000 Americans would perish in 

the successive waves of flu; in France, perhaps as many as 400,000; in Britain, 

228,000. Worldwide, the death toll from the Spanish flu pandemic has been 

estimated at 50 million—five times as many as died in the fighting in World 

War One and 10 million more than AIDS has killed in thirty years. 

One reason Owen and others were so relaxed about influenza was that in 

1918 medical scientists were confident that they knew how the disease was 

transmitted. After all, in 1892 Richard Pfeiffer, the son-in-law of Robert 

Koch, the German “father” of bacteriology, had announced that he had identi -

fied the disease’s “exciting cause,” a tiny Gram-negative bacterium he dubbed 

Bacillus influenzae . Pfeiffer’s “discovery” came at the height of the so-called 

Russian influenza pandemic and made headline news around the world, fuel -

ling expectations that it would only be a matter of time before scientists 

trained in German laboratory techniques had produced a vaccine. Never mind 

that other researchers were not always able to isolate “Pfeiffer’s bacillus,” as 

the bacterium was popularly known, from the throat washings and bronchial 

expectorations of influenza patients. Or that it was notoriously difficult to 

cultivate the bacteria on artificial media and it often took several attempts to 

grow colonies of sufficient size that the small, spherical, and colourless bodies 

could be visualized through a microscope using special dyes. Or that despite 

inoculating monkeys with the bacillus, Pfeiffer and his Berlin colleague, 

Shibashuro Kitasato, had so far been unable to transfer the disease, thereby 

failing the test of Koch’s fourth postulate. 12  As far as most medical authorities 

were concerned, Pfeiffer’s bacillus  was  the aetiological agent of influenza and 

that was that. Rare was the man of science who dared to  challenge the authority THE BLUE DEATH 

9

of Koch and his disciples by expressing unease at the failure to find the bacil -

lus in each and every case of influenza. 

Perhaps that explains why, on arriving at Camp Funston in July, Opie, 

Blake, and Rivers had ignored the fact that researchers had failed to find 

Bacillus influenzae  in 77  per  cent of the pneumonia cases, or that the bacillus 

had also been isolated from the mouths of one-third of the healthy men, i.e., 

those who had  not  shown any signs or symptoms of influenza. * Instead, they 

tried to make sense of the higher pneumonia attack rates observed among 

African American draftees from Louisiana and Mississippi, an incidence they 

attributed to racial differences between white and “coloured” troops. This was 

despite observing that the units that had suffered most severely from post-

influenzal pneumonias were the ones that were new to the camp and had only 

been at Fort Riley for three to six months, and that a greater proportion of 

the African American draftees came from rural areas. 13  For the most part, the 

survey was dull, repetitive work and Blake soon found himself longing for a 

change of scene. As he complained to his wife on 9  August, “No letter from 

my beloved for two days. No cool days, no cool nights, no drinks, no movies, 

no dances, no club, no pretty women, no shower bath, no poker, no people, 

no fun, no joy, no nothing save heat and blistering sun and scorching winds 

and sweat and dust and thirst and long and stifling nights and working all 

hours and lonesomeness and general hell—that’s Fort Riley, Kansas.” 14 

Very soon Opie, Blake, and Rivers would get orders to leave Kansas, only 

to be thrust into a far worse hell when they found themselves in the midst of 

a raging epidemic of influenza and pneumonia at Camp Pike, Arkansas. They 

were spared the worst hell of all, however. 

* * * 

In August 1918, Clifton Skillings, a 23-year-old farmer from Ripley, Maine, 

boarded a southbound Boston train. Like thousands of other American men 

of fighting age, Skillings had received his draft papers a few weeks earlier and 

had now been ordered to report for duty to Camp Devens. Alighting at Ayer, 

he fell into step with other draftees dressed in their Sunday best and began 

striding toward the camp, with a trooper on horseback leading the way. To the 

eyes of the Boston men, Ayer was a “hick town.” 15  Whether Skillings thought 

it so he does not say, but to judge by his letters and his postcards he did not   

> *Today the bacillus is referred to as Haemophilus influenzae .

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

10 

care particularly for the food. “We have your beans at noon but they are not 

like the beans you get at home,” he complained to his family on 24  August. “It 

makes me think of mixing up dog food.” Skillings immediately fell in with a 

group from Skowhegan, Maine, but was amazed to learn that the camp 

included men from midwestern states such as Minnesota. “There is a good 

many thousand men in this campground. It seems awful funny to see nothing 

but men … I wish you folks could come in & look around.” Four weeks later 

the size of the camp and the quality of food is the least of his concerns, how -

ever. “Lots of the boys are sick and in the hospital,” he wrote home on 

23  September. “It is a disease. Some [thing] like the Gripp … I don’t think I 

will get it.” 16 

It’s not known where the fall wave of influenza originated. It could have 

been incubating in America over the summer, but more likely it was intro -

duced by troops returning from Europe. From an ecological point of view, 

northern France was a vast biological experiment—a place where large 

masses of men from two continents converged and mingled freely with men 

from a host of other nations, including Indian soldiers from the Punjab, 

African regiments from Nigeria and Sierra Leone, Chinese “coolies,” and 

Indochinese labourers from Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. One theory is that 

the second wave began with an outbreak at a coaling station in Sierra Leone 

at the end of August, from whence it spread rapidly to other West African 

countries and to Europe via British naval vessels. 17  Another is that the bug was 

already in Europe, hence the pre-pandemic waves recorded in Copenhagen 

and other northern European cities in July. 18 

In the United States, the second wave had first announced itself toward the 

end of August at Commonwealth Pier in Boston, one of the main entry points 

for returning AEF troops, when several sailors were suddenly taken ill. By 

29  August, fifty had been transferred to the Chelsea Naval Hospital, where 

they came under the care of Lieutenant Commander Milton Rosenau, a for -

mer director of the US Public Health Service’s Hygienic Laboratory and a 

member of Harvard Medical School. Rosenau isolated the sailors in an effort 

to contain the outbreak, but by early September US naval stations in 

Newport, Rhode Island, and New London, Connecticut, were also reporting 

significant numbers of flu cases. 19  At around the same time, Devens saw an 

increase in pneumonia cases. Then, on 7  September, a soldier from Company 

B, 42nd infantry, was admitted to the base hospital with “epidemic meningi -

tis.” In fact, his symptoms—runny nose, sore throat, and inflammation of the 

nasal passages—were consistent with influenza, and when the following day 

twelve more men from the same company fell ill with similar symptoms, THE BLUE DEATH 

11 

doctors had no hesitation in labelling it a “mild” form of Spanish influenza. 20 

It would not remain mild for long. 

When a parasitic organism meets a susceptible host for the first time, it 

triggers an arms race between the pathogen and the host’s immune system. 

Having never encountered the pathogen before, the immune system is ini -

tially blindsided and takes time to mobilize its defences and launch a counter -

attack. With nothing to stop it, the pathogen tears through the host’s tissue, 

invading cells and multiplying at will. At this stage, the parasite resembles a 

child having a tantrum. With no one and nothing to discipline it, its tantrum 

can easily escalate and its behaviour can become increasingly virulent. 

Eventually, in the most extreme cases of all, its rage may become all-consum -

ing. This is usually bad news for the host. From a Darwinian point of view, 

however, the parasite does not want to kill its host; its primary objective is to 

survive long enough to escape and infect a new susceptible. In other words, 

the death of the host is a bad strategy for a parasite, an “accident” of biology if 

you will. A far better survival strategy over the long term is to evolve in the 

other direction, toward avirulence, resulting in an infection that is mild or 

barely detectable in the host. But in order for that to happen, the immune 

system must first find a way of taming the parasite. 

It did not take long for the infection to spread from the 42nd infantry to 

adjacent barracks, and when it did, the flu was nothing like the “mild” spring 

wave. It was explosive. By 10  September more than five hundred men had 

been admitted to the base hospital at Devens. Within four days, those num -

bers had tripled, and on 15  September a further 705 were admitted. The next 

three days were the worst, however. On 16  September medical orderlies had 

to find beds for a further 1,189 men and the following day beds for 2,200 

more. The pneumonia cases began to mount soon afterward, but they were 

nothing like the bronchopneumonias associated with measles. Instead, they 

resembled more severe versions of the lobar pneumonias that had developed 

in some of the flu cases at Camp Funston in the spring. “These men start with 

what appears to be an ordinary attack of  La Grippe  or Influenza, and when 

brought to the Hosp. they very rapidly develop the most vicious type of 

Pneumonia that has ever been seen,” recalled a Scottish physician named Roy, 

who was present when pneumonia ripped through the wards. “Two hours 

after admission they have the Mahogany spots over the cheek bones, and a few 

hours later you can begin to see the Cyanosis extending from their ears and 

spreading all over the face, until it is hard to distinguish the coloured men 

from the white. … One could stand it to see, one, two or twenty men die, 

but to see these poor devils dropping like flies … is horrible.” 21 THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

12 

As the writer John Barry noted in his book  The Great Influenza , in 1918 

these cyanoses were so extreme that victims’ entire bodies would take on a 

dark purple hue, sparking “rumours that the disease was not influenza, but the 

Black Death.” 22  British Army medical officers, many, like Welch and Vaughan, 

experienced civilian physicians and pathologists who had taken military com -

missions at the outset of war, were similarly impressed by these cyanotic cases 

and, struck by the resemblance to the cyanoses seen at Étaples and Aldershot 

in the winter of 1917, commissioned an artist from the Royal Academy to 

paint patients in the last throes of illness. The artist labelled the final stage 

“heliotrope cyanosis” after the deep blue flowers of the same name beloved by 

English gardeners. 23 

As concerns about measles and pneumonia had grown over the summer, 

the surgeon general’s office in Washington had kept Welch, Vaughan and Cole 

busy. They were sent to make an inspection of Camp Wheeler, near Macon, 

Georgia, and other camps in the South. On leaving Macon in early September, 

Welch had suggested they stop at the Mountain Meadows Inn, a fashionable 

retreat in Asheville, North Carolina. A portly man famous for his love of 

cigars and gourmet dining, Welch was now in his late sixties and, except for 

a strip of white around the ears, almost completely bald. To offset the absence 

of hair on top, he sported a fashionable goatee and moustache, which were 

also white. To some this gave him the appearance of an elder statesmen—an 

impression underscored by his reputation for being an aloof and distracted 

teacher. But that was the older Welch. In his youth his imagination had been 

fired by reports from Germany of the advances being made in the under -

standing of disease processes using the microscope and new laboratory meth -

ods, and in 1876 he had set sail for Leipzig to work with Carl Ludwig, then 

the foremost experimental pathologist in the world. From Ludwig, Welch 

learned that “the most important lesson for a microscopist [was] not to be 

satisfied with loose thinking and half proofs … but to observe closely and 

carefully facts.” The experience made an indelible impression and, on his 

return to the United States, Welch set about conveying the principles and 

techniques he had acquired in Europe to a new generation of American medi -

cal students, first at Bellevue Medical College, New York, and later at Johns 

Hopkins, the university that, more than any other American institution, is 

credited with creating a new paradigm for medical education in the United 

States. 24  There, to contemporaries such as William Osler and William Steward 

Halstead, Welch was considered a bon vivant whose favourite pastimes were 

swimming, carnival rides, and five-dessert dinners in Atlantic City. But for all 

that they might tease the confirmed bachelor by referring to him as “Popsy,” THE BLUE DEATH 

13 

they also recognized that few could equal Welch’s skills as an anatomist. When 

Welch cared to, he could also awe his students with his intellect and knowl -

edge of art and culture. As Simon Flexner, who went on to write a biography 

of his former teacher, recalled, Welch’s technique was initially to ignore his 

students and leave them to their own devices in the laboratory. But on rare 

evenings when he invited promising students to dine with him, “a spell fell 

over the room as the quiet voice talked on, and the young men, some of them 

already a little round-shouldered from too much peering into the microscope 

… resolved to go to art galleries, to hear music, to read the masterpieces of 

literature about which Welch discoursed so excitingly.” 25 

Welch and his colleagues used their stay in North Carolina to go over what 

they had learned during their tour of the South. The consensus was that a 

better understanding of the immunity of newly drafted men held the key to 

understanding the measles and pneumonia outbreaks. The Meadows Inn “is a 

delightful, restful, quiet place,” Welch observed on 19  September. It would be 

the last respite the group would enjoy for some time. 

Two days later they were back in Washington, DC, but no sooner had they 

alighted at Union Station than they were informed that Devens had been 

struck by Spanish influenza and they were to proceed immediately to Ayer. 

The scene that confronted them there was shocking and difficult to compre -

hend. By now the base hospital was overflowing with patients and care was 

almost non-existent. More than 6,000 men were crammed into the 800-bed 

facility, with cots installed in every nook, crevice, and cranny. Nurses and 

doctors had so exhausted themselves caring for the sick that many also now 

lay ill or dying, having failed, as one observer put it, to “buck the game.” 26 

Everywhere Welch and Vaughan looked there were men coughing up blood. 

In many instances, crimson fluids poured from nostrils and ears. Even eight 

years later the images were still etched in Vaughan’s memory. “I see hundreds 

of young, stalwart men in the uniform of their country coming into the wards 

of the hospital in groups of ten or more,” he wrote in 1926. “They are placed 

on the cots until every bed is full and yet others crowd in. The faces soon 

wear a bluish cast; a distressing cough brings up the bloodstained sputum. In 

the morning the dead bodies are stacked about the morgue like cord wood 

… such are the grewsome [ sic ] pictures exhibited by the revolving memory 

cylinders in the brain of an old epidemiologist.” 27 

The scene that greeted them in the autopsy room, once they had stepped 

over the cadavers blocking the entrance, was possibly even more gruesome. 

Before them, on the autopsy table, lay the corpse of a young man. According 

to Cole, when they tried to move him, bloody fluids poured from his nose. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

14 

Nevertheless, Welch decided it was imperative to take a closer look at his 

lungs. What he saw astonished the veteran pathologist. As Cole recalled: 

“When the chest was opened and the blue swollen lungs were removed and 

opened, and Dr  Welch saw the wet, foamy surfaces with real consolidation, 

he turned and said, ‘This must be some new kind of infection or plague’ … 

it shocked me to find that the situation, momentarily at least, was too much 

even for Dr  Welch.” 28 

By the end of October one-third of the camp’s population, some 15,000 

soldiers, had contracted influenza and 787 had died of the pneumonic com -

plications of the disease. Two-thirds of these pneumonias were of the lobar 

variety. 29  Such pneumonias tended to have a very rapid onset and terminated 

in either massive pulmonary haemorrhage or pulmonary edema. The devasta -

tion was far more extensive than is usually seen in lobar pneumonias, with 

damage to the epithelial cells that line the respiratory tract but little evidence 

of bacterial action. The other type was more akin to an acute aggressive bron -

chopneumonia and was characterized by more localized changes, from which 

pathogenic bacteria could usually be cultured at autopsy. 30 

The first kind of pneumonia was unlike anything pathologists had observed 

before in either lobar or bronchopneumonias, fully justifying Welch’s descrip -

tion of it as some new kind of plague. But while Welch’s intuition may have 

been correct, he was not yet ready to abandon old certainties. Perhaps it was 

the fault of his formative years in Leipzig, followed by his battles to get the 

American medical profession to embrace the new German laboratory meth -

ods, that made him reluctant to challenge the conclusions reached by Pfeiffer 

as to the aetiological role of his bacillus, even when his gut instincts as a 

pathologist told him that this was something both new and terrifying. Or per -

haps it was the fact that by now American scientists trained in the same bacte -

riological techniques were finding  B. influenzae  in influenza patients with simi -

larly gruesome lung pathologies. Foremost among these scientists was William 

H.  Park, the chief of the laboratory division of the New York City Health 

Department, and his deputy Anna Williams, both highly respected medical 

researchers. Mindful of the importance of observing “closely and carefully” and 

“not to be satisfied with … half proofs,” Welch approached Burt Wolbach, the 

chief pathologist of Brigham Hospital, Boston, and asked him to conduct fur -

ther autopsies to see if all cases of this influenza shared the same peculiar lung 

pathology he had seen at Devens. Next he called the surgeon general’s office 

to give a detailed description of the disease and urge that “immediate provision 

be made in every camp for the rapid expansion of hospital space.” 31  The third 

person he approached was Oswald Avery at the Rockefeller Institute. THE BLUE DEATH 

15 

A m ethodical medical researcher, famous for his austere lifestyle, Avery 

lived for the laboratory. Working with Cole, he had already perfected tech -

niques for identifying the four main subtypes of pneumococcus responsible 

for lobar pneumonia using specific serums. Next he had gone on to study how 

efficiently each type killed mice and in what dosages—experiments that led 

him to conclude that virulence was a function of the ability of the polysac -

charide capsule of the pneumococcus to resist ingestion by white blood cells, 

the immune system’s first line of defence against invasive bacteria. 

One of the challenges of culturing  Bacillus influenzae  is that it is a fastidious 

organism that grows only within a very narrow temperature range and which 

depends heavily on oxygen, meaning it is usually found only on the surface of 

culture mediums. Because it tends to grow singly or in pairs, and its colonies 

are translucent and lacking in structure, it is also very easy to miss when 

looking through the field of an optical microscope. Pfeiffer had realized that 

a substrate of haemoglobin greatly facilitated growth of the bacillus and pro -

moted his blood agar culture as necessary for establishing it (Pfeiffer recom -

mended pigeon’s blood; other researchers used rabbit’s blood). Once a bac -

teriologist had obtained colonies of the bacillus, the next step was to stain it 

with an appropriate dye, wash it with alcohol, then stain it again with a con -

trasting dye (Gram-positive bacteria retain crystal violet stains, whereas  B.

influenzae  and other Gram-negative bacteria, such as mycobacteria, require 

red counterstains). 32  Such stains could also be applied directly to slides 

smeared with sputum from influenza cases. However, a more precise and 

conclusive method was to prepare pure cultures of the bacillus by inoculating 

mice with sputum from flu patients and then growing the bacteria from fluids 

taken from the mice and reintroduced to the blood agar media. 

Like other researchers, Avery at first found it difficult to grow Pfeiffer’s 

bacillus from the sputum and bronchial expectorations of flu victims, so, to 

increase his chances, he refined his methods, adding acids to his agar culture 

medium and substituting defibrinated blood for untreated blood (other 

researchers heated the blood or filtered and dried it to separate the haemoglo -

bin from the fibrin). Gradually, as Avery perfected his techniques, he was able 

to find the bacillus more and more frequently, until he was able to tell Welch it 

was present in twenty-two of thirty dead soldiers examined at Devens. 

Wolbach’s results were even more definitive: he had found the bacillus in every 

case he examined at Brigham Hospital. That was enough for Welch, Cole, and 

Vaughan. “It is established that the influenza at Camp Devens is caused by the 

bacillus of Pfeiffer,” they wired th e surgeon general on 27  September. 33 

* * * THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

16 

In fact, influenza is a viral infection.  B. influenzae  is merely a fellow traveller. 

Like other bacteria commonly found in the mouths, throats, and lungs of 

influenza patients, it is not the primary cause of the disease, though it may 

play a role in secondary infections. 34  However, in the fall of 1918 no one 

knew this, though some researchers had begun to suspect it. Instead, failure 

to cultivate  B. influenzae  reflected badly on researchers, not the theory of 

bacterial causation. Indeed, so dominant was the scientific view that influenza 

was a bacterial infection that, rather than doubt Pfeiffer’s claim, scientists 

chose to doubt their instruments and methods. If the bacillus could not be 

cultivated on the first attempt, they needed to improve their culture medium, 

refine their dyes, and try again. 

Anomalies are a common occurrence in science. No two experiments are 

ever exactly alike, but by refining methods and sharing tools and technolo -

gies, scientists are broadly able to reproduce each other’s observations and 

findings, thereby arriving at a consensus that this or that interpretation of the 

world is correct. That is how knowledge emerges and a particular paradigm 

comes to be adopted. However, there is no such thing as absolute certainty in 

science. Paradigms are constantly being refined by new observations and, if 

enough anomalies are found, faith in the paradigm may be undermined and a 

new one may come to supplant it. Indeed, the best scientists welcome anoma -

lies and uncertainty as this is the way scientific knowledge advances. 

When Pfeiffer first put forward his claim for the aetiological role of his 

bacillus, the science of bacteriology and the germ-theory paradigm (one 

germ, one disease) was in the ascendancy. With the invention of improved 

achromatic lenses and better culture-staining techniques, by the late 1880s 

Robert Koch and Louis Pasteur had brought a series of hitherto hard-to-

detect germs into view. These included not only such landmark bacteria as the 

bacilli of fowl cholera and tuberculosis, but streptococcus and staphylococ -

cus. In short order, their discoveries paved the way for the development of 

serums and bacterial vaccines against diseases such as cholera, typhoid and 

plague, and by the eve of World War I, Avery and Cole were using the same 

methods to develop vaccines for pneumococcal pneumonias. 

When Pfeiffer made his announcement in 1892, it raised hopes that it 

would not be long before bacteriology had also delivered a vaccine for influ -

enza. But from the beginning, Pfeiffer’s claim was dogged by doubts and 

anomalous observations. The first problem was that Pfeiffer had failed to find 

B. influenzae  in the majority of clinical cases he had examined in Berlin during 

the Russian influenza epidemic. Second, as noted previously, he had been 

unable to reproduce the disease in monkeys inoculated with pure cultures of THE BLUE DEATH 

17 

the bacillus (Pfeiffer does not specify what type of monkey he used, but his 

failure may have been because many monkeys are a poor refractory species 

for human influenzas). 35  Soon afterwards, Edward Klein, a Vienna-trained 

histologist and author of the leading British textbook on bacteriology, suc -

ceeded in isolating the bacillus from a series of patients admitted to hospitals 

in London during the same epidemic of Russian flu. However, Klein also 

noted finding “crowds” of other bacteria in sputum cultures and observed that 

as the condition of influenza patients improved, it became progressively more 

difficult to find Pfeiffer’s bacillus in the colonies on the agar plating medium 

used to grow bacteria. Finally, Klein noted that  B. influenzae  had also been 

isolated from patients suffering diseases  other than  influenza. 

After 1892, the Russian influenza epidemic abated and it was no longer 

possible to conduct bacteriological exams of influenza patients. Now and then 

there would be a resurgence of Russian flu, however, and investigators would 

attempt to culture the bacillus from the sputum and lung secretions of con -

valescents. Sometimes these efforts succeeded, but just as often they did not. 

For instance, in 1906 David J.  Davis, from the Memorial Institute for 

Infectious Disease in Chicago, reported being able to isolate the bacillus in 

only three of seventeen cases of influenza. By contrast he had found the bacil -

lus in all but five of sixty-one cases of whooping cough. The following year, 

W.  D’Este Emery, clinical pathologist at King’s College London, noted that 

B. influenzae  grew more readily in culture in the presence of other respiratory 

bacteria and seemed to be more virulent for animals in the presence of killed 

streptococci, leading him to speculate that Pfeiffer’s bacillus might, for the 

most part, be a “harmless saprophyte” and that it required other respiratory 

pathogens to make it pathogenic. 36 

With the emergence of Spanish flu in 1918, researchers were able to resume 

their investigations. Again, the results were mixed, and again the anomalies cast 

doubt on Pfeiffer’s claim. By the summer, concerns had reached such a pitch 

that a special meeting was convened at the Munich Medical Union. Summarizing 

the debate,  The Lancet  wrote that “Pfeiffer’s bacillus has been found but excep -

tionally,” and that if any bacteria had a claim to be the cause of influenza it should 

be the far more common streptococci and pneumococci. 37  Britain’s Royal 

College of Physicians concurred, arguing that there was “insufficient evidence” 

for Pfeiffer’s claim, though it was happy to allow that the bacillus played an 

important secondary role in fatal respiratory complications of influenza. 38  In 

other words, the aetiological role of  B. influenzae  might be open to question, but 

the bacterial paradigm was not. However, this paradigm was now facing a seri -

ous challenge from another quarter. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

18 

If Koch was the German father of bacteriology, then Louis Pasteur was its 

French parent or, as one writer puts it, microbiology’s “lynchpin.” 39  In his first 

biological paper, published in 1857 at the age of 35, Pasteur, then a relatively 

unknown French chemist working in Lille, boldly formulated what he called 

the germ theory of fermentation—namely, that each particular type of fer -

mentation is caused by a specific kind of microbe. In the same paper he sug -

gested that this theory could be generalized into a specific microbial aetiology 

of disease and, later, a general biological principle captured by his phrase, 

“Life is the germ, and the germ is life.” However, in his own lifetime Pasteur’s 

fame rested on a famous set of public experiments conducted two decades 

later, in which he isolated the bacteria of anthrax and chicken cholera and, 

using basic chemical techniques (heat or exposure to oxygen), weakened the 

microbes to the point where they lost their virulence. Next, he demonstrated 

that these weakened strains could confer protection to animals challenged 

with fully virulent versions of the same bacteria. In so doing, Pasteur opened 

up a whole new branch of microbiology: the study of immunology. Pasteur 

realized that weak or attenuated microbes stimulated the host (sheep in the 

case of anthrax; chickens in the case of cholera) to produce substances (anti -

bodies) that protected them against challenge with more virulent, disease-

causing microbes. Eight years later, in 1885, Pasteur conducted an even more 

astounding microbiological experiment by applying the same principles to the 

rabies virus. Taking the spinal cord from a rabid dog, he injected the diseased 

material into a rabbit, and, when the rabbit fell ill, repeated the procedure 

with another rabbit. By passaging the virus in rabbits every few days, he was 

able to heighten its virulence for rabbits, but reduce its virulence for dogs. 

Next, he went a stage further and removed the spinal cord of a dead rabbit 

and dried it for fourteen days. This new attenuated virus no longer caused 

disease in dogs at all. Instead, it immunized them against challenge with fully 

virulent rabies. Next, Pasteur staged a daring public demonstration by admin -

istering his vaccine to a nine-year-old boy, Joseph Meister, who had been 

bitten in fourteen places by a rabid dog. Meister made a rapid recovery, 

prompting banner headlines. Other than smallpox, this was the first success -

ful immunization with a virus vaccine, and within a few months Pasteur was 

inundated with requests from victims of rabid animal attacks from Smolensk 

to Seville. However, perhaps the most remarkable aspect of Pasteur’s break -

through in retrospect is that he developed the vaccine without being able to 

see the rabies virus or having much idea what a virus was. The reason is that 

rabies, like other viruses, is too small to be seen through an optical micro -

scope (it measures 150 nanometres, or 0.15 micrometres, and requires THE BLUE DEATH 

19 

magnifications ten thousand times greater than were available in Pasteur’s 

day). But although Pasteur could not visualize the virus or cultivate it in the 

laboratory, he could intuit its existence by excluding microbes that he  could 

grow and see, i.e., bacteria. Indeed, in 1892, the same year that Pfeiffer had 

claimed that a bacillus was the cause of influenza, the Russian botanist Dmitry 

Ivanovski had shown that tobacco mosaic disease was caused by an unseen 

agent that passed through porcelain filters with pores too small to admit 

bacteria. By the turn of the century, these filters, known as Chamberland 

filters after their inventor Charles Chamberland, were being manufactured 

and used in research laboratories in Europe and elsewhere, leading to the 

identification of a variety of “filter passing” agents, including the agents of foot 

and mouth disease of cattle, bovine pleuropneumonia, rabbit myxomatosis 

and African horse sickness. Then, in 1902, a commission headed by US Army 

Surgeon Walter Reed identified the first filter-passing human disease, yellow 

fever. 40  At the Pasteur Institute in Paris, these agents were referred to as “ virus 

filtrants ”—“filter-passing viruses.” 

After his death in 1885, Pasteur’s disciples, such as Emile Roux and Roux’s 

star pupil Charles Nicolle, continued these investigations. Dividing his time 

between biomedical research and administrative duties—it was Roux who 

created the Pasteur Institute—by 1902 Roux had identified ten diseases that 

he believed were due to filter-passing viruses. The same year, he persuaded 

Nicolle to join the Pasteur Institute in Tunis. Though greatly attracted by lit -

erature, Nicolle had bowed to the wish of his physician father and studied 

medicine, but while practicing in Rouen had suffered a hearing loss that pre -

vented him from effectively using a stethoscope—an accident that may have 

persuaded him to concentrate on bacteriology instead and accept the position 

in North Africa. Nicolle quickly showed himself worthy of Roux’s faith, and 

on arriving in Tunis launched a study of epidemic typhus. At the time, most 

doctors thought typhus, which tended to decimate armies at times of war and 

was a particular problem in prisons and other closed institutions, was a dis -

ease of filth and squalor. No one realized typhus was actually transmitted by 

the body louse ( Pediculus humanis corporis ), which infested unlaundered cloth -

ing, or that the agent was a tiny intracellular organism belonging to the 

Rickettsia  family—the same family responsible for the tick-borne disease 

Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Nicolle began by injecting guinea pigs with 

blood from patients with typhus, showing that, although they did not develop 

the disease, the inoculations resulted in transient fevers—evidence that they 

were sub-clinically or, as Nicole put it, “inapparently” infected by something 

in the blood. However, the crucial observation came when he was observing THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

20 

typhus patients entering the Sadiki Hospital in Tunis and realized that they 

ceased to be infectious as soon as their clothing was removed and they were 

bathed and dressed in hospital uniforms. Suspecting that lice, not dirt, was 

the cause, Nicolle requested a chimpanzee from Roux and injected the chimp 

with blood from a typhus patient. When the chimp developed fever and skin 

eruptions, he injected its blood into a macaque monkey, and when the 

macaque also fell ill he allowed lice to feed on it. In this way, he was able to 

transfer the infection to other macaques and, eventually, a chimp. In 

September 1909, he communicated his finding that lice were the carriers of 

typhus to the French Academy of Sciences—a discovery for which in 1928 he 

was awarded the Nobel Prize. 41 

Although Nicolle’s efforts to develop a vaccine for typhus would be unsuc -

cessful (this would be left to others), it was only natural that when the influenza 

epidemic struck he would want to study it using similar methods. There is no 

evidence that Nicolle had worked on influenza before or had tried to culture its 

putative bacillus, but by the summer of 1918 French bacteriologists raised in 

the Pastorian tradition were finding it increasingly difficult to isolate Pfeiffer’s 

organism and were becoming increasingly sceptical of the German’s claims. 

Instead, Nicolle and his assistant, Charles Lebailly, began to suspect that, like the 

microbe of yellow fever, influenza might be a filter-passer. 

By late August the flu had reached Tunis and there were signs of  la grippe 

everywhere. Whether this was an extension of the same flu that had visited 

Europe in the spring and early part of the summer or a different strain, such 

as the more virulent strain seen at Devens in the autumn of 1918, is difficult 

to say. The point is that rather than trying to cultivate the bacillus, Nicolle 

decided to use the same method he had used with typhus. Accordingly, in late 

August he and Lebailly requested more test animals and began monitoring 

patients with flu. Chimpanzees were now impossible to obtain, so once again 

Nicolle settled on macaques, a fortunate choice as it turned out. Nicolle and 

Lebailly then looked for a household afflicted by the epidemic to be sure that 

they were examining a definitive case of  la grippe , and not some other disease. 

The patient they selected was a 44-year-old man, identified only as “M.M.,” 

who had fallen ill on 24  August, together with his daughters. Six days later, 

M.M.  was displaying classic symptoms of influenza—nasopharyngitis, a vio -

lent headache, and fever—and Nicolle and Lebailly drew some blood. The 

following day, 1  September, they also collected bronchial expectorations. At 

this point, Nicolle and Lebailly had no idea if it was possible to transmit flu to 

a monkey or if the organism responsible for the disease was to be found in 

human blood, sputum, or other bodily fluids. However, while noting that THE BLUE DEATH 

21 

M.M.’s sputum contained “diverse” bacteria, including  B. influenzae , they 

observed that the bacillus was present in “minimal” amounts and did not 

attempt to prepare pure cultures of the bacillus. Instead, they removed  B.

influenzae  and other bacteria from M.M.’s bronchial expectorations using a 

Chamberland filter and injected the filtrate directly into the eyes and nose of 

a Chinese bonnet monkey ( Macacus sinicus ). At the same time, they adminis -

tered the filtrate to two human volunteers, a 22-year-old who was inocu -

lated under the skin, and a 30-year-old who received the filtrate intrave -

nously. Six days later, both the macaque and the first volunteer came down 

with symptoms highly suggestive of flu—the monkey developed a fever and 

marked depression with loss of appetite, while the 22-year-old experienced 

rapid onset of fever, accompanied by a runny nose, headache and general -

ized body aches. As no one else in the first volunteer’s living quarters devel -

oped influenza at the same time, Nicolle and Lebailly reasoned that the 

person had contracted flu from the filtrate. However, the second volunteer 

showed no signs of illness, even after fifteen days. Nicolle and Lebailly also 

attempted to infect other macaques by inoculating them with blood from 

M.M., but without success (the injections were given in either the mon -

keys’ peritoneal cavities or their brains). Using blood from the macaque, 

they also inoculated a third volunteer who developed apparent symptoms 

of influenza, but this also proved unsuccessful. Finally, on 15  September 

they repeated the first experiment with a long-tailed macaque ( Macacus 

cynomolgus ) and a fourth volunteer. This time the filtered expectorations 

resulted in only a slight rise in temperature in the monkey and induced mild 

symptoms of flu in the volunteer. 

By today’s standards the experiments were hardly ideal—for instance, 

Nicolle and Lebailly did not use other monkeys or humans as controls (pre -

sumably because macaques were in short supply), nor do they appear to have 

been “blinded” from their subjects, as would be required today. Moreover, 

they did not investigate the pathogenic effect of filtered sputum from  non-

influenza  cases, nor were they able to conduct passage experiments, as Pasteur 

had done with rabies in rabbits, to manipulate the virulence of the organism 

and reproduce the disease through several generations. Nevertheless, Nicolle 

and Lebailly concluded that the bronchial expectorations of influenza patients 

were virulent and that both the bonnet monkey and the long-tailed macaque 

were susceptible to subcutaneous inoculation with the filtered fluids. Flu 

therefore was an “ organisme filtrant ”—a filtered organism. They further con -

cluded that the filtered virus had “reproduced the disease” in the two people 

inoculated subcutaneously. 42 THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

22 

Nicolle and Lebailly’s paper detailing their findings was read by Roux 

before the French Academy of Sciences in Paris on 21  September—the day 

before Welch arrived at Devens and witnessed the carnage sweeping the 

camp. Ordinarily, such an announcement before a respected scientific body 

would make other researchers around the world sit up and take notice. But 

the world was in the midst of war and Welch and his colleagues had more 

pressing concerns. Besides, even if reports of Nicolle and Lebailly’s study had 

reached the surgeon general’s office in Washington, DC in time and the news 

had been communicated to Welch—and there is no evidence that at this stage 

it was—it is unlikely that he would have given it particular credence. After 

all, Nicolle and Lebailly’s investigations could hardly be considered conclu -

sive. Moreover, before accepting their findings, Welch would have wanted 

other researchers—preferably American ones—to duplicate their experi -

ments. The ideal place to do this was at the Rockefeller Institute, now an 

auxiliary laboratory of the US Army, or at nearby naval research laboratories 

in Boston and Rhode Island. The bacteriological paradigm of influenza could 

not be overturned on the basis of a just a few experiments conducted in 

North Africa thousands of miles from the main theatres of war and the 

world’s preeminent medical research institutions. 

Today, we know that Nicolle and Lebailly’s supposition was correct. 

Influenza  is  a virus. To be precise, it is composed of eight slender strands of 

ribonucleic acid (RNA)—by contrast the building blocks of human and 

other mammalian cells are comprised of double-stranded helix spirals of 

deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). However, Nicolle and Lebailly were almost 

certainly not justified in reaching that conclusion based on their experi -

ments. First, while it is possible they could have infected the human volun -

teers with influenza if they had dripped the filtrate directly into their noses, 

it is extremely unlikely they could have done so by injecting the filtrate 

under the skin. That is not to say that the volunteers did not have influenza, 

only that they probably did not get it the way that Nicolle and Lebailly 

thought they did. Second, although it is possible to infect a range of Old-

World monkeys with human flus (squirrel monkeys are particularly suscep -

tible), macaques are a poor refractory species for human influenza and rarely 

develop visible respiratory symptoms or lung damage. It is also very difficult 

to get them to “take” the disease by dripping filtrate into their noses or by 

exposing them to aerosols containing the virus—indeed, in studies con -

ducted in monkeys since 1918 researchers have reported far greater success 

with intravenous inoculations of the virus, somewhat ironic given Nicolle 

and Lebailly’s reported failure in this respect. 43 THE BLUE DEATH 

23 

To be fair, in the absence of a reliable animal model for human influenza 

and a means of propagating the virus in living cells, in 1918 no researcher 

stood much chance of demonstrating that influenza was a virus. That only 

became possible after 1933, when a team of British researchers studying 

canine distemper demonstrated that ferrets were highly sensitive to influenza 

and could be inoculated simply by introducing filtered sputum into their nasal 

passages. When, soon after, one of the ferrets sneezed on a scientist who was 

handling it and the scientist went on to develop flu, the viral aetiology of flu 

was considered proven. This was followed in 1934 by the discovery that influ -

enza viruses could be cultivated in chick egg embryos, freeing researchers 

from the need to collect samples from patients during an outbreak or to 

abandon their research when epidemics ended and the supply of flu patients 

dried up. 44  With chick embryo cultivation, the virus could now be propagated 

continuously in the laboratory, and scientists could be sure that they were 

performing experiments with the same strain of virus, something that had not 

been possible in 1918. By passaging flu viruses through embryonated hen’s 

eggs, scientists could also attenuate the viruses and manufacture vaccines, 

thereby providing protection against whichever type of flu happened to be 

circulating that season. *

* * * 

Unlike AIDS and smallpox, influenza is not a particularly disfiguring disease; 

for the most part, it does not leave visible marks or scars on the body. Nor 

does it cause victims to retch black fluids from their stomachs as yellow fever 

does, or induce uncontrollable diarrhoea as cholera does. But for those who 

witnessed the gruesome cyanotic end stages of the disease, when victims’ 

lungs were compromised by pneumonia and their cheeks and lips turned blue 

then dark purple, Spanish flu was shocking to behold. This was not only the 

case at Devens and other US Army camps, but on the transatlantic troopships 

that conveyed American soldiers to Europe. On the  Leviathan , a massive trans -

port that set sail from New York at the end of September, eyewitnesses 

described having to step through “pools of blood from severe nasal haemor -

rhages.” At first men were confined to steel cabins below deck in the hope of 

containing the infection, but within days of leaving New York so many were 

ill and the stench below decks was so overpowering that they were brought  

> *Chick egg embryo cultivation is still the principal means of making flu vaccines.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

24 

on deck to breathe the sea air. In an era before antibiotics, and with no vac -

cine, doctors were powerless to heal the afflicted. Instead, they distributed 

fresh fruit and water. Sadly, like the bloody discharges, these also soon ended 

up on the floor, so that the decks became “wet and slippery, [with the] groans 

and cries of the terrified added to the confusion of the applicants clamoring 

for treatment.” By the time the  Leviathan  arrived at Brest on 8  October, some 

2,000 soldiers were ill and eighty had died, the majority of their bodies hav -

ing been disposed of at sea. 45 

New Yorkers were unaware of the dreadful scenes on the  Leviathan . When 

the vessel set sail, most New Yorkers still thought of Spanish influenza as an 

exotic foreign disease. Public health officials, keen to contribute to the war 

effort, colluded in the deception, downplaying the flu’s impact on American 

servicemen even as they talked up the toll it was exacting on German troops. 

“You haven’t heard of our doughboys getting it, have you?,” queried New 

York’s Commissioner of Health Royal S.  Copeland. “You bet you haven’t, and 

you won’t.” 46  Slowly but surely, however, the virus was swimming closer to 

shore, conveyed in the bodies of the passengers and crew of returning troop -

ships and commercial liners. And all the while, as it passaged through more 

and more bodies, it was growing in virulence. The result was that when it 

made landfall on the eastern seaboard of the United States soldiers would not 

be the only casualties. 

It is difficult to say how and where the second wave broke. Perhaps the fall 

outbreak began at Commonwealth Pier, in Boston, before spreading to Ayer 

and other towns in Massachusetts. Or perhaps there were several simultane -

ous introductions of the virus. New York, for instance, saw a marked increase 

in influenza deaths, particularly in middle age groups, in February–April 

1918, though the first cases in the second wave were associated with passen -

gers alighting from a Norwegian steamer in the middle of August. By the end 

of September, cases in New York were running at eight hundred a day, and 

Copeland took the unusual step of ordering quarantines (wealthy patients 

were allowed to remain in their homes, but those living in boarding houses or 

tenements were removed to city hospitals where they were kept under strict 

observation). Quarantines were something new and unprecedented for influ -

enza—before the war, flu had not even been a notifiable disease—and New 

Yorkers could not help but be reminded of the polio epidemic two years 

earlier. Then, officials had gone door-to-door rounding up children with 

symptoms of “infantile paralysis,” spreading terror in neighbourhoods like 

Brooklyn where recent Italian immigrants were suspected of harbouring the 

disease. However, the Spanish flu was as likely to visit a Park Avenue THE BLUE DEATH 

25 

brownstone as a Brooklyn tenement, and as each day brought new reports of 

sickness, the city grew increasingly uneasy. Copeland tried to reassure New 

Yorkers by explaining that influenza was only communicable “in the coughing 

and sneezing of one who actually has influenza,” not from someone living in 

the same household as someone stricken with flu but who did not show symp -

toms. 47  He also insisted that a vaccine was imminent. 48  He was referring to 

the efforts by scientists like Park and Williams at the New York Public Health 

Laboratory who were experimenting with vaccines using mixed strains of  B.

influenzae . By the middle of October, Park was reporting that animals immu -

nized with a heat-killed vaccine made from these bacterial cocktails showed 

specific antibodies against the bacillus. Scientists at Tufts Medical School in 

Boston and the University of Pittsburgh’s medical school were reporting 

similar progress with their own version of heat-killed bacterial vaccines. But 

while Park was having more success culturing  B. influenzae  and getting it to 

agglutinate to antibodies in serum, privately he was beginning to worry that 

the results might be a reflection of improved culture techniques rather than 

proof of the bacillus’s aetiological role. “There is of course the possibility that 

some unknown filterable virus may be the starting point,” he wired a col -

league. 49  In spite of these misgivings, Park’s vaccine was eventually released 

to the military. It was also used to immunize 275,000 employees of the US 

Steel Company. 50  There is no evidence that these primitive vaccines and 

serums had any effect on influenza whatsoever. 

By 6  October more than 2,000 people a day in New York were being quar -

antined and the panic was palpable. From several districts came reports that 

patients were holding nurses captive in their homes because they were so 

frightened. Then nurses and doctors also started falling sick. By now the flu 

had reached San Francisco and was also raging in cities in the Midwest and 

South. The flu erupted in Chicago in mid-September, most likely introduced 

by sailors from the nearby Great Lakes Naval Station. With a capacity for 

45,000 men, the station was the largest naval training facility in the world, 

and, like Devens, a breeding ground for respiratory disease. As flu and pneu -

monia gripped Chicago, citizens were advised to avoid crowds and other 

public gatherings and to cover their mouths when sneezing. The most visible 

signs of the contagion were the gauze face masks worn by policemen and 

tram attendants. The trend quickly caught on, prompting a prominent Illinois 

physician to warn that homemade masks were inadequate because they were 

“made from gauze with meshes too large to catch and strain out the bacilli 

from the fine spray issuing from the mouths of victims.” This was of special 

concern in hospitals and other confined spaces as the spray was thought to be THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

26 

infectious at distances of up to twenty feet. Instead, he persuaded the  Chicago 

Herald Examiner  to publish a cut-out-and-keep guide on its front page for the 

proper procedure for making a gauze mask with a narrow mesh. 51 

Unfortunately, these masks made little difference as influenza virus particles 

are many times smaller than the smallest bacteria, and by mid-October 

Chicago was already reporting 40,000 cases. The city hit hardest of all, how -

ever, was Philadelphia. 

By 1918 Philadelphia had grown considerably since its Quaker beginnings 

as the capital of the Pennsylvania colony and the place where the founding 

fathers signed the Declaration of Independence. Ringed by steel mills and 

with its huge shipyards overlooking the Delaware River, Philadelphia was an 

industrial powerhouse. The needs of war (naval vessels, aircraft, munitions) 

brought tens of thousands of additional workers flocking to the city, and as its 

population swelled to nearly two million, so living conditions in Philadelphia 

became increasingly intolerable. In cramped rooming houses and over -

crowded tenements, the virus found ample fodder and steadily increased in 

virulence, killing people rapidly and indiscriminately. At a time when authori -

ties in other cities were advising people to avoid large public gatherings, the 

epidemic was almost certainly exacerbated by the decision of Philadelphia’s 

mayor to proceed with a Liberty Loan Drive on 28  September. The drive 

brought thousands of people crowding into the downtown area, and within 

two weeks Philadelphia had recorded more than 2,600 flu deaths. By the third 

week of October deaths had soared to over 4,500. As bodies piled up in 

morgues for lack of undertakers, the stench became overpowering and the 

city resorted to digging mass graves—something that had not been seen since 

the yellow fever epidemics of the late eighteenth century. The sight of rotting 

bodies became so commonplace that adults made little effort to shield chil -

dren from the horrors. The fear of influenza was now palpable, and with fear 

came panic. But this panic was not the fault of the press. “Panic is the worst 

thing that can happen to an individual or a community,” warned the 

Philadelphia Inquirer  in an editorial at the height of the fall wave. “Panic is 

exaggerated fear and fear is the most deadly word in any language.” The rem -

edy, it suggested, was to expel fearful thoughts by an act of will. “Do not 

dwell on the influenza. Do not even discuss it. … Terror is a big ally of the 

influenza.” 52  But once seen, the sight of a cyanotic, influenza-ridden body was 

not easily forgotten, either in Philadelphia or other places the flu visited, 

including London where by October deaths were running at 1,500 a week. 

The sight of “big strong men, heliotrope blue and breathing 50 to the minute” 

was unforgettable, observed Dr  Herbert French, a pathologist based at Guy’s THE BLUE DEATH 

27 

Hospital in London and a physician to Her Majesty’s Household. But the 

worst case by far was the type that became “totally unconscious hours or even 

days before the end, restless in his coma, with head thrown back, mouth half 

open, a ghastly sallow pallor of the cyanosed face, purple lips and ears.” It was 

“a dreadful sight,” he concluded. 53 

* * * 

The 1918 influenza pandemic was a shot heard around the world. The scenes 

described by French were not confined only to London and other large 

European and American cities but were the same everywhere. In Cape Town, 

observed one eyewitness, the autumn wave “made orphans of between two 

to three thousand children.” 54  One such orphan who was co-opted into 

burial duties reported: “I carry the coffin, holding my nose … no longer 

were church bells tolling for the dead … there was no sexton to ring the 

bells.” 55  It was the same in Bombay (Mumbai), where the disease arrived 

courtesy of a container ship in May. Deaths peaked in the first week of 

October, the same time as Boston. By the end of the year, the flu had killed 

an estimated one million people in this populous Indian city. All told, the 

pandemic claimed the lives of 18.5 million people across the Indian subcon -

tinent, according to the latest estimates, and perhaps as many as 100 million 

worldwide. With the exception of Australia, where strict maritime quaran -

tines delayed the onset of flu until the winter of 1919, virtually the entire 

globe suffered the pandemic at the same time. Only American Samoa, St. 

Helena, and a handful of islands in the South Atlantic escaped the plague. It 

was truly a shared global disaster. 

It is difficult to imagine deaths of this order of magnitude, much less pro -

cess them. The scale is too vast. “When one has fought a war, one hardly 

knows any more what a dead person is,” remarks Camus. “And if a dead man 

has no significance unless one has seen him dead, a hundred million bodies 

spread through history are just a mist drifting through the imagination.” 56 

However, if there is little point in trying to imagine death on this scale, there 

is much to be gained from examining variations in mortality rates observed 

in different geographical locations and ecological and immunological settings. 

When influenza reached New Zealand, for instance, the local Maori popula -

tion died at seven times the rate of British settlers. Similarly wide variations 

in mortality rates were observed between indigenous and European-

descended peoples in Fiji and other South Pacific islands (one of the most 

striking discrepancies was observed in Guam, where the pandemic killed 5% THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

28 

of the local population but just one sailor at the US naval base on the island). 

While the case fatality rate for “white” South Africans was 2.6%, for “blacks, 

Indians, and Coloureds” it was nearly 6%. For those who toiled underground 

in the Kimberley diamond mines the mortality rate was even worse—22%. 

Similar variations were observed at Devens and other large army training 

camps, with recent arrivals suffering far worse clinical outcomes than men of 

a similar age who had been at the camps for four months or longer. On the 

AEF transports, sailors permanently assigned to the ships fared far better than 

soldiers who had just embarked, even though both were attacked by influenza 

in more or less equal numbers. 57 

But perhaps the most striking aspect of the Spanish flu pandemic was the 

mortality pattern observed in young adults. In a normal flu season, curves of 

mortality by age at death are typically U-shaped, reflecting high mortality in 

the very young (children under three) and the elderly (seventy-five and over), 

with low mortality at all ages in between. This is because infants and the aged 

tend to be those with the weakest immune systems. By contrast, the 1918–19 

pandemic and the succeeding winter recurrences in 1919 and 1920 produced 

a W-shaped curve, with a third mortality peak in adults aged 20–40 years. 

Moreover, adults in these age ranges accounted for half the total influenza 

deaths, including the majority of excess respiratory deaths. 58  This abnormal 

mortality pattern was observed both in cities and rural areas, in major 

European metropolises and distant outposts of empire. In other words, it was 

the same everywhere. 

Why this should have been the case has never been satisfactorily explained. 

Nor, despite the advances in influenza virology and immunology and a better 

understanding of the pathophysiology of flu, are scientists today in a much bet -

ter position to say whether the Spanish flu pandemic was a one-off occur -

rence—a never-to-be-repeated epidemiological disaster—or whether it could 

happen again. By reviewing what has been learned about the 1918 virus, and 

the likely identity of previous pandemic viruses, it is possible to rule out some 

hypotheses and rule others in. However, perhaps the biggest clue to the epide -

miological patterns and unusual lung pathologies observed in 1918 comes from 

the ecology of large army camps and the contemporary accounts of medics who 

observed the ravages wrought by influenza in them at first hand. 

* * * 

Influenza, we now know, is a member of the family  Orthomyxoviridae , and 

comes in three types—A, B, and C—named in the order of their discovery. THE BLUE DEATH 

29 

Type C rarely causes disease in humans. Type B can cause epidemics, but the 

course of infection is milder and the spread of the virus tends to be slower. 

By contrast, type A is associated with explosive spread and high rates of mor -

bidity and mortality, making it the leading cause of epidemics and pandemics. 

Like all influenza viruses, type A influenzas are RNA viruses and must infect 

a living cell in order to replicate. Generally, they do this by attacking the 

epithelial cells that line the respiratory tract from the nose and through the 

windpipe to the lungs. 

Although in 1933 scientists had demonstrated that influenza was a virus 

that could be transferred from ferrets to man (the breakthrough was made by 

a team headed by Sir Patrick Laidlaw at the Farm Laboratory, in Mill Hill, 

north London, part of the UK’s National Institute for Medical Research), it 

was not until the 1940s and the invention of the electron microscope that 

researchers were able to see the influenza virion for the first time. It mea -

sured approximately 100 nanometres (0.10 micrometres), making it slightly 

smaller than the rabies virus but larger than rhinovirus, the cause of the com -

mon cold. Magnified, it resembled nothing so much as the surface of a dan -

delion bristling with tiny spikes and mushroom-like spines. The spikes are 

made of a protein called haemagglutinin (HA) that derives its name from its 

ability to agglutinate to red blood cells. When a person inhales an air droplet 

containing the virus, it is these spikes that stick to the receptors on the surface 

of the epithelial cells in the respiratory tract, much as a prickly seed case 

catches on the fibres of clothing in tall grass. The square-headed mushroom-

like protrusions, fewer in number, consist of a powerful enzyme, neuramini -

dase (NA). It is the combination of these proteins and enzymes that enables 

the virus to invade epithelial cells and evade the body’s immune defences. 

These permutations of proteins and enzymes give each virus a signature 

shape, making for easy classification. In all, scientists have identified sixteen 

types of haemagglutinin and nine types of neuraminidase in mammals and 

birds (beside ferrets, type A flu viruses commonly infect pigs, whales, seals, 

horses and wild waterfowl), but to date only influenza viruses of the H1, H2 

and H3 types have caused pandemics. 

Unlike DNA, RNA does not possess an accurate proofreading mechanism. 

During replication, when the virus invades and colonizes animal cells, the 

RNA makes small copying errors, resulting in genetic mutations to the H and 

N molecules on its surface. In the Darwinian world of the virus, some of 

these copies can confer a competitive advantage, allowing the viruses to 

escape the antibodies designed to neutralize them and enabling them to 

spread more efficiently via coughs and sneezes to the wider environment, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

30 

ready to infect the next person. This process of gradual mutation is known as 

“antigenic drift.” Type A viruses can also spontaneously “swap” or exchange 

genetic material. This process is typically thought to occur in intermediary 

hosts such as pigs, which can be infected with swine and human type A strains 

simultaneously, and is known as “antigenic shift.” 59  In this case, the result is the 

emergence of a completely new subtype that codes for proteins that may be 

new to the immune system and for which human populations may possess few 

or no antibodies. It is these strains that historically have been the cause of 

pandemics. However, it is thought that the virus responsible for the 1918 

pandemic may have emerged in yet another way. 

In the 1990s, scientists at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology in 

Bethesda, Maryland, led by molecular biologist Jeffery Taubenberger, suc -

ceeded in retrieving fragments of the Spanish flu virus from lung autopsy 

specimens stored in the institute’s archives. Further genetic viral material 

came from a woman who had died of influenza in 1918 in Alaska and had been 

buried in permafrost, which preserved her lungs from decay. Using this mate -

rial, Taubenberger’s group was eventually able to sequence the virus’s entire 

genome. Published in 2005, the results came as something of a surprise 

because none of the eight genes came from a strain that had previously infected 

humans, as one would have expected if the Spanish flu had been the result of 

antigenic shift. Furthermore, large portions of the genetic code matched 

sequences only found in wild birds. This suggested that the virus may have 

begun as a bird-adapted strain that, with just a handful of mutations, made the 

leap to humans. 60  Alternatively, the pandemic strain may have begun life as an 

H1 which re-assorted with an avian virus shortly before 1918. 61  By 2005, it 

was recognized that mallards and teals were an important reservoir of avian 

influenza viruses in the wild, and the idea that birds might be the source of 

novel genes in pandemic viruses was gaining currency. Taubenberger’s sequenc -

ing studies also coincided with growing concern about an avian virus that was 

then infecting chicken flocks across Southeast Asia. The virus, known as H5N1, 

had first emerged in Hong Kong in 1997, where it infected eighteen people 

and caused six deaths, before re-emerging for a second time in 2002. Since 

then the virus had spread from Asia to Europe and Africa, sparking hundreds 

of human cases and forcing authorities to cull millions of chickens. Alarmingly, 

the H5N1 virus was able to replicate in the human respiratory tract, and the 

mortality rate averaged 60  per  cent. However, it did not transmit easily from 

person to person. Nevertheless, its emergence demonstrated that people could 

be directly infected with a wholly avian influenza virus, meaning it was no 

longer necessary to invoke pigs as intermediary hosts in the generation of THE BLUE DEATH 

31 

pandemic strains. Theoretically, such reassortments, or mixing, of avian and 

mammalian flu strains could also occur in humans. The question was, could 

something like this have happened in 1918? The short answer is that no one 

knows, but the possibility cannot be ruled out. 62 

The precise genetic identities of pandemic strains prior to 1900 are lost to 

history, but in the twentieth century there have been three major shifts. The 

first was the H1N1 Spanish flu virus that emerged in 1918, or possibly a little 

earlier (by comparing older and more recent strains of the virus and running 

molecular clocks backward in time, evolutionary biologists suggest the virus 

may have acquired its avian genes somewhere between 1913 and 1917). 63  This 

was the prevailing strain until 1957, when it was replaced by a new viral 

strain, typed H2N2. Known as the “Asian flu,” the H2N2 seems to have been 

generated by a reassortment of descendants of the 1918 virus with an avian 

influenza strain derived from Eurasian wild waterfowl. It spread rapidly 

around the globe, displacing descendants of H1N1 Spanish flu and killing an 

estimated two million people. In 1968 there was a third shift, when an H3N2 

suddenly emerged in Hong Kong, also apparently as a result of the acquisition 

of novel proteins from Eurasian wild waterfowl. Known, unsurprisingly, as 

the “Hong Kong” flu, this virus is estimated to have killed one million people 

globally, and at the time of writing remains the leading cause of morbidity and 

mortality from influenza. 

To complete the picture of pandemic viruses in the modern period, we 

also need to include the Russian flu. Like the 1918 Spanish flu, this was a true 

worldwide pandemic. Originating in the Eurasian “steppes”—a vast expanse 

of grassland that encompassed parts of Russia plus Tsarist-controlled 

Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan—it spread rapidly along international rail and 

shipping routes and is conservatively thought to have killed one million in the 

period between 1889 and 1892. 64  Unfortunately, scientists have been unable 

to recover fragments of the virus, so its precise genetic identity is unknown. 

However, serology tests on elderly people who were examined for antibodies 

at the time of the 1968 Hong Kong flu suggest that, like that virus, it was 

caused by an H3. This may be an important clue, as those most at risk of dying 

in 1918 were born in or around 1890, meaning they belonged to a birth 

cohort whose first exposure to a flu virus would almost certainly have been 

to the Russian flu. We will return to this in a moment, but first it is necessary 

to consider the nature of the pneumonias that killed people in 1918. 

As noted earlier, broadly speaking these pneumonias can be divided into 

two types—lobar and bronchial. However, it is also important to note that in 

a pre-virological era, these distinctions rested on clinical observations and THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

32 

histological examinations of lung tissue and that the two types were often 

closely related, with the clinical-pathological syndromes sometimes overlap -

ping. The most common type by far appears to have been an acute aggressive 

bronchopneumonia. In this type, pathological changes were most obvious in 

the bronchi, and pathogenic bacteria could usually be cultured at autopsy 

from different parts of the lung. Close to 90  per  cent of the pneumonias fell 

into this category. In the second type, the outstanding features were pulmo -

nary haemorrhage and edema with extensive damage to one or more of the 

lobes, and pathogenic bacteria were less frequently or rarely recovered. In 

this type, the infection appears to have triggered an acute inflammation of the 

pulmonary alveoli resulting in cell death (necrosis) and the deposit of dam -

aged cells and fluids in the alveolar air spaces—the microscopic sacs that 

absorb oxygen in the lung. 65  These features were found whenever victims died 

within a few days of the onset of illness, as well as in 70  per  cent of cases in 

which pneumonia developed after influenza. And they were nearly always 

found in deaths involving healthy young soldiers or civilians. 66  However, it 

must be reiterated that this type accounted for only a small percentage of 

deaths overall. The later-onset bronchopneumonias and mixed infections, in 

which bacteria could be readily cultured after death, were the ones encoun -

tered most frequently. Indeed, it is these bacterial fellow travellers of flu—or 

what pathologists at the time called “secondary invaders”—that many experts 

believe best explain the majority of deaths seen at camps like Devens and the 

variations in mortality observed between recruits of the same age from rural 

and urban areas. 

It is perhaps also worth remarking that as doubts about the aetiological role 

of  B. influenzae  grew, so pathologists took care to distinguish between lung 

lesions attributable to commensal bacteria and those due to the presumed, 

though as yet unproven, virus of the epidemic. By the mid-1920s, this was a 

view that Welch was also coming to endorse. Addressing a meeting of public 

health officials in Boston in 1926,Welch said that the idea that influenza was due 

to an “unknown virus” had much to recommend it, and he now thought that 

“when there was a lesion of the lung … it was attributable to the virus, the real 

influenza virus, not general respiratory manifestations.” He had also been struck 

by the “crowding together” of soldiers at the base hospital at Devens, an occur -

rence that he thought increased patients’ risk of exposure to other organisms 

and was “largely responsible for the enormous extent of the disease.” 67 

Unlike in 1918, today it is possible to study the virus in the laboratory 

using a process called reverse genetics. Beginning in 2005, this is exactly what 

scientists have done, re-assembling the virus in Biosafety Level Four facilities THE BLUE DEATH 

33 

and then challenging mice and other test animals. The resurrected virus kills 

mice in three to five days and causes a severe lung inflammation reminiscent 

of the lesions reported by doctors in 1918. It also replicates very efficiently 

in bronchial epithelial cells. 68  Indeed, so striking is the virulence of the 1918 

virus in laboratory animal studies that some virologists argue that infection 

with the virus alone could have triggered the rapid onset pneumonias and 

symptoms of cyanosis described by pathologists in 1918 and that it is unnec -

essary to invoke secondary bacterial invaders. One suggestion is that the 

pneumonias and symptoms of cyanosis may have been due to an overly exu -

berant immune response involving the release of proinflammatory cells called 

cytokines. This phenomenon—known as a “cytokine storm”—was implicated 

in the deaths from Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) that fol -

lowed the H5N1 bird flu outbreaks in Southeast Asia in the early 2000s, and 

has also been observed with other epidemic viruses such as SARS. 

Whether or not these pneumonias were primarily viral or bacterial, or a 

mixture of both, does not answer the question of why the Spanish flu proved 

so deadly to young adults in the prime of life, however. Here, present-day 

science has several hypotheses but no good answers. One suggestion is that 

older age groups enjoyed greater protection because they had previously been 

exposed to a similar virus. This fits with serological evidence suggesting that 

people born between 1830 and 1889 were also exposed to an H1. It was only 

after 1890 that this virus was replaced by a new pandemic virus, the Russian 

H3. In other words, those aged thirty-eight and over would have already 

possessed some antibodies to the H1N1 Spanish flu, and in the case of the 

very elderly—those born in 1834 who had been infants when they first 

encountered an H1—this protection would have been considerable. 

Another suggestion is that the virus that was to become the Spanish flu (in 

a scenario where it acquired avian genes around 1915) may have begun life as 

an H1 that emerged shortly after 1900. 69  This could have been critical for 

those born in the first years of the twentieth century who would have been 

eighteen or younger at the time the pandemic struck, as it is thought that 

early life infection with influenza results in an immunological “blind spot.” 

Usually referred to as “original antigenic sin,” the idea is that antibodies to the 

first-encountered flu strain are more readily “recalled” and produced at the 

expense of new antibodies specific to newer flu strains. 70  It is even possible 

that through a process known as antibody-dependent enhancement, the older 

immune response might aid the virus to evade the body’s defences and infect 

cells more readily. However, while the advantage of such hypotheses is that 

they help explain why, no matter where the flu struck, the mortality fell most THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

34 

heavily on twenty-to-forty-year-olds, most experts feel that without knowing 

the precise genetic identity of the 1890 virus and the viruses that came before 

and after, and the precise immunological profiles of the affected age groups, 

these hypotheses are somewhat speculative. As David Morens, a medical epi -

demiologist who works closely with Taubenberger, points out, it is equally 

possible that the W-shaped mortality pattern could be due to some as yet 

unidentifiable environmental exposure peculiar to young adults at the time. 71 

We just do not know. Indeed, for all that new molecular techniques and a 

better understanding of the ecology and immunology of flu have brought new 

insights into the patterns of pandemics, Taubenberger and Morens argue that 

“we have moved ever further from certainty about the determinants of, and 

possibilities for pandemic emergence.” 72  It is this uncertainty that makes flu— 

and the 1918 pandemic in particular—such an enigmatic and enduring object 

of scientific interest and source of anxiety. 

But perhaps for the last word on the pandemic we should leave North 

America and turn to someone who viewed the spreading global morbidity 

and mortality from the periphery. In 1919, at the age of twenty, Frank 

Macfarlane Burnet was studying medicine at the University of Melbourne 

when he suffered an attack of influenza. Thankfully, the illness proved mild. 

Nevertheless, it left an indelible impression, igniting a lifelong fascination 

with flu and with what Burnet called “the natural history of infectious dis -

ease.” 73  In 1931, Burnet arrived at the National Institute for Medical Research 

in London on a two-year fellowship to study the burgeoning new field of virus 

diseases. His arrival coincided with the discovery that ferrets could be 

infected with influenza, and on his return to Melbourne in 1934 he pioneered 

the technique for growing the virus in chick egg embryos. This would be the 

first in a series of contributions to influenza research by Burnet—research 

that would see him investigate variations in virulence between newly isolated 

and chick-cultivated viruses and lay the ground for future genetic insights into 

the emergence of pandemics. 74  Intrigued by Nicolle and Lebailly’s findings in 

Tunis in 1918, in 1941 Burnet also conducted a series of trials in macaques, 

challenging the monkeys with several strains of egg-propagated virus. 

Although none of the monkeys developed a fever or other signs of illness 

when infected intranasally, several became ill when Burnet injected the virus 

directly into their trachea, and at autopsy one showed signs of extensive bron -

chopneumonia. 75  However, it was the epidemiology of influenza that fasci -

nated Burnet most, and the more he studied the patterns of morbidity and 

mortality in 1918, the more convinced he became that it was the concentra -

tion of recruits from rural and urban districts in overcrowded barracks that THE BLUE DEATH 

35 

held the key to the pandemic’s unusual characteristics. Like Welch and the 

members of the pneumonia commission, Burnet was persuaded that the 

emergence of Spanish flu was, as he put it, “intimately linked to war condi -

tions,” and that it was the immunological profiles of American recruits, fol -

lowed by their transfer to northern France, where they were able to mix 

freely with men from other nations, that accounted for the extreme virulence 

of the virus and the unusual age profile of its victims. “If the early American 

epidemics supplied the initial spark for the pandemic we can be certain that 

it was fanned into a flame in Europe,” Burnet concluded. 76  But what struck 

Burnet as possibly even more significant from an immunological point of view 

was how many people had been  unaffected  by the pandemic. Two-thirds of the 

population had escaped infection altogether, and the overall mortality, as a 

measure of the total population, had been just 2  per  cent. While that was 

twenty-five times higher than in a normal flu season, it was far lower than the 

mortality rate seen during outbreaks of cholera and pneumonic plague in the 

nineteenth century, and went some way to explaining why, except for the 

height of the killing wave in October, when hospitals had been flooded with 

pneumonia cases and the dead had become impossible to ignore, the pan -

demic had not provoked greater fear and panic. Yes, influenza had briefly 

presented as “some new kind of plague.” But by November 1918 and the 

declaration of the armistice it was already once more on its way to becoming 

a familiar seasonal ailment. Unfortunately, that would not be true of other 

twentieth- and twenty-first-century epidemics caused by similar ecological 

imbalances and environmental disturbances. 37 

# 2

# PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS   

> “The word ‘plague’ had just been uttered for the first time”
> Albert Camus, The Plague (1947)

On 3  October 1924, Dr  Giles Porter, a Los Angeles city health officer, was 

called to the home of a railroad worker in the heart of the Mexican quarter. 

A few days earlier, Jesus Lajun and his 15-year-old daughter, Francisca Concha 

Lajun, had fallen ill at their apartment at 700 Clara Street, and both were now 

running high temperatures. Francisca also had a spasmodic, rattling cough, 

while Jesus had a nasty swelling on his groin. Porter attributed Jesus’s swell -

ing to “venereal adenitis” due to syphilis, while Francisca’s symptoms of fever 

and coughing, he thought, were most likely due to influenza. “This child was 

not considered to be in a serious condition,” he recorded in his report. But 

Porter was wrong and two days later Luciana Samarano, the owner of a 

nearby boarding house who had been nursing Francisca, became so concerned 

about the girl’s condition that she called an ambulance. Francisca died en 

route to Los Angeles General Hospital, a pathologist later listing the cause of 

death as “double pneumonia.” 1 For an otherwise healthy teenager to suffer a 

severe attack of pneumonia was a highly unusual occurrence, but Clara Street 

was surrounded by brickyards and gas and electrical works, and even in fine 

weather the air was choked with pollutants. Taking into account the unpleas -

ant odours emanating from the nearby meatpacking plants, it came as little 

surprise that Mexicans were the only people prepared to live in the environs 

of Clara Street or that a young life had been taken prematurely. 

Built in 1895 on a vacant plot near the Los Angeles River, Clara Street had 

originally been an affordable white middle-class neighbourhood, but as the 

city expanded and a land and building boom brought a demand for brick THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

38 

makers and cheap agricultural labour, the Italian residents had moved out and 

the area had been colonized by Hispanics and migrant workers from south of 

the border. By 1924 some 2,500 Mexicans were packed into the 307 houses 

in and around Clara Street, an eight-block area bounded on the east by the 

Southern Pacific Railroad, on the west by Alameda Street, and on the south 

by Macy Street. Overcrowding was rife. 2 Many houses, such as Samarano’s 

home at 742 Clara Street, had been subdivided into “apartments” or trans -

formed into boarding houses in which up to thirty people resided at a time. 

Other guests bedded down in shacks appended to the rear of the simple 

clapboard dwellings. People were not the only lodgers. The crawl spaces 

beneath the floorboards also provided sanctuary for rats and, on occasion, 

ground squirrels. In short, it was a world away from the Los Angeles 

described by developers as the city “of eternal youth—a city without slums.” 3

In the 1920s, Los Angeles had a population of one million and was one of 

the fastest growing urban centres in the United States. Billed as the “climatic 

capital of the world,” the city was in the midst of a real estate boom as 

Americans tired of the harsh midwestern winters and the overcrowded condi -

tions in cities in the East flocked to Southern California, attracted by the 

promise of a new life in a land blessed by oil, palm trees, abundant farmland, 

and sunshine. Most of these settlers made for the new bedroom communities 

with names like “Petroleum Gardens” that were springing up on reclaimed 

desert just beyond the city limits. By contrast, Hispanics tended to congregate 

in Macy District—as the Mexican quarter was officially known—or the adja -

cent Mariana and Belvedere Gardens districts. 

By 1924, Los Angeles’s Hispanic population totalled around 22,000, and the 

signs of their labour were everywhere: it was Mexican hands, toiling in the clay 

pits adjacent to the Los Angeles River, that had fashioned the bricks for the high 

rises transforming L.A.’s skyline, and it was Mexicans who kept the grocery 

stores stocked with fresh fruit and vegetables and who scrubbed the floors of 

the posh downtown hotels.Yet for the city’s majority Anglo-Saxon population, 

these brown-skinned inhabitants of the City of Angels were all but invisible. 

Sure, there may have been concerns from time to time about the diseases they 

were presumed to carry, or the demographic implications of the burgeoning 

Hispanic birth rate, but as Harry Chandler, the owner of the antiunion  Los 

Angeles Times , and a prominent Californian landowner and power broker, reas -

sured Congress: Mexicans “do not intermarry like the negro with white people. 

They don’t mingle. They keep to themselves. That is the safety of it.” 4

Seven days after Francisca Lajun’s death, her father Jesus also succumbed 

to the mysterious infection. Then, five days later, Luciana Samarano was PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

39 

admitted to County General, dying on 19  October of “myocarditis” or heart 

disease (six months pregnant at the time, Luciana’s unborn child died with 

her). The next casualties were Samarano’s husband, Guadalupe, followed by 

several mourners who had attended Luciana’s wake, which, as per Catholic 

tradition, saw relatives filing past the open casket and kissing the corpse to 

pay their respects. As with Francisca Lajun, Guadalupe’s death was listed as 

“double pneumonia.” 5 By now, several other people who had attended 

Luciana’s wake had also fallen ill with similar symptoms. However, it was only 

on 29  October that the hospital dispatched its chief resident, Dr  Emil Bogen, 

to investigate. Bogen’s first stop was a house at 343 Carmelita Street in 

Belvedere Gardens. “In the middle of the room,” Bogen recalled, “an old 

Mexican woman was lying on a large double bed, crying between paroxysms 

of coughing, while along the wall was a couch on which was seen a Mexican 

man of about 30 years of age, restless and feverish, but not coughing.” Several 

other people were also present, and one agreed to act as Bogen’s interpreter. 

Bogen was told that the man had fallen sick the day before, that he had a pain 

along his spine, and that he was running a temperature of 104 degrees. He 

also had red spots on his chest. The old woman, meanwhile, “had been cough -

ing for the past two days, expectorating a profuse bloody sputum, and had 

loud, coarse rhonchi.” 6

Bogen arranged for the couple to be transferred to an ambulance, then 

went with the interpreter to the adjacent house where another man and his 

wife and daughter were ill with similar symptoms. The wife informed Bogen 

that she felt better than previously while the daughter “insisted that she was 

not sick, only a little tired.” Within three days, however, both the woman and 

the girl were in a critical condition at County General, and the woman’s 

husband was dead. Only later did it emerge that he was Guadalupe Samarano’s 

brother, Victor, and that both he and his wife had recently attended the wake 

at 742 Clara Street. There, Bogen found four desperately sick boys between 

the ages of four and twelve, the recently orphaned sons of Luciana and 

Guadalupe. “The four boys were brought to the hospital that same night, and 

during the following day six more cases were admitted from that neighbour -

hood,” he recorded. “Soon after admission they developed signs of a severe 

pneumonia, with bloody expectoration and marked cyanosis.” 7

Samarano’s home would subsequently be labelled the “death house.” In all, 

thirty-three people who had attended Luciana’s wake, who were related to 

the Samaranos or who had lodged at 742 Clara Street would contract plague, 

and thirty-one would die. The sequence of illnesses was laid out in an official 

report in which the casualties were listed according to their initials and their THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

40 

relationship to “L.S.” or “G.S.” 8 After the Samaranos, the next casualty was 

“J.  F.,” or Jessie Flores, a family friend and next-door neighbour who had 

nursed Luciana. Then came two of the couple’s sons by different marriages, 

and both Luciana and Guadalupe’s mothers. Even the family priest, Father 

Medardo Brualla, contracted the disease. Brualla had gone to 742 Clara Street 

on 26  October to administer the last rites to Guadalupe and Jessie, but a few 

days later he was also expectorating bloody sputum, and by 2  November he 

was dead. 9

After Guadalupe’s death, unsuspecting health officials had released his body 

so that his family could pay their respects. Once again, they held the service 

at 742 Clara Street, and once again, mourners who attended the wake fell ill 

soon after. By 30  October, some twelve people were in critical condition at 

County General. It was one of these, Horace Gutiérrez, a cousin of Luciana 

Samarano, who would provide the crucial evidence that would alert health 

officials to the identity of the pathogen and plunge the Los Angeles Chamber 

of Commerce and city hall into panic. In his summary, Bogen records that 

Gutiérrez had arrived at the hospital at around the same time as the four 

Samarano boys, and, shortly after, had developed the same symptoms of 

pneumonia accompanied by bloody expectorations and cyanosis. As cyanosis 

had been a signature symptom of the Spanish influenza and the epidemic was 

still fresh in physicians’ memories, the immediate suspicion was flu. In the 

end, however, the cases were attributed to “epidemic meningitis.” Only the 

hospital’s pathologist, Dr  George Maner, thought differently, suggesting that 

perhaps they were dealing with plague. 10  Later, Maner decided to check his 

intuition by taking a sputum sample from Gutiérrez and examining it under 

a microscope. What he saw filled him with dread. Gutiérrez’s sputum was 

packed with tiny rod-shaped bacteria that looked distinctly like the images 

Maner had seen in textbooks of  Pasteurella pestis , the bacterium of plague. 11 

Unsure of the bacteria’s morphology and wanting to get a second opinion, 

Maner approached his predecessor as chief of pathology at Los Angeles 

General, a Scotsman by the name of Roy Hammack. Hammack had previously 

served in the Philippines, where he had treated several cases of plague, so he 

had the advantage of having seen the bacillus before. “Beautiful!” he suppos -

edly exclaimed when he espied the familiar rod-shaped bacteria through his 

microscope. “Beautiful but damned.” 12 

* * * 

Pasteurella pestis , or  Yersinia pestis  to give the bacillus its proper name, is one of 

the d eadliest pathogens known to man. Named for the Swiss bacteriologist PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

41 

Alexandre Yersin, who isolated the microbe during the third plague pandemic 

in Hong Kong in 1894,  Y. pestis  is conservatively thought to have been respon -

sible for 100 million deaths throughout history, perhaps as many as 200 mil -

lion. Yet for all the horror evoked by the word  plague , human infections are 

only incidental events in the life cycle of the parasite. The bacillus’s natural 

reservoir is wild rodents, such as marmots, ground squirrels, and rats. 

Transmitted by the bites from infected fleas that live in the rodents’ burrows, 

Y. pestis  circulates for the most part harmlessly in these rodent populations. It 

is only when the relative immunity of rodent populations wanes, and there 

are sudden die-offs, leaving fleas temporarily homeless, or diseased rodents 

are brought closer to human habitations, that the existence of the zoonosis 

becomes visible and there is a risk of transfer of the infection to humans or 

some other animal host. From the point of view of the parasite and its sur -

vival, however, this is not a great strategy, as this “accidental” transfer usually 

results in the death of its new host, preventing further onward transmission 

of the bacillus. 

The human disease takes three forms: bubonic, septicaemic, and pneu -

monic. The bubonic form occurs when a flea jumps from a rat or some other 

rodent and bites a human, injecting the plague bacilli under the skin (after -

wards, human fleas or body lice may transmit bubonic plague to other indi -

viduals). As the victim scratches the site of the wound, the bacilli multiply and 

spread to the lymph glands in the groin (in the case of a flea bite to the leg) 

or the armpits (in the case of a bite to the arm). As the immune system 

struggles to contain the infection, the lymph glands become swollen and 

inflamed, giving rise to the painful egg-shaped “buboes” from which the dis -

ease takes its name. On average, plague takes three to five days to incubate, 

and another three to five days before the victim dies (untreated, bubonic 

plague is fatal in around 60  per  cent of cases), the final stages being marked 

by extensive haemorrhaging and organ failure. In the most toxic form of 

bubonic plague, known as septicaemic plague, the skin becomes mottled with 

dark blue patches and the extremities may turn black, hence one possible 

derivation of the disease’s name, “Black Death.” In the last stages of the infec -

tion, victims often fall into a delirium and are unable to bear the slightest 

touch to their sores. The only mercy is that this form of plague usually kills 

quickly and is only transmissible by bites from fleas. 

By contrast, the pneumonic form can be spread directly from person to 

person and can arise either from inhalation of  Y. pestis  or septicaemic spread 

of bacteria from the bubonic form of the disease. Typically, an originating case 

of pneumonic plague occurs when some of the bacilli escape the lymph THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

42 

system and migrate to the victim’s lungs, causing  oedema and secondary 

infection (this is particularly common when a bubo forms in the neck region). 

During this time, the victim is non-infectious but may exhibit a fever and 

rapid pulse. Within one to four days, however, the victim’s condition suddenly 

deteriorates as the oedema spreads, triggering necrotizing pneumonia 

throughout the lungs and violent paroxysms. At this stage, the victim typically 

coughs or “spits” blood, causing the bed sheets to become spotted and stained 

crimson. Unless treated within twelve hours of the onset of fever, pneumonic 

plague is invariably fatal. Suspended in cough droplets or sputum, the bacilli 

can also be expelled as far as twelve inches, making it easy for someone lying 

on a nearby sofa or an adjacent bed to catch the disease. In cold weather and 

cool, humid conditions the bacilli can also become attached to water droplets 

and linger in the air for minutes or hours at a time. The bacteria can also 

survive for up to three days on hard surfaces, such as glass and steel, and for 

much longer in the soil and other organic material. 13 

It is difficult to be certain what proportion of deaths that occurred during 

historical outbreaks were due to the bubonic as opposed to the pneumonic 

form of the disease, because prior to modern bacteriological tests diagnosis 

was uncertain and rested on the interpretation of clinical symptoms and signs. 

The first plague pandemic, which began during the reign of the Byzantine 

emperor Justinian I, and which is estimated to have killed some 25 million 

people throughout the Mediterranean basin between 541 and 750, is thought 

to have been largely bubonic. However, the second pandemic appears to have 

been a mixed outbreak. Colloquially known as the Black Death, the pandemic 

began in 1334 in China before spreading along the great trade routes to 

Constantinople, Florence, and other European capitals in the middle decades 

of the fourteenth century, reducing Europe’s population by approximately 

one-quarter to one-half between 1347 and 1353 and killing at least 20 million 

people, possibly as many as 50 million. 14  To judge by contemporary accounts, 

buboes and swellings, called  gavocciolo  by Italian chroniclers, were ubiquitous. 

However, in 1348, the first year of the Black Death in Europe, so were pneu -

monic symptoms. “Breath,” wrote one Sicilian chronicler, “spread the infec -

tion among those speaking together … and it seemed as if the victim[s] were 

struck all at once by the affliction and [were] shattered by it. … Victims 

coughed up blood, and after three days of incessant vomiting for which there 

was no remedy, they died, and with them died not only everyone who talked 

with them, but also anyone who had acquired or touched or laid hands on 

their belongings.” 15 

The news that a deadly pathogen from the Middle Ages had arrived in the 

City of  Angels was not something anyone in Los Angeles wanted to hear in PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

43 

1924, least of all business leaders. As William Deverell, a historian of 

California and the West, puts it, at a time when Los Angeles was selling itself 

as a hygienic retirement destination, “plague was not the sort of thing 

expected in the proud city of tomorrow.” 16  Plague’s presence in Los Angeles 

was also a considerable blow to the prestige of the US Public Health Service 

(PHS) and the Californian State Board of Health. Just ten years earlier, health 

officials had confidently declared that all “discoverable” plague had been eradi -

cated from California. 17  This announcement was based on the new knowledge 

of plague’s ecology that had been acquired following the outbreaks of bubonic 

plague in San Francisco in the early years of the century. 

Introduced to the city in around 1900, most likely from black rats that had 

hitched a ride to San Francisco on a steamship from Honolulu, the plague was 

at first confined to Chinatown, where it killed 113 people. However, follow -

ing the earthquake and fire that struck San Francisco in 1906, rats were dis -

placed from their downtown runs and dispersed throughout the city, sparking 

new outbreaks in 1907–08 over a much wider urban area. In response, US 

Assistant Surgeon General Rupert Blue launched a massive rat extermination 

campaign. Whereas in 1903 Blue had concentrated on demolishing houses in 

Chinatown and baiting rat holes with arsenic, now he ordered his men to hunt 

down and kill rats wherever they found them. By January 1908, when the last 

two cases of bubonic plague were seen in the city, some two million rats had 

been exterminated and many thousands had been autopsied, giving Blue, and 

his chief laboratorian, George McCoy, new insights into the transmission of 

plague and its persistence in rodent reservoirs in interepidemic periods. 

Unlike in India and Asia, where the principal vector of plague was the black 

rat,  Rattus rattus , Blue and McCoy discovered that in San Francisco the main 

vector had been the brown sewer rat,  Rattus norvegicus . A prolific breeder, the 

brown rat’s preferred habitat is sewers and cellars where it likes to lay out its 

run in the shape of a Y, with its food store hidden at one branch and its nest at 

the other—evidence, according to Blue, of the rodent’s “sagacity” at evading 

predators. 18  This strategy had served the brown rat well, enabling it to spread 

from the waterfront in northeast San Francisco as far as the County Hospital 

in the southwest. 

Although in 1908 no one had definitively demonstrated that fleas living on 

rats were vectors of plague, their incriminating role was widely presumed, 

and Blue routinely ordered his men to comb rats for fleas and count the 

number of ectoparasites. 19  He found that in winter his men could comb 

twenty rats and recover only one flea among them, but in warm weather the 

flea numbers multiplied, such that a healthy rat could harbour twenty-five THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

44 

fleas, while a sick one might host eighty-five. As long as these fleas fed on rats, 

he hypothesized, they posed little threat to human populations. It was only 

when rats were evicted from their runs and came into contact with people, 

or when plague-infected fleas killed their rodent hosts and began looking for 

a new blood meal, that humans risked being infected. However, there was 

much more to the ecology of plague than just rats and fleas. 

In China, it had long been suspected that marmots acted as reservoirs of 

plague in interepidemic periods. 20  However, until Blue, McCoy, and William 

Wherry, a bacteriologist with the San Francisco Board of Health, began 

studying sporadic outbreaks of plague in counties on the east side of San 

Francisco Bay in 1908, no one had suspected that Californian ground squirrels 

and other wild rodents indigenous to the western United States might be 

similarly susceptible to infection with  Y. pestis  or might play a similar role in 

maintaining transmission of the parasite in interepidemic periods. Blue’s sus -

picions had first been aroused five years earlier when a blacksmith from 

Contra Costa County died of bubonic plague at a hospital in San Francisco. 

On questioning his friends and family, Blue learned that the blacksmith had 

not visited the city in over a month, but that three to four days before the 

onset of his illness he had shot and killed a ground squirrel in the hills near his 

home. By July 1908 Blue was certain that there were no more infected rats in 

San Francisco. However, that same month he learned that the son of a rancher 

from Concord in Contra Costa County had contracted plague and died, 

prompting Blue to dispatch his top rat catcher, William Colby Rucker, to 

investigate. The scene that greeted Colby at the ranch had all the hallmarks of 

a classic epizootic, with bodies of dead rats littering the ground. In a barn on 

the ranch near where the boy had died, Colby also recovered a dead squirrel. 

Blue immediately ordered Colby and his men to collect squirrels from other 

ranches in the region and discovered that several were infected with  Y. pestis .21 

As Blue later wrote to Washington, DC, this was “perhaps the first demonstra -

tion of the occurrence in nature of bubonic plague in the ground squirrel 

(Citellus beecheyi ) of California.” 22  McCoy speculated that the squirrels had 

caught the plague from rats that had migrated from San Francisco to Oakland 

and which had mingled with wild rodents in the hills behind Berkeley, 

exchanging ectoparasites in the process. Evidence for this hypothesis was 

supported by his discovery that the California ground squirrels were heavily 

infested with two species of flea,  Hoplopsyllus anomalus and Nosopsyllus fasciatus .

The latter was commonly found on rats and, together with  Xenopsylla cheopis ,

the oriental rat flea, was thought to have been the principal vector of bubonic 

plague during the 1906 San Francisco outbreak. 23  However, McCoy observed PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

45 

that the squirrel fleas also readily attacked humans, writing that at one point 

his “squirrel stock room became so heavily infested that upon going into the 

room one was certain to be bitten by many of the parasites.” McCoy also 

found that in the laboratory it was easy to transmit plague by means of the  H.

anomalus  flea from squirrels to guinea pigs and rats, and vice versa, leading 

him to conclude that “it is not improbable that the conveyance in nature is in 

the same way.” 24 

The discovery that squirrels might act as reservoirs of plague between rat 

epizootics and that their fleas might also be capable of transmitting the infec -

tion to humans caused Blue “considerable apprehension.” However, it was 

thought that as long as the risk was confined to Contra Costa and Alameda 

Counties, there was little to worry about. Then in August, a report reached 

McCoy of the death of a ten-year-old boy in Elysian Park, in northeast Los 

Angeles, some four hundred miles to the south. On arriving at the boy’s 

home, McCoy discovered that seven days before the onset of illness, the boy 

had come across a ground squirrel in his backyard and it had bitten him on 

the hand. Both the boy and a dead squirrel recovered from the property 

subsequently tested positive for plague. The boy’s home, McCoy noted, * was 

just two miles from city hall and backed onto the yards of the San Francisco– 

Los Angeles line of the Southern Pacific Railroad. 25 

This was alarming news and prompted the PHS to cast its net wider. After 

writing to Washington for more rifles and ammunition, Blue sent hunting 

parties into nearby woodlands and hillsides to collect squirrels and bring 

them to McCoy’s laboratory. By 1910, McCoy had examined 150,000 ground 

squirrels across ten California counties and discovered that 402, or 

0.3  per  cent of them, were infected with plague. These diseased squirrels had 

been recovered from as far south as San Luis Obispo and the San Joaquin 

Valley, many miles from the sea and the presumed original ports of entry to 

the United States. In response, Blue focused his efforts on the areas where 

infected squirrels had been found, poisoning their burrows with carbon bisul -

fide and sending hunting parties into the woods to shoot stray rodents. Blue’s 

war on rodents made him a household name, and in 1912 he was elevated to 

surgeon general, the top medical position in the country. In his absence, oth - 

> *Though McCoy states that the squirrel had bitten the boy on the hand, he goes on
> to say that it is uncertain whether the boy contracted plague this way, speculating
> that he may have contracted it from infected fleas, which is the more usual trans -
> mission route of plague from squirrels to humans.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

46 

ers carried on the eradication work he had begun, and by 1914 ground squir -

rels had been recovered from twenty-one infected ranches and their burrows 

so thoroughly poisoned that officials were only able to find one infected squir -

rel when they repeated the survey, prompting Colby to claim that “danger of 

its further spread has been removed.” 26  But Colby and his colleagues were 

wrong. The ecology of plague was far more complex than they could have 

anticipated—as one expert put it, writing in 1949, plague was “like following 

the different voices in a Bach fugue,” the difference being that while the struc -

ture of a Bach fugue is known, with plague “the basic design is unknown.” 27 

The fact is, plague never entirely disappears from wild rodent populations. 

Rather, the pathogen circulates continually between fleas, squirrels, and other 

wild mammals, including chipmunks, marmots and prairie dogs. * Many of 

these rodents have genetic or acquired immunity so are resistant to illness. 

However, every few years, this resistance wanes and the host population 

crashes, leaving fleas without a source of food. It is at this stage that the fleas 

seek a new host, seizing upon whatever animal happens to stray into the 

vacant rodents’ burrows. This could be another species of ground squirrel or 

it could be a wild rat or a field mouse, or even a rabbit. Regardless, the 

transfer usually results in a violent epizootic as these new and highly suscep -

tible hosts fall victim to the disease for the first time—hence the rats that 

Colby found littering the grounds of the ranch in Concord. 

Nonetheless, there was good reason why, by 1924, California health offi -

cials should have been on their guard, not only against renewed outbreaks of 

the bubonic form of the disease, but of pneumonic plague, too. Indeed, bac -

teriologists only needed to recall the outbreak of pneumonic plague that had 

occurred in Oakland five years earlier, killing thirteen people. The outbreak 

began in August 1919 when an Italian man named Di Bortoli went hunting in 

the foothills of Alameda County, returning with several squirrels for the table 

of his rooming house in Oakland. Within days, Di Bortoli was complaining of 

fever and pain in his right side and had reported to a doctor. Unfortunately, 

the physician attributed Bortoli’s symptoms to influenza and even after Di 

Bortoli developed a painful bubo on his neck, the doctor did not think of 

plague. Most likely, it was septicaemic spread of plague from this bubo that 

sparked a tonsillar infection and secondary pneumonia. The result was that by  

> *Rabbits, pigs, coyotes, bobcats, badgers, bears, grey foxes and skunks can also be
> infected with plague, though they rarely exhibit symptoms. By contrast, domestic
> cats are highly susceptible.

PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

47 

the time Di Bortoli died at the end of the month, five other people, including 

his landlady and a nurse, had been infected and by 11  September, thirteen 

more people had contracted plague. In all, only one survived. Fortunately, 

thanks to the rapid hospitalization and isolation of the patients, the outbreak 

was self-limiting. Nevertheless, the fact that thirteen people had died and that 

the outbreak had begun following contact with a squirrel was extremely 

alarming, suggesting that, as with Siberian marmots, Californian squirrels 

might harbour fleas infected with highly virulent and potentially pneumotro -

pic strains of the bacillus. As William Kellogg, the director of the State Board 

of Health Bureau’s communicable disease division, observed, “Until plague-

infected ground squirrels are entirely eradicated from California we shall 

always have a sword of Damocles hanging over our heads.” 28 

Kellogg’s concerns were born of bitter experience. In 1900 when plague 

had announced itself in San Francisco, it had been he who had taken samples 

from the lymph gland of the first presumed plague patient to Joseph Kinyoun 

at the United States’ Marine Hospital laboratory on Angel Island for testing. 

After Kinyoun demonstrated that the tissues contained the plague bacillus, and 

that that organism caused guinea pigs to sicken and die, Kellogg then found 

himself thrust into the uncomfortable position of having to defend Kinyoun 

against a vitriolic campaign orchestrated by California’s governor, Henry Gage, 

and local business interests. Angered by the imposition of the quarantine 

around Chinatown, Gage and his allies called into question Kinyoun’s methods 

and findings, and alleged that the quarantine measures were a “scare.” They also 

proposed that “it be made a felony to broadcast the presence of plague.” 29 

Kinyoun’s findings were subsequently upheld by a commission of prominent 

bacteriologists appointed by the US Treasury, but Kellogg, whose competence 

came in for similar scrutiny and who faced similar vilification, felt that “for 

unexampled bitterness, unfair and dishonest methods” the campaign “probably 

never had been and never again will be equaled.” 30 

Thankfully, the 1900 outbreak had been brought under control with just 

121 cases and 113 deaths, and when plague revisited San Francisco in 1907 

politicians and health officials no longer tried to pretend it was a fiction, 

moving swiftly to contain the disease by launching an extensive rat extermi -

nation campaign. Like other bacteriologists and officials who had been 

“blooded” by America’s first experience of plague, Kellogg remained a keen 

student of the disease, and when in the winter of 1910 reports reached 

California of an outbreak of pneumonic plague in Manchuria, he followed 

news of the spreading outbreak keenly. Most likely sparked by tarbagans, a 

species of Mongolian and Siberian marmot valued for their fur, the epidemic THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

48 

appears to have begun at Manchouli, near the Chinese–Siberian border, in 

October 1910 before spreading via the trans-Manchurian railway to Harbin 

and other towns along the way. The principal culprits were inexperienced 

Chinese hunters who had been attracted to Manchuria by the high prices for 

pelts and did not take as much care as Manchurian trappers when handling 

sick tarbagans. As the Manchurian winter closed in and the hunters headed 

back to China, they mingled with returning agricultural workers and “coo -

lies,” crowding into packed railway carriages and inns. Soon, hospitals were 

overrun with patients, and by February 1911 some 50,000 people had died. 

Many of the bodies were cremated or dynamited in plague pits. 31  According 

to Wu Lien-Teh, a Cambridge-educated Chinese plague expert who made a 

detailed study of the epidemic, reports of buboes were entirely absent, but 

pneumonic symptoms were ubiquitous. Working with the American physician 

and tropical medicine specialist Richard Strong, Wu performed twenty-five 

autopsies and used bacteriological techniques to confirm the presence of  Y.

pestis , subsequently presenting the evidence at the International Plague 

Conference called by the Chinese in Mukden in 1911. 32 

At this time, most experts subscribed to the idea that plague was a rat-

borne disease, most likely communicated by fleas, so the idea that the bacillus 

could be spread in droplet form to humans directly from tarbagans and mar -

mots was controversial. But when the Chinese and Japanese authorities made 

a close examination of rats—some 50,000 were rounded up—they could not 

find any evidence of infection, and support for the theory grew. Some experts 

suspected the Manchurian strains were more virulent than those associated 

with previous bubonic outbreaks in India and elsewhere; others that the tar -

bagan-derived bacilli were pneumotropic, meaning they had an affinity for the 

lungs. This theory received a boost when Strong, who headed the Biological 

Laboratory in Manila (part of the Philippine Bureau of Science) and led the 

American delegation to the conference, demonstrated that plague bacilli 

could be cultured from agar plates on which patients had been allowed to 

breathe, and that tarbagans could also be infected with pneumonic plague if 

exposed to the organism in droplet form. 

Another compelling theory concerned the weather. In Manchuria the 

average temperature during the three months of the epidemic had been 

–30°C, whereas in India, where plague had raged on and off since 1896 and 

had been largely bubonic, the average temperature had been 30° 

C.  Hypothesizing that the failure of pneumonic plague to spread in India 

had been due to the higher average temperatures there, Oscar Teague and 

M.  A.  Barber, two bacteriologists attached to the Philippine Bureau of PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

49 

Science, decided to perform a series of evaporation experiments with  Y.

pestis  and other infectious bacteria. These showed that sprayed plague drop -

lets disappeared very quickly from the atmosphere in conditions of low 

humidity, whereas the converse was the case in conditions of high humidity. 

“Such an atmosphere is, under ordinary circumstances, of common occur -

rence in very cold climates, whereas it is extremely rare in warm ones,” 

they wrote. “Hence, since the droplets of sputum persist longer, the plague 

bacilli remain alive longer in the air, and there is a greater tendency for the 

disease to spread in cold climates than in warm ones.” 33 

Not everyone was persuaded by this argument, however, or convinced that 

climate had been the decisive factor. Though impressed by the cold weather 

in Harbin in 1910, Wu did not think it had played a major part in the 

Manchurian outbreak, pointing out that there was “ample evidence” to show 

that pneumonic outbreaks also occurred in regions with hot climates, such as 

Egypt and West Africa. Instead, Wu believed that the decisive factor had been 

the overcrowding and the proximity to infectious patients, pointing out that 

“most infections occurred indoors, specially at night-time, when the coolies 

returned to their warm but crowded shelters.” Nor did he accept another 

theory according to which the cold weather had resulted in the wide disper -

sion of  frozen  particles of plague-infected sputum. “If infection occurred in the 

open, it certainly was a direct one from patient to patient, and did not result 

from inhalation of frozen particles of sputum,” he stated. 34 

Weighing the circumstances of the Oakland outbreak, Kellogg concluded 

that the health department had been fortunate that the outbreak had occurred 

in August, as the warm weather and low humidity meant that “conditions 

were not favorable for the transfer of infected droplets.” The result was that 

“the drying and consequent death of the bacillus was so rapid that the ordi -

nary measures of prophylaxis … sufficed to check the progress of the infec -

tion.” Had the weather been cooler or the atmospheric water deficit lower, 

then things might have been different, he acknowledged, but that had not 

been and was unlikely to be the case in California. While San Francisco and 

Los Angeles needed to be on their guard against further cases of bubonic 

plague sparked by stray squirrels, he concluded, it was cities in the East that 

should be most concerned about the pneumonic form of the disease. All it 

would take, he observed, was for someone to be infected by a squirrel and, 

while incubating the disease, journey to “some eastern state in winter time 

and [develop] an infection such as that of Di Bortoli.” He concluded that while 

the persistence of sylvatic reservoirs of plague in California ground squirrels 

constituted a permanent risk of the bubonic form of the disease, the THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

50 

pneumonic form was “probably not a serious menace on the Pacific coast, 

owing to climatic conditions.” 35 

* * * 

The identification of  Y. pestis  in Horace Gutiérrez’s sputum and the symptoms 

of severe pneumonia with bloody expectorations and cyanosis should have 

been a wake-up call that the improbable had happened and that pneumonic 

plague was at large in the Mexican quarter, even as Los Angeles broiled in a 

late autumn heat wave. But that is not what happened. Instead, fearing the 

political and economic repercussions, not to mention the panic that might 

attend an official announcement that the Black Death had arrived in the city 

of the future, health officials prevaricated. On being shown the slide packed 

with rod-shaped bacteria, the city’s health commissioner, Dr  Luther Powers, 

denied the evidence before his eyes, telling Maner the slide had been poorly 

prepared and that he needed to rerun the tests. Nevertheless, he took the 

precaution of sending quarantine officers to the Macy Street District, telling 

them there had been a “return of [Spanish] flu” in a virulent form in the 

Mexican quarter. By now, Maria Samarano, Guadalupe’s 80-year-old grand -

mother—the woman whom Bogen had examined at Carmelita Street—had 

been admitted to County General, and on 1  November she died, becoming 

the fourth victim of the outbreak. But still no one dared utter the “p” word in 

public. However, the evening before, the hospital’s superintendent had sent a 

telegram to state and federal officials asking where he might obtain plague 

serum and vaccine. One of the telegrams was intercepted by Benjamin 

Brown, the PHS’s senior surgeon in Los Angeles. Not sure that he could trust 

what he was reading, Brown called the hospital to inquire if there were plague 

patients on its wards, then wired the Surgeon General, Hugh S.  Cumming, to 

alert him to the gravity of the situation. Encoding his telegram for secrecy, he 

dictated: “Eighteen cases ekkil [pneumonic plague]. Three suspects. Ten begos 

[deaths]. Ethos [situation bad]. Recommend federal aid.” In response, 

Cumming ordered James Perry, a senior surgeon stationed in San Francisco, 

to proceed to Los Angeles and make discreet inquiries, but by now quarantine 

officers were roping off the eight city blocks that encompassed the death 

house at Clara Street and newspapermen had begun asking questions. 36 

Infectious diseases have long been objects of rumour and panic. When the 

identity of the pathogen is unknown or uncertain, and information about the 

outbreak is veiled in secrecy, these rumours—and the fears that attend 

them—can quickly spiral out of control. The first into print was the  Los PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

51 

Angeles Times , posting a report on 1  November that nine mourners who had 

attended the wake at 742 Clara Street had died of a “strange malady” resem -

bling pneumonia. Listing the victims by name, perhaps so its readers would 

have no doubt that, for the moment, this was a Hispanic rather than an Anglo-

Saxon problem, the paper went on to report that eight more people were 

confined to the hospital’s isolation ward and that some of these were also 

“expected to die.” The paper also revealed that the health authorities had 

“isolated a germ” but, like the  Herald Examiner  and other Los Angeles papers, 

the  Times  avoided mentioning the dreaded word “plague.” Instead, the paper 

stated that there would be no official announcement until bacteriological 

studies had been concluded, and that for the moment patients had been given 

“the technical diagnosis of Spanish influenza.” 37  Incredibly, it was this or a 

similar coded report in another California paper that seems to have alerted 

Kellogg’s colleague, Dr  William Dickie, the secretary of the State Board of 

Health, that something was amiss in the Mexican quarter. Dickie immediately 

sent a telegram to Dr  Elmer Pascoe, Los Angeles’s acting health officer, asking 

him to “Kindly wire immediately cause of death of Lucena Samarano [ sic ].” 

Pascoe, who had only just taken up the city’s top health post following the 

sudden death of the previous occupant from a heart attack, kept his answer 

brief and to the point, “Death L.S.  caused by  Bacillus pestis .” 38 

By now the quarantine had been extended to Belvedere Gardens, confining 

some 4,000 people within the plague zone, and the police and fire depart -

ment had strict instructions not to let anyone in or out of the roped-off area. 

In addition, guards had been posted at the front and back of homes that were 

known to contain or that had formerly contained plague victims. Public gath -

erings were also prohibited, and parents were instructed to keep their chil -

dren out of school and away from movie houses. Even Pacific Electric trolley 

cars, which continued to run along Macy Street, were banned from letting 

riders board or alight at stops near the quarantined area. 

This was Los Angeles’s shark-in-the-water moment. The sight of armed 

guards barring entry to the Mexican quarter was the equivalent of posting 

signs on the beach that it was no longer safe to enter the water. But rather 

than admitting the truth, city and health authorities, with the backing of local 

newspaper editors, sought to maintain the fiction that, as the  Los Angeles Times 

put it, the outbreak was merely a “malignant form of pneumonia.” 39  This 

infuriated  El Heraldo de Mexico , the Spanish-language newspaper, which railed 

against “the hermetic silence in which authorities have locked themselves.” 40 

But it was a lone voice and no other paper in Los Angeles dared mention 

plague. Outside Los Angeles, however, it was a different story. “21 Victims of THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

52 

‘Black Death’ in California,” declared the Associated Press on 1  November. 

“Pneumonic Plague is Feared after 13 die in Los Angeles,” announced the 

Washington Post  on 2  November. “Pneumonic Plague takes seven more vic -

tims,” reported the  New York Times  on 3  November. 

The contrasting treatment of the outbreak in America’s metropolitan dai -

lies perhaps says more about the rivalries between East and West Coast busi -

ness elites, and commercial concerns about the plague’s economic impacts, 

than it does about the competence of Los Angeles health officials. Faced with 

the publicity nightmare of a disease from the Dark Ages appearing in twenti -

eth-century Los Angeles, it is little wonder that the first instinct of the city’s 

civic leaders and their press allies was to obfuscate. As George Young, the 

managing editor of the  Herald Examiner , informed the Board of Directors of 

the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, Hearst newspapers “would print 

nothing we didn’t think was in the interests of the city.” 41  At stake was not 

only the viability of Los Angeles’s tourism industry and future real estate 

sales, but the ambition to make the Port of Los Angeles at San Pedro the larg -

est commercial harbour in the United States. Should federal health officials in 

Washington suspect plague was anywhere near the port, the surgeon general 

would have no choice but to close the harbour and impose a strict maritime 

quarantine. Once a quarantine had been instituted it would continue for at 

least ten days and could only be lifted when the authorities were sure the city 

was free of plague and there was no danger of the disease being reintroduced 

to wharfside areas by rats and other rodents. But by that point, of course, the 

damage to the city’s reputation would have been done. 

By contrast, for the New York newspapers there was nothing like plague to 

boost circulation, especially when the outbreak lay a safe 3,000 miles to the 

west. Besides, for years Los Angeles had boasted of its superior climate and 

quality of life, bombarding easterners with postcards adorned with sun-kissed 

orange groves and preternaturally happy couples. Never mind if reporting the 

truth fostered panic: it was worth it just to puncture the booster hubris and 

wipe the smirk off those sunny Californian faces. 

* * * 

In 1924 there was no treatment or cure for pneumonic plague. The best that 

physicians could offer were stimulants such as caffeine and digitalis, or depres -

sants such as morphine. In theory, vaccines containing killed bacteria or con -

valescent serums containing antibodies from patients who had survived infec -

tion with plague might have made a difference, but only if convalescents with PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

53 

immunity to the disease could be found in time and the serums administered 

early enough in the infection to make a difference to the course of the disease. 

In the absence of such measures, 90  per  cent of infections were fatal. 

For those who had attended Luciana Samarano’s wake, had boarded in her 

rooming house, or had helped care for one of her sick or dying relatives, it 

was almost certainly too late. But for those who had not yet been exposed to 

infectious sputum or blood from the Samaranos’ extended family, there was 

one measure that was certain to break the chain of infections: quarantine and 

the rapid isolation of the sick. These measures had eventually halted the out -

break in Harbin in 1911, and they had also stemmed the outbreak in Oakland 

in 1919. Even without an official diagnosis of plague, physicians at County 

General were sufficiently wary of the infection and the alarming symptoms 

of cyanosis to place patients in an isolation ward and wear masks and rubber 

gloves when approaching their beds. However, the decision to quarantine 

Macy Street and Belvedere Gardens appears to have had little to do with 

infection control and everything to do with racism and prejudice. 

Reconstructing the precise sequence of events is difficult given the incom -

plete documentation and the lack of transparency by the Los Angeles news -

papers and Mayor George Cryer. But what is certain is that only Walter 

Dickie, the secretary of the State Board of Health, had the legal authority to 

order a quarantine of the Mexican quarter and he did not learn about the 

outbreak until 1  November, by which time, of course, the area had already 

been roped off. Instead, it seems that the decision was made by the county 

health chief, J.  L.  Pomeroy, acting on his own initiative. Though Pomeroy was 

a qualified doctor, his decision appears to have had less to do with his knowl -

edge of plague than his experience of previous quarantines and his low regard 

for Mexicans. By the 1920s ethnic quarantines, spurred by fears of smallpox 

and typhus being introduced by migrants from across the border, had become 

a routine measure in Los Angeles and other southern Californian towns. 

According to Pomeroy, special guard details were “the only effective way of 

quarantining Mexicans,” and he ordered his men to institute the quarantine 

by stealth so as not to spread alarm. To this end, Pomeroy conscripted sev -

enty-five police officers and positioned his men discreetly at the boundaries 

of Macy Street and Carmelita Street in Belvedere Gardens. To avoid “a general 

stampede,” he instructed the guards to wait until after midnight when they 

were certain all residents had returned home. It was only then that ropes 

were strung around the zone and the “quarantine was [made] absolute.” The 

measures, which were in force for two weeks, would eventually extend to five 

urban districts in which Hispanics were known to reside. However, only two THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

54 

of these, Macy Street and Belvedere, had verifiable cases of plague. As 

Deverell puts it, “the others had only verified cases of ethnicity. In other 

words, Mexicans lived there.” 42 

Though judged by today’s standards Pomeroy’s methods were discrimina -

tory, they appear to have been extremely effective. With the exception of an 

ambulance driver who ferried one of the patients to the hospital, all the casu -

alties, bar one, came from within the quarantine zone and could be traced to 

the Samarano clan or to mourners who had been present at one of the wakes. 

Indeed, Pomeroy’s decision to impose a quarantine seems to have been 

prompted in part by the questioning of boarders who shared the house at 343 

Carmelita Street with Guadalupe’s elderly mother, Maria Samarano. This was 

the address that Bogen had visited two days earlier and where he had discov -

ered Maria and Guadalupe’s brother, Victor, lying deathly ill. By the time 

Pomeroy arrived at Carmelita Street, Victor was dead of suspected “meningi -

tis.” However, on quizzing the other boarders and learning that Victor had 

recently attended his father’s funeral, Pomeroy immediately posted armed 

guards at the front and back of the house. Next, he discovered that one of 

Luciana Samarano’s cousins had died at another house in Belvedere Gardens 

and that his wife was also ill with what was presumed to be the same disease. 

This was the flag that appears to have convinced Pomeroy to draw a wider line 

around Macy District and extend the quarantine to Belvedere Gardens, even 

though it lay across the city line in Los Angeles County. 

Waking the following morning to find that they were effectively prison -

ers—“inmates” was the official term used by the health authorities—must have 

been a terrifying experience for the Mexican residents and anyone else caught 

up in the dragnet. Indeed, no sooner was the quarantine in place than the 

authorities began house-to-house inspections. Those who were sick or were 

suspected of having been in contact with sick persons were removed to the 

isolation ward at County General, while those left behind were told to prepare 

a mixture of hot water, salt, and lime juice, and gargle with it several times a 

day. The chamber of commerce refused to requisition additional funds to pro -

vide provisions for the trapped residents of the plague zone. Instead, it was left 

to local charities to deliver packages of food and milk to stricken families. 

Confined to their homes, waiting to see who would be next to succumb to 

the  Muerto Negro , as Spanish speakers referred to the disease, one can only 

imagine the images that flashed through people’s minds and the thoughts that 

they clung to for comfort. As Camus reminds us, in such situations “we tell 

ourselves that pestilence is a mere bogy of the mind, a bad dream that will 

pass away.” 43  But the plague was not a bogy, it was real and it could strike, PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

55 

without warning, at any time. The only mercy was that the worst suffering 

took place far from the quarantine zone, inside the isolation ward at County 

General. There, in a desperate effort to halt the course of the disease, doctors 

placed patients on an intravenous drip of Mercurochrome solution, a mer -

cury-based antiseptic used to treat minor cuts and bruises that was almost 

certainly useless against plague. * The first to receive the treatment was ten-

year-old Roberto Samarano, the eldest of Guadalupe’s three sons. He was 

hooked up to a Mercurochrome drip on 28  October and given three succes -

sive injections, only to die two days later, his body “practically riddled with 

plague infection.” Roberto’s death was followed by that of his younger 

brother, Gilberto, and Alfredo Burnett, Luciana Samarano’s son from an ear -

lier marriage (Alfredo died on 11  November after a heroic thirteen-day 

struggle with the disease that saw him slipping in and out of a “restless delir -

ium”). 44  By now two boarders at 742 Clara Street had also died. Incredibly, 

the only member of the Samarano clan to survive the death house was the 

Samaranos’ second son, Raul. The eight-year-old was evacuated from Clara 

Street at the same time as his siblings, but, unlike his brothers, was given 

plague serum. 45  He lived, growing up to enjoy a career in the navy and the 

Los Angeles Army Corp of Engineers. Another notable survivor was Mary 

Costello, a nurse who had attended Guadalupe Samarano at Clara Street. 

Costello was admitted to County General on 29  October. By Halloween both 

her lungs were showing signs of consolidation and she was bringing up 

“bloody expectorations,” but after being given Mercurochrome solution 

Costello showed a slight improvement, and a few days later she also received 

plague serum. It was this that may have made the difference. 

Incredible as it might seem today, Angelinos in other parts of the city 

appear to have been largely ignorant of the outbreak and the significance of 

the quarantine. One man recalled the plague as “a big hush-up,” while his 

father, who lived within walking distance of Macy Street and was a regular 

reader of the  Los Angeles Times , admitted he had known little about the out -

break. 46  This is not surprising when you consider that the  Los Angeles Times  and 

other municipal papers did not refer to the disease by its proper name until 

6 November, by which time the epidemic had more or less run its course. 

Even then, they sought to justify their evasion by adding that pneumonic  

> *Mercurochrome is the brand name for dibromohydroxymercurifluorescein, some -
> times called merbromin. Its use was discontinued by the FDA in 1998 because of
> fears of potential mercury poisoning.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

56 

plague was merely the “technical term” for malignant pneumonia. Plague was 

“not a new phenomenon in California,” Dickie pointed out truthfully, if a 

little disingenuously. “While an outbreak of plague is always a potential men -

ace … there is no reason for public alarm.” 47 

Outside of Los Angeles, however, it was a different story, as newspapers 

competed to keep their readers abreast of the latest developments. The call 

for plague serum and the news of its dramatic journey received particular 

attention, not least of all because the manufacturer, Mulford Laboratories of 

Philadelphia, used Los Angeles’s plight as a marketing opportunity to issue 

regular press updates on the progress of the serum from the West to the East 

Coast. Pascoe’s appeal for serum had reached Mulford on 3  November, 

prompting the company to dispatch several vials by automobile to Mineola 

airfield in Long Island. The following day the serum was transferred to a mail 

plane and flown 3,000 miles to San Francisco and thence to Los Angeles, 

reaching the city health department on 5  November. “Serum for plague 

speeds by plane to Los Angeles,” reported the New York  Evening World News  on 

5 November; “5000 more doses of serum go west,” added the  Public Ledger  of 

Philadelphia a few days later. 48  Mulford did its best to play up the “thrilling” 

story of the vaccine’s bicoastal journey, describing how within thirty-six 

hours of receiving the appeal, “the vials of serum were brought to the front 

lines where the battle is on against the Terror.” Speed laws were “forgotten” as 

the precious vials were rushed to Mineola and, though the mail plane was 

briefly delayed by a storm at Salt Lake City, it was not long before “the mes -

senger of mercy had right of way” again. Reading Mulford’s sensational, self-

serving prose must have been an uncomfortable experience for Los Angeles’s 

own boosters. “It was pneumonic plague or Black Plague—the scourge of the 

fourteenth century,” declared an announcement in the Mulford company 

journal, “the dread disease which numbered its victims by the millions.” 49  But 

Los Angeles business leaders were nothing if not adept at inoculating negative 

publicity, and soon they were putting their own spin on the episode, reassur -

ing easterners that, as William Lacy, the president of the Los Angeles Chamber 

of Commerce, put it in an article in the  Los Angeles Realtor , the city had suf -

fered “a slight epidemic of pneumonic plague” and there was no reason for 

anyone to cancel their vacation plans. 50 

If the outbreak challenged Los Angeles’s carefully cultivated image as an 

idyllic holiday destination, it was no less of a headache for the State Board of 

Health and the PHS.  In Washington the sensational newspaper reports were 

read with mounting alarm, leading to demands for reassurance from Congress 

that federal health officials were doing their utmost to ensure that plague did PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

57 

not spread to other harbour cities. The problem was that, technically, the 

outbreak in the Mexican quarter was the responsibility of the Los Angeles 

City Health department and the State Board of Health. Unless and until the 

outbreak reached the Port of Los Angeles, the PHS had no authority to inter -

vene and could only serve in an advisory capacity. In theory, cooperation was 

in the interests of bureaucrats at the local, state, and federal level, but the city 

health commissioner was a political appointee who reported directly to the 

mayor George Cryer, who in turn answered to the board of the chamber of 

commerce. This placed Pascoe in an impossible position, since Cryer was 

acutely sensitive to any statement that adversely impacted the city’s image and 

its commercial prospects. Indeed, when Pascoe overstepped his authority by 

confirming to the eastern papers that the outbreak was due to pneumonic 

plague, Cryer passed him over for promotion and appointed a more pliant 

official to head the department. 51  However, Dickie valued Pascoe’s expertise 

and when, on 3  November, at a meeting in Cryer’s office, Dickie was put in 

charge of the plague clean-up operation, he insisted that Pascoe join his team. 

It would seem that Cryer had little choice but to accede to this demand; nor 

could he prevent Dickie offering a place on the advisory committee to James 

Perry, the PHS surgeon who had been dispatched from San Francisco to 

monitor the situation, despite the board’s paranoia about word reaching 

Washington that plague might be encroaching on the environs of the port at 

San Pedro. Perry found himself in a similarly awkward position vis-à-vis his 

superiors in Washington, as he had to balance the surgeon general’s concerns 

that local officials were not up to the job against interventions that might be 

seen as interfering with the state’s jurisdiction and undermining Dickie’s 

authority. Indeed, it would seem that Perry may have gone too far in accom -

modating local officials, because on 7  November, after being reprimanded for 

not transmitting information to Washington quickly enough, he explained that 

Dickie was “keenly desirous” of taking full control himself and that, in any 

case, there had been some doubt as to whether the outbreak was due to 

pneumonic plague. Interestingly, it would appear that Perry’s scepticism was 

also the opinion of other experts, including Kellogg, who had accompanied 

him to Los Angeles and who had insisted on preparing fresh bacteriological 

slides before accepting Maner’s diagnosis. Once it became clear that the out -

break was plague and deserved to be treated as such, however, Perry found 

himself increasingly at odds with Dickie. At the heart of their differences was 

the question whether the outbreak in the Mexican quarter was due to squir -

rels or rats, or some combination of both, and the implication that this might 

have for other parts of the city, including the port. Dickie and his colleagues THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

58 

in the county health department believed the epidemic would eventually be 

traced to infected squirrels, as had been the case with the Oakland outbreak, 

meaning that it should end when the last infectious patient had been isolated 

in the hospital. Indeed, when, at the suggestion of Karl Meyer, a bacteriolo -

gist who directed the Hooper Foundation for Medical Research in San 

Francisco and who had visited McCoy’s plague laboratory to familiarize him -

self with his techniques, they combed rats in the Mexican quarter for fleas, 

they discovered a fair number harboured  H. anomalus  plus another species, 

Diamanus montanus , more commonly found on ground squirrels. Recalling the 

case of the boy in Elysian Park who had died of plague after exposure to a 

squirrel in 1908, Meyer suggested that this meant the outbreak had probably 

originated in the “hinterland,” not the port. 52  Perry thought otherwise and, 

responding to increasingly stern telegrams from Washington, insisted that the 

outbreak had been due to rats and that only a well-financed rodent eradication 

campaign targeting both the Mexican quarter and the port would be certain 

to rid Los Angeles of the disease. This was not a verdict the chamber of com -

merce wished to hear, for obvious reasons. Nevertheless, in mid-November 

the chamber granted $250,000 to finance rodent extermination measures, 

with the promise of more money should it be needed. The pivotal decision 

came at a meeting of the chamber and the city council on 13  November 

when, standing in front of a map of greater Los Angeles studded with black 

pins representing pneumonic plague cases, Dickie warned: “I realize that the 

dream of Los Angeles and the dream of officials and the chamber of com -

merce is the harbor.Your dream will never come true as long as plague exists 

in Los Angeles and as long as there is any question of doubt in reference to the 

harbor.” Unless San Pedro received a clean bill of health “half of the commerce 

of your harbor will quickly vanish,” Dickie predicted, before concluding that 

“no disease known has such an effect upon the business world as the plague.” 53 

Los Angeles business leaders must have hoped that by granting substantial 

monies for anti-plague measures, they would convince officials in Washington 

they were serious about addressing the rat problem and avoid the need for San 

Pedro to be quarantined. If so, their hopes were dashed. This had little to do 

with the enthusiasm with which Dickie and the City Health Department 

prosecuted rodent extermination, and everything to do with the PHS’s con -

cern for its reputation and its suspicion of California politicians and local 

business leaders. During the rat clean-up campaign in San Francisco, federal 

health officials had watched aghast as local newspapers, encouraged by Gage, 

had questioned Kinyoun’s scientific competence. In the end, the reappearance 

of plague in San Francisco in 1907 had forced Gage to bow to the authority PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

59 

of the federal plague commission and cooperate with the PHS, but the experi -

ence had left Blue and Hugh Cumming, his successor as surgeon general who 

had been a protégé of Kinyoun’s, suspicious of local city health departments 

and state-appointed health officials. In an attempt to foster closer cooperation 

between state and federal officials and improve the flow of information to 

Washington, in 1923 Cumming divided the country into seven public health 

districts and appointed experienced officers to each. One of the key postings 

was at the quarantine station at Angel Island, a position which went to 

Cumming’s close friend and confidant, Assistant Surgeon General Richard 

H.  Creel. From San Francisco, Creel would oversee quarantines for all ports 

along the United States’ western seaboard, including Los Angeles, and keep a 

close eye on the progress of Dickie’s campaign, feeding the information back 

to Cumming in Washington. 54 

Determined to show that the State Board of Health was up to the task, 

Dickie moved into the new Pacific Finance Building off Wilshire Boulevard, 

where he fashioned himself “commander-in-chief.” There, surrounded by 

colour-coded maps studded with pins recording the locations of trapped 

rodents (red for rats, yellow for squirrels), he presided over 127 rodent exter -

minators. 55  Under Dickie’s direction, the campaign took on the trappings of a 

military exercise. One team of rat catchers was assigned exclusively to the 

harbour, with orders to inspect every arriving vessel and tag any rodent found 

in the vicinity of the port. The rats would then be removed to the city labora -

tory on Eighth Street for testing. At the same time, other squads fanned out 

across the Mexican quarter, performing “plague abatements.” Modelled on the 

campaign in San Francisco’s Chinatown in 1900, these involved removing the 

sidings from houses in and around Clara Street and raising the dwellings eigh -

teen inches off the ground, so that dogs and cats could freely enter the build -

ings and flush diseased rodents from their lairs. At the same time, premises 

were ruthlessly stripped of furniture, clothing, and bedding, and funeral pyres 

made of tenants’ belongings. These slash-and-burn tactics culminated with 

fumigation with petroleum, sulphur or cyanide gas, measures that guaranteed 

that no creature foolish enough to return to the properties would survive long 

in the poisoned rooms. Running alongside these plague abatement measures 

was an equally ferocious rodent trapping and extermination campaign. Squares 

of bread baited with phosphorus or arsenic were scattered in suspect neigh -

bourhoods both inside and outside the quarantine zone. The city health depart -

ment also offered a bounty of $1 for every dead rat or squirrel brought for 

counting and testing to its laboratory at Eighth Street. When this did not yield 

a sufficient bounty of rodents, the health department offered men a fixed salary THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

60 

of $130 a day. For First World War veterans this was considerably more than 

they could hope to earn in civilian employment, and soon the hunting parties 

were swelled by former infantrymen eager to demonstrate their sharpshooting 

skills. It was not long before Macy District echoed to the continuous pop of 

rifles, and when the hunting parties ran out of rodents within the city limits 

they fanned out to Belvedere Gardens and other areas in the county. “These 

surveys may take us a hundred miles or more from Los Angeles before we find 

the guilty rodent,” Dickie warned. 56 

Ironically, this campaign turned up far fewer rats in the Mexican quarter than 

had been expected, and virtually none in the harbour area. Indeed, by 

22  November, not one of the 1,000 rats trapped in the harbour had tested posi -

tive for plague. 57  By contrast, to the embarrassment of the chamber of com -

merce, rats were readily trapped in the downtown blocks that housed the city’s 

premier hotels and department stores. Meyer, who accompanied health officials 

on several of their inspections, recalled how at one downtown rice-cake factory 

run by a Japanese gentleman he had only to drop a crumb on the floor to “see a 

rat come up and pick it up.” To Meyer, the scene was like something out of 

“Zanzibar” with the smart facades concealing a “jungle.” The only way to ensure 

that such premises were rat-proof, he observed, was to pour concrete over the 

dirt floors, but that was expensive (and not always effective). 58 

By the end of the year, Dickie could boast that his men had trapped more 

than 25,000 rats and 768 squirrels. In addition, flooring and planking had 

been removed from countless buildings in and around Clara and Macy Streets, 

and poison laid at 1,000 premises. However, for all the intensity of the plague 

abatement measures, Perry was unimpressed by Dickie’s efforts, informing 

Cumming that the Board’s campaign had been “casual and periodic” and that 

its laboratory work could not be trusted. “It is apparent that Dr  Dickie does 

not appreciate the gravity of the situation, or the importance of enlarging the 

scope of the campaign, or of increasing the efficiency of the operations,” Perry 

informed Cumming in mid-December. “This is evidenced by his non-accep -

tance of the proffered, concrete Service aid.” Instead, he urged Cumming to 

dissociate the PHS from the state’s programme, warning that unless the PHS 

took charge of the campaign there was a “grave” danger the disease could 

spread to other countries. 59  This was the one thing that Cumming could not 

allow, as under the provisions of the 1922 International Sanitary Convention 

the United States had a duty to ensure that “adequate measures” were being 

taken to prevent the spread of plague to other jurisdictions, failure to do so 

running the risk that foreign governments would impose quarantines against 

American shipping. Adding to Cumming’s concern was the discovery of PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

61 

plague-infected rats in both New Orleans and Oakland. In the case of New 

Orleans, it was suspected the culprit had been the  Atlanticos , a coal-steamer 

that had reached the Crescent City at the end of October after sailing from 

Oran, a notorious Algerian plague port that would be immortalized in 

Camus’s 1947 novel. On board was a stowaway with a swelling on his groin. 

The stowaway was hospitalized and the ship fumigated, but soon after, eight 

plague rats were found on the waterfront, prompting the Louisiana State 

Board of Health to request the PHS begin a rodent survey. In the case of 

Oakland, there was no evidence of foreign introduction of plague. Instead, 

the alarm was raised by the discovery on 13  December of a plague rat on a 

garbage dump close to the waterfront. 

In Los Angeles, by contrast, no plague-carrying rats had been found in the 

immediate vicinity of the harbour. However, by the end of December thirty-

five had been retrieved from ranches within a mile of the port, and nearly 

twice as many again from other areas within a forty-mile circumference of 

San Pedro. In addition, survey squads had established that 64  per  cent of rats 

in the Los Angeles area were colonized by squirrel fleas and, although hunting 

parties had failed to turn up any infected squirrels in or around the city, eight 

squirrels retrieved from a ranch in San Luis Obispo that had been the focus 

of previous plague epizootics also tested positive for  Y. pestis . At the same 

time, ranchers reported having observed epizootics of squirrel plague in San 

Benito and Monterey Counties the previous summer, suggesting that, as 

Meyer put it, 1924 had “truly [been] a sylvatic plague year in California.” 60 

However, it was the reports from Europe of a new outbreak of rat plague at 

several Mediterranean ports that persuaded Cumming the PHS was facing a 

worldwide recrudescence of the disease and prompted him to finally institute 

quarantines at San Pedro and other “plague-infected” American ports. 61 

Cumming’s decision prompted a subtle but significant shift in the medical 

language. It was no longer the threat of domestic American squirrels trans -

mitting the pneumonic form of the disease that was to be feared, so much as 

foreign introductions by “bubonic rats.” 62  That hysterical conjunction was 

sufficient to panic Congress into voting an emergency appropriation of 

$275,000 to support the PHS’s renewed campaign against its old enemy. At 

first, Los Angeles’s chamber of commerce protested the decision, accusing 

Cumming of “discriminatory” action since no plague rats had been found at 

San Pedro. In any case, it argued, while the harbour was the Fed’s fiefdom, the 

port was the jurisdiction of the state and the city health department. 63  For a 

while Cryer tried to argue the case for his new appointee, city health officer 

George Parrish. However, when Cryer got his wish and the city council THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

62 

authorized Parrish to take over the eradication campaign from Dickie, it also 

slashed his budget, forcing Cryer to swallow his pride and go cap in hand to 

President Calvin Coolidge to request that the PHS be allowed to assume 

responsibility for the plague clean-up work. As far as Cumming was con -

cerned, there was only one man for the job, his predecessor Rupert Blue, 

who was promptly recommissioned into the Service and dispatched to Los 

Angeles. For Blue it was an opportunity to finish the work he had begun in 

1908, and by July he was once again in his element, probing Los Angeles’s 

downtown rat runs, overseeing the concreting over of basements and taking 

other abatement measures. “Nine suspicious rats and five ground squirrels 

have been found since June thirteen in widely separated sections, extending 

from Hollywood north to West Washington Street south,” he wired Cumming 

on 26  June. “Should these prove positive for plague we may expect several 

human cases to occur at any time. Seasonal conditions highly favorable for a 

return of the epidemic.” 64 

It is hard to say who deserves most credit for the eventual eradication of 

plague in Los Angeles, Blue or Dickie. The last reported case of pneumonic 

plague occurred on 12  January 1925, and, despite Blue’s ominous telegram, 

the last plague-infected rat was recovered from eastern Los Angeles on 

21  May, in other words two months before Blue took charge. And while 

Dickie may have been guilty of colluding in the press cover-up, he never 

doubted that the outbreak was serious. Moreover, his prompt action in quar -

antining Macy District and directing the plague clean-up efforts, however 

harsh and unfair the measures must have seemed to the area’s Mexican resi -

dents, ensured that pneumonic plague did not spread to other parts of the 

city. Indeed, it could be argued that the Board’s response might have been 

even more effective had the city health department alerted Dickie to the 

outbreak sooner, rather than waiting for him to learn about it from a news -

paper. As Dickie observed in his official report on the outbreak, 65  physicians 

and bacteriologists at County General were also culpable in failing to recog -

nize the symptoms of plague in Jesus Lajun. * Though official figures probably 

did not reflect the full extent of the outbreak, in total there had been just 

forty-one cases of pneumonic plague and thirty-seven fatalities. In addition,   

> *The swelling in Jesus’s groin was almost certainly an inguinal bubo that had been
> allowed to drain for three weeks before anyone thought to examine it for plague
> bacilli. A culture subsequently revealed “bipolar organisms,” and when a laboratory
> animal was inoculated with the culture it died within twelve hours.

PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

63 

there had been seven cases and five deaths from bubonic plague and a single 

fatal case of septicaemic plague. Most important of all, perhaps, it was the last 

recorded outbreak of pneumonic plague anywhere in North America. 

* * * 

The Los Angeles outbreak upset the assumptions of Kellogg and other plague 

experts, challenging the wisdom that California’s mild, year-round 

Mediterranean climate was a protection. Instead, it demonstrated that condi -

tions of low humidity and warm weather made little difference to the trans -

mission of the pneumonic form of the disease and that in Southern California 

the pathogen could assume as deadly a form as plagues during earlier histori -

cal periods. 66  Indeed, the crucial factor was not the weather but the close 

proximity of the sick to the healthy. In the overcrowded conditions of the 

Mexican quarter the bacillus had found the ideal conditions for spread via 

respiratory droplets. Plague’s explosive potential had been further amplified 

by burial rituals—in particular, the Catholic custom of holding open wakes— 

which brought mourners into close contact with infectious cadavers and those 

who might be incubating the infection. The Los Angeles outbreak had another 

legacy too: it shattered the belief that plague was largely a rat-borne disease 

of urban areas and that to eradicate it all you needed to do was clean up the 

places where rats bred. Though it was never proven that squirrels were the 

source of the 1924 outbreak, the discovery of squirrel fleas on rats recovered 

from the greater Los Angeles area, together with the fact that no plague-

infected rat was found between the port and the Mexican quarter, suggested 

that Meyer had been right and that the disease had most likely found its way 

to the Mexican quarter from the hinterland. Looking back, the signs had been 

there in 1908 when the boy in Elysian Park, thirty miles from the port, had 

died of plague after handling an infected squirrel in his backyard. It was 

around this time that squirrel die-offs had been reported in San Luis Obispo, 

a phenomenon that was repeated in 1924 when similar epizootics were 

observed in several counties in Southern and Northern California. Perhaps 

squirrels had originally caught the bug from rats rummaging in garbage 

dumps in Oakland, or that had hitched a ride south on the Southern Pacific 

Railroad. Or perhaps ground squirrels and other wild rodents had been har -

bouring the plague bacillus for decades without anyone noticing. Whatever 

had been the case, the Los Angeles outbreak prompted Meyer and others to 

take a closer look at the role of squirrels in the persistence of plague between 

epidemics and the role of their fleas in the transmission of the disease to rats THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

64 

and other wild rodents. 67  With Dickie’s help Meyer examined the records of 

previous outbreaks, trying to see if there was a relationship between epizoot -

ics observed in squirrels and human outbreaks. In 1927, when the state 

resumed responsibility for plague control work, Meyer and Dickie joined 

forces to survey ranches and woodlands suspected of harbouring plague-

infected squirrels. By the mid-1930s, state survey crews had trapped tens of 

thousands of squirrels and combed their fur for fleas, returning the rodents 

and their ectoparasites to Meyer’s laboratory at the Hooper Foundation. 

Although many of these squirrels appeared perfectly healthy, Meyer discov -

ered that some harboured latent infections and that their ground-up organs 

could be used to communicate plague to guinea pigs. Many were also infested 

with plague fleas. In addition, crews recovered diseased fleas from burrows 

that were known to have harboured infected squirrels twenty years previously 

but which were now occupied by other rodents, suggesting that in certain 

parts of the state ground squirrels constituted a hidden “reservoir” of disease. 

It was the beginning of a new ecological approach, one that by the mid-1930s 

would see Meyer adopt the term  sylvatic plague  to describe the preservation 

of the disease by forest-dwelling rodents. 

By 1935, the PHS had joined the survey effort and established that sylvatic 

plague was endemic to eleven Pacific coast and Rocky Mountain states and 

that its reservoirs included eighteen species of ground squirrel, plus chip -

munks, prairie dogs, marmots, wild rats, white-footed mice, kangaroo rats 

and cottontails. 68  By 1938 more than 100,000 squirrels had been trapped and 

shipped to the Hooper Foundation for examination. However, when Meyer 

came to autopsy the rodents he found that only a small percentage were 

infected with  Y. pestis . He also observed that no sooner had the squirrels been 

eliminated than field mice took up residence in the empty burrows where 

they promptly became infested with the same plague fleas and “peddled” the 

infection to other rodents. Eradication was doomed to failure because sylvatic 

plague was “independent of the usual lines of communication,” he con -

cluded. 69  The challenge was to keep sylvatic plague at a low level by periodi -

cally culling the squirrel populations that harboured  Y. pestis . Of course, every 

now and again, someone might be bitten by a squirrel flea and contract the 

disease, but such events were rare, and as long as squirrels were prevented 

from infecting urban rat populations, sylvatic plague posed little threat to 

people living in built-up areas. 

This is pretty much the approach employed by the CDC today. From its 

wildlife station in Fort Collins, Colorado, the CDC monitors the incidence of 

plagu e in prairie dogs, thought to be a key reservoir of plague in the western PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

65 

United States, and the spillover of the disease into squirrels and other wild 

rodents. 70  In the Pacific Coast and Rocky Mountain states the principal vector 

is a species of flea called  Oropsylla montana . Unlike in the rat flea  X. cheopis , the 

midgut of  O. montana  gets blocked only rarely when it takes a blood meal, but 

it is known 71  to unleash rapidly moving epizoonotics among Californian 

ground squirrels and rock squirrels through an “early-phase” transmission sys -

tem. * When plague levels are considered dangerously high, warnings are 

posted in state parks and campgrounds showing a squirrel in a red circle with 

a diagonal slash through it. At such times hikers are warned not to feed squir -

rels and pet owners are advised to keep an eye on cats and other domestic 

animals lest they cross paths with a squirrel and accidentally become infested 

with their fleas. In spite of these precautions, every year about three people in 

the United States are infected with plague and in some years, as in 2006, there 

have been as many as seventeen infections. 72  Prompt treatment with a power -

ful antibiotic, such as doxycycline of ciprofloxacin, is usually sufficient to clear 

the plague bacillus from the system. **  Nonetheless, newspapers continue to 

run panicked headlines about the deaths of Americans from “bubonic plague” 

and the threats posed by squirrels and other wild rodents, as occurred in 2015 

when an elderly Utah man died from the disease. 73 

No one is sure what causes these periodic flare-ups, but climate and topog -

raphy are thought to be important factors. Plague persists in relatively small 

geographical pockets, such as the high plateaus and grasslands of New 

Mexico, Utah, and Colorado, and the coastal fog belts of Northern California, 

where the weather tends to be cool and damp year-round. Indeed, in 

California, only the dry, central desert region is completely free of sylvatic 

plague. By contrast, in Yosemite National Park and other wilderness and 

coastal areas, plague is nearly always present. In such locales, it finds the ideal 

ecological balance between climate, flea vectors and rodent hosts. It is only 

when unusual rainfall levels boost plant growth or some other factor increases 

the rodent and flea populations that the balance between parasite and host is 

disturbed and plague risks  spilling over into other animals. 74           

> *Plague bacilli multiply rapidly in X.cheopis , sometimes causing blockages that
> prevent ingested blood from reaching the flea’s midgut. These blockages cause
> the flea to feed more voraciously, thereby increasing the chances it will retransmit
> the infection.
> ** In patients treated with antibiotics the average fatality rate is 16 per cent. In the
> untreated, it ranges from 66 per cent to 93 per cent.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

66 

Indeed, with the ongoing encroachment of residential developments into 

these wild habitats, the animal that most threatens to disturb this balance 

today is humans, which is why in the future we should expect further small 

outbreaks of plague, in its bubonic form at least. However, it is highly unlikely 

that Los Angeles or any other American city will ever again be confronted 

with an epidemic of pneumonic plague, much less a pandemic on the scale of 

the Black Death. 67 

# 3

# THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

> “All these men of death.”
> Paul De Kruif

On 6  January 1930, Dr  Willis P.  Martin paid an urgent house call to a family 

in Annapolis, Maryland. Lillian, her daughter Edith, and Edith’s husband Lee 

Kalmey, the owner of a local auto repair shop, had begun to feel feverish 

shortly after Christmas, and all three were now deathly ill. At first, they 

attributed their symptoms to influenza and the depressive effects of the recent 

stock market crash, which had hit Kalmey’s business as hard as any, but in the 

first week of the new year their condition had taken a decided turn for the 

worse. To the chills and generalized aches and pains typical of influenza was 

now added an irritable dry cough, accompanied by constipation and exhaus -

tion that alternated with headaches and insomnia. For large parts of the day, 

Lillian, Edith, and Lee lay somnolent as logs, the silence broken only by their 

intermittent mutterings. By contrast, when awake they would be restless and 

prone to fits of violent excitement. The most worrying symptom of all, how -

ever, was the rattling sound coming from deep within their lungs. 

Dr  Martin suspected pneumonia, possibly mixed with typhoid fever. 

However, Lillian’s husband, who had eaten the same meals as the rest of the 

family, was perfectly well, which tended to rule out a food-borne illness. The 

only other member of the household who had been sick was a parrot that 

Lillian’s husband had purchased from a pet store in Baltimore and which Edith 

and Lee had kept at their home in the run-up to the Yuletide festivities so as 

to present the bird to Lillian as a surprise on Christmas Day. Unfortunately, 

by Christmas Eve the parrot’s plumage had grown ruffled and dirty and the THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

68 

creature was showi ng signs of listlessness. Come Christmas Day the parrot 

was dead. 1

Dr  Martin was baffled by the family’s symptoms and shared his bewilder -

ment with his wife. At first, Mrs Martin was similarly puzzled. Then 

Dr  Martin mentioned the dead parrot. It might be a coincidence, she said, but 

the previous Sunday she had been reading about an outbreak of “parrot fever” 

in a theatrical troupe in Buenos Aires. According to the newspaper report, the 

disease was being blamed for the death of two members of the company, who, 

in common with other members of the cast, had been required to interact 

with a live parrot on stage. That bird was now dead and pet owners through -

out Argentina were being warned to report sickly psittacines—birds in the 

parrot family—to the authorities. 2

It sounded unlikely, ridiculous even, but Martin was not the type to take a 

chance. Instead, he sent a telegram to the PHS in Washington, DC:  

> Request information regarding diagnosis parrot fever … What information
> available regarding prevention spread of parrot fever. … Can you place supply
> parrot fever serum our disposal immediately. Wire reply. 3

Martin was not the only doctor puzzled by the sudden appearance of mys -

terious pneumonias accompanied by typhoid-like symptoms in the United 

States that winter. By now similar telegrams were arriving at the PHS from 

Baltimore and New York, and health officials in Ohio and California were 

fielding similar requests for information. Like Martin’s telegram, these com -

munications ended up on the desk of Surgeon General Hugh S.  Cumming, 

who passed them on to his subordinate, Dr  George W.  McCoy, the director 

of PHS’s Hygienic Laboratory. A veteran of the bubonic plague investigations 

in San Francisco, McCoy was renowned for discovering tularaemia—dubbed 

the “first American disease” because the bacterium was first identified in 

McCoy’s lab in California—and was then the most celebrated bacteriologist 

in America. * If anyone could solve the outbreak, Cumming figured, it was 

McCoy. But when McCoy read Martin’s telegram he could not help smiling. 

Parrot fever ? It sounded like the sort of diagnosis you might encounter in the 

me dical columns of the yellow press or a joke in the funny pages. Certainly,    

> *McCoy first isolated the bacterium of tularaemia in 1911 while examining squir -
> rels for plague lesions in Tulare County, California. Transmitted by ticks, mites and
> lice, tularaemia is endemic to every state in the US, the principal reservoirs being
> wild rabbits and deer. In humans, the tick or deer fly bites can result in ulceration
> and swelling of the lymph glands; hence its confusion with plague.

THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

69 

McCoy had  never heard of parrot fever. But then McCoy was a busy man— 

America was in the grip of an influenza epidemic, a recrudescence, it was 

feared, of the Spanish flu, and he and his deputy, Charlie Armstrong, were 

working day and night on a serum for post-vaccinal encephalitis, a “sleeping 

sickness” that affected some individuals who’d received the smallpox vaccine. 

Nevertheless, McCoy thought it best to check with his colleague. 

“Armstrong, what do  you  know about parrot fever?” McCoy demanded. 

“What do I know about it? I don’t know a  thing  about it,” Armstrong 

admitted. 4

Within days, however, McCoy and Armstrong would come to rue their 

ignorance as one by one laboratory workers tasked with investigating whether 

parrots were implicated in the outbreaks seen in Annapolis and elsewhere fell 

ill. Indeed, by February Armstrong and several other personnel at the 

“Hygienic,” as the ramshackle red-brick laboratory overlooking the Potomac 

was known, had been removed to the nearby US Naval Hospital. By the time 

the outbreak concluded in March, Armstrong’s long-time assistant, Henry 

“Shorty” Anderson, was dead. In the end, it fell to McCoy to conduct the 

critical passage experiments on parrots in the basement of the Hygienic in an 

attempt to isolate the “virus” of psittacosis and develop a serum. But the tests 

were inconclusive and in the end McCoy had been forced to chloroform the 

birds and fumigate the Hygienic from top to bottom to prevent the putative 

virus from escaping the building. As the science writer Paul de Kruif put it in 

his book  Men Against Death , McCoy “never smiled nor even muttered” as he 

performed this grim task, “but just killed and killed and at the end of it 

swashed out every last cage with creosol, and gave all the dead bodies of those 

assorted unhappy experimental creatures a decent and thorough burning in 

the laboratory incinerator.” 5

* * * 

Today few people recall the hysteria surrounding the great parrot fever pan -

demic of 1929–30, but in an era when parrots were all the rage and itinerant 

peddlers went door-to-door with “lovebirds” for widows and bored house -

wives, the idea that one’s pet parrot or parakeet might be harbouring a deadly 

pathogen from the Amazon was the stuff of domestic nightmares and a story 

few newspaper editors could resist. Indeed, were it not for the yellow press, 

and the Hearst newspaper group in particular, it is unlikely that the connec -

tion between parrots and psittacosis would have come to light so fast, or that 

the PHS would have reacted so quickly. The story about the Argentine theatri -

cal troupe had appeared in the 5  January edition of  the  American Weekly , a THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

70 

lavish supple ment distributed with the Sunday editions of the  New York 

American  and other papers in the Hearst group, under the headline “Killed By 

A Pet Parrot.” Mrs Martin probably read the story in the  Baltimore American 

sandwiched between an article about a well-to-do twice-divorced couple and 

the “astonishing confessions” of a slave trader. Morrill Goddard, the editor of 

the  American Weekly , had spotted the tale about the troupe in an obscure 

Argentine scientific journal the previous November and had wired the paper’s 

Buenos Aires correspondent, asking for further details. 6 The correspondent 

found the theatre where the troupe had been performing shuttered, but man -

aged to trace the surviving cast members. The most prominent victim had 

been Carmen Mas, the show’s star and a well-known Argentinian comedian. 

Her leading man, Florencia Paravincini, had also been felled by the disease, 

but, according to the Hearst correspondent, after “17 days of agony” had 

recovered. Nevertheless the “bacillus passed from the parrot” had exacted a 

considerable toll. Prior to the attack Paravincini had been a “big, heavy-set 

man with hair as black as leather.” Now, he weighed less than one hundred 

pounds and his hair was “as white as snow.” It was a doctor at the hospital who 

had put two and two together. After speaking to the company’s prop man, he 

learned that the actors had been required to pet the parrot on stage and that 

said bird had since died. As a result, an alert was issued by the  Asistencia 

Publica , the Argentine National Health Board, and soon reports of similar 

outbreaks connected to sickly parrots but wrongly diagnosed as typhoid or 

influenza were coming to light. In Cordoba, fifty cases were traced to a parrot 

dealer who had set up shop in a local boarding house. His birds were promptly 

slaughtered but too late to prevent the distribution of other suspect psitta -

cines. According to the correspondent, the outbreaks in Argentina were 

entirely avoidable and would not have occurred had dealers observed some 

simple precautions familiar to indigenous forest peoples accustomed to living 

alongside wild birds in their natural habitat.  

> In semitropical parts of Argentina where the parrots are caught, the parrot
> disease is well known among the natives, who never have the creatures for
> pets, and keep away from them unless they make a business of catching and
> shipping them to the cities. The professional parrot catcher takes care not to
> get hold of a sick bird. If by mistake he does catch a “quiet one” he knows it is
> deadly and lets it go as well as any healthy captives with which it may have
> come in contact. 7

The outbreak in Cordoba was subsequently traced to a consignment of 

5,000 parrots imported from Brazil that had been kept in unsanitary condi -

tions in overcrowded crates. By the time Goddard came to learn of the out -THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

71 

breaks, the connection between psittacosis and Brazilian parrots was well 

known in Argentina and the authorities had outlawed the trade. However, 

passengers on cruise ships calling at Buenos Aires were largely ignorant of the 

ban, creating an opening for unscrupulous dealers to offload their sickly birds 

on unsuspecting tourists. It was this practice that most likely led to the intro -

duction of psittacosis to the United States. 

As the term “pandemic” implies, the United States was not the only coun -

try affected. In the summer of 1929, four cases of suspected psittacosis were 

reported in Birmingham, England, and by March of the following year one 

hundred cases had been recorded across England and Wales. One notable 

early victim was a ship’s carpenter who had purchased two parrots in Buenos 

Aires, only to see them perish on the voyage to London (when he presented 

at the London Hospital in December 1929, the carpenter’s symptoms were 

mistaken for typhoid, just as with the Martins in Annapolis). Although most 

cases seemed to involve sustained exposure to live birds, British researchers 

observed that this was not always the case, one example being a man who had 

merely stopped for a beer in a public house in which a sick parrot had been 

present. By January 1930, similar outbreaks were also being reported in 

Germany, Italy, Switzerland, France, Denmark, Algeria, Holland and Egypt. 

There were even reports of an outbreak in Honolulu. 8

During the first week of illness, most patients appeared comparatively well 

in spite of running high temperatures. After five or six days, however, headache, 

insomnia and an irritable cough would set in, and they would complain of 

profound exhaustion, their symptoms often being accompanied by lung consoli -

dation. Soon after, many patients slipped into delirium and became semi-coma -

tose. This was the critical period, with death often following soon after. 

However, in other cases, just as it looked as if the illness was about to take a fatal 

turn, the patient’s temperature would fall and his condition would suddenly 

improve. Full recovery might take a further week or two, and sometimes as 

long as eight. During this protracted convalescence period, physicians had to 

constantly monitor their patients’ temperatures, as relapses were frequent. 

It was not until much later, of course, that doctors would become familiar 

with the typical course of the illness and recognize it as psittacosis. Instead, it 

was the story in the  American Weekly  and Dr  Martin’s telegram that appears to 

have alerted Cumming to the outbreak and prompted him to put McCoy and 

Armstrong onto the case. By then, psittacosis was widely seeded in cities on 

the eastern seaboard of the United States and had already been communicated 

via dealers to other caged birds popular with American consumers, such as 

shell parakeets (Australian budgerigars). The result was that as parrot fever THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

72 

spread from A nnapolis to Baltimore, New York and Los Angeles, the outbreak 

became a headline writer’s dream. “Parrot Fever Hits Trio at Annapolis,” 

declared the  Washington Post  on its front page on 8  January 1930. “Parrot 

Disease Fatal to Seven,” reported the  Los Angeles Times  three days later. 

“Woman’s Case Brings Parrot Victims to 19,” announced the  Baltimore Sun  on 

16  January. 

For widows and bored housewives, caged birds were the FM radios of their 

day. The chirping of canaries provided a soothing background music, punctuat -

ing the drudgery of household tasks, and, in the case of parakeets—parrots’ 

smaller, sprightlier cousin—their facility for words and humorous phrases 

provided a facsimile of human conversation. Estimating that New York City 

alone was home to some 30,000 parrots, the  National Geographic  dubbed 

Amazons and African grays “the ballyhoo barkers of birddom, the noisy, clever, 

side-show performers of the tropical forest.” 9 Their pint-sized cousin, the para -

keet or lovebird (genus  Agapornis ), had a reputation for similarly buffoonish 

behaviour, and with their talent for hanging upside down or dancing on their 

owners’ shoulders were a source of endless amusement for children and an 

entertainment for house guests. Little wonder then that in 1929 nearly 50,000 

parrots, parakeets and lovebirds, and some 500,000 canaries, were imported 

to the United States. 10  These birds arrived not only from Brazil and Argentina, 

but from Colombia, Cuba, Trinidad, Salvador, Mexico and Japan. The majority 

entered the United States via New York, the centre of the East Coast bird 

trade. However, in the case of Australian budgerigars, the main ports of entry 

were San Francisco and Los Angeles. Indeed, following the Wall Street crash in 

1929, a huge bird breeding industry had grown up in Southern California, 

with hundreds of independent breeders raising lovebirds in their backyards to 

supplement their incomes. To the naked eye these birds appeared perfectly 

healthy. However, when they were packed into crowded aviaries or containers 

and shipped across state lines, many began to shed the virus and transmit the 

infection. It would prove an invisible and comb ustible combination. 

* * * 

Despite its name, parrot fever or psittacosis is not confined only to parrotlike 

birds but has been isolated from some 450 other bird species, including 

canaries, finches, pigeons, doves, and kestrels. * Moreover, although human 

infections are typically acquired by exposure to parakeets, bird-to-human  

> *In nonpsittacine birds, the infection is known as ornithosis.

THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

73 

transmission has also been documented from poultry and free-ranging birds. 

The culprit is a tiny intracellular parasite,  Chlamydophila psittaci , a member of 

the same family of bacteria that transmits chlamydia, a common infection of 

the eye and genital tract. In the wild, psittacosis lives in equilibrium with its 

host. Hatchlings are usually infected in the nest through contact with mature 

birds who harbour the bacillus in their guts. Under natural conditions this 

contact results in a mild infection that confers lifelong immunity. However, 

under conditions of stress, such as when food becomes scarce or birds are 

packed into small crates or confined to cages for long periods, immunity can 

wane and the infection can be reignited. Typically, a bird’s feathers become 

rough and dirty, and instead of squawking and clawing at the bars of the cage 

it becomes listless and inert. Sometimes, bloody fluid may leak from its beak 

and nose, but the most common symptom is diarrhoea. It is the faeces that 

pose the principal threat to humans, especially when they become dry and 

powdery, as occurs in cool conditions. Then, all it takes is a flap of the birds’ 

wings or a sudden breeze from an open window for the particles to be wafted 

into the atmosphere. The final stage comes when a person enters the same 

space and inhales the aerosolized particles, allowing the psittacosis bacillus to 

lodge in the respiratory tract from where it is free to colonize the lungs. 

Sickness usually occurs six to ten days later, the first sign being a fever accom -

panied by headache, an irritable dry cough and, on occasion, discharges of 

bloody mucus from the nose. 

It is likely that aboriginal peoples from South America suffered psittacosis 

from time to time, particularly given the fondness of the Awa and other 

Brazilian tribes for headdresses featuring brightly coloured feathers from 

macaws, parrots, and toucans. However, it is unlikely that they would have 

noticed sudden die-offs due to epizootics, since birds falling from the trees in 

the jungle would have been camouflaged by vegetable debris on the forest 

floor or rapidly consumed by insects and other scavengers. By contrast, sud -

den die-offs of birds in captivity are highly visible and difficult to ignore. 

No doubt European aristocrats who started the vogue for importing exotic 

birds from Africa and elsewhere noted such occurrences as early as the eigh -

teenth century, but it was not until 1872 that Jakob Ritter, a Swiss physician 

living in Uster, near Zurich, gave the first detailed description of the disease 

when an outbreak occurred at his brother’s house, infecting seven people and 

killing three. Ritter named the disease “pneumotyphus” and blamed it on a 

consignment of parrots and finches caged in his brother’s study that had 

recently been imported from Hamburg. This was followed, in 1882, by a 

second outbreak in Switzerland, this time in Bern, in which two people died. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

74 

On that occasion, suspicion fell on some sick parrots imported from London. 

However, the outbreak that attracted widest comment occurred in Paris in 

1892 and centred on the homes of two bird fanciers who had recently shipped 

some five hundred parrots to the French capital from Buenos Aires. During 

the sea crossing, 300 birds had died, and people coming into contact with the 

survivors had rapidly developed symptoms of influenza. On this occasion the 

outbreak had a mortality rate of 33  per  cent, prompting the interest of 

Edmond Nocard, a young assistant of Pasteur. Nocard was unable to get hold 

of any live birds implicated in the outbreak. Instead, he examined a packet of 

dried wings taken from parrots that had died during the voyage. From their 

bone marrow, he was able to cultivate a small Gram-negative bacterium. He 

then injected or fed the organism to a wide variety of test animals—parrots, 

pigeons, mice, rabbits and guinea pigs—and demonstrated that in all cases it 

caused a fatal illness similar to the human disease. Nocard named the microbe 

Bacillus psittacosis , psittacosis being the Greek word for parrot. However, 

other researchers found it difficult to cultivate Nocard’s bacillus from the 

blood, lungs, urine, or faeces of presumed human cases, and as agglutination 

tests proved similarly negative or inconsistent, doubts gradually grew as to 

the bacillus’s aetiological role. 11 

Scientists were right to question Nocard’s claim: in fact, the organism he 

had isolated was a type of salmonella and had nothing to do with psittacosis. 

Unfortunately, this would not become known until after the 1929–30 out -

break. In the meantime, just as with Pfeiffer’s erroneous claim about the 

bacterial aetiology of influenza, Nocard’s error spread confusion, making 

medics and public health officials reluctant to accept that parrots had anything 

to do with the human cases of typhoid-like illness. * This only compounded the 

uncertainty and fears about the source of the epidemic. 

Scientists were not the only ones to fail the public. Reflecting on the parrot 

fever pandemic in 1933 in his best-selling book,  Men Against Death , Paul de 

Kruif would describe the outbreak and the panic that accompanied it as “one 

of our American hysterias.” 12  If so it was a hysteria that he and other journalists 

helped engender. This was a pity, as de Kruif ought to have known better. 

Before turning to science writing de Kruif had worked as a bacteriologist at  

> *The ease with which people contracted psittacosis in the presence of parrots was
> seen as further evidence that the infective agent must be an intestinal parasite,
> even though in many cases patients had not touched sick birds or handled their
> faecal matter but had merely been in the same room as them.

THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

75 

the University of Michigan and during the First World War had served as a 

captain in the US Sanitary Corps, where he helped develop an antitoxin for gas 

gangrene. Afterwards, he joined the Rockefeller Institute, but just as it looked 

as if he were set for an illustrious career as a medical researcher, de Kruif 

wrote an ill-advised book,  Our Medicine Men  (1922), containing thinly disguised 

portraits of his Rockefeller colleagues. The book cost him his position at the 

Rockefeller Institute but launched his career as a science journalist. In 1925, 

he teamed up with Sinclair Lewis to write  Arrowsmith , a runaway best seller 

about a country doctor turned research scientist that fired the imaginations of 

a generation of American medical researchers. This was followed in 1926 by 

Microbe Hunters , a nonfiction book profiling the pioneers of microbiology, such 

as Koch, Pasteur, and the Nobel Prize-winning physiologist Paul Ehrlich, who 

had reversed centuries of medical superstition by applying laboratory tech -

niques to the study of infectious disease. 13  But successful as these books were, 

de Kruif’s bread and butter was “scare” stories about obscure microorganisms 

that posed a theoretical threat to American housewives. “In American milk 

today there lurks a terrible, wasting fever, that may keep you in bed for a 

couple of weeks, that may fasten itself on you for one, or for two, or even for 

seven years—that might culminate by killing you,” he informed the readers of 

Ladies Home Journal  in 1929. 14  De Kruif was referring to undulant fever, or 

brucellosis, a disease of cattle that, while it might cause cows to abort prema -

turely, in truth posed little threat to people. However, in an era before pas -

teurization when many housewives still drank “raw” milk drawn from local 

dairy herds, undulant fever was a perfect candidate for a germ panic, fitting the 

template of what medical historian Nancy Tomes calls the “killer germ genre 

of journalism.” 15  Drawing on the latest microbiological discoveries and 

Progressive Era messages about the importance of sanitation and personal 

hygiene, this genre played on the dangers that lurked in everyday objects, such 

as coins, library books, or drinking cups. Dust and insects were targets of simi -

lar scaremongering, hence the advertisements urging housewives to mop regu -

larly with disinfectants and spray their homes with insecticides. By the 1920s, 

as Americans adopted new germ-conscious regimes, even handshaking and 

kissing babies came to be frowned upon. 

These fears were not only used to sell bleaches, detergents, and bug sprays, 

but they were also a way of selling newspapers; hence Goddard’s decision to 

hype the story about the Argentine theatrical troupe. In a germophobic era, 

even the normally level-headed  New York Times  was not immune to the parrot 

panic. “Many have long had the feeling that there is something diabolical about 

the parrot tribe,” opined a columnist at the height of the scare. “More than THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

76 

one family pet, known by its owners to possess the amiable and gentle dispo -

sition of a kitten, is regarded with fear and trembling by visitors. Until more 

has been learned about the nature of the malady the safest course seems 

absolute ostracism for recent immigrants of the parrot family.” 16 

Within days of that editorial, however, the  New York Times  was quoting the 

opinion of a Viennese expert who thought the scare “baseless” and that 

Americans were victims of “mass suggestion.” 17  Two days later, psittacosis—or 

parrots, at least—had become a laughing matter as the paper regaled its read -

ers with the story of Secretary of State Henry Stimson’s pet parrot, “The Old 

Soak.” Stimson’s bird had been caught misbehaving while his master was over -

seas, cursing at tourists and their guides as they entered the Pan-American 

Building. The bird, apparently, was “quite a linguist,” and was said to have 

learned the profanities “during his days in the Philippines.” As a punishment, 

The Old Soak was confined to the basement of the Pan-American building 

where he could curse without giving offence. 18  However, no joking could hide 

the fact that America’s microbe hunters had missed something that had been 

known to their medical colleagues in Argentina since the previous summer, 

and that had most likely been incubating under their noses since the autumn 

of 1929. How had this been possible, and who would be the person to restore 

the reputation of the US Public Health Service? 

* * * 

Charlie Armstrong is a type that has almost disappeared from American medi -

cine today: a scientist equally at home in the laboratory and the field, who 

combined serious medical research with a career devoted to fighting infec -

tious disease and improving public health. A graduate of Johns Hopkins 

Medical School, Armstrong’s interest in public health was fired by his early 

experiences as medical officer in the US Marine Hospital Service on Ellis 

Island in 1916, where it was his job to examine immigrants suspected of 

introducing diseases like trachoma and typhus to the United States. Two years 

later, as an assistant surgeon on the  Seneca , a US coast guard cutter on escort 

duty in the Atlantic, he had witnessed the first wave of Spanish flu when an 

outbreak occurred on his boat off the coast of Gibraltar, prompting him to 

hoist the yellow quarantine ensign. Later, while serving at the Fore River 

Shipyard, near Boston, Armstrong had also treated sailors affected by the 

deadly second wave. It was an experience he would never forget. Asked years 

later what the flu was like, he told a reporter: “with influenza you think you 

are going to die and afraid that you won’t [ sic ].” 19  After the war, Armstrong THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

77 

was pos ted to the Ohio Department of Health, where he continued his inves -

tigations into influenza and honed his epidemiological skills. Then, in 1921, 

he was posted to the Hygienic. He would remain there until his retirement in 

1950, a period in which he would also contract malaria, dengue fever, 

encephalitis, Q fever and tularaemia. Despite the risks that his laboratory 

work exposed him to, however, Armstrong was a tireless investigator. His 

most notable contribution to scientific research came in 1934 when he iso -

lated a new neurotrophic virus—a virus with affinity for nerve tissue—which 

he named  lymphocytic choriomeningitis , from the spinal fluid of monkeys artifi -

cially infected with material from the 1933 St. Louis encephalitis epidemic. 

This was followed, in 1940, by the first transmission of a polio virus from 

monkeys to rats and mice, an experimental innovation that laid the ground 

for subsequent investigations into the immunology of the disease and the 

development of human polio vaccines. Awarded the Sedgwick Memorial 

Medal of the American Public Health Association the following year, 

Armstrong was hailed as someone who had made “a distinct contribution to 

the knowledge of every disease with which he has worked.” 20  In short, he was 

the epitome of the microbe hunter. As de Kruif put it, Armstrong was “thick 

set, with reddish hair and round china-blue eyes set wide apart in a face that 

couldn’t keep from smiling,” and definitely not the sort of man who would 

“own a parrot let alone kiss it.” 21  In spite of his scepticism about parrot fever, 

however, when McCoy summoned him to his office, Armstrong immediately 

agreed to drop his vaccine experiments and travel to Annapolis to see if there 

was any truth in the rumour. 

According to de Kruif, by now requests for information about the mysteri -

ous new disease were pouring into Washington, and Cumming’s desk was 

piled with “stacks of yellow and blue slips.” 22  For once, de Kruif was not 

exaggerating. In her history of the PHS, Bess Furman reports that by early 

January thirty-six cases of suspected psittacosis had been reported to the 

surgeon general, and his desk was “deluged” with urgent telegrams. 23  Like all 

good disease detectives, Armstrong headed to the scene of the crime: Lillian’s 

bedside. Her pet parrot had long been buried but she still had the cage and, 

miraculously, it still contained some of the bird’s droppings. Following pro -

tocol, Armstrong shared some of the cleanings from the cage with William 

Royal Stokes, the head of bacteriology at the Baltimore Department of 

Health, so that he could conduct independent tests. Before returning to 

Washington, Armstrong warned Stokes to be careful when culturing organ -

isms from the material, reminding him that many people suspected that psit -

tacosis “might be a virus,” not a bacterium. 24  Stokes promised to heed 

Armstrong’s warning, but within a matter  of weeks he would be dead. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

78 

By 8  January 1930, Lillian and her daughter and son-in-law were not the 

only ones thought to have parrot fever. Four employees of the pet store at 

North Eutaw Street were also ill, as was a woman who had bought a parrot at 

another store in southeast Baltimore. Then, on 10  January, came the fatalities. 

The first victim was a Baltimore woman, Mrs Louise Schaeffer, whose death 

had originally been attributed to pneumonia; it was only when Baltimore 

health officials questioned her family that it emerged she had been in contact 

with a parrot several days earlier. However, it was the second death that really 

alarmed health officials because it occurred in Toledo, Ohio, nearly five hun -

dred miles to the northwest of Baltimore. The victim was Mrs Percy 

Q.  Williams. She had died at Toledo’s Mercy Hospital three weeks after her 

husband had returned from Cuba with a gift of three parrots (one of the par -

rots had died shortly after his return). It was the first indication of the true 

extent of the epidemic and the challenge facing state and federal health offi -

cials. Cumming had previously avoided making a public statement. Now he 

had no choice. He “did not fear an epidemic,” he said, as it was generally 

believed that psittacosis was transmitted “only from bird to human being, and 

not from person to person.” Nevertheless, he advised Americans to avoid 

handling recently imported parrots until the completion of Armstrong’s 

investigation. “There is at present no indication of widespread prevalence of 

the disease, but I would urge that people avoid contact with possible convey -

ors, the birds.” 25 

Cumming’s statement was all that newspapers needed to run with the story. 

Even the  New York Times  displayed the reports prominently. “Parrot Fever Kills 

2 In This Country,” it declared on 11  January, placing the story at the top of 

page 3. “Woman in Baltimore and Another in Toledo are Victims of Rare 

Disease. Eleven others are ill,” continued the subhead. The following day, with 

reports of further suspect cases in Ohio involving several clerks in the poultry 

department of a Toledo store, the paper promoted the story to page one. 

“Hunts For Source of ‘Parrot Fever,’” it declared, above a report describing the 

efforts of Baltimore state health officials and the Bureau of Animal Industry and 

Biological Survey to confirm the source of the parrots sold in Baltimore pet 

shops. “We do not consider it practical to place an embargo on importation 

before making sure where the sick parrots are coming from,” stated Cumming 

in a game attempt to reassure an increasingly nervous public. 26 

By the middle of January, Baltimore officials working with colleagues from 

the state health department had visited seven pet stores in the city and the 

homes of thirty-eight people who had recently purchased parrots. Of these, 

thirty-six were ill with the same symptoms as Mrs Martin. This so alarmed THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

79 

Daniel S.  Hatfield, the director of the Bureau of Communicable Diseases, that 

he ordered an immediate moratorium on the sale of parrots and the isolation 

of all birds seized in Baltimore pet stores. However, Hatfield was not so cau -

tious when it came to protecting his own health, and on 19  January, while 

assisting Stokes, he contracted psittacosis and was rushed to Baltimore’s 

Mercy Hospital. Hatfield was lucky. Unlike Stokes, who by now was autopsy -

ing parrots daily and, presumably, exposing himself to massive amounts of the 

virus, he had a mild case of the disease and survived. 

If there was any doubt before about the role of foreign birds, the Baltimore 

investigations dispelled it: out of the seven pet shops investigated, four were 

shown to be the source of diseased parrots. Nearly all were traced to ship -

ments from Central or South America that had come via dealers in New York. 

If that was the case, it was highly likely that those same dealers had sold dis -

eased birds to pet stores in other cities. Sure enough, when Armstrong wired 

public health officials across the country he was inundated with information, 

and birds, both dead and alive, began arriving from Baltimore, Maine, 

Chicago, New Haven and Los Angeles. And as more and more cases came to 

light, so the death toll crept up. Women, many of them widows, constituted 

the majority of victims, most likely because they were the principal recipients 

of lovebirds. Peddlers usually sold the birds singly to facilitate their bonding 

with their owners. Women were also most likely to kiss the birds affection -

ately, or care for them when they fell sick. By the final week in January, more 

than fifty cases had been reported nationwide, including fourteen in New 

York, where, under pressure from the city’s health commissioner, bird dealers 

were forced to accept a voluntary embargo. Soon, orphaned birds began 

turning up all over the city, including in the vestibule of a house in East 

Elmhurst, Queens. Taking pity on the young foundling, which had a chipped 

beak, the householder turned it over to the Society for the Prevention of 

Cruelty to Animals. “Fear of psittacosis,” reported the  New York Times , “is 

thought to be the reason for the abandonment of the bird.” 27 

At this point, the only persons interested in collecting parrots were 

Armstrong and his assistant, “Shorty” Anderson (so called because he stood 

just five feet six inches tall). By 16  January, Armstrong and Anderson had 

everything they needed to conduct bacteriological tests: parrots both dead 

and alive, the scrapings from Lillian’s birdcage, and blood from human 

patients. Well aware that the birds were highly contagious and that they were 

probably dealing with a “filter-passing” virus, Armstrong decided to confine 

the experiments to two small dark rooms in the basement of the Hygienic. 

According to de Kruif, these rooms were “dank, frowsty little holes hardly THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

80 

bigger than coal bins, [and] an insult to offer to any self-respecting microbe 

hunter for a laboratory.” Worse, the healthy birds were “clawing green devils,” 

who were constantly scrabbling to escape their cages or scattering food and 

faecal droppings onto the floor. 28  To try to contain them, Armstrong and 

Anderson placed the most violent birds in cages they’d rigged from metal 

garbage cans enclosed with wire mesh covers. In addition, they kept the birds 

behind moist curtains soaked in disinfectant and put troughs containing creo -

sol in the doorways. They also periodically scrubbed the walls with disinfec -

tant and wore heavy rubber gloves and aprons when extracting birds from 

their cages. Nevertheless, de Kruif considered the Hygienic one of the most 

“odiferously untidy” buildings he had ever visited. 29  The Rockefeller virolo -

gist, Thomas Rivers, a leading authority on filterable viruses, concurred, 

remarking that the only thing hygienic about the building was its name. 30 

Despite this unpromising working environment, however, within days 

Armstrong had succeeded in communicating the disease from sick to healthy 

birds using either the droppings from infected birds or ground-up tissue from 

a dead parrot (according to de Kruif, the deceased bird came from Stokes in 

Baltimore). Armstrong also observed that while some of the sick birds died, 

many survived inoculation with infective material, after which they became 

asymptomatic carriers. * According to de Kruif, Anderson was particularly 

adept at grabbing the parrots without getting “gaffed” by them. Just days 

before, both men had considered themselves “parrot ignoramuses.” Now, “by 

a little jab of next to nothing through a needle,” the birds were sitting hunched 

in their cages “with their heads bent forward,” and Armstrong and Anderson 

had the feeling they were “getting control of this weird disease.” 31  Try as they 

might, however, they could not isolate the bacillus described by Nocard, or 

culture any other organism from the ground-up material. It seemed increas -

ingly likely that psittacosis was a filter-passer that could only be transmitted 

from bird to bird or from bird to human by close contact. But how precisely 

the virus was conveyed from parrots and whether people were also capable 

of transmitting it independently of birds, was anyone’s guess. Perhaps patients 

communicated the virus via the respiratory route when they coughed infec -

tious material? If that was the case, it might become as transmissible as flu.  

> *This was an important clue to the natural history of the disease, one that helped
> explain why wild birds were not continually dropping dead of psittacosis and
> epizootics were rare. However, the significance of the finding would only become
> apparent to researchers in the mid-1930s. See discussion below.

THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

81 

Clearly, it was imperative to make a serum before the unthinkable happened 

and psittacosis became a true pandemic. 

Armstrong would need that serum sooner than he anticipated. Based on 

the initial results of his investigation, on 24  January President Herbert Hoover 

issued an Executive Order prohibiting “the immediate importation of parrots 

into the United States, its possessions and dependencies from any foreign 

port” until such time as the causative organism and its means of transmission 

could be ascertained. 32  Unfortunately, when Armstrong strode into the “old 

red brick building on the hill” to resume the investigation the following 

morning he found Shorty slumped over his desk, complaining of a high fever 

and a “rotten headache.” Normally, when work was going well Shorty was “all 

smiles and cheerful profanity.” A born “lab-swipe,” Shorty was never happier 

than when he was microbe-hunting, claimed de Kruif. “Now he looked 

awful.” It was not difficult to diagnose the cause of his malaise. Armstrong 

arranged for him to be admitted to the US Naval Hospital, where X-rays 

showed a sinister cloud at the base of his left lung. It was at this point that 

McCoy stepped in and, over the objections of his employees and family, 

joined Armstrong in the basement. As McCoy tried to mimic Shorty’s tech -

nique of gaffing the birds, Armstrong rushed back and forth between the 

laboratory and the hospital to check on his assistant’s condition. There was 

little sign of improvement, and in desperation Armstrong drew blood from 

Shorty’s veins and collected expectorations from his bedsheets in order to 

inoculate the fluids into parrots and other test animals. At the same time, to 

see how parrots became infected, he and McCoy also placed parts of dead 

parrots in cages along with healthy birds. Armstrong may have thought that 

by co-opting Shorty into the experiments, he would buy his assistant some 

more time. But though he was able to confirm that psittacosis was a filter 

passer, he could not forestall the inevitable and on 8  February Shorty died. 

Scrupulous about paying his bills, his last request was that Armstrong settle 

his outstanding debts. 

Unfortunately, it was a request Armstrong was unable to honour as that 

very day he was also admitted to the hospital. As Shorty was laid to rest in 

Arlington National Cemetery with full military honours (he was an ex-navy 

man), Armstrong’s temperature spiked from 102° to 104°F.  The following 

day, an X-ray showed a white shadow enveloping his left lung, confirmation 

that he had pneumonia and was almost certainly infected with the same bug. 

When McCoy saw the X-ray he decided to take a gamble by using a method 

of unknown and questionable value: namely, the administration of convales -

cent blood serum. It had been known since the 1890s that survivors of THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

82 

diphtheria and other bacterial diseases were immune to reinfection, and that 

their immunity was associated with antibodies circulating in their blood. 

Moreover, if their blood was purified and the antibodies separated from the 

red corpuscles, the resulting serum could also be used to protect immune-

naïve individuals from the same diseases. By the 1920s, this principle was also 

being applied to viral diseases, such as influenza and polio, but although the 

transfer of passive serum from survivors of flu and polio sometimes appeared 

to confer protection, it was far from clear if this protection was due to the 

serum or some other factor. Moreover, since there was no way of screening 

blood for impurities in the 1920s, physicians had no way of knowing whether 

or not passive serums contained active viral material or some other undiscov -

ered virus, such as hepatitis. Ironically, one of the biggest serum sceptics of 

all was McCoy. Hardly a month went by without a claim from some fly-by-

night pharmaceutical firm that it had developed a serum for pneumonia or 

meningitis. As the head of the Hygienic, it was McCoy’s job to examine these 

requests and deny licences to those he considered questionable. Now, he 

threw caution to the wind and instructed Roscoe Spencer of the Rocky 

Mountain Laboratory to head the search for potential serum donors. Spencer 

had recently developed a vaccine against spotted fever, a tick-borne disease 

endemic to Montana and some midwestern states—an endeavour for which 

he would be awarded the gold medal of the American Medical Association— 

and was quite happy to turn errand boy to help a fellow microbiologist 

stricken in the line of duty. According to de Kruif, the serum came from an 

elderly Maryland lady who graciously refused payment for her blood. Others 

report Spencer procured the precious serum from a physician at Johns 

Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. What is not in dispute is that within hours of 

the serum entering his veins, Armstrong rallied and his condition improved. 

Over the next two weeks, as Armstrong grew stronger, McCoy continued 

his investigation, mashing up the livers and spleens of dead parakeets before 

passing them through filters and inoculating the filtrate into healthy birds. 

Fearing further infections, McCoy forbade his staff from entering the make -

shift laboratory in the basement of the north building of the Hygienic 

Laboratory, and from 7  February insisted on conducting the autopsies of 

parrots and disposing of their carcasses in person. At this point, it was still not 

known whether psittacosis could be communicated from person to person or 

whether the microbe was also conveyed as an aerosol in dust particles. To 

minimize the risk of accidental contamination, the only person McCoy 

allowed to approach the basement laboratory was the general foreman whose 

job it was to bring sandwiches for McCoy and feed for the birds. He usually THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

83 

handed these items to McCoy at the threshold and did not enter the rooms 

himself. To reduce the chances of the sick birds accidentally spreading the 

infection to healthy parrots, McCoy also strung a muslin curtain across the 

archway between the laboratory rooms and wetted the floor each morning 

with creosol. Nevertheless, on occasion, McCoy would find diseased parrots, 

who had somehow freed themselves from the cages, wandering in a room 

reserved for healthy birds. 

Despite these precautions, within eight days of Armstrong’s illness several 

other staff at the Hygienic had also fallen ill. The first casualty was the north 

building’s night watchman, Robert Lanham, who came on duty at midnight 

and left every morning at 8am, a period when laboratory work was sus -

pended and no autopsies were being carried out. Lanham’s only risk was that 

he had briefly been in the same room as Anderson on 27  January, the day 

Shorty fell ill. However, Lanham had fallen sick eighteen days later, which was 

well outside the presumed incubation period. 

The next person to contract psittacosis was a laboratory assistant, whose 

symptoms became apparent on 28  February. Unlike Lanham, she had never 

breathed the same air as someone incubating psittacosis. However, her office 

was next door to the basement room where McCoy kept the healthy birds, 

and she had also handled material for culturing the organism, though since 

her principal role was to look for salmonella and streptococci McCoy thought 

it unlikely that she could have been exposed to psittacosis this way. However, 

the next group of casualties left McCoy in no doubt that his precautions had 

failed and that the north building was thoroughly contaminated. The first to 

fall ill was a medical officer whose office was on the side of the corridor 

opposite the autopsy room. The next day, 11  March, the general foreman was 

also taken ill, followed in quick succession by two cleaners and two bacteri -

ologists engaged in research on other diseases. Except for McCoy, no one 

escaped the disease. Even Ludvig Hektoen, a distinguished pathologist and 

chairman of the National Research Council, who was doing private research 

at the Hygienic and had merely spent his afternoons in one of the rooms, was 

admitted to the hospital. 

All told, between 25  January and 15  March, eleven people at the Hygienic 

were hospitalized with psittacosis. Despite drawing a floor plan of the infec -

tions, McCoy could discern no pattern in the cases, leading him to speculate 

that psittacosis may have been transferred to the upper floors by mice or 

cockroaches. 33  The other possibility, of course, was that the organism had 

been aerosolized and the building was full of infectious fomites. Either way, 

drastic action was needed. So it was that on 15  March McCoy ordered THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

84 

everyone to evacuate the building and shut the laboratory. Experimental ani -

mals not involved in psittacosis research were removed to temporary lodg -

ings. Then McCoy entered the basement for the last time and exterminated 

all those that remained—a menagerie of parrots, guinea pigs, mice, rats, 

pigeons, and monkeys. Next, he burned their bodies in the incinerator and 

scrubbed their cages with creosol, and methodically worked his way through 

the building to seal the windows on each floor. Finally, when he was sure 

there was no living thing left inside the Hygienic, he ordered a fumigation 

squad to blitz the building with cyanide. The legend goes that so much gas was 

used that sparrows flying fifty feet above the Hygienic stopped in mid-flight 

and plummeted to Earth. The next day, the headline in the Sunday edition of 

the  Washington Post  read, “Parrot Fever Panic Seizes Laboratory.” 34 

McCoy was not the only one panicking. By now, Roscoe Spencer was rush -

ing up and down the East Coast in search of serum. The flasks of blood he 

brought back to Washington were used to treat the Hygienic personnel, and 

by April all the building’s staff had recovered, Armstrong included. Others 

were not so fortunate, however. Stokes got two transfusions of Roscoe’s 

serum but died on 9  February, the day after Anderson. 35  For those stricken 

with psittacosis there was good reason to be afraid. The infection often proved 

fatal, with thirty-three deaths recorded in the United States between 

November 1929 and May 1930. Of the 167 cases where the sex of the victim 

was known, 105, or two-thirds, had been women. 36  Another badly affected 

country was Germany, with 215 cases and 45 deaths. Indeed, at one point 

Berlin Zoo had been forced to bar its gates to frightened parrot owners des -

perately looking for a temporary refuge for their birds. In all, some fifteen 

countries were affected. By the time the pandemic ended in May 1930, eight 

hundred cases had been recorded worldwide, with an average mortality rate 

of 15  per  cent. 37 

Armstrong and McCoy were not the only researchers puzzled by the sud -

den appearance of psittacosis and the failure to find Nocard’s bacillus. Soon, 

researchers in other countries were also convinced the pathogen must be a 

filter passer and that Nocard had mistaken it for salmonella, the bacterium 

that causes typhoid. The first to succeed was a team led by Samuel Bedson, a 

senior researcher at the London Hospital. 38  Taking parrots associated with 

human cases, Bedson and his colleagues emulsified the dead birds’ liver and 

spleen, passed the material through a Chamberland filter, and then inoculated 

budgerigars with the filtrate. The budgerigars died within five days. Next, 

Bedson’s group showed that by passaging filtered material from diseased bud -

gerigars every few days, the organism gradually lost its virulence. Bedson’s THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

85 

conclusion was unequivocal: “the aetiological agent of psittacosis in parrots is 

a virus which cannot be cultivated on ordinary bacteriological media, and 

which is capable of passing through some of the more porous filters.” 39 

Soon after, Charles Krumwiede, a researcher at the New York Board of 

Health, demonstrated that the virus could be readily transferred from para -

keets to white mice. This greatly facilitated laboratory study of psittacosis as 

white mice were far less infectious than birds. Nevertheless, Krumwiede was 

forced to suspend his studies when he fell ill, resulting in his research being 

taken up by Thomas Rivers. Aware that psittacosis was highly infectious, the 

Rockefeller researcher left nothing to chance, insisting that his team wear full 

body suits, with glass goggles in the helmets and rubber gloves attached to the 

sleeves—precautions that foreshadowed measures that would become stan -

dard in Biosafety Level Four laboratories used to study Ebola and other haz -

ardous pathogens sixty years later. Rivers also demonstrated that psittacosis 

could be transferred to rabbits, guinea pigs, and monkeys. However, in mon -

keys the infectious material only produced typical pneumonia if introduced 

via the trachea. To Rivers, this suggested that the principal transmission route 

in humans was via the respiratory tract, not through scratches or parrot 

bites—a view soon adopted by other researchers. 40 

Although psittacosis was beyond the magnification range of optical micro -

scopes at that time, by now Ralph Lillie at the Hygienic Laboratory, 

A.  C.  Coles of the Lister Institute in London, and Walter Levinthal of the 

Robert Koch Institute in Dahlem, Germany, were reporting distinctive clus -

ters of inclusion bodies in the cytoplasm of patients who had died of psittaco -

sis. Dubbed “Levinthal-Coles-Lillie” or “LCL” bodies, these could be observed 

through an ordinary optical microscope, where they appeared as microcolo -

nies on the surface of the cell, making the diagnosis of psittacosis and the 

development of agglutination tests far easier. 41  The only point that remained 

uncertain was the exact mode of transmission. Handling an ill or dead bird 

was certainly a risk, but there were also plenty of cases in which patients had 

merely been in the same room or house as a sick parrot. There were even 

cases in which people had contracted psittacosis after visiting a pet shop or, 

in the case of baggage handlers, sharing a railway carriage with a sick bird. 

This was not a message that pet shop owners or bird breeders wished to hear. 

On the contrary, many refused to accept that the reports of pneumonia and 

typhoid-like illness were due to parrots or parakeets at all, much less that 

psittacosis could be spread via the atmosphere from bird to man. Otherwise, 

they claimed, breeders and people who worked in pet shops would be ill all 

the time, but according to dealers the opposite was the case. “So far as it is THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

86 

aware,” declared the newly formed Bird Dealers Association of America at a 

meeting held in New York’s Commodore Hotel at the height of the pandemic, 

“no bird dealers whose hourly contact with feathered pets presumably would 

render them likely to contract psittacosis if it is communicable to humans, 

have been affected.” Nor could reports of pet owners catching psittacosis 

directly from imported birds be believed as “any one putting his face near 

enough a newly imported parrot to catch a disease would be sure to be bitten 

by the untrained bird.” In short, the parrot fever “scare” was down to “the 

active imagination of a Baltimore newspaper man.” 42 

One can hardly blame bird dealers for wanting to fight back. America’s six 

leading pet dealers, all of which were based in either New York of 

Philadelphia, stood to lose $5 million annually from Hoover’s import ban. 

And, in many ways, they were right, for as the panic over imported parrots 

subsided, foreign birds no longer constituted the principal threat. Instead, it 

was home-reared birds—parrots and parakeets raised in backyard aviaries— 

that posed the biggest risk to pet owners, particularly in Southern California 

where conditions were perfect for breeding birds outdoors year-round. This 

time it would not be a newspaperman who would spot the danger, however, 

but a Swiss-trained veterinary pathologist whose laboratory sat near the sum -

mit of a chilly, fog-shrouded hill overlooking the Golden Gate Bridge. 

* * * 

In the summer of 1930, while researchers on the East Coast were developing 

tools for visualizing psittacosis and refining agglutination tests, Karl Friedrich 

Meyer was focused on a mysterious “sleeping sickness” affecting horses in 

California and other western states. Educated in Basel and Zurich, Meyer’s 

interest in animal diseases bridged by multiple insect and arthropod vectors 

was born in 1909 in South Africa, when, as an assistant to Arnold Theiler (the 

father of the Nobel Prize winner Max Theiler), he became the first person to 

elucidate the life cycle of the plasmodium of East Coast Fever, a tick-borne 

disease of cattle. Soon after, Meyer contracted malaria and was forced to 

return to Europe, but he did not stay long. By 1911 he had secured a teaching 

position at the University of Pennsylvania’s veterinary school. There, Meyer 

became acquainted with the leading lights in American pathology and bacte -

riology, including Theobald Smith, whose ground-breaking study of Texas 

Cattle Fever was to provoke a rethinking of germ theory and the role of para -

sitical infections generally, and Frederick Novy, the director of the University 

of Michigan’s Hygiene Laboratory, who had headed the official inquiry into THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

87 

the  1901 bubonic plague outbreak in San Francisco. Through Smith, Meyer 

was also introduced to Simon Flexner, the director of the Rockefeller 

Institute. But rather than take a job in New York, Meyer decided to head west, 

lured by the offer of an assistant professorship at Berkeley and the prospect of 

a research position at the newly formed George Williams Hooper Foundation 

for Medical Research in San Francisco. 43 

Housed in a three-story brick building in the former veterinary school on 

Mount Sutro in Parnassus Heights, the Hooper Foundation had been estab -

lished by Hooper’s widow in 1913 with a generous $1 million bequest and 

was the first private medical research institution to be attached to any 

American university. Although Flexner warned Meyer that in joining the 

Hooper, he risked “disappear[ing] in the Pacific Ocean, because the intelligent -

sia of the United States lives within a hundred miles from New York,” the 

Hooper offered Meyer a degree of intellectual freedom that would have been 

impossible in the East. 44  Besides, as Meyer acknowledged, he was a “typical 

Basel squarehead” with a stubborn streak as wide as the Rhine. In his interac -

tions with colleagues and other scientists, this stubbornness could come 

across as arrogance—an impression not helped by Meyer’s Teutonic bearing, 

thick German-accented English, and intolerance of errors, particularly ones 

that occurred in his laboratory. However, when it came to tracking and iden -

tifying the source of new diseases there was, apparently, no more indefatigable 

opponent of microbes. Indeed, in a special tribute published in  Reader’s Digest 

in 1950, de Kruif hailed Meyer, then in his 60s, as “the most versatile microbe 

hunter since Pasteur.” In a career spanning three decades, Meyer had helped 

eradicate brucellosis from Californian dairy herds; had demonstrated that 

botulism, a deadly food-borne pathogen, was a highly resistant spore found 

in soils across America; and had shown how sylvatic plague was endemic to 

ground squirrels and other wild rodent populations across the western United 

States. In short, declared de Kruif, Meyer was “an outdoor scientist living in 

a state of permanent outdoor emergency … [and a] master among the world’s 

microbe hunters.” 45 

History does not record whether Meyer was pleased or embarrassed by de 

Kruif’s gushing tribute—interviewed in the 1960s, Meyer said that his for -

mer wife suspected de Kruif of trying to “belittle” and “besmear” him. 46 

However, although de Kruif was an alcoholic and had a turbulent personality, 

he and Meyer maintained a friendship for more than three decades, and twice 

a year de Kruif would make a point of visiting Meyer in San Francisco, where 

the pair enjoyed solitary moments hiking together on Mount Tamalpais, dis -

cussing the latest medical breakthroughs and exchanging gossip about their 

bacteriologic al colleagues. 47 THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

88 

A member of the Sierra Club, Meyer traced his fascination with infectious 

disease to his boyhood excursions in the Swiss Alps, where he fell into con -

versation with British climbers recently returned from the plague spots of 

India; De Kruif was right to link his passion for microbe hunting with his 

enthusiasm for adventure and outdoor living. So it is little wonder that when 

reports reached the Hooper of a massive horse epizootic in the San Joaquin 

Valley, Meyer raced from his laboratory to investigate. 48  There, he found 

horses wandering aimlessly in circles or listing from side to side. Meyer’s 

veterinary colleagues thought the horses’ staggering symptoms were the 

result of “forage poisoning” due to botulism. However, the San Joaquin epizo -

otic had broken out in June—the wrong time of year for botulism—and vets 

who visited affected ranches noted that the majority of the victims of “stag -

gers,” as the disease was known, were free-ranging horses, not those that had 

been fed on silage or stacked hay. At autopsy Meyer noted that the horses’ 

brains were inflamed and scarred by microscopic haemorrhages, leading him 

to suspect that the neurological impairment was caused by a virus. 

Unfortunately, by the time he came to examine the horses, the virus had 

disappeared. What Meyer needed was to autopsy the brain of a recently 

infected horse. His opportunity came later that summer when one of his 

colleagues located a sick horse on a ranch in Merced. The rancher wanted 

nothing to do with Meyer’s experiment, so Meyer bribed his wife with $20 

and, when she signalled that her husband was asleep, snuck into the stable and 

decapitated the horse, hot-tailing it back to San Francisco in the middle of the 

night with its severed head sticking out of the trunk of his car. That very same 

morning, Meyer extracted the horse’s brain, mashed it up, and injected the 

material into guinea pigs. Soon the guinea pigs’ bodies were racked with 

tremors. Next, they curled up into balls or hunched up like cats, dying four 

to six days later. After repeating the experiment in rabbits, monkeys, and 

horses with the same results, Meyer and his colleagues announced that they 

had isolated a new filter-passing virus. It would be several years before 

researchers would confirm that, as Meyer had suspected, the virus was a type 

of encephalitis communicated to horses by mosquitoes breeding in nearby 

irrigation ditches, and would be able to divine its arboreal life cycle. 49 

Though preoccupied by equine encephalitis, Meyer had followed the par -

rot fever outbreaks and Armstrong and McCoy’s efforts to passage the virus. 

However, it was not until the following year that he had reason to initiate his 

own studies and became interested in the involvement of bird breeders. The 

impetus came when three elderly women, who had attended a coffee club in 

Grass Valley in the Sierra Nevadas shortly before Thanksgiving in 1931, died. THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

89 

Local physicians were baffled as to the cause, attributing the women’s deaths 

to, variously, typhoid fever, dysentery, and “toxic pneumonia.” However, on 

reviewing the medical reports and learning that the husband of the woman 

who had convened the gathering was also ill, Meyer realized that the common 

denominator was the room where they had gathered. He instructed the local 

health officer to see if there was a sick or dead parrot there. Meyer’s intuition 

was partially correct: there was no parrot, but on going to the woman’s home 

in Grass Valley the health officer discovered a healthy shell parakeet still in its 

cage, and another one which had recently died. Meyer immediately ordered 

the official to disinter the parakeet and send its carcass to the Hooper, 

together with its live mate. That same evening, at around 10pm, Meyer was 

astonished to see a driver in a face mask pull up outside his laboratory. It was 

the official, and on the back seat was the surviving parakeet chirping in its 

cage. “He was scared out of his wits that he might pick it up,” Meyer recalled, 

“because it was generally known that because it was air-borne this was a 

highly contagious disease.” 50 

To verify his hunch that the bird was infected, Meyer began with a simple 

exposure test, taking a healthy Japanese ricebird (finch), which he had read was 

highly susceptible to psittacosis, and placing it in a bell jar with the parakeet. 

Within two to three weeks the ricebird was dead. The parakeet, meanwhile, 

appeared “perfectly normal” and continued to shed sufficient virus such that if 

it was transferred again to a clean bell jar with another ricebird, that bird also 

became ill and died. 51  When Meyer finally sacrificed the parakeet on 16  January 

1932, and inoculated the bird’s mashed-up spleen into mice in his laboratory, 

the mice died within three to four days, suggesting that the “agent was exceed -

ingly virile.” 52  To be sure, Meyer repeated the experiment, removing the para -

keet from the glass jar every time a finch died and transferring it to a new jar 

with another finch. After six months, Meyer had his proof: it was the desiccated 

droppings from the parakeet that were spreading the infection. 

In the meantime, in January, the woman’s husband had also died. 

Concerned that there might be a state-wide problem, Meyer had pressed the 

health department to issue a press release. The resulting publicity brought 

further reports of suspicious deaths involving parakeets from as far south as 

Tehachapi. Questioning itinerant peddlers who made a living selling parakeets 

door-to-door, Meyer and his assistant Bernice Eddie discovered that most of 

the birds had come from backyard aviaries in the Los Angeles area. Many of 

these breeding establishments belonged to war veterans and had been funded 

by the bonuses they had received under Depression relief. It was a low-tech 

and highly profitable business as the birds bred astonishingly fast. All an THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

90 

amateur breeder needed was lumber, wire netting and a breeding box. Within 

weeks the pens were full of young hatchlings or “crawlers.” These young birds 

were very popular with pet owners; they could be trained to sit on their fin -

gers and pick seeds. Rather than allow the nestlings to mature, amateur 

breeders had quickly sold them on to the trade. Indeed, over the Thanksgiving 

period and in the run-up to Christmas, Meyer discovered peddlers had criss -

crossed the state offering lovebirds as gifts for housewives and widows. 

Meyer put out a call to pet shops throughout California requesting that 

they send him other birds that were visibly sick or were associated with a 

householder who had recently been hospitalized with psittacosis. Soon, birds 

were arriving at the Hooper Foundation from as far north as Santa Rosa and 

as far south as San Luis Obispo. At first glance, the parakeets appeared per -

fectly healthy, but when Meyer examined their spleens he discovered their 

organs were swollen and scarred with lesions characteristic of psittacosis. The 

final proof came when he inoculated mice with the mashed-up bird spleens 

and the rodents fell ill. The more Meyer and Eddie quizzed peddlers and pet 

shop owners, the greater became their fear that birds all over California might 

be harbouring these asymptomatic, latent infections. From Pasadena, they 

obtained twenty-two birds, only to find that nine had enlarged livers and 

spleens. In some of the breeding pens, Meyer reported, the birds were visibly 

diseased and “so weak that they were actually crawling on the floor.” 53 

Concerned that as many as 40  per  cent of birds raised in backyard aviaries 

and professional breeding pens might be carriers of psittacosis, Meyer warned 

that California could be harbouring a huge reservoir of infection. He urged 

health officials to take action. In particular, he worried that when Californian 

parakeets were packed into crowded containers and shipped across state lines, 

the stress caused them to shed the virus, running the risk that they would 

reignite the epidemic. In other words, Argentine parrots were no longer the 

main danger: it was Californian birds that now posed the principal threat. 

The State Department of Health had previously been blissfully unaware of 

the extent of California’s bird breeding industry and the implications for 

public health. Now, it declared it was imposing a quarantine and placed an 

embargo on the transportation of lovebirds across state lines. The measure 

sparked uproar among California’s breeders, particularly as Hoover’s 

embargo on imported parrots the previous year had led to pent-up demand 

for parakeets, and pet stores in the East were increasingly looking to 

California to supply the market. Estimates as to the value of this market 

varied: breeders put it at $5 million; Meyer thought it was worth one-tenth 

of that. What was not in doubt was that Southern California’s temperate year-THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

91 

round Mediterranean climate provided the ideal conditions for bird breeding 

and that upwards of 3,000 individuals now depended on the trade. What was 

needed was a system of inspecting pens and checking the condition of birds. 

However, it was a completely unregulated industry, and no one seemed will -

ing to assume responsibility. Meyer scented an opportunity. When the botu -

lism scare had hit the sales of Californian sardines and other canned foods in 

the 1920s, the canners had hired Meyer to advise on heat sterilization, estab -

lishing safety procedures that soon became standard across America. Now, he 

proposed a similar technological solution for Californian bird breeders. 

His opening came in March 1932 when 125 leading breeders were sum -

moned to a meeting at the Associated Realty Building in Los Angeles. 

Opening the proceedings, Dr  Giles Porter, the director of the State 

Department of Public Health with whom Meyer had previously collaborated 

during the pneumonic plague outbreak in Los Angeles, introduced Meyer as 

a world authority on psittacosis and someone who could “prove to you, that 

this is not just a ‘scare’ but … a really serious matter.” Meyer began with a 

review of medical knowledge of psittacosis prior to 1930, then presented the 

evidence obtained during the pandemic that psittacosis was a filterable virus. 

“Probably there is a lot of ‘hokus-pokus’ talk about psittacosis that is not true,” 

he told breeders, but there was no doubt that it was a “highly contagious 

infection” that could be spread aerially from bird to man via droppings or 

mucal discharges. This had been proven by the “sad experience” at the 

Hygienic Laboratory, where nine people had contracted psittacosis merely 

after passing along a corridor close to cages containing desiccated material. 

“Probably the wind blew the dust from these cages through a crack in the 

door and in this way the contact was made,” he said. Next, he briefly detailed 

his own investigations in San Francisco. Then, pointing to a chart, he directly 

addressed the problem of infections in bird breeding establishments.  

> Let us say, for the sake of argument, we have one hundred birds. In this group
> of one hundred birds, the disease, parrot fever, breaks out. Probably—let us
> say—ten of the birds will die. Now these ten birds should have been exam -
> ined. Unfortunately, nothing of this sort is usually done, but so far, we exam -
> ine these birds and find ten have the parrot fever. There are ninety birds left.
> You would probably assume that these ninety birds … are practically safe. My
> answer is NO! NO!

The difficulty was that every pen contained a certain percentage of “carri -

ers”; that is, birds whose spleens showed evidence of prior infection but who 

did not appear sick or visibly diseased. These healthy-looking birds might THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

92 

harbour t he virus for six months or longer without infecting other birds in 

the same pen. However, if such birds were exposed to cold or sudden climatic 

changes, then these infections could “become activated,” and the birds might 

“secrete the virus,” infecting other birds with whom they were confined. In 

particular, Meyer speculated, there was a good chance they would pass the 

virus to young birds or “runts.” Nor was that the end of the danger. 

“Convalescent birds,” that is birds recovering from infection, might also 

secrete the virus for four to six weeks. In all probability, the only birds that 

were safe were those with inherited immunity, or older birds that had 

acquired immunity during previous outbreaks or through exposure to the 

virus in the nest. 

The only way to know for sure whether a flock was infected or not was for 

breeders to turn over 10 to 20  per  cent of their stock so that Meyer could 

examine them for latent infections. In this way, Meyer would be able to give 

those aviaries that were free of disease a clean bill of health, and there would 

be no need for further embargos or quarantines. However, Meyer warned, 

autopsying the birds was dangerous and expensive work, and, in return, he 

would expect breeders to pay him for his services. He suggested that $10,000 

would be sufficient. 

> This is a disease which has caused in every laboratory they work with cases of
> psittacosis; and we have to almost put our foot in the grave, so to speak, in
> order to solve the problem. I took this responsibility to work with you. I
> therefore solicit from you your earnest cooperation—or, I give it up. It is not
> my business to die for a disease like psittacosis. 54

Not surprisingly, the breeders balked at Meyer’s offer, feeling his price was 

too steep. Instead, they tried to convince health officials that such tests were 

unnecessary and that once birds reached the age of four months they no 

longer presented a health risk. Next, they proposed that officials introduce a 

permit system. Porter refused to budge, but the breeders lobbied the gover -

nor, who relented and lifted the embargo. As the trade resumed in the sum -

mer of 1931 and parakeets were sent from California to markets in the East, 

Meyer feared a revival of the pandemic. Once the parakeets reached dealers 

in New York, there was no telling how many flocks might be infected or in 

which state or country a psittacosis carrier might turn up next. By the end of 

the year, Californian lovebirds had been scattered to every state in the union. 

They proved particularly popular at country fairs in Wisconsin and Minnesota, 

where they were raffled as prizes. Then, on 22  September 1932, came the 

news that Mrs William E.  Borah, the wife of the senator from Idaho, was THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

93 

seriously ill at her home in Boise, Idaho. On investigation, her physician dis -

covered she was a collector of parakeets and had recently acquired a set of 

lovebirds from California. Suspecting parrot fever, her husband, the senator, 

wired Washington to send serum immediately. Thus began another extraordi -

nary chapter in the history of the Hygienic. 

* * * 

Two m onths after McCoy’s fumigation of the north building, Congress had 

passed an act changing the laboratory’s name to the National Institute of 

Health (NIH) and establishing fellowships for research into basic biological 

and medical problems. The Randsell Act, named after Senator E.  Randsell, a 

Democrat from Louisiana, was seen as a reward for the PHS’s investigations 

of psittacosis and the heroism of its research staff, and marked a sea change in 

American attitudes to the public funding of medical research. * Unfortunately, 

when Senator Borah’s request arrived on McCoy’s desk, the NIH’s stores of 

serum had been exhausted. It was at this point that Armstrong volunteered 

his services. Having made a full recovery, it was likely his blood still contained 

antibodies. Why not make use of it? Armstrong’s personal physician per -

formed the phlebotomy, then stayed up all night separating out the serum. 

Because of the urgency, there was no time to check that it was sterile. Instead, 

the serum was dispatched directly to a waiting plane. The story of the mercy 

flight was a media sensation, with the Associated Press and national and local 

newspapers publishing hourly logs of the serum’s progress from Washington 

to Boise, Idaho. By now Mrs Borah was close to death and her doctors were 

doubtful the serum would make a difference. But they decided it was worth 

a try and administered all twelve ounces (350 ml) in a single transfusion. Five 

days later she was on the road to recovery and by the following February she 

was fit enough to travel to Washington. Her first stop was the NIH.  “I came 

to thank you for saving my life,” she told Armstrong. “I have some of your 

blood flowing through my veins.” 55 

If Mrs Borah’s recovery was good news for the NIH, it was bad news for 

Californian  bird breeders, as no sooner had his wife recovered than Senator  

> *It also appears to have been motivated by the 1928–29 influenza epidemic, the
> worst flu outbreak since the 1918 pandemic, and chemists’ desire to apply their
> knowledge to medical problems. In 1948, the institute’s name was pluralized to
> National Institutes of Health.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

94 

Borah urged President Hoover to reinstate the embargo, but this time on 

Californian rather than Argentine birds. Hoover forwarded the request to the 

PHS, prompting Cumming to issue an order banning the interstate transport 

of Californian parakeets. However, he indicated that if California could find a 

procedure for demonstrating that its birds were free of psittacosis then he 

might make an exception. The previous March, breeders had done everything 

they could to avoid submitting their birds to testing. Now, as the embargo bit, 

denying them access to lucrative markets in the East, they came around to 

Meyer’s proposition. 

By 1933 Meyer and Eddie had inspected sixty-six aviaries containing nearly 

2,000 lovebirds. In these aviaries, they found that anywhere from 10 to 

90  per  cent of birds classed as healthy by their owners might be carrying latent 

psittacosis. However, they observed that while many of these infections were of 

an “eminently chronic character,” they did not spread to parakeets in adjacent 

pens. Contrary to breeders’ claims that they never fell ill, Meyer and Eddie 

discovered many had antibodies to psittacosis, suggesting they had been previ -

ously exposed and had suffered mild infections which had been misdiagnosed. 

The principal risk came from handling dead birds or direct contact with their 

nasal discharges and excreta, or from bite wounds. However, on occasion, psit -

tacosis could be contracted simply by inhaling desiccated droppings. Indeed, 

Meyer found that such droppings were highly efficient aerosols and could be 

scattered over a wide area simply by the flapping of a bird’s wings when it 

became agitated. In such circumstances, the environment is “charged with virus 

and becomes a menace to human beings who inhale it.” 56  For this reason, they 

warned, psittacosis presented a particular threat to bird breeders and pet store 

owners, or those with close attachments to lovebirds. 

They also found that the LCL bodies of psittacosis could be readily 

observed on a microscopic slide simply by taking a smear from the spleens of 

diseased birds and adding an appropriate stain. In other cases, the size of the 

spleen provided a rough-and-ready approximation of the degree of a latent 

infection in a pen. In particular, medium-sized spleens measuring three to five 

millimetres were more likely to produce “a typical, acutely fatal, or latent” 

illness in inoculated mice than spleens measuring seven to ten millimetres. 

Meyer and Eddie also found proportionately more enlarged spleens (six mil -

limetres or greater) in young, immature birds than in the older capped birds, 

suggesting that parakeets typically contracted psittacosis early in their devel -

opment and that enlarged but noninfective spleens in the older caged birds 

were evidence of an old sterilizing infection. Their conclusion was unequivo -

cal: “In general, ‘noncapped’ immature birds are more frequently carriers of THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

95 

the virus than the ‘capped’ old birds.” 57  The implications were clear: birds 

needed to be observed until they were at least four months old to be sure that 

they had cleared the infection and no longer presented a danger of transmit -

ting the mycobacterium. 

By 1934 Meyer and Eddie had tested nearly 30,000 parakeets and certified 

185 Californian aviaries as psittacosis-free. The program was a valuable source 

of income for the Hooper Foundation, and soon Meyer was using the funds 

to investigate other scientific questions. Meyer was not only a bacteriologist 

and veterinary pathologist, he also considered himself a biologist and nascent 

ecologist. Though trained in the German tradition, by the 1930s he was grow -

ing disenchanted with bacteriology’s narrow focus on microbes. Instead, as 

he considered the phenomenon of latent infections, he found himself drawn 

to the language of “hosts” and “parasites” and wider evolutionary questions 

about the relationship between virulence and immunity to disease. In particu -

lar, he wished to discover whether wild parakeets showed the same suscepti -

bility to psittacosis as birds bred in captivity. To find out, Meyer paid a barber 

on a Pacific liner to bring him two hundred wild shell parakeets from the 

Australian bush. As psittacosis had never been reported in Australian para -

keets before, Meyer assumed that these birds would possess a high susceptibil -

ity to the virus and lend themselves to comparative exposure and immunity 

tests. Imagine his astonishment, then, when within four weeks of his quaran -

tining the Australian parakeets, one of them died. On examination he found 

its spleen riddled with the same lesions as those in the Californian birds. 

Perhaps the most significant finding, however, came when Meyer allowed the 

Australian birds to mingle freely with Californian parakeets, half of which he 

knew to be latently infected: none of the Australian parakeets died of the 

disease, and when he sacrificed the birds and performed autopsies, Meyer was 

unable to recover virus from the birds’ spleens. 

In an example of Meyer’s use of international scientific networks, he 

immediately shared his findings with the Australian virus researcher Frank 

Macfarlane Burnet, prompting Burnet to launch a parallel study in which he 

found that psittacosis was an endemic infection of wild Australian parakeets 

and had probably been “enzootic amongst Australian parrots for centuries.” 58 

Burnet hypothesized that it was most likely Australian parrots and parakeets 

from Japanese dealers, not Argentine parrots, that had been the source of the 

outbreaks of psittacosis in California in 1931. In a letter to Meyer, Burnet 

explained that in the wild, young birds were typically infected in the nest, but 

these natural, mild infections could also flare up under the stress of close 

confinement, resulting in the birds’ losing their acquired resistance and THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

96 

shedding the virus. By questioning importers, Meyer established it was com -

mon practice for shippers to mix wild unbanded birds with clean birds, 

greatly facilitating the spread of the virus. He concluded that in the wild, 

these virus strains were highly adapted to their avian hosts, but conditions in 

shipping containers and Californian aviaries had greatly increased the viru -

lence of psittacosis and, as he put it, “shifted the balance in favor of the 

virus”—hence the spillovers of enzootic psittacosis infections seen in 

Californian birds and people in the early 1930s. 59 

* * * 

Today, psittacosis no longer presents a pressing health threat and parrot fever 

has once again disappeared from public view. The disease’s retreat from popu -

lar consciousness is due in large part to Meyer. Following the discovery of 

Aureomycin in 1948, Meyer approached the Hartz Mountain Distribution 

Company, then the largest supplier of milled bird seed in the United States, 

to develop a line of medicated millet. By the middle 1950s another easy-to-

administer antibiotic, oral tetracycline, had also become available and chlor -

tetracycline-impregnated seed had become standard in the bird breeding 

industry. To be sure, there were still occasional outbreaks, but these tended 

to occur on turkey farms or in poultry processing plants, where exposure to 

psittacosis was, and still is, an occupational hazard. In most cases, all it took 

was a properly administered course of tetracycline to clear human infections 

and return a flock to health. 60 

Unfortunately, today, as in the 1930s, some breeders refuse to believe their 

aviaries are latently infected. Instead, they dilute the seed or fail to administer 

a full course of antibiotics, resulting in the persistence of subclinical infec -

tions of psittacosis in domestic bird flocks. Should these birds be shipped to a 

pet store and mingle with imported birds emerging from quarantine, there is 

a risk they will communicate the organism and spark fresh outbreaks of par -

rot fever. Indeed, the principal lesson of the 1930 pandemic is that imported 

birds were merely the fall guys. The main culprits were domestic lovebirds 

bred in Californian aviaries. Once this was realized, parrots and parakeets 

ceased to be a source of fear and hysteria, and the control of psittacosis 

became a largely veterinary problem. However, without the simultaneous 

worldwide outbreaks sparked by Argentinian parrots and the press coverage 

that accompanied them, it is unlikely that anyone would have noticed the 

unusual pattern of pneumonia deaths, and Nocard’s misconception that psit -

tacosis was due to a type of salmonella would have taken longer to dispel. THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

97 

There was another lesson, too, one that would become increasingly appo -

site in the second half of the twentieth century as other little-known or 

neglected pathogens emerged to spark new epidemic scares. And that is that 

in nature parrots and parakeets pose little threat to human populations. Sure, 

there might be occasional mass die-offs deep in the Amazonian rain forest or 

the Australian bush, but, in Burnet’s words, psittacosis was “not intrinsically 

a very infectious disease.” On the contrary, he argued, the parasite’s primary 

function was to return wild bird populations that had grown too large or too 

dense for their ecological niches to a state of equilibrium. The problem was 

that when man disrupted these biological and ecological processes by packing 

parakeets into overcrowded crates, he created the ideal conditions for the 

propagation of the virus and its transfer from bird to man. “It is reasonably 

certain that cockatoos, left to a natural life in the wild, would never have 

shown any symptoms of their infection,” Burnet observed, following an out -

break in Melbourne in 1935. “In captivity, crowded, filthy and without exer -

cise or sunlight, a flare-up of any latent infection was only to be expected.” 61 

Indeed, by the 1940s Burnet was worrying that these spillover events were 

becoming more common and that overpopulation, coupled with international 

trade and jet travel, was disrupting natural ecologies in new and unpredict -

able ways, leading to virulent outbreaks of vector-borne diseases such as 

yellow fever. While a world in which everyone and everything was more 

closely linked in a biological sense should favour a “virtual equilibrium” 

between humans and microbial parasites, Burnet warned that “man … lives 

in an environment constantly being changed by his own activities, and few of 

his diseases have attained such equilibrium.” 

Meyer also worried about the way that rapid economic and industrial 

change was disrupting the balance between humans and microbes. However, 

in the case of psittacosis he placed the blame squarely on bird breeders and 

their stubborn insistence that psittacosis did not pose a threat, even as the 

disease claimed the lives of pet owners and medical researchers in Baltimore 

and Washington. Perhaps the most important factor of all, however, had been 

the popularity of lovebirds with American consumers and the lucrative inter -

state trade that saw itinerant peddlers going door-to-door offering parakeets 

to widows and housewives. In 1930, the idea that these cute American-bred 

birds might be the avian equivalent of Trojan horses was too disturbing to 

contemplate. Far easier to blame feathered green immigrants from the south -

ern hemisphere. 99 

# 4

# THE “PHILLY KILLER”   

> “The outbreak … has presented a number of unusual and complex features. … It has
> run counter to our expectations that contemporary science is infallible and can solve all
> the problems that we confront.”
> David J. Sencer, Director, Center for Disease Control, Atlanta,
> 24 November 1976

At the junction of Walnut Street and South Broad Street—or what 

Philadelphians now call the “Avenue of the Arts”—stands a well-appointed 

modern business hotel. With its spacious guestrooms boasting “pillow top” 

mattresses and its wood-panelled nineteenth-floor restaurant with sweeping 

views over Center City, the Hyatt at the Bellevue effortlessly combines con -

temporary luxury and old-world charm. That charm is evident the moment 

you step from Broad Street into the lobby area and glide across the polished 

floor to the reception desk, taking in the glittering chandelier overhead and 

the curved staircase with its elegant hand-worked marble-and-iron rails. 

However, if you care little for decor and have important business to attend to, 

the hotel also offers state-of-the-art conference rooms, plus an indoor jogging 

track, a full-length swimming pool, and a 93,000-square-foot sports club. For 

allergy sufferers or the hyper-health-conscious, the Hyatt at the Bellevue even 

has spotless “hypo-allergenic” rooms equipped with a high-tech air purifica -

tion system designed to filter out allergens and other airborne irritants. 

“Enjoy a better night’s sleep and make the most of your travels in a Hyatt 

PURE room,” purrs the hotel’s marketing blurb. 1

What is not mentioned anywhere on the hotel’s website is the thing the 

building is best known for, at least among members of Philadelphia’s baby 

boom generation. For in 1976, the Bellevue-Stratford, as the hotel was then 

known, was the site of one of the most baffling infectious disease outbreaks THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

100 

in history—an outbreak centred on the hotel’s air conditioning and water 

cooling systems. 

The “Legionnaires’ disease” affair began on Wednesday, 21  July, when 2,300 

delegates from the Pennsylvania section of the American Legion and their 

families (some 4,500 people in all) began arriving at the Bellevue-Stratford 

for their annual four-day jamboree. It was the summer of the American 

Bicentennial celebrations, and the Legionnaires—many of them veterans of 

World War II and Korea—were looking forward to partying in style. Those 

who could afford it—perhaps five hundred in all—had checked into the 

Bellevue, taking advantage of the discounts on rooms negotiated by the 

Legion’s state adjutant, Edward Hoak, whose job it was to preside over the 

convention that year and glad-hand delegates. 

Formed from the shell of the Stratford, which used to stand at the south -

west corner of Stratford and Broad, and the Bellevue, which used to overlook 

the northwest corner, the Bellevue-Stratford had opened its doors to guests 

in 1904 after a two-year refit costing a staggering $8 million (about $20 mil -

lion in today’s money). Billed at the time as the most luxurious hotel in 

America, it was designed in the French Renaissance style, with the most 

magnificent ballroom in the United States, four restaurants, 1,000 guest 

rooms, and lighting fixtures by Thomas Edison. By the 1920s, “the Grande 

Old Dame of Broad Street” had become a fixture of Philadelphia society and 

a favourite haunt of celebrities, royalty and heads of state. Former guests 

included Mark Twain, Rudyard Kipling, Queen Marie of Romania and 

General John J.  Pershing. Every US president from Theodore Roosevelt on 

had stayed there, including President John F.  Kennedy, who had visited the 

hotel in October 1963, the month before his assassination in Dallas. However, 

by the 1970s the Bellevue had fallen out of fashion and was struggling to 

compete with the new luxury chains. Indeed, despite the discounts negotiated 

by Hoak, many delegates complained that the food and drinks were over -

priced. They also thought the air conditioning in the hospitality suites was 

substandard and did not like the attitude of the “snooty” staff. 2

Those who could not afford the Bellevue had opted for the nearby Ben 

Franklin hotel and other cheaper midtown options. However, nearly everyone 

had visited the Bellevue’s lobby to register and as all the principal conference 

events, from the Keystone Go-Getter Club Breakfast on the opening day to 

the Commander’s Bicentennial Ball on the final evening, were held at the 

hotel, conventioneers and their families soon became familiar with its bars 

and hospitality suites. The Legionnaires loved a drink at the best of times, and 

with temperatures in Philadelphia that week in the high nineties, the suites THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

101 

were soon packed with delegates seeking to quench their thirst and cool off. 

To keep costs down, Hoak had arranged for delegates to supply their own 

alcohol and snacks, but he could do little about the hotel’s creaking air con -

ditioning system or the ice supplies, which soon ran out. 

The first intimation Hoak had that Legionnaires had been visited by some -

thing worse than a hangover came a week later when he arrived in Manor, 

Pennsylvania, a small town two hundred miles west of Harrisburg, for the 

swearing-in of new officers of Post 472 and was informed that six Legionnaires 

in the area were ill and that one had died. There was further grim news when 

Hoak returned to his home near Harrisburg and found a letter waiting for him 

from the wife of a close colleague informing him that her husband was ill with 

pneumonia and was not responding to treatment. A few hours later Hoak 

received word from his secretary that the man was dead. Next, Hoak called his 

assistant adjutant in Chambersburg concerning another matter only to learn 

that he was attending the viewing of Charles Chamberlain, commander-elect 

of St. Thomas Post 612 in south-central Pennsylvania, who had died suddenly 

following the convention. When Hoak called the former state commander of 

Williamsport to inform him of the three deaths, he learned that six other 

people from Williamsport who had also attended the convention were seri -

ously ill in area hospitals. In theory this was not unusual. After all, the 

Legionnaires formed an elderly demographic and many were also heavy smok -

ers and drinkers with underlying health problems. But three deaths and more 

than six hospitalizations in the space of a week struck Hoak as more than a 

little odd, and when he made further calls and learned that other delegates 

across the state were also ill, his alarm deepened. 3

Hoak was not the only person becoming concerned that weekend. On 

Saturday, 31  July, Robert Sharrar, chief of Acute Communicable Disease 

Control for Philadelphia, had taken a call from a physician in Carlisle worried 

about a patient who had recently attended the Legion convention and who 

was complaining of a fever and a dry, hacking cough. A chest X-ray indicated 

the patient had bronchopneumonia of the lower right lobe. Sharrar told him 

it sounded like mycoplasmal pneumonia and advised him to draw blood and 

send it for testing to the state laboratory when it reopened on Monday. In the 

meantime, he recommended the doctor treat his patient with a fast-acting 

antibiotic. Sharrar was about to end the conversation when the doctor asked 

whether he knew of any other cases of pneumonia in Philadelphia in the past 

few days. Sharrar did not. That was when the doctor said that he had heard 

that a patient had recently died of pneumonia in Lewisburg, in northwest 

Pennsylvania. Sharrar immediately called Lewisburg Hospital and asked to be THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

102 

put through to the resident pathologist, who informed him that the victim 

was a Legionnaire and that the cause of death had been “acute viral … hemor -

rhagic pneumonia.” 4

Two cases of pneumonia in a city the size of Philadelphia was not unusual— 

in an average summer week Sharrar could expect twenty to thirty deaths from 

the disease. Nevertheless, the cases gave Sharrar pause for thought. In 

February, a new strain of swine flu had been isolated at a US Army base at Fort 

Dix, New Jersey, thirty-five miles northeast of Philadelphia. The flu had 

claimed the life of a young private and gone on to sicken several soldiers on 

the base. Tests showed the strain was closely related to the H1N1 virus respon -

sible for the deadly “Spanish flu” pandemic. Fearing that the Fort Dix outbreak 

was the harbinger of a new pandemic wave, David Sencer, the director of the 

CDC in Atlanta, had urged the Ford administration to immunize the entire US 

population. As a CDC-trained epidemiologist, Sharrar had fully supported 

Sencer’s recommendation and was determined that Philadelphians would be 

among the first to get the flu shots. All he was waiting for was for Congress to 

approve the administration’s $134 million funding request and for politicians 

in Washington to agree to insurance to cover vaccine manufacturers worried 

about their liability should the vaccine prove to have adverse effects. 

* * * 

In the late Victorian and Edwardian periods, pneumonia had been the most 

feared disease after tuberculosis and was nearly always fatal, particularly in 

the case of the elderly or those with compromised immune systems. Indeed, 

prior to antibiotics, lobar pneumonia had accounted for between one-quarter 

to a third of all deaths. 

However, this changed with Dubos’s discovery in 1927, in Avery’s labora -

tory at the Rockefeller Institute in New York, of an enzyme that decomposed 

the polysaccharide capsule of the pneumococcus, making it vulnerable to 

phagocytosis. Together with the isolation of the first sulpha drugs in the 

1930s, treatment and survival rates for pneumonia gradually improved. The 

wider availability of penicillin in the late 1940s, and the discovery of new 

antibiotics such as erythromycin and doxycycline in the 1950s, coupled with 

better respiratory technology in hospitals, saw further strides in treatment 

and convalescent care. By the early 1970s the rate of hospital fatalities had 

fallen to around 5  per  cent, the level at which it remains today. 5 The result 

was that pneumonia ceased to be an interesting field of research for young 

medical scientists. Instead, believing that the “conquest of epidemic disease” THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

103 

was imminent, researchers focused on cancer and chronic diseases associated 

with genetic conditions and modern lifestyles. 6

As the outbreak in Philadelphia would demonstrate, this was a mistake. 

While most bacterial pneumonias are due to the pneumococcus, pneumonia 

can also be caused by several other common bacteria, for example,  Yersinia 

pestis , the bacterium of plague, and  Chlamydia psittaci , the bacterium of psit -

tacosis. Another common source of atypical pneumonias is  Haemophilus influ -

enzae , the bacillus that Pfeiffer blamed for the Russian and Spanish influenza 

pandemics, and  Mycoplasma pneumoniae , a tiny organism midway between a 

bacterium and a virus. In addition, there had been several outbreaks of pneu -

monia for which a causal agent had never been identified. These unsolved 

outbreaks included an incident in 1965 at St. Elizabeth’s Mental Hospital in 

Washington, DC in which fourteen people had died, and an outbreak at a 

health department building in Pontiac, Michigan. Dubbed “Pontiac Fever,” the 

latter had caused an influenza-like illness in 144 workers and visitors to the 

building, including a team from the CDC.  Although there had been no deaths 

and no recorded cases of pneumonia, guinea pigs exposed to aerosols of unfil -

tered water from the building’s air condenser unit developed nodular pneu -

monia. That suggested the presence of a bacterium-sized infectious agent. 

Unfortunately, all attempts to culture the pathogen from the water or from 

the lung tissue of guinea pigs failed, much to the CDC’s frustration. The result 

was that while the Pontiac and St. Elizabeth’s outbreaks were known to epi -

demiologists, the cases had never been written up. 7 By contrast, everyone 

knew about the swine flu outbreak at Fort Dix because there was such a panic 

about it and the newspapers were full of the government’s vaccination plans. 

Perhaps that was why, on 2  August, a physician from the Veterans 

Administration Clinic in Philadelphia telephoned CDC headquarters and 

asked to speak with someone from the National Influenza Immunization 

Program. He was put through to Robert Craven, a young Epidemic 

Intelligence Service (EIS) officer who, together with his colleague, Phil 

Graitcer, was manning the desk in Auditorium A, the “war room” set up by 

the CDC in expectation of a nationwide epidemic of swine flu. The physician 

had grim news: four Legionnaires admitted to his clinic had died of pneumo -

nia over the weekend. All of them had attended the state convention in 

Philadelphia. In addition, some twenty-six other people who had been at the 

convention were also showing signs of “febrile respiratory disease.” 8

At first Craven and Graitcer dismissed the reports: four deaths from pneu -

monia was to be expected among such a large gathering of elderly people. 

However, within the hour the CDC officers had fielded several more calls THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

104 

from doctors and health officials in Pennsylvania telling a similar story, and by 

mid-morning the death count from pneumonia had reached eleven. This was 

certainly unusual. As it happened, one of their colleagues, another young EIS 

officer named Jim Beecham, had recently been posted to the headquarters of 

the Pennsylvania State Health Department in Harrisburg. When Craven got 

through to him he learned that earlier that morning Hoak had issued a state -

ment saying that at least eight of his members were dead and some thirty 

other Legionnaires who had attended the convention were ill with “mysteri -

ous symptoms.” Reporters wondered whether the cases were connected to 

swine flu. 

Influenza typically has an incubation period of one to four days, and most 

healthy adults are able to infect others up to five to seven days after becoming 

sick. If the Legionnaires had caught swine flu at the convention in 

Philadelphia, then the first illnesses would have shown themselves around 

28  July. It also meant that officials could expect a second wave in the first 

week of August. Was that what was now happening? Had the long-feared 

swine flu outbreak begun? No one was sure, but with rumours mounting and 

pharmaceutical companies months away from being able to supply sufficient 

doses of vaccine, it was imperative that the CDC answer the question quickly. 

If nothing else, David Sencer’s reputation depended on it. 

The person to whom it fell to investigate the outbreak was David Fraser, a 

32-year-old graduate of Harvard Medical School who bore a striking resem -

blance to Bobby Kennedy. Tapped as a future director of the CDC, Fraser had 

recently been appointed head of the CDC’s Special Pathogens Branch and 

occupied a small windowless office five floors above the swine flu war room. 

There he presided over a crack team of epidemiologists, including the latest 

cohort of EIS graduates. Established in 1951 as an early warning corps against 

biological warfare, EIS is the CDC’s elite disease detection squad. As befits a 

group that takes pride in its ability to investigate outbreaks in any part of the 

world, its symbol is a globe with a worn-out shoe sole. Every year, between 

250 to 300 applicants compete for the privilege of seventy-five places in the 

EIS’s intensive, two-year training program. Candidates are recruited from 

every area of medicine and include doctors, veterinarians, virologists, nurses 

and dentists. The emphasis is on applied epidemiological procedures, biosta -

tistics, and the management of an outbreak investigation. Particular emphasis 

is placed on the study of old case files and the compilation of “line lists,” or 

charts, detailing each case and the distribution of infections in time and space. 

In addition, trainees are expected to learn how to gather pathology and serol -

ogy specimens. THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

105 

In keeping with the vision of EIS’s founder, Alexander D.  Langmuir, the 

emphasis was on learning on the job. As Langmuir once told an interviewer, 

he liked nothing better than throwing EIS candidates “overboard” to see if 

they could swim; and if they couldn’t, he was happy to “throw them a life 

ring, pull them out, and throw them in again.” 9 In short, EIS graduates would 

stop at nothing to get to the bottom of an outbreak. A few years earlier, for 

instance, Fraser had helped solve the mystery of a Lassa Fever outbreak in 

Sierra Leone that had very nearly killed one of his colleagues who tramped 

through villages trapping rodents in search of the presumed reservoir of the 

virus (he eventually traced it to a local species of brown rat). Another reason 

Sencer had picked Fraser was his reputation for diplomacy, something that 

Sencer knew would be needed when Fraser arrived in Harrisburg, the 

Pennsylvania state capital, and local health officials learned of the CDC’s 

interest in the case. 

The first thing epidemiologists are taught in the event of an outbreak is to 

draw up a working case definition in order to verify the diagnosis. The second 

is to look at the frequency of exposure among people with illness and those 

of comparable groups who are not ill (so-called controls). Only then is it 

possible to say whether the identified cases constitute an epidemic. As Fraser 

left for Harrisburg on 3  August, he knew there were one hundred suspected 

cases and that there had been nineteen deaths. He also knew that all the cases 

involved Legionnaires who had attended the state convention in Philadelphia. 

However, that could merely be an artefact of the reporting: the American 

Legion was a close-knit group with efficient communication networks, so it 

was only natural that cases occurring among Legionnaires would come to 

attention first. Moreover, the press was already showing a keen interest in the 

outbreak, something that was likely to further skew the reporting. To know if 

there really was an epidemic underway in Pennsylvania, Fraser would need to 

establish whether any other groups or individuals had also fallen ill with pneu -

monia in the relevant time period and whether they had also been in 

Philadelphia or somewhere else. He would also need to establish how many 

Legionnaires and their families had attended the convention so as to obtain an 

accurate denominator with which to gauge the attack rate. Ideally, he would 

also need line lists detailing the name, age, and address of each patient, and, 

in the case of Legionnaires, the dates they had attended the convention and 

the hotels they had stayed at. These charts would also need to include key 

medical and pathological information, such as the date of onset of illness and, 

in the case of the deceased, the cause of death. Clearly it was a big job, and 

before it had ended thirty EIS officers had fanned out across the state, inter -THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

106 

viewing the families of victims or, in the case of those who had been hospital -

ized, the institutions where they had received treatment. In anticipation of 

this effort, on 2  August the CDC had dispatched Craven and Graitcer to 

Pittsburgh and Philadelphia respectively, and a recently qualified EIS officer, 

Theodore Tsai, to Harrisburg. In addition, Fraser would be joined in 

Harrisburg by two other newly qualified EIS officers, David Heymann, a 

future director of Emerging and Communicable Diseases at the World Health 

Organization, and Stephen Thacker, who would go on to become an assistant 

surgeon general in the US Public Health Service. 

The other priority was to establish whether or not the outbreak was due 

to swine flu. This task would largely fall to Graitcer, whose job it was to liaise 

with state laboratories and forward throat washings and sera to the CDC’s 

laboratory in Atlanta. There, a team of specialists was on hand to see if the 

sera cross-reacted with the H1N1 swine flu, dubbed A/New Jersey/76, that 

had been isolated at Fort Dix in February. At the same time, CDC technicians 

would test for antigens to the most prevalent strain of flu then circulating in 

the northern hemisphere, an H3N2 virus known as A/Victoria/75, as well as 

other common infectious agents associated with pneumonia. 

Within forty-eight hours of arriving in Harrisburg, Fraser had the answer 

to the first question: it was not swine flu. And within seventy-two hours 

technicians confirmed it was not the A/New Jersey or A/Victoria strains 

either. That left several other possibilities. At the top of the list was  Chlamydia 

psittaci , the bacterium of psittacosis, and  Coxiella burnetii , the bacterium of Q 

Fever, a disease of cattle, sheep, and goats which was also known to cause 

pneumonia in humans. Another more remote possibility was  Histoplasma , a 

fungal infection transmitted by birds and bats. Testing for these pathogens, 

Fraser knew, would take weeks and possibly months, and would have to be 

combined with the calm and careful collection of other evidence, such as dust 

and water samples from the Bellevue, and the examination of pathology speci -

mens from deceased Legionnaires. But arriving at the offices of Leonard 

Bachmann, the secretary of health for Pennsylvania, and his chief epidemiolo -

gist, William Parkin, Fraser found the atmosphere anything but calm. Already, 

the phones were ringing off the hook with panicked callers, while in the press 

room next door newspapermen were demanding to know whether the out -

break might be something more sinister, a deliberate act of poisoning perhaps 

by anti-war radicals intent on sabotaging the Bicentennial celebrations or 

sending a message to Gerald Ford, who two years earlier had controversially 

pardoned Richard Nixon for his alleged crimes in connection with the 

Watergate break-in. The press could be forgiven for asking such questions; in THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

107 

the run-up to the convention, Philadelphia’s mayor Frank Rizzo, a tough-

talking former policeman and close friend of Nixon’s, had deliberately stoked 

fears of a terrorist attack by posting undercover officers in and around the 

downtown area. Following the outbreak, Rizzo’s official spokesman, Albert 

Gaudiosi, had raised even more bizarre conspiracy theories, including the 

possibility of a covert operation by the CIA using chemical and biological 

weapons. Gaudiosi’s statement struck many as a blatant attempt to divert 

attention from the mayor’s failure to resolve a long-running garbage collec -

tion dispute—a dispute that had gone on for three weeks and had seen 

mounds of refuse collect on city streets. 10  Those garbage mounds were a 

magnet for rats and other vermin. Might those rats be infested with plague 

fleas, wondered journalists? Could plague be the source of the Legionnaires’ 

peculiar pneumonic symptoms? 

While CDC scientists were testing sputa and examining lung tissue and 

other pathology specimens, EIS officers were extending their investigations 

across Pennsylvania. Each officer drove an average of 450 miles, interviewing 

ten patients in over six hospitals. By now, a clear clinical picture was emerg -

ing. Typically, a case of Legionnaires’ disease began with a feeling of malaise, 

muscle aches, and a slight headache. Within twenty-four hours, patients 

would exhibit a rapidly rising fever, chills, and a dry cough, as well as, on 

occasion, abdominal pains and gastrointestinal symptoms. Two or three days 

later, the patients would have a raging fever of 102–105°F, and a chest X-ray 

would show patchy pneumonia. Accordingly, a case was defined clinically as 

any person with a cough and a fever of 102°F or higher, or any fever and chest 

X-ray evidence of pneumonia. In addition, investigators included an epide -

miological criterion (a case must have attended the American Legion conven -

tion or been inside the Bellevue-Stratford between 1  July and 18  August). At 

this point, the cases listed at the State Department of Health consisted 

entirely of people who had attended the convention or who had been at the 

Bellevue, so this clinico-epidemiological definition made sense. However, it 

was also possible that the line lists had been skewed by the publicity surround -

ing the outbreak at the Bellevue and that people had not thought to report 

other cases that might warrant inclusion, so the Department of Health also 

set up a hotline and invited members of the public to report possible epi -

demic cases regardless of association with the convention or the Bellevue. 

By the first week of August it was clear that the epidemic had peaked and 

the disease was not contagious, there being no secondary cases. Tracing the 

epidemic curve back in time, it was evident there had been a rapid upswing 

in cases from 22 to 25  July, followed by a plateau through 28  July and a THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

108 

somewhat slow decline through 3  August. Moreover, there had been no cases 

prior to the convention, suggesting that, whatever the agent, the incubation 

period was two to ten days. In all, in a four-week period up to 10  August, 

there had been 182 cases and 29 deaths, giving a case fatality rate of 

16  per  cent. The infection had proved particularly dangerous to cigarette 

smokers and older age groups, with those aged sixty or more twice as likely to 

suffer fatal outcomes. Almost all were Legionnaires who had either resided at 

the Bellevue or had attended events in its lobby and hospitality suites. 

However, there were also a few clinically compatible cases among non-Legion -

naires. These included a Bellevue air conditioner repair man, a bus driver, and 

several pedestrians who had merely passed by the hotel’s imposing frontage on 

Broad Street. Were these Broad Street pneumonias part of the same epidemio -

logical event? And why was it that, with the exception of the air conditioner 

repair man, hardly any of the Bellevue’s employees appeared to have fallen ill? 

Though epidemiology aspires to be an exact science, it also contains a large 

element of induction. As Wade Hampton Frost, a former professor of epide -

miology at Johns Hopkins and one of the pioneers of the field, once put it: 

“Epidemiology at any given time is something more than the total of its estab -

lished facts. It includes their orderly arrangement into chains of inference 

which extend beyond the bounds of direct observation.” 11  In other words, the 

raw data can only be parsed so far. To get a feel for Legionnaires’ disease, 

Fraser realized he needed to go to the focus of the outbreak. Obtaining rooms 

at the Bellevue was not a problem: by now, most guests had cancelled their 

bookings for fear of contracting the disease, and on 10  August Fraser and ten 

of his officers moved into the hotel and began exploring the lobby area and 

hospitality suites. 12  Was there a pattern, he wondered, some sort of clue in 

the way that the Legionnaires had used the hotel’s facilities? 

To verify how many of the 10,000 registered Pennsylvania Legion mem -

bers had actually attended the convention and to reconstruct their move -

ments, Fraser distributed questionnaires to Legionnaires across the state. As 

well as confirming their attendance in Philadelphia, Legionnaires were asked 

to provide details of which hotel they had stayed at, and how many hours they 

had spent inside the Bellevue or on the sidewalk outside. The two-page ques -

tionnaires also contained checklists about key convention activities and func -

tions. Had they gone to the Keystone Go-Getter Club Breakfast on the morn -

ing of 23  July in the Rose Garden on the eighteenth floor of the Bellevue? 

Had they attended the ticket-only Commander’s Bicentennial Ball in the 

Bellevue’s lavish second floor ballroom that same evening? Fraser also quizzed 

them about their consumption of food, coffee and alcohol, and whether they THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

109 

had added ice and mixers to their drinks or bought anything from street 

vendors during the Legion parade through downtown. In addition, officers 

interviewed other guests and non-conventioneers who had stayed at or visited 

the Bellevue during the same period. Finally, EIS officers interviewed 

Bellevue staff to establish whether they had suffered any illnesses. To help with 

the surveys, Rizzo even provided Fraser and Sharrar with a team of homicide 

detectives. According to Sharrar, the detectives “did not miss a trick” and 

proved particularly adept at quizzing Legionnaires about their interactions 

with female sex workers, many of whom had passed themselves off as hotel 

guests in order to gain access to the hospitality suites. 

It quickly became apparent that nearly everyone had spent time in the first 

floor lobby area, where the registration desk was set up, talking to other dele -

gates running for election or chatting to family and friends. And nearly everyone 

had ridden in the elevators, either to visit the rooftop restaurant or to visit the 

bars and hospitality suites. Typical cases included Jimmy Dolan and John Bryant 

Ralph—“J.D.” and “J.B.” in the anonymous line lists. Members of the 

Williamstown Legion post, Dolan and Ralph were thirty-nine and forty-one 

respectively and had been buddies since childhood. To save money, the pair had 

stayed at the Holiday Inn in midtown with Jimmy’s cousin, Richard Dolan, the 

43-year-old commander of Pennsylvania Legion Post 239. Well built and with 

a reputation for partying, all three had attended the Commander’s Bicentennial 

Ball, drinking until well past midnight. The trio had also spent many hours in 

the lobby area, but had avoided the hotel’s bars and restaurants. Within days of 

returning to Williamstown, both Jimmy Dolan and Ralph were complaining of 

fever, headaches and coughs, and on 29  July Jimmy Dolan was admitted to the 

hospital. He died three days later, the pathologist recording the cause as “bilat -

eral consolidation lungs, bloody sputum terminal.” The day after, 2  August, 

Ralph also succumbed to the mysterious disease, the cause of death being listed 

as “gross massive bilateral lobar pneumonia.” By contrast, Richard Dolan had 

suffered no symptoms of illness. 13 

Three “statistically significant” factors emerged from the questionnaires. 

First, ill delegates had spent on average four or five more hours in the 

Bellevue than had healthy delegates, and considerably more time in the lobby 

than controls. The correlation between the amount of time spent in the lobby 

and illness applied particularly to those who had slept at the Bellevue, but also 

held for Legionnaires who had stayed at other hotels. However, this correla -

tion did not hold for hotel staff who worked in the lobby area and had spent 

as much if not more time there than Legionnaires. Indeed, with the exception 

of an air conditioning repair man, who had developed flu-like symptoms on THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

110 

21  July and had returned to work four days later, there was no evidence of 

illness or disease in any of the hotel’s thirty full-time employees. Second, 

there appeared to be a small correlation between illness and visits to hospital -

ity suites, with delegate cases visiting on average 2.6 hospitality rooms as 

compared to 1.8 visited by nondelegate cases. However, no one hospitality 

room had been visited by more than one-third of cases. Third, while cases 

were more likely to have drunk water at the Bellevue than non-cases, only 

two-thirds admitted to drinking water in any form, presumably because they 

preferred to quench their thirst with alcohol and/or carbonated drinks. In 

short, as Sharrar put it, the typical case “was most likely to be a friendly, 

thirsty, elderly, male delegate who hung around the hotel lobby.” 14 

In any outbreak investigation, once the existence of the epidemic has been 

confirmed and the diagnosis established, the next questions are who, where, 

when, how, and what? Following the surveys, there could be little doubt that 

Legionnaires were the who, the convention was the when, and the Bellevue 

was the where. But that left the how and what wide open. Had Legionnaires’ 

disease been triggered by exposure to a fomite, such as dust or ash particles, 

or was it due to some kind of gas? Alternatively, could the pathogen have been 

water- or food-borne? Moreover, if the common denominator was the 

Bellevue, how did one explain the apparent immunity of the hotel’s staff? Was 

it possible that the conspiracy theories were right and the outbreak had been 

a deliberate act of espionage? 

By now, speculation was rife, with several newspapers suggesting the 

Legionnaires had been poisoned with paraquat, a weed killer known to cause 

pulmonary edema and breathing problems. Another suggestion was phosgene 

gas, a pulmonary agent that had been deployed by the Germans, and later the 

Allies, in World War I, which causes choking and shortness of breath. Other 

suggestions were that the Legionnaires’ symptoms could be due to poisoning 

with nickel carbonyl, a highly toxic liquid that can trigger chemical pneumo -

nitis and cardiorespiratory failure, or else cadmium poisoning from the cad -

mium pitchers that the bar staff had used to mix the Legionnaires’ drinks. 

Fraser asked CDC technicians to screen pathology specimens from the 

deceased Legionnaires for traces of these toxins and poisons and instructed 

EIS officers to examine the restaurants, bars, rooms, and hospitality suites for 

traces of the same chemicals. If the pathogen had been phosgene, Fraser rea -

soned, it could have been added to the Legionnaires’ drinks or sucked in 

gaseous form via the elevator shaft, from where the constant motion of the 

elevators would have distributed it to the upper floors of the hotel. That could 

be why the survey had turned up no association between the illness and THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

111 

Legionnaires’ presence in a particular hospitality suite. However, everyone 

had ridden the elevators and had gotten in and out at the lobby. Phosgene is 

also rapidly excreted from the body, making it an ideal poisoning agent. 

However, it usually causes severe kidney damage, and none of the kidneys 

from Legionnaires exhibited signs of trauma. Nor did any of the specimens 

contain paraquat. By contrast, traces of nickel were found in the lungs, liver, 

and kidneys of six Legionnaires and two of the Broad Street pneumonias. 

However, these were well within normal levels and were not elevated com -

pared to those of controls. 

As the obvious candidates were excluded, Fraser began to consider more 

remote possibilities, including the air conditioning system. Most modern hotels 

boast rooftop chiller units, as cold air settles and it is impossible to drive cold 

air upwards. However, the Bellevue employed an old cold water system oper -

ated via two Carrier refrigeration machines located in the subbasement. 

Installed in 1954, these chillers had a capacity of 800 and 600 tons respectively 

and used Freon 11 refrigerant to cool the water. This chilled water was then 

pumped up to the roof of the hotel from where it was circulated downward to 

some sixty air-handling units (AHUs). Most of these used approximately 

75  per  cent recirculated air and 25  per  cent outside air, but in the case of the 

AHU located directly above the lobby desk, all of the air was recirculated. 

At the same time, a separate system, using “cooled” water from a cooling 

tower on the roof, was employed to condense the refrigerant. In the event of 

accidental leakage, the chilled water system was designed to be replenished 

automatically via a float valve in a nearby water expansion tank. Unfortunately, 

due to a fault in the valve, the water pipes at the top of the hotel had become 

filled with air, resulting in the failure of one of the AHUs serving the Rose 

Garden restaurant on the eighteenth floor. To rectify this, staff had hooked up a 

temporary connection using a garden hose that ran from the water tower to a 

pipe leading to the AHU.  This makeshift system solved the problem of the faulty 

float in the expansion tank, but if the valves at either end of the hose were left 

open or leaked and various safety valves malfunctioned, it was conceivable that 

water from the water tower could have found its way into two steel tanks, also 

located in the roof, that supplied the hotel’s drinking water. Since the water in 

the tower had been treated with chromate to preserve the pipes, this made it a 

potential contamination risk. The water tower was also uncovered and exposed 

to the elements, meaning it would be very easy for droppings from pigeons 

roosting on the balconies to get into the potable water. 

Another potentially worse hazard was the 800-ton basement chiller unit. 

The unit had been leaking F-11 coolant continuously since May, prompting THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

112 

the Bellevue’s management to put in repeated calls to the Ca rrier company 

to fix the problem. However, these repairs had been only partly successful, 

and with the summer conference season imminent, management had opted 

to postpone further servicing until later in the year. Unfortunately, air from 

the subbasement exhausted directly onto Chancellor Street on the southern 

side of the hotel. In theory the exhausted air could have contained F-11 cool -

ant from the faulty chiller in a gaseous state. In addition, piped vents from the 

chillers also discharged air onto Chancellor Street just three feet away from 

the exhaust fan, meaning it was possible that some of this air could have been 

sucked back into the subbasement via an air shaft adjacent to the point of 

exhaust. Fraser was unable to determine the “ultimate fate of this air,” but as 

the subbasement was also served by two large fans that exhausted air via 

another shaft that extended up to the roof, he could not discount the possibil -

ity that contaminated air had been circulated throughout the hotel. 15  Fuelling 

Fraser’s suspicions about leaking chiller coolant was the fact that an air con -

ditioner repair man had signed off sick on 20  July, the day before the conven -

tion opened. As the man reported having a cough and a temperature of 102°F, 

his name had been included in the line list. However, he did not develop 

pneumonia and on 24  July was well enough to return to work. Later, it was 

discovered that his wife and two daughters had been sick with a respiratory 

illness at the same time, prompting Sharrar to argue that he should never have 

been included in the line list and that his illness was probably due to flu, not 

Legionnaires’ disease. 16 

By the end of August, EIS officers had combed the hotel from top to bot -

tom. Samples removed to Atlanta for testing included Freon II and chilled 

water from the air conditioner system; dust from the AHUs, carpets, draper -

ies, and hotel elevators; water from the hotel drinking fountains and ice dis -

pensers; rodent control chemicals; bleaches and housekeeping supplies; and 

a variety of convention mementos including mugs, hats, badges, and packs of 

Merit cigarettes that had been included in the convention gift bags. Noticing 

that ventilation grilles from the subway discharged onto Broad Street, Fraser 

had also ordered inspections of the underground concourse. Finally, mindful 

that no epidemiological survey could be considered complete without a 

record of the weather, Fraser ordered up meteorological readings for the 

period from 21 to 25  July. These showed that the convention had opened to 

sweltering conditions and that on 22  July there had been a sharp temperature 

inversion. The result was that rather than temperatures decreasing with eleva -

tion above ground level, as is usual, air at the upper levels of the hotel, includ -

ing the roof, had become superheated. This unusual effect had lasted for a day 

and a half, en ding at around noon on 24  July, and, Fraser discovered, had been THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

113 

acco mpanied by slightly higher levels of carbon monoxide and other atmo -

spheric pollutants. 

From the beginning, one of the most popular theories was that the out -

break had been due to psittacosis. Although in 1976 the great parrot fever 

pandemic of 1930 was a distant memory, ornithologists and veterinary spe -

cialists had continued to study the epidemiology of the disease and its natural 

history. As tighter regulation reduced the incidence of outbreaks in bird 

breeding establishments and pet stores, the focus had shifted to occupational 

settings, such as turkey farms and poultry processing plants. At the same 

time, serological studies and a better understanding of the role of latent infec -

tions had brought a new appreciation of the disease’s wide host range. Indeed, 

in 1967, Karl Meyer had tabulated 130 species of bird that carried the dis -

ease. These included homing pigeons raised in backyard lofts and the pigeons 

in New York’s Central Park, half of whom were found to be harbouring the 

chlamydia bacterium. 17 

Fraser noted that the upper floors and roof of the Bellevue were popular 

pigeon roosts. In addition, a local Philadelphia character, known as the 

“pigeon lady,” had been seen scattering bread crumbs on Broad Street. Then, 

there was the report from a guest that she had heard a parakeet chirping in 

one of the rooms. Fraser’s task was not made any easier by the support given 

to the psittacosis theory by prominent medics. The most vocal was Dr  Gary 

Lattimer, a specialist in infectious diseases at the Sacred Heart Hospital in 

Allentown. In early August, Lattimer had examined four Legionnaires and, 

believing they had psittacosis, treated them with tetracycline, a broad-spec -

trum antibiotic that was known to be effective against psittacosis and rickett -

sial diseases. * 

> *

The Legionnaires’ symptoms had immediately improved, 

prompting Lattimer to urge Fraser to issue a directive recommending tetra -

cycline to other patients. Fraser refused, citing the absence of scientific proof 

and saying it would be irresponsible to recommend tetracycline over eryth -

romycin and rifampicin. 18  However, Lattimer would not back down. Instead 

he began holding press conferences and writing to well-known chlamydia 

experts, including Julius Schachter, Meyer’s formal pupil and a professor of 

epidemiology at UCSF. 19  In support of his theory, Lattimer cited the fact that 

psittacosis had a variable incubation period of three to eleven days, similar to 

the two to ten days’ period for Legionnaires’ di sease. The mortality rate and    

> *Rickettsia is the name for a family of bacteria transmitted by the bites of chig -
> gers, ticks, fleas and lice. The best known rickettsial diseases are typhus and Rocky
> Mountain spotted fever.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

114 

symptoms were also similar, and, as with  psittacosis, there appeared to be no 

secondary transmission. Finally, Lattimer pointed out that histopathological 

examinations revealed extensive alveolitis or inflammation of the air sacs of 

victims’ lungs. Together with the changes seen in the liver and spleen, these 

were “compatible in all aspects with those reported from previous human 

chlamydial epidemics.” 20  Unfortunately for Lattimer, in September a panel of 

expert pathologists tasked with reviewing the autopsy evidence disagreed. 

Although the panel found that five of the core Legionnaires’ cases and the 

three Broad Street pneumonias showed patterns of “acute diffuse alveolar 

damage,” it ruled that such alveolar damage could also be the result of expo -

sure to toxins. “No pathologic diagnosis could be made on the basis of these 

findings,” they concluded. 21 

All hope of solving the mystery now rested on the microbiology studies. 

As the leading federal agency for disease control and a WHO reporting centre 

for influenza, the CDC’s laboratories in Atlanta were considered second to 

none. Staffed by 625 scientists and technicians, the laboratories, which were 

located on the main Clifton Road site adjacent to Emory University, covered 

seventeen separate disciplines, including bacteriology, toxicology, mycology, 

parasitology, virology, vector-borne diseases and pathology. Here technicians 

could use electron microscopy to directly observe infected tissue, culture 

bacteria on appropriate media, and inoculate diseased material in cell cul -

tures, eggs and small laboratory animals. In addition, they could screen sputa 

and sera for antibodies to a range of antigens. 

By the end of August, CDC technicians had scanned hundreds of tissue 

samples and used fluorescent antibodies against over a dozen different microbes. 

With the exception of one patient, who tested positive for mycoplasmal pneu -

monia, none of the sera showed significant antibody responses. Nor did tests of 

nasal and throat washings reveal the presence of chlamydia,  Y. pestis , or more 

exotic bacteria and viruses, such as Lassa and Marburg. At one point, technicians 

got excited when three guinea pigs died of a mixed bacterial infection after 

inoculation with a lung suspension from a patient. However, it later transpired 

that the bacteria were typical of those found in patients after treatment with 

antibiotics or in post-mortem overgrowth, 22  and when the lung suspension was 

passed through a bacterial filter in an effort to exclude everything except a 

virus, it wa s no longer pathogenic for guinea pigs. * As the tests came up blank,  

> *Many bacteria will continue to grow in tissue post-mortem, hence the importance
> of embalming and cold storage to prevent putrefaction. However, most bacteria
> that cause disease cannot survive more than a few hours in a dead body.

THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

115 

the scientists tried different methods. One was to put blood samples in test 

tubes with antibodies against various microbes and look for a positive reac -

tion. Mindful of the toxic chemicals theory, the scientists also subjected lung, 

liver, and kidney samples from deceased Legionnaires to radioactive assays for 

poisoning with twenty-three heavy metals, including mercury, arsenic, nickel 

and cobalt. 

After influenza and psittacosis, the next most likely suspect had been Q 

fever. Caused by  Coxiella burnetii , an obligate intracellular parasite midway 

between a bacterium and a virus, Q fever used to be classed as a type of 

rickettsia. 23  However, unlike other rickettsial diseases, such as typhus and 

Rocky Mountain spotted fever, which are transmitted by the bites of arthro -

pods, humans typically get Q fever when they breathe in dust infected by 

contaminated animals (the principal animal reservoirs are cattle, sheep, and 

goats). Common symptoms are fever, severe headache, and a cough. In about 

half of patients, pneumonia ensues, and hepatitis is frequent enough that the 

combination of pneumonia and hepatitis is usually considered diagnostic. 

Unlike with typhus, a rash is rare and, though Q fever is an acute illness, 

patients usually recover even in the absence of antibiotics. 

The researchers to whom it fell to test for Q fever were Charles Shepard, 

the head of the CDC’s Leprosy and Rickettsia Branch, and his assistant, Joe 

McDade. A bespectacled, blue-eyed scientist with a reputation for meticulous 

research, McDade had only just joined the CDC a year earlier. Thirty-six 

years old, he had previously been stationed with a Naval Medical Research 

Unit in North Africa, where he had worked on rickettsial diseases. In theory, 

this made McDade the perfect person for the job. However, at the time he had 

no experience of public health microbiology and looked to Shepard and other 

more experienced CDC hands for direction. 24  After his overseas posting, 

McDade found the work in Atlanta laborious and a little dull. Departing from 

standard tests and other procedural deviations was not encouraged, he 

recalled. Instead, he was expected to follow prescribed algorithms and testing 

procedures, entering the results in a matrix that would hopefully line up with 

the epidemiological evidence and bring about a resolution of the mystery. 

Working with lung tissue from deceased Legionnaires, McDade’s first job was 

to grind up the autopsy material and inoculate it into guinea pigs. Q fever has 

an incubation period of a week to ten days, so the next stage was to wait. If a 

guinea pig developed fever, McDade euthanized the animal, removed some of 

its tissue, and injected it into an embryonic egg. In this way, he hoped to 

obtain sufficient numbers of bacteria that could be stained and examined. 

Part of the reason for McDade’s lack of enthusiasm was that at the time 

“everyone was looking for influ enza or known causes of bacterial pneumonia,” THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

116 

and there was no evidence that the Legionnaires had been exposed to live -

stock, making Q fever highly unlikely. Sure enough, when he inoculated the 

material into guinea pigs they developed fever within two or three days, far 

earlier than if the organism had been  C. burnetii . Modifying his procedure, 

McDade euthanized the guinea pigs prematurely and removed a section of 

their spleens. He then made impression smears on glass slides and stained 

them to see what organisms he could observe through the microscope. At the 

same time he used some of the tissue to prepare a suspension and streaked it 

on an agar plate to see if anything would grow on the media. Finally, he added 

antibiotics to the mixture to inhibit the growth of any contaminants that 

might be lurking in the tissue and inoculated the material directly into embry -

onated eggs so as to grow rickettsia should they be present. 

He found no evidence of rickettsia; all the eggs remained perfectly healthy 

for more than ten days. Nor was he able to recover any bacteria from the agar 

plates. However, as he peered at the smears through the microscope, McDade 

would occasionally spot a rod-shaped, Gram-negative bacterium, “one here 

and another there.” Distrusting his observations, McDade shared the slides 

with more experienced colleagues, only to be told that guinea pigs were 

“notoriously dirty animals” and what he had seen was most likely an “experi -

mental contamination.” “I was told there was an accumulating body of evi -

dence that no bacteria were involved and what I had was an anomalous obser -

vation,” he recalled. Instead, McDade was told to look for a virus. 25 

As McDade and Shepard’s efforts faltered, other scientists, abetted by politi -

cians in Washington, revived the toxic metal and chemical contaminant theories. 

The leading advocate of the toxic metals theory was Dr  William F.  Sunderman 

Jr., the head of laboratory medicine at the University of Connecticut School of 

Medicine. Early on in the outbreak, Sunderman and his father, William 

Sunderman Sr., professor of pathology at the Hahnemann Medical College, 

Philadelphia, had urged the public health authorities to collect urine and blood 

samples from suspected cases so they could be analyzed for toxic substances. 

The leading suspect in the Sundermans’ view was nickel carbonyl. A colourless, 

odourless metal, nickel carbonyl is widely used in industrial operations and is 

highly toxic. Symptoms can present themselves anywhere from one to ten days 

after exposure and typically include a severe headache, dizziness, and muscle 

pains. In the first hour after exposure, victims may also complain of shortness 

of breath and a dry cough. Without treatment, exposure can result in acute 

pneumonitis and bronchopneumonia with high fever. 

In mid-September, the younger Sunderman had studied six lung tissue 

samples from patients with Legionnaires’ disease and found that five  contained THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

117 

unusually high levels of nickel. However, while this suggested the patients 

may have inhaled a toxic substance, nickel concentrations in other tissues and 

organs, such as the liver and kidney, were normal. To exclude the possibility 

that the elevated readings were due to accidental contamination, he would 

also need to test urine and blood from Legionnaires, but unfortunately, in the 

confusion of the early days of the outbreak, public health officials had failed 

to collect and preserve specimens for future testing. Despite these caveats, at 

a congressional hearing in November chaired by John M.  Murphy, a Democrat 

from Staten Island, New York, the Sundermans were highly critical of the 

CDC and the “flaws” in its investigation—flaws that they attributed to the 

“zeal” of public health authorities to see Congress enact legislation indemnify -

ing vaccine manufacturers against prosecution arising from the swine flu 

immunization program. Sunderman Sr. was particularly critical, agreeing 

with a recent newspaper article in the  Washington Post  that had accused the 

CDC of “eagerness bordering on mania … to find swine flu in Pennsylvania.” 26 

Indeed, in his congressional testimony, he went further than his son had been 

prepared to do, stating definitively that the outbreak was due to nickel car -

bonyl poisoning. 27  Congressman Murphy was similarly critical, stating it was 

“inconceivable” that no one could say with any certainty whether the outbreak 

had been “murder; a virus; accidental introduction of a toxic substance; or a 

… convergence of factors yet to be determined.” 28  In particular, he described 

the lack of coordination between the CDC and other agencies as a national 

“embarrassment,” telling House committee members that “nothing was done 

to search for toxic evidence until it was almost too late.” Pointing out that 

“many experts [had] recognized the toxicological symptoms very early,” he 

argued that the possibility of “foul play” could not be excluded and that toxic 

substances may have been placed on telephones, food or the Legionnaires’ ice 

cubes. “It is entirely possible that a terrorist group or single fanatic might 

possess the technology to distribute a deadly poison or bacteria among a large 

group,” he concluded. 29 

It was not the first time Murphy had sought to stoke paranoia about the 

anti-war movement. In October, aides to his committee had leaked a story to 

the  Washington Post  saying that congressional investigators believed “a 

demented veteran or paranoid anti-military type” with some knowledge of 

chemistry may have been responsible for the Legionnaires’ deaths. 30  Such 

stories played to the suspicion and anxiety that infected American society in 

the mid-1970s, which, arguably, has only become more pronounced with 

time. A decade earlier, historian Richard Hofstadter had coined the term 

“paranoid style” to describe “the sense of heated exaggeration, suspiciousness, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

118 

and conspiratorial fantasy” he detec ted in extreme right-wing movements, 

such as the 1964 campaign for the White House by Barry Goldwater, the mili -

tantly anti-communist Republican senator from Arizona. 31  By the 1970s, this 

paranoid style was arguably no longer confined to the Right, but following the 

assassination of leading lights of the civil rights movement was also beginning 

to infect the Left, hence the popularity of theories blaming the deaths of Jack 

and Bobby Kennedy and Martin Luther King on the CIA, the Mafia, and the 

Ku Klux Klan, or some combination of all three. 

The early 1970s was also a time of growing anxiety about nuclear energy 

and the dangers of environmental and chemical pollutants, such as Agent 

Orange, the highly toxic herbicide sprayed on the Vietnamese countryside, 

which was just beginning to give rise to cancers and other unexplained health 

problems among Vietnam vets and their children. As Laurie Garrett has 

argued, from the perspective of the Left, “events in Philadelphia fit neatly 

with the then vogue view that an unregulated chemical industry was raining 

toxic compounds upon the American people.” 32  By contrast, the Right was 

more inclined to view the outbreak as an act of sabotage, or as the Philadelphia 

Veterans of Foreign Wars put it, “a sneak attack against the finest kind of 

Americans.” 33  This sense of moral panic did not escape Bob Dylan, who incor -

porated some of the wilder speculation into “Legionnaires’ Disease,” a song 

written for his touring guitarist. 34 

In retrospect this panic seems irrational, laughable even. After all, unlike 

cholera and plague, Legionnaires’ disease was not contagious. Nor was it a 

disfiguring disease like smallpox, or one freighted with metaphors of waste 

and decay, like cancer and tuberculosis. On the other hand, the fact that its 

identity was unknown made it ripe for the projection of society’s worst fears. 

Like Jack the Ripper, the mysterious killer had descended suddenly and unex -

pectedly on the Bellevue, then vacated the scene just as mysteriously. In the 

process, it had left few clues—or at least, none that the CDC’s disease detec -

tives had been able to parse—turning what was usually considered a safe and 

secure location into dangerous ground. It was a blow from which the 

Bellevue, already in financial trouble before the outbreak, would never 

recover. With newspapers using phrases like “mysterious and terrifying dis -

ease” and “the Philadelphia killer” to describe the outbreak, guests cancelled 

their reservations one by one. 35  The result was that on 10  November, the 

management announced the Bellevue was no longer able “to withstand the 

economic impact of the worldwide, adverse publicity” and closed its doors to 

further business. 36 

Not long after, Fraser decided it was also time for him to close the book 

on the EIS i nvestigation and begin the laborious process of drafting his final THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

119 

report, known as an EPI-2. Despite going over the hotel with a fine-tooth 

comb and many hours of interviews, he was still no closer to identifying the 

pathogen or means of transmission. Privately, he was dismissive of the nickel 

carbonyl theory as the metal usually has an incubation period of less than 

thirty-six hours and rarely causes fevers above 101°F.  Nor did he think it was 

food poisoning: the Legionnaires had purchased food from many different 

sources, and EIS officers had been unable to implicate a common meal at the 

convention. Similarly, although the cross-connection between the AHU and 

the Bellevue’s potable water supply suggested a waterborne illness, more than 

one-third of the ill delegates insisted they had never drunk water at the hotel. 

By contrast, almost all the hotel employees, none of whom had suffered 

Legionnaires’ disease, said they frequently drank from a fountain in the lobby. 

In October, Fraser discussed the case with his boss, John V.  Bennett. 

Bennett had been the lead investigator of the 1965 outbreak at St. Elizabeth’s 

Hospital. Based on the epidemiology of the outbreak (the cases were associ -

ated with proximity to open windows), Bennett had suspected airborne trans -

mission. However, all attempts to identify the aetiological agent had failed, so 

at the end of the investigation Bennett had filed the blood from St. Elizabeth’s 

patients in the CDC’s serum banks in the hope that it might prove useful at a 

later date. “When you solve the Legionnaires’ outbreak you will solve my 

outbreak at St. Elizabeth’s,” he told Fraser. 37 

Mulling over Bennett’s words, Fraser thought an airborne agent might 

explain the sickness of both the Legionnaires and Broad Street pneumonia 

cases—individuals who had passed by the hotel without entering it. Fraser 

also noted the strong association between illness and time spent in the 

lobby, and the fact that after the convention a fault had been discovered in 

the AHU serving the lobby area, prompting the hotel’s management to have 

the filters cleaned. This cleaning operation had taken place on 6  August and 

“may have inadvertently limited the ability of investigators to identify a 

toxic or microbiologic agent in the air handling system,” Fraser wrote in his 

report. On the other hand, the relatively low attack rate “may rule against 

an airborne agent to some degree.” All that Fraser could say with confidence 

was that the illness resembled an infectious disease and there had been no 

secondary spread. Unfortunately, despite exhaustive microbiological stud -

ies, all the tests had been negative. It was possible that as new tests and 

technologies became available, new toxins capable of causing pneumonitis 

might be discovered, but that lay in the future. At present, “no toxin is 

known that causes just this pattern of disease,” he concluded, “and toxico -

logical studies are also negative so far.” 38 THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

120 

In all his years as an outbreak investigator Fraser had never come across a 

case quite like it; it stuck in the craw, but he had to admit defeat. So did 

Langmuir. The Philadelphia outbreak, he informed the press, constituted “the 

greatest epidemiological puzzle of the century.” 39 121 

# 5

# LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX   

> “The discovery of the etiologic agent of Legionnaires’ disease was accomplished in the
> face of overwhelming odds. All of the combined bacteriology and pathology experience
> accumulated since the beginning of the century pointed away from this agent being a
> bacterium.”
> William H. Foege, Director of the CDC, Senate Subcommittee on
> Health and Scientific Research, 9 November 1977

In a period when antibiotics and vaccines seemed to have closed the book on 

infectious disease, the Legionnaires’ outbreak challenged medical confidence 

that America was on the brink of a germ-free era. Little wonder then that the 

CDC’s failure to solve the puzzle of the century produced a lingering sense of 

insecurity and anxiety. However, outside of medical and public health circles, 

the same sense of anxiety did not attach to swine flu. This is odd when you 

consider that CDC officials had been warning of an epidemic since February. 

Indeed, in late March, President Ford had gone on television to drive home the 

concerns that an outbreak of swine flu was imminent. Flanked by the two 

godfathers of the polio vaccine, the scientists Albert Sabin and Jonas Salk, Ford 

told the American public that he had been advised that “there is a very real 

possibility that unless we take effective counteractions, there could be an epi -

demic of this dangerous disease next fall and winter.” Accordingly, he was 

seeking a $135 million appropriation from Congress for sufficient vaccine “to 

inoculate every man, woman, and child in the United States.” 1

Congress approved the appropriation bill in April, and by the middle of 

August had also passed legislation waiving corporate liability for the immuniza -

tion campaign. Ironically, Congress’s willingness to indemnify vaccine manufac -

turers had little to do with its enthusiasm for the insurance business and every -

thing to do with the fears raised by the Philadelphia outbreak. Even though on THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

122 

5 August Sencer had told senators he did not think the outbreak was due to 

swine flu, politicians were petrified he might be wrong and that they would end 

up being branded obstructionists who had impeded the delivery of a life-saving 

vaccine. 2 Nonetheless, scientists’ and politicians’ enthusiasm for the flu immu -

nization campaign was not shared by the public, with a Gallup poll in September 

indicating that only about half of all Americans were willing to be immunized. 3

In other words, faced with a repeat of an epidemic on the scale of 1918, the 

public’s response was to shrug its shoulders. This indifference turned to resis -

tance when at the beginning of October the campaign finally got under way. 

Within ten days, one million Americans had rolled up their sleeves and received 

the jab, but on 11  October the campaign suffered a disastrous blow when it was 

reported that three elderly people in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, had died hours 

after having the inoculation. The deaths prompted a media scare that led to nine 

states suspending their vaccination programs. To calm the public’s nerves and 

restore confidence, President Ford and his family were photographed receiving 

jabs at the White House. CDC scientists, meanwhile, attempted to educate the 

public, explaining that the risk of temporally associated deaths within forty-

eight hours of inoculation occurred at a rate of 5/100,000 a day. By compari -

son, the anticipated death rate per day for  all  causes among citizens in 

Pennsylvania was 17/100,000. In other words, it was to be expected that some 

people would die after receiving the flu shot, but that did not mean there was a 

causal connection. 4

Unfortunately, by 1976 the public’s unquestioning acceptance of scientific 

authority was beginning to wane, as were memories of life before vaccines 

against polio, measles, and other debilitating childhood diseases. Moreover, 

by now influenza experts in other countries were beginning to question the 

American scientific consensus that the swine flu isolated at Fort Dix was the 

harbinger of a new pandemic strain, a scepticism shared by WHO officials in 

Geneva who advocated a “wait and see” policy. 5 As October turned to 

November with no signs of the feared pandemic, scepticism hardened. Still, 

the campaign might have been saved were it not for reports of cases of 

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). A rare and occasionally lethal neurological 

syndrome, GBS occurs at a steady rate in the general population and, if a 

pandemic had been occurring, would have been deemed an acceptable risk. 

However, in the absence of a pandemic, the reports in December that as many 

as thirty people had developed the syndrome within a month of receiving the 

flu jab sparked widespread alarm, prompting the government to suspend the 

campaign so that the association with the vaccine could be investigated. The 

program was never restarted, and as cases of the syndrome soared—by the LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

123 

end of December, 526 cases were being reported, of which 257 had received 

the flu jab—the press and politicians in Washington began looking for a fall 

guy. The  New York Times  was especially harsh, labelling the campaign a “fiasco” 

and, in view of the fact that the pandemic had never materialized, a waste of 

time and effort. 6 The result was that when Jimmy Carter moved into the 

White House in January, Joseph Califano Jr., the incoming secretary of 

Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW), demanded Sencer’s resignation. 

Shamefully, Califano informed Sencer of his dismissal minutes before the pair 

were due to appear together at a meeting in Washington on the moratorium 

of the swine flu programme. Worse, the whispered conversation in an HEW 

hallway was captured by the TV cameras, deepening Sencer’s humiliation. 

According to public health historian George Dehner, this was “shabby treat -

ment” for someone who had given sixteen years of service to the CDC, eleven 

as its director. On the other hand, Dehner writes, in his efforts to convince 

administration officials of the vaccination campaign’s necessity, Sencer had 

deliberately downplayed the scientific uncertainty so as to give “a distorted 

vision of the new virus.” The result was that “only the most dire vision of a 

swine flu pandemic remained.” 7

Ironically, just three weeks before Sencer’s very public firing, Shepard 

had rushed into his office to announce that he and McDade had solved the 

puzzle of the century. The culprit was a hitherto unknown Gram-negative 

bacterium. Other researchers had missed it because the bacterium was dif -

ficult to see using a conventional Gram stain. However, McDade had solved 

the problem using a different staining technique. According to Garrett, 

after all the pressure and frustration of the past year, Sencer was reluctant 

to accept what Shepard was telling him. “Shep, how sure are you?” “Better 

than 95  per  cent,” he replied, “but I’d like to run a few more experiments 

before we go public.” 8

There is an old saying in medical research: “fortune favours the prepared 

mind.” The saying is usually attributed to Louis Pasteur, who famously stum -

bled on a vaccine against chicken cholera in 1880 when a colleague inoculated 

some chickens with an old culture of chicken cholera germs. 9 In McDade’s 

case, however, it was because he was a novice to public health microbiology 

and therefore not schooled in the same thought processes as his colleagues 

that a chance observation led him to the answer that had eluded them. It also 

helped that McDade was a worrier and a perfectionist. To his way of thinking, 

the peculiar rod-shaped bacteria he had weakly glimpsed through his micro -

scope in August represented a loose end, and he didn’t like it. However, it was 

not until late December that he thought to return to the problem. The THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

124 

impetus was a conversation with a man who had cornered him at a party 

shortly before Christmas. “I don’t know how he knew I was CDC but he did,” 

recalled McDade. “He said, ‘We know you scientists are a little weird but we 

count on you and we’re very disappointed.’ I stuttered because I didn’t know 

what to say. But it bothered me and stuck in my mind.” 10 

It had always been McDade’s habit to use the week between Christmas and 

New Year’s to resolve any outstanding paperwork in preparation for the new 

working year. While tidying his office he spotted the glass slides with the 

smears he had taken from the guinea pigs in a box on the shelf and decided to 

have another look. The exercise, he recalled, was like “searching for a missing 

contact lens on a basketball court with your eyes four inches away from the 

floor.” Eventually, however, McDade spotted a cluster of organisms in the 

corner of one of the microscopic fields. To McDade’s way of thinking, the fact 

that the organisms were clustered together “suggested that it wasn’t just 

organisms that happened to be there but were actually growing there inside 

the guinea pig.” It was at this point that McDade decided to have another go 

at culturing the organism. His thinking was, “if I can rule out that it has noth -

ing to do with the disease my conscience will be salved and I can go about my 

business.” It was at this point that McDade’s expertise as a rickettsial specialist 

and his willingness to depart from conventional patterns of thought came into 

play. Going to the freezer drawers containing spleen tissue from suspect 

guinea pigs that had been put on ice in August, McDade thawed the samples 

and inoculated some of the tissue into embryonated eggs. However, this time 

he withheld antibiotics in order to allow whatever organisms were present in 

the guinea pig tissue to grow freely. Five to seven days later the eggs died and 

McDade took new smears. As before, he applied a Gimenez stain, a technique 

which had been developed specifically for rickettsial organisms, and, once 

again, spotted the same rod-shaped bacteria growing in clusters. Could these 

bacteria be responsible for the guinea pigs’ deaths, and could the same bacte -

ria be responsible for the Legionnaires’ disease outbreak? To answer the ques -

tion, McDade retrieved some preserved serum from the Legionnaires’ cases 

and mixed it with the organism he had found in the eggs. If a patient’s serum 

contained antibodies specific to the organism, an observable reaction would 

take place. It did. “They just lit up dramatically,” he said. “My neck hair bris -

tled. I wasn’t sure what I’d got there but I knew it was something.” 

McDade immediately shared his findings with Shepard, and together they 

ran further tests using paired serum samples taken from Legionnaires two or 

more weeks apart. If it could be shown that the reaction took place at much 

higher dilution in the second serum sample than in the first, this would be LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

125 

strong evidence that the patient had recently recovered from the disease 

caused by the organism. At the same time, McDade and Shepard repeated the 

test using blinded samples from both Legionnaires’ and non-Legionnaires’ 

patients, some of whom had had other pneumonias or were healthy. Nearly 

fifty years later, McDade vividly recounted the moment of discovery:  

> When we’d finished all the tests, later that evening, they brought down the
> paper and we broke the code. All the normal specimens from healthy people
> were negative, specimens from patients with other pneumonias were all nega -
> tive. Then we looked at the Legionnaires’ disease specimens. Specimens taken
> from Legionnaires early in the illness had little or no antibodies, and speci -
> mens taken later in illness had very high levels of antibody, which suggested
> they had been infected with this bacteria. So that was the moment when we
> knew we’d found the aetiologic agent. 11

When Shepa rd informed Sencer of the breakthrough he could hardly con -

tain his excitement and insisted that they issue an announcement in the next 

edition of the  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report , the CDC’s house journal, 

and schedule a press conference for the same day, 18  January 1977. This was 

earlier than Shepard and McDade had been anticipating—normally, scientific 

discoveries take several months to be written up before being submitted to a 

scientific journal. Because of the political pressure on Sencer, however, he 

could not wait for the usual peer review process. Worried that they would be 

laughing stocks if their methodology was subsequently found to be faulty, 

Shepard and McDade double-checked their results. Then, out of curiosity, 

McDade decided to look in the CDC’s stores for serum from other unsolved 

outbreaks. That’s when he came across the stored blood from the patients at 

St. Elizabeth’s Hospital. McDade injected the blood into chicken eggs, then 

added the organism he had isolated in Philadelphia. The eggs lit up immedi -

ately, indicating that there was an antibody reaction and that the St. Elizabeth’s 

patients had been infected with the same organism. Bennett’s intuition had 

been correct: in solving the Philadelphia outbreak, Fraser and his team had 

also solved the mystery of the earlier outbreak in Washington, DC. 

News of Shepard and McDade’s discovery travelled around the world, 

prompting scientists at other research establishments in Europe and else -

where to duplicate the CDC’s results. As scientists exchanged information 

and examined old case files, it became apparent that St. Elizabeth’s was not 

the only prior outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease. Blood specimens from 

patients at the Oakland County Health Department in Pontiac, Michigan, in 

1968 also tested positive for antibodies to  Legionella pneumophila , as the organ -

ism was now known, suggesting that they had been infected by the same THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

126 

agent, though why there had been no pneumonia in the “Pontiac Fever” cases 

and why the outbreak had not resulted in any fatalities was unclear. That was 

not all: in May 1977, Marilyn Bozeman, a rickettsia specialist at the Walter 

Reed Army Institute of Research, in Bethesda, Maryland, informed McDade 

that she had seen very similar organisms in guinea pigs while investigating 

specimens taken from an outbreak in 1959. Like McDade, she had assumed 

these were contaminants and described them as “rickettsia-like.” 12  It was only 

later, when she ran new tests, that she found they were actually two new 

species of legionella,  Legionella bozemanii  and  Legionella micdadei . It was subse -

quently found that  L. micdadei  had also been responsible for an outbreak of 

“Fort Bragg fever” in 1943 and that Walter Reed also had an isolate of  L.

pneumophila  dating from 1947. 13 

Then, in early summer, came news of an outbreak at a medical centre in 

Burlington, Vermont. EIS officers rushed to the scene, and by September 

they had documented sixty-nine cases of Legionnaires’ disease. However, 

once again, the source of the exposure eluded them. 14  Soon, there were 

reports of other outbreaks in hospitals across the United States. The most 

notable was an outbreak that began at the Wadsworth Medical Center, a 

veterans’ hospital in Los Angeles, in the summer and which by the end of the 

year had claimed sixteen lives. At around the same time, a smaller epidemic 

broke out at a hospital in Nottingham, England, sickening fifteen people. 

Once again, no common source was found, but two of the sera from patients 

sent to the CDC for analysis tested positive for antibodies to legionella. 15 

That was not all: in 1978 CDC scientists confirmed that legionella had been 

responsible for a mysterious outbreak of pneumonia at the Rio Park hotel in 

Benidorm, Spain, that had been blamed for the deaths of three Scottish holi -

daymakers five years earlier. 16  The result was that when, in 1980, another 

outbreak occurred at the same hotel, epidemiologists took water samples 

and found the bacterium lurking in the shower heads. Apparently, an old 

water well had been brought back into use five days before the start of the 

outbreak and had fed water infected with  L. pneumophila  directly into the 

hotel. Investigators concluded that those who showered and washed first 

thing each morning were at most risk because the bacteria multiplied over -

night in water standing in peripheral pipe work. In all, a total of fifty-eight 

people were sickened, and one woman died. Like the outbreak at the 

Bellevue, the Rio Park outbreak sparked considerable press interest and 

inspired the thriller writer Desmond Bagley to pen a novel,  Bahama Crisis 

(1980), in which a Caribbean holiday resort’s water system is deliberately 

seeded with Legionella bacteria in an act of industrial espionage. 17 LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

127 

By no w, it was becoming clear that Legionnaires’ disease was closely asso -

ciated with hotels, hospitals and other large buildings. But though it was 

suspected that cooling towers and modern air conditioning systems facilitated 

the spread of the organism, attempts to isolate  L. pneumophila  from the cool -

ing towers of hospitals failed. Then, in 1978, came a breakthrough with the 

report of an outbreak in the heart of Manhattan’s garment district. By 

September, the CDC had identified seventeen cases, the majority of them 

centred around a building on 35th Street between Seventh Avenue and 

Broadway. On the CDC’s advice, the city ordered businesses in the immediate 

vicinity to switch off their air conditioners. The agency then collected epide -

miological samples from nearby buildings, including the cooling tower on the 

roof of Macy’s Department Store located directly opposite the building on 

35th Street. The sample tested positive for legionella, but the CDC did not 

have sufficient epidemiological evidence to say the Macy’s cooling tower was 

to blame. 18  However, earlier that year, investigators had attended another 

outbreak at the Indiana Memorial Union and recovered  L. pneumophila  from 

the Union’s cooling tower, so it was pretty obvious that cooling towers were 

responsible for many of the outbreaks. In addition, scientists found a nearby 

stream teeming with other species of the same bacteria, suggesting that the 

organism was widespread in the environment. 19 

Currently, the genus  Legionella  comprises nearly forty different species 20 

and sixty-one serogroups. * However, it is one species,  L. pneumophila , that is 

responsible for 90  per  cent of Legionnaires’ disease cases. A facultative intra -

cellular parasite, it is unable to grow outside of cells. Instead, it has evolved 

to live in natural aquatic environments, such as lakes, streams, ponds and 

ground water. These environments are teeming with amoebae and protozoa 

that routinely ingest other ubiquitous bacteria as food. However, legionellae 

are able to evade these microbial processes and “trick” the amoeba into ingest -

ing them. Once inside an amoeba, the bacterium multiplies intracellularly 

before releasing dozens of newly formed legionellae into the water. The new 

organisms then try to trick other amoebae into ingesting them. In this way, 

legionellae are considered “Trojan horse” bacteria. 21 

Under natural conditions, water rarely reaches the temperatures necessary 

for the bacteria to multiply (legionellae grow best at temperatures of 72°F to 

113°F), ensuring that populations are kept to safe levels. Man-made environ -

ments are differe nt, however. Hotels, hospitals, and other large buildings are  

> *A serogroup is a group of bacteria that share a common antigen.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

128 

home to a  number of devices that utilize water at ideal temperatures for the 

growth of legionella bacteria. These include showerheads, hot tubs, whirlpool 

spas, water fountains, humidifiers, misting equipment, and architectural foun -

tains. Cooling towers are of particular concern because the pools of warm 

water are open to the atmosphere—indeed, legionella bacteria have been 

repeatedly isolated from the biofilms of slime and encrusted sludge on top of 

such towers, with some surveys indicating that as many as half of all cooling 

towers in the United States may be contaminated with the organisms. 22  If 

such towers are not regularly serviced, this contaminated water can be aero -

solized into microscopic droplets containing legionella, enabling the organism 

to be drawn directly into a person’s lungs. One way this may occur is during 

the cooling process, when warm water from the condenser or chiller unit is 

sprayed across the fill at the top of a cooling tower, splintering the water into 

tiny droplets. While most of the water returns to the collecting pan to be 

circulated to the heat source to cool refrigerant from the air conditioning 

unit, some of the water is aerosolized, resulting in the production of a fine 

mist at the top of the tower. If a drift eliminator is not fitted to the tower or 

the eliminator is inadequate, this mist may then be drawn into nearby air 

intake vents and air shafts. 23  Under certain temperature conditions, the mist 

can also cascade down the side of the building to ground level, from where it 

may be drawn in through open windows or inhaled by passing pedestrians. A 

third possible route of contamination is the pipework supplying potable water 

to showers and so forth, especially where hot water systems are run intermit -

tently and water is left to stand for long periods in pipes. Finally, in theory, 

contamination can also occur if there is a direct link from the water tower to 

the chilled water supply of an air conditioning unit. 

One reason legionella is so dangerous is that the same strategy that enables 

the organism to evade ingestion by amoebae also enables the organism to 

escape attack by the alveolar macrophages, the body’s first line of defence 

against lung infections. Instead, legionellae multiply within the cells of the 

alveoli, before spilling out and colonizing other lung cells. If other host 

defence responses are not activated in time, the result is pneumonia and 

systemic illness. 

In the United States, the incidence of Legionnaires’ disease varies from 

state to state, with the highest incidence being recorded in the summer and 

autumn. Those aged sixty and over are at greatest risk, especially if they suffer 

from chronic lung disease or have other underlying medical conditions. The 

disease also occurs more frequently in men than women, though whether this 

is due to the higher prevalence of cigarette smoking and lung disease in men, LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

129 

or some other predisposing factor, is not known (cigarette smokers have a 

two- to fourfold higher risk of developing Legionnaires’ disease than non-

smokers). Hospitals present a particular risk because of inadequate servicing 

of hot water systems and the way that such settings bring together large 

numbers of immunocompromised patients. Confined to their beds for long 

periods in wards, these patients, many of whom may be suffering from other 

conditions and have compromised immune systems, present the organism 

with the ideal host. Surveys have also found that modern medical technolo -

gies such as immunosuppressive therapies, intubation, anaesthesia, and the 

placing of nasogastric tubes also increase the risk of pneumonias due to 

Legionnaires’ disease. 24 

In 1978, the CDC held an international meeting to review what had been 

learned about legionella, its epidemiology and its ecology. By now, McDade 

had perfected a technique for visualizing the organism using a special silver 

stain that coloured the walls of the Gram-negative bacteria. Meanwhile, other 

researchers were learning how to cultivate it on charcoal yeast agar, a special 

medium supplemented with iron and cysteine. In addition, using a fluores -

cent-antibody staining technique, CDC researchers had demonstrated that 

organisms observed by pathologists in lung tissue recovered from 

Legionnaires in Philadelphia were in fact  L. pneumophila .25  Unfortunately, 

however, the final piece of evidence—legionella from the water tower on the 

roof of the Bellevue—eluded investigators as the hotel had now been closed 

and the tower and the air conditioning units thoroughly cleaned. 

Nevertheless, in light of the outbreaks seen at hospitals and other buildings in 

the United States, Fraser had little doubt that the hotel’s water tower had 

been to blame. Noting that the convention had coincided with a marked 

temperature inversion in Philadelphia, he speculated that this inversion could 

have caused mist from the tower to come across the edge of the roof and 

“cascade down the side of the building.” 26  In this way, the contaminated air 

could have enveloped people on the sidewalk and been sucked into the lobby 

through a vent near the ground floor, thus accounting for both the cases 

observed among delegates and the Broad Street pneumonias. There were two 

further pieces of evidence implicating the Bellevue. The first was the discov -

ery of antibodies to legionella in eleven members of another convention 

group that had visited the hotel two years earlier and whose members had 

suffered similar fevers and pneumonias. The second was a survey of hotel staff 

who had been employed at the hotel at around the same time. They also had 

antibodies to legionella. This suggested that hotel staff had been exposed from 

time to time and had managed to acquire immunity, which was why so few of THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

130 

them had succumbed to the infection in 1976. By contrast, the Legionnaires 

had no such history of exposure. 

* * * 

The Legionnaires’ disease outbreak is a classic example of how new technolo -

gies and changes to the built environment designed to improve hygiene and 

ameliorate the conditions of life are constantly giving rise to new threats to 

health and well-being. It also illustrates how, in certain political and cultural 

contexts, epidemics that might otherwise have gone unnoticed can command 

wide public attention and provoke considerable anxiety. 

L. pneumophila  has been around for millennia, but it was not until we began 

building cities and equipping buildings with indoor plumbing and hot water 

systems that we presented the bacterium with a new ecological niche in 

which to prosper. And it was not until we added other luxuries, such as air 

conditioning, showers, humidifiers and misters, that we gave the bacterium 

an efficient way to aerosolize and colonize the human respiratory tract. Even 

so, it took several years for doctors and public health experts to wake up to 

the pathogenic threat posed by the presence of this ancient organism in the 

heart of modern metropolises. 

One reason is that prior to the invention of a method for culturing the 

bacterium and diagnosing legionella infections, Legionnaires’ disease was 

indistinguishable from other atypical pneumonias for which a causative agent 

had yet to be identified. This made it largely invisible to physicians and respira -

tory disease experts who believed that pneumonia was largely a problem of the 

past. Even where outbreaks were sufficiently unusual to draw the attention of 

doctors and public health experts, as had been the case at St. Elizabeth’s 

Hospital in 1965 and Pontiac, Michigan in 1968, investigations were inconclu -

sive and had reached dead ends. This might also have been the fate of the 

CDC’s inquiry into the outbreak at the Bellevue. That it was not is due, first, 

to its occurrence at a time of acute national anxiety about another epidemic 

disease, and second, to the intense media interest in the outbreak, sparked 

both by the focus on swine flu and by the fact that the victims were a venerated 

and vulnerable section of the American population. However, for all the 

resources at the CDC’s disposal, in the final analysis these factors might have 

counted for nothing had it not been for the determination of one scientist and 

his willingness to set aside preconceived notions and patterns of thought. 

By 1976, medical researchers were confident that they had identified all 

the leading causes of pneumonia and that, in any case, the condition LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

131 

responded to treatment with penicillin or one of the new generation of anti -

biotics, such as erythromycin and rifampicin. What few realized was that only 

half of sporadic pneumonia cases could be determined with existing diagnos -

tic tests, much less that there had been several outbreaks for which a causal 

agent had never been identified. 27  When examining pathology specimens and 

bacterial cultures, laboratory technicians had been taught to look, first, for 

the pneumococcus and, if that was absent, other known bacterial and myco -

bacterial causes of the disease. Using long-established culturing and staining 

techniques, it was possible to grow these bacteria on laboratory media and 

then colour them with Gram stains or other common dyes. But what of an 

organism that could not be cultivated on the usual media and which, because 

it lacked a cell wall, could not be easily visualized with existing stains either? 

What, in other words, of an unknown unknown? This was the problem that 

confronted McDade when, using a stain developed for rickettsia, he peered 

through his microscope and spotted a faint rod-shaped organism growing in 

clusters. Because the organism did not conform to any of the known bacterial 

causes of pneumonia, McDade’s colleagues insisted it must be a “contami -

nant.” That is what their experience of cultivating bacteria in guinea pigs and 

their microbiology training had taught them. By contrast, McDade’s mind 

was unprepared by previous experience for such an observation, and the 

more he ruminated on it the more he became concerned. What if it was the 

stain and not experimental error that had brought the bacteria to light, and 

what if his observation was not an anomaly? Thus it was that a chance observa -

tion led McDade in the direction opposite to that of his colleagues and to an 

eventual resolution of the problem. 

Legionnaires’ disease also illustrates the role of medical technology and 

human behaviour in shaping our interactions with pathogens. It was not sim -

ply that water towers and air conditioning systems afforded an old bacterium 

a new place in which to breed; to provoke an outbreak, the bacterium also 

had to meet a group of highly susceptible individuals. This happened first at 

hospitals and medical centres, where the expansion in intensive care beds in 

the 1960s and the growing number of elderly or mentally ill patients receiv -

ing institutional treatment increased the bacterium’s chances of finding an 

appropriate host. However, it also occurred at meatpacking plants and other 

large industrial premises with chiller units. And, of course, it also happened 

at luxury hotels and other large buildings with cooling towers and state-of-

the-art air conditioning systems. The Bellevue was not alone in installing a 

Carrier refrigeration unit in the 1950s. In 1952, in preparation for that year’s 

Republican and Democratic conventions, engineers from the Carrier THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

132 

Company brought air conditioning to the International Amphitheatre in 

Chicago. Six years later, Carrier installed similar units in the Fidelity Building 

in Los Angeles, making it the first fully air-conditioned office building in 

California. By the end of the decade, air conditioning had also arrived in 

domestic homes, fuelling migration to Florida and other “Sun Belt” states. The 

result was that by 1969, when Carrier announced that the towers of New 

York’s World Trade Center would be cooled and heated by its equipment, no 

American office or home, large or small, was considered complete without 

air conditioning. 28 

At the time, of course, no one realized that cooling towers and air condi -

tioners presented an infectious disease risk. This only became significant after 

January 1977, when Joe McDade’s isolation of  L. pneumophila  resulted in the 

discovery of the organism in other buildings across the United States. Once  L.

pneumophila  had been identified, researchers were able to show it submitted to 

treatment with erythromycin and rifampicin, drugs that quickly became the 

standard therapy. The result is that today legionella is recognized around the 

world as an important cause of community-acquired pneumonia outbreaks, 

prompting routine checks on the cooling towers of hotels and hospitals. That 

is not to say the threat has disappeared: despite the wider availability of diag -

nostic tests, legionella is thought to be responsible for around 2  per  cent of 

pneumonia cases in the United States annually (around 50,000 cases). 29 

Moreover, outbreaks continue to occur with disturbing regularity wherever 

public water management standards or the inspection and cleaning of private 

water towers is found wanting. For instance, between 2014 and 2015, ninety 

people in Flint, Michigan, contracted Legionnaires’ disease and twelve died 

after the town switched its water source from Detroit’s system to the Flint 

River. And in 2015, New York City experienced the largest Legionnaires’ 

outbreak in its history when the organism sickened 133 people living in apart -

ment blocks in the South Bronx, killing sixteen. It later transpired that the 

source of the outbreak was a hotel water tower teeming with legionella bacte -

ria. In the most recent period for which figures are available—2000 to 2014— 

the CDC recorded almost a threefold increase in cases of legionellosis, which 

comprises both Legionnaires’ disease and Pontiac fever, across the United 

States. Of these, 5,000 cases a year were due to Legionnaires’ alone and the 

mortality rate was 9  per  cent. 30  Of course, not all these outbreaks were the 

result of poorly maintained water systems or aging plumbing. America’s aging 

population, the wider availability of diagnostic tests, and more reliable report -

ing to local and state health departments and the CDC most likely also played 

a role. A further factor may be climate change: as summers become hotter and LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

133 

unseasonably warm temperatures continue into the autumn, the more likely it 

is that plumes of contaminated water will issue from water towers unless 

effective chlorination and other disinfectant measures are taken. Unfortunately, 

all too frequently, they are not. 

To the extent that Legionnaires’ disease tapped into Cold War fears about 

biological weapons and chemical toxins, it seemed to hark back to the preoc -

cupations of the 1950s; hence, Congress’s concern that it was a “missed 

alarm.” But to the extent that it was a disease completely new to medical 

science, and one that could be traced to new technologies and alterations to 

the built environment, it seemed to represent a new paradigm of public 

health, one that would become increasingly relevant in the closing decades of 

the twentieth century. Indeed, by 1994, with the publication of Laurie 

Garrett’s  The Coming Plague , Legionnaires’ disease was being seen as one of a 

series of “emerging infectious diseases” (EIDs), whose appearance was threat -

ening to undo the medical advances of the post-war years and, with them, the 

certitude that advanced industrialized societies no longer needed to fear the 

plagues that had bedevilled previous eras. That the outbreak in Philadelphia in 

1976 had coincided with the emergence the same year of a new viral haemor -

rhagic fever at a remote mission hospital in Yambuku, Zaire, close to the Ebola 

River, only served to underline these parallels; hence, the disease’s inclusion 

in an iconic list of EIDs drawn up by the Institute of Medicine in 1992. The 

authors’ biggest concern, however, was not Legionnaires’ disease or Ebola, 

but HIV, a previously unknown virus that had first become visible to medical 

science in around 1981, and which by 1992 was recognized as the agent of 

one of the largest pandemics in history. 135 

# 6

# AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

> “This is a very, very dramatic illness. I think we can say, quite assuredly, that it is new”
> James Curran, epidemiologist, 1982

In December 1980, Dr  Michael Gottlieb was looking for an unusual teaching 

case to present to residents at the University of California Medical Center 

Los Angeles (UCLA) when one of his colleagues stumbled on a patient named 

Michael. A 33-year-old artist, Michael had been admitted to the emergency 

room suffering from extreme weight loss and looked like an anorexic. In 

addition, his mouth was full of thrush, or candidiasis, a yeast infection usually 

seen in patients with weakened immune systems. Intrigued, Gottlieb, then a 

young assistant professor specializing in immunology, led residents to 

Michael’s bedside and afterwards discussed the case with them. “There was 

something medically interesting about him,” Gottlieb recalled. “He  smelled  like 

an immune deficiency.” 1

Gottlieb’s intuition was correct: Michael’s antibody-producing capacity 

seemed to be intact, but when a colleague ran a specialized test using the 

latest monoclonal antibody technology he discovered that Michael had very 

few T cells. 2 In particular, he found that a subset of Michael’s T cells, known 

as CD4 cells, were perilously low. The central controllers of the immune 

system, CD4 cells are required for every type of immune response—whether 

to signal CD8 “killer” cells, whose job it is to destroy virus-infected cells; 

activate macrophages, a type of white blood cell that patrols for pathogens; 

or alert B lymphocytes, which produce antibodies against foreign invaders. 

Once these CD4 cells have been eliminated, sooner or later the entire 

immune system crashes. Their absence almost certainly explained the thrush. 

According to Gottlieb, the yeast infection was so extensive that Michael’s 

mouth looked as if it was full of “cottage cheese.” But it was impossible to THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

136 

arrive at a definitive diagnosis, so Michael was discharged. However, within a 

week he had developed pneumonia and had to be readmitted. 

Concerned that Michael might have contracted an opportunistic lung infec -

tion, Gottlieb convinced a pulmonary specialist to perform a bronchoscopy and 

send a sample of his lung tissue to the laboratory. To Gottlieb’s surprise, the 

tissue came back positive for  Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia , or PCP, a rare fungal 

infection seen almost exclusively in malnourished newborns and infants in 

intensive care, terminally ill cancer patients, or the recipients of organ trans -

plants. 3 What such patients shared in common was compromised immune sys -

tems. For a young man to develop PCP was practically unheard of. “It was a 

distinctly unusual thing for someone previously healthy to walk into a hospital 

so significantly ill. It just didn’t fit any recognized disease or syndrome that we 

were aware of.” 4 By March, Michael had been hospitalized, but no amount of 

drugs or experimental therapies would arrest the progress of the infection, and 

in May 1981 he died. The autopsy found  Pneumocystis  throughout his lungs. 

Later, trying to figure out what could have caused Michael’s immune system to 

give up on him, Gottlieb reviewed the artist’s medical charts and saw that he 

had a cornucopia of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). He also recalled a 

conversation in which Michael had mentioned that he was gay, but then Los 

Angeles had long boasted a sizable gay community, so it was difficult to see what 

bearing this could have on the matter. 

Gottlieb was not the only doctor in Los Angeles to spot an unusual constel -

lation of symptoms in gay men that autumn and winter. The previous October, 

Joel Weisman, a local physician with a largely gay practice, had also treated 

two men for thrush. In addition, the men had chronic fevers and suffered 

from diarrhoea and lymphadenopathy—swollen lymph nodes. In February 

one of the men’s symptoms worsened and he was admitted to UCLA, where 

Gottlieb tested his blood and found the same abnormality that Michael had: 

a lower than expected number of CD4 cells. Soon after, he also developed 

PCP, as did the second patient in Weisman’s care. In addition, both men had 

active cytomegalovirus (CMV), a type of herpes virus which is spread in 

bodily fluids, typically through kissing and sex, and which is usually quiescent 

in healthy adults. 5 By April Gottlieb was becoming sufficiently concerned to 

call a former student, Wayne Shandera, now a member of the CDC’s 

Epidemic Intelligence Service in Los Angeles. Gottlieb told Shandera of his 

suspicion that there was a new disease circulating in Los Angeles and asked 

him to check the LA County health records for other reports of PCP and/or 

CMV.  Shandera quickly located a report about a man in Santa Monica who 

had recently been diagnosed with  Pneumocystis  and was deathly ill in the AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

137 

hospital. Soon after Sh andera’s visit, the man died and, on autopsy, CMV was 

found in his lungs. 6

Unbeknownst to Gottlieb and Weisman, by now physicians in New York 

were also seeing similar cases of swollen lymph nodes, low CD4 cell counts, 

and PCP in gay men in their care. At autopsy many were also found to be 

infected with CMV.  Observing these patients up close was a shocking experi -

ence. Donna Mildvan, chief of infectious disease at Beth Israel Hospital, New 

York, recorded how in one case involving a German man who had formerly 

worked as a chef in Haiti and who had died in December, she had cultured 

CMV directly from his eyeball. “We were totally bewildered. … I can’t even 

begin to tell you what an awful experience it was.” Dr  Alvin Friedman-Kien, 

a dermatologist and virologist at New York University’s Medical Center, was 

similarly disturbed to find that many of the patients also had Kaposi’s sarcoma 

(KS), an extremely rare type of skin cancer typically seen in elderly Jewish 

men or men of eastern European and Mediterranean descent. Most derma -

tologists might go their whole career and see only one case of KS, but by 

February Friedman-Kien was aware of twenty cases of KS in the New York 

area alone. One of the most heart-breaking involved a young Shakespearean 

actor who presented at Friedman-Kien’s practice in January with pink-purple 

spots on his face. The spots were so extensive, Friedman-Kien recalled, “he 

couldn’t cover them up anymore.” 7

In medicine, as in other professions, being first is everything—no one 

remembers the second person to describe a new disease—and by June 

Gottlieb was ready to go into print, informing the editor of the  New England 

Journal of Medicine  that he had “possibly a bigger story than Legionnaires’ 

Disease.” 8 By now Gottlieb had five severe pneumonia cases (the fifth had 

come to him via a Beverly Hills physician). All were gay men between the ages 

of twenty-nine and thirty-six, all had PCP, candidiasis and CMV, and three had 

low CD4 cell counts (in the two others, immune deficiency had not been 

studied). In addition, Gottlieb and Weisman noted, all five had also used “pop -

pers”—amyl nitrate or butyl nitrate inhalers so named for the noise the 

ampules make when broken. 9 However, their leading hypothesis at this stage 

was that the disease was due to CMV and, perhaps, some other virus, such as 

Epstein-Barr, interacting with one another so as to compromise the immune 

system. From a public health point of view this was worrying. Sexual health 

clinics across the United States had recently seen a marked increase in CMV 

cases which, along with other sexually transmitted diseases, such as hepatitis 

B and gonorrhoea, were running at epidemic levels in the gay community. 

Given the interest in getting the announcement out quickly, the editor of 

the  New England Journal of Medicine  advise d Gottlieb to submit a brief article THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

138 

to the CDC’s Sexually Transmitted Diseases division for publication in the 

agency’s house journal,  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report , on the under -

standing that the  New England Journal of Medicine  would consider a longer 

article at a later date. Jim Curran, the official who headed the STD division, 

immediately recognized the article’s significance, not least because he was 

concerned about the recent increase in STDs in gay men and had been work -

ing closely with the homosexual community to evaluate the risk factors for 

hepatitis B.  Before publishing the article, however, he asked a female col -

league to check whether there had been any other reports of PCP in people 

without cancer, or who had not received organ transplants and had been 

taking drugs to suppress their immune systems. Looking back over fifteen 

years, she could find only one such case. Alarmingly, however, orders for 

pentamidine, an anti-PCP drug that was no longer in commercial production 

and of which the CDC had a small emergency stock, had jumped from the 

usual fifteen requests a year to thirty in the first five months of 1981. 10  Curran 

did not require further convincing, and on 5  June 1981, he published 

Gottlieb’s article in the  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report  together with an 

accompanying editorial. Noting that PCP was almost exclusively limited to 

severely immunosuppressed patients, Curran commented that its occurrence 

in previously healthy individuals was “unsettling,” and the fact that all five 

individuals were gay suggested “an association between some aspect of a 

homosexual lifestyle or disease acquired through sexual contact and 

Pneumocystis  pneumonia in this population.” Although no definite conclusion 

could be reached about the role of CMV infections, Curran also noted recent 

surveys showing that many homosexual men carried CMV in their semen and 

that “seminal fluid may be an important vehicle of CMV transmission.” In 

other words, there was no evidence that CMV was the cause of the mysteri -

ous new syndrome, but sexual transmission was suspected. Though hedged 

with qualifications, Curran’s conclusion was prophetic: “All the above obser -

vations suggest the possibility of a cellular-immune dysfunction related to a 

common exposure that predisposes individuals to opportunistic infections 

such as pneumocystis and candidiasis.” 11  No one could have imagined that 

within months of that article appearing, these strange symptoms would be the 

talk of Hollywood, and by the following summer the world would have 

learned a terrifying new acronym. Curran may not have realized it but he had 

just described AIDS, Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome. 

* * * AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

139 

In the forty years since—the CDC settled on the acronym in 1982—public 

attitudes toward AIDS have gone from indifference, to horror and dread, to 

seeing it as just another infectious disease, one that can be treated with an 

arsenal of drugs that suppress but never quite eliminate the Human 

Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), which is the cause of the immune deficiency 

that allows the opportunistic infections with which AIDS is associated to occur. 

In this transition from fear to familiarity, it is easy to forget the shocking sight 

of the first AIDS patients and the dismay they provoked in doctors powerless 

to help them. As David Ho, a physician at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 

recalled, those early patients “looked like concentration camp survivors.” 

Adding to the dismay was the fact that the causes were “completely 

unknown.” 12  As the true extent of the epidemic became evident—in 1982 the 

number of AIDS cases in the United States totalled 593; two years later there 

were nearly 7,000 cases and there had been over 4,000 deaths—AIDS came 

to be regarded as a plague (the “gay plague” to be specific) and the signal of a 

disastrous return to a former historical epoch when “the” plague and other 

epidemic diseases had routinely ravaged human communities. If Legionnaires’ 

disease had been a warning to an overly complacent public health profession, 

then AIDS was the epidemic that drove home the lesson: despite vaccines, 

antibiotics and other medical technologies, infectious disease had not been 

banished but posed a continuing and present threat to technologically advanced 

societies. Worse, as scientists learned more about the disease and its origins, it 

soon became apparent that sex and medical technologies—in particular, the 

wide provision of hypodermic needles and reusable syringes via public health 

programmes and other humanitarian medical initiatives in Africa, plus blood 

banks and blood transfusion services—had greatly amplified transmission of 

the virus, transforming what had been scattered, isolated cases in Africa into a 

widely dispersed infection which eventually became a pandemic. Even so, no 

one could have imagined that by the end of the twentieth century 14 million 

people would have died of AIDS globally and 33 million more would be living 

with the virus. Or that by 2015, a further 36 million people around the world 

would have contracted HIV, and some 40 million would be dead, a figure that 

approaches the mortality of the Spanish flu. 13 

As we shall see, the AIDS pandemic was not only the result of technologi -

cal interventions; as with psittacosis, economic, social and cultural factors 

also likely played a part. In particular, the emergence of AIDS appears to have 

been connected to the construction in the colonial period of new railways and 

roads in equatorial regions of Central Africa, projects that fuelled the influx 

of male labourers into rural areas, destabilizing gender relations and fostering THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

140 

a culture of prostitution in Léopoldville (Kinshasa) and other large towns and 

cities. The loosening of sexual taboos following gay liberation was a similarly 

important factor in the spread of AIDS in the United States, particularly in 

cities like New York and San Francisco where bathhouses became venues for 

unprotected anal sex between men boasting multiple sexual partners. 

However, it would appear that such practices only contributed to the explo -

sion of AIDS in America after HIV had been imported to the United States 

from Haiti in the late 1960s. 

In many respects, AIDS is the exception to the epidemics and pandemics 

canvassed in this book. Unlike the examples of influenza or Legionnaires’ 

disease, medical researchers could hardly be accused of being blinded by 

overconfidence in 1981. Nor could the CDC be accused of being complacent 

about the threat posed by sexually transmitted diseases in the early 1980s, or 

of failing to recognize AIDS’s peculiar constellation of symptoms sooner. On 

the contrary, AIDS might have continued its slow, stealth-like spread for sev -

eral more years had it not been for key conceptual advances in oncology and 

new laboratory technologies that, for the first time, gave clinicians the pos -

sibility of identifying the depletion of CD4 cells that is the signature of 

advanced HIV infection, and medical researchers the ability to continuously 

grow T cells in culture. Indeed, reflecting on the history of AIDS, Robert 

Gallo, the NIH cancer specialist who would share credit for the discovery of 

HIV with Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute, argued that had AIDS 

struck in 1955, scientists would have been “in a dark box,” so limited was the 

contemporary understanding of retroviruses and scientists’ ability to study 

them. “No one would have believed in this kind of virus. They did not even 

know what this kind of virus was,” he told an interviewer in 1994. 14  Even in 

the 1960s and early 1970s, he argued, scientists would have struggled to 

comprehend HIV. 15  Or, to put it another way, the AIDS epidemic broke out 

at precisely the moment when, for the first time in history, scientists working 

in oncology and the specialized area of human retrovirology were inclined to 

believe that a retrovirus might be the cause of the peculiar new syndrome and 

possessed the tools and technology to test the hypothesis. Even so, from the 

beginning of the hunt for the virus of AIDS, research was clouded by pre -

sumptions about what sort of retrovirus HIV would turn out to be, and 

nowhere more so than in the mind of Gallo. 

* * * 

Today, in an era of antiretroviral drugs, when a diagnosis of AIDS is no longer 

an automatic death sentence, it is easy to forget the panic, hysteria and stigma AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

141 

of the early days of the pandemic. For conservative politicians such as Jesse 

Helms, the former Republican senator from North Carolina, and Moral 

Majority leader Jerry Falwell, AIDS was nothing less than “God’s judgment” 

and divine retribution for homosexuals’ “perverted” lifestyles. 16  Others 

argued that the virus had something to do with voodoo; hence, the way it 

appeared to target Haitians. Still others thought it had been transported to 

Earth on the tail of a comet from outer space, or that the virus had been 

incubated in a bioweapons lab by the CIA with the connivance of the Pentagon 

and Big Pharma. 17 

In fact, HIV is a special type of virus called a retrovirus. Due to its long 

latency and gradual onset, it is also classed as a lentivirus (from the Latin term 

for slow). When a person is first infected with HIV, the immune system pro -

duces antibodies to fight off the virus. This process of acute infection can take 

anywhere from two weeks to three months. During this period, virus levels 

in the blood are very high and patients are extremely infectious. Victims may 

also experience flu-like symptoms such as fever, rash, muscle aches, and joint 

pains, but frequently the symptoms are so mild they pass unnoticed. After 

seroconversion, HIV usually betrays no further outward sign of its presence 

for several years. 18  Instead, it works by stealth, silently parasitizing CD4 cells 

and colonizing the lymphatic system. During the silent phase of infection, 

HIV uses the machinery of CD4 cells to make copies of itself and spread 

throughout the body. At each stage, CD4 cells are repeatedly activated and die 

off. This cycle of activation followed by cell death continues until the body’s 

capacity for replenishing CD4 cells is exhausted, a process that takes around 

ten years, but can be shorter or longer. Eventually, without an adequate sup -

ply of CD4 cells, the immune system can no longer signal B cells to produce 

antibodies, or CD8 cells—also known as T cells—to kill infected cells. It is 

at this point that a victim becomes susceptible to opportunistic infections and 

develops prominent signs of illness. Until then, however, HIV is quiescent: it 

lies hidden from view inside CD4 and other immune cells. 

Measuring CD4 cells is the most important laboratory indicator of a per -

son’s immune status and how well their immune system is coping with the 

virus. 19  Viral load shows the amount of virus in the blood and gives an indica -

tion of the risk of progression and transmission, but without the ability to 

count Michael’s CD4 cells, Gottlieb would have had no idea that his immune 

system was compromised and that he might be the victim of a new condition. 

In retrospect, it is astonishing to think that this technology became available 

at precisely the moment when AIDS first emerged in Los Angeles and other 

US cities. That the technology was available at UCLA and other hospital THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

142 

immunology departments could largely be attributed to the work of an 

Argentine émigré, César Millstein, and a German biologist, Georges Köhler. 

In 1975, these scientists found a way to produce an immortal cell line capable 

of producing endless quantities of antibodies that targeted specific antigens. 

Known as monoclonal antibodies—or Mabs for short—the technology 

removed the need to laboriously isolate and purify antibodies from laboratory 

cultures, and was soon being used in everything from the rapid typing of 

blood and tissue, to the development of new drugs against infectious diseases. 

Soon, Mabs were also aiding the study of leukaemia, and by 1981 commercial 

Mabs technologies also became available to distinguish one population of 

T cells from another. Thus it was that in the winter of 1981 Gottlieb’s col -

league found a virtual absence of CD4 cells in Michael’s blood, suggesting 

that his symptoms were the result of an immune deficiency. 20 

If it is impossible to imagine AIDS being diagnosed without new Mabs 

technologies, it is also inconceivable that the virus would have been isolated 

without conceptual advances in oncology and knowledge of lentiviruses. The 

first lentivirus was described in 1954 by an Icelandic researcher investigating 

an outbreak of visna, a slow disease of sheep characterized by pneumonia and 

brain plaques similar to the demyelination of the central nervous system seen 

in multiple sclerosis. This was followed, three years later, by the description 

of kuru among members of the Fore tribe of Papua New Guinea highlands. A

neurodegenerative disorder, kuru produces a steady deterioration of brain 

tissue similar to Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE), also known as 

“mad cow disease.” Like BSE, kuru is thought to be due to the transmission of 

an infectious protein called a prion. The difference is that whereas BSE is 

caused by eating food contaminated with prions from the brains and spinal 

cords of infected cattle, kuru most likely resulted from funerary cannibalism 

practices in which the Fore consumed the brains of dead relatives. 

In parallel with discoveries of new lentiviruses, in the 1950s scientists were 

also describing new oncoviruses. * These viruses included mouse leukaemia 

and Burkitt’s lymphoma, a rare jaw tumour especially prevalent in children in 

Uganda and other parts of East Africa with high rates of malaria, which was 

later found to be due to the Epstein-Barr virus, a close cousin of herpes. 21 

Until the 1960s, it was thought that all viruses, including oncoviruses, repli -

cated by inserting their DNA into animal cells and co-opting the cell’s 

machinery to make multiple copies. The only difference in the case of  

> *Oncovirus is the term for any virus that causes cancers or tumours.

AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

143 

oncoviruses was that, instead of being lytic and killing infected cells, they 

entered into a state of symbiosis with cells and caused them to replicate. 

However, this theory hit a major roadblock with the finding that the oncovi -

rus of feline leukaemia contained the “messenger” molecule, ribonucleic acid 

(RNA), rather than DNA, thereby violating one of the central tenets of 

molecular biology: namely, that genetic information flows from DNA to RNA 

to protein, not in the opposite direction. 

The first breakthrough came with the demonstration in 1970 by David 

Baltimore of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Howard Temin of 

the University of Wisconsin that certain RNA viruses could achieve integra -

tion into cellular genomes with the help of an enzyme, reverse transcriptase. 

This was an enzyme that they alone, among all RNA viruses, carried, and 

which enabled them to form DNA from the genes of viral RNA.  At first, 

Baltimore and Temin’s discovery of reverse transcriptase was regarded as 

“heresy,” but it was eventually accepted and led to them being awarded the 

Nobel Prize in 1975. It also led to the coining of the term retroviruses for 

viruses that possessed this special ability, removing an epistemological obsta -

cle to the understanding of how viral genes could cause cancerous transfor -

mations of cells. When a retrovirus infects a cell, the reverse transcriptase 

takes the clockwise RNA helix and re-transcribes it in the reverse direction, 

rendering it into double-stranded DNA.  This DNA “provirus” is then inserted 

into the host chromosomal DNA with the help of another viral enzyme, 

integrase. Because the integration site of the provirus is random, it frequently 

triggers disruptions of adjacent genes, causing cancer. At the same time, inte -

grated into the cell, the virus is protected from attack by the immune system 

and is effectively invisible to detection with scientific instruments. The virus 

remains there for the life of the cell, being replicated along with cellular DNA 

and passed on to daughter cells. 22 

In 1975 only retroviruses causing cancer in animals were known (the clas -

sic examples being chicken sarcoma and feline leukaemia) and many cancer 

researchers, discouraged by the contamination of cell lines with infectious 

viruses of other species, had given up hope of ever finding a human oncogenic 

retrovirus. Robert Gallo, an ambitious young researcher at the National 

Cancer Institute, a branch of the NIH, in Bethesda, Maryland, thought other -

wise. The son of a metallurgist from Waterbury, Connecticut, with unkempt 

crinkly hair that betrayed his Italian heritage, Gallo understood right away 

that reverse transcriptase could add an important dimension to cancer 

research. He began searching for the enzyme in white blood cells from human 

leukaemia patients. Gallo had two things going for him: a fierce competitive THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

144 

streak—he made no secret of the fact that he hankered after the Nobel 

Prize—and a novel technology that enabled him to continuously grow T cells 

in culture—the T cell growth factor, interleukin-2. Prior to the late 1970s, 

oncologists investigating leukaemia had to laboriously culture malignant 

white blood cells on agar media in order to produce sufficient numbers for 

the detection of reverse transcriptase. However, the leukaemia cells fre -

quently refused to cooperate, resulting in frustration and wasted effort. But 

in 1976 all that changed when two of Gallo’s colleagues at his Laboratory of 

Tumor and Cell Biology discovered that a plant derivative stimulated certain 

T-lymphocytes and caused them to release a growth factor. This was interleu -

kin-2, and soon Gallo’s lab had demonstrated that it could be used to prompt 

leukaemia cells to grow and multiply, thereby perpetuating cell lines indefi -

nitely. 23  Nevertheless, even with this method it took nearly three years of trial 

and error before Gallo’s group hit paydirt, detecting reverse transcriptase in 

1979 in the lymphocytes of a 28-year-old African American man from 

Alabama who had been diagnosed with  mycosis fungoides , a type of T-cell lym -

phoma. Soon after, both Gallo’s laboratory and a group of Japanese research -

ers found the same virus in other patients with leukaemia and in 1980 named 

it HTLV, short for Human T-cell Leukaemia Virus. 24  This discovery made 

headlines around the world, earning Gallo the prestigious Lasker Prize, and 

was followed, in 1982, by the isolation of a second human retrovirus in the 

same family, designated HTLV-II by Gallo. 25 

In his book on the discovery of AIDS,  Virus Hunting: AIDS , Cancer & The Human 

Retrovirus , Gallo acknowledges that his interest in HTLV was partly inspired by 

the finding, a decade earlier, that the feline leukaemia virus more often caused 

an AIDS-like immune deficiency in cats than it did leukaemia. He was also 

inspired by research by his Harvard colleague, Myron “Max” Essex, showing that 

Japanese infectious disease wards were full of people who had tested positive 

for HTLV-I. 26  Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the discovery of HTLV-I 

paved the way for the isolation in 1983 at the Pasteur Institute in Paris of the 

lymphadenopathy virus (LAV), the virus now known as HIV, by the French 

researchers Françoise Barré-Sinoussi and Luc Montagnier. 

HTLV infects CD4 cells and spreads by blood and sexual contact, often 

producing leukaemias several decades after the originating infection. The dif -

ference is that HTLV is oncogenic; for reasons which are not fully understood 

but which involve a protein called Tax, it causes cells to replicate rather than 

killing them. However, similar techniques are required to grow the virus 

continuously in cell cultures, and had Gallo not demonstrated that HTLV 

depended on reverse transcriptase and was associated with a depletion of AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

145 

CD4 cells, it is unlikely that Barré-Sinoussi and Montagnier would have 

thought that the retrovirus they were studying might possess similar proper -

ties. However, it is also clear that Gallo’s conviction that the virus of AIDS was 

an oncogenic virus, similar to the feline leukaemia virus, blinded him to other 

research avenues that might have seen him isolate HIV before the French. 27 

Instead, in May 1983, in a note published in the  Morbidity and MortalityWeekly 

Report  and followed by a series of articles in  Science , Gallo announced that a 

variant of HTLV-I, or its near relative HTLV-II, was most likely the pathogen 

of AIDS. 28  Unfortunately for Gallo, in the same issue of  Science , Barré-Sinoussi 

and Montagnier announced their discovery of LAV.  As the virus showed little 

or weak cross-reactivity with HTLV-I, it was clear that theirs was a different 

virus. 29  Despite this, at the request of the editors, Montagnier agreed to an 

abstract, written by Gallo, stating that the French had discovered “a retrovirus 

belonging to the same family of recently discovered human T-cell leukaemia 

viruses (HTLV), but clearly distinct from each previous isolate.” 30  That sen -

tence would leave the Pasteur Institute researchers with a nasty aftertaste, 

one that would provoke a bitter international dispute over the correct 

nomenclature of the virus and who had discovered it—a dispute that in turn 

would engender misunderstandings about HIV’s identity and its precise rela -

tionship to AIDS, fuelling conspiracy theories that persist to this day. 

The dispute between Gallo and Montagnier, and the scientific and com -

mercial stakes that lay behind it (one of the fiercest issues was who should 

collect royalties for the development of an HIV diagnostic test), has been the 

subject of books by both of the principals and has also been analyzed exten -

sively by other writers. 31  The bad feeling between the French and American 

scientists was exacerbated by an ill-considered press conference in April 1984 

at the US Department of Health and Human Sciences at which Gallo 

announced that he had isolated the virus of AIDS 32  and followed up that 

announcement with four further papers in  Science  in which he named the 

virus HTLV-III. * In 1986, the dispute appeared to have been settled when the 

International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses renamed the virus HIV 

and, soon afterwards, Ronald Reagan and François Mitterrand, who was then 

the president of France, announced that both groups of scientists deserved 

equal credit for the discovery, only for the dispute to be reopened in 1990 

by  new genetic tests suggesting, wrongly as it turned out, that Gallo had  

> *It subsequently emerged that HTLV-III was identical to LAV and was almost
> certainly a contaminant from a virus that Montagnier had shared with Gallo’s lab.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

146 

misappropriated samples forwarded to his labor atory from the Pasteur 

Institute in 1983. This is not the time or place to revisit that fraught history 

or whether in naming the virus HTLV-III Gallo intended to suggest it was 

related to other viruses in the HTLV family or even that it was the cause of 

AIDS (he would subsequently say he had never made this claim). 33  However, 

it is worth dwelling on one aspect of the dispute because it goes to the heart 

of the question as to what both groups of scientists knew, or thought they 

knew, about the virus at the time they first posited its aetiological role in 

AIDS, and the extent to which Gallo was blinded by his belief that the AIDS 

virus belonged to the cancer family of retroviruses. 

In the second set of papers published in  Science , Gallo described how he 

had isolated HTLV-III from forty-eight patients and spelled out how to grow 

the virus continually in laboratory cultures. This was a critical feat. HIV rou -

tinely kills the cells it infects, making it difficult to grow the virus in the 

quantities needed to study its properties and develop a blood test, let alone a 

vaccine. Indeed, using the new cell line, Gallo’s group was already well on the 

way to developing a prototype screening test (or ELISA), as well as a confir -

matory test (known as the “Western blot”). However, in his earlier 1983 

paper Gallo had made no mention of the virus’s cell-destroying properties, 

merely observing that it could be immunosuppressive in vitro: that is, it could 

harm the function of T cells in laboratory cultures. This left open the question 

of how precisely HTLV, a virus that was known to cause lymphocytes to 

divide, also resulted in them becoming depleted. 

By contrast, the French started from the premise that because the virus 

reduced and destroyed the numbers of circulating T cells, it would be difficult 

to isolate in peripheral blood. At this stage, Montagnier’s group accepted that 

it was most likely a retrovirus closely related to, or identical to, 

HTLV.  However, rather than look for it in blood they decided to look for it in 

fluid taken from the lymph nodes of a presumed AIDS patient, reasoning that 

there might be higher levels of the virus present in people who were at an 

earlier stage of illness before most of their T cells had been killed off. Thus it 

was that on 3  January 1983, a researcher at the Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital in 

Paris removed a lymph node from the neck of a 33-year-old man * with 

“lymphade nopathy syndrome”—a condition of chronically swollen lymph    

> *The patient was identified in Montagnier’s laboratory notes by the first three
> letters of his name, BRU. He was later named by newspapers as Frédéric Brugière,
> a homosexual who had allegedly had relations with fifty partners a year and who
> had visited New York City in 1979.

AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

147 

glands increasingly prevalent in gay men—and added interleukin-2 to encour -

age cell-line growth. 34  If the virus had been a species of HTLV, the addition of 

interleukin-2 should have maintained the culture and its population of T cells, 

but that is not what happened. Instead, no sooner had Barré-Sinoussi observed 

the production of reverse transcriptase by the cultured lymphocytes on 

25  January, than production of the enzyme reached a peak, before falling 

back. The virus seemed to be killing the T cells rather than causing them to 

replicate. Fearing that without a new supply of lymphocytes she would lose 

the virus, she asked a member of the team to obtain fresh blood from a nearby 

blood bank. Adding the new source of lymphocytes to the culture, she saw 

that cell death correlated once again with the detection of reverse transcrip -

tase activity. It was as if the addition of the plasma containing fresh lympho -

cytes caused the elusive virus to begin gobbling up T cells again, leaving an 

unmistakable trail of reverse transcriptase, much as a shark leaves a blood trail 

after attacking its prey. It was at that moment that Barré-Sinoussi realized that 

the virus was killing the T cells, that it was a new retrovirus and that it was 

almost certainly not Gallo’s HTLV.  As she later recalled: “It was very easy. We 

received the first sample at the beginning of 1983 and, fifteen days later, we 

had the first sign of the virus in the culture.” 35 

If Barré-Sinoussi thought the wider world would immediately grasp the 

significance of her experiment she was wrong, however. The publication of 

her paper on LAV in the May 1983 edition of  Science  was completely over -

shadowed by the papers by Gallo and Essex. Not only that, but when in the 

fall of 1983 Montagnier travelled to an international virology conference held 

each September in Cold Spring Harbor, New York, and reported finding LAV 

in about 60  per  cent of patients with lymphadenopathy syndrome and 

20  per  cent of those with AIDS, and that none of these patients appeared to 

be infected with HTLV, his findings were fiercely disputed by Gallo. In his 

book, Gallo would later write of his “regret” about his aggressive questioning 

of Montagnier and acknowledge his failure to spot LAV’s cell-killing proper -

ties earlier—a failure that he attributed to the “distortion” of his laboratory’s 

measurement of reverse transcriptase activity due to the fact that tests usually 

began later in the course of infection, by which time most of the T cells were 

already damaged or dying, as well as to inconclusive immunofluorescent 

assays that were sometimes positive for HTLV-I and sometimes not (perhaps 

because some of the subjects were infected with both HIV and HTLV simul -

taneously, or one or other of the viruses separately). 36  However, in his account 

of his own investigation Montagnier argues persuasively that, with the supe -

rior financial resources available to the Americans, had Gallo believed in the THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

148 

French virus from the very beginn ing, he “would have rapidly left us far 

behind.” That is a conclusion with which Gallo reluctantly concurred, 

acknowledging that his “overconfidence” that AIDS could not be a type of 

retrovirus different from HTLV probably cost him six months and that he 

should have solved the problem before Montagnier’s group embarked on their 

first experiment. “AIDS being identified right after the discovery of the first 

and second human retroviruses … misled me,” Gallo admitted. “As well as 

leading me right, it also led me wrong.” 37  Or as the historian of science, Mirko 

Grmek, put it rather more directly, “If Gallo had not discovered HTLV-I, he 

might well have been the discoverer of HIV.” 38 

* * * 

In her book  Illness as Metaphor , the cultural critic Susan Sontag draws attention 

to the way in which any disease whose causality is murky and for which treat -

ment is ineffectual tends to be awash with significance. “First, the subjects of 

deepest dread (corruption, decay, pollution, anomie, weakness) are identified 

with the disease. The disease itself becomes a metaphor. Then, in the name of 

the disease (that is, using it as a metaphor), that horror is imposed on other 

things.” 39  Those words were written in 1978 and were originally inspired by 

Sontag’s experiences as a cancer patient, when she had been made to feel that 

the disease was shameful and somehow her fault, but as she recognized when 

she revisited her thesis in the wake of the AIDS epidemic, her comments 

applied even more to AIDS.  Indeed, by 1989 she argued that the secrecy, 

shame and feelings of culpability experienced by cancer patients in the 1970s 

had to a large extent been replaced by those of AIDS patients. This was par -

ticularly the case for homosexual men and other designated at-risk groups, 

such as intravenous drug users, whose dangerous behaviours were thought to 

have somehow invited the affliction. Such groups, she argued, had been made 

to feel like “a community of pariahs.” Worse, whereas in the case of cancer, 

culpability for illness had been linked to unhealthy habits such as cigarette 

smoking and excessive drinking, the unsafe behaviour that produced AIDS 

was viewed as something more than weakness of will. “It is indulgence, delin -

quency—addictions to chemicals that are illegal and to sex regarded as devi -

ant.” The result was that what should have been considered an individual 

“calamity” that invited sympathy for the afflicted was judged harshly “as a 

disease not only of sexual excess but of perversity,” resulting in the wide -

spread stigmatization of people with AIDS. 40 

At what point this stigmatization morphed into hysteria and panic about 

the threat tha t such patients posed to wider society is harder to say. Initially, AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

149 

the public responded with indifference to news of the outbreak, perhaps tak -

ing their cue from White House press spokesman Larry Speakes who, when 

asked by a reporter in October 1982 whether the Reagan administration had 

any reaction to the CDC’s announcement of over six hundred cases of the 

mysterious new disease, famously responded, “I don’t know anything about 

it.” This indifference was due partly to ignorance and partly to prejudice about 

a disease that was thought to affect only homosexuals. As long as AIDS was 

framed as a disease of gay lifestyles, and therefore not a problem for “straight” 

society, it could be safely ignored by mainstream politicians. Instead, Ronald 

Reagan’s administration, backed by the Republican-controlled Senate, starved 

AIDS researchers of funds, forcing scientists at the NIH and CDC to beg and 

steal money from other programmes. Indeed, for the first three years of the 

epidemic, Reagan refused to mention the “A”-word, only referring to AIDS 

in public for the first time in the fall of 1985. By then, of course, the actor 

Rock Hudson had been forced to admit that he had the dreaded disease, issu -

ing a press release from his sickbed at the American Hospital in Paris, and the 

CDC was reporting that more than 10,000 people had been diagnosed with 

AIDS, many of them children and haemophiliacs. According to David France, 

a contributor to the New York  Native  who would go on to make an Oscar-

nominated film telling the story of how AIDS activists took on the scientific 

establishment in the quest for medications that would prolong their lives, 

Hudson’s announcement was a game changer. “We prayed for a day when the 

disease struck someone who mattered,” he wrote. 41  In particular, it prompted 

reporters to ask embarrassing questions about why the Hollywood icon had 

been forced to seek treatment in Paris, unleashing a wave of publicity that 

finally broke the administration’s murderous silence around AIDS and per -

suaded the White House to release much needed funds for research into 

experimental treatments, such as AZT.  What France and other activists did 

not foresee is that it would also unleash a wave of fear and hysteria. 

This hysteria can be traced to three factors: the first was the discovery that 

AIDS was a blood-borne disease that could also be spread by intravenous drug 

use and the sharing of needles and that it was in the nation’s blood supply; the 

second was poor public health messaging and the use of vague terms such as 

“bodily fluids,” which gave the impression that you could contract AIDS from 

saliva and sneezes, or even from touching an object that had been handled by 

someone with AIDS; and the third was the realization that the disease was due 

to a deadly new type of virus that might also be capable of heterosexual spread, 

and there were no drugs available to treat it, making diagnosis equivalent to a 

death sentence. Suddenly, it seemed, there was no safe ground, no place that THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

150 

was secure from the virus. Instead, AIDS rapidly took on the aspect of a conta -

gion, sparking what the journalist Randy Shilts called an “epidemic of fear.” 42 

Looking back, Shilts had little doubt that scientists and medical experts— 

not the media—were largely responsible for this new framing of AIDS.  In 

March 1983 the CDC had named the principal risk groups as homosexual 

men with multiple sexual partners, heroin addicts who injected drugs, 

Haitians, and haemophiliacs—the so-called “four Hs.” However, two months 

later, the  Journal of the American Medical Association  gave a completely different 

impression, publishing an article about eight cases of unexplained immune 

deficiency among children in Newark, New Jersey, four of whom had died, 

and stated that “sexual contact, drug abuse or exposure to blood products is 

not necessary for disease transmission.” Worse, in an accompanying editorial, 

Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 

Diseases (NIAID) and the leading federal AIDS researcher, compounded the 

offense by stating there was a “possibility that routine close contact, as within 

a family household” could spread the disease. 43  In case the press failed to get 

the message, the American Medical Association also issued a press release 

headlined, “Evidence Suggests Household Contact May Transmit AIDS,” in 

which it quoted Fauci as saying that the possibility of “non-sexual, non-blood 

borne transmission” had “enormous implications” and that “If routine close 

contact can spread the disease, AIDS takes on an entirely new dimension.” The 

release was immediately taken up by the Associated Press, who interpreted it 

to mean that the general population was at greater risk of AIDS than had 

previously been thought, and flawed versions of the AP story were soon run -

ning in  USA Today  and other newspapers. Within days, officials in San Francisco 

began distributing face masks and rubber gloves to police and fire officers, 

and an image of an officer trying on one of the masks appeared in several 

metropolitan dailies, becoming what Shilts calls “a virtual emblem of the 

AIDS hysteria” sweeping the nation. Not long after, other police departments 

began agitating for the same masks, and California dentists were advised to 

take similar precautions. 44 

Although Fauci would subsequently accuse the media of taking his comments 

out of context and of failing to appreciate the nuances of his editorial, his com -

ments were compounded by the language employed by health officials who, 

nervous about offending public sensibilities by specifying that AIDS was spread 

through “semen” and blood, adopted the euphemism “bodily fluids.” The result 

was that it was a year before Fauci corrected the misunderstanding by clarifying 

in an article for another peer-reviewed journal that there was no evidence that 

AIDS could be transmitted by routine household or social contact. 45 AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

151 

The capacity of this new framing of AIDS to provoke panic and hysteria 

was driven home by the news in July 1985 that a middle school in Kokomo, 

Indiana, was refusing to readmit a 14-year-old haemophiliac, Ryan White, 

who had been infected with AIDS following a routine blood transfusion a year 

earlier. Even though White had been declared fit by doctors, the local school 

corporation had bowed to pressure from hysterical parents worried about 

their children sharing a classroom with an AIDS “carrier.” The hysteria spread 

rapidly to other school districts, including New York, where, in an article 

headlined “The New Untouchables,”  Time  reported that some nine hundred 

parents at an elementary school in Queens were refusing to let their children 

attend classes because of one AIDS-infected second grader. 46  Soon, newspa -

pers in other countries were carrying stories of similarly hysterical overreac -

tions. In England, the  Sun  newspaper reported that AIDS was “spreading like 

wildfire” and that a victim of the disease had been entombed in concrete in a 

cemetery in North Yorkshire “as a precaution.” In Brussels, according to the 

Daily Mirror , a court had been emptied in seconds after a prisoner declared 

that he was infected with the virus, prompting the judge, clerks, and several 

prison officers to flee in terror. 47  Meanwhile, back in the United States, 

researchers William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson warned that AIDS 

could lurk on toilet seats, while in Chicago a worried motorist who had just 

run over a gay pedestrian telephoned an AIDS hotline wanting to know 

whether he should decontaminate his car. 48  Even family physicians, whose 

Hippocratic oath meant they owed a duty of care to all patients, found excuses 

not to treat people with AIDS or to refer them to specialist colleagues. 

In the early months of the epidemic, it was common for both network 

news anchors and gay men to refer to AIDS as a lifestyle disease associated 

with homosexuality and living in the “fast lane.” In retrospect, it can be seen 

that this construction was a product of the initial case descriptions used by 

CDC epidemiologists to identity the main risk groups. Thus in the first report 

about the new syndrome in the  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report , Curran 

had floated the hypothesis that the incidence of PCP in Gottlieb’s UCLA 

patients suggested an association with “some aspect of a homosexual lifestyle 

or disease acquired through sexual contact.” This was followed in July 1981 

by a second report in the same journal, detailing how KS had been diagnosed 

in twenty-six male patients in New York. 49  Coinciding with an article in the 

NewYork Times , in which Friedman-Kien, himself a gay man, provided fifteen 

more cases of KS to a reporter, it was at this point that the wider medical 

community and the media began to talk about a “rare cancer” and, afterwards, 

a “gay plague.” 50 THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

152 

Perhaps the CDC’s most significant contribution to the stigmatization of 

homosexuals was the publication in 1982 of a study of patients with KS and 

other opportunistic infections in Los Angeles and Orange Counties. Known 

as the Los Angeles cluster study, it was this that introduced the public to 

perhaps the most notorious patient in the history of infectious disease after 

Typhoid Mary: French Canadian flight attendant Gaetan Dugas. 51 

Subsequently immortalized as “patient zero” by the journalist Randy Shilts in 

his popular history of AIDS,  And the Band Played On , Dugas was ready-made 

for demonization as the epidemic’s “bad guy.” A complex character who 

boasted hundreds of casual sexual partners, Dugas refused to give up his 

addiction to bathhouses even as his body was ravaged by KS and evidence 

mounted that AIDS might be sexually transmitted. After Dugas’s death in 

March 1984, Friedman-Kien and other physicians were quick to label him a 

“sociopath.” But such judgments tend to ignore the extent to which, in the 

early years of the epidemic, knowledge about AIDS’s aetiology and its routes 

of transmission were uncertain and subject to conjecture. They also obscured 

the fact that, though sceptical of medical claims about gay lifestyles contribut -

ing to the epidemic, Dugas was very helpful to William Darrow, the CDC 

sociologist who led the study, providing him with the names of 72 of the 

roughly 750 men he had slept with in the previous three years. Ironically, it 

was this frankness about his sexual history, and his willingness to assist epide -

miologists in reconstructing the pathways of transmission, that would result 

in Dugas being accorded a starring role in Darrow’s study and Shilts’s book, 

leading to what the historian of medicine Richard McKay calls Dugas’s “post -

humous notoriety.” 52 

In contrast to microbiologists and other laboratory-based investigators, 

epidemiologists tend to privilege multifactorial models of disease: that is, 

they believe a given disease may have a number of causes or antecedents, a 

combination of which may be required to produce the disorder. By investigat -

ing this “web of causes,” the aim is to identify the disorder’s most vulnerable 

point and intervene, thereby curtailing further spread of the pathogen before 

its identity is known. Prior to the identification of the virus in 1983, this was 

the situation that confronted Curran and his colleagues in the STD division of 

the CDC.  At that point no one realized that the epidemic was due to a new 

virus unknown to medical science, let alone that it could be transmitted in 

blood as well as semen. However, as discussed above, new medical technolo -

gies had already made the depletion of CD4 cells visible to medical research -

ers, alerting physicians and epidemiologists to the immune deficiency that is 

one of AIDS’s hallmarks. Moreover, the CDC had just completed a multi-year, AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

153 

multi-site study of hepatitis B, a disease which is often sexually transmitted 

and whose prevalence was known to be very high among homosexual men. 

In analyzing the data, the researchers found that blood markers for the disease 

were significantly associated with, among other factors, having a large number 

of male sexual partners and engaging in sexual practices involving anal con -

tact. At the same time, researchers at the NIH and elsewhere were growing 

concerned about the increase in CMV transmission among homosexuals—a 

phenomenon that had never been seen on such a scale before among adults, 

homosexual or otherwise. 53  The analysts who read these studies were mostly 

heterosexual and middle-aged and had little understanding of gay lifestyles, 

so it is not surprising that they were quick to link the epidemic in STDs to the 

gay liberation movement and its attendant world of bathhouses and anony -

mous hook-ups. In addition, as Garrett reports, many researchers began to 

worry that these same gay lifestyles might be altering the “ecology” of STDs. 54 

In this way, the same factors that made the new syndrome visible to epidemi -

ologists for the first time also contributed to the stigmatization of gay men 

and their supposed behaviours, and it was not long before the CDC was 

referring to the disorder as Gay-Related Immune Deficiency (GRID). 

This stigmatization of gay men’s lifestyles was almost certainly inadvertent. 

Curran, who headed the CDC’s new Task Force on Kaposi’s Sarcoma and 

Opportunistic Infections, had previously worked closely with the gay com -

munity to evaluate the hepatitis B vaccine, so he was well aware of the com -

munity’s sensitivities. However, as an STD specialist he also could not help 

but favour the sexual transmission theory. This bias deepened when Curran 

ordered a “quick and dirty” survey of 420 males attending venereal disease 

clinics in San Francisco, New York and Atlanta, and then selected thirty-five 

for interview. Two patterns of behaviour caught the task force’s attention: 

first, the men had had many sexual partners in the past year (the median was 

eighty-seven), and second, they had frequently used marijuana, cocaine and 

amyl nitrate poppers. In particular, there was a close association with the 

number of sexual partners and the use of poppers. 55  This soon led to the sug -

gestion that it might be exposure to amyl nitrate, rather than the sexual 

behaviour of the subjects, which caused the immune deficiency. The theory 

received a boost with a study showing that exposure to amyl nitrate was 

associated with an increased risk of KS in New York, and an investigation of 

eleven immunocompromised men with PCP, also from New York, seven of 

whom were identified as drug “abusers” (what received rather less attention 

was the fact that five of the men had described themselves as heterosexual). 56 

However, with the publication of the first instalment of the Los Angeles THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

154 

cluster study, and even more so with the publication of Darrow’ s expanded 

study linking forty homosexual male AIDS patients in ten US cities, this 

theory gradually gave way to the sexual transmission hypothesis, prompting 

news networks to talk about the “gay plague.” In particular, Darrow reported 

that the linked men were more likely than nonlinked controls to have met 

sexual partners in bathhouses and to have participated in “fisting” (manual-

rectal intercourse). Darrow also pointed out that the index patient in the 

cluster study diagram had had approximately 250 different male sexual part -

ners each year from 1979 through 1981, and that eight of his named partners 

were AIDS patients, four from Southern California and four from New York. 57 

Darrow would later claim that the “O” indicating the index patient in the 

cluster diagram stood for “Out[side]-of California,” not zero. However, Shilts 

reports that when he visited the CDC to speak to members of the task force, 

officials were already using the term “Patient Zero ”* and he immediately 

thought, “Ooh, that’s catchy.” 58 

Whether or not Darrow meant to brand Dugas Patient Zero by designating 

him the index case, the LA Cluster Study gave the impression that this was 

where AIDS in America had begun. This impression was reinforced by Shilts’s 

unmasking of Dugas and the revelation that the air steward had made frequent 

trips to France and, perhaps, to Africa, a continent long feared as a seat of 

plagues. The result was that in the hands of Shilts and other journalists, Dugas 

rapidly became a “super spreader” and the prime suspect in the mass murder 

of hundreds of young men. Thus it was that on 6  October 1987, shortly after 

the publication of  And The Band Played On , the tabloid  NewYork Post  published a 

front-page story with the headline, “The Man Who Gave Us AIDS.” Even sup -

posedly serious news outlets embraced Shilts’s partial narrative, with CBS’s 

60 Minutes  describing Dugas as both the “central victim and victimizer” of the 

epidemic, and the  National Review  dubbing the Canadian flight attendant “the 

Columbus of AIDS.” 59  Perhaps the most shameful moment came at the end of 

the year when  People  magazine published an article naming Dugas as one of 

the “25 most intriguing people of ’87” and speculating that it was his “fierce 

sexual drive” that had given impetus to the epidemic. The article prompted 

one reader to scrawl “Pervert” and an arrow in a red pen next to Dugas’s 

picture an d mail the article to the San Francisco AIDS Foundation. 60  

> *Patient zero is a trope that crops up time and again in narrative accounts of
> epidemics. In epidemiological terms, patient zero is simply the index case; but in
> nonfiction and novelistic accounts, patient zero is the embodiment of the pathogen
> and the personification of the infection about to burst forth in society.

AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

155 

The perception that Dugas was the main culprit for America’s AIDS epi -

demic was only finally debunked in 2016 when scientists examined stored 

blood taken from gay and bisexual men in the late 1970s in San Francisco and 

New York City and found that they already carried antibodies to the main 

pandemic strain of HIV, suggesting that the index case had probably arrived 

in New York in around 1970. Not only that, but when scientists examined the 

genetic sequences in detail, they found them to be similar to HIV strains 

found in the Caribbean, particularly Haiti, but with enough differences to 

suggest the virus had already been circulating and mutating on both coasts of 

America since 1970. When scientists compared these with blood taken from 

Dugas, they found that Dugas’s HIV genome fell right in the middle of the 

phylogenetic tree of these strains, proof not only that Dugas had not intro -

duced HIV to the US but that his sexual activity had not been a significant 

factor in the spread of AIDS in the United States. 61 

What makes the stigmatization of Dugas all the more unfortunate is that 

by early 1982 the CDC had good reason to believe that homosexuals were not 

the only victims of AIDS and that sexual intercourse was not the only means 

of transmission, but it took them some time to revise their blinkered view. 

The first clue had come in September 1981 when infectious disease specialists 

at Miami’s Jackson Memorial Hospital noticed similar symptoms in men and 

women of Haitian origin. The same month, paediatricians in Miami and New 

York recognized the same syndrome in children born to Haitian mothers, but 

when they brought the cases to the attention of the CDC, agency officials 

were reluctant to believe them. However, by the following summer the CDC 

task force was hearing of more and more cases of PCP in heterosexuals who 

were injecting drug users, leading them to believe that GRID might also be 

transmitted intravenously. At around the same time, the CDC received the 

first reports of severe PCP in haemophiliacs. The cases involved three men 

from Denver, Colorado and Westchester, New York—parts of the country not 

yet known to be affected by the epidemic. Ominously, none of the men had a 

history of homosexuality or needle sharing, but all three had been given mul -

tiple injections of Factor VIII, a blood coagulant concentrate pooled from the 

plasma of thousands of donors across the United States. This was followed, in 

July 1982, by a report that a disease identical to GRID had broken out among 

thirty-four Haitian emigrants to the United States, most of them heterosexual 

men who had arrived in the country in the previous two years. In addition, 

eleven cases of KS were discovered in the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince. 

However, it was only in September 1982, after the agency learned that a 

paediatrician at the University of California Medical Center was treating an THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

156 

infant with PCP and that the two-year-old had received multiple blood trans -

fusions at birth, that the CDC finally dropped the term GRID and in 

September 1982 began referring to the disease as AIDS. 62 

* * * 

By the late 1980s, with half of America’s haemophiliacs infected with HIV— 

70  per  cent in the case of those with the most severe form of the disorder— 

few experts doubted that AIDS was also a blood-borne disease. But that still 

left open the question of where the virus had come from and how it had 

infected such a diverse range of social and ethnic groups—homosexuals, 

Haitians, heroin addicts, haemophiliacs—before anyone in the medical com -

munity had noticed. By now every region of the world had reported at least 

one case of HIV, leading the WHO to suggest that the pandemic had emerged 

simultaneously on three continents. However, few people accepted this the -

ory, not least because it was in Africa that AIDS appeared to be spreading 

most quickly. Moreover, by the close of the decade, tests on historical serum 

samples had demonstrated that HIV had already been present in Zaire and 

Uganda in the 1970s. That these HIV-infected patients included women and 

children suggested that HIV might have been seeded in heterosexual popula -

tions in Central Africa several decades before it arrived in America. Coupled 

with the growing awareness of AIDS infections among Haitians, this suggested 

an African point of origin. 

The first evidence for this hypothesis had come in 1983 when serum col -

lected from a woman in the obstetrics ward of Mama Yemo Hospital in 

Kinshasa tested positive for LAV. 63  The findings prompted Montagnier to 

conduct further tests on archived blood samples from Zaire dating back to 

1970, many of which also turned out to be positive for the virus. At the same 

time, using the ELISA test, Gallo began examining stored blood samples that 

had been collected by the National Cancer Institute in 1972 and 1973 from 

schoolchildren in Uganda as part of a study of Burkitt’s Lymphoma. To his 

astonishment, these showed that two-thirds of the Ugandan children were 

infected with HTLV-III. 64 

In 1983 Peter Piot, a Belgian microbiologist who had become concerned 

about the number of wealthy Zairians presenting with symptoms of immune 

deficiency at his tropical diseases clinic in Antwerp, decided to investigate the 

full extent of the problem in Zaire. 65  Focussing on Mama Yemo Hospital, 

where doctors had first noted AIDS-like wasting symptoms in the late 1970s, 

he found that during a three-week period scores of patients on the wards AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

157 

were infected with AIDS. 66  Subsequently he was joined by Jonathan Mann, a 

former CDC epidemiologist who would go on to become director of the 

WHO Global Program on AIDS, and the pair began gathering further epide -

miological data as part of  Project SIDA , the first and largest AIDS research 

project in Africa. By 1986, they had established that AIDS was an escalating 

problem in Zaire and Rwanda, with up to 18  per  cent of blood donors and 

pregnant women infected with HIV.  They also noted that the syndrome 

affected men and women more or less equally, and that most of the men 

surveyed considered themselves heterosexuals. If this was not enough to 

dispel the canard that AIDS was a predominantly homosexual disease, 

researchers went on to report that up to 88  per  cent of commercial sex 

workers in Kinshasa and the Rwandan capital Kigali were also infected with 

the virus, with a similarly high frequency of HIV infections in their clients. 67 

However, perhaps the best evidence that the virus had been present in 

Africa for some time came from retrospective tests of stored serum samples 

collected during the Ebola outbreak in Yambuku in 1976. Of the 659 samples 

drawn from patients in villages close to the Catholic mission hospital, 

0.8  per  cent tested positive for HIV.  But while the shocking symptoms of 

Ebola and the high mortality rate had immediately attracted the attention of 

investigators from the CDC and elsewhere, no one had noticed these HIV 

infections at the time. If evidence were ever needed of HIV’s cunning, this 

was it. Unlike Ebola, and other animal-origin viruses that are new to humans, 

HIV does not draw attention to itself by killing its host suddenly or violently. 

Instead, the virus has evolved a slow-but-sure strategy that enables it to infect 

human cells and replicate unnoticed. The result is that people parasitized by 

HIV can live and quietly pass on the virus for ten years or more before show -

ing any signs of illness. Indeed, it was only in 1985–86 when three of the 

villagers in Yambuku developed illnesses suggestive of AIDS that scientists 

thought to screen the local population for HIV.  Interestingly, this survey 

turned up similar levels of HIV infection as a decade earlier, suggesting that, 

in rural areas of Africa at least, the virus had made little progress in ten years. 

This would be an important clue to its epidemiology. 

As scientists began screening other collections of archived sera, so other 

missed alarms came to light, this time in Europeans. One of the most inter -

esting was that of the Danish surgeon, Grethe Rask, who had died in 

Copenhagen in 1977, after suffering a range of AIDS-like opportunistic infec -

tions, including PCP.  At the time she became ill, in 1975, Rask had been 

working in Kinshasa, but prior to that, between 1972 and 1975, she had been 

based in Abumonbazi, a rural hospital sixty miles north of Yambuku. Initial THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

158 

tests in 1985 using an early version of ELISA were negative for HIV, but when 

the tests were repeated two years later with more sophisticated assays they 

were positive for the virus. 68  Another case was that of a Norwegian family— 

father, mother and nine-year-old daughter—all of whom had died of AIDS-

like symptoms in 1976. In 1988, retrospective tests showed they all had HIV, 

and since the daughter had been born in 1967, this suggested the mother had 

already been infected by that date. Intriguingly, the father had been a sailor 

who had visited a number of ports in West Africa in the early 1960s, including 

Nigeria and Cameroon in 1961–62. The hypothesis was that at one of these 

ports he may have slept with a prostitute and contracted the virus. 69 

By the mid-1980s, evidence of similarly early cases of AIDS were also com -

ing to light in Africa. The first HIV-positive specimen was isolated from a Bantu 

man who had given blood in 1959 in Léopoldville, the old Belgian colonial 

name for Kinshasa. The blood specimen had lain in a refrigerator for twenty-

seven years. 70  At the time, it was not possible to identify to which HIV group 

the specimen belonged, but in the 1990s it became possible to amplify genetic 

material using a new technique called polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and 

in 1998 scientists established that it belonged to the same group responsible 

for the vast majority of pandemic infections. Then, in 2008, a group of scien -

tists writing in  Nature  announced they had sequenced HIV from another speci -

men, also from Léopoldville. This specimen had been taken from the lymph 

gland of a woman in 1960, after which it had been stored in the pathology 

department of the University of Kinshasa. Although the material was badly 

fragmented, using PCR the team, led by Michael Worobey, an evolutionary 

biologist at the University of Arizona, were able to sequence a few strands of 

DNA and RNA.  After amplifying the genetic material, Worobey then com -

pared the virus to the earlier isolate from Léopoldville and established that it 

was a closely related subtype. The next stage was to use a molecular clock to 

calculate how long it would have taken the two viruses to have diverged from 

one another. This produced a date for the common ancestor virus between 

1908 and 1933 (with a median of 1921). 71  Given the uncertainty of molecular 

clock calculations (RNA does not mutate at the same rate as DNA), these 

measures should be viewed with a degree of scepticism. However, there is 

little doubt that HIV was present in Léopoldville by 1959, and, if Worobey’s 

calculations are correct, very possibly as early as 1921. 72 

Using the same PCR techniques, scientists have also gone on to study cur -

rent circulating strains of HIV.  To date, these studies have shown that there 

are two main types of HIV: HIV-1, which is highly transmissible and is respon -

sible for the vast majority of infections worldwide, and HIV-2, which AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

159 

circulates mainly in West Africa and is associated with comparatively low 

levels of virus in the blood. To complicate the picture further, HIV-1 has been 

divided into four groups and one of these groups, group M, has been subdi -

vided into ten subtypes. In addition, if individuals are infected with more than 

one subtype, the subtypes can swap genes and form new recombinant strains. 

The result is an alphabet soup highly confusing to the layman. 

Nevertheless, today few scientists doubt that AIDS originated in Africa. 

This is not only because the two oldest isolates of HIV come from Kinshasa, 

but because nowhere else in the world does the virus show such diversity. 

HIV evolves only in one direction, from a single model of a virus to an 

increasingly complex differentiation into subtypes and recombinants, so viral 

diversity is strong evidence of point of origin. So far, so uncontroversial. But 

almost everything else about the origins of HIV and its association with AIDS 

has been contested. For instance, some retrovirus experts, such as Peter 

Duesberg, a biologist at the University of California, continue to deny that 

HIV is the cause of AIDS, even though the virus’s aetiological role has long 

been accepted by all competent scientific authorities. Similarly, the British 

writer and journalist Edward Hooper maintains that AIDS can be traced to 

mass polio vaccination campaigns conducted in Central Africa in the late 

1950s (Hooper argues that the inhabitants of the Belgian Congo, Rwanda and 

Burundi were given an oral polio vaccine, known as CHAT, contaminated 

with a simian immune-deficiency virus [SIV] as a result of the chimpanzee 

cells used in the production of the vaccine). Hooper’s thesis is described in 

exhaustive detail in his 1999 book,  The River: A Journey Back to the Source of HIV 

and AIDS , and on his website, where he continues to wage an increasingly 

lonely campaign against his scientific critics, the vast majority of whom con -

sider the weight of evidence against his theory overwhelming. 73  Whether or 

not Hooper or his critics will ultimately be proved right, one of the conse -

quences of his and Duesberg’s critiques has been to fuel conspiracy theories 

about the role of medical science in spreading AIDS, and to undermine faith 

in AZT and other potentially life-saving drug treatments. This is particularly 

true of South Africa where Thabo Mbeki, who was president from 1999 to 

2008 and who had taken advice from Duesberg, refused people access to 

antiretroviral drugs, thereby resulting in 330,000 unnecessary deaths from 

AIDS between 2000 and 2005, according to one study. 74  Similarly, there is 

evidence that Hooper’s vaccine contamination theory may have contributed 

to the distrust of modern polio vaccines, particularly in countries such as 

Nigeria, Afghanistan, and Pakistan where suspicions about the vaccines and 

the motivations of international health workers have fuelled resistance to THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

160 

mass immunization campaigns, jeopardizing the WHO’s attempts to eradicate 

the disease from its last endemic centres. 75 

Regardless of the truth or otherwise of these theories, no one disputes that 

both HIV-1 and HIV-2 are descended from Simian Immune-deficiency Viruses 

(SIVs) that parasitize, respectively, chimpanzees and sooty mangabeys indig -

enous to Central and West Africa, and which cause simian versions of AIDS. 76 

The question is, how did these viruses jump species or “spillover” from mon -

keys and become widely amplified in human populations? 

A leading spillover mechanism is thought to be the hunting and butchering 

of monkeys captured in the tropical rain forests of Cameroon, Gabon and the 

Congo—the region that is home to  Pan troglodytes troglodytes  chimpanzees. 77 

When hunters are cut or bitten in the course of capturing the monkeys or 

when the animals are butchered for the table, their viruses can readily be 

transferred to humans. Both Simian Foamy Virus (SFV) and the Ebola and 

Marburg viruses have been acquired from monkeys in this way. Serological 

tests of pygmies and Bantu huntsmen show that many carry antibodies to 

SIVs, suggesting that exposure is a common occurrence in nature. Further -

more, from analysis of the genomes of HIV-1 and 2, as well as their various 

groups and subtypes, it is known that modern HIV viruses are more closely 

related to their nearest ancestral SIVs than they are to one another. 78  This is 

evidence that the simian progenitors of human HIVs must have jumped to 

humans several times in the course of their evolution. However, as only one 

group of HIV-1—the M group—is responsible for 99  per  cent of HIV-1 

infections worldwide, this also suggests that the AIDS pandemic started not 

because a lot of people were infected directly from chimpanzees, but because 

a rare case of infection managed to spread and multiply in humans, something 

that all the other simian-origin infections that came before and after it had not 

managed to do. 79  Fortunately, as the isolate taken from the Bantu man in 

Léopoldville in 1959 belongs to the HIV-1 M group, and it is there that the 

virus shows the greatest genetic diversity, when and where this event 

occurred is no longer a matter of conjecture. The pandemic strain of HIV 

must have been up and running in 1959 in Léopoldville or else in a nearby 

town in the Belgian or French Congo. It is in answering the question of how 

this happened that the debate gets interesting. 

Broadly speaking, there are two schools of ecological thought. The first is 

that a combination of bushmeat hunting and economic and social changes 

driven by colonialism, plus globalization—better road, rail and plane connec -

tions—are sufficient to account for the amplification of the HIV-1 M group 

in Africa and the subsequent international spread of the virus. The second is AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

161 

that, yes, all those factors are significant but insufficient to explain how this 

particular group came to be so widely dispersed, first in urban African popu -

lations, and later in rural Africa and the rest of the world. This is because, in 

practice, it is very difficult for a simian virus to establish itself in a new human 

host. Indeed, many SIVs that cause infection in the short term are rapidly 

eliminated by the host’s immune response. Even if an infection establishes 

itself in one person, the virus may not spread easily to others. To explain that 

we need an additional amplifying effect, and the best candidate is provided by 

medicine. In particular, Jacques Pepin, the leading proponent of this school, 

points to the reuse of inadequately sterilized hypodermic needles and syringes 

in the administration of drugs against venereal diseases such as syphilis and 

tropical diseases such as malaria and yaws in clinics across Africa. As transmis -

sion of HIV-1 is ten times more effective through shared needles and syringes 

than via sexual intercourse, Pepin, a Canadian infectious disease specialist and 

epidemiologist with broad African experience, argues that these well-meaning 

medical interventions, many of which were launched during the colonial era, 

could have given the virus the boost it needed to go from a localized urban 

epidemic in Léopoldville/Kinshasa to one capable of infecting people as far 

away as Haiti, New York and San Francisco. 80 

Unfortunately, it is not possible to go back in time and test Pepin’s theory 

by conducting serological tests of patients who attended clinics in the Congo 

and elsewhere in the colonial period. The only evidence available is historical 

serum samples containing surviving fragments of HIV, and inferences from 

analogous examples of the inadvertent transmission of other blood-borne 

viruses via needles and syringes used in humanitarian medical programs. A 

good example of the latter is the tragedy that occurred in Egypt during the 

government campaigns against schistosomiasis, a potentially fatal disease 

caused by a parasitic blood fluke spread by snails that live in irrigation channels 

along the River Nile and other watercourses. Between 1964 and 1982, more 

than two million injections of tartar emetic were administered each year to 

250,000 Egyptians to combat schistosomiasis. On average patients received ten 

to twelve weekly IV injections with hastily sterilized syringes and needles. The 

result was a huge increase in hepatitis C, with half of the individuals aged forty 

and over testing positive for the virus in areas where the schistosomiasis treat -

ment was administered. 81  Similar iatrogenic transmission of hepatitis B 

occurred in the 1950s during the administration of IV drug treatments for 

syphilis and gonorrhoea at STD clinics in Léopoldville. Of course, while such 

studies may lend support to Pepin’s theory, the evidence, such as it is, must be 

considered circumstantial and speculative. Like a jury presented with a THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

162 

murderer but no clear-cut murder weapon, we must weigh the evidence and 

decide who—or, in this case, what—is the most likely culprit. 

The first question a jury must address is why, given the fact that humans 

living in Cameroon, Gabon, Guinea and Congo-Brazzaville have been in con -

tact with chimpanzees infected with the SIV progenitor of HIV-1 for at least 

2,000 years, an epidemic of HIV did not occur sooner? One answer is that in 

the precolonial period the lack of firearms made it more difficult to hunt apes 

and the dearth of roads through densely forested areas of Central Africa would 

have reduced interactions between humans and chimps. Even if, as seems 

likely, a bushmeat hunter was occasionally infected with HIV and managed to 

transmit the virus to his wife—or conversely, a cook infected her husband— 

the worst that might happen is that both would die of AIDS ten years later. 

Even if the couple were not monogamous, it is highly unlikely that in a remote 

village setting the virus would have spread far beyond the immediate com -

munity. Thus, in the precolonial period such infections would have represented 

epidemiological dead ends for the virus. However, around the turn of the 

nineteenth century, these epidemiological conditions began to change, creating 

new opportunities for progenitor HIV viruses to passage between people and 

be amplified more widely. The first development was the inauguration in 1892 

of a steamship service from Léopoldville to Stanleyville (Kisangani) in the 

heart of the Congo. By connecting populations that had previously been largely 

separated, the service created the potential for viruses that might have died out 

in isolated, rural populations to reach growing urban centres. The population 

of Léopoldville received another boost in 1898 with the opening of the Matadi-

Leo railway, prompting an influx of economic migrants and Belgium adminis -

trators. The result was that by 1923 Léopoldville had become the capital of the 

Belgian Congo. At around the same time, the city began hosting domestic 

flights and in 1936 inaugurated a direct international service to Brussels. More 

significant perhaps was the construction of new roads and railways by the 

French, including the 511-kilometre Chemin de Fer Congo-Ocean railroad. 

Connecting Brazzaville, on the opposite bank of the Congo River from 

Léopoldville, with Pointe-Noire on the coast, the railroad required the con -

scription of some 127,000 male labourers, resulting in the influx in the 1920s 

and 1930s of adult men into precisely the rural areas that were home to the 

chimpanzees that carried the progenitor of HIV-1. It also resulted in a constant 

passage of Africans and Europeans to and from Brazzaville, the new capital of 

the French federation. 

Once these rural-urban connections were up and running, it would not 

have taken very much to initiate a chain of sexual transmission in Brazzaville AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

163 

or Léopoldville. Pepin argues that one of the most important factors would 

have been the disruption of social relations that occurred during the colonial 

period. In particular, he points to the gender imbalances caused by the Belgian 

policy of conscripting large numbers of men into the labour force while dis -

couraging their wives and families from leaving their villages. This was 

nowhere more pronounced than in Léopoldville, where by the 1920s men 

outnumbered women by 4 to 1—an imbalance that encouraged unmarried, 

working women known as “ femmes libres ” to turn to part-time prostitution to 

supplement their income. Perhaps a bushmeat hunter travelled to Léopoldville 

and slept with one of these women. Or perhaps a labourer on the railway 

alighted at Brazzaville and then caught a ferry to the opposite bank of the 

Congo River before making his way to a prostitute in Léopoldville. Or per -

haps a migrant worker carried the virus to Brazzaville from higher up the 

Congo River, via one of its tributaries with Cameroon—the HIV-1 M group 

is most closely related to an SIV indigenous to chimpanzees from south-

eastern Cameroon; at the time of writing this is the favoured scenario. 82  The 

virus would have had an even greater chance of spreading if the person had 

earlier been treated for a tropical disease at one of the rudimentary hospitals 

near the railway and had contracted the virus from a contaminated syringe. 

This is not as far-fetched as it may sound. According to Pepin, the authorities 

were conducting campaigns against sleeping sickness and yaws along the rail -

way in the 1930s, and in the same period southern Cameroon saw massive 

iatrogenic transmission of hepatitis C following the administration of intrave -

nous quinine to treat malaria. 83  Alternatively, the amplification effect could 

have occurred when an infected hunter presented himself at an STD clinic in 

Léopoldville to receive treatment for syphilis, or a prostitute infected by one 

of her clients presented herself for IV drug treatment at the same clinic. The 

prostitute would then have transmitted the virus sexually to her clients, and 

they in turn would have infected other sex workers, leading to an expanding 

circle of onward transmission and the gradual spread of HIV to other cities 

and towns in the Congo. The next amplifying effect would have come with 

independence from Belgium in 1960. As political chaos and civil war engulfed 

the Congo, thousands of refugees made their way to Kinshasa, resulting in a 

further expansion of prostitution. According to Pepin, it was this that most 

likely transformed HIV into a generalized epidemic; hence, the cases of AIDS 

that physicians encountered at the Mama Yemo hospital in the late 1970s and 

early 1980s. From Kinshasa, the virus was most likely spread by truckers and 

business travellers to other African cities and, afterwards, via planes to other 

countries and continents. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

164 

But this is only one theory. Others put more emphasis on the rapid growth 

of African cities; the increased prevalence of STDs, including genital ulcers, 

which would have increased the transmissibility of HIV; and ecological and 

environmental factors such as the construction of roads through the Congo 

basin by corporations eager to harvest timber from equatorial Africa. 84  Such 

roads would have afforded the virus several opportunities to establish itself in 

human populations: first, by enabling hunters to venture deeper into the habi -

tat of  Pt . troglodytes  in search of bushmeat; and second, by encouraging the 

growth of prostitution near camps supplying labour to the timber companies. 

In this respect, it is argued, HIV may be similar to other viruses, such as 

Ebola, that are thought to reside in discrete ecological niches and whose 

emergence can be traced to ecological degradation and environmental 

changes that bring humans into closer contact with wild animals. However, 

there is no doubt that phylogenetic analysis of HIV has revolutionized the 

understanding of AIDS’s global spread, and this is nowhere more true than in 

the case of one isolate from Africa, known as subtype B. 

The story begins in 2008, when Worobey studied six blood samples from 

Haitian AIDS sufferers who had been treated in Miami in the early 1980s. The 

isolates exhibited greater genetic diversity than subtype B isolates from any 

other part of the world except for Africa. This was proof that the subtype had 

jumped from Africa to Haiti before it had reached the United States. Using the 

same molecular clock technique he had used to date the common ancestor of 

the isolates from Léopoldville, Worobey calculated that the founder virus had 

reached Haiti in around 1966 and had spread to the United States around 1969. 

A possible source were Haitians who had travelled to Zaire in the early 1960s 

to work as teachers, doctors, and nurses for WHO and UNESCO programs, 

one of whom, on their return to Haiti, could have introduced the virus. Pepin 

further believes that the subtype may have been amplified by unsterile condi -

tions at a private blood-collecting company, Hemo-Caribbean, run by a close 

ally of the then-Haitian president, François Duvalier. Pepin believes that after 

the virus spread to Haiti’s heterosexual population, bisexuals communicated it 

to American sex tourists, including homosexuals from New York and San 

Francisco who holidayed on the island. Alternatively, since Hemo-Caribbean 

exported 1,600 gallons of plasma to the United States monthly, and plasma 

clotting factors were widely used by American haemophiliacs, many of whom 

died of AIDS, the B subtype could also have been introduced to homosexuals in 

New York and San Francisco via a haemophiliac. 

What is not in dispute is that homosexuals in NewYork were already infected 

with the subtype B strain in 1976 and that the same strain was isolated from AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

165 

Gaetan Dugas in 1983. In other words, not only could Dugas not have been 

patient zero but it is highly unlikely that homosexuals from New York or San 

Francisco introduced HIV to Haiti either. More likely, it was the other way 

around. Once gay men from New York and San Francisco were infected with 

the B strain of HIV from Africa via Haiti, however, the high numbers of sexual 

partners within this community, coupled with practices such as anal sex, trig -

gered an exponential amplification of the virus, eventually bringing AIDS to the 

attention of Gottlieb and other American doctors in 1981. 

* * * 

Even more so than Legionnaires’ disease, the AIDS pandemic forced scientists 

to confront the hubristic assumption that medicine was on the verge of con -

quering infectious disease. This was not only because AIDS patients presented 

with conditions—PCP, KS, thrush—that were thought to have been con -

signed to the medical curiosity chest, but because by the time experts woke 

up to the new syndrome, HIV was widely dispersed and spreading on several 

continents. As we have seen, this was not the fault of epidemiologists or can -

cer specialists. On the contrary, AIDS became a pandemic at precisely the 

moment when, for the first time in history, scientists had the technology and 

intellectual tools to identify a new retrovirus and devise tests and treatments 

for it. However, AIDS also underlined something that had been overlooked by 

scientists and public health officials in the wake of the celebrations that fol -

lowed the eradication of smallpox in 1980. The first was that pathogens are 

constantly mutating in ways that are difficult to predict. The second is that 

humans, either through their changing social and cultural behaviours, or 

through their impact on the environment and animal and insect ecologies, 

exert powerful evolutionary pressures on microparasites. 85  Sometimes, these 

pressures select for a particularly virulent strain of the parasite. At other 

times, they present the parasite with an opportunity to colonize a new host 

and extend its ecologic range. This is a particular risk in the case of zoonotic 

diseases bridged by rodent and insect vectors, such as plague, yellow fever 

and dengue. However, it was realized that in an era of increasing globaliza -

tion, it was also true of other zoonoses that were not nearly as mobile. In 

particular, it was argued, AIDS would not have been able to escape Africa had 

humans not changed the rules of “viral traffic.” 86  According to the virologist 

Stephen Morse, who coined the phrase, these rules included not only envi -

ronmental and social changes that afforded the simian progenitor of HIV new 

opportunities for interspecies transfer and amplification within human THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

166 

populations, but such factors as better road and rail connections and interna -

tional jet travel. Morse’s concerns were soon echoed by other scientists, 

including the bacterial geneticist and head of Rockefeller University, Joshua 

Lederberg. In 1989 Lederberg and Morse organized a conference in 

Washington, DC, then followed it up in 1991 with a scientific report looking 

at the threat posed by “EIDs.” As defined by the Institute of Medicine report, 

EIDs included diseases such as AIDS and Ebola that were previously unknown 

as afflictions of human populations and whose “emergence may be due to the 

introduction of a new agent, to the recognition of an existing disease that has 

gone undetected, or to a change in the environment that provides an epide -

miologic ‘bridge.’” 87  Taking up a theme explored by René Dubos, Lederberg 

went on to argue that in an era of increasing “globalization,” air travel and the 

rapid mass movements of goods and people from one part of the globe to 

another had tilted the balance in favour of microbes, “defining us as a very 

different species from what we were 100 years ago.” The result, according to 

Lederberg, was that despite new medical technologies and the wider avail -

ability of vaccines and antibiotics, the human race was “intrinsically more 

vulnerable than before.” 88 

Lederberg’s warning was not lost on the journalist and science writer 

Laurie Garrett, who had witnessed the ravages of AIDS in Zaire first-hand. In 

her 1994 bestseller,  The Coming Plague , Garrett explained that thanks to glo -

balization “few habitats on the globe remain truly isolated or untouched,” and 

because of rapid international jet travel, “a person harboring a life-threatening 

microbe can easily board a jet plane and be on another continent when the 

symptoms of illness strike.” AIDS, she concluded bleakly, “does not stand 

alone,” but was a harbinger of epidemics and pandemics to come. 89 167 

# 7

# SARS 

“SUPER SPREADER”   

> “The island of Hong Kong is not only the most unhealthy spot in China … but the site
> selected for Victoria, the principal town and seat of government, is the most unhealthy
> locality of the whole Island, situated as it is on the side of an arid rock, which reflects
> the rays of a tropical burning sun in a fearful manner.”
> Sir Henry Charles Sirr, China and the Chinese , 1849

It is hard to imagine a less promising site for a major international metropolis 

than Hong Kong, much less one boasting seven million souls. Perched on the 

southern edge of the Chinese mainland, sixty miles east of Macau, the Special 

Administrative Area, as Hong Kong has been known since 1997 when the 

British crown colony reverted to Chinese control, occupies an area of 400 

square miles. But as most of that comprises scattered islands and rugged hills 

rising steeply from a narrow shoreline, in practice most of the population is 

crammed into a strip of land on the northern side of Hong Kong island over -

looking Victoria Bay, plus the peninsula of Kowloon and the adjoining New 

Territories. The result is one of the most densely populated cities on Earth 

and an urban wonder. 

Whether arriving by cruise ship or swooping through the clouds in a 

Boeing 747, one’s first sight of Hong Kong takes the breath away. It is not just 

that Hong Kong boasts more high rises than any other city on Earth, or that 

its iconic skyscrapers, such as IM Pei’s Bank of China building, once the tallest 

office building in Asia, seem to defy gravity; it’s the juxtaposition of all that 

sharp-edged glass and steel with the soft verdancy of those vertiginous hill -

sides. No matter the depths of a bank’s pockets or the ingenuity of its archi -

tects, no human construction can equal the majesty of Victoria Peak, let alone THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

168 

the view from Tai Mo Shan, which at nearl y 3,300 feet above sea level marks 

the highest point on the island. Looking up from the trading floor first thing 

in the morning, or sipping a cocktail in a luxury penthouse late at night, even 

a star bond trader cannot help but feel a sense of wonder and reflect on the 

limits that nature sets on man’s ambitions. 

It is not only Hong Kong’s forbidding landscape that has made human 

settlement a challenge. The island’s unusual topography and subtropical cli -

mate are also an ideal breeding ground for malaria and other mosquito-borne 

diseases, especially during the summer monsoons or the typhoons that batter 

Hong Kong in the autumn. Indeed, such was the island’s reputation for insa -

lubrity that the early British colonists preferred to sleep on board their ships 

in Victoria harbour rather than risk a bout of “Hong Kong fever” on land. In 

an era when such fevers were thought to be due to noxious gases emanating 

from the earth and rocks, such measures made sense. “The geological forma -

tion of Hong Kong,” wrote Sir Henry Pottinger, the second colonial governor, 

in 1843, “is found to consist of strata which quickly absorb any quantity of 

rain, which it returns to the surface in the nature of a pestiferous mineral gas. 

The position of the town prevents the dissipation of this gas, while the geo -

logical formation favours the retention of the morbific poison on the surface.” 

Other authorities agreed, arguing that “in the intervals of rain, a nearly verti -

cal sun acts with an intense evaporating power and a noxious steam or vapor 

rises from the foetid soil, yielding a gas of a most sickly and deleterious 

nature.” This gas, the writer continued, “produces a depressing effect on mind 

and body which undermines and destroys the strongest constitutions.” 1

One of the most feared areas was the harbour and the predominantly 

Chinese Tai Ping Shan district, a warren of poorly constructed wooden shacks 

running with raw sewerage in which people, pigs and rats mingled freely. 

Even before bubonic plague forced the authorities to level Tai Ping Shan in 

1894, the area had a reputation for disease: cholera, typhoid and smallpox 

were rife. To escape the successive waves of infection, Hong Kong’s wealthier 

residents built their homes as far from the waterfront as possible, inching up 

the slopes of Mount Victoria to about the midpoint of the mountain. One of 

the first residents of the Mid-Levels, as the area became known, was George 

Bonham, the governor of Hong Kong from 1848 to 1854. His gated mansion 

set a precedent, and soon others with names like “Rose Hill,” “Cringleford,” 

and “Idlewild” followed (one resident was Sara Roosevelt, the mother of 

Franklin D.  Roosevelt, who took up residence here with her family during the 

American Civil War). 

Of course, not everyone could afford such views or such commodious 

quarters. Inst ead, as workers from the Chinese mainland poured into Hong SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

169 

Kong in the early 1980s, drawn by its booming economy and liberal political 

climate, so architects devised ever more ingenious solutions to accommodate 

the city’s growing population. These public housing projects frequently took 

the form of multiple occupancy tower blocks rising to forty stories or more. 

With upwards of twenty apartments per floor, and as many as ten blocks 

occupying sites of five acres or less, these complexes were practically cities in 

themselves. Typically, whole families were crammed into single occupancy 

apartments, reducing the average adult living area in Hong Kong to under 

two square metres. 2

With no air conditioning, the apartments were stiflingly hot in summer, 

the only solution being to throw open a window and risk a lungful of smog 

from the traffic-clogged streets below, or to install high-powered fans adja -

cent to the light wells that ran through the centre of the blocks. Most families 

who could afford it opted for the latter, but there was little that could be done 

about the creaking plumbing and, with so many people showering and flush -

ing at the same time, backups and breakdowns were frequent. 

Little wonder, then, that on weekends many sought the fresh air and open 

spaces of Shek O Country Park or the paved paths and trails that encircle 

Victoria Peak. But even here, above the mosquito line, comfort was not guar -

anteed and the island could still spring a surprise. Indeed, long-time residents 

know that for all that Hong Kong boasts its own subway system, at heart it is 

still a jungle. Those inviting hillsides, for instance, teem with wild boar and 

venomous snakes, and hikers are advised to keep a wary eye on the under -

growth for hungry pythons. 

It is not pythons that pose the principal threat to Hong Kong’s residents, 

however. Nor is it mosquitoes: malaria and dengue are no longer endemic to 

Hong Kong, though on occasion doctors see imported cases. The principal 

ecological danger comes from Hong Kong’s giant neighbour to the north and 

the modernizing and urbanizing processes that have intensified the microbial 

traffic between animals and humans. From Kowloon, on the opposite side of 

Victoria Bay, it is just ninety minutes by train to Shenzhen and the gateway to 

Guangdong, the most populous province in China, which is home to some 80 

million people. Since the market liberalization measures introduced by 

China’s leadership in the late 1970s, Shenzhen and the provincial capital, 

Guangzhou, have witnessed astonishing rates of economic growth. Spurred 

by the production of sports trainers, cheap toys and electronics, between 

1978 and 2002 Guangdong’s GDP grew by an average of 13.4  per  cent per 

annum, while the urban population of the Pearl River Delta region, which 

encompasses Guangzhou, expanded to the point where it now accounts for THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

170 

70  per  cent of the province’s total population. This manufacturing boom has 

had two major ecological effects. First, to feed the vast labour force in its 

factories, Guangdong raises millions of chickens on industrial-scale poultry 

farms (in 1997, the province was home to an estimated 700 million chickens 

and by 2008 it was producing one billion “high quality” broiler chickens a 

year). 3 At the same time, rice farmers and smaller livestock producers fatten 

domestic chickens and ducks in their backyards, hawking the birds in “wet 

markets” on the edge of urban areas when they are plump and ready for the 

pot. The result, according to the sociologist and urban historian Mike Davis, 

is a “fractal pattern of garden plots next to dormitories and factories [that] has 

brought urban populations and livestock together in more intimate contact.” 

As many smallholders also keep pigs close to chicken pens, these farming 

patterns also increase the chances that bacteria and viruses harboured by 

chickens will inadvertently be communicated to the swine in faecal deposits 

and that, in turn, pigs will communicate the pathogens to humans. In short, 

Guangdong has become the potential source of a viral Armageddon and what 

Davis calls the ecological “monster at our door.” 4

To cater to Guangdong’s newly affluent entrepreneurial classes, in the early 

2000s chefs also began offering ever more exotic fare on restaurant menus, 

including game animals that had previously been considered rare seasonal 

delicacies. Animal traders responded to this increased demand by sourcing 

exotic game from countries such as Laos and Vietnam, or breeding game 

animals on small, unregulated farms, from where they were transferred to 

animal markets in Guangzhou and Shenzhen when they were ready to be 

eaten. The result was a mixing of multiple species in animal markets that 

would rarely, if ever, encounter one another in nature, and certainly not in 

such crowded conditions. 

Fortunately, Hong Kong, unlike Guangzhou and other provincial towns and 

cities in Guangdong, benefits from world-class medical facilities and teaching 

hospitals equipped with the latest diagnostic technologies. Because of the 

greater political freedoms enjoyed in Hong Kong, Kowloon and the New 

Territories under China’s “one country, two systems” policy, Hong Kong is 

also not subject to the cloying regulations and fear of authority that make 

potentially embarrassing disclosures anathema to the communist authorities 

on the Chinese mainland. Rather, Hong Kong health officials, many of whom 

were trained overseas in American and European universities, seek to apply 

the same clinical and public health standards as they would anywhere else in 

the world. This reputation for medical rigour, combined with Hong Kong’s 

unique political and geographical position, make it something of a “sentinel” SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

171 

for the health of the rest of the world. In short, when a new epidemic or 

pandemic virus emerges somewhere in China, it is in Hong Kong that the 

alarm is likely to sound first. 

* * * 

From his sixth floor office at Hong Kong University’s School of Public 

Health, Malik Peiris has a perfect view of Pok Fu Lam country park and 

Queen Mary Hospital. For the soft-spoken microbiologist with a passion for 

epidemiology and viruses that cross the species barrier, it is the perfect situ -

ation. In the winter, geese, teal and other wild migratory birds swoop past 

his window en route to the Mai Po Nature Reserve, a protected wetland on 

the edge of the Inner Deep Bay that is an important waystation for birds 

migrating south from Siberia to New Zealand during the northern winter. 

And when an unusual respiratory case presents itself in the emergency room 

of Queen Mary Hospital, Peiris’s laboratory is well placed to perform a viral 

assay. So when in November 2002 public health officials began hearing 

rumours of an unusual respiratory outbreak in Guangzhou, it was only natu -

ral that Peiris’s lab should be placed on alert in the expectation that similar 

cases would soon be presenting themselves at Queen Mary and other public 

hospitals in Hong Kong. 

Peiris’s interest in viral ecology dates from 1987 when, shortly after 

obtaining his PhD in microbiology at Oxford University, he was asked to 

investigate an outbreak of Japanese encephalitis in his native Sri Lanka. A viral 

disease spread by mosquitoes that breed in rice paddies, Japanese encephalitis 

had broken out in Anuradhapura, an historic city in northern Sri Lanka 

famous for its architectural ruins. Some 360 people fell ill, the majority of 

them rice farmers. This was puzzling; although the virus can be transmitted 

to humans, it usually cycles between birds, mosquitoes and pigs. Moreover, 

although outbreaks of Japanese encephalitis in humans had previously been 

documented in Japan and other parts of Asia, large human outbreaks had not 

occurred in Sri Lanka before. Clearly something had changed; the question 

was what? 

At first, Peiris and his colleagues thought that the outbreak might be due 

to a sudden change in the virulence of the virus, but when they looked at the 

virus in the lab they could see it had not mutated. Next, they trapped mos -

quitoes in and around farmers’ fields to see if there had been a change in the 

transmission dynamics of the disease. Perhaps a species other than  Culex , the 

usual vector, was now transmitting the virus, or there had been a sudden THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

172 

increase in mosquito numbers. But, once again, in both cases the answer was 

negative. Then they looked at pigs. To diversify the agricultural base and 

supplement farmers’ incomes, the Sri Lankan provincial authorities had 

handed each farmer twenty pigs free of charge. These pigs now grazed freely 

in the farmers’ backyards beside the rice paddies. In so doing, Peiris discov -

ered, the pigs not only provided mosquitoes with a ready blood meal, but 

greatly increased the chances of transmission of Japanese encephalitis to 

humans. “It was like putting a match to dynamite,” he said. “Pigs turned out 

to be perfect amplifiers. With the best intentions, somebody puts this in and, 

boom, you have this huge explosion.” The investigation peaked Peiris’s interest 

in veterinary epidemiology and the interface of animal and human diseases, 

and set him wondering about other human interventions that might alter the 

balance of microbial ecologies. 

Peiris’s next big opportunity came in 1997 soon after he joined Hong Kong 

University’s medical faculty as a senior lecturer in microbiology. His appoint -

ment coincided with the first documented transmission of avian influenza 

from birds to humans. An influenza virus, known as H5N1, had been isolated 

from the throat washings of a three-year-old boy. He had been admitted to 

Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Kowloon in early May with what appeared to be 

a run-of-the-mill upper respiratory tract infection. 5 Initially, the boy was 

given aspirin to relieve his fever and sore throat, but within days his condition 

had deteriorated and he was transferred to intensive care. Soon, his tiny body 

was being racked by an unusual cluster of conditions, including viral pneumo -

nia, Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) and Reye’s syndrome. He 

died on 21  May, the cause being recorded as multi-organ failure. 6

H5 influenza viruses were not entirely unknown to flu researchers in 

1997—the virus had first been isolated nearly four decades earlier in 

Scotland. However, since then, veterinary virologists had seen it on only two 

other occasions: during a devastating outbreak of “fowl plague” in Pennsylvania 

in 1984 that had forced the authorities to cull 20 million chickens, and on an 

English turkey farm in 1991. 7 The point is that until 1997 no one had imag -

ined that H5N1, or any other bird flu virus, might be capable of jumping the 

species barrier and sickening humans, much less killing them. 

Working backward, a team from the CDC, headed by Keiji Fukuda, a 

Japanese-American clinical epidemiologist and the future coordinator of the 

WHO’s Global Influenza Program, learned that a few months earlier chickens 

on farms near Yuen Long, in rural northwest Hong Kong, and the Mai Po 

Marshes close to Kowloon, had been struck by a mysterious plague. The 

culprit also seemed to be H5N1. Alarmingly, one of the farms was only fifteen SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

173 

miles from the boy’s home. Not only that but several weeks before he had 

fallen ill, teachers at his nursery school had brought in three baby chicks and 

two ducklings for the children to play with. By the time Fukuda arrived at the 

school in August both ducklings had died, as had two of the chicks. 8

To flu ecologists the latter findings were especially worrying. Ducks are 

considered “silent reservoirs” of bird flu viruses—silent, because they harbour 

and excrete the virus without exhibiting symptoms of illness or other obvious 

signs of infection. Not so chickens, which are highly susceptible. When they 

come into contact with diseased ducks and are exposed to the virus for the 

first time—typically through excreted faecal matter—they fall violently ill. 

One moment they are clucking contentedly, the next they are staggering 

from side to side as their brains, stomachs, lungs and eyes leak bloody haem -

orrhagic fluids. It is for this reason that poultry farmers describe such infec -

tions as a “plague” and that Robert Webster, the world’s preeminent avian 

influenza expert, has dubbed mallards and teals “Trojan ducks.” 9

Both chickens and ducks can also transmit bird flu to pigs, and because 

swine can simultaneously be infected with human strains of influenza this 

makes them the perfect vessel for the reassortment of avian and human flu 

viruses. Indeed, scientists hypothesize that it is when these avian and human 

strains exchange genes, reconfiguring their surface proteins and generating a 

new, hybrid virus, that you get pandemics. This is what appears to have caused 

both the 1957 “Asian flu” pandemic and the 1968 “Hong Kong” flu pandemic, 

triggered respectively by H2N2 and H3N2 hybrid viruses containing both 

bird and mammalian influenza genes. 

In addition, scientists suspect that pandemics may also be triggered by 

spontaneous mutations of avian viruses. Viruses are continuously making 

copying errors, and avian viruses are no exception. The theory is that some of 

these mutations could result in subtle changes to the molecules on the surface 

of the virus, enabling it to bind deeper into the human respiratory tract. As 

people are not ordinarily infected with bird flus, once such a virus found a 

way of transmitting efficiently to humans, runs the theory, there would be 

little to stop it because our immune systems would be powerless to mount an 

antibody response. Instead, the infection might trigger a catastrophic cascade 

similar to the syndrome that killed the three-year-old Hong Kong boy. 

Indeed, when scientists looked more closely at the genome of H5N1 they 

discovered that its surface proteins had the ability to bind to both avian recep -

tor sites and human cells deep in the lungs. That discovery sparked renewed 

interest in the natural history of influenza and the ecological conditions driv -

ing adaptations of wild viruses circulating in aquatic bird populations. It also THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

174 

led to speculation that similar processes may have triggered the emergence in 

1918 of the Spanish flu—a virus that a leading flu expert has described as “the 

most bird-like of all mammalian flu viruses” and which was associated with a 

similarly unusual pathology in young adults. 10 

As spring turned to summer then autumn, Hong Kong held its breath. By 

now teals and other migratory waterfowl had begun to gather in the city’s 

Deep Bay and Mai Po Marshes en route from their Siberian breeding grounds, 

adding to anxieties that the birds might communicate H5N1 to local ducks 

and chickens. Then in November there were two further human cases, fol -

lowed in December by several more. Panicked, the Hong Kong authorities 

closed the city’s wet markets and ordered the culling of 1.5 million of the 

territory’s chickens. That seemed to do the trick. Although the virus contin -

ued to turn up every now and again in samples collected from wild birds, no 

more cases were reported in domestic chickens. Nevertheless, by the time 

the outbreak ended in 1998, eighteen people had been infected and six had 

died, five of them adults. 

For Peiris, the outbreak was a wake-up call. Together with his Hong Kong 

University colleagues Yi Guan and Ken Shortridge, he warned that the H5N1 

virus had been “possibly one or two mutational events from achieving pande -

micity.” The good news was that because of Hong Kong’s geographical posi -

tion and the territory’s concentration of microbiological expertise, it was 

well positioned to act as an “influenza sentinel”—an early warning post for 

avian flu viruses that might suddenly emerge from their aquatic reservoirs. 11 

By 2002 these included not only H5N1, but another bird virus, H9N2, that 

was widely seeded in pigeons, pheasants, quail, and guinea fowl in southern 

China. 12  More alarming still was the fact that the H9N2 virus had also 

infected two children in Hong Kong, though without sickening them, and 

shared several of the same internal proteins as H5N1. Indeed, the more 

Peiris, Guan and Shortridge looked at the range of viruses circulating in live 

poultry markets, the more they realized that genetic reassortment was a 

common occurrence in nature, and that, far from being in evolutionary stasis 

in aquatic birds, avian flu viruses were constantly transiting between ducks 

and poultry and back again, generating “multiple reassortants.” 13 

The result was that when, in December 2002, ducks, geese, flamingos, 

swans, egrets and herons suddenly started dying in two popular Hong Kong 

parks, and soon after Peiris began hearing rumours of an unusual respiratory 

outbreak in Guangzhou, he naturally assumed that bird flu had returned in a 

more virulent form. Two months later, at the beginning of February 2003, 

using web-crawling software to scan the internet for reports of unusual SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

175 

respiratory outbreaks, the WHO picked up an item about an outbreak of 

“atypical pneumonia” in three hospitals in Guangzhou. Soon after, the WHO 

intercepted text messages saying there had also been a major outbreak at a 

fourth Guangzhou hospital and that there was panic-buying of gauze masks, 

antibiotics and white vinegar, a traditional Chinese remedy for warding off 

respiratory infections. This was followed by an advertisement by the Chinese 

subsidiary of the Swiss drug company Roche that its antiviral medication 

Tamiflu was effective against bird flu. According to Klaus Stohr, the head of 

WHO’s influenza vaccination program, “that put in the minds of people that a 

bird flu epidemic had started.” 14  However, the clincher came when a seven-

year-old girl from Hong Kong suddenly died of respiratory disease while visit -

ing her family in Fujian. Although she was buried before the cause of death 

could be ascertained, nine days later her father was stricken with what 

appeared to be the same disease, dying in mid-February in Hong Kong. His son 

also developed symptoms of respiratory distress but recovered. Laboratory 

tests subsequently showed that both had been infected with the same strain of 

H5N1 that had been killing ducks and other birds in Hong Kong’s parks. By 

now Peiris was convinced he was seeing the start of a new bird flu outbreak, 

possibly far bigger than the one that had visited Hong Kong in 1997. He was 

sceptical of the official line being peddled by the communist authorities in 

Guangdong that the respiratory outbreaks were due to a form of chlamydia, so 

he asked two Chinese colleagues who had previously worked at the Institute of 

Respiratory Diseases in Guangzhou to make discreet inquiries. Ignoring the 

usual diplomatic channels, the medics travelled to Guangzhou independently 

and returned with throat washings from twenty Chinese respiratory patients. 

Peiris and Yi had expected the washings to light up when they added the sam -

ples to sera infected with H5N1, but to their surprise nothing happened. 

Next, they looked for reactions for other common respiratory viruses, but 

once again the serological tests were negative so they began testing for more 

exotic viruses, such as Hanta. Finally, Peiris and Yi added the washings to vari -

ous off-the-shelf cell cultures to see if they could persuade anything to grow in 

them. But whatever was lurking in the throat washings did not replicate in the 

usual laboratory growth media. All they could be sure of was that it was not 

bird flu or other commonly known causes of respiratory illness. 

* * * 

Like other Hong Kong streets commemorating important events in British 

history, Waterloo Road seems to belong to a bygone era. Named after the THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

176 

Belgium battleground at which the Duke of Wellington bested Napoleon 

Bonaparte, the road is one of Kowloon’s principal thoroughfares, running east 

past Ferry and Nathan Roads, before turning sharply in the direction of 

Logan’s Rock to the north. It is not a pretty road. Clogged with traffic and 

hemmed in by ugly high-rises, it is for passing through rather than lingering 

in. Indeed, were it not for Kwong Wah Hospital at one end and the 487-room 

Metropark Kowloon—a mid-priced hotel formerly known as the 

Metropole—at the other, there would be little reason for stopping here. 

On 21  February, Liu Jianlun, a 64-year-old professor of nephrology, 

checked into room 911 on the ninth floor of the Metropole. A doctor at the 

Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhongshan Medical University in Guangzhou, 

Liu was feeling a little under the weather. A few weeks earlier, a Guangdong 

seafood trader had presented at his hospital with peculiar respiratory symp -

toms. Although the trader spent only eighteen hours in the emergency room, 

in that time he infected twenty-eight hospital staff. He was then transferred 

to the Third Affiliated Hospital, where he set off further respiratory clusters 

among health care workers, earning himself the nickname “poison king.” 15  On 

15  February, Liu had developed similar respiratory symptoms. But after dos -

ing himself with antibiotics he felt well enough to travel and boarded a bus in 

Guangzhou for the three-hour ride south to Kowloon. After checking in to 

the Metropole, Liu had mustered the energy to go shopping, but the follow -

ing morning he woke with a high fever. Instead of attending his nephew’s 

wedding he turned right outside the hotel and walked to Kwong Wah 

Hospital. Once there Liu asked to be admitted, informing medical staff that 

Guangzhou had many patients with atypical pneumonia and that it was “a very 

virulent disease.” 16  He also said that he had treated some of the patients in the 

hospital’s outpatient clinic, but as he had been wearing a mask and gloves he 

was confident he had not contracted anything. He was wrong. 17 

On 4  March Liu died of what would later be called SARS—short for 

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. Not only that, but during his stay at the 

Metropole, via a mechanism that was never identified, he managed to trans -

mit the disease to sixteen other guests on the same floor plus a visitor to the 

hotel, though not, miraculously, to the hotel’s staff. Within seventy-two 

hours, sixteen of those guests, who included airline crew members, had intro -

duced the disease to seven other countries, including Vietnam, Singapore, and 

Canada, sparking similar respiratory outbreaks in hospitals in Hanoi and 

Toronto. At this juncture, no one connected those outbreaks to Liu or to 

room 911 of the Metropole—that would come later. Instead, convinced that 

this was the start of the long-feared bird flu pandemic, on 12  March the SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

177 

WHO issued a global travel alert. As images of nervous Hong Kong commut -

ers in face masks flashed around the globe, air travel to Southeast Asia ground 

to a halt and financial markets went into a tailspin. On a China Airlines flight 

from Hong Kong to Beijing, a 72-year-old man who, unknown to him or 

anyone else on board, had been infected with SARS while visiting Hong 

Kong, communicated the disease to twenty-two passengers on the same 

flight, as well as two crew members. Meanwhile, in Thailand, at the end of 

March the mysterious pathogen claimed the life of one of Asia’s most 

respected doctors, Carlo Urbani. The head of WHO’s infectious disease divi -

sion in Vietnam, the Italian parasitologist and clinician had contracted the 

infection while tending to a young Chinese American businessman who had 

presented with severe respiratory symptoms at the French Hospital in Hanoi 

on 26  February. A few nights before, the businessman, Johnny Chen, had been 

staying on the ninth floor of the Metropole, though it was only later that the 

significance of that fact would be appreciated. 

Urbani’s death at the age of forty-six, heavily sedated on morphine and 

hooked up to a ventilator in a makeshift isolation room in a Bangkok hospital 

(after treating Chen, Urbani had flown to the Thai capital, not realizing he was 

incubating the infection), sent shock waves through Southeast Asia’s expatri -

ate medical community. How was it possible that at the dawn of the twenty-

first century a physician familiar with the measures for treating highly infec -

tious patients had contracted such a severe respiratory disease? And why had 

the pneumonic ailment resisted treatment with antibiotics and antiviral 

drugs? Once again the question was asked: was it H5N1 or some other strain 

of avian influenza? 

In March 2003 no one knew the answers to those questions and, except for 

Peiris and other specialists in viral ecology, few people appreciated the threat 

posed by SARS.  This was understandable given that, at the time, the world’s 

attention was focused on the Middle East, where British and American troops 

were massing on the Iraqi border in preparation for a ground war prompted 

by “intelligence” that the Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein was harbouring weap -

ons of mass destruction in breach of United Nations Security Council resolu -

tions. It had been less than two years since Islamist terrorists had seized the 

controls of four commercial airliners and piloted three of them into the 

World Trade Center and the Pentagon in a shocking act of international ter -

rorism. The Bush administration was eager for revenge, and it had decided 

Iraq was the place to exact it. In fact, there was no evidence of Saddam’s 

involvement in 9/11 and, it subsequently emerged, the Iraqi dictator had 

destroyed his deadly weapons arsenal several years earlier. Instead, the real THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

178 

weapon of mass destruction had been incubating in Guangdong and was now, 

seemingly, in the process of spreading worldwide through the simple expedi -

ent of hitching rides on buses, trains and airplanes. 

Solving the mystery of SARS involved the mobilization of hundreds of 

scientists and laboratories all over the world. It would also require microbi -

ologists to challenge their assumptions about a pathogen that had long been 

considered uninteresting and a “Cinderella” of the microbial world. As with 

the Legionnaires’ disease outbreak nearly thirty years earlier, unravelling the 

mystery hinged on epidemiologists and microbiologists working hand-in-

hand. And their efforts would lead to a deeper appreciation of the importance 

of urban ecologies, medical technologies, and human-made surroundings— 

particularly hotels, hospitals, and apartment blocks—in the spread of respira -

tory infections. But on 12  March, when WHO issued its alert, and as Peiris 

experimented with yet another cell culture in an effort to grow the virus—or 

whatever organism was lurking in the throat washings—all this lay in the 

future. By now, with the help of Dr  Wilimina Lim, chief virologist at Hong 

Kong’s Department of Health and the head of Queen Mary’s public health 

laboratory, Peiris had set up a surveillance system for people presenting with 

atypical pneumonias at Hong Kong outpatient departments. Specimens were 

pouring into his laboratory (Peiris had wanted to include recent travel to 

Guangdong in the case definition, but his request was overruled out of con -

cern that it might offend the Chinese authorities). 

The urgent need for a reliable diagnostic test, so as to distinguish true cases 

of SARS from run-of-the-mill pneumonias and respiratory infections, was 

underlined by the horror stories reaching Peiris from clinicians and health 

workers on the front line. At the Prince of Wales Hospital in Sha Tin, in the New 

Territories, some fifty doctors, nurses, and medical orderlies appeared to have 

contracted the infection, prompting the hospital’s management to quarantine 

them in a special isolation room with its own air conditioning system. However, 

the measures were ineffective. Over the following days and weeks nearly one 

hundred more health workers and patients succumbed, followed by friends and 

relatives who had visited them in the hospital. As at the Second Affiliated 

Hospital in Guangzhou, the outbreak appeared to have begun with a single 

case—what would later be dubbed a “super spreader” event. 18 

* * * 

On 4  March, a 26-year-old airport worker, identified only as “Mr  CT,” pre -

sented at Hong Kong’s Prince of Wales Hospital complaining of fever, body SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

179 

aches, and breathlessness—typical symptoms of community-acquired pneu -

monia. Accordingly he was admitted to the hospital’s eighth-floor medical 

ward and given a course of antibiotics. The drugs appeared to do the trick, 

and over the next few days his fever abated and the patches on his lungs faded. 

However, the scratch in his throat would not go away and he coughed inces -

santly. Finding his airways choked with phlegm, doctors decided he needed a 

nebulizer—a device that delivers drugs to the lungs in the form of a fine mist. 

It was a big mistake. A nebulizer is an excellent way to deliver drugs to the 

lungs. Unfortunately, it is also a highly efficient way for viruses and bacteria 

lingering in the respiratory tract to be diffused more widely as after each 

inhalation comes an exhalation. In the case of Mr  CT, it is thought the nebu -

lizer aerosolized the virus-laden droplets in his breath, turning them into a 

mist that scattered the particles throughout the Prince of Wales’s medical 

ward. Four times a day, for seven days in a row, Mr  CT sucked on the nebu -

lizer, then exhaled, releasing a fine mist of viral particles that drifted over the 

beds of other patients and infected passing health care workers. Although 

Mr  CT was eventually isolated in a private room with negative-pressure ven -

tilation and medical staff were instructed to wear disposable gloves and N95 

masks, the measures came too late. The result was a mini-epidemic that very 

nearly closed the hospital. 19 

By the second week of March there were also several reports of cases 

occurring outside of hospitals, fuelling rumours that the pathogen was 

spreading freely in the community and that no one was safe. At first, Dr  Yeoh 

Eng-kiong, Hong Kong’s secretary for Health, Welfare, and Food, tried to 

make light of the rumours, but on 18  March he was forced to acknowledge 

the reports were true and convened a “war council” at health department 

headquarters in Queen’s Road East. There, using a computer program loaned 

from the police,Yeoh and his director of health, Dr  Margaret Chan, the future 

director-general of the WHO, pored over the latest reports as they tried to 

predict the pathogen’s next move. “Every day we asked, ‘What are we dealing 

with? What do we know?’” Chan recalled. 20 

In an office on the eighteenth floor of the same building, Thomas Tsang 

Ho-fai, a consultant in the communicable disease unit, was asking similar 

questions. A slightly built man, Tsang was a graduate of the CDC’s elite 

Epidemic Investigation Service. Tipped for higher things (he would eventually 

be appointed controller of Hong Kong’s Centre for Health Protection), Tsang 

had first come to prominence during the 1997 bird flu outbreak, but it was 

during SARS that he got a chance to demonstrate his sleuthing skills and was 

dubbed “detective Fai” by the Hong Kong media. Since the first week of THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

180 

March, Tsang had been working around the clock, tracking SARS patients and 

their contacts. On 26  March he noticed that one hospital had reported fifteen 

SARS cases in a single day and that all the patients had given their address as 

Amoy Gardens, a nearby housing complex overlooking Kowloon Bay. That 

was unusual, so Tsang decided to take a closer look. 

When he arrived at the complex he found that cases were increasing at an 

alarming rate: thirty-four people hospitalized on 28  March, thirty-six more 

the following day, and sixty-four more on 31  March. With the outbreak 

threatening to overwhelm the public hospital system, and his bosses consider -

ing quarantines, Tsang was under pressure to locate the source of the out -

break as quickly as possible. The problem was how. Without knowing whether 

SARS was a virus or a bacterium, and whether it was an aerosol or droplet 

infection, it was difficult to determine how it was transmitted and how best 

to halt its progression. However, Tsang reasoned that since most of the SARS 

cases had come from block E, that was the logical place to start. 21 

Built in 1981, Amoy Gardens is typical of many of the middle-income 

housing projects that blight Hong Kong. The complex consists of fourteen 

hideous beige tower blocks laid out in a cruciform shape. Each block has 

thirty-three floors and each floor has eight units arranged in pairs. In all, the 

blocks are home to some 19,000 residents. As a solution to Hong Kong’s 

housing shortage, Amoy Gardens must at one time have seemed elegant. 

Unfortunately, the complex also presented the ideal environment for the 

spread of SARS. 

Tsang noted that most of those who had fallen ill lived in the corner units, 

numbered seven and eight on each floor, suggesting that the disease had 

spread vertically between each floor. 22  Tsang also noted that while there had 

been cases in other blocks, those who lived in Block E had fallen ill about 

three days earlier, indicating that this was probably the seat of the outbreak. 

But what was the mechanism? Was it contamination from the water tanks, as 

had occurred during the Legionnaires’ disease outbreak? Or could it have 

something to do with the high-powered exhaust fans that many of the resi -

dents had installed in their bathrooms? Tsang set up a classic epidemiological 

study, comparing rates of infection among residents who owned exhaust fans 

with those who did not. The results showed that those who used exhaust fans 

while taking showers had a five times greater chance of contracting SARS, 

suggesting that the pathogen may have been sucked into their bathrooms via 

sewerage leaking into the drains fitted to the floors of showers. However, 

when Tsang took samples from the sewer pipes and the building’s water 

tanks,  the tests were negative. Next, he examined the rubbish for signs of SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

181 

cockroaches and rodents. Also negative. Finally, he considered the possibility 

that, like the anthrax letter mailings that had followed the 9/11 terrorist 

attacks in the United States, the residents of Amoy Gardens had been delib -

erately targeted by a foreign power or a terrorist organization. 23  “We thought 

it might be a biological attack because of the vertical arrangement of cases,” 

Tsang explained. 24  However, this theory was also soon ruled out. 

Amoy Gardens was not the only building to attract Tsang’s attention. By 

now epidemiologists from the Department of Health were also scouring the 

Metropole Hotel. The first indication that the hotel might be implicated in the 

outbreak came on 12  March when the Singaporean authorities notified Hong 

Kong’s health department that three young women who had recently been 

hospitalized with SARS in Singapore had stayed at the Metropole. It subse -

quently transpired that one of the women, Esther Mok, a 23-year-old former 

airline stewardess who had been in Hong Kong on a shopping expedition, had 

stayed in a room on the same floor as Liu. On 28  February she had been 

admitted to Singapore’s Tan Tock Seng Hospital, sparking an outbreak that 

infected twenty-one of the hospital’s medical staff. One of the people she 

infected was a prominent infectious disease physician, Leong Hoe Nam, who 

subsequently had to be hauled off a flight that was returning to Singapore 

from New York, where he had been attending a conference. Deplaned at 

Frankfurt airport, Leong, who was traveling with his pregnant wife and 

mother-in-law, became Europe’s first official SARS patient. 25 

By 18  March, Tsang had learned of two further cases who had stayed at the 

Metropole: a 72-year-old Canadian man who had been hospitalized in 

Vancouver, and a 78-year-old Chinese-Canadian woman, Kwan Sui Chu. Mrs 

Kwan and her husband had been visiting their sons in Hong Kong over the 

new year and had taken a room at the Metropole as part of an airline package 

deal, their stay overlapping with Liu’s. Two days after returning to Toronto, 

Mrs Kwan fell ill and by 5  March she was dead. In the interim, she transmit -

ted SARS to four family members, including her 44-year-old son, who in turn 

introduced SARS to Scarborough Grace Hospital, in Toronto, sparking the 

worst disease outbreak in the hospital’s history. 26 

The information prompted the Hong Kong health department to review 

all its files on severe community-acquired pneumonia, and by 19  March Tsang 

knew of seven SARS cases linked to the ninth floor of the Metropole, includ -

ing Johnny Chen, the Chinese American businessman who had introduced 

SARS to Hanoi, infecting Carlo Urbani. Tsang and his colleagues spent days 

combing the Metropole for clues, taking samples from the carpets, furniture, 

elevators, air vents, and toilets. Perhaps Liu had sneezed on Chen when he THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

182 

walked by him in the corridor of the ninth floor, or perhaps Chen had been 

infected when they shared an elevator. Or perhaps, the bug had been com -

municated to Chen and other guests via the hotel’s air conditioning system, 

as had occurred with Legionnaires’ disease at the Bellevue-Stratford in 

Philadelphia. These were all plausible hypotheses, but without knowing what 

they were looking for and being able to test for it, Tsang and his team could 

make little progress. 

* * * 

The discovery that the Metropole was the common denominator in the 

spread of SARS to other countries shook senior WHO officials. Unlike on 

9/11 when the Pentagon’s inability to imagine that terrorists might weapon -

ize commercial airliners had caught America’s security apparatus by surprise, 

in 2002 the WHO felt sure it had a system in place for detecting novel bio -

logical threats before they could cause widespread epidemics or pandemics. 

The name of that system was GOARN, short for Global Outbreak Alert and 

Response Network. The brainchild of David Heymann, the head of WHO’s 

Communicable Diseases Division and a former CDC epidemiologist who was 

a veteran of the Legionnaires’ and Ebola outbreaks, GOARN routinely 

trawled the internet for electronic “chatter” about outbreaks occurring in 

remote regions of the world. It used systems developed by Canada’s Global 

Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) and the Program for 

Monitoring Emerging Diseases (ProMED). The idea was that once alerted to 

a suspicious event, WHO officials could make discreet inquiries with the 

relevant health authorities and dispatch a team to investigate. Essentially, the 

electronic eavesdropping network was WHO’s version of 999 and GOARN 

its fire and ambulance service. Indeed, it was the WHO’s interception in 

November 2002 of the report about an unusual respiratory outbreak in 

Guangdong that had first prompted officials to make inquiries. But of course, 

in 2002 the pathogen that WHO officials had in mind was bird flu. The result 

was that when officials persuaded the Chinese to forward samples from 

Guangdong to a WHO laboratory for testing and it was found that those 

samples contained only routine strains of flu, no one thought to check for 

other pathogens and the samples were discarded. 

Initially, Peiris had also assumed that the respiratory outbreaks in 

Guangdong and Hong Kong were due to a mutant strain of bird flu. “It was 

not at all clear at that stage that we were looking at something unknown,” he 

said. “The only unusual thing about the disease was that health care workers SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

183 

seemed to get affected disproportionately, but a particularly severe influenza 

could conceivably have produced the same effect.” 27  What changed Peiris’s 

view and swept away the assumptions clouding experts’ view of the SARS 

outbreak were two samples that arrived at Peiris’s laboratory in the second 

week of March. As it happened, one of those samples came from Liu’s 

brother-in-law, Chan Ying-pui, who had also been hospitalized in Hong Kong 

and who had died shortly after the 64-year-old professor of nephrology. 

Unlike other samples arriving at Peiris’s laboratory, many of which only 

broadly fitted the WHO’s case definition and may not have been true cases of 

SARS, Chan’s clearly was. 28  Moreover, as the biopsy had been taken while he 

had been alive, there was a good chance that live virus might still be present 

in the tissue. 

Once again, Peiris instructed technicians at his laboratory and at Queen 

Mary’s to run tests using the usual cell cultures for growing respiratory 

viruses. It was only when these failed, as they had before, that Peiris suggested 

using other cell lines, including foetal kidney cells from rhesus monkeys that 

had proved useful for growing hepatitis and the human metapneumovirus, a 

common cause of severe bronchitis in children. Thus it was that on 13  March, 

Dr  Chan Kwok Hung, a senior scientist in the microbiology laboratory at 

Queen Mary’s, introduced Chan’s lung biopsy into a monkey cell culture. Two 

days later, examining the culture through a microscope, he spotted a sheet of 

cells that appeared shinier and rounder than the others. However, the change 

in the culture was extremely subtle so he asked Peiris for a second opinion. 

Peiris agreed the culture looked “a bit unusual,” but two days later there had 

been no further change, as one would expect if a virus were growing, so 

Peiris suggested scraping a bit off and transferring the material to a fresh cell 

line. 29  This time, they could see more of the rounded bodies, suggesting that 

something was definitely growing in the monkey cells. However, the same 

effect might be produced by a contaminant, such as a mycoplasma, or a drug 

that had been administered to the patient in hospital. To be certain Peiris 

asked a pathologist colleague, John Nicholls, to examine the cells through a 

high-powered electron microscope. Gathering in a room in the hospital’s 

pathology department, Nicholls and Peiris could clearly see the particles. 

Peiris now had no doubt that a virus was growing in the cell culture, but what 

kind of virus was it and how could he be certain it was the cause of SARS? 

Microbiologists tend to be a cautious lot and Peiris is no exception. To be 

sure he had isolated the agent of SARS he needed to confirm that the virus was 

also present in other SARS cases. The simplest way to do that was to use a 

serology test—the same test McDade had used to demonstrate that legionella THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

184 

was the cause of Legionnaires’ disease in 1977. If the virus they had isolated 

was SARS, then serum from SARS patients would contain antibodies that 

would react with it. The strongest evidence of all would be if the virus reacted 

with serum taken from patients at an advanced stage of infection. Accordingly, 

to make the test as rigorous as possible, Peiris asked Lim at the public health 

laboratory to send him “paired” serum samples from patients with suspected 

SARS, i.e., samples collected from patients in the early and late stages of infec -

tion. In addition, he asked for serum from patients who did not have SARS and 

instructed Dr  Lim not to tell him which was which. As they added the serum 

samples to the virus, they noted a marked antibody reaction. Importantly, the 

sera from the patients who did not have SARS gave no reaction. Moreover, 

using an indirect immunofluorescence assay to demonstrate seroconversion, 

they could see the reaction was stronger in the later serum samples—a strong 

indication of rising antibody levels in the SARS patients. 

Peiris was now confident he had found the virus of SARS, and on 21  March 

he emailed Klaus Stohr at the WHO to tell him the news. However, as Peiris 

still did not know the classification of the virus, he asked Stohr to keep the 

finding confidential to give him time to complete the identification. 

Unfortunately, at this point scores of suspect cases were being reported in 

Canada, Hong Kong, Vietnam and Singapore, many of them among health 

workers, and the WHO was desperate for positive news. Somehow or other 

the news leaked out, forcing Peiris to go public on 22  March. 

By now, researchers at several WHO collaborating laboratories were claim -

ing they had also isolated the pathogen of SARS and that it resembled a para -

myxovirus, the same type of virus that causes mumps and measles. However, 

none of these researchers had grown the virus in cell culture or tested it 

against serum from known SARS patients, so their statements were prema -

ture. To know what sort of virus it was, Peiris needed to match it to sequences 

stored on GenBank, a database managed by the National Institutes of Health 

that contains a repository of all known viruses. “But you can only do this if 

you know the sequence of the virus you are looking for and in this case we 

didn’t know this,” Peiris explained. 30 

That just left one option: to fish out bits of the viral genome from the 

infected cells using a random primer. Peiris had asked his colleague Leo Poon 

to set up this technique to directly test specimens. Now Poon applied the 

technique to the virus-infected cells in the hope of finding a match with 

sequences on GenBank. Thirty-five times Poon got fragments of genetic infor -

mation, but each time the result came back as monkey cell DNA or some 

other “junk.” By the thirty-eighth attempt Poon was losing hope. Then, on the SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

185 

thirty-ninth attempt, there was a partial match. “It was not perfect, but it 

seemed to be a coronavirus,” said Peiris. If accurate, this was astonishing 

news. Coronaviruses are typically the concern of veterinarians. First isolated 

in 1937, coronaviruses had long been associated with fatal enteric and respira -

tory infections in pigs, rodents, chickens, and other animals. However, in 

humans they usually resulted in nothing worse than a sniffle and mild respira -

tory illness. In short, coronaviruses were considered the “Cinderellas” of the 

virus world, beautiful to look at after work but too insignificant to take up 

microbiologists’ daylight hours. 

To be sure there had not been an error, Peiris also spun the fluid containing 

the virus in a high-speed centrifuge and asked Lim to look at the concentrated 

virus particles under an electron microscope. Each virus particle was ringed 

by a halo of tiny spikes as if it were wearing a crown—that, too, strongly 

suggested a coronavirus. Peiris was now confident that SARS was indeed a 

coronavirus. He speculated that the reason the homology was not perfect was 

that it was very likely a new type of coronavirus that had emerged recently 

from an animal reservoir and therefore had yet to be typed by GenBank. 31 

Using the partial genetic sequence of the virus, Peiris and his colleagues set 

up a PCR test to detect the virus, and on 28  March made the test available to 

hospitals in Hong Kong and to the WHO.  “It is not the way we would nor -

mally set about it but time was of the essence,” he explained. 32 

Events now moved rapidly. Within three days of the WHO’s receiving this 

information, two other laboratories also reported finding the coronavirus, 

and by 25  March the CDC had uploaded images of the virus to a secure WHO 

website, prompting Peiris’s group to do the same. Nonetheless, some 

researchers continued to insist that SARS was caused by a paramyxovirus or 

perhaps the human metapneumovirus. This prompted speculation that the 

viruses worked synergistically, with the coronavirus weakening the immune 

system to the point where the other viruses colonized the respiratory tract, 

triggering SARS’s distinctive pathology. However, the patients with SARS that 

Peiris had investigated showed no evidence of metapneumovirus, only the 

coronavirus. Nor were the coronavirus or antibodies to the coronavirus found 

in other patients who did not have SARS.  Peiris was therefore sure that the 

new coronavirus was the cause of SARS and that it had been newly introduced 

to humans, and he submitted a paper to this effect to the British medical 

journal  The Lancet .33  Researchers at Erasmus University in Rotterdam eventu -

ally resolved the dispute by performing an experiment on macaques, one 

group of which was infected with the coronavirus, a second with the human 

metapneumovirus, and a third with both viruses. Only the animals infected THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

186 

with the coronavirus developed full-blown SARS.  By contrast, the metapneu -

movirus resulted in only a mild rhinitis, while animals infected with both 

viruses did not develop worse symptoms than the first group. Ergo, the coro -

navirus was both a sufficient and necessary cause of SARS. 34 

It had taken scientists more than two years to discover the cause of AIDS 

and develop a diagnostic test for HIV, and five months to demonstrate that 

Legionnaires’ disease was due to legionella. By identifying the SARS virus so 

quickly and having a rough-and-ready test at hand, Peiris and other microbi -

ologists were now in a position to say who had the disease and who did not, 

and hence who presented a risk to the community and ought to be isolated to 

prevent wider spread. * 

> *

At a time of growing panic in Hong Kong this was a 

significant achievement, one that would help health authorities gain the pub -

lic’s support for quarantines and other vigorous public health measures. 

Unfortunately, with hundreds of specimens pouring into Peiris’s laboratory 

every day, he did not have enough staff to run the tests, and when he adver -

tised for additional technicians hardly anyone responded. “Basically, people 

were scared to work with SARS in case they were accidentally contaminated. 

It really was a nightmarish situation. It was all we could do to keep our heads 

above water.” 35 

If laboratory technicians were wary of the virus, so were other medical 

workers. Nowhere was the danger of SARS more acute than at the Scarborough 

Grace Hospital in Toronto. Following his arrival on 7  March, Mrs Kwan’s son 

had waited twenty hours in the emergency department with only a thin cur -

tain separating him from other patients. When, the following day, he was finally 

admitted he was so sick that he had to be rushed to intensive care for intuba -

tion. Suspecting tuberculosis, the attending physician isolated him. Unfortu -

nately, during his stay in the emergency room he had been given oxygen and 

vaporized medications. The result was that a week later a patient who had been 

in a nearby bed returned to Scarborough Grace complaining of similar symp -

toms. The patient was immediately isolated and moved to the ICU, where he 

was intubated by a physician wearing a surgical mask, eye protection, gown 

and gloves. But the infection control measures failed and a few days later the 

physician developed full-blown SARS, followed by three nurses who had been 

present in the room when the doctor had inserted the tube into the man’s  

> *One of the first samples Peiris tested came from Amoy Gardens; it was positive
> for antibodies to the coronavirus, confirming that the outbreak in the apartment
> complex was due to SARS.

SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

187 

trachea. Worse, the man’s wife had not been asked about her exposure risk and 

was allowed to wander freely through the hospital’s corridors even though, by 

then, she was incubating the disease and would also soon fall sick. During her 

visit to Scarborough Grace she infected six health care workers, two patients, 

two paramedics, a firefighter and a housekeeper. 

In the meantime, in mid-March another patient who had been in contact 

with her husband, and who later presented with symptoms of a heart attack, 

plus a mild fever, was transferred to York Central Hospital, Toronto, where he 

became the source of another SARS cluster. Some fifty individuals were even -

tually infected, forcing the authorities to close the hospital. On 23  March 

Scarborough Grace followed suit, and anyone who had entered the hospital 

after 16  March was asked to observe a ten-day home quarantine. By now, 

guards had been posted at the entrance of the hospital and the city was run -

ning out of negative pressure rooms. In an effort to care for patients safely, 

West Park Hospital recommissioned twenty-five beds in a facility that had 

previously been used to house tuberculosis patients. Having worked out that 

SARS was a droplet infection, medical workers were told to apply stringent 

infection controls, such as handwashing, and wearing gowns, gloves and N95 

masks. Despite these precautions, by 26  March some forty-eight people in 

Ontario had been hospitalized with “presumptive” SARS and eighteen were 

confirmed to have the disease, leading to the quarantining of hospitals across 

the province and the declaration of a “code orange” emergency. All but essen -

tial hospital services were suspended in Toronto. 36 

By now, SARS was dominating the news feeds, with press and TV compet -

ing to report every aspect of the outbreak. Toronto was gripped by hysteria. 

Panicked producers, concerned about their health and the expense of caring 

for sick crew members should they contract SARS, cancelled film and TV 

shoots. Chinatown became a ghost town as diners, spooked by rumours of the 

disease’s Chinese origins, avoided dim sum restaurants and noodle shops. 

Anyone presenting with suspicious respiratory symptoms was advised to 

quarantine themselves at home, and when the child of a nurse from 

Scarborough Grace exhibited symptoms of SARS, her school shut its gates 

rather than take the risk of her infecting other children. Yet still, SARS con -

tinued to spread. 

Public health officials had no choice but to assume the worst. As James 

Young, Ontario’s provincial coroner and commissioner of public safety and 

security, recalled: “We did not know the duration of the incubation period. 

We did not know whether it was spread by droplet or by air. We had no reli -

able diagnostic test, no vaccine, no treatment.” Indeed, wandering around THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

188 

Toronto, Young was reminded of a “bioterrorist” attack, the difference being 

that when a bomb detonated you could see the carnage on the streets, but 

with SARS there was no “obvious destruction.” Other colleagues feared it 

might be the harbinger of a pandemic, but “we realized that we simply didn’t 

know enough about it to tell whether or not this was ‘the big one.’” 37  For all 

the supposed medical progress that had been made since 1918, officials 

resorted to the quarantine measures that had proved effective in stemming 

plague and other outbreaks of infectious disease in the eighteenth and nine -

teenth centuries. 

By April, officials were hopeful the crisis had passed, but shortly before 

Easter a new cluster of cases emerged among a Catholic sect in Toronto. In 

response, Ontario’s health department asked clergy to place communion 

wafers in the hands of congregants, rather than their mouths, and advised 

priests not to enter confessional booths to take confessions. Then, on Easter 

weekend, healthcare workers at Sunnybrook Hospital contracted SARS while 

performing an intubation on a patient. Three days later, WHO issued a second 

travel advisory, warning tourists not to visit Toronto unless absolutely neces -

sary. Ontario’s minister of health was outraged and flew to Geneva to try to 

persuade WHO officials to change their minds, but it was to no avail. Instead, 

after lifting the travel advisory at the end of April, the WHO reinstituted it in 

May when a further twenty-six cases unexpectedly emerged at four Toronto 

hospitals. The result was that it was not until 3  July that the travel advisory 

was finally lifted. In all, SARS had resulted in 250 infections and 44 deaths in 

Toronto and Vancouver. That was not a lot when set against the annual death 

toll from cancer and chronic lung infections. However, in psychological and 

economic terms, the impact was dramatic. At the height of the crisis, one 

member of Ontario’s SARS advisory scientific committee recalled waking up 

drenched in sweat, convinced that “Toronto and Kingston had been consumed 

by SARS and were desolate.” 38  The hotel industry suffered a 14  per  cent drop 

in bookings. Toronto’s film industry, which had enjoyed a record year in 2001, 

taking nearly one billion Canadian dollars in production money, saw a similar 

dip in its fortunes. It would not be until 2010 that Toronto’s film industry 

would rebound to 2001 levels boosted by the remake of the Arnold 

Schwarzenegger film  Total Recall  and the depreciation of the Canadian dollar 

that had occurred in the meantime. 39 

If SARS was a calamity for Toronto, for Hong Kong it was disaster. Public 

anxiety had been mounting steadily since the end of March when government 

officials descended on Amoy Gardens. As officers secured the housing com -

plex with metal barricades and tape, TV viewers were treated to pictures of SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

189 

health workers in biohazard suits guarding the entrance to the high rises as 

health officials went door-to-door to issue residents with notices informing 

them that Amoy Gardens was being quarantined and they would not be able 

to step outside their apartments for the next ten days. The eerie images 

relayed around the world were the first that many people knew of SARS.  The 

following day, 1  April, a 14-year-old boy decided to play an April Fool’s prank 

by posting a bogus message on the website of a local newspaper. The message 

stated that Hong Kong was about to be declared an “infected port,” that the 

Hang Seng Index had collapsed, and that its chief executive had resigned. 

Terrified, people rushed to grocery stores to stock up on rice and other 

essential commodities, then bolted the doors of their apartments and tele -

phoned and texted those who had not yet heard the “news.” That afternoon 

Margaret Chan held an emergency press conference in an attempt to reassure 

the public, but the following day her efforts were undone by the WHO’s 

declaration that it had issued an advisory warning against unnecessary travel 

to Hong Kong. Prior to 2  April, Hong Kong’s airport had been one of the 

busiest in the world, processing nearly 100,000 inbound passengers a day. 

Within weeks passenger numbers had fallen by two-thirds, and by the end of 

the month Hong Kong was seeing just 15,000 arrivals a day. “Hong Kong is a 

city gripped by fear,” reported CNN.  “A place that markets itself as ‘The City 

of Life’ and whose lifeblood is travel, trade and international business, is 

acquiring a reputation as a place of disease.” 40 

The effects of this fear were far-reaching. In Britain, Hong Kong children 

attending a boarding school on the Isle of Wight were informed that they 

would be quarantined on the island following the Easter vacation. At the 

University of California, Berkeley, Hong Kong students and their families 

were asked to stay away from graduation ceremonies. Meanwhile, in 

Switzerland, health officials issued a decree banning anyone who had been in 

Hong Kong, Singapore, China or Vietnam since 1  March from attending the 

World Jewellery and Watch Fair in Basel and Zurich. Hong Kong, which usu -

ally mustered the second biggest delegation after the Swiss, threatened to sue, 

but the Swiss refused to budge, prompting one Hong Kong company to erect 

a sign over an empty booth that read: “Due to our fear of Swiss Aggravated 

Respiratory Syndrome we are going home.” 41 

From an economic perspective, SARS could not have come at a worse time 

for Hong Kong as the territory was only just beginning to recover from the 

1998 Asian financial crisis. The previous year Hong Kong had seen its real 

GDP grow by 2  per  cent, and in 2003 the government had been forecasting 

3 per  cent real GDP growth. Within weeks of the WHO’s travel advisory, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

190 

those forecasts were revised downward as shops reported a halving of retail 

sales and hotels saw their occupancy rates plunge by 60  per  cent. 42  As malls 

emptied and banks like HSBC ordered bond traders to stay home, the only 

people seen to be doing a brisk trade on the formerly packed streets were 

salesmen of N95 masks. The sense of panic was palpable. As a lawyer and 

filmmaker recently arrived in Hong Kong recalled, “It was no longer an ani -

mal flu, but ‘Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome’—an altogether more 

urban-sounding virus.” 43 

By now there was little doubt that SARS was spread by respiratory drop -

lets, but could it also be communicated in other ways, through contaminated 

faecal matter, for instance? And why, if the disease was so infectious, had none 

of the hotel staff at the Metropole contracted it? The questions recalled the 

epidemiological puzzle that had confronted CDC investigators at the 

Bellevue-Stratford in Philadelphia nearly thirty years earlier. Until Peiris 

identified the coronavirus and diagnostic tests became available, investigators 

had no way of checking these intuitions. Now, they were in a position to 

gather samples from different locations of the Metropole and at Amoy 

Gardens and send them to Peiris’s laboratory to be analyzed. In late April a 

team of environmental health experts from Health Canada arrived in Hong 

Kong to assist the Department of Health with its investigation, and on 16  May 

they reported their findings. The investigators had concentrated their efforts 

on the ninth floor of the Metropole as this was where most of those who had 

fallen ill had been staying. In all, genetic material of the SARS virus had been 

found in 8 of 154 samples. The interior of Liu’s room, 911, had yielded no 

traces of the virus. However, four positive samples had been collected from 

the carpet and door sills outside his room and the rooms on either side, sug -

gesting that he may have thrown up when he stepped out of his room or else 

spread the virus when he coughed in the corridor. In addition, four positive 

samples were collected from the air inlet fan of the elevator that served the 

ninth floor. That suggested that Liu’s body fluids had been aerosolized when 

he entered the elevator, meaning that anyone who stepped out of the ninth-

floor lift shortly afterward would have been exposed. However, the investiga -

tors dismissed the theory that the virus was transmitted through contact with 

elevator buttons, door handles, or handrails, pointing out that, if that had 

been the case, then other guests in the hotel, as well as staff, would also have 

been infected. 

Disappointingly, despite collecting and testing 143 samples from Amoy 

Gardens, the investigators were unable to recover any genetic material from 

the SARS virus at the housing complex. However, they noted that the SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

191 

outbreak had begun  after a kidney patient who had been receiving dialysis 

treatment at Prince of Wales Hospital, and who had later developed what the 

hospital thought was influenza, was discharged and spent several nights at his 

brother-in-law’s apartment at Amoy Gardens. As well as a fever and a cough, 

the man had suffered from diarrhoea, a symptom that Peiris’s group would 

later discover occurs in about 10  per  cent of SARS patients. As the virus had 

been found in stools for at least two days and the investigators suspected the 

man had had a high viral load, they speculated that his faeces could have been 

the cause of the outbreak. Noting that many of the drain taps in the bath -

rooms had dried out or been removed, and that many residents had bought 

exhaust fans that were six to ten times more powerful than were needed for 

such a small space, the investigators suggested that contaminated faecal mat -

ter could have been sucked into the bathrooms via the sewerage system when 

people showered. Alternatively, contaminated air from nearby bathroom 

vents could have carried droplets from adjoining bathrooms via the light well, 

releasing contaminants through the open windows of apartments above and 

below. Another factor that may have contributed to the spread of the virus 

was a sixteen-hour water shutdown that occurred in Block E on the evening 

of 21  March in order to allow a broken pipe to be fixed. During that period, 

many residents flushed their toilets with buckets of water, a practice that may 

have resulted in splashing, increasing the risk of contamination. 44  Overall, the 

epidemiological evidence suggested that SARS was primarily a droplet infec -

tion and that the risk was greatest when an infectious patient coughed or 

sneezed, propelling infectious particles over distances of about three feet. In 

many ways, that was good news as it meant that, unlike influenza, SARS did 

not linger in the atmosphere for long periods, making it an unlikely vehicle 

for a pandemic. Nor, despite the fears generated by the reports of hospital 

super spreaders, was it an efficient aerosol, meaning it was unlikely to recom -

mend itself to terrorists. Having said that, at the point when patients develop 

symptoms—typically two to seven days after infection—they are highly 

infectious and one person can infect as many as three other people, possibly 

more if infection controls are inadequate and there is frequent contact 

between patients and nurses, as occurred in hospitals. Not only that, but 

SARS had spread efficiently in large buildings, such as the Metropole and 

Amoy Gardens. Clearly, the virus was a particular threat in urban settings. 

* * * 

Once scientists had cracked SARS’s genetic code and established it was a 

coronavirus, the next obvious question was to a sk where it had come from. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

192 

The two types of coronavirus previously known to infect humans belonged to 

groups that typically infected mammals and birds. SARS, however, did not 

appear to belong to either of these groups. Still, it was likely that SARS had 

zoonotic origins and that its animal host was located in Guangdong, where 

the earliest cases had occurred. As several of those cases had been traced to 

chefs and seafood merchants, the obvious places to look were the markets 

where restaurants bought exotic animals for their clientele. 

In May 2003 Peiris’s colleague Yi Guan packed a satchel with syringes, 

swabs and sample vials and set off by train for Shenzhen’s Dongmen Market. 

There, working with the Shenzhen Centers for Disease Control, Guan 

approached animal traders and asked to take nasal samples and faecal swabs. 

Those who demurred were reassured that if any animal died they would be 

compensated up to the sum of 10,000 Hong Kong dollars (about $6), but 

more often than not Guan was able to anaesthetize the animals and take 

samples on the spot. As you might expect, there was a wide array of animals 

on sale: raccoon dogs, Chinese ferret badgers, beavers, Chinese hares and 

Himalayan palm civets. At the end of two days, Guan had collected twenty-five 

samples. They showed that four out of six of the palm civets carried a corona -

virus that was 99.8  per  cent genetically identical to the human coronavirus. In 

addition, one of the raccoon dogs carried the same virus as the civet cats, 

while one ferret badger had antibodies to the virus. When the animal viruses 

were sequenced, they were found to have a short section of twenty-eight 

nucleotides that were missing in the human virus, leading Guan and his col -

leagues to conclude that it was the absence of this sequence, or perhaps a 

random mutation, that had enabled the virus to transmit easily between 

humans. Moreover, 40  per  cent of the animal traders whose blood was tested 

and 20  per  cent of those involved in slaughtering the animals had antibodies 

to the virus carried by the civet cats, indicating that the virus had probably 

been circulating between animals and market traders for some time without 

causing disease. Even though other researchers were not immediately able to 

replicate Guan’s findings, the Chinese halted sales of fifty-four species of wild 

animals while further tests were conducted in other markets. Those tests also 

found evidence of SARS antibodies in traders who dealt in palm civets, sug -

gesting that the virus was regularly passing from animals to humans in south -

ern China. However, it did not resolve the question of where the virus nor -

mally resided in nature. Nor did it explain why the SARS viruses carried by 

some of the civet cats at the market in Shenzhen had subtle differences when 

compared to human variants. One explanation was that the civets had been 

infected by some other animal in the wild, or on the farms where they bred. SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

193 

“It is conceivable that civets, raccoon dogs, and ferret badgers were all infected 

from another, as yet unknown, animal source, which is in fact the true reser -

voir in nature,” wrote Guan and his colleagues. In other words, civet cats and 

other animals popular in Chinese markets might be “intermediate hosts that 

increase the opportunity for transmission of infection to humans.” 45 

Since then, further evidence has emerged to support this hypothesis. In 

2005 researchers found that Chinese horseshoe bats harboured SARS viruses 

that were 88  per  cent to 92  per  cent identical to isolates from humans. 

However, those viruses were missing a crucial protein that binds to a receptor 

on the surface of human cells, meaning that the bat viruses could not infect 

humans directly—they would have to pass through an intermediary animal 

host first. Then, in 2013, scientists from China, Australia and the United 

States announced another discovery: after visiting a cave inhabited by horse -

shoe bats in Kunming, in southern China, they identified two new strains of 

coronavirus. Unlike previous strains isolated from bats, these did contain the 

crucial protein enabling them to infect mammalian cells, including cells lining 

the human lung. 46  Although this was not definitive evidence that SARS could 

move directly from bats to humans, it suggested that, as with other bat 

viruses, such as Nipah and Hendra, that also cause disease in humans, it had 

the potential to do so. “I think people should stop hunting bats and stop eating 

bats,” commented one of the report’s authors, Peter Daszak, the president of 

EcoHealth Alliance. 47 

They should probably also stop eating civets. To the credit of the Chinese, 

following the identification of civets infected with SARS, the animals were 

banned from wet markets and strict infection controls were introduced on 

civet farms. However, it seems that nothing could sate the Chinese appetite 

for the exotic mammals, and soon customer demand had driven up the price 

for civets to $200, making it likely they would find their way onto restaurant 

menus whatever action the authorities took. 48  The reason? Roasted whole, 

braised or added to soups, civets are considered a delicacy by the Chinese. 

They are also said to be full of  yang , a heat-giving energy source that, accord -

ing to traditional beliefs, helps people stay warm in cold weather. 

* * * 

If AIDS had given the world a preview of how the consumption of bushmeat 

and faster international communications were presenting animal pathogens 

with new opportunities to infect human populations and spread around the 

globe, SARS underlined the risks that the demand for exotic sources of THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

194 

protein and faster international air travel presented in the twenty-first cen -

tury. Dubbed the “millennium’s first jetset disease,” SARS managed to infect 

thirty countries worldwide by the simple expedient of hitching lifts on air -

planes. 49  All it required were unwitting dupes to carry it onto flights bound 

for Singapore, Hanoi, Toronto and other international destinations. That it 

found these human vessels at the Metropole Hotel was bad luck for the hotel’s 

owners, but it could just as easily have been any Hong Kong hotel catering to 

international business travellers and package tourists. Once it was airborne, 

the virus ensnared the globe in a web of interconnecting lines, like a Lufthansa 

map iterated to the power of ten. This was something new and scary, serving 

as a reminder that unlike the physical borders between countries, interna -

tional airspace is highly porous and vulnerable to interflows of people and 

pathogens. Coming in the wake of 9/11 and the anthrax letter mailings, it 

was also a reminder that, in the words of Peiris and Guan, “‘nature’ remains 

the greatest bioterrorist threat of all.” 50 

There were other lessons, too. Perhaps the biggest was that for all that the 

internet and new web-crawling technologies had given the WHO the ability 

to monitor disease outbreaks occurring far from the eyes of prying interna -

tional health officials, governments still had considerable powers to cover up 

outbreaks and spread disinformation within their own borders, especially 

where it was felt that transparency might be detrimental to their economic 

and political interests. Indeed, it was not until mid-April, when a Chinese 

whistle-blower revealed the true numbers of SARS infections in Beijing, that 

the authorities owned up to the full extent of the outbreak and mobilized 

resources on a scale necessary to quell it. Previously, the Communist Party 

had insisted there were just thirty-seven cases in the Chinese capital. In fact, 

by 19  April, Beijing had already seen 339 cases, including eighteen deaths, 

and SARS had also spread to Shanxi province, inner Mongolia, Guangxi and 

Fujian. Thanks to the institution of mass quarantines and the construction of 

new treatment facilities—a feat the Chinese accomplished virtually over -

night—disaster was averted, but it was a close call. In all, China reported 

5,327 SARS cases, more than any other country. Luckily, the vast majority 

were confined to Beijing and Guangzhou. However, had the virus become 

seeded in poorer, rural areas lacking sophisticated medical facilities, it could 

have been a different story. 51 

Chinese secrecy during the first three months of the outbreak, when SARS 

was spreading in Guangdong, had sown considerable confusion. Fed misleading 

information and with incomplete knowledge, WHO officials assumed the out -

break was due to bird flu. On the other hand, once the WHO triggered an SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

195 

international alert and named SARS as the culprit, screening measures at air -

ports were sufficient to prevent further importations of the disease. And for the 

most part SARS was also controlled in hospitals once the risk of super spreaders 

was recognized and managers instituted rigorous infection controls. The result 

was that although there were 8,422 cases of SARS and 916 deaths globally, the 

disease was contained without the need for vaccines or specific therapies. 

Unfortunately, the same thing could not be said for the fear propagated by the 

WHO alerts. In an era of global news and the internet, news of SARS spread 

far faster than the virus, amplifying anxiety about the outbreak. As airports shut 

and pictures of nervous Hong Kong commuters flashed around the globe, the 

tourism, aviation and service sectors took a massive financial hit, resulting in an 

estimated $50 billion in losses to the global economy. 52 

On the other hand, the WHO could take encouragement from the way that 

GOARN had operated. SARS had been the first opportunity to test whether 

scientists and clinicians could set aside academic rivalries and work together 

for the public good by sharing information about the virus and the most effec -

tive treatment strategies. Within a month of establishing an international labo -

ratory network, scientists had identified a coronavirus as the cause of 

SARS.  Not long after, they completed the sequencing of its DNA and were on 

the trail of its animal reservoir. SARS, concluded Heymann, was “proof of the 

effectiveness of GOARN.” At the same time, he recognized the WHO was also 

“aided by good fortune” in that the outbreak had occurred in Hong Kong. 

“Had SARS established a foothold in countries where health systems are less 

well developed cases might still be occurring,” he observed, “with global 

containment much more difficult, if not impossible.” 53 

* * * 

At a post-mortem at the Royal Society in London, Roy Anderson, the rector 

of Imperial College and an internationally renowned epidemiologist, was 

similarly cautious. Although the WHO’s handling of SARS had restored faith 

in the UN, the world had also been “very lucky,” he wrote. It was only thanks 

to the low transmissibility of SARS and the fact that China and other Asian 

countries had been able to introduce “fairly draconian” public health mea -

sures, such as home isolations and mass quarantines, that disaster had been 

averted. He predicted such measures would have met greater resistance in 

North America, where people tended to be more litigious, and to a lesser 

extent in western Europe. The persistence of SARS in animal reservoirs 

meant that further outbreaks were inevitable. In the meantime, the real global THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

196 

threat came from the emergence of an antigenically novel influenza virus. 

“One of the major dangers arising from the effective control of SARS is com -

placency,” Anderson concluded. “Sentiments of the type, ‘we have been suc -

cessful once—we will be again,’ may be far from the truth.” 54 197 

# 8

# EBOLA AT THE BORDERS    

> “The outbreak … delivered some horrific shocks and surprises. The world, including
> WHO, was too slow to see what was unfolding before us.”
> Dr Margaret Chan, Special Session of the Executive Board on Ebola, Geneva,
> 25 January 2015

In December 2013 a g roup of children gathered around the stump of a hol -

lowed-out tree in Meliandou, a remote farming village in south-eastern 

Guinea, and began probing the hollow with a stick. The tree was a well-

known roosting spot for  lolibelo —a species of insectivorous, long-tailed 

bats—and the children liked nothing better than coaxing the tiny grey mam -

mals from their hiding places. This was not merely idle sport. In a region 

where chimpanzees and other sources of bushmeat are scarce, the Angolan 

free-tailed bat  Mops condylurus  was an important source of protein. Indeed, for 

the children of Meliandou the tree stump en route to the village watering 

hole was the nearest thing to a hamburger stand and  Mops condylurus  was the 

equivalent of a Big Mac. 1

It is not known how many bats the children caught and cooked that morn -

ing. In recent years, as more and more forested areas around Meliandou were 

cleared for palm oil cultivation, the  lolibelo  had taken to nesting under the 

roofs of the villagers’ simple mud-and-wattle dwellings and had become a 

familiar sight. What is known is that shortly after visiting the tree stump, one 

of the children, a two-year-old boy named Emile Ouamouno, developed a 

high fever, with vomiting and bloody stools. His father gave him soup in the 

hope of calming his stomach, but nothing would halt the progress of his illness 

and on 6  December Emile died. Not long after, Emile’s mother, who was 

seven months’ pregnant, also fell ill, followed by Emile’s three-year-old sister. 

This time there was even more blood, and on 13  December Emile’s mother 

died together with her sti llborn baby, followed soon after by Emile’s sister. 2THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

198 

Like other villages in the forested  region of south-eastern Guinea, 

Meliandou is an endemic area for malaria and Lassa Fever, a haemorrhagic 

infection spread by rats. Emile’s symptoms and those of his mother and sister 

resembled both diseases, so at this point no one had any reason to suspect a 

new pathogen, much less that the  lolibelo  might be responsible. Had 

Meliandou lain deep within the forest that might have been the end of the 

matter, but the village is just six miles along a dirt track from Guéckédou, a 

busy trading town close to the borders of both Sierra Leone and Liberia. 

From Guéckédou, a poorly paved highway also leads north to Kissidougou, 

after which it joins the N1, the road to Guinea’s coastal capital, Conakry. 

For the main local ethnic groups, the Kissi and the Gola, trade is their 

lifeblood. Indeed, the ethnonym “Gola” is said to derive from the word for a 

nut, commonly known as  kola , with stimulant properties revered throughout 

West Africa. It is thought that both groups settled the upper Guinea forest in 

around the fourteenth century, emigrating west from modern-day Côte 

d’Ivoire. Of the two, the Kissi are the largest, numbering some 220,000. As 

they are cut off from the Muslim majority in Conakry, census figures are hard 

to come by, but it is thought that as many as 80,000 live in the forest on the 

Guinean side of the border, and a further 140,000 in Liberia and Sierra Leone 

(by contrast, the Gola are concentrated in western Liberia). Linked by blood, 

traditions and a common language, the Kissi have little regard for the colo -

nial-era borders that separate the countries, and extended families travel 

easily from one to another either by motorcycle along unpaved roads, or, just 

as frequently, by dugout canoes along the Mano River, which forms a natural 

boundary between Liberia and Sierra Leone. 3 Little wonder then that within 

weeks of the mysterious illness appearing in Guéckédou, it had spread beyond 

the town limits, radiating west to Macenta, east to Kissidougo, and south to 

Foya in Liberia. 

The first person to fall ill outside the family was a midwife who had been 

summoned by Emile’s grandmother to try to save her pregnant daughter and 

baby. She was admitted to a hospital in Guéckédou on 25  January and died 

eight days later on 2  February. Unfortunately, before being hospitalized she 

transmitted the disease to a relative, setting off a new chain of infections in 

the Guinean border town. By now Emile’s grandmother had also died and at 

her funeral her sister and several mourners were likewise infected, probably 

because they prepared her body for burial in accordance with traditional 

funerary practices. This was followed, on 10  February, by an outbreak at a 

hospital in Macenta. The infection, which was introduced by a health worker 

from Guéckédou, sparked fifteen further deaths, including that of a local 

doctor,  prompting Guinea’s Ministry of Health to issue an alert on 10  March. 4EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

199 

One of the first to respond was the private medical charity Médecins Sans 

Frontières (MSF). In 2010, MSF had established a sentinel facility in 

Guéckédou to monitor the incidence of malaria; it was only natural that they 

would assume that the deadly mosquito-borne disease was to blame. But 

when MSF staff interviewed health workers about the outbreak they discov -

ered that while many of the victims had exhibited symptoms typical of 

malaria, such as severe headaches and muscle and joint pains, they had also 

reported profuse bleeding, vomiting and violent diarrhoea, symptoms not at 

all typical of malaria. In addition, many complained of hiccups. The MSF 

medics initially suspected Lassa, but when they forwarded their report to 

Dr  Michel Van Herp, a senior viral haemorrhagic fever expert at the organiza -

tion’s Brussels headquarters, it was the hiccups that caught his attention. They 

reminded him of a patient he had previously seen with the same symptoms. 

That patient had had Ebola. 5

* * * 

Ebola haemorrhagic fever is one of the most virulent diseases known to man. 

It is also one of the most terrifying. One moment, victims are complaining of 

fever, headache and a sore throat; the next, they are doubled up with abdomi -

nal pain, vomiting and diarrhoea. As the symptoms worsen, many also 

develop a dazed, glassy expression and a purple rash, accompanied by hic -

cups—caused, most likely, by irritation to the nerves that control the dia -

phragm. The most alarming symptoms occur several days into the illness 

when cells infected by the Ebola virus attach themselves to the insides of 

blood vessels, causing bloody fluids to leak from the mouth, nose, anus and 

vagina—even, on occasion, from the eyes. Ebola is especially damaging to the 

liver, where the virus wipes out cells required to produce coagulation pro -

teins and other important components of plasma. Eventually, this damage 

reaches a point of no return and patients suffer a fatal drop in blood pressure, 

terminating in shock and multiple organ failure. 6 Little wonder, then, that 

one writer has described Ebola as “a perfect parasite … [that] transforms 

virtually every part of the body into a digested slime of virus particles.” 7

Perhaps the only disease that compares to Ebola for visual shock value is 

yellow fever, which in acute cases can also cause bleeding of the mouth, eyes 

and the lining of the gastrointestinal tract, as well as the production of a vis -

cous black vomit from the stomach. However, while Ebola is sometimes hor -

rifying to behold, bleeding only occurs in around half of the cases; diarrhoea 

is a far more common symptom. Compared to HIV and SARS, it is also not THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

200 

that contagious. Ebola patients only b ecome infectious when they develop 

symptoms—typically two to twenty-one days after exposure—and on aver -

age one Ebola patient will infect just two other people. By contrast, with HIV 

and SARS, the reproduction rate rises to four, and for truly catchy diseases 

such as measles, that number is eighteen. 

Nevertheless, in previous outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the 

Congo (DRC) and other countries in Central Africa, Van Herp knew that 

Ebola had been associated with mortality rates as high as 90  per  cent. Then, 

as in 2014, there had been no vaccine, nor were there any approved treatment 

drugs. Instead, doctors’ only option was to connect patients to an intravenous 

drip and keep them hydrated with fluids until such time as their immune 

system managed to defeat the virus. The problem is, while Ebola is not all that 

communicable, the disease is highly infectious—a cubic centimetre of blood 

contains one billion copies of the virus—and the attachment of an IV-line can 

result in blood leaking uncontrollably from the site of a puncture. If the out -

break in Guinée Forestière was due to Ebola—and the hiccups strongly sug -

gested to Van Herp that it was—it was imperative to immediately isolate 

patients and their contacts, as well as anyone handling infectious cadavers, and 

introduce strict barrier nursing controls in hospitals. The problem was that as 

soon as news got out that MSF suspected Ebola, there would be panic across 

the region, not least among the organization’s staff in Guéckédou, none of 

whom had experience with the pathogen. On the other hand, Van Herp knew 

that, other from a case in Côte d’Ivoire in 1995 involving a Swiss zoologist, 

Ebola had never been detected in West Africa before. Nevertheless, until such 

time as diagnostic tests could be conducted, Van Herp thought it best to err 

on the side of caution. “After further examination, I said to my colleagues, 

‘We’re definitely dealing with viral haemorrhagic fever, and we should be 

prepared for Ebola, even if never seen in this region before.’” 8

Van Herp was right to say that Ebola had never been seen in Guinea, but 

wrong to think that no one had previously suspected its presence in West 

Africa. In 1982, German scientists examined blood from hundreds of 

Liberians in Lassa-endemic rural areas of the country. Rather than simply 

testing for Lassa, however, they also looked for Ebola and a related filovirus 

called Marburg—so called because it was first isolated in the German town 

of Marburg in 1967—using a fast and inexpensive microscopic test known as 

indirect im munofluorescence. * They found antibodies to Ebola in 6  per  cent  

> *Filoviruses belong to the family Filoviridae and take their name from the Latin word
> filum , meaning filamentous, a reference to their elongated filamentous structure.

EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

201 

of the samples. Similar rates were also found in samples from Guinea and 

Sierra Leone. However, because the test depended on skilled interpretation 

and sometimes resulted in false positives, few experts took much notice. 9 This 

was followed in 1994 by the infection of the Swiss zoologist. The zoologist 

most likely contracted Ebola when she performed a necropsy on a chimpan -

zee that had been found dead in Tai National Park, near Côte d’Ivoire’s border 

with Liberia, but there was no further transmission and, after being flown to 

Switzerland for treatment, she recovered. Then, in 2006, a group of medical 

researchers made a further intriguing discovery at Kenema General Hospital, 

in eastern Sierra Leone, not far from the Guinean border. As in Liberia, the 

researchers had decided to run a quick antibody test on blood from patients 

who had presented at the hospital for Lassa Fever. Previously, one-third of 

these patients had tested negative for Lassa, leading the researchers to suspect 

they were infected with another type of haemorrhagic fever, or possibly a 

mosquito-borne virus, such as dengue or yellow fever. To their surprise, of 

four hundred samples taken between 2006 and 2008, nearly 9  per  cent tested 

positive for Ebola. Not only that, but when they ran a more sophisticated 

assay, the researchers also saw that most of the antibodies were against  Zaire 

ebolavirus , the most virulent of the five strains of Ebola.  Zaire ebolavirus  had 

previously been found in only three countries: the DRC, the Republic of the 

Congo, and Gabon. How the Zairean strain had come to be in Sierra Leone, 

3,000 miles northwest of its endemic centre of transmission, was a mystery. 

Nevertheless, the researchers thought the findings worth publishing and in 

August 2013 submitted a paper to the CDC’s journal,  Emerging Infectious 

Diseases . As the research was a collaborative effort between the US Army 

Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) and Tulane 

University, the lead investigator, Ronald J.  Schoepp, was reasonably confident 

the paper would be accepted. But after waiting nearly a year for a reply he 

was told it had been rejected; the final reviewer informed Schoepp, “I don’t 

believe there is Ebola virus in West Africa.” 10 

By the middle of March, MSF’s senior leadership in Geneva was sufficiently 

alarmed by the reports from Guéckédou to dispatch three medical teams to 

the area. One was a team from Sierra Leone trained in the containment of 

viral haemorrhagic fevers. They arrived in Guéckédou on 18  March and 

immediately set about securing the area. Van Herp joined them soon after and 

began touring nearby communities to track the infection and raise awareness. 

Unfortunately, there was no laboratory in Guinea equipped to handle Ebola, 

much less to run sophisticated tests for detection of a filovirus, so blood 

samples were shipped all the way to the Institut Pasteur in Lyon. There, in a THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

202 

secure biosafety level 4 laboratory, Sylvain Baize, a specialist in haemorrhagic 

fevers who had previously worked in Africa, ran the critical assays that, on 

21  March, confirmed the presence of Ebola in several of the blood samples. 

It was too early to say which strain of Ebola was responsible—that would 

require more sophisticated tests using specific assays for each of the five 

strains—but the Pasteur Institute’s finding was sufficient to convince the 

Guinean government it had a problem. 11  On 22  March, Guinea’s Ministry of 

Health made the news public and the following day the WHO followed suit, 

declaring that it had been notified of a “rapidly evolving outbreak of Ebola 

virus disease in forested areas of south-eastern Guinea.” 12 

The announcement could not have come at a worse time for the 

WHO.  After its success containing SARS, the United Nations organization 

suffered deep budget cuts due to the global recession that had begun in 2008. 

The result was that by 2014, 130 members of GOARN had been laid off, 

leaving the WHO with a skeleton crew in the event of an emergency. The 

WHO’s management was already monitoring concurrent outbreaks of bird 

flu in China, the MERS coronavirus in Saudi Arabia, and polio in war-torn 

Syria. In addition, there were ongoing military and humanitarian crises in the 

Horn of Africa and the Sahel region of Africa. Set against these problems, an 

outbreak of Ebola in a remote forested region of Guinea that had so far trig -

gered just twenty-three deaths struck officials in Geneva as small beer. 

Besides, as the WHO’s press spokesman Gregory Hartl tweeted on 23  March: 

“There has never been an Ebola outbreak larger than a couple of hundred 

cases.” Two days later Hartl went further, insisting that “Ebola has always 

remained a localised event.” 13 

Not everyone shared Hartl’s complacency. The following day in an emer -

gency teleconference involving officials in the WHO’s Africa office (AFRO) 

and emergency directors in Geneva headquarters, WHO personnel warned 

that the outbreak in Guinée Forestière was spreading faster than anyone had 

anticipated and there was a “high possibility of cross-border transmission.” 

Worried that the deaths of health workers were an indication that barrier 

nursing controls in hospitals were inadequate and that there was a risk of the 

outbreak being amplified, the officials recommended raising the WHO’s alert 

to Grade 2, the second highest level possible. Instead, senior officials in 

Geneva decided to keep the alert at Grade 1 and deploy a multidisciplinary 

team, comprising thirty-eight individuals, to Guinea to supervise infection 

control measures and help with surveillance and case tracking. By now, MSF 

was also hearing of suspected cases across the border in Foya, in northern 

Liberia. Then came reports of a case in Conakry. For Van Herp, the appearance EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

203 

of Ebola in Guinea’s coastal capital, four hundred miles to the west of 

Guéckédou, was clear evidence of the “unprecedented” geographic spread of 

the virus. 14  His statement infuriated Guinea’s minister of health, Colonel 

Rémy Lamah, who responded by instructing officials to record only labora -

tory-confirmed cases of the disease, thereby allowing suspected cases and 

contacts of suspected cases to go unreported. This policy would come back 

to haunt the WHO when official figures from Guinea showed a fall in case 

numbers in the last week of April, leading observers to believe that the worst 

was over. 15 

* * * 

No one knows for sure if bats are the natural reservoir of the Ebola virus. To 

date the only live filovirus that has been recovered from bats is Marburg. 

However, in surveys conducted in Ebola-stricken areas of Gabon and the 

Republic of the Congo, Ebola antibodies and fragments of Ebola RNA have 

been recovered from three species of fruit bat. One of these, the hammer-

headed bat,  Hypsignathus monstrosus , is routinely hunted as a source of protein. 

Coupled with the isolation of Marburg from the Egyptian fruit bat,  Rousettus 

aegyptiacus , this lends support to the theory that bats are the virus’s natural 

reservoir and the main source of human infections. However, gorillas and 

chimpanzees are also known to be infected with Ebola and Marburg from 

time to time, and on occasion, they suffer dramatic die-offs, so it is possible 

they could also transmit the viruses to humans. In 1967 an outbreak of 

Marburg in a consignment of African green monkeys shipped from Uganda to 

vaccine research laboratories in Germany and the former Yugoslavia sparked 

thirty-seven infections leading to the deaths of seven laboratory workers. In 

1994 the Swiss zoologist in Côte d’Ivoire almost certainly contracted Ebola 

from a monkey that had died in the forest. Then, in 1996, nineteen people in 

Mayibout, Gabon, were infected with Ebola after butchering and eating a 

chimpanzee they had discovered on the forest floor. Similar outbreaks in 

humans following extensive deaths of chimpanzees and gorillas have been 

documented in the Republic of the Congo. On the other hand, the high case 

fatality rates recorded in apes, combined with their declining geographic 

range, indicate that they are likely dead-end hosts for the virus and therefore 

not the primary reservoir for Ebola. 

To date, five strains of Ebola have been identified, each name correspond -

ing to the place where it was first isolated. The first two species,  Zaire ebolavi -

rus  and  Sudan ebolavirus , were discovered in near simultaneous outbreaks that THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

204 

occurred in 1976 in Yambuku and Sudan respectively. While the Sudan out -

break was traced to a worker in a cotton factory, in Yambuku the index case 

was a male instructor at a Belgian Catholic mission school who had brought 

fresh antelope and monkey meat on his way to the village, suggesting the 

outbreak had a zoonotic origin. The following year, a nine-year-old girl died 

of Ebola at Tandala Mission Hospital, in Zaire, but no one else in her family 

was infected and the virus spread no further. This was followed, in 1989, by 

the isolation of a third species,  Reston ebolavirus , during an outbreak that 

occurred at a primate quarantine facility in Reston, Virginia. That outbreak 

was blamed on a shipment of wild monkeys—long-tailed macaques—that 

had been imported to the United States from the Philippines for use in animal 

research. However, although the outbreak resulted in four subclinical infec -

tions in laboratory workers, no humans died, suggesting that the Reston 

strain did not present a disease risk to humans. The fourth species,  Côte d’Ivoire 

ebolavirus , was the one isolated from the Swiss zoologist in the Tai Forest in 

1994. The fifth and final subtype,  Bundibugyo ebolavirus , was named after a 

small outbreak in the Bundibugyo district of western Uganda in 2007, in 

which just thirty people were killed (by contrast, seven years earlier, an out -

break of  Zaire ebolavirus  in Gulu, Uganda, resulted in 425 cases and 224 

deaths). In addition, in 1995 there was an outbreak of  Zaire ebolavirus  in 

Kikwit, a city in the DRC with a population of 400,000. 16 

The sporadic appearance of Ebola coupled with the genetic variation 

between the different subtypes is both a puzzle and a challenge to viral ecolo -

gists. On average the genomes of each species show a 30–40  per  cent diver -

gence, suggesting that each subtype has evolved in a different animal reservoir 

or occupies a different ecological niche. Moreover, as no one knows where 

the virus goes between outbreaks or the evolutionary history of the different 

strains, it is impossible to say why some, such as  Zaire ebolavirus , are especially 

lethal to humans, while others, such as  Bundibugyo ebolavirus , are associated 

with far lower rates of mortality. The fact that so much about Ebola remains 

shrouded in mystery underlines the importance of paying attention to factors 

that are known to increase the risk of infection and that lie within human 

control. One of these is the consumption of bushmeat. The other is social 

behaviours and cultural practices. In the context of West Africa, perhaps none 

are more significant than the rituals surrounding death, mourning and burial. 

These rituals are informed by Christian and Muslim religious beliefs as well 

as people’s subscription to sodalities or secret societies. Although few outsid -

ers have gained access to these societies, it is known that their members 

worship ancient bush spirits that are thought to reside in the forest and are EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

205 

usually represented by a masked figure that is part crocodile, part human. For 

instance, during the initiation into  Poro , as the traditional men’s society is 

known, young boys are led into the forest to be “eaten” by the masked bush 

spirit, after which they undergo circumcision and ritual scarification. Female 

initiates into the women’s society,  Sande , undergo similar ritual scarification, 

as well as, on occasion, genital mutilation. 17 

Peoples’ subscription to such societies, however, is probably far less impor -

tant than syncretistic beliefs and practices, including mortuary practices, 

designed to ensure that the deceased are reunited with their ancestors in the 

afterlife. For the Kissi and other ethnic groups indigenous to the region, 

including the Mende and Kono, this so-called “village of the ancestors” is not 

like the Christian idea of heaven or hell—how people have conducted them -

selves on Earth has no bearing on their destiny in the afterlife. Rather, it is 

determined by the accomplishment by the living of certain mortuary prac -

tices that are owed to the dead. These include washing and dressing the 

corpse, a practice that is repeated twice, first when the corpse is initially 

clothed or wrapped in a fine cloth, and second when it is re-clothed for burial 

(usually in a cheaper material). These rituals may also include treatments and 

sacrifices to dispel angry spirits or to address imagined acts of “sorcery” and 

“witchcraft.” Such rituals assume even more significance when an Ebola 

patient collapses in a remote rural area and is removed to an Ebola Treatment 

Unit (ETU) many miles from their home village. If these rituals are not per -

formed in the prescribed manner, or crucial steps are missed, it is thought 

that the deceased will be condemned to wander eternally, in which state they 

will visit curses upon their family and community—something survivors fear 

more than Ebola itself. 18 

Finally, in times of sickness, it is common for local people to turn to  zoes 

or traditional female healers for help. Sometimes these healers will treat the 

sick with herbal remedies. On other occasions they may touch them and offer 

magical incantations in an effort to dispel the “evil spirits” that are thought to 

be the source of the affliction. In the case of Ebola, of course, such practices 

represent a considerable infection risk. Washing and touching the bodies of 

Ebola cadavers is similarly dangerous, as studies have shown that Ebola can 

persist in blood and organs for up to seven days after death. 19 

* * * 

Perhaps no one knows more about the significance of these traditions and the 

challenges they present for the management of Ebola in rural areas of Africa THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

206 

than Jean-J acques Muyembe-Tamfum. A short, vital man who always seems 

to be on the point of breaking into a grin, Muyembe is the director of the 

National Institute for Biomedical Research (INRB) in Kinshasa, and has 

attended more Ebola outbreaks than any other scientist alive. Known in his 

home country as “Dr  Ebola,” Muyembe points out that bushmeat is a tradi -

tional part of Africans’ diet, which is why, rather than seeking to ban the 

practice, he supports efforts in the DRC to train hunters to butcher and 

prepare carcasses safely. He is also critical of Ebola control measures such as 

mandatory cremations and bans on burial rituals. “By seizing their cadavers 

we hurt peoples’ spirit,” he explained. 20 

Muyembe’s first encounter with Ebola came during the 1976 outbreak 

at Yambuku, although, like other people involved in the response to the 

mysterious illness at the Belgian mission hospital, he had no idea at the time 

that he was dealing with a new filovirus. “We heard that a lot of people were 

dying, even the Catholic sisters,” he said. “The minister of health ordered 

me to go there and assess the situation.” At the time, Zaire was ruled by the 

dictator Joseph Mobutu, and when Muyembe, then a young professor of 

microbiology at Kinshasa Medical School, was told Mobutu had offered the 

use of his private jet, he realized he had no choice in the matter. He arrived 

at the mission late in the evening after a gruelling four-hour journey by jeep 

from the nearest landing strip to find that all the staff had fled and the wards 

were deserted save for a single sick child. “The mother said it was malaria 

but I think it was probably Ebola because the child died in the night.” The 

next day, he awoke to find the hospital full of anxious villagers, many of 

whom were also feverish. 

> Word had got out that we had come from Kinshasa with medicine. I thought
> it was typhoid fever so I lined them up and collected blood. I was immediately
> struck by the fact that when I removed the syringe from the site of the punc -
> ture wound it bled profusely. My fingers and hands were soiled with blood. I
> just used water and soap to wash it off.

The next outbreak Muyembe attended was in 1995 when, after a nearly 

twenty-year hiatus,  Zaire ebolavirus  re-emerged in the Congolese city of 

Kikwit. The outbreak had almost certainly begun in January in a forested area 

close to the city but had initially been mistaken for typhoid. It was only when 

a surgical team at Kikwit General Hospital fell ill in March after carrying out 

a risky operation on a laboratory technician, and Muyembe was sent to inves -

tigate, that he realized it was probably Ebola. 21  He forwarded blood samples 

to the CDC in Atlanta for testing. In all, the Kikwit outbreak resulted in 315 EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

207 

infections a nd 254 deaths, and might have been much worse had the govern -

ment not closed the highway to Kinshasa. *

It was at that outbreak that Muyembe renewed his friendship with David 

Heymann. The pair had first met at Yambuku when Heymann was a young EIS 

officer. However, by 1995 Heymann was director of the WHO’s Division of 

Emerging and Other Communicable Diseases, and it had fallen to him to 

coordinate the international response in Kikwit. As Heymann dealt with DRC 

officials and the global media, Muyembe met with local chiefs to try to win 

the community’s cooperation. “He speaks about those who are infected as 

being full of evil spirits that cause illness as they attempt to escape,” explained 

Heymann. “He also discusses with them the reason that there are foreigners 

with him—because these spirits are stronger than most, and that he needs 

foreign help. Outbreaks then stop rapidly.” 22 

Unfortunately, in the crucial early weeks of the West African epidemic 

these lessons appeared to have been forgotten. Instead, the arrival of medical 

teams in Guinée Forestière sparked violent clashes with communities suspi -

cious of the intentions of foreigners dressed in white biohazard suits. For 

instance, in April rumours that Ebola had been deliberately introduced to 

Guinea prompted an angry crowd to storm an MSF facility in Macenta and 

stone aid workers. In response, MSF was forced to evacuate its staff and close 

the facility for a week. By July, as anger over Ebola intensified, Kissi-speaking 

villages in Guéckédou cut bridges and felled trees to block the path of medi -

cal teams offering assistance. Meanwhile, those in the community who were 

seen to be aiding foreigners were accused of being “traitors” and beaten up. 

Red Cross burial teams were also a target; the agency reported an average of 

ten attacks a month across the country. Resistance was particularly intense in 

Forécariah, where local people objected to burial teams taking blood samples 

away for testing. Disinfection measures, such as spraying with chlorine, were 

also subject to misinterpretation, a common rumour being that the sprays 

were being used to spread Ebola rather than to control it. The most unfortu -

nate incident of all occurred in Womey, in Nzérékoré prefecture, where a 

mixed delegation of medical personnel and government officials was set upon 

by an angry mob. Eight members of the delegation were captured and killed, 

their bodies being dumped in a la trine. 23  

> *Unfortunately, the order did not extend to the airport, resulting in the boarding
> of a plane to the Congolese capital by a 31-year-old female patient. Once there,
> it was only her rapid isolation in a private clinic and strong disease surveillance
> measures that prevented the virus from spreading to other parts of Kinshasa.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

208 

This resistance was not unique to Guinea; it was a feature across the West 

African Ebola zone. One of the most common rumours was that the virus had 

been manufactured in a US military facility or that it was a plot by govern -

ments to attract foreign aid to the region. People were particularly distrustful 

of ETUs—hardly surprising given that many of those entering the treatment 

units were never seen again—fearing that the tented facilities were being 

used to harvest organs or steal blood. Some of these rumours no doubt 

reflected people’s interactions with government officials and their experi -

ences of medical programs generally. Others drew on folk memories of the 

slave trade and colonial histories of exploitation and extraction. Many of the 

routes used by foreign medical teams were the same as those that had been 

used by slave raiders in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. In the nine -

teenth century those routes were exploited by colonial administrators to 

harvest rubber from the forests. Then, during the bloody civil wars that 

racked Liberia and Sierra Leone in the 1990s and early 2000s, rival militias 

used the same trails to export diamonds in one direction and import guns in 

the other. More recently, the demand for natural resources has seen new 

forms of exploitation as large swaths of the forest have been felled for timber 

or planted for cash crops, such as cassava. These measures have fallen particu -

larly hard on the rural poor, especially in Guinea, where the inhabitants of 

forested regions have long resisted assimilation into the country’s Muslim 

majority. However, it is no less true in Kenema, in eastern Sierra Leone, and 

Lofa County, in Liberia, where local people are also distrustful of urban 

political elites and more likely to listen to their local chief than a trouser-

suited official from Freetown or Monrovia. 

Perhaps because of the hostile reception MSF received in Guinea, it was one 

of the first to warn of the dangers that the distrust of foreign medical teams 

presented for the containment of the virus. Speaking at a meeting of disease 

policy experts in London in May 2014, Armand Sprecher, an MSF emergency 

physician recently returned from a tour of duty in Conakry, warned that the 

international health community had “a marketing problem”:  

> Our best response … is to produce good advocates, survivors who can say and
> bear witness to what goes on inside the treatment units, to tell everyone that
> we do have their best interests at heart, that we are trying to save people. The
> problem is, in order to have survivors, you need patients. In order to get
> patients, you need survivors. Unfortunately, we’re caught in a catch 22. 24

One consequence of this fear of ETUs was to further skew the Ebola case 

data. Official counts based on people presenting at treatment units in Conakry EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

209 

with e ither confirmed or probable Ebola reached a new low in mid-April, 

leading many experts to believe that the world had dodged a bullet. However, 

at the same time as a dip in cases was observed in Conakry, MSF physicians 

saw a dramatic spike in the mortality rate in Guéckédou. “All of a sudden 

we’re having patients who have to come in, they cannot hide their illness, 

they’re so obviously deathly ill that in their communities they cannot hide 

from us anymore,” said Sprecher. “That’s not what the end of an outbreak 

looks like.” Sprecher would subsequently label the dip in cases observed in 

Conakry in April and May “the dog that didn’t bark.” 25 

Guinea was not the only country that had an invisible and growing prob -

lem. In early March 2014, a young woman named Luisey Kamano had 

approached a fisherman on the Guinean border with Sierra Leone and asked 

to be ferried across the river. Kamano had just seen her mother, grandmother, 

and two of her aunts die of Ebola and was terrified that she was about to be 

forcibly removed to an ETU.  “I was told white people were looking for me, 

that they wanted to take me to Guéckédou,” she said. “I was told they’d kill 

me with an injection. So I ran away.” 26 

Once in Sierra Leone, Luisey easily evaded the authorities who had been 

alerted by WHO officials that she might be harbouring the virus. She was not 

the only one. By late March other people who had cared for sick relatives had 

also fled across the border. Many of them made for Koindu, a village set deep 

in the rolling hills and diamond mines of Kailahun. There they visited a tradi -

tional healer, Finda Mendinor, drawn by the belief that she had the powers to 

expel the evil spirits that were the source of their affliction. It is not known 

how many people Mendinor treated or how—most likely she gave them 

herbal medicines and uttered incantations as she touched their foreheads and 

other parts of their body. One thing is certain, however: her ministrations 

were no protection against Ebola, and soon she had also contracted the dis -

ease. Her death at the end of April sparked a week-long mourning period that 

brought scores more people to Koindu to attend her funeral. There, local 

women prepared her for burial by washing and dressing her corpse, while 

others crowded around the cadaver and showered it with kisses. The result 

was that within a month of Mendinor’s death, authorities were reporting 

thirty-five laboratory-confirmed cases of Ebola across Sierra Leone and at 

least five active chains of transmission. Nowhere was the impact of this new 

phase of the outbreak more dramatically felt than at Kenema General 

Hospital—the same hospital where researchers had detected Ebola antibodies 

in stored serum samples from Lassa patients a year earlier. 

* * * THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

210 

Kenema is located in the heart of diamond-mining  country, and feels like a 

frontier town. Approached via a new Chinese highway that abruptly turns 

into a red dirt road just beyond the city limits, the town is a magnet for 

prospectors en route to the rich alluvial diamond beds that dot the surround -

ing hills and valleys. In boom times the main square teems with dealers ready 

to pay hard cash for the right stone, but the city has also seen its fair share of 

terror. In the early 1990s, Kenema was overrun by the Revolutionary United 

Front (RUF), a rebel militia led by a former Sierra Leone Army corporal, 

Foday Sankoh, who specialized in amputations and the abduction of child 

soldiers. Trading diamonds for arms, Sankoh advanced as far as Freetown, 

occupying and reoccupying the Sierra Leone capital for several years before 

finally being repulsed in 2002 by a British-backed force of UN peacekeepers. 

With the cessation of the civil war, diamond production increased tenfold and 

good times returned to Kenema. But the conflict had taken its toll on Sierra 

Leone’s health system, and many doctors fled the country. One of the few to 

return was Dr  Sheik Humarr Khan. 

Born in 1975 in Lungi, a small town just across the bay from Freetown 

which also happens to be the site of the country’s international airport, Khan 

had grown up dirt-poor, the youngest of ten children. Despite these unprom -

ising beginnings, Khan graduated at the top of his class in 1993 and won a 

place at a prestigious medical school in the capital. He hoped to become a 

Lassa Fever specialist, but in 1997, as the RUF closed in on Freetown, he was 

forced to flee to Conakry. His family urged him to apply for a visa to the 

United States, where several of his siblings had already settled. But in 2004 

Khan learned that the director of Kenema’s Lassa program, Dr  Aniru Conteh, 

had died after accidentally pricking himself with a needle; Khan decided to 

apply for the position. His application was accepted. 

In those days, there was no Chinese highway and it took eight hours to 

reach Kenema from Freetown, a gruelling drive along untarred dirt roads. 

On arrival, Khan was pleased to find that the public hospital was no longer a 

scientific backwater but had a state-of-the-art laboratory courtesy of a part -

nership with Tulane University. Researchers could now screen patients for 

Lassa and treat them on the spot. Dividing his time between the laboratory 

and the maternity ward, Khan quickly won the respect of nursing staff and 

was soon also a well-known figure about town, particularly on the nights 

when his favourite football team, AC Milan, was playing in the European 

Champions League and he could be heard cheering them loudly from his 

regular spot in a local bar. 

When Khan learned about the outbreak in Guinea, he warned nurses they 

should be pr epared in case Ebola came to Kenema. At the very least there was EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

211 

a good possibility that suspected Ebola bloods would be sent to the hospital 

for testing since the Tulane laboratory was the only one in the country with 

PCR equipment. Unfortunately, by the time he verified the first positive 

blood sample on 24  May from a nurse who had attended Mendinor’s funeral, 

it was too late: staff had already admitted a pregnant woman to the maternity 

ward unaware that she was infected with Ebola. A few days later the woman 

miscarried, spreading the virus to other patients. 

In response, Khan set up a triage zone in front of the hospital and tried to 

impress upon the staff the importance of avoiding contact with blood, vomit 

and other fluids whenever they entered the red zone—the area of the hospital 

reserved for Ebola patients. When a Tulane research colleague arrived with 

surgical gloves and personal protection kits, Khan demonstrated the correct 

procedures for disrobing and disinfecting the suits and gloves with chlorine. 

Unfortunately, within weeks the hospital was overrun with new Ebola 

cases—many of them people who had attended Mendinor’s funeral—and 

nurses were under so much pressure that many disregarded the protocols. In 

the hope of stemming the outbreak, Khan travelled to Kailahun, where he 

met with village headmen and tried to convey the dangers Ebola presented to 

the local population. However, many community leaders were in denial and 

resisted Khan’s entreaties to evacuate suspect cases to Kenema for testing. On 

one occasion, a local chief seized Khan’s government-issued Toyota and held 

it overnight, warning him to stay out of Kailahun. Opposition was fiercest of 

all in Koindu, where the population erected roadblocks and threw stones, 

shattering the windshield of Khan’s car. “There were rumours that we were 

coming to give them the disease,” recalled Robert Garry, the Tulane 

researcher who had travelled to Kenema to assist Khan. “They said we would 

take people away and never come back. The attitude was, ‘Leave us alone.’” 27 

The news that Ebola had crossed the border sent government officials in 

Freetown into a spin. Over the next few days Khan fielded increasingly frantic 

calls from the president’s office and the Ministry of Health. By now, a Seattle-

based nonprofit, Metabiota, one of whose members shared the Kenema labo -

ratory, had also confirmed the presence of Ebola in Sierra Leone and was 

being asked to send a representative to Monrovia where there were reports 

of suspected Ebola cases in New Kru Town. However, WHO officials on the 

ground were in denial, telling members of local NGOs, “Ebola doesn’t cause 

urban outbreaks” and that there was no danger of the virus reaching 

Freetown. 28  Judging by a series of memos and emails between senior WHO 

officials in Geneva that were obtained by Associated Press, this denial went all 

the way to the top of the UN organization. Treating Ebola as an international THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

212 

emergency “could be seen as a hostile a ct … and may hamper collaboration 

between WHO and affected countries,” warned Keiji Fukuda, the WHO’s 

Assistant Director-General for Health, Security and Environment, in an 

internal briefing note to WHO Director-General Margaret Chan on 2  June. 

“This outbreak must be considered as a sub-regional public health issue.” 29 

Sylvie Briand, the director of WHO’s Pandemic and Epidemic Diseases 

Department, concurred. “I don’t think declaring a PHEIC [Public Health 

Emergency of International Concern] will help fight the epidemic at this 

stage,” she emailed a colleague on 4  June. “The problem with declaring a 

PHEIC is that one has to make recommendations and these risk hurting the 

country without helping public health. … I see [it] as a last resort.” As a 

result, it was not until late July that Chan upgraded the emergency to Grade 

3 and it was not until 8  August that, bowing to international pressure and 

concerns that, in the words of MSF, the outbreak was “totally out of … con -

trol,” 30  Chan finally declared Ebola a PHEIC. *

Unfortunately, that declaration came too late for Khan. In the hope of 

containing the outbreak, the Ministry of Health had decided to refer all sus -

pected cases from Freetown to Kenema—a gruelling four-hour journey by 

road in overheated ambulances. On one level, the policy made sense: Kenema 

was one of the few hospitals in the country whose staff had previous experi -

ence treating haemorrhagic fever, albeit Lassa. However, Kenema was also a 

stronghold of the opposition Sierra Leone People’s Party. The result was that 

when ambulances carrying Ebola patients began arriving at the hospital, 

rumours spread that the epidemic was a plot by the ruling All People’s 

Congress Party and that nurses on the wards were deliberately infecting 

patients with Ebola in order to attract foreign aid for the benefit of the politi -

cal elite in Freetown. In early July these tensions reached a boiling point 

when a woman set up a makeshift pulpit in Kenema’s market area. Claiming 

that she was a former nurse and had seen Khan poisoning patients with her 

own eyes, she incited an angry mob to march on the hospital. In response 

Khan barred the gates and ordered his staff to evacuate while police fired tear 

gas to disperse the crowd. 

The claims were nonsense, of course. The people who were in most danger 

of getting Ebola were not other patients but Khan and his staff. As Will Pooley, 

a newly qualified British nurse who volunteered to work on the Ebola ward 

in June , recalled, conditions inside the hospital were “chaotic.” Arriving for  

> *The term is commonly pronounced “pike” or “fake.”

EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

213 

duty in the morning, it was common to find five or more corpses lying 

sprawled in the toilets surrounded by pools of vomit and bloody diarrhoea. 

There were maggots and flies everywhere, and the heat inside the PPE suits 

was oppressive. To Pooley’s horror, many nurses were unable to bear it and 

removed their suits when they got too hot. Others would perform cursory 

decontaminations, then splash water on their faces. Most alarming of all, he 

frequently saw staff eating from shared bowls of rice, oblivious to the fact that 

someone who had just emerged from the Ebola unit may have dipped their 

hands into the same bowl. “For that reason I always left the hospital to eat,” 

said Pooley. 31 

The first member of the medical team to fall ill was Khan’s colleague, Alex 

Moigboi. In a rare breach of protocol for the usually meticulous doctor, Khan 

reached for Moigboi’s face to examine his pupils. In doing so, he inadvertently 

touched Moigboi’s skin. Moigboi was diagnosed with Ebola soon after, and 

died on 19  July. By now Mbalu J.  Fonnie, the hospital’s much-loved matron, 

was also feverish. Refusing to believe she had Ebola, Khan allowed her to stay 

in the annex reserved for “suspect” cases long after her blood samples tested 

positive. Fonnie was given antimalarials and IV fluids but there was little Khan 

could do, and on 22  July she died. By now, Khan was also feeling unwell and 

kept his distance from colleagues as a precaution. When his blood tested posi -

tive for Ebola it was decided that rather than remaining in Kenema, where his 

sickness might panic patients and staff, he should be moved to an MSF facility 

in Kailahun. It would prove a fateful decision. In Kenema, the treatment 

protocol was to give patients fluids intravenously, but MSF took the view that 

the risk of death from bleeding was greater than the potential benefits so 

placed Khan on the standard regimen of oral treatments—paracetamol for 

pain relief, antibiotics for diarrhoea, and rehydration salts. In addition, MSF 

considered giving Khan an experimental drug called ZMapp that had shown 

great promise in monkeys but had never been tested in humans. In June a 

researcher from Canada’s public health agency had brought three treatment 

courses to Kailahun to test the drug’s viability in a tropical environment, 

depositing the vials in a freezer adjacent to Khan’s ward. MSF agonized over 

whether it should give Khan the drug. On the one hand the ZMapp might save 

his life; on the other, if he died, people might accuse MSF of hastening his 

death, or worse, poisoning him, thereby further eroding trust in its medical 

staff. In the event, MSF decided not to give Khan the drug. Critically ill, Khan 

was apparently never told about the ZMapp. As his white blood cell count 

dropped, there was talk of evacuating him in an air ambulance, but there were 

no protocols in place for managing such a risky procedure, and many doubted THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

214 

that in his fragile condition Khan would survive the arduous journey to Lungi 

airport where, in the shadow of the town where he grew up, a plane was 

waiting to fly him to Europe. The debate proved moot; Khan died on 29  July 

before a final decision could be made. However, his case focused attention on 

the need for procedures for airlifting other health workers to safety, particu -

larly foreign nationals working for NGOs or under contract to the WHO.  The 

result was that when Will Pooley fell ill in August after handling a baby whose 

parents had died of Ebola but who had initially tested negative for the virus, 

he was airlifted to London in a Royal Air Force ambulance. Removed to a 

high-level isolation unit at the Royal Free Hospital, London, Pooley was 

sealed in a pressurized tent and treated with ZMapp. He survived. Around the 

same time, two American missionaries who had been caring for patients at 

Samaritan’s Purse’s Eternal Love Winning Africa (ELWA) treatment centre in 

Monrovia also fell ill. After a debate about what to do, the decision was taken 

to airlift Kent Brantly and Nancy Writebol to Georgia for emergency treat -

ment at Emory Hospital, Atlanta; they were first given ZMapp to stabilize 

their condition. They also survived. 

The contrast in the treatment accorded the American missionaries was not 

lost on Khan’s elder brother, C-Ray, who argued “if it was good enough for 

Americans, it should have been good enough for my brother.” 32  Many experts 

had sympathy for his point of view. Worrying that the better outcomes 

enjoyed by foreign health workers might further undermine trust in ETUs, 

they opined that it was important to replace the “stick” of confinement with 

the “carrot” of treatment. 33  Just as importantly, Khan’s death sent shock waves 

through Sierra Leone’s medical community that were also felt in Freetown. 

In a country with one doctor for every 45,000 inhabitants (in the United 

Kingdom, the ratio is one per eighty-eight), the government could ill afford 

to lose the figurehead of its fight against Ebola and a man whom Sierra 

Leone’s president Dr  Ernest Bai Koroma had described as a “national hero.” 

The result was that the day after Khan’s death, Koroma declared a state of 

emergency and established a presidential task force to oversee the country’s 

response to Ebola. 

* * * 

It was not only in Sierra Leone that the free passage of people across the 

porous borders of the Mano River region ceded an advantage to the virus. 

In Liberia too, health facilities were completely unprepared for the arrival 

of Ebola from Guinea, and medics had to learn the lessons of previous EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

215 

outbreaks all over again. A good example came at Foya Borma hospital in 

Lofa district, the site of what is widely believed to have been Liberia’s index 

case. CDC epidemiologists traced the introduction of Ebola there to a 

woman who had arrived in Foya from Guéckédou in the first days of April. 

At the time, Liberia had no laboratory capable of conducting an ELISA test 

for Ebola, much less PCR, and because the woman presented with severe 

diarrhoea, the attending physician assumed she had cholera. Even when on 

the second day she began to display haemorrhagic symptoms, the physician 

did not consider Ebola, assuming she was coinfected with Lassa. The absence 

of diagnostic facilities was not the only reason Ebola was able to take hold in 

Foya. Nursing staff also had limited training in infection control, no rubber 

gloves or masks, and very limited access to running water—all basic require -

ments that had been identified by Ebola experts decades earlier but which, 

due to chronic underinvestment in health care in Liberia, were notably 

absent. The result was that in a matter of days several health workers and 

patients had also been infected with the virus. Once it was in Foya, there was 

little the authorities could do to prevent Ebola from travelling to Liberia’s 

capital. It is thought the virus was introduced to Monrovia by a patient who 

travelled by motorcycle taxi to the Firestone treatment centre on the out -

skirts of the city. En route, he infected the taxi driver and others. The result 

was that by 7  April, Liberia was reporting twenty-one cases and ten deaths 

from Ebola. However, by the end of May, no new cases had been recorded 

since 9  April, and by June the WHO was confident that Liberia was free of 

Ebola, having gone through two full incubation periods (twenty-one days 

times two) without any new cases being registered. 

As in Guinea, the official case counts would prove misleading. Far from 

disappearing, Ebola had gone underground. Indeed, retrospective phyloge -

netic analysis suggests there were now at least three related strains of the 

virus circulating concurrently in the tri-border region. 34  The first hint of a 

resurgence in infections in Liberia came in early June when six people in New 

Kru Town fell ill. Before long other cases were turning up at the John 

F.  Kennedy Medical Center, the country’s only referral hospital. The hospital 

had been badly damaged during Liberia’s protracted civil war and lacked an 

isolation ward or personal protection equipment. The result was that, as in 

Kenema, the virus quickly spread to doctors and nursing staff, prompting the 

authorities to close the hospital in mid-July. The only other facility in 

Monrovia equipped to treat Ebola was the Eternal Love Winning Africa 

Hospital, known as ELWA, operated by the missionary group Samaritan’s 

Purse. ELWA was rapidly overwhelmed. Then, on 22  July, Kent Brantly THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

216 

collapsed, prompting the discussions that would lead to his evacuation to 

Atlanta at the end of the month together with his Samaritan’s Purse colleague 

Nancy Writebol. By contrast, Liberians enjoyed no such privileges. So 

incensed was one Liberian by this disparity in medical treatment that in late 

July he stormed the government’s Emergency Operations Center and set off 

a firebomb, destroying computers that were being used to track Ebola cases. 

By now, Samaritan’s Purse had closed ELWA and had opened a new facil -

ity—ELWA 2—next door, but there were still too few beds, prompting 

patients to camp outside the unit. The pictures of desperately ill people col -

lapsed in the road for want of spaces inside ELWA 2 should have been a game 

changer, driving home MSF’s earlier warnings that the epidemic in West 

Africa was out of control. However, it would seem that officials in Geneva 

were still reluctant to treat the outbreak as anything more than a regional 

health crisis, albeit a severe one. 

The event that arguably changed this was the arrival of a Liberian-American 

lawyer in Lagos, one of the most populous cities in Africa. Patrick Sawyer had 

boarded a flight to the Nigerian capital on 20  July. An employee of the mining 

company ArcelorMittal, he was en route to a conference in Calabar, in south -

ern Nigeria, as a representative of the Liberian ministry of finance. At least, 

that was the story Sawyer gave officials on arrival at Murtala Mohammed 

International Airport in Lagos. In fact, Sawyer, who had been caring for his 

sick sister in Monrovia a few days earlier, was already infected with Ebola. 

One theory is that he was desperate to get to Nigeria, calculating he would 

have a better chance of receiving high quality care there. Unfortunately, on 

the flight to Lagos, Sawyer started vomiting and passing bloody stools, endan -

gering other passengers. Taken on landing to the First Consultant Hospital in 

Lagos, Sawyer at first denied having had any infectious contacts and insisted 

on being discharged so he could continue his journey to Calabar. Initially, the 

nursing staff thought he might have malaria, but as his symptoms worsened, 

one of the consultants grew suspicious and decided to test him for Ebola. 

When his blood test came back positive, she quickly instituted barrier nursing 

controls and alerted the authorities to trace other passengers on the flight. In 

all, Sawyer infected nineteen people and it was only thanks to the consultant’s 

quick thinking that the outbreak spread no further. However, she could do 

nothing to stop the infection running its course, and five days later Sawyer 

died. Then in August she also fell ill and died, adding another health worker 

to Ebola’s tragic toll. 

The Sawyer case was a wake-up call. In response, Liberia’s president Ellen 

Johnson Sirleaf ordered the country’s borders sealed and banned diplomats EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

217 

from traveling abroad. The United States followed suit, issuing a travel warn -

ing advising its citizens to stay away from the former American-freed slave 

colony. Meanwhile, prompted by the news that the Samaritan’s Purse mis -

sionaries had arrived in Atlanta, Donald Trump, then a New York property 

developer, tweeted, “Stop the EBOLA patients from entering the U.S.” and 

“The U.S.  cannot allow EBOLA infected people back. People that go to far 

away places to help out are great—but must suffer the consequences!” 35  As 

panic spread, several major carriers, including British Airways and Air France, 

cancelled their services to Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, leaving just two 

operators, Brussels Air and Air Maroc, to continue flying health workers and 

vital aid in and out of West Africa. “Let’s face it,” lamented Peter Piot, “there 

is an epidemic of Ebola in West Africa, then there is a second epidemic, an 

epidemic of mass hysteria.” 36 

Through all of this, Margaret Chan held steadfast to her belief that the 

outbreak did not warrant an escalation in the WHO’s response. However, by 

now it was clear to everyone that Ebola was spreading faster and further than 

the WHO had anticipated, and when on 6  August Sirleaf announced a national 

state of emergency, the pressure on Chan became irresistible. The result was 

that on 8  August she finally bowed to international pressure and declared 

Ebola a PHEIC.  Joanne Liu, the international president of MSF, would later 

comment acidly that Chan’s decision had less to do with the growing humani -

tarian crisis in Africa than the fear that Ebola was just a plane ride away from 

a major American or European metropolis. “The lack of international political 

will was no longer an option when the realisation dawned that Ebola could 

cross the ocean,” she says. “When Ebola became an international security 

threat … finally the world began to wake up.” 37 

Unfortunately, by now the epidemic was also testing the limits of MSF’s 

medical and humanitarian capacity. At the onset of the epidemic in March, 

MSF had a handful of Ebola veterans it could call on. Since then, it had called 

up all its haemorrhagic fever experts, plus experienced medical and logistical 

staff, and put an additional 1,000 volunteers on crash courses in Ebola man -

agement. At the same time, the agency had begun construction of the ELWA 

3 centre in Monrovia, which would become, when it was fully operational in 

late September, the largest Ebola treatment centre in the world. However, the 

immediate impact of the evacuation of the American missionaries was paraly -

sis. Samaritan’s Purse quickly suspended operations at its two Ebola manage -

ment centres in Monrovia and Foya—the only centres in the country at that 

time—leaving MSF to absorb the full brunt of the crisis. Nor did WHO’s 

declaration of a public health emergency trigger a direct intervention from THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

218 

other humanitarian aid organizations on the scale witnessed during natural 

disasters such as the 2010 Haiti earthquake or Typhoon Haiyan in the 

Philippines in 2013. On the contrary, in the short term, it worsened matters. 

“We didn’t want to say it but everybody was dragging their feet to come and 

play a role,” said Liu. 38 

One reason for this paralysis was fear. Ever since the publication of  The Hot 

Zone , the best-selling 1994 book by  New Yorker  journalist Richard Preston, 

Ebola had occupied a terrifying place in the public imagination. Drawing on 

the outbreak at the Reston primate facility in Virginia in 1989 and interviews 

with survivors of the Yambuku outbreak, Preston’s account focused on the 

most lurid and visually shocking symptoms of Ebola, such as the way that in 

the last stage of illness patients sometimes “bled out,” leaking blood and haem -

orrhagic fluids from their eyes, noses, and intestines. Even though such symp -

toms are mercifully rare, they helped fix in the public’s mind the idea that 

Ebola was, as Preston put it, a “molecular shark.” 39  Through the imaginative use 

of flypapers marked with biosafety hazard warnings and extensive passages 

devoted to the Reston incident, Preston also reinforced the impression of 

Ebola as a potential biowarfare agent, one that could emerge from the jungles 

of Africa, or the laboratory of a deranged terrorist, at any time, spreading 

panic and threatening the future of humankind. “A tiny change in its genetic 

code,” he warned, “and it might turn into a cough and zoom through the 

human race.” 40  Experts subsequently concluded that concerns of Ebola becom -

ing a viable aerosol were overblown. Nevertheless, the proximity of the Reston 

outbreak to the US capital underlined Ebola’s potential as a biosecurity threat, 

resulting in its selection for a war game exercise * at a meeting of the American 

Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene in Honolulu. 41  More significantly, 

the Reston incident contributed to Ebola appearing alongside AIDS in the 

Institute of Medicine’s iconic 1992 list of EIDs. 

* * * 

By the middle of August, as dead bodies piled up in the streets of Monrovia, 

Sirleaf was becoming desperate. In a moment of panic she ordered for Ebola 

patients to be moved to a temporary holding centre in a converted school in  

> *The war game exercise uncannily presaged the 2013–16 Ebola epidemic, imag -
> ining an outbreak at the border of three fictitious equatorial countries where civil
> war had led to a dangerous concentration of refugees living in unsanitary border
> encampments.

EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

219 

West Point, a slum area of Monrovia that is home to some 50,000 people, 

most of them desperately poor. In response, West Pointers ransacked the 

centre, and seventeen Ebola patients fled into the slum. Four days later, on 

20  August, Sirleaf ordered police and soldiers to block all the exit roads and 

placed the entire community under quarantine. 

West Point is an opposition stronghold, and soon rumours were rife that 

Ebola was a hoax and that Sirleaf’s real motivation was to quash an armed 

rebellion. As food prices soared, the imprisoned slum dwellers took to the 

streets in protest. Then, when a government-appointed commissioner tried 

to escort her family out of West Point under armed guard, an angry mob 

stormed the barricades. Police and armed soldiers drove them back with their 

batons and shields, but when the rioters began throwing stones they opened 

fire, wounding two young men. Tragically, one of them, a 15-year-old called 

Shakie Kamara, died. Incredibly, Kamara’s death brought Sirleaf to her senses, 

and ten days later she lifted the quarantine, but the damage had been done and 

public distrust of the health measures deepened. 

In late August, shocked by the scenes of police brutality, CDC director Tom 

Frieden travelled to West Africa to assess the situation, meeting with Sirleaf 

and other West African leaders. Although he was no stranger to explosive 

outbreaks of infectious disease, Frieden found the conditions in Liberia 

“beyond belief.” Stopping at a hastily constructed MSF treatment unit in 

Monrovia, he was appalled to find just one doctor for 120 patients.  

> There were people … struggling for their lives, right next to people that had
> died … but to remove someone who’s died you have to have six people come
> in in full body suits and they didn’t have enough staff to do it. … I particularly
> remember one tent I went into, there were eight beds, or eight mattresses on
> the ground, and there was one woman lying face down with beautiful cornrow
> braided hair, and as I looked more closely I realized that she was dead. There
> were flies on her legs and she was one of the ones that couldn’t be removed.
> So to have so many deaths that you can’t even keep up with burying the dead
> is just a horrific situation. 42

Frieden warne d Sirleaf that bad as the situation was it was “going to get 

worse very quickly” and that if she wanted to get to grips with the epidemic 

she needed to put Ebola management on a professional footing. He also 

advised her to engage with communities, as there was no possibility that extra 

bed capacity could be provided quickly enough. On his return to the United 

States, Frieden briefed President Barack Obama, telling him that the epi -

demic was even worse than he had feared. He then issued a statement to 

reporters in which he compared the W HO’s lacklustre response to Ebola to THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

220 

the foot-dragging he’d witnessed during the early years of AIDS.  By now, Liu 

had also decided to up the ante. In an emotional address to the UN in New 

York on 2  September, she decried the “coalition of inaction” and warned that 

severing links with the affected countries in the hope that the epidemic would 

burn itself out was not a solution.  

> To curb the epidemic, it is imperative that states immediately deploy civilian
> and military assets with expertise in biohazard containment. … To put out this
> fire, we must run into the burning building. 43

At this point, there had been ne arly 1,400 probable and confirmed cases 

of Ebola in Liberia and nearly seven hundred deaths. However, with new 

infections doubling in Liberia every fifteen to twenty days, and Sierra Leone 

not far behind, CDC disease modellers were predicting the two countries 

could see as many as 16,000 cases by the end of September. In the absence 

of additional interventions, and extrapolating from existing behavioural 

patterns, by the new year the situation could be catastrophic, according to 

the CDC, with as many as 550,000 cases across Liberia and Sierra Leone, 

or 1.4 million when corrected for underreporting. 44  “Something is different 

in Monrovia,” MSF’s Armand Sprecher told a reporter from the  New York 

Times  in August. “We’ve never seen this kind of explosion in an urban envi -

ronment before.” 45 

Just at the point when it seemed the situation in Liberia could not get any 

worse, it did. August is monsoon season, and as the rains fell on the graves of 

hastily buried Ebola victims, the dead began floating to the surface. The sight 

of the decomposed corpses sparked outrage, prompting Sirleaf to institute 

mandatory cremations. Although cremations are deeply offensive in Liberian 

culture, this time Liberians acquiesced. “People accepted it and it didn’t cause 

any riots,” said Kevin De Cock, the head of the CDC’s mission to Liberia. 

“There was some resistance, but basically it was done.” 

Then came another surprise: people stopped touching one another. At first 

this sudden behavioural change astonished De Cock and other Western 

observers, but when they thought about it later it made sense. As Bruce 

Aylward, assistant director-general for polio and emergencies, argued, it was 

precisely because in Monrovia the crisis had been so extreme and the WHO’s 

failure so marked that the beh aviour change happened there earliest:   

> Suddenly the entire Monrovia knew Ebola was real—Ebola kills. Ebola’s going
> to kill me unless I do one or two things differently. There was a huge fear and
> people didn’t know what this was. They wouldn’t know a virus from a bacteria
> from whatever, but they knew we had to do something differently. … the first

EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

221 

> thing you do in that kind of overwhelming fear is you retreat, and they changed
> their behaviours in ways which suddenly slowed down and took the heat out
> of this thing. 46

Similar  behavioural shifts also occurred spontaneously in Sierra Leone 

around the same time, particularly in Kailahun and Kenema, the two districts 

that had been hit earliest and hardest by Ebola. Elsewhere, however, resistance 

to the Ebola control measures persisted. Noncompliance was a particular 

problem in the Western District, the area that includes Freetown and its extra 

urban sprawl, and Port Loko, a 2,000-square-mile district to the north of the 

capital scored with swamps and rivers. For instance, in March 2015, shortly 

before Liberia released its last Ebola patient from the hospital, a fisherman 

infected with Ebola evaded government contact tracers and persuaded three 

colleagues to ferry him to a remote island in the Rhombe swamps within sight 

of Lungi airport. There, he consulted a traditional healer before continuing by 

sea to Aberdeen, a township on the outskirts of Freetown, where he alighted 

at Tamba Kula wharf, a stone’s throw from the Radisson Blu Yammy, the city’s 

premier luxury hotel. By now the fisherman was a walking virus bomb, and on 

disembarking he made straight for an Oxfam-built toilet block where he vom -

ited haemorrhagic fluids. As a result, twenty villagers in Tamba Kula were 

infected with Ebola, prompting the authorities to quarantine the Aberdeen 

community for twenty-one days. In theory that should have been the end of 

the transmission chain, but despite the best efforts of contact tracers, one of 

the men who had accompanied the fisherman by boat got away, hitching a ride 

on a motorcycle to Makeni, three hours’ drive from Freetown, where he 

infected three more people, including a local healer. All four were eventually 

traced and taken to a nearby Ebola treatment centre. However, once there, 

they refused medical care, fearing that staff were trying to murder them with 

what the healer called their “Ebola guns”—a reference to the hand-held elec -

tronic thermometers used to measure patients’ temperatures. 

In an attempt to eliminate the last hot spots of infection, the government 

launched a public health campaign under the Krio slogan, “ Leh we tap Ebola 

(Let us stop Ebola).” At the same time, officials met with local paramount 

chiefs and asked them to use their authority with village headmen to pass on 

information about suspicious behaviour. However, while in many parts of the 

country this reporting system was successful, in Port Loko there were several 

cases of village headmen concealing Ebola patients and turning a blind eye to 

secret burials. The result was that in Sierra Leone, unlike in Liberia, there was 

no spontaneous behaviour change and sudden decline in cases: instead, the 

outbreak persisted in to the summer of 2015. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

222 

In the end, what made the difference was the mobilization of additional 

resources by the international community. On 19  September 2014, in rec -

ognition of the security threat posed by the ongoing outbreak, the UN 

secretary general established the United Nations Mission for Ebola 

Emergency Response (UNMEER) to scale up the response and coordinate 

the delivery of logistical and technical support to the Ebola zone. It was 

only the second time in history that an infectious disease outbreak had been 

debated on the floor of the UN—the first time had been AIDS in 1987— 

and it had a similarly galvanizing effect. President Obama pledged to send 

3,000 troops to Liberia, and by the end of the year the US Congress had 

agreed to emergency funding of $5.4 billion for Ebola, more than had 

previously been allocated for any EID.  The result was that by March 2015, 

Britain, France and the United States had mobilized significant military 

assets, and thousands of health workers and contact tracers from more than 

twenty countries were on their way to West Africa to assist in the “getting 

to zero” drive. 47  Nevertheless, it would take a further year for the WHO to 

certify the end of the epidemic. In all, Ebola had sparked nearly 29,000 

infections, 11,300 of them fatal. It was the worst outbreak of the disease in 

history, but while five countries in West Africa had been affected, the 

Armageddon scenario of a pandemic had been averted. 

* * * 

Like SARS, the Ebola epidemic drove home the risks that the emergence of 

novel pathogens in previously remote regions posed in an increasingly inter -

connected world. The West African outbreak was exactly the sort of scenario 

that had been envisaged by the Institute of Medicine in the early 1990s when 

it warned of the dangers that the growth in international air travel and com -

merce posed for the spread of EIDs. These risks had been brought home to 

Americans first by the arrival of Patrick Sawyer in Lagos, and secondly, by the 

presentation in September 2014 of another Liberian national infected with 

Ebola at a hospital in Texas. Thomas Duncan had walked into the Emergency 

Department at Dallas Presbyterian Hospital on 25  September complaining of 

abdominal pain and nausea, but despite his telling staff that he had recently 

visited Liberia, no one thought to screen him for Ebola and he was sent home 

with Tylenol and a course of antibiotics. For three days, the 42-year-old lay 

feverishly ill at a friend’s apartment in Dallas, before being picked up by 

paramedics and returned to the hospital on 28  September. It was only then 

that Duncan was tested for Ebola. Unfortunately, by now he was vomiting EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

223 

copious fluids and was highly contagious. He died ten days later, having 

infected two nurses. 48 

Like the 9/11 attacks, the Duncan case exposed the porosity of American 

airspace and the United States’ vulnerability to exotic pathogens which, 

thanks to commercial air travel, could be in any city on the globe within 

seventy-two hours. 49  Little surprise then that even before Donald Trump 

began calling for bans on Ebola patients and health workers returning from 

abroad, the inquests had started. Most people blamed the WHO.  There was 

a clear lack of direction and “vacuum of leadership” at the highest levels of the 

UN organization, concluded Christopher Stokes, the general director of the 

Brussels branch of MSF, a year into the epidemic. “Instead of limiting its role 

to providing advisory support … the WHO should have recognized much 

earlier that this outbreak required more hands-on deployment.” 50  Dame 

Barbara Stocking, the chair of the Ebola Interim Assessment Panel, the inde -

pendent panel of experts tasked by the WHO with examining its response to 

the crisis, was similarly scathing. Finding that the Ebola epidemic exposed 

shortcomings in both the WHO’s functioning and the operation of the 

International Health Regulations, she argued that what had been needed was 

“independent and courageous decision-making” by the director-general and 

the WHO Secretariat—qualities that had been notably “absent” in the early 

months of the crisis. 51 

But if the WHO was at fault, then so were other organizations. For 

instance, in March 2014 the CDC had dispatched one of its top Ebola 

experts, Pierre Rollin, to Guinea. The deputy head of the CDC’s Special 

Pathogens branch, Rollin is a veteran of several Ebola outbreaks and an 

affable Frenchman with a talent for putting the science of filoviruses in lay -

man’s terms. Frieden hoped that, as a French speaker, Rollin would establish 

a rapport with Guinea’s president Alpha Condé and convince him to extend 

an invitation to the CDC to assist with surveillance and control efforts. 

Rollin did not disappoint, quickly persuading Condé he needed the CDC’s 

help and that it would be counterproductive to close Guinea’s borders. 

Next, he set up an information management system to log cases and trace 

contacts who may have been exposed to the virus. For most of the five-and-

a-half weeks he was in Guinea, Rollin stayed in Conakry, the better to moni -

tor cases at Donka Hospital, but he also found time to tour prefectures close 

to the capital and dispatch staff to Guéckédou to report from the epicentre 

of the outbreak. By the end of April Conakry had not seen a new patient in 

over a week, and Rollin noted that cases had also slowed to a trickle in 

Guinée Forestière. Sierra Leone, meanwhile, had yet to report any cases, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

224 

while Liberia had not seen a case in four weeks. As far as Rollin was con -

cerned, the job was done. Returning to CDC headquarters in Atlanta on 

7 May, he recalls thinking to himself, “It looks like, smells like, tastes like 

regular outbreaks in previous areas.” 52 

However, by the fall of 2014 as Ebola spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone, 

prompting border closings and the suspension of international flights by pan -

icked airlines, Rollin was desperately backpedalling. “It was an unprecedented 

outbreak; it never happened before,” he told the  NewYork Times  in December. 

“There were a lot of things we didn’t know at that time. No one could have 

imagined that it would be what we have now.” 53  Peter Piot, director and pro -

fessor of global health at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 

and a veteran of the original 1976 Yambuku outbreak, was similarly humbled 

by the experience. “Together with the Swiss Franc this was probably the Black 

Swan event of the last 12 months,” Piot informed global health policy makers 

gathered at the World Economic Forum in Davos on 21  January 2015, two 

weeks after Switzerland’s surprise announcement that it was abandoning the 

cap on the franc to allow the Swiss currency to float against the Euro. “It was 

totally unanticipated and we could not have predicted what would happen 

based on the experience of the previous thirty-seven years.” 54 

What was it that had so blinded these experts to the risks posed by the 

outbreak in Guinée Forestière? And why, even as Ebola spread across the 

border to Sierra Leone and Liberia, threatening urban outbreaks, were health 

agencies so slow to respond? 

There are several answers to those questions. One is that while Ebola had 

previously been amplified in hospital settings and, on occasion, had sparked 

urban outbreaks, those outbreaks had been rapidly contained by the institu -

tion of strict barrier nursing controls and the isolation of infectious contacts. 

Another is that while books like  The Hot Zone  had reinforced the impression 

of Ebola as a highly unstable and virulent virus, by the turn of the millennium 

the concerns that Ebola might mutate into an “Andromeda strain” were 

diminishing. This was because for all that the reservoir of the virus was 

unknown, each of the five identified subtypes showed a high degree of 

genomic stability. Moreover, while the Yambuku outbreak had seen case mor -

tality rates as high as 90  per  cent, in Kikwit the mortality rate had been 

78  per  cent, while in an outbreak in Gabon the following year the mortality 

rate had been 57  per  cent. 55  Clearly, for all the concerns about Ebola’s viru -

lence, infection was not an automatic death sentence. Indeed, in the two 

dozen outbreaks of Ebola in Africa prior to 2013, the virus had been respon -

sible for a total of just 2,200 infections and no single outbreak had caused EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

225 

more than four hundred deaths. 56  Compared to AIDS or more widely preva -

lent tropical diseases such as malaria, this made Ebola more of a security risk 

than an urgent public health threat. 

Unfortunately, the experts had forgotten the importance of social behav -

iours and deeply entrenched cultural practices, such as the consumption of 

bushmeat and people’s adherence to traditional funerary rituals. Nor had they 

factored in the mobility of local populations living at the border of three 

countries or the fact that new highways had greatly reduced travel times to 

urban areas. Nor had they considered the impact that the widespread distrust 

of foreigners and government elites might have on the willingness of affected 

communities to accept that Ebola was real, and not a hoax. No doubt there 

were other reasons too: in the early days of the epidemic, the absence of labo -

ratories in West Africa capable of testing for Ebola had been critical, as had 

the Guinean government’s insistence on only counting laboratory-confirmed 

cases. Nor had medical research agencies and pharmaceutical companies 

shown much interest in conducting safety studies of Ebola vaccines and drugs 

that had shown promise in animal models, much less in advancing the medica -

tions to license. Instead, ZMapp and other experimental medical products 

had languished on the shelves of biotech companies. 57 

The absence of doctors and nurses trained and equipped to handle Ebola, 

plus the fragmentation of health systems due to chronic underinvestment and 

civil war, also played a role. But perhaps the biggest lesson of the West African 

Ebola epidemic was that  Zaire ebolavirus  had most likely been circulating unde -

tected in the tri-border zone for years. Indeed, the strain that sparked the out -

break—known as the Makona variant—was all but identical to strains isolated 

in previous outbreaks in Central Africa (in the language of viral genomics, the 

subtypes were 97  per  cent homogenous). Moreover, phylogenetic analysis sug -

gested that the outbreak had been triggered by a single spillover event, a finding 

consistent with the epidemiological evidence and reports that the index case 

had originated in Meliandou in December 2013. There was one other intriguing 

finding: the Makona variant had diverged from other  Zaire ebolavirus  variants 

only about a decade earlier. This suggested that it was a relatively recent intro -

duction to West Africa. 58  Little wonder then that when medical researchers 

discovered that some local people presenting for Lassa also carried antibodies 

to Ebola, no one gave the report much attention. 

The question is, how did  Zaire ebolavirus  get all the way to Guinea and why 

Guéckédou? Introduction from a human traveller seems unlikely: there is 

little regular travel or trade between Central Africa and Guéckédou, and the 

town is a twelve-hour drive from the nearest international airport at either THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

226 

Conakry, Freetown or Monrovia. The more likely culprit is a fruit bat. 

Besides the hammer-headed fruit bat,  Hypsignathus monstrosus , the leading 

candidates are Franquet’s epauletted fruit bat,  Epomops franqueti , and the 

little collared fruit bat,  Myonycteris torquata . These bats are common across 

sub-Saharan Africa, including Guinea, and some are thought to be capable of 

migrating long distances. Perhaps a wayward fruit bat introduced the virus 

to Guinée Forestière, from where it spread to local bat populations, includ -

ing the colony of  Mops condylurus  sheltering in the tree stump in Meliandou. 

As for why Guéckédou, one need look no further than the clearance of 

formerly forested areas by loggers and farmers. Clear-cutting in particular 

has had a devastating impact, driving bats from their roosts and forcing them 

ever closer to human habitations. 

Finally, why did the outbreak occur in 2014 and not earlier? Without fur -

ther ecological investigations and a better understanding of Ebola transmis -

sion patterns and where the virus goes between outbreaks, it is difficult to say. 

However, several observers noted that the outbreak coincided with the begin -

ning of the dry season in Guinée Forestière, prompting speculation that the 

drier conditions may somehow have influenced the number or the proportion 

of infected bats in the region—presuming, of course, that bats are in fact the 

reservoir of Ebola—and the frequency of their contact with humans. Or 

perhaps Emile and his friends had a knack for extracting the  lolibelo  and were 

simply unlucky. 227 

# 9

# Z IS FOR ZIKA 

> “The ideal is to think globally and to act locally”
> René Dubos, “Despairing Optimist”

Recife in north-eastern Brazil is a city of contrasts. Take a stroll along the 

grand Haussmann-style boulevards that radiate from Recife’s renovated har -

bour area and you could be in Paris. The sense of dislocation increases as you 

board a catamaran on the Rio Beberibe and sail past the brightly painted 

baroque buildings that line the waterfront of Santo Antonio, the city’s historic 

centre. With its network of canals and ornate churches and monasteries dat -

ing back to the colonial period, Recife rightly calls itself the “Venice of the 

South.” Built with the profits of the seventeenth-century sugar trade, it is a 

monument to the ingenuity and vision of the original Portuguese and Dutch 

settlers. However, first impressions can be misleading, and as you turn your 

back on the lavishly gilded  Capela Dorada  and head west toward Boa Vista, you 

enter a world of modern apartment buildings and outsized shopping malls, 

and, in the gaps and crevices between, the places the poor call home. 

Like other cities in Brazil, Recife (pronounced “he-see-fey”) is infamous for 

its favelas and urban slums. They hug the highways running parallel to the 

coast and encroach on the canals that feed into the Beberibe and other tribu -

taries that drain from what used to be a massive mangrove swamp. One of the 

largest, Jaboatão dos Guararapes, lies south of the seaside resort of Boa 

Viagem, a five-mile stretch of prime beachfront lined with international 

hotels and luxury condominiums. 

It was here that in 2015 Brazilians awoke to a disturbing new reality. In 

August of that year several women from Jaboatão dos Guararapes and adja -

cent communities gave birth to babies with an unusual congenital syndrome. 

The infants had normal faces up to the eyebrows, but virtually no foreheads, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

228 

and when paediatricians  ran a tape measure around their heads they found 

they were far smaller than normal, less than 32 centimetres, and in some case 

as small as 26 cm (a typical newborn’s head measures 35 cm). Many of the 

babies cried continually, as if they were in constant pain, and could only be 

comforted by being bathed in warm water or by resting their stomachs on 

pilate balls. Others had trouble focusing on their mother’s faces, while the 

worst affected were racked by seizures and spasms and had grotesquely 

twisted limbs and clubfeet. 

One of the first physicians to recognize the new syndrome was Vanessa van 

der Linden, a neuro-paediatrician of Dutch descent who practices at Hospital 

Barão de Lucena, a public hospital in the northeast of the city. In early August, 

van der Linden examined a pair of twins. One of the boys had a severe case of 

congenital microcephaly, and when van der Linden ordered a CT scan she was 

alarmed to see that instead of having the usual walnut formation, the child’s 

brain was smooth and white, with calcified patches marring the cortex. “I’d 

never seen anything like it,” she said. 1 The boy’s mother recalled that in the first 

month of pregnancy she had developed a rash, but nothing that was overly 

concerning. Puzzled, van der Linden ordered tests for rubella, syphilis and 

toxoplasmosis, a parasite harboured by cats that is extremely common in Brazil 

and which, like rubella and syphilis, is known to be associated with congenital 

birth defects, but all the tests were negative. Next, she looked for genetic 

mutations, such as Down’s syndrome, but again the tests were negative. 

However, for all that van der Linden was concerned, the twin was just one 

of hundreds of children delivered in Recife hospitals every month. Then, two 

weeks later, while doing her usual maternity rounds, she came across three 

more babies with microcephaly, and the following week two more. At a loss 

to explain the pattern of neurological damage, she shared her concern with 

her mother, Ana van der Linden, also a paediatrician. “ Hà algo errado ,” she told 

her. “There is something very wrong.” 2 Her mother agreed, informing her that 

she had seen seven similar cases. Soon, the van der Lindens had identified 

fifteen cases in hospitals in Recife. In a normal year, physicians in Pernambuco 

might see five cases across the whole state. It could not be a coincidence. 3

The van der Lindens immediately informed the Pernambuco Health 

Department and asked them to check for reports of other cases of neurologi -

cal malformations in newborns. In all, fifty-eight had been registered in hos -

pitals across the state, most of them within the space of four weeks. In addi -

tion to rubella, syphilis and toxoplasmosis, tests had been run for 

cytomegalovirus, HIV and parvovirus, but they had all been negative. At a loss 

to explain the pattern, the Pernambuco Health Department did the only 

thing  it could: it called a disease detective, Carlos Brito. Z IS FOR ZIKA 

229 

A slim man with wiry hair, Brito is constantly in motion. Trained as an 

infectious disease clinician, he seems never happier than when parsing epide -

miological data or tapping furiously at his laptop. Brito’s first experience of 

outbreak control came in 1991 when Brazil’s Ministry of Health invited him 

to draw up diagnostic guidelines for physicians during a cholera epidemic. 

Since then he has consulted on several outbreaks in Brazil including, most 

notably, those caused by the arboviruses dengue and chikungunya, and he 

works closely with the Osvaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Brazil’s premier 

public health and medical research organization. In August 2014, shortly after 

the FIFA World Cup final, Brito was summoned to Bahia, a state adjacent to 

Pernambuco famed for its coconut-fringed beaches and agreeable climate. A 

few weeks earlier an epidemic of chikungunya had broken out in Feira de 

Santana, a city sixty miles north of Salvador, Bahia’s populous capital. The 

Ministry of Health was concerned that physicians needed better guidelines to 

help them diagnose and recognize the mosquito-borne disease. As it turned 

out, this experience would make Brito the ideal person to investigate the 

mysterious cases of microcephaly in Pernambuco two years later. 

* * * 

Arboviruses (short for arthropod-borne viruses) are endemic to South 

America. The deadliest arbovirus, yellow fever, was most likely introduced to 

Brazil in the late seventeenth century when slave ships from West Africa began 

arriving at Recife and other coastal ports with slave labourers for the sugar 

plantations. Those ships also brought the  Aedes aegypti  mosquito, the main 

vector of yellow fever, dengue and chikungunya. A small, dark mosquito with 

white lyre-shaped markings and banded legs,  A. aegypti  is extremely common 

in areas lacking regular public water services and adequate sanitation systems. 

Virtually eradicated from Brazil in the 1950s with DDT and other pesticides, 

in the 1970s the mosquito launched a comeback, gradually colonizing Brazil’s 

fast-growing cities and, in particular, urban slums and favelas. The result is 

that today  A. aegypti  is ubiquitous in Recife and other Brazilian cities, and in 

far greater densities than in the past. 

The mosquito prefers to lay its eggs in fresh water (during the slave trade, 

the  Aedes  larvae would have bred in the casks of drinking water kept below 

decks, next to the slaves whose chains made them sitting targets for the 

mature mosquitoes). Ideally,  Aedes  looks for a shady uncovered container with 

a wide opening, but it is not fussy and its larvae have been found in everything 

from flowerpots to water bowls, to car tires and discarded plastic bottles. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

230 

While the male mosquitoes feed exclusively on nectar, the females need 

blood to produce their eggs and are extremely active in the two hours after 

sunrise and at dusk. Their preferred mode of attack is to sneak up from 

behind and insert their sharply pointed proboscises into ankles or elbows, 

though knees will also do. The bad news is that one bite is usually sufficient to 

transmit whatever virus the mosquito happens to be harbouring. Unlike other 

types of mosquitoes, such as  Culex , Aedes  is also a “sip” feeder, meaning it likes 

to bite again and again. But perhaps  Aedes ’s most important characteristic is 

that it is a house-haunting mosquito that seldom leaves any dwelling where it 

has once fed. 

Yellow fever is the most feared virus transmitted by  A. aegypti . Though 

most people will experience little more than a mild headache, fever, and 

nausea, in something like one-fifth of cases patients enter a highly toxic phase 

with ghastly symptoms characterized by high fever, severe jaundice (hence its 

name “yellow fever”), bleeding from the mouth and gums, and the retching 

of black vomit ( vomito negro  in Spanish) due to the haemorrhaging of the 

stomach lining. In such cases, the disease is nearly always fatal. The good news 

is that there is a vaccine against yellow fever and one shot offers protection 

for life. This is not the case with dengue, a painful and debilitating disease 

caused by one of four closely related serotypes, or chikungunya. For both 

diseases there are, as yet, no vaccines approved for general use, nor are there 

any cures. 

In the case of dengue, symptoms usually appear three to seven days after 

infection. Most patients experience a high fever, intense headaches, and 

severe joint and muscle pains. It can feel as if someone has taken a sledgeham -

mer to your arms, legs and neck; hence the common name for the disease, 

“breakbone fever.” Sometimes, patients will also develop a rash on the face 

and limbs two to five days after the onset of fever. After a period of four to 

seven weeks of illness, most patients will recover. However, some may go on 

to develop dengue haemorrhagic fever, a rare complication characterized by 

high fever, bleeding from the nose and gums, and failure of the circulatory 

system. In the worst cases of all, these symptoms may terminate in massive 

internal haemorrhaging, shock, and death. 

The symptoms of chikungunya are almost identical, the main difference 

being that the virus is very rarely fatal and has a longer incubation period (one 

to twelve days). In addition, the characteristic rash of the disease usually 

appears within forty-eight hours of the onset of symptoms, and can be found 

practically anywhere on the body (the trunk, limbs, face, palms or feet). 

Whereas with dengue the pains tend to be muscular, with chikungunya the Z IS FOR ZIKA 

231 

pain is located in the joints and there may be noticeable swelling or oedema 

in the morning. These joint pains may become chronic, particularly in the case 

of the elderly or those with underlying medical conditions. 4

Dengue has been a recurrent problem in Brazil since 1981, when an epi -

demic broke out unexpectedly in the state of Roraima. In 1986, and again in 

1990, there were significant outbreaks in Rio de Janeiro, and by 2002 dengue 

was being reported in sixteen states, including in Sao Paolo, the most popu -

lous city in the Americas. Since 2008, when Brazil recorded 734,000 sus -

pected cases and 225 deaths, and 2010, when cases exceeded one million for 

the first time, these epidemics have been growing in severity. 5 Most worrying 

of all, there is now active circulation of all four serotypes with outbreaks of 

one or sometimes two or more dengue serotypes simultaneously every two 

to three years (while patients infected with one serotype enjoy lifelong 

immunity, cross-immunity to other serotypes is partial and temporary, and 

subsequent infections with other serotypes increase the risk of the haemor -

rhagic form of the disease). Little wonder then that the Pan American Health 

Organization (PAHO) has made the control of dengue a regional priority and 

that the WHO has been urging the uptake of an experimental vaccine devel -

oped by Sanofi Pasteur in areas of endemic transmission. 6

It was against this background of growing concern about dengue and the 

spread of arboviruses generally that Brito was dispatched to Bahia to take 

stock of the chikungunya outbreak in Feira de Santana. There he was intro -

duced to another physician, Kleber Luz, who specialized in arbovirus infec -

tions. Based in Natal, the state capital of Rio Grande de Norte, two hundred 

miles north of Recife, Luz had recently returned from Martinique, the site of 

a recent large chikungunya outbreak, so was well versed in differential diag -

nosis of the disease—the process of distinguishing a disease or condition from 

one with which it shares similar signs or symptoms. By the end of September, 

Feira de Santana had seen more than 4,000 cases, and Luz feared that chikun -

gunya was primed to spread to neighbouring states and cities, including Natal 

(chikungunya would eventually spark 20,000 infections across Brazil in 

2015). However, when patients began turning up at clinics in Natal complain -

ing of fever, rashes and itchy red eyes the following January, Luz decided their 

symptoms did not fit either chikungunya or dengue, and shared his concerns 

with Brito. “These patients had mild fevers, but with dengue the fever is usu -

ally very high,” Brito explained. “About 40  per  cent of the patients com -

plained of joint pains, but unlike with chikungunya the pains were not severe. 

By contrast, there was a very high frequency of rashes, something you see 

infrequently in dengue and which is not all that important in chikungunya.” It THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

232 

was at this point that Brito and Luz made a crucial decision. Rather than 

writing a report and waiting for it to be circulated to interested parties, they 

decided to make use of the social messaging service WhatsApp, so that they 

could share their thoughts instantly with other like-minded physicians. 

Inspired by the example of the early Jesuit missionaries to Brazil, they named 

their WhatsApp group, “Chikungunya: The Mission.” 7

By now similar cases were appearing in Recife. Then in March came 

reports of further outbreaks in Salvador and Fortaleza, another city in the 

northeast, prompting journalists to begin talking about the “ doenca exantemat -

ica misteriosa” —the “mysterious disease with a rash.” Frantically, Luz and Brito 

began searching the medical literature for clues. Eventually, in the medical 

textbook  Fields Virology , under the section on arboviruses, Luz found a brief 

report of a virus whose symptoms seemed to fit the pattern of illness he had 

observed in patients in Natal. The virus was called Zika and had last been 

associated with an outbreak in 2013 in French Polynesia in the South Pacific, 

five thousand miles from the coast of Chile. As in Natal, patients presented 

with a mild fever, an itchy pink rash, bloodshot eyes, headaches, and joint 

pains. In all, 18  per  cent of the population of French Polynesia had been 

affected, but no one had died and the outbreak had been rapidly forgotten. 

Could this be the mysterious disease? 

With growing conviction, Luz sent Brito a message on WhatsApp. It read: 

“Isso deve sere Zika virus . Veja . Aqui esta todo munde doente … vai ter que dar Zika 

virus .” (“This must be Zika virus. Look. Here everyone is sick … it can only 

be Zika virus”). The date stamp read 21:19 on 28  March 2015. Brito, who 

admits he had never heard of Zika, recalls the moment clearly as he was in a 

restaurant having dinner with his family at the time and immediately typed 

“Zika” into a search engine, coming up with several references to the outbreak 

in French Polynesia, as well as another smaller outbreak that had occurred in 

Micronesia in 2007. Although Micronesia is in the western Pacific and even 

further from South America than French Polynesia, Brito was intrigued. “I 

will begin working on it first thing tomorrow,” he replied, toasting Luz with 

a glass of wine. 8

Brito was not the only person who had never heard of Zika. Except for a 

handful of arbovirus experts, no one had. Rarely diagnosed, most Zika infec -

tions are mild and even fewer require hospitalization. Certainly, in the seventy 

years since the first description of the virus, no one had recorded a fatality 

from the disease. Worse, Zika lacked a reliable animal model. The only way to 

study the virus’s properties was to passage it repeatedly through mice spe -

cially adapted for the purpose, but in so doing the risk was that the virus Z IS FOR ZIKA 

233 

would cease to bear much resemblance to the pathogen seen in nature. In 

short, as the  New York Times ’s science correspondent Donald McNeil put it: “In 

the hunt for research funding, a virologist specializing in Zika would struggle 

to get grants.” 9

Indeed, as he delved into Zika’s history, it became apparent to Brito that 

knowledge of Zika was largely a by-product of historical research into yellow 

fever and laboratory studies that focused on the Aedes mosquito. In 1942 

Alexander Haddow, a Scottish-educated zoologist with an interest in mos -

quito-borne diseases, had moved to Africa to work as an entomologist at the 

Rockefeller Foundation’s Yellow Fever Research Institute in Entebbe, Uganda 

(now the Uganda Virus Research Institute). There, he teamed up with another 

Rockefeller researcher, Stuart F.  Kitchen, and George W.  A.  Dick from the 

UK’s National Institute for Medical Research, and began looking for a suitable 

site to trap mosquitoes. They found it in the Zika forest, a swampy inlet of 

Lake Victoria adjacent to the Entebbe-Kampala highway which was home to 

several species of  Aedes , including  A. africanus , the vector of yellow fever in 

Uganda. Placing traps on steel towers that rose forty metres above the forest 

floor, they began by measuring the density of mosquitoes at different levels of 

the tree canopy and the times they were most active. Next, they placed mon -

keys in cages at the elevations where they knew there were a lot of  Aedes  and 

allowed them to be bitten repeatedly. Afterwards, they checked the monkeys’ 

temperatures and, if they were sick, took a blood sample to see whether they 

were infected with yellow fever or some other virus. It was from one of these 

monkeys that, in April 1947, Haddow and his colleagues succeeded in isolat -

ing the Zika virus for the first time. Nine months later, they also isolated the 

virus from an  A. africanus  mosquito, though it would take five more years for 

them to prove that mosquito and monkey were infected with one and the 

same virus and that it had an affinity for nerve tissue. 

Today Zika is classified as a flavivirus, from  flavus , the Latin word for yellow 

(in the case of Zika the name is somewhat misleading as, unlike yellow fever, 

the virus rarely causes jaundice). Under an electron microscope both viruses 

look like twenty-sided polygons called icosahedrons, each containing a single 

strand of RNA.  It is these strands that invade and hijack the machinery of 

animal cells, including human cells, and cause the characteristic symptoms of 

Zika: a raised red rash, headache, conjunctivitis and myalgia. 10 

In the 1950s, following reports of the first human infections, several 

researchers tried to show that  A. africanus  was not the only vector, but that  A.

aegypti , which thrives in urban environments, could also transmit the virus 

(they did this by infecting themselves with Zika and allowing  A. aegypti  to bite THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

234 

them on the arm repeatedly, somethin g that would not be permitted by uni -

versity ethics committees today). However, the experiments proved unsuc -

cessful, and it was not until 1966 that the virus was isolated from  A. aegypti 

for the first time. That this occurred in Malaysia, not Africa, should have rung 

alarm bells, indicating that the virus was on the move and might be capable 

of infecting people in urban areas. Indeed, by the early 1980s Zika had spread 

to India and other parts of equatorial Asia and was being reported as far west 

as Indonesia. However, since cases requiring medical attention were rare and 

seroprevalence studies showed there was wide population exposure, there 

was little concern. In retrospect, researchers suspect that the fact that just 

sixteen human Zika infections were recorded between 1947 and 2007 prob -

ably resulted from underreporting due to the disease’s similarity to dengue 

and chikungunya, 11  and because 80  per  cent of people infected with Zika 

never develop symptoms and so do not seek medical attention. *

The first outbreak to make an impression on doctors and public health 

professionals came in 2007 when five hundred Yap islanders suddenly fell ill. 

At first the outbreak was mistaken for mild dengue, but when the CDC sent 

samples to the United States for testing, they turned out to be positive for 

Zika. This was a shock, as Yap is a long way from Africa and there were no 

monkeys present on the island. In theory, the virus could have been intro -

duced by windblown mosquitoes from Indonesia. However, it is far more 

likely the virus was carried to Yap in the blood of an infected patient or by an 

Aedes  mosquito that hitched a ride on a ship. Whatever the source, within five 

months more than two-thirds of the island’s 7,000 residents were infected. ** 

The next significant outbreak occurred in 2013 when physicians on Tahiti 

and other islands in French Polynesia reported an “eruption” of fevers, rashes, 

and bloodshot eyes. 12  At first the French suspected dengue, but by the end of 

October half of the samples had tested positive for Zika, and by December 

cases were being reported on all seventy-six islands that comprise the archi -

pelago. In addition, patients began arriving at emergency rooms in varying 

degrees of paralysis, something that ha d not been noted or reported in previous   

> *It is also likely that due to repeated exposure to the virus, most Asian populations
> were immune to Zika.
> ** There have been no further outbreaks on Yap since 2007. This is most likely
> because the majority of islanders now possess immunity to Zika. It is only when
> herd immunity wanes and there are sufficient numbers of susceptibles again that
> a new epidemic may erupt.

Z IS FOR ZIKA 

235 

Zika outbreaks. The cause of the paralysis was Guillain-Barré syndrome, a rare 

autoimmune condition that in the most extreme cases can result in perma -

nent nerve and muscle damage and even death if the paralysis extends to the 

diaphragm. As fears of Guillain-Barré spread and the government stepped up 

mosquito spraying, rumours began to circulate that the insecticide, deltame -

thrin, was responsible. By the time the outbreak concluded the following 

April, 8,750 people had fallen sick and forty-two had been diagnosed with 

Guillain-Barré. 13  Fortunately, most of these cases resolved with time, but if 

the world needed another wake-up call that Zika deserved to be taken seri -

ously, this was it. That is not what happened, however. Instead, as Zika con -

tinued its westerly spread across the Pacific, reaching New Caledonia in 

March 2014 and Rapa Nui (Easter Island), a territory of Chile, soon after, the 

world’s attention was seized by a far more visible emerging disease threat: the 

Ebola outbreak in West Africa. The result was that when at some point in 

2014 Zika arrived in Brazil, no one noticed. 

* * * 

By April 2015 Brito and Luz were becoming increasingly convinced that Zika 

was responsible for the spate of rashes and fevers in the northeast, but in 

order to convince the Pernambuco health authorities and Brazil’s Ministry of 

Health that these were not “dengue light” cases, they needed hard laboratory 

evidence. Unfortunately, antibodies to Zika cross-react with those of dengue 

and other flaviviruses, so conventional serological testing using ELISA or 

immunofluorescence would not be sufficient. To be certain that Zika was the 

cause, positive results would have to be obtained by the detection of viral 

nucleic acids using RT-PCR.  Accordingly, in April, Luz sent serum samples 

from twenty-one suspected cases to Claudia Nunes Duarte dos Santos, a 

virologist at the Carlos Chagas Institute in Curitiba in Paraná. Eight of the 

patients, seven of whom were women, tested positive for Zika by RT-PCR.  All 

lived in Natal and all had relatives with the same symptoms. At around the 

same time, another group of virologists based at the Federal University of 

Bahia in Salvador also detected the presence of Zika RNA in seven cases from 

Camacari, 650 miles to the south. There could now be no doubt, and on 

14  May the Ministry of Health released a statement confirming that Zika was 

circulating in Brazil. However, while the statement prompted PAHO to issue 

an epidemiological alert, no further action was forthcoming, and the 

announcements prompted little alarm among Brazilian physicians or the 

wider global health community. By now, however, Brito had read up on the THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

236 

Guillain-Barré cases in French Polynesia and had issued an alert to members 

of the WhatsApp group warning them to look out for neurological symptoms. 

That’s how he came to learn about a group of patients being treated by Lucia 

Brito (no relation), the head of neurology at the Hospital da Restauracao in 

Recife. Some had inflammation of the optic nerve, others of the brain and 

spinal cord, and several had Guillain-Barré syndrome. 14 

As yet, the link between Zika and Guillain-Barré was unproven—it was 

merely a temporal association and could have been a coincidence. To show the 

two were causally connected, a virologist would need to test the cerebrospi -

nal fluid (CSF) of patients with Guillain-Barré for Zika virus—something that 

had not happened during the outbreak in French Polynesia. In short, Brito 

needed a microbiologist to help him connect the dots. Fortunately, Brito 

knew the perfect person: Ernesto Marques, the head of virology at Fiocruz in 

Recife and an expert on dengue. 

The grandson of a pharmacist from Recife, Marques was raised in Recife 

and has long felt a duty to use his knowledge to serve the people of his home 

town. That sense of purpose took Marques to medical school in Recife and, 

after graduation, to Johns Hopkins to study for a PhD in pharmacology. 

Drawn to research with practical applications for health problems, he decided 

to specialize in dengue, developing a tool to help doctors predict the health 

outcomes of patients infected with the virus. On obtaining his doctorate in 

1999, Marques was offered a prestigious faculty research position, but he 

knew that in order to study dengue and other mosquito-borne diseases he 

needed to be close to the people most affected, so in 2006 he left Baltimore 

and returned to Recife to head up Fiocruz’s virology department at the 

Instituto Aggeu Magalhães (IAM). Among his first cohort of research students 

was Brito. While Brito was interested in the clinical symptoms of dengue, 

Marques was interested in mapping the T cells involved in clearing the virus 

with a view to identifying segments on the surface of the virus known as 

epitopes to which antibodies bind and which might be relevant to vaccine 

design. The two men soon became close friends, discovering in the process 

that they shared an enthusiasm for medical detection. 

In 2009, Marques was offered an associate professorship at the University 

of Pittsburgh’s Graduate School of Public Health, and began dividing his time 

between Pittsburgh and Recife. However, he and Brito stayed in touch, swap -

ping notes and helping to recruit patients for Fiocruz’s ongoing research into 

dengue. The result was that when Marques first heard about the outbreak in 

Recife, he assumed the mysterious disease was mild dengue. Even when, in 

late April, Brito visited Fiocruz with a list of candidate viruses, including Z IS FOR ZIKA 

237 

Zika, and raised the possibility of a connection with Guillain-Barré, Marques, 

who watched the meeting on a video link from his office in Pittsburgh, saw 

little reason to alter his opinion. Nevertheless, he agreed to order reagents to 

conduct tests for Zika and instructed his laboratory to concentrate on patients 

recently diagnosed with Guillain-Barré. Not long after, the laboratory took 

delivery of samples from thirty of Lucia Brito’s patients. By May Brito and 

Marques had their answer. Zika was present in the blood of seven of the 

patients. Not only that, but CSF from some of the same patients also tested 

positive—strong evidence of a causal link with Guillain-Barré. 

When other laboratories in Brazil had first reported the presence of Zika 

in dengue light patients, Marques had shared the news with his Pittsburgh 

colleagues, including Donald Burke, the dean of the Graduate School of 

Public Health and an expert on arboviruses (it was Burke who had written 

the chapter on arboviruses in the textbook that Luz had consulted in March). 

Although at this stage it was assumed that such infections were largely benign, 

with Marques’s input Burke agreed to draft an email to a former colleague in 

the Biological Threats Department of the White House. The email read:  

> If Zika is in fact spreading in Brazil, it is of concern for several reasons. 1. It
> will cause confusion about what is dengue and what is Zika, and what will be
> vaccine preventable. 2. It could spread more widely in the Americas. 3. There
> may be surprising interactions of Zika and dengue.

The e mail concluded by urging the implementation of surveillance for Zika 

“as soon as possible.” 15  Now, with hard evidence of a causal link between Zika 

and Guillain-Barré, and possibly other neurological conditions as well, the 

case for surveillance was even more urgent. At the very least, Marques 

expected Fiocruz to issue an announcement about their findings. Instead, as 

Brito briefed the press, officials at Fiocruz urged caution, then issued a state -

ment denying the reports. Marques was furious, but in the meantime he had 

filed a report to the Ministry of Health, so he knew it was only a matter of 

time before the truth came out. 

Events now moved quickly. When van der Linden began noticing the cases 

of microcephaly, one of the first persons she shared her concern with was 

Marques, her old medical school classmate. Soon Brito was also on the case. 

His first move was to gather together sixteen women who had recently given 

birth to babies with microcephaly at the Instituto Materno Infantil de 

Pernambuco (IMIP) and distribute detailed questionnaires asking whether 

they had recently experienced a rash, conjunctivitis, or oedema. “Because of 

the discovery of Zika virus in ce rebrospinal fluid and the neurological THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

238 

conditions seen in previous outbreaks, he was already thinking Zika,” said 

Marques when I met him at his office at IAM. 16 

As Brito expanded his inquiries, circulating questionnaires to women at 

other maternity wards, his conviction grew that he was on the right track. All 

the women had tested negative for the common causes of microcephaly, and 

all had experienced a rash and a fever during the first trimester of pregnancy. 

Besides, the dispersal was too extensive. “It could not be an outbreak trans -

mitted by saliva, such as rubella, or a sudden decline in immunity that would 

allow the spread of cytomegalovirus,” says Brito. “It needed a vector.” 17 

However, although Brito was enthused by the thought that he might be on the 

brink of solving the mystery, his excitement was tempered by sadness. Many 

of the women he spoke to were as young as fourteen and barely out of child -

hood. “It was their first child and when they burst into tears it was hard for 

me not to cry too.” 18 

By now Luz had also identified several women in Natal who had given birth 

to microcephalic babies and had experienced symptoms characteristic of Zika 

early in their pregnancies. Increasingly convinced that Zika was responsible 

for the increase in microcephaly cases, in October Brito presented his findings 

to the Ministry of Health and the Pernambuco health authorities. At this 

juncture, 141 cases of microcephaly had been detected in Pernambuco (by 

comparison, in 2014 Pernambuco had registered 12 cases). Similar increases 

in microcephaly and other peculiar neurological malformations were being 

reported in Rio Grande do Norte and other nearby states, and although the 

authorities were reluctant to accept that Zika was to blame, it was obvious 

there was a problem. Accordingly, on 11  November the Ministry of Health 

declared a national public health emergency and the Pernambuco Health 

Department issued an order requiring the compulsory notification of all 

microcephalic births. 

Still, rumours abounded. Some people speculated that the supposed 

increase in microcephaly cases could be an artefact of Brazil’s live-birth 

reporting system and better surveillance. Others clung to the theory that it 

was a bad batch of rubella vaccine or the fault of insecticides and larvicides. 

What scientists needed was live virus from a pregnant woman. But the Zika 

virus is typically detectable only in the first two to five days after the onset of 

symptoms, after which it usually disappears from the blood. * Because no one  

> *By contrast, Zika virus has been isolated from semen up to 188 days after the onset
> of symptoms.

Z IS FOR ZIKA 

239 

in Brazil was aware of the threat posed by Zika in the early part of the year, 

presumably the most common time when pregnant women had contracted 

the disease, no one had thought to test their blood for the virus during this 

critical period. Nor could they have—even as late as December 2015, when 

epidemiologists began to study the microcephaly births intensively, there was 

no routine diagnostic test available for Zika, and PCR was only available in 

specialist labs such as Marques’s. Of course, antibodies to Zika might still be 

detectable, but such antibodies could have been produced during prior expo -

sures and were not evidence that the women had been infected with Zika 

during their pregnancies. The only possibility was to look for the virus in the 

amniotic fluid of a pregnant woman. The question was, where could such a 

candidate be found? 

Unbeknownst to Brito and Marques, while they were puzzling over these 

questions, Adrian Melo, a researcher in foetal medicine in Paraíba specializing 

in high-risk pregnancies, was treating two women whose sonograms showed 

unusual foetal brain development. The first woman had developed a rash, fol -

lowed by fever and myalgia at eighteen weeks of gestation, and had been pre -

scribed intravenous cortisone. She recovered, and at sixteen weeks her ultra -

sound was normal, but further ultrasounds at twenty-one and twenty-seven 

weeks indicated foetal microcephaly (the woman would eventually give birth 

to a baby with a head circumference of 30 cm). 19  The second woman had simi -

larly suffered Zika-like symptoms during pregnancy—in this case, at the tenth 

gestational week—with an ultrasound at twenty-five weeks also indicating 

foetal microcephaly. What particularly concerned Melo was that both foetuses 

had marked deformations of their cerebellum, the part of the brain that con -

trols muscular movement, hearing, and eyesight, something that was not usual 

in microcephaly. * A few days later, Melo received a text about the suspected 

link between neurological malformations in newborns and Zika. That’s when 

it hit home. “It was the only possible explanation,” she said. 20 

In early November Melo succeeded in making contact with a researcher at 

Fiocruz in Rio de Janeiro and arranged for amniotic fluid to be drawn from 

the women at twenty-eight weeks. Both samples tested positive for Zika 

virus. It was exactly the proof Brito needed, but still the Ministry of Health 

hesitated. Only when on 28  November another research group in the state of 

Pará announced it had also isolated the virus, this time from the brain of a  

> *These malformations and nervous system deficits would later be labelled
> Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS).

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

240 

stillborn baby with microcephaly and other congenital abnormalities, did the 

ministry agree to issue a statement confirming the findings. It was official: 

something as innocuous as a mosquito bite might be causing severe neurologi -

cal damage in newborns across Brazil, the most populous country in South 

America; and pregnant women exposed to Zika, especially during their first 

trimester, should be presumed to be at risk of microcephaly. On 1  December, 

with nine other countries in South America, including Venezuela, Colombia, 

and Mexico, reporting transmission of Zika, PAHO also fell into line, issuing 

an alert warning member states about the virus and advising them to prepare 

health centres and antenatal centres for a “possible increase in demand … for 

neurological syndromes.” At this point, Brazil was investigating 1,248 cases of 

microcephaly, including seven deaths, in fourteen states. That gave a preva -

lence of 99.7 microcephaly cases per 100,000 live births—a twentyfold 

increase over the 2010 rate. 21  The question was how much of this increase was 

down to Zika, as opposed to heightened awareness of microcephaly and the 

efficiency of Brazil’s live births information system. Were other countries in 

Latin America experiencing similar increases? As 2015 drew to a close, no 

one knew the answers to those questions, least of all the WHO’s then-director 

general Margaret Chan, to whom it now fell to assess the level of the threat 

and whether it constituted a public health emergency of international con -

cern (PHEIC). 

* * * 

In a filing cabinet somewhere at WHO headquarters in Geneva is a document 

listing the world’s leading infectious disease threats. Only to be referred to in 

the event of an emergency, the document, known as a “decision instrument,” 

provides a step-by-step guide for assessing outbreaks that may pose a “serious” 

threat to public health. At the top of that list are smallpox, polio, pandemic 

influenza and SARS.  Outbreaks of any of these pathogens automatically trig -

ger a PHEIC.  In second place come cholera, pneumonic plague and viral 

haemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola and Marburg. Yellow fever, dengue and 

West Nile, another arbovirus, also make the list, but in 2015 there was no 

mention of Zika. This is not because the virus was unknown to public health 

experts—it had first been identified in 1947—but because until the outbreak 

in Brazil no one had imagined it might pose a threat to expectant mothers and 

their babies, let alone require a coordinated international response. 

By any measure Zika’s rise through the microbial threat rankings had been 

astonishing. In the corridors of the WHO some officials were suggesting it Z IS FOR ZIKA 

241 

might even constitute a bigger health risk than Ebola. The timing was particu -

larly unwelcome for Chan. After she had weathered months of criticism over 

her handling of the Ebola epidemic and stinging reports questioning her lead -

ership abilities, the epidemic was finally over and officials were returning 

from West Africa to enjoy Christmas with their families. In the closing months 

of the outbreak, the WHO had even scored a significant victory, supervising 

the trial of an experimental vaccine that, according to preliminary data, con -

ferred complete protection against Ebola. Now, with just eighteen months of 

her term as director-general left to serve, Chan was faced with another criti -

cal decision, one that could forever define her stewardship of the WHO as a 

success or failure. She could not afford to make another wrong call. But in the 

case of Zika, it was by no means clear what was the right thing to do. As yet, 

there was no proof the virus caused birth defects—it was simply an associa -

tion in time and space. Moreover, any suggestion that there might be a causal 

relationship risked needlessly panicking expectant mothers. There was 

another consideration, too: the Olympic torch was on its way to Rio ready 

for the official launch of the Summer Games on 5  August. The Olympics 

would bring thousands of spectators and tourists flocking to Brazil. As few of 

them would have been exposed to Zika before, few would possess immunity, 

risking further outbreaks and the introduction of the virus to their home 

countries once the games were over. Finally, there were the athletes and the 

Brazilian economy to consider. The Olympics was a mega-event, one in which 

the Brazilian government and corporate sponsors had invested millions. 

Stadium construction was already behind schedule, and with the government 

facing growing criticism over its clearance of urban slums and other favela 

“beautification” measures, there was a risk athletes might withdraw rather 

than risk exposing themselves and their families to Zika. 

When faced with a tricky decision there is nothing like safety in numbers. 

In weighing whether or not to announce a PHEIC for Ebola, Chan had taken 

advice from thirteen experts. In the case of the Zika emergency committee 

Chan recruited eighteen experts and invited David Heymann to chair their 

deliberations. It was a shrewd choice. Heymann had been a key architect of 

the 2005 revisions to the International Health Regulations and one of those 

who, behind the scenes, had criticized Chan’s handling of Ebola, believing she 

had been too slow to challenge claims by WHO’s Africa office and member 

states that they had the outbreak under control. After leaving WHO’s 

Communicable Disease Division, Heymann had taken up a position as profes -

sor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and 

Tropical Medicine and accepted the chairmanship of Public Health England, THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

242 

an executive agency of Britain’s Department of Health and Social Care tasked 

with the surveillance and control of contagious disease outbreaks. A regular 

contributor to  The Lancet  and the  New England Journal of Medicine , he also 

headed Chatham House’s Centre on Global Health Security, giving him a 

powerful platform to expound on global health issues and network with other 

key opinion makers. 

From Heymann’s point of view, chairmanship of the emergency committee 

would give him a chance to push for the sort of systems that had proved so 

successful during the SARS outbreak when the WHO had put its faith in 

virtual networks of experts and allowed them the space and security to col -

laborate and share confidential research data. Still, it must have come as a 

shock when four days before the committee was due to meet, Heymann got 

the call to say he had been selected as chair. 

In the case of Ebola, once an emergency committee had been convened, 

the determination of a PHEIC had been relatively easy. After all, by August 

2015 Ebola had killed thousands of people in West Africa and was known to 

be highly virulent. But in the case of Zika there was so much that was not 

known about the virus and its pathology, and although it was clear that trans -

mission was widespread and likely to affect other countries in the Americas, 

it was unclear to what extent Zika posed an ongoing health threat, let alone 

a “serious” one, which is the first test of a PHEIC.  Another problem was that 

although the relationship between Zika and microcephaly was unknown, the 

virus was not: on the contrary, it had first been described in 1947 only to be 

dismissed by experts as a virological curiosity (in epistemological terms this 

made it an “unknown known”). Nor was it possible to say whether Zika’s 

emergence in Brazil was truly “unexpected” or “unusual”—the other tests of 

a PHEIC—or simply an artefact of better surveillance. Adding to the pressure 

on Heymann and other committee members were the heartbreaking pictures 

of babies with tiny heads that were beginning to fill the morning news shows 

and Twitter feeds and a recent travel advisory from the CDC recommending 

that pregnant women consider postponing travel to Brazil and twelve other 

countries with Zika transmission. 

If Heymann had been hesitating about recommending a PHEIC before, as 

soon as the committee began reviewing the evidence his doubts evaporated. 

The first shock was the presentation of new evidence from French Polynesia 

indicating that there had been an increase in neurological disorders, including 

Guillain-Barré, coincident with the 2014 Zika epidemic, something that had 

not been reported at the time. 22  In addition, it was discovered that the 

authorities had overlooked several cases of neurological damage in foetuses. Z IS FOR ZIKA 

243 

None of the affected mothers had recalled being ill during pregnancy, but 

four had subsequently tested positive for flavivirus antibodies, suggesting they 

could have been carrying silent Zika infections. These discoveries were game 

changers. As Chan was to put it: “Now it wasn’t ‘only Brazil’ any more.” 23 

Another critical determinant was Heymann’s realization that the clusters 

of microcephaly and neurological disorders required “intensified research.” 

Without this research, and the deployment of rapid diagnostic tests to 

enhance the surveillance and diagnosis of Zika infections, it would be very 

difficult to establish a causative link or, conversely, to rule one out. 

Declaring a PHEIC would have a galvanizing effect, Heymann calculated, 

making a coordinated international response and the development of a 

vaccine that much easier. On precautionary grounds, then, and to avert a 

potentially bigger crisis, the committee was justified in ruling that the clus -

ters represented an “extraordinary event” and a public health threat to other 

parts of the world. “That is the PHEIC,” Heymann explained, sitting along -

side Chan as she announced the decision to the world’s press on 1  February 

2016. “The PHEIC has to do with proving whether the clusters are or are 

not linked to the Zika virus.” 24 

* * * 

Even before the WHO’s announcement, speculation about Zika and its effects 

on women’s gestation cycles was sparking hysterical headlines around the 

world. Now that hysteria had ramped up several notches, the Rio Olympics 

committee decided it had no choice but to issue its own travel advisory. 

Standing in front of a poster showing a mosquito with a red line through it 

and the caption “ Mensagem sobre Zika ” (“Message about Zika”), João Granjeiro, 

the director of medical services for Rio 2016, advised athletes and visitors 

attending the games to smother themselves in mosquito repellent, shut their 

windows, and use air conditioners to minimize the risks of being bitten. He 

could offer little reassurance to pregnant women, however. Instead, he 

echoed previous government advice that expectant mothers should think 

twice about travel to Brazil. 25  By now, imported Zika cases in travellers who 

had recently visited South America were being reported from Ireland to 

Australia, and the United States had confirmed a rare case of sexual transmis -

sion of the virus in Texas, further ratcheting up the hysteria. “No one is safe 

from Zika,” screamed the  Daily Mail  in an article revealing that more 

than  21,000 Colombian women had contracted the virus. 26  “Living with 

Zika,” declared another story illustrated with pictures of women cradling THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

244 

microcephalic babies at a rehabilitation centre in Recife—victims of what the 

Daily Mail  referred to as the “head-shrinking bug.” 27 

By June, with reports that the virus had spread to Mexico and the 

Caribbean and that the CDC was monitoring 279 pregnant women with 

confirmed or suspected Zika infections in the United States, the outbreak 

took on panic proportions. Newlyweds who had been looking forward to 

honeymoons in Puerto Rico and Costa Rica cancelled their trips, while retir -

ees, whose childrearing days were long behind them, reconsidered plans for 

leisurely Caribbean cruises. Soon athletes were also exhibiting signs of Zika 

hysteria. One of the first to fall victim was the world’s number one golfer, 

Jason Day, whose wife had recently given birth to their second child. When 

Day announced he would not be competing at the Olympics because of his 

concerns about Zika, several other famous golfers followed suit. Meanwhile, 

Greg Rutherford, the British Olympic long jump champion who was a hot 

favourite to repeat his gold medal-winning performance at Rio, revealed he 

had taken the precaution of freezing his sperm (even so, his partner, Susie, 

and their son Milo would not be attending). Even normally level-headed 

commentators such as Amir Attaran, professor of law and medicine at the 

University of Ottawa, got publicly involved, signing an open letter with one 

hundred other public health experts calling on the International Olympic 

Committee to move or postpone the games. “The fire is already burning but 

that is not a rationale not to do anything about the Olympics,” Attaran 

explained. “It is not time now to throw more gasoline on the fire.” 28 

By now fumigation brigades, their numbers swelled by 55,000 Brazilian 

military personnel, were going door-to-door in Rio and other Brazilian cities, 

spraying insecticides and handing out educational leaflets aimed at persuading 

people to remove sources of standing water. The  Aedes  had not seen an assault 

of this magnitude since the 1930s when the Brazilian dictator Getúlio Vargas, 

with financial support from the Rockefeller Foundation, authorized a mili -

tary-style program of larval reduction in an effort to eradicate yellow fever. 

Then, city and town dwellers had been compelled to destroy mosquito breed -

ing sites or risk fines for noncompliance, but by 2016 Brazil was no longer a 

dictatorship and the authorities could not force disadvantaged communities 

living in the shadow of the Olympic village to cooperate. Instead, the last-

minute blitz fuelled conspiracy theories that insecticides and larvicides were 

to blame and that medical technology, not the mosquito, was the culprit. 29 

However, it was in Miami, another subtropical city 4,000 miles to the north, 

that the buzz and clamour around Zika reached fever pitch when in August 

the CDC issued a travel warning advising pregnant women to avoid a one-Z IS FOR ZIKA 

245 

square-mile area of the city. Fourteen people had been diagnosed with Zika 

after being bitten by mosquitoes in and around the trendy Wynwood arts 

district, and although Florida’s governor, Rick Scott, insisted that Miami was 

still open for business, the CDC begged to differ. As planes loaded with an 

insecticide called Naled stepped up their aerial bombing missions, Wynwood 

became a ghost town, prompting protests about “chemical warfare.” 30  The 

protestors’ voices were soon joined by those of hotel and casino operators in 

and around South Beach, nervous about the impact the Zika scare was having 

on summer tourist bookings. The only silver lining was that the panic per -

suaded politicians in Washington to pass a $1.1 billion funding package for 

Zika that had been deadlocked in Congress for months. Though by the time 

Congress approved the bill in late September the summer mosquito season 

was drawing to a close, those funds were desperately needed for future Zika 

control measures and, just as important, research into vaccines. 

Today, the panic over Zika is a fading memory. The Olympic Games went 

ahead as scheduled, and while a few athletes tested positive for the virus none 

developed serious illnesses or neurological complications. Nor did their wives 

return home to be confronted, nine months later, with the news that their 

children had microcephaly. And while the epidemic eventually spread to 

eighty-four countries, and the virus is now firmly entrenched throughout the 

Americas, at the time of writing Zika is no longer considered an international 

health emergency. The WHO lifted the PHEIC in November 2016 after a 

systematic review of the scientific evidence left experts in no doubt that Zika 

was  a cause of congenital brain abnormalities, including microcephaly seen in 

newborns (six months later, in May 2017, Brazil’s Ministry of Health followed 

suit). There are even several candidate vaccines in the pipeline, but given the 

ethical problems of conducting trials with pregnant women—the main target 

for such vaccines—and the fact that vaccines themselves can sometimes trig -

ger Guillain-Barré, making it difficult to distinguish the effects of vaccination 

from those associated with infection, such vaccines are unlikely to be available 

for several years. Meanwhile, the social and environmental conditions that 

turn Brazil’s favelas into fertile breeding grounds for  Aedes  and other Zika-

bearing mosquitoes that transmit the virus have not gone away, nor have 

mosquitoes stopped taking blood meals. 

* * * 

In July 2017 I travelled to Recife to speak to the Brazilian doctors, epide -

miologists, and virologists who had been at the forefront of the outbreak. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

246 

At that point Zika was no longer front-page news; in the first six months of 

2017 the CDC had registered just one case of local transmission in the 

United States. Moreover, with a huge cholera outbreak raging in Yemen, the 

WHO’s attention was firmly back on Africa. Arriving at my hotel in Boa 

Viagem within sight of Recife’s famous reefs, I found that the news shows 

were preoccupied with a yellow fever outbreak that had begun in Minas 

Gerais state and was now encroaching on the environs of Sao Paolo and Rio. 

But though Zika was no longer a pressing public health issue, there were 

still many unanswered questions. 

For instance, though it had been established that the virus that triggered 

the outbreak in Brazil in 2015 was the same as the one that had caused the 

outbreak in French Polynesia two years earlier, and that both were descended 

from an Asian strain of Zika, it was still not known how the virus had reached 

Brazil. It used to be thought that Zika arrived during the FIFA World Cup that 

had kicked off in Rio in June 2014. This seemed plausible, particularly as one 

of the host cities had been Natal, until it was pointed out that no Pacific 

countries had sent teams to the competition. The next suggestion was that the 

virus may have been introduced during the Va’a World Sprint Championship 

held in Rio de Janeiro in August of the same year. This was more likely, as four 

Pacific countries (French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Cook Islands and Easter 

Island) had sent canoe squads to the competition. However, this theory was 

undermined by a letter published in  Nature  in May 2017 in which an interna -

tional team of scientists announced they had collected fifty-eight Zika virus 

isolates from Brazil and other countries in the Americas and sequenced their 

genomes. Using phylogenetic analysis to run the molecular clocks of the 

isolates backwards in time, the scientists showed that all the strains descended 

from an ancestral virus that had arrived in northeast Brazil around February 

2014. If the analysis was accurate, that suggested Zika had been in Brazil six 

months before the sprint championship and fifteen months before the confir -

mation of the first Zika cases by Brazil’s Ministry of Health. 31  Zika’s precise 

relationship to microcephaly presented a similar puzzle because it was still not 

known how and why the Zika virus triggered birth defects in some women 

but not others, or whether apparently normal newborns might present with 

developmental problems in later childhood. Nor could anyone say what the 

long-term prognosis was for Brazil’s Zika babies and what the risks were of 

sexual transmission of the virus. 

I was keen to find out what Brito and Marques made of these questions and 

to hear their thoughts as to why the outbreak had proved so explosive in 

Pernambuco (by now, a paper in  The Lancet  had shown that the northeast had Z IS FOR ZIKA 

247 

accounted for 70  per  cent of microcephaly cases during the first wave of the 

epidemic). I also wanted to visit Jaboatão dos Guararapes and other impover -

ished communities in the greater Recife metropolitan area and speak to ento -

mologists investigating mosquito breeding patterns and Zika’s transmission 

dynamics. But most of all I wanted to meet the women who had given birth 

to the first cohort of microcephalic babies, and find out what provisions had 

been made for them and how they were coping now that the world’s interest 

had moved on. In short, I wanted to see what the epidemic looked like since 

Zika had once again become an object of neglect. 

I was hoping to find some of the answers at the IAM, the research centre 

where Marques has his laboratory. Located on a sprawling campus in north-

eastern Recife, it was here that Brito first presented his theory of a link 

between Zika and Guillain-Barré, and that Marques’s colleague, the Fiocruz 

epidemiologist Celina Turchi, coordinated the initial investigation into micro -

cephaly. Realizing the scale of the threat, Turchi was instrumental in reaching 

out to other researchers around the world and lobbying the authorities to 

issue a public health alert. Such were the consequent offers of support, the 

director of IAM offered to lend her his office. It was here that, two years later, 

I caught up with Turchi sitting at a large glass desk surrounded by her assis -

tants still busily sorting papers and responding to queries from the public. 

“Even today there are people who still believe the rumours that the epidemic 

was due to insecticides or the rubella vaccine,” she said. “The latest conspiracy 

theory is that the virus is being spread by transgenic [genetically modified] 

mosquitoes,” she added, rolling her eyes. “We have no choice but to respond 

to each and every one.” 32 

A soft-spoken woman, Turchi’s voice becomes louder, her speech more 

urgent, as she recalled the shock of the first wave of microcephaly cases and 

the challenges facing Brazilian mothers of Zika babies as they struggle to raise 

severely disabled children in a climate of mounting austerity and cuts to pub -

lic health programs. Visiting the maternity wards in the early days of the 

epidemic was “frightening,” she said. “I remember seeing four or five babies 

with no forehead and a very strange skull structure. They looked very differ -

ent from babies with congenital microcephaly. My grandmother could have 

diagnosed it.” 

One of Turchi’s first moves, once she had been briefed by Brito (“he had 

the whole thing worked out”), was to call other epidemiologists both in 

Recife and abroad and ask whether they had noticed similar increases in 

microcephaly, including during the epidemic in French Polynesia. A retro -

spective investigation of birth records there subsequently turned up seventeen THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

248 

cases of neurological malformations and showed that the peak had been 

missed because most women had terminated their pregnancies rather than 

give birth to microcephalic children. By contrast, in Brazil, where abortion is 

illegal, it is very difficult to get a termination unless you are wealthy and can 

afford to travel abroad for the procedure. 

At this point, Turchi began to worry that the cases in maternity wards in 

Recife might be the tip of an iceberg. “We didn’t know how it was going to 

turn out, but we could see that it was going to be something really big.” It 

was around this time that some paediatricians began urging the Pernambuco 

health authorities to revise the reporting criteria for microcephaly. 

Contrary to the suggestion that it was Brazil’s live birth system that had led 

to the increase in reported microcephaly cases, prior to December 2015 

the Ministry of Health had lowered the head circumference limit from 33 

cm to 32 cm, 33  reducing the number of newborns likely to be categorized 

as microcephalic. 34 

Now the figures are in, it is clear that the upsurge was not a reporting arte -

fact. In all, Brazil recorded 4,783 suspected cases of microcephaly and 476 

deaths in 2015, as opposed to 147 cases in 2014. The highest rates were in the 

northeast, with 56.7 cases per 10,000 live births at the peak of the epidemic in 

November 2015. That rate was twenty-four times higher than the historical 

mean in Brazil. By contrast, in the southeast, where Zika appeared later and was 

generally less severe, the rates were far lower—5.5 cases per 10,000 live births, 

which is similar to the rates observed in the United States (the overall rate for 

Brazil was 18 per 10,000). The question is, how much of this increase was due 

to Zika, as opposed to another cofactor, and why was the peak observed in the 

northeast so much higher than in other areas of Brazil? 35 

In an attempt to answer that question, in 2016 Turchi initiated a case con -

trol study with colleagues from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical 

Medicine in which women attending antenatal clinics in Recife were screened 

for Zika. The laboratory-confirmed cases were then followed to term, 

together with those of two controls who had tested negative for the virus. The 

babies were examined for microcephaly and other manifestations of congeni -

tal Zika syndrome with clearly defined denominators. 

At the time of the epidemic, rumours abounded that the higher prevalence 

of microcephaly in the northeast might be due to exposure to insecticides 

used to control mosquitoes. Another widespread conspiracy theory was that 

the fault lay with vaccines administered during pregnancy. Now that the 

results of the study are in, both theories can be ruled out. Researchers found 

no statistically significant correlation between the incidence of microcephaly Z IS FOR ZIKA 

249 

and exposure to insecticides or vaccines. By contrast the odds of association 

with prior Zika infection was 95  per  cent. 36 

Unfortunately the study was unable to investigate the association—long 

suspected by researchers—between the incidence of microcephaly and a 

mother’s socioeconomic background. That would require better Zika sero -

prevalence data in order to ascertain whether women included in the study 

are representative of the wider population. More importantly, because Zika 

was not a reportable condition at the time of the epidemic, researchers have 

no way of gauging the total number of babies born to pregnant women 

infected with Zika in 2015–16 and thus whether the high rates of micro -

cephaly observed in the northeast were really as high as they seem. Laura 

Rodrigues, a professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London 

School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine who works closely with Turchi, 

suspects that northeastern Brazil may have had a fast-moving outbreak of a 

particularly severe strain of Zika. However, Rodrigues also acknowledges that 

this is “a gut feeling” and without better data she cannot be sure. 37 

Another open question is the extent to which the higher microcephaly 

prevalence rates may have been due to higher mosquito densities and wom -

en’s greater risk of exposure to Zika because of social behaviours and envi -

ronmental conditions. Climate scientists point out that 2015 was an El Niño 

year in South America, with higher than normal amounts of rainfall in north -

east Brazil, increasing the risk of flooding. Coupled with rising temperatures 

due to climate change, this could have accelerated the reproductive cycle and 

density of  Aedes  and the mosquito’s transmission of the virus. “I do feel it’s got 

to do with the environment and social conditions,” said Turchi. “Recife is a 

highly urbanized area, and it’s a city crossed by rivers with a lot of swamp 

areas, so there are a lot of mosquitoes. And because it’s hot, people do not 

cover up: they are very exposed.” Indeed, in Jaboatão dos Guararapes and 

other poor communities it is not unusual to find upwards of a thousand 

people crammed into an area measuring one hundred square metres, and 

since many accommodations lack screened windows and even fewer have air 

conditioning, occupants are frequently bitten many times in the same night 

by the same mosquitoes. Then there is the fact that piped water supplies are 

erratic, meaning that many residents have no choice but to store water in 

bottles and buckets in their backyards, or that when it rains channels behind 

people’s homes fill with sewage and rubbish, providing perfect breeding sites 

for mosquitoes. 

In addition, there is the ongoing question of whether prior exposure to 

another arbovirus infection or vaccination against yellow fever confers cross-THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

250 

immunity to Zika or, conversely, makes an individual more susceptible. Turchi 

points out that prior to the 2015 Zika outbreak, Pernambuco had not suffered 

a major dengue epidemic for several years, whereas in central Brazil and the 

southeast, dengue had been a more recent visitor. Moreover, the highest rates 

of CZS were seen in younger women—precisely the group who had less time 

to be exposed to dengue or to get the yellow fever vaccine. On the other hand, 

in vitro studies by Marques and his colleagues using serum from pregnant 

women suggest that the presence of dengue antibodies can make Zika infec -

tions more severe. 38  The technical term is antibody-dependent enhancement 

(ADE). In layman’s language the Zika virus latches onto the dengue antibodies 

and uses them as camouflage to evade the immune system and ease its entry to 

a human cell. “Think of it as the viral equivalent of a Trojan horse,” said 

Marques. When the epidemic broke, such was the demand for testing that his 

laboratory became a public reference laboratory. Later, Marques and his col -

leagues developed a rapid diagnostic test for dengue, making it easier to diag -

nose and differentiate it from Zika. His principal focus now is whether or not 

ADE might explain the high microcephaly prevalence rates in the northeast 

and whether high anti-dengue titers confer protection against Zika. However, 

he does not discount the possibility that the high rates might be due to an 

unknown environmental cofactor. “There is still so much we do not know 

about Zika,” Marques acknowledged. “We have decades of work ahead of us.” 

Like Turchi, Marques was full of praise for Brito, and I was looking forward 

to meeting him face-to-face. Although we had previously spoken by Skype, his 

English was halting and as my Portuguese was non-existent I feared much may 

have been lost in translation. Fortunately, when we did eventually meet at a 

restaurant near my hotel, he brought his daughter, Celina, a second-year 

medical student, to translate. The restaurant specialized in tapioca, the tradi -

tional accompaniment to any meal in Pernambuco, and after ordering some 

tapioca flour pancakes we got down to business. Why, during previous Zika 

outbreaks, had the association with microcephaly and neurological disorders 

been missed? Why did he think that no one had made the connection before? 

“My father says that when the first microcephaly cases appeared it was easy 

for him to make the connection because he had been following the Zika epi -

demic from the beginning,” said Celina. “So naturally one of the first questions 

he asked the women was whether they remembered having a rash during 

pregnancy.” 

Yes, but what was it about Pernambuco that made the microcephaly cases 

so obvious? In other words, why did it become visible here and not some -

where else? Z IS FOR ZIKA 

251 

Brito furrowed his brow as Celina translated my question. Then, nodding 

intensely, he explained that it was all a matter of numbers. French Polynesia 

has a population of just under 300,000, whereas the population of Pernam -

buco is nine million, of which four million live in Recife and the greater 

urban area. Pernambuco also has a very high birth rate, with some 170,000 

babies being delivered at maternity wards across the state every year. In addi -

tion, in French Polynesia the microcephaly cases were scattered across the 

archipelago, whereas in Pernambuco they were concentrated in a handful of 

hospitals in and around Recife. The result was that it did not require much of 

an increase in the prevalence rate of microcephaly for these cases to come to 

paediatricians’ attention. “If you have twenty cases in one room in one week 

you can’t miss it. That’s why it was easier to recognize here.” 

It was a good answer, the answer you would expect an epidemiologist to 

give, and as I mulled it over afterwards I was reminded of Turchi’s comment 

that “her grandmother” could have spotted the microcephaly cases. However, 

it did not address the deeper questions of causation, of why the risk of micro -

cephaly seemed to be so much higher for women from poor neighbourhoods, 

what the role of social conditions was, and how the provision of adequate 

water services and sanitation systems affected the transmission dynamics of 

Zika in Recife and other cities in Brazil. Nor did it address the issue of what 

measures were needed to interrupt the transmission of the virus by mosqui -

toes and reduce the risk of Zika infections in the future. Those were questions 

that were best answered by an entomologist and perhaps by a sociologist. 

Ever since Haddow and Dick isolated Zika from an  A. africanus  mosquito 

in Uganda in 1948, it has been assumed that  Aedes  is the principal vector of 

the virus in the wild. In Brazil and other parts of South America, most studies 

have focused on  A. aegypti . In addition, Zika can be transmitted by the “Asian 

tiger mosquito,”  Aedes albopictus , which ranges as far north as Chicago and 

New York during the northern summer. * However, Zika has also been isolated 

from several species of  Culex , including  C. quinquefasciatus , which is abundant 

in Brazil, as well as in Asia. Moreover, unlike  Aedes , which prefers clean water, 

C. quinquefasciatus  favours dirty water and is happy to breed in sewer runoffs 

and canals clogged with refuse and other debris. 

In an office a few doors from Turchi’s, another Fiocruz researcher, 

Constância Ayres, had been taking a closer look at the  Culex  mosquito and the 

evidence that it might play a role in transmission. A slim energetic woman     

> *A.albopictus is also the principal vector of West Nile virus.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

252 

with the posture of a ballet dancer, Ayres began by collecting  Culex  and  Aedes 

mosquitoes from different neighbourhoods around Recife and raising them in 

an insectary. Next, she allowed both sets of mosquitoes to feed on infected 

blood in her laboratory. Then, a week later, she collected saliva from the 

mosquitoes and assayed them for Zika. Positive results were obtained for both 

sets of mosquito. In addition, Ayres was able to recover Zika virus from the 

salivary glands of the  Culex , a necessary condition for a “competent” vector. 

However, despite these results, many experts refused to accept that  Culex 

might be responsible for spreading Zika in the wild, so in 2016 Ayres returned 

to the field and, using an aspirator, collected more mosquitoes, this time 

vacuuming them up from residences occupied by individuals with symptoms 

of Zika. When she returned to the lab and examined her catch, she found she 

had nearly four times as many  Culex  as  Aedes . Next, she separated out the 

female mosquitoes of each species, divided them into pools, and assayed them 

for Zika. Three of the  C. quinquefasciatus  and two of the  A. aegypti  pools were 

positive for Zika. 

Unlike  Aedes , Culex  is not a sip feeder—the mosquito typically takes just 

one blood meal per night. However, they are about twenty times as abundant 

as  Aedes  in urban areas of Recife with the highest concentrations of micro -

cephaly. The mosquito is similarly ubiquitous in Micronesia and French 

Polynesia. Interestingly, in these areas researchers were unable to detect Zika 

in wild-caught Aedes. Unfortunately, no one thought to test  C. quinquefasciatus 

in these places, so it is not known if it could have been a vector for the Zika 

epidemics there, but the possibility cannot be ruled out. 

If Ayres is right, her findings have important implications for ongoing vector 

control strategies aimed at reducing the threat of Zika and other arboviruses. At 

present, mosquito fumigation measures are directed at the  Aedes . This is not 

surprising given its role in transmitting dengue, but Ayres is furious at sugges -

tions by local health chiefs that this is why Recife has not witnessed another 

outbreak. “The reason we have not seen another Zika epidemic is because the 

majority of the population now has antibodies. It is not because the mosquitoes 

that transmit the virus have been eliminated. Unless something is done about 

Culex , I predict that once immunity wanes, Zika will return.” 

Unfortunately, that is a message no one appeared interested in hearing. 

Instead, the week I visited Recife, a German biotech company was gearing up 

to release male  A. aegypti  mosquitoes artificially infected with  Wolbachia  bac -

teria in Corrego do Jenipapo, a sprawling favela in the northeast of the city. 

The bacteria, which is harboured by 60  per  cent of the world’s insect species 

but not  Aedes , renders the offspring of the mosquitoes infertile, thereby Z IS FOR ZIKA 

253 

reducing the size of  Aedes  populations and their ability to transmit Zika and 

other arboviruses. Similar trial releases of  Wolbachia -modified mosquitoes 

have taken place in Rio and Medellin, in Colombia, and similar genetic modi -

fication techniques are being used on the  Anopheles  mosquitoes that transmit 

malaria. 39  The trials have the backing of major charitable funders, including 

the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in Seattle, Washington, and the 

London-based Wellcome Trust, not least because they can be conducted in 

distinct geographic areas and the effects are relatively easy to quantify using 

scientific measures—one of the key requisites for global health interventions 

“from above.” Meanwhile, low-tech ground-up control measures, such as 

providing bednets and screens for windows, are neglected, as are urban 

renewal programs that might improve waste management and the provision 

of water services to the poorest, mosquito-blighted communities. 

One day I accompanied Ayres’s mosquito collectors on one of their regular 

sweeps through Jaboatão dos Guararapes. The aim was to visit ten addresses 

in the favela and vacuum up mosquitoes from people’s bedrooms and living 

rooms, but in the event one of the portable aspirators failed, so it was only 

possible to visit five addresses. The residents were for the most part elderly 

and crammed into narrow two-or-three-room cinderblock dwellings, one on 

top of the other. Only two had indoor toilets, and all the cooking and washing 

took place in the same room, or, if they were lucky, a backyard. Ayres’s top 

mosquito collector, Miguel Longman, led the way, running his battery-pow -

ered Horst Armadilhas aspirator along the walls and countertops, before 

concentrating on the ceilings and hard-to-reach corners. A typical haul, he 

told me, was fifty to sixty mosquitoes. While he unhooked the net on his 

aspirator to inspect his catch, I asked the couple whose home we were in how 

often they got piped water. Twice a week, came the reply. And the other days? 

They pointed to two plastic tubs filled with dirty dishwater in their kitchen 

and a series of water containers lined up on their windowsill. As with the 

other homes we visited, the windows had no screens, although in this case I 

noticed their bedroom had a mosquito net. Had she or her husband had Zika? 

No, came the reply, but several of their neighbours had. 

Later that day, back at IAM, Ayres introduced me to Andre Monteiro, a 

Fiocruz public health engineer. Monteiro is an expert on the hydrology of the 

greater Recife area and has made a close study of the city’s sanitation system. 

Only 6  per  cent of households in Jaboatão dos Guararapes have access to 

sewage services, he told me. By contrast, for Recife as a whole the figure is 

30  per  cent. Most of the waste is sluiced into rivulets that flow through 

people’s backyards and empty into the canals and storm sewers designed to THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

254 

prevent flooding. Up until the 1800s most of the city comprised mangrove 

swamp, so excess rain water was easily absorbed or was able to flow out to 

sea with the falling tide. But in the nineteenth century, as Recife expanded, 

the mangrove swamp was gradually covered to make way for new buildings 

and roads. To compensate for the loss of natural drainage, Recife’s engineers, 

inspired by the example of the Dutch, built 200 kilometres of canals, thread -

ing them through Recife’s backstreets and alongside the city’s rivers. 

However, by the 1970s many of the canals had fallen into disrepair and were 

not being properly maintained, leading to frequent floods (the largest, in 

1975, saw 80  per  cent of the city under water). At the same time, favelas in 

hills to the north of Recife begun suffering catastrophic mudslides, culminat -

ing in one in 2002 in which fifty people lost their lives. But perhaps the city’s 

most embarrassing moment came in 2013 when a Reuters photographer 

captured the image of a nine-year-old boy bobbing about in a refuse-filled 

canal near his home in Canal do Arruda, a favela in northeast Recife. It later 

transpired that Paulinho da Silveiro was combing the canal for bottles and 

other recyclable material he could sell and, together with his brothers, was a 

regular visitor to the polluted waterway. The shocking images prompted the 

municipal authorities to launch a clean-up campaign, and, although Recife’s 

canals and rivers are flowing freely again, at low tide it is common to see the 

river banks choked with plastic bottles and other litter. “The rubbish is a big 

problem,” says Monteiro, “not only because it affects drainage but because of 

the mosquitoes that breed in the trapped water.” 

At the end of our interview, Monteiro showed me a heat map of Recife 

with the areas with the highest numbers of microcephaly cases marked in 

oranges and reds. Although there were orange dots sprinkled throughout the 

city, including in middle-class districts such as Boa Vista, the deepest reds 

coincided with the favelas to the north and south. 

The following day, in search of the mothers of some of these microcephalic 

babies, I visited a specialist rehabilitation centre for sight-impaired children 

in Iputinga. Nearly half of children with CZS have severe vision problems due 

to lesions in their retinas or optic nerves, as well as, in some cases, neurologi -

cal and cortical-based impairments. To address their vision deficits, Altino 

Ventura, a medical charity specializing in the treatment of ophthalmic condi -

tions, had already provided several children with corrective magnifying gog -

gles and intensive rehabilitation. Now it had also designed a multisensory kit 

to help mothers train their children to focus on objects and interact with 

them better, and had invited several women to test the devices at its Menina 

dos Olhos rehabilitation centre. Z IS FOR ZIKA 

255 

I arrived to find mats with cushions for the children already spread out on 

the floor and volunteers removing items from the kit—ping pong paddles 

with bright, painted faces, shakers with long glittery tassels. The session began 

with a prayer from Altino Ventura’s president, Liana Ventura. “Today is the 

Sabbath so let us take a moment to recognize all our hard work and the chal -

lenges we face in our lives. Lord, show us the light and make us instruments 

of inspiration and, above all, hope.” Ventura, a professor of ophthalmology, 

and her husband Marcelo Ventura have won numerous awards for their work. 

Their foundation, which is open around the clock seven days a week, pro -

cesses up to five hundred patients a day at its emergency ophthalmic clinic in 

downtown Recife. Patients come from all over Pernambuco, drawn by the 

promise of free eye care and corrections for cataracts and other common 

vision problems. Altino Ventura conducts research into ophthalmological 

conditions associated with diseases like toxoplasmosis, syphilis, rubella and 

cytomegalovirus, which are common in Brazil, and also runs an outreach 

program on Recife maternity wards. So when babies began presenting with 

microcephaly and unusual optical lesions in the fall of 2015, it was not long 

before Liana Ventura was showing an interest. Many of the babies had eyes 

that were crossed or swivelled aimlessly from side to side. In some cases, the 

vision loss was profound. “We realized the babies could see only 30  per  cent 

of the normal visual field and in a few cases they couldn’t see anything,” she 

told me. “It was heart-breaking. They could not see their mothers’ faces, they 

had no interest in anything around them. They cried the whole time.” 40 

90  per  cent of vision develops in the first year of a child’s life. Without the 

ability to see, a child’s ability to interact with their primary caregiver and to 

develop normally is greatly impaired. With corrective goggles, however, the 

transformation was dramatic. “Their faces lit up immediately and for the first 

time they smiled,” said Ventura. 

Ventura removed a ping pong paddle from one of the bags and handed it to 

Joane and Marcilio da Silva, a young couple from Olinda. Their son, Hector, 

was born with a severe astigmatism but with goggles can now see 60  per  cent 

of his visual field. Nevertheless, at twenty months he still could not sit up on 

his own unaided and had to be propped up with pillows in order to interact 

with the trainers. Sitting beside them, observing their progress, was another 

young woman, Mylene Helena dos Santos. Aged twenty-three, dos Santos is 

the mother of three sons, including her youngest, David Henrique. Born in 

August 2015, David was one of the first cohort of Zika babies and is pro -

foundly disabled. Strapped to a baby seat, with braces supporting his legs, he 

is unable to swallow properly and has a severe astigmatism. He developed a THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

256 

lung infection when some food got caught in his trachea and had to be rushed 

to the hospital. The doctors inserted a tube in his stomach so that he could be 

fed antibiotics, but, according to dos Santos, the tube caused him considerable 

discomfort. “It is too big so he wriggles the whole time,” she explained. “The 

doctors have warned me to keep it clean, otherwise it could become infected. 

I would like to get him goggles but as long as he has stomach problems it is 

impossible. Hopefully, when he is better.” 

Dos Santos was five months into her pregnancy when an ultrasound 

revealed David might have a congenital malformation, but no one mentioned 

microcephaly and she had never heard of Zika. “I only knew about dengue,” 

she said. She does not recall a rash, but as her pregnancy progressed there was 

a series of complications, including a leak of amniotic fluid, and she very 

nearly miscarried. In the event, David was born seven weeks premature. A 

year later, both mother and son tested positive for Zika. 

Dos Santos is currently living with her parents in Jaboatão dos Guararapes, 

having separated from David’s father shortly after his birth, and relies on her 

extended family to care for her other children while she and David travel to 

medical appointments. “In the beginning everybody wanted to help,” said dos 

Santos. “But after a year it slowed down and I was removed from a govern -

ment program. That’s when I turned to Altino Ventura for help.” 

It is an all too common story. In the wake of the epidemic, the Brazilian 

government approved cash-transfer programs for poorer families and prom -

ised to invest $35 million a year in specialized rehabilitation centres. At the 

same time, the Pernambuco state authorities pledged $5 million for the con -

struction of regional centres for infants with CZS.  But at the close of 2016, 

the National Congress approved a constitutional amendment freezing public 

spending for twenty years, and at the time of writing most of the centres have 

yet to be built. Instead, as austerity measures bite, women like dos Santos 

struggle to find the money for essential medicines and care. Nor is there any 

indication that the authorities are prepared to make the investments necessary 

to rectify the systemic water and sanitation problems. Instead, the govern -

ment has been shifting the responsibility for mosquito control back onto 

households through awareness campaigns targeting housewives. 

This is not the only way that the underlying social and environmental con -

ditions that gave rise to the outbreak continue to be neglected. As Human 

Rights Watch discovered when it visited Brazil to interview women in 

Pernambuco and Paraiba on the first anniversary of the epidemic, roughly a 

quarter of the women and girls who gave birth to babies with microcephaly 

were below the age of twenty. Yet this is precisely the group least likely to Z IS FOR ZIKA 

257 

ha ve access t o contraception and sexual and reproductive health information. 

Nor was Human Rights Watch impressed by the state of the favelas they vis -

ited, reporting that it was common to find channels running with raw sewage 

and mosquitoes breeding in refuse-clogged canals and marshes behind peo -

ple’s homes. 

“Brazilians may see the health ministry’s declaration of the end of the Zika 

emergency as a victory,” commented Amanda Klasing, senior women’s rights 

researcher at Human Rights Watch. “But … Brazilians’ basic rights are at risk 

if the government doesn’t reduce mosquito infestation over the long term, 

secure access to reproductive rights, and support families raising children 

affected by Zika.” 41 

That is a verdict with which Liana Ventura concurs. Of the 325 children 

being treated by her foundation, just two were private referrals—everyone 

else came through the public health system. Yet two years on from the epi -

demic, nearly half are still awaiting the results of Zika serology tests. “There 

is still so much that we don’t know about the pathology of Zika and micro -

cephaly, but at the moment, frankly, it’s a struggle,” she told me. “Let’s hope 

it doesn’t take another epidemic to make the world sit up and take notice.” 

* * * 

Before checking out of my hotel I decided to go for a stroll on the prome -

nade at Boa Viagem. When I had left for Ipitunga in the morning the waves 

were covering the rocks that form a barrier with the roadside and there was 

no beach to be seen, but by 4pm the tide had receded to reveal Recife’s 

famous reefs, and the sand was now studded with beach umbrellas and 

children splashing happily in the channels and puddles left by the ebbing 

waters. With a light offshore breeze, the conditions were perfect for surf -

ing, but to my surprise there were no surfers to be seen beyond the break -

ers, nor did anyone appear to be venturing into the sea to swim. The reason 

soon became apparent when within a few yards of the beach I was con -

fronted by a fierce red and white sign that read “Perigo” (danger) and below 

it, in English, “Danger—Shark Zone.” This was followed by the outline of a 

shark in yellow and advice on when to avoid bathing. Some of the advice 

was commonsensical. Swimmers should not venture into the sea “with 

bleeding or wearing bright objects” or when they were “drunk” or “alone.” 

However, bathing was also not advised “in open waters,” “at high tide,” or at 

“dawn and dusk.” In other words, pretty much anytime except the daylight 

hours when the tide was out. THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

258 

A little fu rther along the beach, I spotted a lookout station and 

approached the lifeguard for an explanation. Until the early 1990s, he 

explained, Boa Viagem had been a popular surfing destination. Then, in 

1992, came the first in a series of shark attacks. By 2013 Boa Viagem had 

suffered fifty-eight such attacks, twenty-one of them fatal, forcing the 

authorities to ban surfing and post shark warning signs. No one was sure of 

the reason for the sudden change in the sharks’ behaviour, but most experts 

blamed it on the construction in the 1980s of a new container port at 

Suape, twelve miles south of Recife. During construction, workers had 

dredged the estuaries and built docks that protruded far out into the ocean. 

The dredging of the estuaries was thought to have been particularly disrup -

tive to the breeding and feeding patterns of bull sharks, who generally stay 

close to shore and are able to tolerate fresh water. However, the more 

serious shark infestation coincided with the completion of the container 

port and the subsequent explosion in ship traffic in the 1990s. The larger 

ocean-going vessels brought with them migratory tiger sharks, attracted by 

the waste and rubbish thrown overboard. Drawn into Port Suapes, it is 

thought that these tiger sharks, which are expert scavengers, rapidly devel -

oped a taste for the coastal waters and began feeding on the untreated 

sewage that spills into the sea every day from Recife’s canals and rivers. The 

result is that today even lifeguards avoid swimming at Boa Viagem, prefer -

ring to train in chlorinated pools, and if they are forced to intervene in a 

life-or-death situation at sea their preferred mode of transport is a jet ski. 42 

It was transatlantic shipping and the international search for profits that 

had first brought  Aedes  to this coast, too. No one can be sure when  Aedes  first 

made landfall in Brazil. Perhaps it was as early as the 1530s when the first 

Portuguese colonists arrived at Olinda, a colonial town just north of Recife, 

and discovered the natural harbour formed by the confluence of the 

Capibaribe and Beberibe Rivers and the long sea wall guarding the estuary. 

But most likely the mosquito arrived later in the sixteenth century when 

Portuguese ships loaded with slaves destined for Pernambuco’s sugarcane 

plantations began crossing from the west coast of Africa. 43  By 1637, when the 

Dutch took possession of the plantations and moved the colonial capital to 

Recife, the sugarcane business was booming. However, by now British and 

Dutch slavers making the middle passage to the Caribbean had introduced the 

virus of yellow fever to Barbados. In 1685 the first outbreak was recorded in 

Recife, inaugurating a cycle of arbovirus epidemics, the threat of which— 

except for a brief period in the 1940s and 1950s—has never gone away. 

Today, mosquitoes are once again making the crossing, 44  this time breeding 

in car tires filled with rain wate r as they once bred in the casks of fresh Z IS FOR ZIKA 

259 

drinking water beside slaves chained below decks. * And as they do so it is 

unlikely that Zika will be the last arbovirus to accompany them. Nor, when 

you factor in the growth of international jet travel, would you wish to bet 

against other viruses and microbial pathogens, to which local people may have 

little or no immunity, hitching a ride to Brazil in airplanes. 

Predicting what that pathogen might be and when it will make landfall is a 

fool’s errand. Like the lifeguards at Boa Viagem, all we can do is scan the 

horizon for dorsal fins and other lurking threats, and while we may not be 

able to alter the facts of global travel and commerce, we can address the local 

sanitary and environmental conditions that have made Recife and other 

Brazilian cities so hospitable to the  Aedes  and other disease-carrying mosqui -

toes. That is not a matter of knowledge but of political will.   

> *This is almost certainly how Aedes albopictus , the principal vector of chikungunya,
> and a mosquito previously restricted to Southeast Asia, reached the Americas,
> reproducing in ornamental bamboo and disused car tires on ships destined for
> Texas, from whence it spread via interstate trucking routes to Mexico and Latin
> America.

261 

# EPILOGUE 

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY  

> “Messieurs ,c’est les microbes qui auront le dernier mot .”
> Louis Pasteur

Sharks never attack swimmers in the North Atlantic. Flu is a bacterial disease 

and a threat to infants and the elderly, not young adults in the prime of life. 

Ebola is a virus endemic to forested regions of equatorial Africa—it can’t 

reach a major city in West Africa, let alone one in North America or Europe. 

As the pandemic century draws to a close, we know better than to trust the 

pronouncements of experts. Battered by their repeated failure to predict 

deadly outbreaks of infectious disease, even the experts have come to recog -

nize the limits of medical prognostication. This is not only because microbes 

are highly mutable—that has been known since Pasteur’s time—but because 

we are continually lending them a helping hand. Time and again, we assist 

microbes to occupy new ecological niches and spread to new places in ways 

that usually only become apparent after the event. And to judge by the recent 

run of pandemics and epidemics the process seems to be speeding up. If HIV 

and SARS were wake-up calls, then Ebola and Zika confirmed it. “Despite 

extraordinary advances in medical science, we cannot be complacent about the 

threat of infectious diseases,” acknowledged the National Academy of Medicine 

in a report published just weeks before Zika became a PHEIC.  “The underlying 

rate of emergence of infectious diseases appears to be increasing.” 1

Why this should be the case—if it is the case—is a matter of ongoing 

research and conjecture. Certainly urbanization and globalization would 

appear to be key factors. The mega-cities of Asia, Africa and South America, 

like Athens in the time of Thucydides, provide ideal conditions for the ampli -

fication and spread of novel pathogens by concentrating large numbers of 

people in cramped and often unsanitary spaces. Sometimes technology and 

alterations of the built environment can mitigate the risks that such THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

262 

overcrowding presents for the transfer of pathogens to people. The plague 

abatement measures in the Mexican quarter of Los Angeles in 1924 may have 

been brutal and morally questionable (certainly, it is hard to imagine com -

munity activists in California tolerating the wholesale demolition of minority 

neighbourhoods and the mass slaughter of squirrels today), but at the time 

they were effective in removing the threat of plague from downtown Los 

Angeles and its harbour. Likewise, air conditioners and modern cooling sys -

tems are very effective ways of insulating people from the mosquitoes that 

breed in and around urban high rises and favelas, but as the Legionnaires’ 

disease outbreak demonstrated, and SARS confirmed, water towers and 

fanned air can also present new disease risks, particularly in closed environ -

ments such as hotels and hospitals. 

Greater global interconnectivity driven by international travel and com -

merce is undoubtedly another key factor. While in the sixteenth century it 

took several weeks for smallpox, measles and other Old World pathogens to 

reach the New World, and even longer for the vectors of diseases like yellow 

fever to become established in the Americas, today international jet travel 

means that an emerging virus can be in any country or continent on the globe 

within seventy-two hours. It is not the microbes that are doing this, but our 

own technology. Any one of us could be like Johnny Chen, the Hong Kong 

businessman who, without knowing that he was harbouring a deadly virus, 

introduced SARS to Vietnam by the simple expedient of boarding a plane 

bound for Hanoi. Indeed, tens of millions of us annually make such trips in 

aircraft either for business or pleasure, and as flights become cheaper and 

passengers make more and more journeys, the risks are only likely to grow. 

Herded into airline waiting rooms, then crammed into economy row seats, 

we resemble nothing so much as the captive Amazonian parakeets who intro -

duced psittacosis to Baltimore and other US cities in 1929. The difference is 

that the parakeets had no choice about their accommodation, whereas we do. 

As the environmental historian Alfred Crosby put it, international jet travel 

is like “sitting in the waiting room of an enormous clinic, elbow to elbow with 

the sick of the world.” 2 Yet budget airlines continue to grow in popularity. 

Other pathogens take a more leisurely and circuitous route to our cities 

and living rooms. HIV is one such example; Zika is another. The difference is 

that whereas scientists had known about the Zika virus since 1947 and did not 

consider it a pressing disease threat, HIV really was an unknown unknown. 

Indeed, until the clinical symptoms of AIDS announced themselves to physi -

cians in the early 1980s, no one could have known that HIV had been spread -

ing silently and stealthily in homosexual communities and other at-risk groups EPILOGUE 

263 

in Nor th America for several years, or that the virus had reached Haiti from 

Africa, where it had likely been circulating under the radar for decades. That 

only became apparent once scientists had the technological tools for tracking 

the depletion of CD4 cells that is the signature of HIV infection and devel -

oped a conceptual understanding of retroviruses. Before then, medics and 

public health officials could hardly be accused of being overly complacent or 

of somehow missing the alarm. On the contrary, the CDC had been warning 

about rising STD rates in homosexuals for some time. 

This was not the case with Ebola. “It looks like, smells like, tastes like regu -

lar outbreaks in previous areas,” the CDC’s resident Ebola expert Pierre 

Rollin informed his superiors in May 2014. But Rollin was wrong, not 

because the virus that appeared in Guinée Forestière had suddenly mutated 

or changed in ways that Rollin and his colleagues could not have anticipated, 

but because they had failed to properly absorb the lessons of the previous 

twelve large outbreaks of Ebola in Africa. In particular, they had forgotten the 

importance of engaging with local chiefs and village headmen in order to 

convince the sick of the necessity of rapid isolation and of presenting at Ebola 

treatment units. Instead, distrusting the motives of foreign medical teams, 

patients hid in their villages or consulted traditional healers, skewing the 

official Ebola case counts. The result was that by the time people with Ebola 

began reporting to ETUs in large numbers, many were already at the point of 

death and it was too late. There was no time to close the highways, as the 

DRC authorities had done in 1995 when the Kikwit Ebola outbreak threat -

ened to spread to Kinshasa. Instead, Ebola had already crossed the border and 

was festering in Freetown and Monrovia. 

What is still not known at the time of writing is how Ebola reached Guinée 

Forestière in the first place or why it emerged in Meliandou. As with HIV, the 

virus is thought to have spilled over into human communities in south-eastern 

Guinea when people interacted with the local wildlife. As with the SARS coro -

navirus, bats are the prime suspect.Yet so far no one has succeeded in recover -

ing live Ebola virus from any species of bat, let alone one in West Africa. * 

> *

You 

might say th at disease ecologists know the virus is out there and that from time  

> *In 2018, Sierra Leone’s ministry of health announced that researchers from the
> University of California Davis and Ecohealth Alliance had identified a new species
> of Ebola from RNA recovered from free-tailed bats and another type of bat in the
> northern Bombali district of the country. However, at time of writing the study
> of the “Bombali virus” had not been published and it is unclear how it might be
> related to other Ebola viruses and whether it can cause disease in humans.

THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

264 

to time the virus gets into bats, but no one can say for sure whether bats are 

the primary reservoir or simply an intermediary host for the virus. And what 

applies to Ebola also applies to other emerging and re-emerging infectious 

diseases of unknown provenance. Since 1940, scientists have identified 335 

new human infectious diseases. Nearly two-thirds are of animal origin, and of 

these 70  per  cent originate in wildlife, with bats harbouring a higher propor -

tion than any other mammal. The good news is that in recent decades scientists 

have identified several of these viruses; the bad news, according to a recent 

survey, is that for every bat species there may be seventeen viruses out there 

still waiting to be discovered, and ten more in the case of each species of 

rodent and primate. 3 Nor is that an end to the unknown microbial threats. Half 

of all EID events are caused by bacteria and rickettsial organisms, a reflection 

of the large number of drug-resistant microbes that, thanks to the abuse of 

antibiotics, are now present in the environment. 4

Writing at the highpoint of the so-called conquest of infectious disease 

seventy years ago, René Dubos observed that “microbial disease is one of the 

inevitable consequences of life in a world where nothing is stable.” 5 In a rap -

idly changing world it was incumbent on scientists, he suggested, to “avoid 

pride of intellect and guard against any illusion or pretence as to the extent 

and depth of what he knows.” Instead, Dubos advised medical researchers to 

“develop an alertness to the unexpected, an awareness of the fact that many 

surprising effects are likely to result from even trivial disturbances of ecologi -

cal equilibrium.” 6

To their credit, modern medical researchers can no longer be accused of 

complacency about drug-resistant pathogens, such as the strains of multidrug-

resistant tuberculosis and malaria now circulating in Africa and Southeast 

Asia. Chastened by the criticism of its handling of the 2014–16 Ebola epi -

demic, the WHO is also wary of appearing complacent. That is why, in 

February 2018, it added a new pathogen to its list of potential pandemic 

threats. Recognizing the limits of current scientific knowledge, the WHO 

designated the pathogen “Disease X” in acknowledgment that “a serious inter -

national epidemic could be caused by a pathogen currently unknown to cause 

human disease.” 7 In other words, to borrow Donald Rumsfeld’s terminology, 

Disease X is an “unknown unknown.” 

Concerned that an unanticipated infectious disease outbreak due to bioter -

rorism or a natural event could kill some 30 million people at some point in 

the next decade, Bill Gates is also stepping up efforts to improve the surveil -

lance of EIDs and responses to epidemics through the work of his charitable 

foundation. 8 And in 2017 Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and his wife EPILOGUE 

265 

Priscilla Chan added their considerable wealth to these efforts, joining with 

the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and Bloomberg Philanthropies in an 

initiative called Resolve. Headed by former CDC director Tom Frieden, 

Resolve’s ambition is to save 100 million lives globally by investing in the 

prevention of cardiovascular disease and giving countries the ability to 

respond to outbreaks of Ebola and other emerging viruses more quickly. 9

Meanwhile, noting that “pandemics are one of the most certain uninsured 

risks in the world today,” the World Bank recently established a $500 million 

emergency facility to provide “surge” funding to fight explosive outbreaks of 

“six viruses that are most likely to cause a pandemic.” 10  Prompted by the slow 

response to the Ebola epidemic, the idea is to use bond issues to build a cash 

fund that can be disbursed rapidly to resource-poor countries before out -

breaks of bird flu, SARS and other viral diseases of zoonotic origin become 

global health threats. But even before the insurance fund was up and running, 

a fast-spreading outbreak of pneumonic plague in Madagascar in September 

2017 had exposed a fatal flaw in the World Bank’s scheme, for, of course, 

plague is a bacterial disease and therefore not covered by the emergency 

facility. In other words, it was a risk that no one had foreseen. 

Lurking in the background of these initiatives is the ghost of Spanish flu. If 

anything has taught scientists the value of caution and the perils of hubris, it 

is the long shadow cast by the 1918–19 influenza pandemic—what the WHO, 

an organization not known for hyperbole, calls the “most deadly disease event 

in the history of humanity.” Since it became possible to retrieve viral genetic 

material from the H1N1 pandemic virus using modern molecular pathology 

techniques, virologists have made huge progress in understanding the factors 

that made the Spanish flu so virulent. By comparing the 1918 virus to descen -

dant H1N1 strains still in circulation, scientists have also come to a better 

understanding of its epidemiology and pathophysiology. Moreover, the 1997 

outbreak of H5N1 bird flu in Hong Kong, and the subsequent outbreaks of 

other varieties of bird flu in China and Southeast Asia, have shown that it is 

not necessary for an avian influenza virus to transit through an intermediary 

mammalian host first in order for it to be the cause of morbidity and deaths 

in humans. At the same time, the 2009 scare over the “Mexican” swine flu 

demonstrated that from time to time different swine and human lineages of 

H1N1 can recombine to produce new pandemic viruses. However, so far, no 

bird flu or recombinant swine flu virus has yet managed the trick of wide 

infectivity and high virulence, as was the case in 1918. Furthermore, while it 

is known that the H1N1 Spanish flu was infectious to all age groups in 1918– 

19, scientists are still no closer to solving the riddle of why it proved  relatively THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

266 

more deadly to young adults, or why mortality rates were closely associated 

with the increased incidence of secondary bacterial infections. The result is that 

despite the tremendous advances in microbiology, immunology, vaccinology, 

and preventive medicine in the century since 1919, influenza researchers are 

still no closer to being able to predict when new pandemic strains will emerge 

or how they will impact human populations. As David Morens and Jeffrey 

Taubenberger put it: “In recent decades, pandemic influenza has continued to 

produce numerous unanticipated events that expose fundamental gaps in sci -

entific knowledge. … These uncertainties make it difficult to predict influenza 

pandemics and, therefore, to adequately plan to prevent them.” 11 

Reviewing the last hundred years of epidemic outbreaks, the only thing that 

is certain is that there will be new plagues and new pandemics. It is not a ques -

tion of if, we are told, but when. Pestilences may be unpredictable but we 

should expect them to recur. However, what Camus could not have foreseen 

is that the attempt to anticipate disaster also creates new distortions and intro -

duces new uncertainties. Twice this pandemic century, in 1976 and again in 

2003, scientists thought the world was on the brink of a new influenza pan -

demic, only to realize that the outbreaks were false alarms and that the real 

danger lay elsewhere. Then in 2009 the WHO declared that the Mexican swine 

flu, a ressortment of two well-known H1N1 swine-lineage viruses that had 

circulated separately for over a decade, met the criterion of a pandemic virus, 

triggering the activation of global pandemic preparedness plans. On paper, this 

was the first pandemic of the twenty-first century and the first influenza pan -

demic in forty-one years. The fact that the swine flu was an H1N1, just like the 

Spanish flu, raised the prospect that this might be the Big One and that govern -

ments should expect a wave of illness and deaths similar to that in 1918–19. 

But though the WHO’s declaration sparked widespread panic, the anticipated 

viral Armageddon never materialized. Instead, when it was realized that the 

Mexican swine flu was no more severe than a seasonal strain of flu, the WHO 

was accused of “faking” the pandemic for the benefit of vaccine manufacturers 

and other special interests. 12  The result is what Susan Sontag calls “a permanent 

modern scenario: apocalypse looms … and it doesn’t occur.” 13  As we look to 

the next one hundred years of infectious disease outbreaks, let us hope that is 

one prognostication that turns out to be true. 267 

## pp. [xi–xix] 

# NOTES 

PROLOGUE: SHARKS AND OTHER PREDATORS 

1.  Richard Fernicola,  Twelve Days of Terror: A Definitive Investigation of the 1916 New Jersey 

Shark Attacks  (Guilford, CT: Globe Pequot Press, 2001), xxiv–xxx. 

2.  The best narrative account of the New Jersey shark attacks is Michael Capuzzo’s  Close 

to Shore  (London: Headline Publishing, 2001).The attacks also inspired Peter Benchley’s 

best-selling 1974 novel  Jaws , the basis for the Steven Spielberg film of the same name. 

In both the book and the film, the shark attacks are transposed to the fictional Long 

Island resort of Amity. 

3.  David Oshinsky,  Polio: An American Story  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 

19–23. 

4.  John Paul,  A History of Poliomyelitis  (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1971), 

148–60; Naomi Rogers,  Dirt and Disease: Polio before FDR , Health and Medicine in 

American Society (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1992), 2–6. 

5.  René Dubos,  Mirage of Health: Utopias , Progress and Biological Change  (New Brunswick, 

NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1996), 266–67. 

6.  On 12  February 2002, five months after the 9/11 attacks and a year before the inva -

sion of Iraq, the then-US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld appeared at a Pentagon 

news conference to field questions about the purported threat posed by the Iraqi dic -

tator Saddam Hussein’s secret weapons program. Asked by a journalist what evidence 

he had that Iraq had supplied or was willing to supply terrorists with weapons of mass 

destruction, Rumsfeld responded: “Reports that say that something hasn’t happened 

are always interesting to me, because as we know, there are known knowns; there are 

things we know we know. We also know there are known unknowns; that is to say we 

know there are some things we do not know. But there are also unknown unknowns— 

the ones we don’t know we don’t know.” 

At the time, Rumsfeld’s comments were widely lampooned for their “Alice in 

Wonderland” quality, but, as many of Rumsfeld’s critics subsequently acknowledged, 

he was drawing on well-known scholarship in the philosophy of knowledge and the 

social construction of scientific facts. Indeed, much scientific research is based on 

investigating known unknowns, where scientists develop a hypothesis and then design 

experiments to test the null hypothesis, or the commonly held view. At the outset the 

researcher does not know whether or not the results will support the null hypothesis. NOTES 

268 

## pp. [xxi–6] 

However, it is common for the researcher to believe that the result that will be obtained 

will be within a range of known possibilities. Occasionally, however, the result is com -

pletely unexpected, making it an unknown unknown. 

Historians of science also routinely apply these ideas to capture the uncertainty 

surrounding natural events from earthquakes, to climate change, to pandemics, that 

pose a catastrophic threat to modern societies and where knowledge may be partial 

and incomplete. However, in addition to the three types of knowledge described by 

Rumsfeld, they also propose a fourth category—the “unknown known.” This captures 

a situation in which experimenters think they have discovered everything there is to 

know about a scientific object but are unaware of their ignorance as regards certain 

important aspects of it (it is sometimes also described as “uncomfortable knowledge”). 

Pneumonic plague, Psittacosis, Ebola, and Zika belonged to this category. By con -

trast, Legionnaires’ disease, SARS, and HIV were unknown unknowns. To the extent 

that no one had a way of studying the influenza virus before 1918, Spanish flu could 

also be considered an unknown unknown, though many researchers had begun to sus -

pect it might be a filter-passer and had become uncomfortable with the state of bac -

teriological knowledge of the disease. For the background and context of Rumsfeld’s 

remarks, see Errol Morris, “The Certainty of Donald Rumsfeld,”  New York Times ,

25  March 2014, accessed 1  September 2017, https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes. 

com/2014/03/25/the-certainty-of-donald-rumsfeld-part-1/?mcubz=1; for further 

discussion of Rumsfeld’s parsing of the philosophy of knowledge and unknown knowns, 

see Steve Rayner, “Uncomfortable Knowledge:The Social Construction of Ignorance 

in Science and Environmental Policy Discourses,”  Economy and Society  41, no.  1

(1  February 2012): 107–25. 

7.  Thucydides,  History of the Peloponnesian War  (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1972); 

David Morens et al., “Epidemiology of the Plague of Athens,”  Transactions of the American 

Philological Association  122 (1992): 271–304. 

1.  THE BLUE DEATH 

1.  Roger Batchelder,  Camp Devens  (Boston: Small Maynard, 1918), 11. 

2.  Ibid., 94. 

3.  Carol R.  Byerly, “The U.S.  Military and the Influenza Pandemic of 1918–1919,”  Public 

Health Reports  125, suppl. 3 (2010): 82–91. 

4.  William Osler, Henry A.  Christian, and James G.  Carr,  The Principles and Practice of 

Medicine: Designed for the Use of Practitioners and Students of Medicine , 16th edition (New 

York and London: D.  Appleton-Century, 1947), 41. 

5.  Victor Vaughan,  A Doctor’s Memories  (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1926), 424–25. 

6.  J.  A.  B.  Hammond et al., “Purulent Bronchitis: a study of cases occurring amongst 

the British troops at a base in France,”  The Lancet  190, no.  4898 (14  July 1917): 41–46. 

7.  A.  Abrahams et al., “Purulent Bronchitis: its influenzal and pneumococcal bacteriol -

ogy,”  The Lancet  190, no.  4906 (8  September 1917): 377–82. 

8.  A.  Abrahams et al., “A Further Investigation into Influenzo-pneumococcal and NOTES 

269 

## pp. [7–13] 

Influenzo-streptococcal Septicæmia: Epidemic influenzal ‘pneumonia’ of highly fatal 

type and its relation to ‘purulent bronchitis,’”  The Lancet  193, no.  4975 (5  July 1919): 

1–11. 

9.  E.  L.  Opie et al., “Pneumonia at Camp Funston,”  Journal of the American Medical 

Association  (11  January 1919): 108–16. 

10.  Byerly, “The U.S.  Military and the Influenza Pandemic of 1918–1919,” 125. 

11.  “Letter to Susan Owen, 24  June 1918,” in  Wilfred Owen: Collected Letters , ed. H.  Owen 

and J.  Bell (London: Oxford University Press, 1967), 599. 

12.  This stipulates that in order for a microorganism to be considered the aetiological 

agent of a disease, the organism must be constantly present in all clinical cases of the 

disease, and when grown and isolated in pure culture and inoculated into healthy 

test animals must be able to reproduce the same disease. 

13.  E.  L.  Opie et al., “Pneumonia at Camp Funston,”  Journal of the American Medical 

Association  72, no.  2 (11  January 1919): 108–16. 

14.  Dorothy A.  Petit and Janice Bailie,  A Cruel Wind: Pandemic Flu in America , 1918–1920 

(Murfreesboro, TN: Timberlane Books, 2008), 83. 

15.  Batchelder,  Camp Devens , 16. 

16.  Letters and postcards from Pvt. Clifton H.  Skillings,  Bangor Daily News , accessed 

6 July 2017: https://bangordailynews.com/2009/05/15/news/letters-postcards-

from-pvt-clifton-h-skillings/ 

17.  F.  M.  Burnet and E.  Clark,  Influenza: A Survey of the Last FiftyYears . Monographs from 

the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Research in Pathology and Medicine, no.  4

(Melbourne: Macmillan, 1942); Anton Erkoreka, “Origins of the Spanish Influenza 

Pandemic (1918–1920) and Its Relation to the First World War,”  Journal of Molecular 

and Genetic Medicine:An International Journal of Biomedical Research  3, no.  2 (30  November 

2009): 190–94. 

18.  V.  Andreasen et al., “Epidemiologic Characterization of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic 

Summer Wave in Copenhagen: Implications for Pandemic Control Strategies,”  The 

Journal of Infectious Diseases  197, no.  2 (2008): 270–78. 

19.  Petit and Bailie,  A Cruel Wind , 85. 

20.  Paul G.  Woolley, “The Epidemic of Influenza at Camp Devens, MASS,”  Journal of 

Laboratory and Clinical Medicine  4, no.  6 (March 1919): 330–43. 

21.  R.  N.  Grist, “Pandemic Influenza 1918,”  British Medical Journal  2, no.  6205 

(22  December 1979): 1632–33. 

22.  John M.  Barry,  The Great Influenza:The Epic Story of the Deadliest Plague in History  (New 

York: Viking Penguin, 2004), 187–88. 

23.  A.  Abrahams et al., “A further investigation into influenzo-pneumococcal and influ -

enzo-streptococcal septicaemia,”  The Lancet  193, no.  4975 (5  July 1919): 1–11. 

24.  Barry D.  Silverman, “William Henry Welch (1850–1934): The Road to Johns 

Hopkins,”  Proceedings Baylor University Medical Center  24, no.  3 (2011): 236–42. 

25.  “The Four Founding Physicians,” Johns Hopkins Medicine, accessed 6  July 2017: 

http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/about/history/history5.html NOTES 

270 

## pp. [13–23] 

26.  Woolley, “The Epidemic of Influenza at Camp Devens, MASS.” 

27.  Vaughan,  A Doctor’s Memories , 383–84. 

28.  Jim Duffy, “The Blue Death—Flu Epidemic of 1918,”  Johns Hopkins School of Public 

Health , Fall 2004, accessed 6  July 2017: http://magazine.jhsph.edu/2004/fall/pro -

logues/index.html 

29.  Woolley, “The Epidemic at Camp Devens, MASS.” 

30.  Jeffery K.  Taubenberger et al., “The Pathology of Influenza Virus Infections,”  Annual 

Review of Pathology  3 (2008): 499–522. 

31.  Barry,  The Great Influenza , 190–91, 288. 

32.  Pfeiffer recommended Ziehl-Neelsen’s carbol-fuchsin stain. Pickett-Thomson 

Research Laboratory, ed.,  Annals of the Pickett-Thomson Research Laboratory  9 (London: 

Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, 1924): 275. 

33.  Barry,  The Great Influenza , 289–90. 

34.  H. influenzae —also known as type b (Hib)—can cause many different kinds of infec -

tions ranging from mild ear infections, to severe bloodstream infections, to pneu -

monia. Hib meningitis is a particular danger to unvaccinated children, and even with 

treatment approximately one in twenty will die. 

35.  A.  Sally Davis et al., “The Use of Nonhuman Primates in Research on Seasonal, 

Pandemic and Avian Influenza, 1893–2014,”  Antiviral Research  117 (May 2015): 75–98. 

36.  John M.  Eyler, “The State of Science, Microbiology, and Vaccines Circa 1918,”  Public 

Health Reports  3, no.  125 (2010): 27–36. 

37.  “Bacteriology of The ‘Spanish Influenza’ 1,”  The Lancet  192, no.  4954 (10  August 

1918), 177. 

38.  Royal College of Physicians, London, “Prevention and Treatment of Influenza,”  British 

Medical Journal  2, no.  3020 (16  November 1918): 546. 

39.  S.  W.  B.  Newson,  Infections and Their Control: A Historical Perspective  (Los Angeles and 

London: Sage, 2009), 36. 

40.  Erling Norrby, “Yellow Fever and Max Theiler: The Only Nobel Prize for a Virus 

Vaccine,”  The Journal of Experimental Medicine  204, no.  12 (26  November 2007): 

2779–84. 

41.  Myron G.  Schultz et al., “Charles-Jules-Henri Nicolle,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases 

15, no.  9 (September 2009): 1519–22; Ludwik Gross, “How Charles Nicolle of the 

Pasteur Institute Discovered That Epidemic Typhus Is Transmitted by Lice: 

Reminiscences from My Years at the Pasteur Institute in Paris,”  Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences  93, no.  20 (1  October 1996): 10539–40. 

42.  C.  Nicolle et al., “Quelques notions expérimentales sur le virus de la grippe,”  Comptes 

Rendus de l’Académie Sciences  167 (1918 II): 607–10; C.  Nicolle et al., “Recherches 

expérimentales sur la grippe,”  Annales d’Institut Pasteur  33 (1919): 395. 

43.  Davis, Taubenberger, and Bray, “The use of nonhuman primates in research on sea -

sonal, pandemic and avian influenza, 1893–2014.” 

44.  The technique was discovered by Ernest Goodpasture at Vanderbilt University, but 

it was an Australian researcher and future Nobel Prize winner, Frank Macfarlane NOTES 

271 

## pp. [24–31] 

Burnet, who first applied the technique to growing influenza virus. F.  M.  Burnet, 

Changing Patterns: An Atypical Biography  (Melbourne: Heinemann, 1968), 41, 90–91. 

45.  C.  R.  Byerly,  Fever of War: The Influenza Epidemic in the U.S . Army During World War I 

(New York: New York University Press, 2005), 102–3. 

46.  Nancy K.  Bristow,  American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza Epidemic 

(New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 101. 

47.  “New York prepared for influenza siege,”  New York Times , 19  September 1918, 11. 

48.  “Vaccine for Influenza,”  New York Evening Post  (12  October 1918), 8. 

49.  Barry,  The Great Influenza , 279. 

50.  John M.  Eyler, “The State of Science, Microbiology, and Vaccines Circa 1918,”  Public 

Health Reports  3, no.  125 (2010): 27–36. 

51.  “Battle Influenza Microbes, Noted Physician Warns,”  Chicago Herald Examiner 

(6  October 1918), 1. 

52.  “Spanish Influenza and the Fear of It,”  Philadelphia Inquirer  (5  October 1918), 12; 

“Stop the Senseless Influenza Panic,”  Philadelphia Inquirer  (8  October 1918), 12. 

53.  Herbert French, “The clinical features of the influenza epidemic of 1918–19,” UK 

Ministry of Health,  Report on the Pandemic of Influenza 1918–19  (London: HMSO, 

1920), 66–109. 

54.  Letter from Harry Whellock, Cape Province, South Africa, 10  November 1918. 

Mullocks sale item. 

55.  A.  E.  Baumgardt to Richard Collier, 28  May 1972, Richard Collier Collection, 

Imperial War Museum. IWM 63/5/1. 

56.  Albert Camus,  The Plague , trans. Robin Buss (New York: Penguin Classics, 2002), 

31. 

57.  John F.  Bundage et al., “Deaths from Bacterial Pneumonia During 1918–19 Influenza 

Pandemic,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases  14, no.  8 (August 2008): 1193–99. 

58.  Jeffery K.  Taubenberger et al., “1918 Influenza: The Mother of All Pandemics,” 

Emerging Infectious Diseases  12, no.  1 (January 2006): 15–22. 

59.  T.  Tumpey et al., “Characterization of the Reconstructed 1918 Spanish Influenza 

Pandemic Virus,”  Science  310, no.  5745 (10  July 2005): 77–80; J.  K.  Taubenberger 

et al., “Characterization of the 1918 Influenza Virus Polymerase Genes,”  Nature  437, 

no.  7060 (6  October 2005): 889–93. 

60.  Ann H.  Reid et al., “Evidence of an Absence: The Genetic Origins of the 1918 

Pandemic Influenza Virus,”  Nature Reviews . Microbiology  2, no.  11 (November 2004): 

909–14. 

61.  Michael Worobey et al., “Genesis and Pathogenesis of the 1918 Pandemic H1N1 

Influenza A Virus,”  Proceedings National Academy of Sciences  111, no.  22 (3  June 2014): 

8107–12. 

62.  The British virologist John Oxford has argued that such a reassortment could have 

occurred at Étaples in the winter of 1916–17 when hundreds of soldiers at the camp 

were sickened by “purulent bronchitis.” As well as being crowded with troops en 

route to the Front, Étaples boasted its own piggeries, and many men also kept ducks NOTES 

272 

## pp. [31–33] 

and geese as pets, meaning that all the ecological conditions were in place for the 

direct transfer of an avian flu virus to humans, or its reassortment with a mamma -

lian flu virus first. Similarly, John Barry argues that the ecological conditions for a 

reassortment with a bird flu virus were in place in Haskell County, Kansas, a sparsely 

populated farming area three hundred miles to the west of Camp Funston, where 

people raised poultry and hogs. However, his suggestion that the epidemic at Camp 

Funston in March 1918 was a precursor of the Spanish flu is undermined by the fact 

that, unlike during the later autumn wave or the outbreak at Étaples in 1917, there 

were no reports of heliotrope cyanosis. Even more problematic for Barry’s theory 

is that in the summer of 1918, Copenhagen, and other northern European cites, suf -

fered large flu outbreaks marked by unusual mortality in younger age groups—a 

hallmark of the later pandemic waves. Moreover, New York saw a similar wave of 

pre-pandemic flu activity in February–April 1918. According to the authors of the 

New York study, these findings are “inconsistent with the prevailing hypothesis of a 

spring 1918 Kansas origin, and … reopen the possibility that the virus had spread 

from Europe to NewYork City in the context of troop movement during World War 

I.” John S.  Oxford, “The So-Called Great Spanish Influenza Pandemic of 1918  May 

Have Originated in France in 1916,”  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 

London , Series B  356, 1416 (2001): 1857–59; John M.  Barry, “The Site of Origin of 

the 1918 Influenza Pandemic and its Public Health Implications,”  Journal of Translational 

Medicine  2 (20  January 2004): 3; Viggo Andreasen et al., “Epidemiologic 

Characterization of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Summer Wave in Copenhagen: 

Implications for Pandemic Control Strategies,”  The Journal of Infectious Diseases  197, 

no.  2 (January 2008): 270–78; Donald R.  Olson et al., “Epidemiological Evidence 

of an Early Wave of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic in NewYork City,”  Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  102, no.  31 (August 2005): 

11059–63. 

63.  Worobey et al., “Genesis and Pathogenesis.” 

64.  Kevin D.  Patterson,  Pandemic Influenza , 1700–1900: A Study in Historical Epidemiology 

(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1986), 49–82. 

65.  Taubenberger et al., “The Pathology of Influenza Virus Infections.” 

66.  E.  W.  Goodpasture, “The Significance of Certain Pulmonary Lesions in Relation to 

the Etiology of Influenza,”  American Journal of Medical Science  158 (1919): 863–70. 

67.  “Remarks of Dr.  William H.  Welch, 1926,” Chesney Medical Archives, Johns Hopkins 

University, Baltimore, MD. 

68.  Terence M.  Tumpey et al., “Characterization of the Reconstructed 1918 Spanish 

Influenza Pandemic Virus,”  Science  310, no.  5745 (2005): 77–80. 

69.  Worobey et al., “Genesis and Pathogenesis of the 1918 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza A 

Virus.” 

70.  Susanne L.  Linderman et al., “Antibodies with ‘Original Antigenic Sin’ Properties 

Are Valuable Components of Secondary Immune Responses to Influenza Viruses,” 

PLOS Pathogens  12, no.  8 (2016): e1005806. NOTES 

273 

## pp. [34–43] 

71.  David M.  Morens et al., “The 1918 Influenza Pandemic: Lessons for 2009 and the 

Future,”  Critical Care Medicine  38, no.  4 suppl. (April 2010): e10–20. 

72.  Jefferey K.  Taubenberger et al., “Influenza: The Once and Future Pandemic,”  Public 

Health Reports  125, no.  3 (2010): 16–26. 

73.  F.  M.  Burnet,  Natural History of Infectious Disease  (Cambridge: Cambridge University 

Press, 1953). 

74.  Burnet,  Changing Patterns .

75.  F.  M.  Burnet, “Influenza Virus ‘A’ Infections of Cynomolgus Monkeys,”  Australian 

Journal of Experimental Biology and Medicine  19 (1941): 281–90. 

76.  F.  M.  Burnet and E.  Clark,  Influenza: A Survey of the Last FiftyYears . Monographs from 

the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Research in Pathology and Medicine, no.  4

(Melbourne: Macmillan, 1942). 

2.  PLAGUE IN THE CITY OF ANGELS 

1.  Walter M.  Dickie and California State Board of Health, “Reports on Plague in Los 

Angeles, 1924–25,” 11–30, HM 72874, The Huntington Library, San Marino, CA. 

2.  Arthur J.  Viseltear, “The Pneumonic Plague Epidemic of 1924 in Los Angeles,”  Yale 

Journal of Biology and Experimental Medicine  1 (1974): 40–54. 

3.  William Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe: The Rise of Los Angeles and the Remaking of Its 

Mexican Past  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004), 3. 

4.  Mark Reisler,  By the Sweat of Their Brow : Mexican Immigrant Labor in the United States ,

1900–1940  (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1976), 180. 

5.  Dickie, “Reports on Plague in Los Angeles, 1924–25.” 

6.  Emil Bogen, “The Pneumonic Plague in Los Angeles,”  California andWestern Medicine 

(February 1925): 175–76. 

7.  “The Pneumonic Plague in Los Angeles,” 175–76. 

8.  California State Board of Health, Special Bulletin, no.  46, “Pneumonic Plague, Report 

of an Outbreak at Los Angeles, California, October–November, 1924,” Sacramento: 

California State Printing Office, 1926. 

9.  Dickie, “Reports on Plague in Los Angeles, 1924–25.” 

10.  Bogen, “Pneumonic Plague in Los Angeles”; Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe , 176–82. 

11.  Dickie, “Reports on Plague in Los Angeles, 1924–25.” 

12.  Frank Feldinger,  A Slight Epidemic:The Government Cover-Up of Black Plague in Los Angeles 

(Silver Lake Publishing Kindle edition, 2008), location 473. 

13.  “USGS Circular 1372, Plague,” accessed 11  May 2016: http://pubs.usgs.gov/ 

circ/1372/ 

14.  Ole Jørgen Benedictow,  The Black Death , 1346–1353:The Complete History  (Suffolk: 

Boydell Press, 2004), 382. 

15.  John Kelly,  The Great Mortality  (NewYork and London: Harper Perennial, 2006), 22. 

16.  Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe , 182. 

17.  According to the San Francisco–based bacteriologist Karl F.  Meyer, the statement 

was made by Colby. W.  E.  Carter and Vernon Link, “Unpublished biography of Karl NOTES 

274 

## pp. [43–46] 

F.  Meyer and related papers, written and co mpiled by William E.  Carter and Vernon 

B.  Link, 1956–1963,” Sixth interview, 199, UCSF Library, Archives, and Special 

Collections, MSS 63–1. Hereafter “Carter MSS.” 

18.  Marilyn Chase,  The Barbary Plague:The Black Death inVictorian San Francisc o (NewYork: 

Random House, 2003), 160. 

19.  In 1898, Paul-Louis Simond, a French researcher based in Karachi, succeeded in 

transmitting plague from an infected to an uninfected rat by allowing fleas harvested 

from a cat to feed on the diseased rat, but other experts questioned his methods, 

casting doubt on his findings. The result was that it was not until 1914, when two 

British researchers at the Lister Institute repeated Simond’s experiment under more 

rigorous conditions, that flea-rat transmission of plague was unequivocally accepted. 

Edward A.  Crawford, “Paul-Louis Simond and His Work on Plague,”  Perspectives in 

Biology and Medicine  39, no.  3 (1996): 446–58. 

20.  The first person to posit the link with marmots was the Russian medical researcher 

Mikhail Edouardovich Beliavsky. Examining an outbreak in 1894 of bubonic plague 

at Aksha, on the Russian–Chinese border, Beliavsky argued that the Siberian mar -

mot, or tarbagan, a large rodent hunted by native Mongols and Buryats, might be 

the carrier of plague, and that the disease spread to humans when they skinned the 

animal. Four years later, another Russian researcher, Danilo Zabolotny, reached the 

same conclusion while investigating an outbreak of pneumonic plague in eastern 

Mongolia. See Christos Lynteris,  Ethnographic Plague: Configuring Disease on the Chinese-

Russian Frontier  (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016). 

21.  William B.  Wherry, “Plague among the Ground Squirrels of California,”  The Journal 

of Infectious Diseases  5, no.  5 (1908): 485–506. 

22.  Chase,  Barbary Plague , 189.  Citellus beecheyi  has since been renamed  Otospermophilus 

beecheyi .

23.  In 1914 researchers at the Lister Institute in London demonstrated that plague bacilli 

multiply and form a block in the proventriculus of  X. cheopis . This block prevents 

the ingested blood from reaching the flea’s midgut, causing the flea to starve. The 

resulting increase in the number of feeding attempts by blocked fleas, combined 

with regurgitation of ingested blood and infectious material from the blockage, 

makes them dangerous vectors for humans. However, as these blockages can take 

twelve to sixteen days to form,  X. cheopis  is not thought to be infectious for long 

enough to be a factor in epizootics. Rebecca J.  Eisen et al., “Early-Phase Transmission 

of Yersinia Pestis by Unblocked Fleas as a Mechanism Explaining Rapidly Spreading 

Plague Epizootics,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  103, no.  42 (2006): 

15380–85. 

24.  McCoy, “Plague Among the Ground Squirrels in America,”  Journal of Hygiene  10, 

no.  4 (1910–1912): 589–601. 

25.  Wherry, “Plague Among the Ground Squirrels of California.” 

26.  Meyer, “The Ecology of Plague,”  Medicine  21, no.  2 (May 1941): 143–74 (147). 

27.  P.  C.  C.  Garnham, “Distribution of Wild-Rodent Plague,”  Bulletin of theWorld Health 

Organiza tion  2 (1949): 271–78. NOTES 

275 

## pp. [47–59] 

28.  W.  H.  Kellogg, “An Epidemic of Pneumonic Plague,”  American Journal of Public Health 

10, no.  7 (July 1920): 599–605. 

29.  J.  N.  Hays,  The Burdens of Disease: Epidemics and Human Response inWestern History  (New 

Brunswick, NJ, and London: Rutgers University Press, 2009), 184–85. 

30.  W.  H.  Kellogg, “Present Status of Plague, With Historical Review,”  American Journal 

of Public Health  10, no.  11 (1  November 1920): 835–44; Guenter B.  Risse,  Plague ,

Fear and Politics in San Francisco’s Chinatown ( Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 

Press, 2012), 156–58, 167–69.The commission was led by Simon Flexner, the head 

of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York, and had the aim of 

exonerating the Marine Hospital Service. 

31.  Eli Chernin, “Richard Pearson Strong and the Manchurian Epidemic of Pneumonic 

Plague, 1910–1911,”  Journal of the History of Medicine and the Allied Sciences  44 (1989): 

296–391. 

32.  Wu Lien-Teh,  A Treatise on Pneumonic Plague  (Geneva: League of Nations Health 

Organization, 1926). 

33.  Oscar Teague and M.  A.  Barber, “Studies on Pneumonic Plague and Plague 

Immunization, III.  Influence of Atmospheric Temperature upon the Spread of 

Pneumonic Plague,”  Philippine Journal of Science  7B, no.  3 (1912): 157–72. 

34.  Wu,  Treatise on Pneumonic Plague .

35.  Kellogg, “Epidemic of Pneumonic Plague,” 605. 

36.  Viseltear, “Pneumonic plague epidemic.” 

37.  “Nine Mourners At Wake Dead,”  Los Angeles Times  (1  November 1924). 

38.  Viseltear, “Pneumonic plague epidemic,” 41. 

39.  “Malady outbreak traced,”  Los Angeles Times  (5  November 1924), A10. 

40.  Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe , 197. 

41.  Ibid. 

42.  Ibid, 185–86. 

43.  Albert Camus,  The Plague  (New York: Random House, 1948), 35. 

44.  Emil Bogen, “Pneumonic Plague in Los Angeles: A Review,” 1925, MSS Bogen Papers, 

The Huntington Library, San Marino, CA. 

45.  Dickie, “Reports on Plague in Los Angeles, 1924–25,” 32–34. 

46.  Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe , 197. 

47.  “Disease Spread Checked,”  Los Angeles Times  (6  November 1924), A1. 

48.  Viseltear, “Pneumonic plague epidemic,” 42. 

49.  Ibid., 43. 

50.  Feldinger,  A Slight Epidemic , location 1838. 

51.  Viseltear, “Pneumonic plague epidemic,” 46. 

52.  Meyer, Carter MSS, Sixth interview, 209. 

53.  Deverell,  Whitewashed Adobe , 197–98. 

54.  Bess Furman,  A Profile of the U.S . Public Health Service 1798–1948  (Bethesda, MD: 

National Library of Medicine, 1973), 350–51. 

55.  “Rat War Death Toll Is Heavy,”  Los Angeles Times  (30  November 1924), B1. NOTES 

276 

## pp. [60–65] 

56.  “Malady Outbreak Traced,”  Los Angeles Times  (5  November 1924), A10. 

57.  “Rat War Death Toll Is Heavy.” 

58.  Meyer, Carter MSS, Sixth interview, 211. 

59.  “Report Hugh Cumming to Secretary of Treasury, 23  June 1925,” RG 90 Records 

of the Public Health Service, General Subject File, 1924–1935, State Boards of 

Health, California, 0425–70. 

60.  Meyer, “Ecology of Plague,” 148. 

61.  “Signs of Bubonic Plague in Three American Cities,”  NewYork Times  (8  February 1925); 

Letter from Cumming to medical officers in charge of U.S.  quarantine stations, 

22  December 1924, RG 90 General Subject File, 1924–1935, 0452–183 General 

(Plague). 

62.  “Quarantine Ordered Against Bubonic Rats,”  New York Times  (1  January 1925). 

63.  Letter from A.  G.  Arnoll to Robert B. Armstrong, 8  January 1925, RG 90, Records 

of the Public Health Service, General Subject File, 1924–1935, State Boards of 

Health, California, 0425–70. 

64.  “Report Hugh Cumming to Secretary of Treasury, 23  June 1925,” RG 90 Records 

of the Public Health Service, General Subject File, 1924–1935, State Boards of 

Health, California, 0425–70. 

65.  Dickie, “Reports on Plague in Los Angeles, 1924–25,” 23–24. 

66.  In 1348, the year the Black Death first visited in Europe, Italian chroniclers recorded 

symptoms characteristic of both the pneumonic and bubonic forms of the disease. 

The seventh-century plague outbreaks in Iceland and Norway are also thought to 

have been largely pneumonic, since in these northerly countries it would have been 

too cold to maintain rat-flea transmission over the winter and because pneumonic 

plague is more easily transmitted in cold weather. 

67.  K.  F.  Meyer, “Selvatic Plague—Its Present Status in California,”  California andWestern 

Medicine  40, no.  6 (June 1934): 407–10; Mark Honigsbaum, “‘Tipping the Balance’: 

Karl Friedrich Meyer, latent infections and the birth of modern ideas of disease ecol -

ogy,”  Journal of the History of Biology  49, no.  2 (April 2016): 261–309. 

68.  C.  R.  Eskey et al.,  Plague in theWestern Part of the United States  (Washington, DC: US 

Public Health Service, 1940). 

69.  Meyer, “Selvatic Plague—Its Present Status in California.” 

70.  “Plague Homepage | CDC,” accessed 11  May 2016: http://www.cdc.gov/plague/ 

71.  Eisen et al., “Early-Phase Transmission of Yersinia Pestis by Unblocked Fleas as a 

Mechanism Explaining Rapidly Spreading Plague Epizootics.” 

72.  “Human Plague—United States, 2015,” accessed 11  May 2017: http://www.cdc. 

gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6433a6.htm?s_cid=mm6433a6_w 

73.  Wendy Leonard, “Utah Man Dies of Bubonic Plague,” DeseretNews.com, 27  August 

2015, accessed 11  May 2017: http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865635488/ 

Utah-man-dies-of-bubonic-plague.html?pg=all 

74.  Kenneth L.  Gage and Michael Y.  Kosoy, “Natural History of Plague: Perspectives 

from More than a Century of Research,”  Annual Review of Entomology  50 (2005): 505– NOTES 

277 

## pp. [68–77] 

28; “USGS Circular 1372 Plague, Enzootic and Epizootic Cycles, 38–41,” accessed 

11  May 2016: http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1372/ 

3.  THE GREAT PARROT FEVER PANDEMIC 

1.  V.  L.  Ellicott and Charles H.  Halliday, “The Psittacosis Outbreak in Maryland, 

December 1929, and January 1930,”  Public Health Reports  46, no.  15 (1931): 843– 

65; Jill Lepore, “It’s Spreading: Outbreaks, Media Scares, and the Parrot Panic of 

1930,”  New Yorker , 1  June 2009. 

2.  “Killed by a Pet Parrot,”  AmericanWeekly , 5  January 1930. 

3.  Paul de Kruif,  Men Against Death  (London: Jonathan Cape, 1933), 181. 

4.  Ibid., 182. 

5.  Ibid., 203. 

6.  The journal was most likely  La Revista de La Asociación Médica Argentina . Enrique 

Barros, “La Psittacosis En La República Argentina,”  La Revista de La Asociación Médica 

Argentina , Buenos Aires, 1930. 

7.  “Killed by a Pet Parrot,”  AmericanWeekly  (5  January 1930). 

8.  E.  L.  Sturdee and W.  M.  Scott,  A Disease of Parrots Communicable to Man (Psittacosis) .

Reports on Public Health and Medical Subjects, no.  61 (London: H.M.S.O., 1930), 

4–10. 

9.  “30,000 Parrots Here; Amazon Best Talker,”  New York Times  (29  January 1930). 

10.  Katherine C.  Grier,  Pets in America:A History  (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 

Press, 2006), 244. 

11.  Sturdee and Scott,  A Disease of Parrots Communicable to Man , 10–17. 

12.  De Kruif,  Men Against Death , 182. 

13.  Albin Krebs, “Dr.  Paul de Kruif, Popularizer of Medical Exploits, Is Dead,”  NewYork 

Times  (2  March 1971). 

14.  Paul de Kruif, “Before You Drink a Glass of Milk,”  Ladies Home Journal  (September 

1929). 

15.  Nancy Tomes, “The Making of a Germ Panic, Then and Now,”  American Journal of 

Public Health  90, no.  2 (February 2000): 191–98. 

16.  “Topics of the Times: Warning Against Parrots,”  New York Times  (11  January 1930). 

17.  “Vienna Specialist Blames ‘Mass Suggestion’ for Parrot Fever Scare,Which He Holds 

Baseless,”  New York Times  (16  January 1930). 

18.  “Stimson’s Parrot Is Banished for Cursing,”  New York Times  (18  January 1930). 

19.  Edward. A.  Beeman,  Charles Armstrong , M.D .:  A Biography  (Bethesda, MD: Office of 

History, National Institutes of Health, 2007), 45. 

20.  Jeanette Barry,  Notable Contributions to Medical Research by Public Health Scientists , U.

S. Department of Health: A Bibliography to 1940  (Washington, DC: US Department of 

Health, Education and Welfare, 1960), 5–8. 

21.  De Kruif,  Men Against Death , 182, 185. 

22.  Ibid., 181. 

23.  Bess Furman,  A Profile of the U.S . Public Health Service 1798–1948  (Bethesda, MD: 

National Library of Medicine, 19 73), 370–73. NOTES 

278 

## pp. [77–87] 

24.  Beeman,  Charles Armstrong , 145. 

25.  “Parrot Fever Kills 2 In This Country,”  New York Times  (11  January 1930). 

26.  “Hunts For Source of ‘Parrot Fever,’”  New York Times  (12  January 1930). 

27.  “Parrot Fever Cases Halted in the City,”  New York Times  (19  January 1930). 

28.  De Kruif,  Men Against Death , 184. 

29.  Ibid., 125. 

30.  Beeman,  Charles Armstrong , 139. 

31.  De Kruif,  Men Against Death , 183–84. 

32.  “Hoover Bars Out Parrots to Check Disease: Gets Reports of Fatal Psittacosis Cases,” 

New York Times  (25  January 1930). 

33.  George W.  McCoy, “Accidental Psittacosis Infection Among the Personnel of the 

Hygienic Laboratory,”  Public Health Reports  45, no.  16 (1930): 843–49. 

34.  De Kruif,  Men Against Death , 203. 

35.  “Parrot Fever Attack Fatal to Dr  Stokes,”  The Sun  (11  February 1930). 

36.  Charles Armstrong, “Psittacosis: Epidemiological Considerations with Reference to 

the 1929–30 Outbreak in the United States,”  Public Health Reports  45, no.  35 (1930): 

2013–23. 

37.  Edward C.  Ramsay, “The Psittacosis Outbreak of 1929–1930,”  Journal of Avian Medicine 

and Surgery  17, no.  4 (2003): 235–37. 

38.  S.  P.  Bedson, G.  T.  Western, and S.  Levy Simpson, “Observations on the Ætiology of 

Psittacosis,”  The Lancet  215, no.  5553 (1  February 1930): 235–36; S.  P.  Bedson, 

G.  T.  Western, and S.  Levy Simpson, “Further Observations on the Ætiology of 

Psittacosis,”  The Lancet  215, no.  5555 (15  February 1930): 345–46. 

39.  Sturdee and Scott,  A Disease of Parrots Communicable to Man , 68–74. In Bedson’s hon -

our, the organism was named  Bedsoniae , a nomenclature that stuck until the 1960s. 

40.  Karl F.  Meyer, “The Ecology of Psittacosis and Ornithosis,”  Medicine  21, no.  2 (May 

1941): 175–205. 

41.  Sturdee and Scott,  A Disease of Parrots Communicable to Man , 88–89. 

42.  “Deny Parrot Fever Affects Humans,”  New York Times  (18  January 1930). 

43.  Albert B.  Sabin,  Karl Friedrich Meyer 1884–1974 , A Biographical Memoir  (Washington, 

DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1980); Mark Honigsbaum, “‘Tipping the Balance’: 

Karl Friedrich Meyer, Latent Infections and the Birth of Modern Ideas of Disease 

Ecology,”  Journal of the History of Biology  49, no.  2 (April 2016): 261–309. 

44.  Karl F.  Meyer,  Medical Research and Public Health . An interview conducted by Edna 

Tartaul Daniel in 1961 and 1962 (Berkeley: The Regents of the University of 

California, 1976), 74. 

45.  Paul de Kruif, “Champion among Microbe Hunters,”  Reader’s Digest , June 1950: 

35–40. 

46.  Meyer,  Medical Research and Public Health , 358. 

47.  It was on one of these expeditions that they agreed that the lives of these medical 

men would make “a fantastic story,” and Meyer told de Kruif to “forget science and 

… go into the writing game.” De Kruif took Meyer’s advice and by 1926 was forging NOTES 

279 

## pp. [88–94] 

a new career as a science writer. Indeed, it is said that when Sinclair Lewis was cast -

ing around for a real-life disease detective for his novel  Arrowsmith , de Kruif sug -

gested Meyer as a model for Gustaf Sondelius, Lewis’s bombastic Swedish plague-

hunter. However, although de Kruif credited Meyer with the inspiration for 

Arrowsmith , he would subsequently claim that Sondelius had “no prototype.” Meyer, 

Medical Research and Public Health , 340; de Kruif to Dr  Malloch, 16  April 1931. Paul 

H.  de Kruif papers, Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research Scientific Staff, 

Rockefeller Archive Center, Correspondence, 1919–1940, Box 1, Folder 9. 

48.  Altogether, some 6,000 horses became diseased during the outbreak and 3,000 died. 

49.  Technically, equine encephalitis is an arbovirus transmitted from birds to horses by 

Aedes and other species of mosquitoes. In horses and other animals it frequently 

attacks the optical nerves and meninges, causing the brain to swell and leading to 

neurological impairment.The key experiments were conducted in 1941 in theYakima 

Valley in Washington, where Meyer’s colleagues, Bill Hammon and William Reeves, 

succeeded in isolating the virus from  Culex  mosquitoes trapped in the wild and from 

chickens and ducks on which the mosquitoes had been allowed to take a blood meal. 

Although not definitive proof of mosquito-transmission, the experiments were strong 

evidence. Subsequent studies demonstrated that chickens were naturally infected 

with the virus over the winter and that it was only as summer approached and mos -

quito populations increased and began to feed on chickens that the virus spilled over 

into horses. 

50.  Meyer,  Medical Research and Public Health , 150. 

51.  Ibid. 

52.  Karl F.  Meyer, “Psittacosis Meeting,” Los Angeles, California, 2  March 1932, folio 

leaves 1–31, 5, Karl Meyer Papers, 1900–1975, Bancroft Library, Berkeley, BANC 

76/42 cz, Box 89. 

53.  W.  E.  Carter and V.  Link, “Unpublished biography of Karl F.  Meyer and related 

papers, written and compiled by William E.  Carter and Vernon B.  Link, 1956–1963,” 

“Fifth Interview,” 157. UCSF Library, Archives and Special Collections. MSS 63–1. 

54.  Karl F.  Meyer, “Psittacosis Meeting,” Los Angeles, California, 2  March 1932, folio 

leaves 1–31, BANC 76/42 cz, Box 89—“Psittacosis study.” Aware of the risk of acci -

dental laboratory exposure, Meyer insisted that test animals at the Hooper be kept 

in a special isolation room and that laboratory workers wear rubber gloves and masks 

at all times. Unfortunately, the rules were not always observed, and in 1935 it was 

anonymously reported that a Hooper laboratory worker had been accidentally con -

taminated with psittacosis during a routine examination of a smear from a mouse 

spleen. Only years later would it emerge that that worker had been Meyer and that 

the breach of protocol had occurred when he had removed his rubber gloves to take 

a phone call. 

55.  Beeman,  Charles Armstrong , 142–43. 

56.  K.  F.  Meyer and B.  Eddie, “Latent Psittacosis Infections in Shell Parakeets,”  Proceedings 

of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine  30 (1933): 484–88. NOTES 

280 

## pp. [95–108] 

57.  K.  F.  Meyer, “Psittacosis,”  Proceedings of the Twelfth International Veterinary Congress  4

(1935): 182–205. 

58.  F.  M.  Burnet, “Psittacosis amongst Wild Australian Parrots,”  The Journal of Hygiene 

35, no.  3 (August 1935): 412–20. 

59.  Meyer, “The Ecology of Psittacosis and Ornithosis.” 

60.  Julius Schachter and Chandler R.  Dawson,  Human Chlamydial Infections  (Littleton, 

MA: PSG Publishing, 1978), 25–26, 39–41. 

61.  Frank Macfarlane Burnet,  Natural History of Infectious Disease  (Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press, 1953), 23. 

4.  THE “PHILLY KILLER” 

1.  “Hyatt at the Bellevue,” accessed 6  September 2017: https://philadelphiabellevue. 

hyatt.com/en/hotel/home.html 

2.  Gordon Thomas and Max Morgan-Witts,  Trauma , the Search for the Cause of Legionnaires’ 

Disease  (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1981), 68–69, 120. 

3.  “Statement of Edward T.  Hoak,” in “Legionnaires’ Disease,” Hearings before House 

of Representatives, Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Finance, 23 and 

24  November 1976 (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1977), 156– 

57 (hereafter: “House hearings on Legionnaires’ Disease”); Thomas and Morgan-

Witts,  Trauma , 101, 120. 

4.  Thomas and Morgan-Witts,  Trauma , 103; Robert Sharrar, “Talk—Legionnaires’ dis -

ease,” Legionnaires’ disease files and manuscripts, Smithsonian, Box 5. 

5.  American Thoracic Society, “Top 20 Pneumonia Facts—2015,” accessed 1  May 2017: 

https://www.thoracic.org/patients/patient-resources/fact-sheets-az.php 

6.  Charles-Edward Amory Winslow,  The Conquest of Epidemic Disease: A Chapter in the 

History of Ideas  (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1971). 

7.  David W.  Fraser, “The Challenges Were Legion,”  The Lancet , Infectious Diseases  5, no.  4

(April 2005): 237–41. 

8.  Statement of David J.  Sencer, “House hearings on Legionnaires’ Disease,” 95. 

9.  Elizabeth W.  Etheridge,  Sentinel for Health: A History of the Centers for Disease Control 

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 47–48. 

10.  In Gaudiosi’s defence, Fort Detrick, in Maryland, the site of the US germ warfare 

program, was just across the state border, and there had been reports that the CIA 

had been experimenting with hallucinogenic fungi at Toughkenamon, just an hour’s 

drive from Philadelphia. Moreover, the year before, the public had been treated to 

revelations about MKULTRA, the CIA’s clandestine experiments with LSD and other 

psychotropic drugs in the 1950s that had grown out of the program to counter Soviet 

efforts to create a “Manchurian candidate.” For further discussion, see Thomas and 

Morgan-Witts,  Trauma , 179–80; John Marks,  The Search for the Manchurian Candidate 

(New York: Norton, 1991), 81. 

11.  Thomas M.  Daniel,  Wade Hampton Frost , Pioneer Epidemiologist , 1880–1938: Up to the 

Mountain  (Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press, 2004), xii. NOTES 

281 

## pp. [108–118] 

12.  Sharrar, “Talk—Legionnaires’ disease.” 

13.  “Progress Report Legionnaires Disease Investigation, August 12, 1976,” Legionnaires’ 

disease files and manuscripts, Smithsonian, Box 2. 

14.  Ibid. 

15.  David Fraser, EPI-2 report on Legionnaires’ disease, 21  March 1976, in “Legionnaires’ 

disease: Hearing before the Senate Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research,” 

9 November 1977, 85–129. 

16.  Sharrar, “Talk—Legionnaires’ disease,” 20. 

17.  Julius Schachter and Chandler R.  Dawson,  Human Chlamydial Infections  (Littleton: 

PSG Publishing, 1978), 29–32; Karl F.  Meyer, “The Ecology of Psittacosis and 

Ornithosis,”  Medicine  21, no.  2 (May 1941): 175–206. 

18.  Thomas and Morgan-Witts,  Trauma , 224–25. 

19.  Schachter had recently traced an outbreak of psittacosis at UCSF to pigeons roost -

ing on office window sills, a discovery that prompted the university to install anti -

roost spikes. 

20.  Gary Lattimer to Theodore Tsai, 20  December 1976, Legionnaires’ disease files and 

manuscripts, Smithsonian, Box 5. 

21.  Fraser, EPI-2 report, 125. 

22.  Ibid., 35. 

23.  The organism is named for Macfarlane Burnet, who did much to elaborate the aeti -

ology of Q Fever following a series of outbreaks in Australia in the 1930s. 

24.  Joseph McDade, interview with author, 26  May 2016. 

25.  Ibid. 

26.  Statements of F.  William Sunderman and F.  William Sunderman Jr., “House hear -

ings on Legionnaires’ disease,” 54. 

27.  Ibid., 51–61. 

28.  Ibid., 60. 

29.  “House hearings on Legionnaires’ disease,” 4–6. 

30.  Jack Anderson and Les Whitten, “Paranoid Suspect in Legion Deaths,”  Washington 

Post  (28  October 1976), 1. 

31.  Richard Hofstadter, “The Paranoid Style in American Politics,”  Harper’s Magazine ,

(November 1964). 

32.  Laurie Garrett,  The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World out of Balance 

(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994), 176. 

33.  Michael Capuzzo, “Legionnaires Disease,”  Philadelphia Inquirer , 21  July 1986. 

34.  It would seem Dylan never recorded the song and only played it on one occasion— 

at a sound check in Detroit on 13  October 1978. By then, of course, the real patho -

gen had been discovered, so perhaps Dylan lost interest. However, Cross liked the 

song and recorded it three years later with his Delta Cross Band. Some writers have 

detected a similarity to the melody of “Hurricane,” the song released by Dylan the 

year before inspired by the wrongful conviction of the Canadian middleweight boxer 

Rubin “Hurricane” Carter, for a triple homicide in a bar in New Jersey in 1966, a NOTES 

282 

## pp. [118–126] 

conviction that was eventually overturned in 1985. “Delta Cross Band Back on the 

Road Again,” accessed 1  May 2017: https://www.discogs.com/Delta-Cross-Band-

Back-On-The-Road-Again-Legionaires-Disease/release/2235787 

35.  “The Philadelphia Killer,”  Time  (16  August 1976). 

36.  After sale to a local developer and extensive renovations, the Bellevue was acquired 

by San Francisco’s Fairmont chain, reopening its doors in 1979 as the Fairmont 

Philadelphia. Since then, the hotel has changed hands and its name several times. 

37.  David Fraser, interview with author, 4  February 2015. 

38.  EPI-2, Second Draft, 15  December 1976, Legionnaires’ disease files and manu -

scripts, Smithsonian, Box 2. 

39.  Gwyneth Cravens and John S.  Karr, “Tracking Down The Epidemic,”  NewYork Times 

(12  December 1976), accessed 4 April 2018: https://www.nytimes. 

com/1976/12/12/archives/tracking-down-the-epidemic-epidemic.html 

5.  LEGIONNAIRES’ REDUX 

1.  Laurie Garrett,  The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World out of Balance 

(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994), 167. 

2.  Arthur M.  Silverstein,  Pure Politics and Impure Science:The Swine Flu Affair  (Baltimore: 

Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), 100–1. 

3.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 175. 

4.  George Dehner,  Influenza: A Century of Science and Public Health Response  (Pittsburgh: 

University of Pittsburgh, 2012), 183–84. 

5.  Ibid., 148. 

6.  For further discussion, see ibid., 185–88, and Garrett,  Coming Plague , 180–83. 

7.  Dehner,  Influenza , 144. 

8.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 185. 

9.  The chickens survived, prompting Pasteur to repeat the experiment with both old 

and new cultures and discover the principle of attenuated vaccines. 

10.  Joe McDade, interview with author, 26  May 2015. 

11.  Ibid. Later, CDC researchers would also demonstrate that the organism was pres -

ent in lung tissue from patients who had died of Legionnaires’ disease. Previous 

attempts to detect the organism had failed, but when researchers used a little-known 

stain called Dieterle’s, the bacteria showed up clearly. Subsequently, researchers also 

succeeded in growing the bacteria on special agar media and developing a specific 

reagent to aid diagnosis. “Statement of William H.  Foege,” in “Follow-up examina -

tion of Legionnaires’ Disease,” US Senate Subcommittee on Health and Scientific 

Research, 9  November 1977, 42–43. 

12.  Joseph McDade, interview with author, 26  May 2015. 

13.  W.  C.  Winn, “Legionnaires Disease: Historical Perspective,”  Clinical Microbiology 

Reviews  1, no.  1 (January 1988): 60–81. 

14.  C.  V.  Broome et al., “The Vermont Epidemic of Legionnaires’ Disease,”  Annals of 

Internal Medicine  90, no.  4 (April 1979): 573–77. NOTES 

283 

## pp. [126–135] 

15.  John T.  MacFarlane and Michael Worboys, “Showers, Sweating and Suing: Legionnaires’ 

Disease and ‘New’ infections in Britain, 1977–90,”  Medical History  56, no.  1 (January 

2012): 72–93. 

16.  J.  F.  Boyd et al., “Pathology of Five Scottish Deaths from Pneumonic Illnesses 

Acquired in Spain due to Legionnaires’ Disease Agent,”  Journal of Clinical Pathology 

31, no.  9 (September 1978): 809–16. 

17.  MacFarlane and Worboys, “Showers, Sweating and Suing: Legionnaires’ Disease and 

‘New’ Infections in Britain, 1977–90.” 

18.  Ronald Sullivan, “A Macy’s Tower Held Bacteria That Cause Legionnaires’ Disease,” 

New York Times  (12  January 1979), accessed 1  May 2017: http://www.nytimes. 

com/1979/01/12/archives/a-macys-tower-held-bacteria-that-cause-legionnaires-

disease.html 

19.  G.  K.  Morris et al., “Isolation of the Legionnaires’ Disease Bacterium from 

Environmental Samples,”  Annals of Internal Medicine  90, no.  4 (April 1979): 

664–66. 

20.  J.P.  Euzéby, “Genus  Legionella,”  List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature 

(LPSN), accessed 1  May 2017: http://www.bacterio.net/legionella.html 

21.  R.  F.  Breiman, “Impact of Technology on the Emergence of Infectious Diseases,” 

Epidemiologic Reviews  18, no.  1 (1996): 4–9. 

22.  Ibid., 6. 

23.  Alfred S.  Evans and Philip S.  Brachman, eds.,  Bacterial Infections of Humans: Epidemiology 

and Control  (New York: Springer, 2013), 365. 

24.  Ibid., 361–63. 

25.  “Statement of William H.  Foege,” 43. 

26.  David Fraser, interview with author, 4  February 2015. 

27.  H.  M.  Foy et al., “Pneumococcal Isolations from Patients with Pneumonia and 

Control Subjects in a Prepaid Medical Care Group,”  The American Review of Respiratory 

Disease  111, no.  5 (May 1975): 595–603. 

28.  Willis Haviland Carrier, “The Invention That Changed the World,” accessed 1  May 

2017: http://www.williscarrier.com/1876–1902.php; Steven Johnson,  HowWe Got 

to Now: Six Innovations That Made the ModernWorld , reprint edition (NewYork: Riverhead 

Books, 2015), 76–83. 

29.  A.  D.  Cliff and Matthew Smallman-Raynor,  Infectious Diseases: Emergence and 

Re-Emergence:A Geographical Analysis  (Oxford and NewYork: Oxford University Press, 

2009), 296. 

30.  Laurel E.  Garrison et al., “Vital Signs: Deficiencies in Environmental Control 

Identified in Outbreaks of Legionnaires’ Disease—North America, 2000–2014,” 

MMWR . Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report  65, no.  22 (10  June 2016): 576–84. 

6.  AIDS IN AMERICA, AIDS IN AFRICA 

1.  Ronald Bayer and Gerald M.  Oppenheimer,  AIDS Doctors:Voices from the Epidemic 

(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 18. NOTES 

284 

## pp. [135–141] 

2.  T cells, so-called because they are produced in the thymus, are a type of lympho -

cyte, or white blood cell. They can be distinguished from other lymphocytes by the 

presence of a T-cell receptor on their surface. 

3.  Michael S.  Gottlieb, “Discovering AIDS,”  Epidemiology  9, no.  4 (July 1998): 365–67. 

PCP used to be considered a protozoan infection, but in 1988 it was reclassified as 

a fungus and renamed  Pneumocystis jirovecii . However, to avoid confusion, the abbre -

viation “PCP” was retained. “Pneumocystis pneumonia” CDC, accessed 21  September 

2017: https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/pneumocystis-pneumonia/index. 

html#5 

4.  Nelson Vergel, “There When AIDS Began: An Interview With Michael Gottlieb, 

M.D.,”  The Body  (2  June 2011), accessed 10  October 2016: http://www.thebody. 

com/content/62330/there-when-aids-began-an-interview-with-michael-go.html 

5.  CMV can be transmitted in saliva, semen, vaginal fluids, urine, blood, even breast 

milk. Newborns can also contract CMV infections via the placenta or during deliv -

ery if their mother’s genital tract is infected. Most people contract CMV in child -

hood and are unaware they carry the virus, but if their immune systems are com -

promised the infection can be reactivated. Prior to AIDS, CMV was most commonly 

seen in transplant patients who had received immunosuppressant medication to pre -

vent the rejection of donor organs. 

6.  Elizabeth Fee and Theodore M.  Brown, “Michael S.  Gottlieb and the Identification 

of AIDS,”  American Journal of Public Health  96, no.  6 (June 2006): 982–83. 

7.  Bayer and Oppenheimer,  AIDS Doctors , 12–14. 

8.  Fee and Brown, “Michael S.  Gottlieb and the Identification of AIDS.” 

9.  Amyl nitrate reduces blood pressure while increasing heart rate, producing a dizzy -

ing “rush” to the head. Poppers were popular at parties, where they were commonly 

used to break the ice and heighten the pleasure of sex. 

10.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 285. 

11.  CDC, “Pneumocystis Pneumonia—Los Angeles, 1981,”  Morbidity and MortalityWeekly 

Report  45, no.  34 (August 1996): 729–33. 

12.  “The Age of AIDS,”  Frontline , accessed 13  October 2016: http://www.pbs.org/ 

wgbh/frontline/film/aids/ 

13.  “A Timeline of HIV/AIDS,” accessed 13  October 2016: https://www.aids.gov/hiv-

aids-basics/hiv-aids-101/aids-timeline/; “WHO | HIV/AIDS,”  WHO , accessed 

13  October 2016: http://www.who.int/gho/hiv/en/ 

14.  Office of NIH History, “In Their Own Words: NIH Researchers Recall the EarlyYears 

of AIDS,” interview with Dr  Robert Gallo, 25  August 1994, 33, accessed 21  October 

2016: https://history.nih.gov/nihinownwords/docs/gallo1_01.html 

15.  Robert C.  Gallo, “HIV—the Cause of AIDS: An Overview on Its Biology, Mechanisms 

of Disease Induction, and Our Attempts to Control It,”  Journal of Acquired Immune 

Deficiency Syndromes  1, no.  6 (1988): 521–35. 

16.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 330. 

17.  Douglas Selvage, “Memetic Engineering: Conspiracies, Viruses and Historical NOTES 

285 

## pp. [141–145] 

Agency,”  OpenDemocracy , 21  October 2015, accessed 8  November 2016: https:// 

www.opendemocracy.net/conspiracy/suspect-science/douglas-selvage/ 

memetic-engineering-conspiracies-viruses-and-historical-agency 

18.  In this stage of the infection, virus levels fall and it becomes harder to pass on HIV 

via sexual intercourse. 

19.  The CD4 count of a healthy, uninfected adult generally ranges from 500–1600 cells/ 

mm 3. By contrast, a very low CD4 count (less than 200 cells/mm 3) indicates a com -

promised immune system. 

20.  The significance of Mabs to immunology must not be understated. As the historian 

of medicine Lara Marks puts it, “Before the arrival of Mabs, scientists had as much 

knowledge of the surface of immune cells as they had of the surface of the moon.” 

Lara V.  Marks,  The Lock and Key of Medicine: Monoclonal Antibodies and the Transformation 

of Healthcare  (New Haven and London:Yale University Press, 2015), 68. 

21.  Oncoviruses do not always cause tumours. For instance, Epstein-Barr is ubiquitous 

in infancy, and infections in adolescence usually result in mononucleosis, the so-

called “kissing disease.” Similarly, while infection with hepatitis B can lead to cirrho -

sis and liver failure, only a small percentage of people go on to develop hepatocel -

lular carcinomas. 

22.  Surindar Paracer and Vernon Ahmadjian,  Symbiosis: An Introduction to Biological 

Associations , 2nd edition (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 

21. When the human genome was sequenced it revealed some 96,000 retrovirus-

like elements. These elements occupied around 8  per  cent of the genome, suggest -

ing they might be the remains of ancient virus infections. 

23.  Mirko D.  Grmek,  History of AIDS: Emergence and Origin of a Modern Pandemic  (Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990), 56. 

24.  Bernard J.  Poiesz et al., “Detection and Isolation of Type C Retrovirus Particles from 

Fresh and Cultured Lymphocytes of a Patient with Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma,” 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  77, no.  12 (December 1980): 7415–19. 

Following isolation of the same virus by a Japanese research group, the L in HTLV 

was changed to “lymphotropic.” 

25.  John M.  Coffin, “The Discovery of HTLV-1, the First Pathogenic Human Retrovirus,” 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  112, no.  51 

(22  December 2015): 15525–29. 

26.  Robert C.  Gallo,  Virus Hunting: AIDS , Cancer , and the Human Retrovirus: A story of 

Scientific Discovery  (New York: Basic Books, 1991), 135–36. 

27.  The Yugoslavian historian of science Mirko Grmek, who made a detailed study of 

the history of AIDS and the intellectual and technological developments that led to 

the discovery of HIV, claims that in early 1983 Gallo had dissuaded a researcher at 

the CDC from pursuing the hypothesis that AIDS was due to a cell-killing virus, 

insisting “it had to be oncogenic.” Grmek,  History of AIDS , 58. 

28.  R.  C.  Gallo et al., “Isolation of Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus in Acquired Immune 

Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS),”  Science  220, no.  4599 (20  May 1983): 865–67; NOTES 

286 

## pp. [145–151] 

M.  Essex et al., “Antibodies to Cell Membrane Antigens Associated with Human 

T-Cell Leukemia Virus in Patients with AIDS,”  Science  220, no.  4599 (20  May 1983): 

859–62. 

29.  F.  Barré-Sinoussi et al., “Isolation of a T-lymphotropic Retrovirus from a Patient at 

Risk for Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS),”  Science  220, no.  4559 

(20  May 1983): 868–71. 

30.  Grmek,  History of AIDS , 65. 

31.  Ibid., 60–70; Nikolas Kontaratos,  Dissecting a Discovery:The Real Story of How the Race 

to Uncover the Cause of AIDS Turned Scientists against Disease , Politics against Science , Nation 

against Nation  (Xlibris Corp, 2006); Gallo,  Virus Hunting ; Luc Montagnier,  Virus:The 

Co-Discoverer of HIV Tracks Its Rampage and Charts the Future  (New York and London: 

Norton, 2000). 

32.  Jon Cohen,  Shots in the Dark: The Wayward Search for an AIDS Vaccine  (NewYork: Norton, 

2001), 7–10. 

33.  Kontaratos,  Dissecting a Discovery , 274–75. 

34.  Grmek,  History of AIDS , 63. 

35.  F.  Barré-Sinoussi, “HIV: A Discovery Opening the Road to Novel Scientific Knowledge 

and Global Health Improvement,”  Virology  397, no.  2 (20  February 2010): 255–59; 

Patrick Strudwick, “In Conversation With … Françoise Barré-Sinoussi,”  Mosaic ,

accessed 19  October 2016: https://mosaicscience.com/story/francoise-barre-

sinoussi 

36.  Gallo,  Virus Hunting , 143. 

37.  NIH, “In Their Own Words,” 4, 31. 

38.  Grmek,  History of AIDS , 71. 

39.  Susan Sontag,  Illness as Metaphor  (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1978), 58. 

40.  Susan Sontag,  AIDS and Its Metaphors  (London: Allen Lane, 1989), 25–26. 

41.  David France,  How To Survive a Plague:The Story of How Activists and Scientists Tamed AIDS 

(London: Picador, 2016), 189. 

42.  Randy Shilts,  And The Band Played On: Politics , People and the AIDS Epidemic  (New York 

and London: Penguin Viking, 1988), 302. 

43.  Anthony S.  Fauci, “The Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome:The Ever-Broadening 

Clinical Spectrum,”  Journal of the American Medical Association  249, no.  17 (6  May 

1983): 2375–76. 

44.  Shilts,  And The Band Played On , 299–302. 

45.  L.  K.  Altman, “The Press and AIDS,”  Bulletin of the NewYork Academy of Medicine  64, 

no.  6 (1988): 520–28. 

46.  Evan Thomas, “The New Untouchables,”  Time  (23  September 1985). 

47.  Colin Clews, “1984–85. Media: AIDS and the British Press,”  Gay in the 80s  (28  January 

2013), accessed 24  October 2016: http://www.gayinthe80s.com/2013/01/1984-

85-media-aids-and-the-british-press/ 

48.  John Tierney, “The Big City; In 80’s, Fear Spread Faster Than AIDS,”  NewYork Times 

(15  June 2001). NOTES 

287 

## pp. [151–157] 

49.  CDC, “Kaposi’s Sarcoma and Pneumocystis Pneumonia among Homosexual Men— 

NewYork City and California,”  Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report  30, no.  25 (3  July 

1981): 305–8. 

50.  Lawrence K.  Altman, “Rare Cancer Seen In 41 Homosexuals,”  NewYork Times  (3  July 

1981); “ ‘Gay plague’ Baffling Medical Detectives, ” Philadelphia Daily News  (9  August 

1982). 

51.  CDC, “A Cluster of Kaposi’s Sarcoma and Pneumocystis Carinii Pneumonia among 

Homosexual Male Residents of Los Angeles and Orange Counties, California,” 

Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report  31, no.  23 (18  June 1982): 305–7. 

52.  Richard A.  McKay, “‘Patient Zero’:The Absence of a Patient’s View of the Early North 

American AIDS Epidemic,”  Bulletin of the History of Medicine  88 (2014): 161–94, 178. 

53.  Gerald M.  Oppenheimer, “Causes, Cases, and Cohorts: The Role of Epidemiology 

in the Historical Construction of AIDS,” in Elizabeth Fee and Daniel Fox,  AIDS:The 

Making of a Chronic Disease  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), 50–83. 

54.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 270–71. 

55.  Report of the Centers for Disease Control Task Force on Kaposi’s Sarcoma and 

Opportunistic Infections, “Epidemiologic Aspects of the Current Outbreak of 

Kaposi’s Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections,”  New England Journal of Medicine  306, 

no.  4 (28  January 1982): 248–52. 

56.  Michael Marmor et al., “Risk Factors for Kaposi’s Sarcoma in Homosexual Men,” 

The Lancet  319, no.  8281 (15  May 1982): 1083–87; Henry Masur et al., “An Outbreak 

of Community-Acquired Pneumocystis Carinii Pneumonia,”  New England Journal of 

Medicine  305, no.  24 (10  December 1981): 1431–38. 

57.  D.  M.  Auerbach et al., “Cluster of Cases of the Acquired Immune Deficiency 

Syndrome. Patients Linked by Sexual Contact,”  American Journal of Medicine  76, no.  3

(March 1984): 487–92. 

58.  McKay, “Patient Zero,” 172–73. 

59.  Ibid., 182; France,  How to Survive a Plague , 87. 

60.  “Patient Zero,”  People , 28  December 1987. 

61.  The New York samples were closely related to a strain from Haiti, suggesting that 

someone arriving from Haiti had introduced AIDS to the United States. Jon Cohen, 

“‘Patient Zero’ No More,”  Science  351, no.  6277 (4  March 2016): 1013; Michael 

Worobey et al., “1970s and ‘Patient 0’ HIV-1 Genomes Illuminate Early HIV/AIDS 

History in North America,”  Nature  539, no.  7627 (3  November 2016): 98–101. 

62.  CDC, “AIDS:The EarlyYears and CDC’s Response,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 

Report 60, no.  4 (7  October 2011): 64–69. 

63.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , 350. 

64.  Ibid., 352. These were later considered false positives, causing a lot of resentment 

in Africa. 

65.  In 1995 Peter Piot became executive director of the United Nations AIDS agency, 

UNAIDS. 

66.  Peter Piot et al., “Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome in a Heterosexual Population 

in Zaire,”  The Lancet  324, no.  8394 ( July 1984): 65–69. NOTES 

288 

## pp. [157–160] 

67.  P.  Van de Perre et al., “Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome in Rwanda,”  The Lancet 

2, no.  8394 (14  July 1984): 62–65; T.  C.  Quinn et al., “AIDS in Africa: An 

Epidemiologic Paradigm, 1986,”  Bulletin of the World Health Organization  79, no.  12 

(2001): 1159–67. 

68.  Edward Hooper,  The River: A Journey Back to the Source of HIV and AIDS  (London: 

Penguin, 1999), 95–96. 

69.  Jacques Pepin,  The Origins of AIDS  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 

6–11. 

70.  A.  J.  Nahmias et al., “Evidence for Human Infection with an HTLV III/LAV-like 

Virus in Central Africa, 1959,”  The Lancet  1, no.  8492 (31  May 1986): 1279–80. 

71.  Michael Worobey et al., “Direct Evidence of Extensive Diversity of HIV-1 in Kinshasa 

by 1960,”  Nature  455, no.  7213 (2  October 2008): 661–64. 

72.  Pepin,  The Origins of AIDS , 41. 

73.  “AIDS Origins, Edward Hooper’s site on the origins of AIDS,” accessed 2  November 

2016: http://www.aidsorigins.com/ 

74.  Responding to the study, Duesberg repeated his argument that AIDS is not a specific 

disease but a battery of previously known and specific diseases and that HIV is merely 

“a harmless passenger virus.” Therefore, Mbeki’s decision to withhold AZT did not 

contribute to the death toll. To prove his point, Crawford reports that at one point, 

Duesberg even offered to inject himself with AIDS.  Dorothy H.  Crawford,  Virus 

Hunt:The Search for the Origin of HIV  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), 10–12. 

75.  Celia W.  Dugger and Donald G.  McNeil Jr., “Rumor, Fear and Fatigue Hinder Final 

Push to End Polio,”  New York Times  (20  March 2006); Stephen Taylor, “In Pursuit of 

Zero: Polio, Global Health Security and the Politics of Eradication in Peshawar, 

Pakistan,”  Geoforum  69 (February 2016): 106–16. 

76.  To date serological evidence of SIV infection has been found in forty species of pri -

mates. These viruses appear to be largely non-pathogenic in their natural hosts, 

despite clustering together with the human and simian AIDS viruses in a single phy -

logenetic lineage. Paul M.  Sharp and Beatrice H.  Hahn, “Origins of HIV and the 

AIDS Pandemic,”  Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine  1, no.  1 (September 2011): 

1–22. 

77.  The term “spillover” was popularized by the science writer, David Quammen, and 

refers to a single event where a pathogen moves from one species to another, typi -

cally as a result of contamination with blood or other bodily fluids. However, anthro -

pologists and sociologists have criticized the term as overly simplistic. In particular, 

they argue that the focus on bushmeat hunting and the consumption of game in spill -

over events overlooks other types of “contact” between animals and humans in tra -

ditional rural settings. Tamara Gilles-Vernick, “A multi-disciplinary study of human 

beings, great apes, and viral emergence in equatorial Africa (SHAPES),” accessed 

21  September 2017: https://research.pasteur.fr/en/project/a-multi-disciplinary-

study-of-human-beings-great-apes-and-viral-emergence-in-equatorial-africa-shapes/ 

78.  The simian progenitor virus of HIV-1 is thought to be a hybrid virus consisting of NOTES 

289 

## pp. [160–172] 

two monkey viruses that chimpanzees probably acquired from eating other 

monkeys. 

79.  Pepin,  The Origin of AIDS , 50. 

80.  Ibid., 1–5. 

81.  Ibid., 110–11. 

82.  Sharp and Hahn, “Origins of HIV and the AIDS Pandemic.” 

83.  Pepin,  The Origin of AIDS , 224. 

84.  Nathan Wolfe,  The Viral Storm:The Dawn of a New Pandemic Age  (London: Allen Lane, 

2011), 161–63. 

85.  Viruses, bacteria, and protozoa are all examples of microparasites. In disease ecol -

ogy, parasitism designates a non-symbiotic relationship in which one species, the 

parasite, benefits at the expense of the other, usually referred to as the host. 

86.  Stephen S.  Morse, “Emerging Viruses: Defining the Rules for Viral Traffic,”  Perspectives 

in Biology and Medicine  34, no.  3 (1991): 387–409. 

87.  Joshua Lederberg, Robert E.  Shope, and S.  C.  Oaks, eds.,  Emerging Infections: Microbial 

Threats to Health in the United States  (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1992), 

34–35, 83. 

88.  Joshua Lederberg, “Infectious Disease as an Evolutionary Paradigm,”  Emerging Infectious 

Diseases  3, no.  4 (December 1997): 417–23. 

89.  Garrett,  Coming Plague , xi. 

7.  SARS: “SUPER SPREADER” 

1.  Arthur Starling and Hong Kong Museum of Medical Sciences, eds.,  Plague , SARS and 

the Story of Medicine in Hong Kong  (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2006), 

2. 

2.  Stephen Boyden et al.,  The Ecology of a City and Its People: The Case of Hong Kong 

(Canberra: Australian National University Press, 1988), 1. 

3.  Tamara Giles-Vernick and Susan Craddock, eds.,  Influenza and Public Health: Learning 

from Past Pandemics  (London and Washington, DC: Earthscan, 2010), 125. 

4.  Mike Davis,  The Monster at Our Door:The Global Threat of Avian Flu  (NewYork:The New 

Press, 2005), 58–60. 

5.  The initial tests were conducted at the Hong Kong Department of Health. Subsequently, 

the samples were forwarded to the CDC in Atlanta and laboratories in London and 

Rotterdam, where they were identified as H5N1. Alan Sipress,  The Fatal Strain: On the 

Trail of Avian Flu and the Coming Pandemic  (New York and London: Penguin 2010), 

53–54; Pete Davis,  The Devil’s Flu:TheWorld’s Deadliest Influenza Epidemic and the Scientific 

Hunt for theVirus That Caused It  (New York: Henry Holt, 2000), 8–12. 

6.  Scientists would subsequently blame the boy’s death on the unusual genetic proper -

ties of the virus and its effect on white blood cells associated with inflammatory 

responses. By inducing the release of proinflammatory cytokines, it is thought the 

H5N1 virus induced an extreme autoimmune reaction known as a “cytokine storm.” 

Robert G.  Webster, “H5 Influenza Viruses,” inY.  Kawaoka, ed.,  InfluenzaVirology: Current NOTES 

290 

## pp. [172–179] 

Topics  (Caister Academic Press, 2006), 281–98; C.  Y.  Cheung et al., “Induction of 

Proinflammatory Cytokines in Human Macrophages by Influenza A (H5N1) Viruses: 

A Mechanism for the Unusual Severity of Human Disease?”  The Lancet  360, no.  9348 

(2002): 1831–37. 

7.  Davis,  The Devil’s Flu , 46–47. 

8.  Sipress,  The Fatal Strain , 57. 

9.  Mark Honigsbaum, “Robert Webster: ‘We Ignore Bird Flu at Our Peril,’”  The Observer 

(17  September 2011), accessed 13  April 2017: https://www.theguardian.com/ 

world/2011/sep/17/bird-flu-swine-flu-warning 

10.  The statement is by Jeffery Taubenberger, the molecular biologist who in 2005 

sequenced all eight genes of the 1918 Spanish flu together with colleagues at the 

Armed Forces Institute of Pathology at Bethesda, Maryland. Taubenberger is now 

chief of viral pathogenesis and evolution at the National Institute of Allergy and 

Infectious Diseases. “The 1918 flu virus is resurrected,”  Nature  437 (6  October 2005): 

794–95. 

11.  K.  F.  Shortridge et al., “The Next Influenza Pandemic: Lessons from Hong Kong,” 

Journal of Applied Microbiology  94 (2003): 70S–79S. 

12.  Y.  Guan et al., “H9N2 Influenza Viruses Possessing H5N1-Like Internal Genomes 

Continue to Circulate in Poultry in Southeastern China,”  Journal ofVirology  74, no.  20 

(October 2000): 9372–80. 

13.  K.  S.  Li et al., “Characterization of H9 Subtype Influenza Viruses from the Ducks of 

Southern China: A Candidate for the Next Influenza Pandemic in Humans?,”  Journal 

ofVirology  77, no.  12 (June 2003): 6988–94. 

14.  Donald G.  McNeil and Lawrence K.  Altman, “As SARS Outbreak Took Shape Health 

Agency Took Fast Action,”  New York Times  (4  May 2003), accessed 2  October 2017: 

https://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/04/world/as-sars-outbreak-took-shape-

health-agency-took-fast-action.html 

15.  Thomas Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague:The Story of SARS  (Baltimore, MD: Johns 

Hopkins University Press, 2005), 19. 

16.  Kung-wai Loh and Civic Exchange, eds.,  At the Epicentre: Hong Kong and the SARS 

Outbreak  (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 2004), xvi. 

17.  “Solving the Metropole Mystery,” in World Health Organization,  SARS: How A Global 

Epidemic Was Stopped  (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2006), 141–48; CDC, 

“Update: Outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome—Worldwide, 2003,” 

MMWR  52, no.  12 (28  March 2003): 241–48. 

18.  Alison P.  Galvani and Robert M.  May, “Epidemiology: Dimensions of Superspreading,” 

Nature  438, no.  7066 (17  November 2005): 293–95. 

19.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 64–67; Raymond S.  M.  Wong and David S.  Hui, 

“Index Patient and SARS Outbreak in Hong Kong,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases  10, 

no.  2 (February 2004): 339–41. 

20.  Alexandra A.  Seno and Alejandro Reyes, “Unmasking SARS: Voices from the 

Epicentre,” in Loh and Civic Exchange, eds.,  At the Epicentre , 1–15 (10). NOTES 

291 

## pp. [180–188] 

21.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 70–75. 

22.  “Lockdown at Amoy Gardens,” in WHO,  SARS , 155–62. 

23.  The anthrax mailings, which began one week after 9/11, were the worst biological 

attacks in US history. In all, five Americans were killed and seventeen were sickened 

when letters containing anthrax spores arrived at the offices of two congressmen 

and several news outlets. After a lengthy investigation the FBI concluded the attacks 

had been perpetrated by a disgruntled microbiologist at the US Army Medical 

Research Institute for Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Maryland, who had com -

mitted suicide shortly before he was due to be arrested. However, the National 

Academy of Sciences subsequently cast doubt on the agency’s findings, accessed 

19  February 2017: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2001_anthrax_attacks 

24.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 73. 

25.  David L.  Heymann and Guenael Rodier, “SARS: Lessons from a New Disease,” in 

S.  Kobler et al., eds.,  Learning from SARS: Preparing for the Next Disease Outbreak:Workshop 

Summary  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press [US], 2004). 

26.  “How a Deadly Disease Came to Canada,”  The Globe and Mail , accessed 4  February 

2017: http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/how-a-deadly-disease-

came-to-canada/article1159487/ 

27.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 111. 

28.  At that time, a suspect case of SARS was defined as anyone exhibiting fever, cough, 

or shortness of breath and who had had close contact with a suspect or probable case 

or who had recently been in an area where transmission had occurred. A probable 

SARS case had all the features of a suspect case plus X-ray, laboratory, or autopsy 

findings consistent with the disease. 

29.  Malik Peiris, interview with author, Hong Kong, 27  March 2017. 

30.  Ibid. 

31.  J.  S.  M.  Peiris andY.  Guan, “Confronting SARS: A View from Hong Kong,”  Philosophical 

Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B , Biological Sciences  359, no.  1447 

(29  July 2004): 1075–79. 

32.  Peiris, interview with author. 

33.  J.  S.  M.  Peiris et al., “Coronavirus as a Possible Cause of Severe Acute Respiratory 

Syndrome,”  The Lancet  361, no.  9366 (19  April 2003): 1319–25. 

34.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 118–20. 

35.  Peiris, interview with author. 

36.  “Learning from SARS: Renewal of Public Health in Canada,” Report of the National 

Advisory Committee on SARS and Public Health, October 2003, accessed 8  February 

2017: http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/sars-sras/naylor/index-eng.php 

37.  James Young, “My Experience with SARS,” in Jacalyn Duffin and Arthur Sweetman, 

eds.,  SARS In Context: Memory , History , Policy  (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University 

Press, 2006), 19–25. 

38.  Dick Zoutman, “Remembering SARS and the Ontario SARS Scientific Advisory 

Committee,” in Duffin and Sweetman, eds.,  SARS In Context , 27–40. NOTES 

292 

## pp. [188–196] 

39.  “How ‘Total Recall’ Saved Toronto’s Film Industry,”  Toronto Star  (22  September 2011), 

accessed 8  February 2017: https://www.thestar.com/news/2011/09/22/how_ 

total_recall_saved_torontos_film_industry.html 

40.  Christine Loh and Jennifer Welker, “SARS and the Hong Kong Community,” in Loh 

and Civic Exchange, eds.,  At the Epicentre , 218. 

41.  Keith Bradsher, “A Respiratory Illness: Economic Impact; From Tourism to High 

Finance, Mysterious Illness Spreads Havoc,”  NewYork Times  (3  April 2003), accessed 

2 October 2017: http://www.nytimes.com/2003/04/03/world/respiratory-ill -

ness-economic-impact-tourism-high-finance-mysterious-illness.html 

42.  Sui A Wong, “Economic Impact of SARS: The Case of Hong Kong,”  Asian Economic 

Papers  3, no.  1 (2004): 62–83. 

43.  Duncan Jepson, “When the Fear of SARS Went Viral,”  NewYork Times  (14  March 2013), 

accessed 2  October 2017: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/15/opinion/ 

global/when-the-fear-of-SARS-went-viral.html 

44.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 70–75. 

45.  Yi Guan et al., “Isolation and Characterization of Viruses Related to the SARS 

Coronavirus from Animals in Southern China,”  Science  302, no.  5643 (10  October 

2003): 276–78. 

46.  Wendong Li et al., “Bats Are Natural Reservoirs of SARS-Like Coronaviruses,”  Science 

310, no.  5748 (28  October 2005): 676–79. 

47.  Kai Kupferschmidt, “Bats May Be Carrying the Next SARS Pandemic,”  Science 

(30  October 2013).To add further confusion, in 2012 another coronavirus, distantly 

related to SARS, emerged in Saudi Arabia. Serological evidence suggests that the 

virus, dubbed Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), had circulated in cam -

els in Africa and the Arabian peninsula for up to twenty years and that camels most 

likely acquired the virus from a bat native to sub-Saharan Africa.Victor Max Corman 

et al., “Rooting the Phylogenetic Tree of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 

Coronavirus by Characterization of a Conspecific Virus from an African Bat,”  Journal 

ofVirology  88, no.  19 (1  October 2014): 11297–303. 

48.  Robert G.  Webster, “Wet Markets—a Continuing Source of Severe Acute Respiratory 

Syndrome and Influenza?,”  The Lancet  363, no.  9404 (17  January 2004): 234–36. 

49.  Gaby Hinsliff et al., “The day the world caught a cold,”  The Observer  (27  April 2003), 

accessed 2  October 2017: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/apr/27/ 

sars.johnaglionby 

50.  Peiris and Guan, “Confronting SARS,” 1078. 

51.  Abraham,  Twenty-First Century Plague , 42–49. 

52.  “Panicking Only Makes It Worse: Epidemics damage economies as well as health,” 

The Economist  (16  August 2014), accessed 2  October 2017: https://www.econo -

mist.com/news/international/21612158-epidemics-damage-economies-well-

health-panicking-only-makes-it-worse 

53.  Heymann and Rodier, “SARS: Lessons from a New Disease.” 

54.  Roy M.  Anderson et al., “Epidemiology, Transmission Dynamics and Control of NOTES 

293 

## pp. [197–204] 

SARS: The 2002–2003 Epidemic,”  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 

Biological Sciences  359, no.  1447 (29  July 2004): 1091–1105. 

8.  EBOLA AT THE BORDERS 

1.  Almudena Marí Saéz et al., “Investigating the Zoonotic Origin of the West African 

Ebola Epidemic,”  EMBO Molecular Medicine  (29  December 2014), e201404792 

2.  Sylvain Baize et al., “Emergence of Zaire Ebola Virus Disease in Guinea,”  New England 

Journal of Medicine  371, no.  15 (9  October 2014): 1418–25. 

3.  Paul Richards,  Ebola: How a Peoples’ Science Helped End an Epidemic  (London: Zed Books, 

2016), 29–31. 

4.  Baize et al., “Emergence of Zaire Ebola Virus Disease in Guinea.” 

5.  Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), “Ebola: Pushed to the limit and beyond,” 23  March 

2015: accessed 29  April 2015: http://www.msf.org/article/ebola-pushed-limit-and-

beyond 

6.  Daniel S.  Chertow et al., “Ebola Virus Disease in West Africa—Clinical Manifestations 

and Management,”  New England Journal of Medicine  371, no.  22 (27  November 2014): 

2054–57; Mark G.  Kortepeter et al., “Basic Clinical and Laboratory Features of 

Filoviral Hemorrhagic Fever,”  Journal of Infectious Diseases  204, suppl. 3 (11  January 

2011): S810–16. 

7.  Richard Preston,  The Hot Zone  (London and New York: Doubleday, 1994), 81–83. 

8.  MSF, “Ebola,” 1–21, 5. 

9.  J.  Knobloch et al., “A Serological Survey on Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers in Liberia,” 

Annales de l’Institut Pasteur /Virologie  133, no.  2 (1  January 1982): 125–28. 

10.  “Army Scientist Uses Diagnostic Tools to Track Viruses,” US Department of Defense, 

accessed 7  December 2015: http://www.defense.gov/News-Article-View/Article/ 

603830/army-scientist-uses-diagnostic-tools-to-track-viruses. Later, when the WHO 

confirmed the outbreak was due to  Zaire ebolavirus , the journal revised its decision 

and published Schoepp’s paper. Randal J.  Schoepp et al., “Undiagnosed Acute Viral 

Febrile Illnesses, Sierra Leone,”  Emerging Infectious Diseases  20, no.  7 (July 2014): 

1176–82. 

11.  Baize et al., “Emergence of Zaire Ebola Virus Disease in Guinea.” 

12.  WHO, “Ebola Outbreak 2014–15,” accessed 6  May 2015: http://www.who.int/ 

csr/disease/ebola/en/ 

13.  Pam Belluck et al., “How Ebola Roared Back,”  NewYork Times , 29  December 2014, 

accessed 6  May 2015: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/30/health/how-ebola-

roared-back.html 

14.  MSF, “Ebola,” 6. 

15.  In fact, as would subsequently become clear, Ebola had already crossed into Liberia 

and Sierra Leone and was spreading via several concurrent transmission lines, aided 

by the passage of the family members incubating the virus across the region’s porous 

borders. 

16.  Jean-Jacques Muyembe-Tamfum et al., “Ebola Virus Outbreaks in Africa: Past and NOTES 

294 

## pp. [205–212] 

Present,”  The Onderstepoort Journal ofVeterinary Research  79, no.  2 (2012): 451; David 

M.  Pigott et al., “Mapping the Zoonotic Niche of Ebola Virus Disease in Africa,”  eLife ,

8 September 2014, e04395. 

17.  Neil Carey, “Ebola and Poro: Plague, Ancient Art, and the New Ritual of Death,” 

Poro Studies Association, accessed 16  January 2017: http://www.porostudiesasso -

ciation.org/ebola-and-secret-societies/ 

18.  Paul Richards, “Burial/other cultural practices and risk of EVD transmission in the 

Mano River Region,” Briefing note for DFID, 14  October 2014, Ebola Response 

Anthropology Platform, accessed 16  January 2017: http://www.ebola-anthropol -

ogy.net/evidence/1269/ 

19.  Mark G.  Kortepeter et al., “Basic Clinical and Laboratory Features of Filoviral 

Hemorrhagic Fever,”  Journal of Infectious Diseases  204, suppl. 3 (1  November 2011): 

S810–16. doi:10.1093/infdis/jir299. 

20.  Jean-Jacques Muyembe-Tamfum, interview with author, 29  May 2015. 

21.  David L.  Heymann et al., “Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever: Lessons from Kikwit, 

Democratic Republic of the Congo,”  Journal of Infectious Diseases  179, suppl. 1 

(1  February 1999): S283–86. doi:10.1086/514287. 

22.  David Heymann, interview with author, 19  March 2015. 

23.  James Fairhead, “Understanding social resistance to Ebola response in Guinea,” Ebola 

Response Anthropology Platform, April 2015, accessed 16  January 2017: http:// 

www.ebola-anthropology.net/evidence/1269/; Pam Belluck, “Red Cross Faces 

Attacks at Ebola Victims’ Funerals,”  New York Times  (12  February 2015), accessed 

16  January 2017: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/world/africa/red-

cross-faces-attacks-at-ebola-victims-funerals.html 

24.  “Ebola and Emerging Infectious Diseases: Measuring the Risk,” Chatham House 

(6  May 2014), accessed 11  November 2015: https://www.chathamhouse.org/ 

events/view/198881 

25.  Armand Sprecher, “The MSF Response to the West African Ebola Outbreak,” The 

Ebola Epidemic in West Africa, Institute of Medicine, Washington, DC, 25  March 

2015. 

26.  “Outbreak—Transcript,”  Frontline , accessed 5  October 2017: http://www.pbs.org/ 

wgbh/frontline/film/outbreak/transcript/ 

27.  Joshua Hammer, “My Nurses are Dead and I Don’t Know If I’m Already Infected— 

Matter,”  Medium  (12  January 2015), accessed 4  February 2015: https://medium. 

com/matter/did-sierra-leones-hero-doctor-have-to-die-1c1de004941e 

28.  Oliver Johnson, interview with author, 10  March 2015. 

29.  “Briefing note to the director-general, June 2014,” Associated Press, “Bungling Ebola-

Documents,” accessed 17  June 2015: http://data.ap.org/projects/2015/ 

who-ebola/ 

30.  “Ebola Outbreak in W.  Africa ‘totally out of control’—MSF,”  RT English , accessed 

30  September 2015: http://www.rt.com/news/167404-ebola-africa-out-of-

control/ NOTES 

295 

## pp. [213–223] 

31.  Will Pooley, interview with author, 24  May 2015. 

32.  Umaru Fofana and Daniel Flynn, “Sierra Leone Hero Doctor’s Death Exposes Slow 

Ebola Response,” accessed 12  February 2015: http://in.reuters.com/arti -

cle/2014/08/24/health-ebola-khan-idINKBN0GO07C20140824 

33.  Daniel G.  Bausch et al., “A Tribute to Sheik Humarr Khan and All the Healthcare 

Workers in West Africa Who Have Sacrificed in the Fight against Ebola Virus Disease: 

Mae We Hush,”  Antiviral Research  111 (November 2014): 33–35. 

34.  Etienne Simon-Loriere et al., “Distinct Lineages of Ebola Virus in Guinea during the 

2014 West African Epidemic,”  Nature  524, no.  7563 (6  August 2015): 102–4. 

35.  Ed Mazza, “Donald Trump Says Ebola Doctors ‘Must Suffer the Consequences,’” 

Huffington Post  (4  August 2014), sec. Media, accessed 6  May 2015: https://www. 

huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/03/donald-trump-ebola-doctors_n_5646424.html 

36.  Belgium Airways in-flight magazine, March 2015. 

37.  MSF, “Ebola,” 11. 

38.  Joanne Liu, Global Health Risks Framework, Wellcome Trust workshop, 

1–2  September 2015. 

39.  Preston,  The Hot Zone , 81–83. 

40.  Ibid., 289–90. 

41.  Garrett,  The Coming Plague , 593–95. 

42.  Tom Frieden, interview with author, 26  October 2015. 

43.  “Statement of Joanne Liu at United Nations Special Briefing on Ebola,” United 

Nations, NewYork (2  September 2014), accessed 27  November 2015: http://asso -

ciation.msf.org/node/162513 

44.  Martin Meltzer et al., and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 

“Estimating the Future Number of Cases in the Ebola Epidemic—Liberia and Sierra 

Leone, 2014–2015,”  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . Surveillance Summaries 

(Washington , DC: 2002)  63 suppl. 3 (26  September 2014): 1–14. 

45.  Norimitsu Onishi, “As Ebola Grips Liberia’s Capital, a Quarantine Sows Social Chaos,” 

NewYork Times  (28  August 2014): http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/29/world/ 

africa/in-liberias-capital-an-ebola-outbreak-like-no-other.html 

46.  Breslow, “Was Ebola Outbreak an Exception Or Was It a Precedent?” “Outbreak,” 

Frontline , accessed 6  May 2015: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/health-

science-technology/outbreak/was-ebola-outbreak-an-exception-or-was-it-a-

precedent/ 

47.  Mark Honigsbaum, “Ebola: The Road to Zero,”  Mosaic , accessed 5  October 2017: 

https://mosaicscience.com/story/ebola-road-zero 

48.  Manny Fernandez and Kevin Sack, “Ebola Patient Sent Home Despite Fever, Records 

Show,”  NewYork Times  (10  October 2014), accessed 1  October 2016: https://www. 

nytimes.com/2014/10/11/us/thomas-duncan-had-a-fever-of-103-er-records-

show.html 

49.  Duncan was most likely infected with Ebola in Monrovia on 15  September when he 

carried his landlord’s daughter, who was stricken with Ebola, home from the  hospital. NOTES 

296 

## pp. [223–225] 

However, he had showed no signs of fever or other symptoms of Ebola when he was 

screened on 19  September before boarding a flight from Monrovia to Brussels, from 

where he caught a connecting flight to Washington Dulles, followed by a second to 

Dallas-Fort Worth. “Retracing the Steps of the Dallas Ebola Patient,”  NewYork Times 

(1  October 2014): http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/10/01/us/retrac -

ing-the-steps-of-the-dallas-ebola-patient.html 

50.  MSF, “Ebola,” 9. 

51.  WHO, “Report of the Ebola Interim Assessment Panel—July 2015,”  WHO , Geneva, 

accessed 6  August 2015: http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/ 

ebola-panel-report/en/ 

52.  Pierre Rollin, interview with author, 26  October 2015. 

53.  Kevin Belluck et al., “How Ebola Roared Back,”  NewYork Times  (29  December 2014), 

accessed 1  October 2016: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/30/health/how-

ebola-roared-back.html 

54.  Wellcome. “Discussing Global Health at Davos,”  Wellcome Trust Blog , accessed 11  June 

2015: http://blog.wellcome.ac.uk/2015/01/21/discussing-global-health-at-

davos/.  Black Swan  is the title of a 2010 best-selling book by the Lebanese-American 

essayist Nassim Nicholas Taleb, and refers to an event for which past experience has 

not prepared us and which, until it occurs, is widely considered to be an impossi -

bility—the paradigm example being that before the discovery of Australia, people 

in the Old World were convinced that all swans were white because no one had seen 

a black one before. According to Taleb, a Black Swan has three key elements: “rar -

ity, extreme impact, and retrospective (though not prospective) predictability.” 

55.  Muyembe-Tamfum, “Ebola Virus Outbreaks in Africa.” 

56.  WHO, “Ebola virus disease, fact sheet 103, updated August 2015.Table: Chronology 

of previous Ebola virus disease outbreaks,” accessed 4  December 2015: http://www. 

who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/ 

57.  The reasons for this are beyond the scope of this book, save to say that pharmaceu -

tical companies have little commercial incentive to invest in vaccines and drugs for 

neglected tropical diseases such as Ebola. Having said that, during the outbreak in 

Guinea an international consortium backed by the WHO were able to demonstrate 

that an experimental vaccine developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada and 

the US Defense Threat Reduction Agency that had previously only been tested in 

monkeys under laboratory conditions conferred 100  per  cent protection against 

Ebola in trial subjects immunized randomly in the field. While questions remain 

about the safety of the rVSV vaccine and the duration of its protective effect, the 

prospect is that it could be offered to health workers before they are deployed to 

the next Ebola outbreak, thereby reducing the incidence of disease and keeping casu -

alties to a minimum. Thomas W.  Geisbert, “First Ebola Virus Vaccine to Protect 

Human Beings?,”  The Lancet  389, no.  10068 (4  February 2017): 479–80. 

58.  Edward C.  Holmes et al., “The Evolution of Ebola Virus: Insights from the 2013– 

2016 Epidemic,”  Nature  538, no.  7624 (13  October 2016): 193–200. NOTES 

297 

## pp. [228–240] 

9.  Z IS FOR ZIKA 

1.  Juliana Ba rbassa, “Inside the fight against the Zika virus,”  Vogue  (5  May 2016), accessed 

1 August 2017: https://www.vogue.com/article/zika-virus-doctor-vanessa-van-

der-linden 

2.  Laura Clark Rohrer, “Enigma,”  Pitt (University of Pittsburgh) , Summer 2017, 19–23. 

3.  Liz Braga, “How a Small Team of Doctors Convinced the World to Stop Ignoring 

Zika,”  Newsweek  (29  February 2016), accessed 1  August 2017: http://www.news -

week.com/2016/03/11/zika-microcephaly-connection-brazil-doctors-431427. 

html 

4.  “Chikungunya Fever Guide,” accessed 3  August 2017: http://www.chikungunya. 

in/dengue-chikungunya-differences.shtml 

5.  Dick Brathwaite et al., “The History of Dengue Outbreaks in the Americas,”  The 

American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene  87, no.  4 (3  October 2012): 584– 

93, doi:10.4269/ajtmh.2012.11–0770. 

6.  WHO, “Dengue and severe dengue,” accessed 3  August 2017: http://www.who. 

int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs117/en/ 

7.  Carlos Brito, interview with author, 5  January and 24  July 2017. 

8.  Ibid. 

9.  Donald McNeil,  Zika:The Emerging Epidemic  (New York: Norton, 2016), 30. 

10.  “Alexander Haddow and Zika Virus,”  Flickr , accessed 7  August 2017: https://www. 

flickr.com/photos/uofglibrary/albums/72157668781044525; McNeil,  Zika , 19–22; 

G.  W.  A.  Dick, “Zika Virus (II). Pathogenicity and Physical Properties,”  Transactions 

of The Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene  46, no.  5 (1952): 521–34. 

11.  Mary Kay Kindhauser et al., “Zika: the origin and spread of a mosquito-borne virus,” 

Bulletin of the World Health Organization  94 (2016): 675–686C, accessed 7  August 

2016: http://www.who.int/bulletin/online_first/16–171082/en/ 

12.  McNeil,  Zika , 41. 

13.  Ibid., 43–45. 

14.  Rachel Becker, “Missing Link: Animal Models to Study Whether Zika Causes Birth 

Defects,”  Nature Medicine  22, no.  3 (March 2016): 225–27. 

15.  Rohrer, “Enigma,” 19–23. 

16.  Ernesto Marques, interview with author, 24  July 2017. 

17.  Braga, “How a Small Team of Doctors Convinced the World to Stop Ignoring Zika.” 

18.  Brito, interview with author, 24  July 2017. 

19.  G.  Calvet et al., “Detection and Sequencing of Zika Virus from Amniotic Fluid of 

Fetuses with Microcephaly in Brazil: A Case Study,”  The Lancet Infectious Diseases  16, 

no.  6 (1  June 2016): 653–60. 

20.  Braga, “How a Small Team of Doctors Convinced the World.” 

21.  “Neurological syndrome, congenital malformations, and Zika virus infection. 

Implication for public health in the Americas,”  PAHO , Epidemiological Alert, 

1 December 2015, accessed 10  August 2017: http://www.paho.org/hq/index. 

php?option=com_content&view=articl e&id=11599&Itemid=41691&lang=en NOTES 

298 

## pp. [242–248] 

22.  David Heymann et al., “Zika Virus  and Microcephaly:Why Is This Situation a PHEIC?,” 

The Lancet  387, no.  10020 (20  February 2016): 719–21. 

23.  Margaret Chan, “Zika: we must be ready for the long haul,” 1  February 2017, accessed 

10  August 2017: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/commentaries/2017/zika-

long-haul/en/ 

24.  WHO, “Zika: Then, now and tomorrow,” accessed 10  August 2017: http://www. 

who.int/features/2017/zika-then-now/en/ 

25.  Jonathan Watts, “Rio Olympics Committee Warns Athletes to Take Precautions against 

Zika Virus,”  The Guardian  (2  February 2016), accessed 11  August 2017: https:// 

www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/02/zika-virus-rio-2016-olympics-

athletes 

26.  Jonathan Ball, “No One is Safe from Zika: Confirmation that Mosquito-borne Virus 

Does Shrink Heads of Unborn Babies … and a Chilling Warning,”  Daily Mail 

(31  January 2016), accessed 11  August 2017: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/ 

article-3424776/No-one-safe-Zika-Confirmation-mosquito-borne-virus-does-

shrink-heads-unborn-babies-chilling-warning.html 

27.  Julian Robinson, “Living with ‘Zika’: Brazilian Parents Pose with Their Children 

Suffering from Head-shrinking Bug to Highlight Their Plight,”  Daily Mail  (25  February 

2016), accessed 11  August 2017: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/arti -

cle-3464023/Living-Zika-Brazilian-parents-pose-children-suffering-head-shrinking-

bug-highlight-plight.html#ixzz4pR4i82UG 

28.  Nadia Khomani, “Greg Rutherford Freezes Sperm over Olympics Zika Fears,”  The 

Guardian  (7  June 2016), accessed 11  August 2017: https://www.theguardian.com/ 

sport/2016/jun/07/greg-rutherford-freezes-sperm-over-olympics-zika-fears 

29.  Andrew Jacobs, “Conspiracy Theories About Zika Spread Through Brazil with the 

Virus,”  NewYork Times  (16  February 2016), accessed 11  August 2017: https://www. 

nytimes.com/2016/02/17/world/americas/conspiracy-theories-about-zika-

spread-along-with-the-virus.html 

30.  Sarah Boseley, “Florida Issues Warning after Cluster of New Zika Cases in Miami 

Neighborhood,”  The Guardian  (1  August 2016), accessed 11  August 2017: https:// 

www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/florida-zika-cases-transmission 

-neighborhood-miami-dade-county; Jessica Glenza, “Zika Virus Scare is Turning 

Miami’s Hipster Haven into a Ghost Town,  The Guardian  (10  August 2016), accessed 

11  August 2017: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/10/zika-virus-

miami-florida-cases-mosquito-wynwood; Richard Luscombe, “Miami Beach Protests 

against use of Naled to fight Zika-carrying Mosquitos,”  The Guardian  (8  September 

2017), accessed 11  August 2017: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/ 

sep/08/miami-beach-zika-protests-naled-mosquitos 

31.  N.  R.  Faria et al., “Establishment and Cryptic Transmission of Zika Virus in Brazil 

and the Americas,”  Nature  546, no.  7658 (15  June 2017): 406–10. 

32.  Celia Turchi, interview with author, 24  July 2017. 

33.  Ilana Löwy, “Zika and Microcephaly: Can we Learn from History?,”  Revista de Saúde 

Coletiva  26, no.  1 (2016): 11–21. NOTES 

299 

## pp. [248–264] 

34.  C.  G.  Vict ora et al., “Microcephaly in Brazil: How to Interpret Reported Numbers?,” 

The Lancet  387, no.  10019 (13  February 2016): 621–24. 

35.  W.  K.  Oliveira et al., “Infection-related Microcephaly after the 2015 and 2016 Zika 

Virus Outbreaks in Brazil: A Surveillance-based Analysis,”  The Lancet  6736, no.  17 

(21  June 2017): 31368–5. 

36.  W.  Kleber de Oliveira et al., “Infection-Related Microcephaly after the 2015 and 

2016 Zika Virus Outbreaks in Brazil: A Surveillance-Based Analysis,”  The Lancet 

(21  June 2017), accessed 19  March 2018: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-

6736(17)31368–5 

37.  Stephanie Nolen, “TwoYears after Brazil’s Zika Virus Crisis, Experts Remain Baffled,” 

The Globe and Mail  (1  September 2017), accessed 2  September 2017: https://beta. 

theglobeandmail.com/news/world/zika-crisis-brazil/article36142168/ 

38.  Priscila M.  S.  Castanha et al., “Dengue Virus–Specific Antibodies Enhance Brazilian 

Zika Virus Infection,”  The Journal of Infectious Diseases  215, no.  5 (3  January 2017): 

781–85. 

39.  Ewen Callaway, “Rio fights Zika with Biggest Release Yet of Bacteria-infected 

Mosquitoes,”  Nature News  539, no.  7627 (3  November 2016): 17. 

40.  Liana Ventura, interview with author, 28  July 2017. 

41.  “Neglected and Unprotected:The Impact of the Zika Outbreak on Women and Girls 

in Northeastern Brazil,”  Human RightsWatch  (12  July 2017), accessed 24  August 2017: 

https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/07/12/brazil-zika-epidemic-exposes-rights-

problems 

42.  Rob Sawers, “The beautiful Brazilian beaches plagued by shark attacks,”  BBC World 

News  (27  September 2012), accessed 22  August 2017: http://www.bbc.co.uk/ 

news/world-radio-and-tv-19720455 

43.  Andrew Spielman and Michael D’Antonio,  Mosquito:The Story of Man’s Deadliest Foe 

(New York: Hyperion, 2001). 

44.  “Aedes Albopictus—Factsheet for Experts,”  European Centre for Disease Prevention and 

Control , accessed 6  October 2017: http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/disease-vectors/ 

facts/mosquito-factsheets/aedes-albopictus 

EPILOGUE: THE PANDEMIC CENTURY 

1.  Commission on a Global Health Risk Framework for the Future, and National Academy 

of Medicine, Secretariat,  The Neglected Dimension of Global Security:A Framework to Counter 

Infectious Disease Crises  (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2016), accessed 

26  September 2017: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/21891 

2.  Crosby,  America’s Forgotten Pandemic , xiii. 

3.  Kai Kupferschmidt, “Bats Really Do Harbor More Dangerous Viruses than Other 

Species,”  Science  (21  June 2017), accessed 28  September 2017: http://www.sci -

encemag.org/news/2017/06/bats-really-do-harbor-more-dangerous-viruses-other-

species 

4.  Kate E.  Jones et al., “Global Trends in Emerging Infectious Diseases,”  Nature  451, 

no.  7181 (21  February 2008): 990 –93. NOTES 

300 

## pp. [264–266] 

5.  René Dubos, “Infection into Disease,”  Perspectives in Biology and Medicine  1, no.  4

(7  January 2015): 425–35. 

6.  Dubos,  Mirage of Health , 271. 

7.  WHO, “2018 Annual Review of Diseases Prioritized under the Research and 

Development Blueprint,” 6–7  February 2018, accessed 1  April 2018: http://www. 

who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/en/ 

8.  “Bill Gates: A New Kind of Terrorism Could Wipe out 30 Million People in Less than 

aYear—and We Are Not Prepared,”  Business Insider , accessed 8  October 2017: http:// 

uk.businessinsider.com/bill-gates-op-ed-bio-terrorism-epidemic-world-

threat-2017–2 

9.  Sarah Boseley, “Resolve Health Initiative Aims to Save 100m Lives Worldwide,”  The 

Guardian  (12  September 2017), accessed 8  October 2017: https://www.theguard -

ian.com/society/2017/sep/12/resolve-health-initiative-aims-to-save-100m-lives-

worldwide-tom-frieden 

10.  “Pandemic Emergency Financing Facility: Frequently Asked Questions,”  World Bank ,

accessed 8  October 2017: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/pandemics/brief/ 

pandemic-emergency-facility-frequently-asked-questions 

11.  David M.  Morens and Jeffery K.  Taubenberger, “Pandemic Influenza: Certain 

Uncertainties,”  Reviews in MedicalVirology  21, no.  5 (September 2011): 262–84. 

12.  “Dr  Wolfgang Wodarg—Council of Europe Will Investigate and Debate on ‘Faked 

Pandemic,’” accessed 8  October 2017: http://www.wodarg.de/english/2948146. 

html 

13.  Sontag,  AIDS and Its Metaphors , 87. 301 

# ABBREVIATIONS 

AFRO  Africa Regional Office 

AIDS  Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 

ARDS  Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 

CDC  Centres for Disease Control and Prevention 

CMV  Cytomegalovirus 

CSF  Cerebrospinal Fluid 

CZS  Congenital Zika Syndrome 

DRC  Democratic Republic of the Congo 

EID  Emerging Infectious Disease 

EIS  Epidemic Intelligence Service 

ELISA  Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 

ELWA  Eternal Love Winning Africa 

ETU  Ebola Treatment Unit 

GOARN  Global Outreach and Response Network 

GPHIN  Global Public Health Intelligence Network 

GRID  Gay-Related Immune Deficiency 

HIV  Human Immunodeficiency Virus 

HTLV  Human T-cell Leukaemia Virus 

IAM  Instituto Aggeu Magalhães 

KS  Kaposi’s Sarcoma 

LAV  Lymphadenopathy Virus 

LCL  Levinthal-Coles-Lillie 

MSF  Médecins Sans Frontières 

NGO  Nongovernmental Organization 

NIAID  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases 

NIH  National Institutes of Health 

PAHO  Pan American Health Organization 

PCP  Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia 

PCR  Polymerase Chain Reaction 

PHS  Public Health Service ABBREVIATIONS 

302 

ProMED  Program for Monitoring Emerging Diseases 

RT-PCR  Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction 

SIV  Simian Immune-Deficiency Virus 

UNMEER  United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response 

USAMRIID  U.S.  Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases 

WHO  World Health Organization 303 

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This book is the product of over a decade of research and thinking about 

infectious disease. My interest in epidemics and pandemics began in 2005 

when I went to speak to John Oxford, then Professor of Virology at Queen 

Mary and Westfield School of Medicine in East London, about avian influ -

enza. A few months earlier a strain of the H5N1 bird flu virus had sparked a 

spate of deaths in Vietnam, and I had asked John to give me a tutorial on the 

ecology and virology of influenza before heading to Hanoi to write a feature 

article for  The Observer . Very quickly our conversation turned to other nota -

ble outbreaks of infectious disease, including the 1918–19 Spanish influenza 

pandemic. It was the beginning of an obsession with influenza that has led, 

by way of a PhD and a research fellowship, to a deeper engagement with the 

history of bacteriology and disease ecology. That research has been gener -

ously supported by the Wellcome Trust, allowing me to visit archives in the 

United States and Australia, where I was able to consult primary documents 

on the Spanish flu as well as several of the other epidemics canvassed in this 

book. In 2015, the Wellcome Trust also funded my travel to Sierra Leone to 

document the impressions of patients, clinicians, and research scientists 

swept up in the Ebola epidemic, and in Chapter 8 I have drawn on several of 

these interviews. 

Since 1918 there has been a huge change in the scientific understanding of 

infectious disease and of virology in particular, and I am acutely aware of the 

scope for error in seeking to summarize this shifting scientific knowledge in 

relation to such a wide range of infectious pathogens. I have been fortunate 

in being able to consult some of the leading experts in their fields to help me 

avoid more obvious errors and summarize past and current scientific knowl -

edge of these pathogens accurately (any errors that remain are my own). In 

particular, I would like to thank the following for their comments on specific 

chapters and passages: Wendy Barclay, Kevin De Cock, David Fraser, David 

Heymann, Michael Kosoy, Ernesto Marques, Joe McDade, David Morens, 

Malik Peiris, Celina Turchi and Liana Ventura. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

304 

I would also like to thank the librarians and archivists who helped me 

locate key documents and who directed my attention to collections that I 

might otherwise have missed. In particular: Diane Wendt, Curator of 

Medicine and Science at the National Museum of American History; Louise 

E.  Shaw, Curator of the David J.  Sencer CDC Museum; and Polina E.  Ilieva, 

the Head of Archives and Special Collections at the University of California 

San Francisco. My thanks also to the staff at the Wellcome Library in London, 

the National Library of Medicine and National Archives in Bethesda, 

Maryland, and the librarian in the Library of Congress’s newspaper room, 

who helped me locate the January 1930 report in Hearst’s  American Weekly 

about the outbreak of parrot fever in the theatrical troupe in Buenos Aires. 

Writing a book—especially one of this size—is not a task to be under -

taken lightly, and for urging me on and encouraging me that my initial pro -

posal would find an enthusiastic editor, I would like to thank my agent, 

Patrick Walsh. I would also like to thank Anne Bogart for her knowledge of 

Los Angeles and her comments on the pneumonic plague chapter, and my 

wife, Jeanette, who perhaps missed her vocation as a copy editor but has more 

than made up for it since. No one has read more drafts than she has, and I 

cannot thank her enough for her intellectual and emotional support. Finally, 

I am very pleased that the editors who “got” this book and wanted to publish 

it were John Glusman, whom I had previously worked with at Farrar, Straus 

and Giroux, and Jon de Peyer at Hurst. 305 

# INDEX 

Abumonbazi, Congo, 157 

achromatic lenses, 16 

Acute Communicable Disease Control, 

101 

Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 

(ARDS), 33, 172 

Aedes  mosquito, 229–30, 233, 244, 245, 

249, 251–3, 258–9, 279 n

aetiology, xvi, 16–18, 269 n (see also 

specific diseases )

Afghanistan, 159 

Africa 

AIDS in, 139–40, 156–66, 193 ( see 

also specific countries )

colonialism in, xx, 139–40, 160, 161, 

163, 198, 208 

disruption of social relations in, 160, 

163 

distrust of foreign medical aid in, 

208–9, 213–14, 225, 263 

early cases of AIDS in, 157 

Ebola in, xii, xiii, xix, xx, 133, 157, 

160, 197–226, 235, 242, 261, 

263–4 

economic, social, and cultural change 

in, 139, 160, 163, 165 

environmental change in, 164, 165 

globalization and, 160, 165–6, 261 

mass polio vaccination campaigns in, 

159 

mega-cities in, 261 

public health and humanitarian 

medical initiatives in, 139 

African Americans, 9, 144 

African horse sickness, 19 

agar media, 15, 17, 48, 116, 129, 144, 

282 n

Agent Orange, 118 

AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency 

syndrome), xvii, xviii, xx, 135–66, 

186, 193, 218, 220, 222, 225, 262 

aetiology of, 146, 152, 159 

conspiracy theories and, 145, 159 

cultural causes and factors, xx, 139, 

165 

as death sentence, 140, 149 

early cases of, 157 

economic, social, and cultural factors, 

139, 160, 163, 165 

as EID (emerging infectious disease), 

133, 166 

environmental causes and factors, 

164, 165–6 

as ‘epidemic of fear’, 150 

gay lifestyle, framing as disease of, 

138, 139, 141, 148–57 

hysteria of 1980s,  see  panic about 

index case for, 154–5 

latency and slow onset of, 141 

medical technologies and, 135, 

139–44, 152, 165, 166 

as metaphor, 148 

mother–child transmission of, 155, 

156 

naming of, xvii, 145 

panic about, 140–41, 148–51 INDEX 

306 

poor public health messaging around, 

149 

principal risk groups for, 148, 150, 

151 

public attitudes toward, 139 

sexual transmission of, 138, 139, 140, 

141, 146, 148, 150–57, 165 

simian versions of, 159–66, 193 

spillover mechanism from simian to 

human populations, xx, 160 

stigmatisation of people with, 140, 

141, 148, 152–6 

transmission of, 138, 139–40, 141, 

146, 148, 150, 152–6, 158, 161–5 

worldwide spread of, 139, 156, 158, 

160, 164–6 

air conditioning systems, xix, 262 

Legionnaires’ disease and, 100–101, 

108, 109, 111, 112, 127–32 

SARS and, 169, 178, 182 

Zika and, 243, 249 

Aldershot, England, 6, 12 

All People’s Congress Party, 212 

Altino Ventura, 254–6 

alveoli, 4, 32, 114, 128 

American Expeditionary Force, 2, 7 

American Hospital in Paris, 149 

American Legion , see  Legionnaires’ 

disease 

American Medical Association, 82, 150 

American Society of Tropical Medicine 

and Hygiene, 218 

AmericanWeekly , 69–70, 71, 304 

amniotic fluid, 239, 256 

amoebae, 127–8 

Amoy Gardens, 180–81, 186 n, 188–91 

amyl nitrate, 137, 153, 284 n

anal sex, unprotected, 140, 165 

Anderson, Henry ‘Shorty’, 69, 79–80, 

83–4 

Anderson, Roy, 195–6 

A/New Jersey/76, 106 

animals, as disease vectors, xx, 30–31, 

157, 164, 165, 169–70, 172, 185, 

264 

AIDS/HIV, xx, 160–66, 193 

avian influenza, xiii, 30–31, 172–4, 

265 

Ebola, xiii, xx, 157, 160, 164, 197, 

203, 204, 226, 263–4 

Legionnaire’s disease, 115–16 

plague, 38, 41, 43–50, 52, 57–66, 

274 n, 276 n

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) and, 67–97 

SARS, 185, 192–3, 263 

Zika, xix, 233–5, 240, 243–5, 247, 

248, 249, 251–4, 256–9 

Annapolis, Maryland, 67, 69, 71–2, 77 

anomalies, 16, 17, 45, 58, 116, 131 

anthrax, xxi, 18 

post-9/11 mailings, 181, 194, 291 n

vaccines against, xv 

antibiotics, xvii, 139, 166, 213, 222, 

256, 264 

discovery of new, 96, 102 

drug-resistant microbes and, 264 

era before, 3, 24, 102 

Legionnaire’s disease and, 101, 113, 

114, 115–16, 121, 124, 131 

plague and, 65 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) and, 96 

SARS and, 175, 176, 177, 179 

antibody-dependent enhancement 

(ADE), 33, 250 

antibody reactions, 125, 184 

‘antigenic drift’, 30 

antiretroviral drugs, 140, 159 

anti-war movement, 106, 117 

arboviruses, 229, 231–2, 237, 240, 249, 

252–3, 258–9, 279 n

Argentina, 68–71, 72, 75–6, 90, 94–6, 

142, 304 

Argentine National Health Board 

(Asistencia Publica ), 70 INDEX 

307 

Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 30, 

290 n

Armstrong, Charlie, 69, 71, 76–84, 88, 

93 

Asheville, North Carolina, 12 

Asia 

Asian financial crisis (1998), 189 

mega-cities in, 261 

Zika in, 234, 246, 251, 259 

‘Asian flu’, 31, 173 

Associated Press 

AIDS panic and, 150 

Ebola and, 211 

plague and, 52 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) and, 93 

Athens, plague of, xxi, 261 

Atlanta, Georgia, 99, 102, 106, 112, 

114–15, 153, 206, 214, 216–17, 224, 

289 n

Atlanticos , 61 

Attaran, Amir, 244 

Aureomycin, 96 

Avery, Oswald, 5, 14–16, 102 

avian influenza, xiii, xviii, 30–31, 33, 

171–5, 177, 265, 272 n, 289 n

of 1997, xiii, 30, 172, 175, 179, 265 

H5N1 virus, xiii, xviii, 30, 33, 172–5, 

177, 265, 289 n

‘multiple reassortants’ of, 174 

unusual pathology in young adults, 

174 

avian viruses, mutations of, 173–4 

avirulence, survival strategy of, 11 

Ayer, Massachusetts, 1–2, 9, 13, 24 

Aylward, Bruce, 220 

Ayres, Constância, 251–3 

AZT, 149, 159, 288 n

Bachmann, Leonard, 106 

Bacillus influenzae , 8–9, 15 

Bacillus psittacosis , 74 

bacteria,  see specific kinds of bacteria 

bacterial infections, xv, 16, 114, 266 ( see 

also specific diseases )

bacterial paradigm, 17 

bacteriology, xiv, 8, 16–19, 77, 86, 95, 

114, 121 

Bagley, Desmond, 126 

Bahia, Brazil, 229, 231, 235 

Baize, Sylvain, 202 

Baltimore, David, 143 

Baltimore, Maryland, 67–8, 70, 72, 

77–9, 80, 82, 86, 97, 236, 262 

Baltimore American , 70 

Baltimore Sun , 72 

Bantu people, 158, 160 

Barbados, 258 

Barber, M.  A., 48 

Barré-Sinoussi, Françoise, 144–5, 147 

Barry, John, 12, 272 

Batchelder, Roger, 2 

bathhouses, 140, 152, 153, 154 

B cells, 141 

Bedson, Samuel, 84 

Beecham, Jim, 104 

behavioral factors, xvii, 165 ( see also 

specific diseases )

Beijing, China, 177, 194 

Belgian Congo, xx, 158, 159, 160, 161, 

162–3 

Belgium, 156, 176, 204, 206, 295 n

Beliavsky, Mikhail Edouardovich, 274 n

Bellevue Medical College, 12 

Bellevue-Stratford Hotel, Philadelphia, 

xvii, 99–102, 106–13, 118–19, 133, 

182, 190 

air conditioning system in, 100, 101, 

108, 109, 111–12 

American Legion convention in, 

100–102, 107–13 

closing of, 118 

investigation of, 106–13 

pigeon roosts at, 111, 113 

water supply of, 100, 106, 110–12 INDEX 

308 

Benidorm, Spain, 126 

Bennett, John V., 119, 125 

Berlin Zoo, 84 

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 253, 

265 

biohazard suits, 189, 207 

Biosafety Level Four facilities, 32, 85, 

202 

biostatistics, 104 

bird breeding industry, 72, 90–91, 96, 

113 

Bird Dealers Association of America, 86 

bird flu,  see  avian influenza 

bird seed, medicated, 96 

Birmingham, England, 71 

‘Black Death’, 12, 41, 42, 50, 52, 56, 

66, 276 n

Blake, Francis G., 5, 9 

‘blind spot’, immunological, 33 

blood banks, 139, 147 

blood donors, 157 

blood supply, 149 

blood transfusions, 139, 151, 156 

Bloomberg Philanthropies, 265 

Blue, Rupert, 43–5, 59, 62 

B lymphocytes, 135 

Boa Viagem, Brazil, 227, 246, 257–9 

‘bodily fluids’, euphemism of, 149, 150 

body suits, 85, 219 

Bogen, Emil, 39–40, 50, 54 

Boise, Idaho, 93 

‘Bombali virus’, 263 n

Bonham, George, 168 

Borah, Mrs. William E., 92–4 

Borah, William E., 92–4 

Bordeaux, France, 7 

Boston, Massachusetts, 1, 2, 9–10, 14, 

22, 24, 25, 27, 32, 76 

botulism, 87–8, 91 

bovine pleuropneumonia, 19 

Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 

(BSE), 142 

Bozeman, Marilyn, 126 

Brantly, Kent, 214, 215–16 

Brazil 

arboviruses in, 229–31, 262 

chikungunya in, 231–2 

cholera in, 229 

dengue in, 230–31 

favelas and urban slums in, 227, 229, 

241, 245, 252–4, 257, 262 

fumigation brigades in, 244 

Ministry of Health, 229, 235, 237, 

238, 239–40, 245, 246, 248, 257 

Olympic Games in, 241, 243–5 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 70–71, 

72, 73 

yellow fever in, 230 

Zika in, xiii, 227–9, 232–3, 235–59 

Brest, France, 7, 24 

Briand, Sylvie, 212 

Brigham Hospital, 14, 15 

British Army, 5–8, 10, 12 

Brito, Carlos, 228–9, 231–3, 235–9, 

246–7, 250–51 

Brito, Celina, 250–51 

Brito, Lucia, 236–7 

bronchitis, 5, 183, 271 

bronchopneumonia, 4, 11, 14, 32, 34, 

101, 116 

Brualla, Medardo, 40 

brucellosis, 75, 87 

Brugière, Frédéric, 146 n

Brussels, Belgium, xiii, 151, 162, 199, 

217, 223, 296 n

bubonic plague, 41–4, 46, 48, 49, 61, 

63, 65–6, 68, 87, 168, 274 n

first pandemic (541–750), 42 

second pandemic (1347–1353), 42 

third pandemic (1855–1945), 41 

Buenos Aires, Argentina, 68, 70, 71, 74, 

304 

built environment, changes to, 130, 133, 

261 INDEX 

309 

Bundibugyo ebolavirus , 204 

Bureau of Animal Industry and Biological 

Survey, 78 

Bureau of Communicable Diseases, 79 

burial rituals, xxi, 63, 198, 204–7, 209, 

221 

Burke, Donald, 237 

Burkitt’s lyphoma, 142, 156 

Burlington, Vermont, 126 

Burnet, Frank Macfarlane, 34–5, 95, 97, 

281 

Burnett, Alfredo, 55 

Bush administration, 177 

bushmeat, xx, 160, 162, 163, 164, 193, 

197, 204, 206, 225, 288 n

bush spirits, 205 

butyl nitrate inhalers, 137 

Califano, Joseph, Jr., 123 

California 

AIDS in, 135, 150, 154, 155, 159 

air-conditioning in, 132 

bird breeding industry in, 72, 86, 

90–96 

brucellosis in, 87 

plague in, xviii, 37–66, 262 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 68, 72, 

86, 90–96 

State Department of Public Health, 

43, 47, 51, 53, 56, 59, 91 

Cameroon, 158, 160, 162, 163 

Camp Devens, Massachusetts, 2, 9, 15 

Camp Funston, Kansas, 2, 6, 9, 11, 272 

Camp Pike, Arkansas, 9 

Camp Wheeler, Georgia, 4, 12 

Camus, Albert, 1, 27, 37, 54, 61, 266 

Canada 

Global Public Health Intelligence 

Network (GPHIN), 182 

Health Canada, 190 

Program for Monitoring Emerging 

Diseases (ProMED), 182 

Public Health Agency, 213, 296 n

SARS in, 176, 181, 184, 186–8 

Canal do Arruda, Recife, 254 

cancer, as metaphor, 148 

candidiasis, 135, 136, 137, 138, 165 

Caribbean ( see also specific countries )

AIDS in, 137, 140, 141, 150, 155–6, 

161, 164–5, 263, 287 n

yellow fever in, 258 

Zika in, 244 

Carlos Chagas Institute, 235 

Carrier Company, 111–12, 131–2 

Carter, James ‘Jimmy’, 123 

CD4 cells, 135–7, 140–42, 144–5, 152, 

263, 285 n

CD8 ‘killer’ cells, 135, 141 

cellular genomes, 143 

Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention (CDC) 

AIDS and, xvii, 136–40, 149–57, 

263, 285 n

Ebola and, 201, 206–7, 215, 219–20, 

223–4 

Emerging Infectious Diseases , 133, 201 

Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS), 

103–10, 112, 118–19, 126, 136, 

207, 301 

flu immunisation campaign and, 117, 

122 

‘fowl plague’ and, 172 

GRID, use of term, 153, 156 

H5N1 and, 172, 289 n

hepatitis B study, 138, 152–3 

Legionnaires’ disease and, xvii–xviii, 

103–20, 121–32, 190, 282 n

Los Angeles cluster study, 152–4 

Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report ,

125, 138, 145, 151 

Murphy’s criticism, 117 

plague and, 64 

SARS and, 179–82, 185, 190 

Special Pathogens Branch, 104, 223 INDEX 

310 

STDs and, 138, 153, 263 

serum banks, 119, 124, 125, 184 

swine flu and, xviii, 102–7, 117, 122 

Task Force on Kaposi’s Sarcoma and 

Opportunistic Infections, 153 

Zika and, 242, 244–5, 246 

certainty, 16, 266, 268 n

Chamberlain, Charles, 101 

Chamberland filters, 19, 21, 84 

Chan, Margaret, 179, 189, 197, 212, 

217, 240–43 

Chan, Priscilla, 265 

Chandler, Harry, 38 

Chan Kwok Hung, 183 

Chan Ying-piu, 183 

charcoal yeast agar, 129 

CHAT, 159 

Chatham House’s Center on Global 

Health Security, 242 

Chelsea Naval Hospital, 10 

Chemin de Fer Congo-Ocean railroad, 

162 

Chen, Johnny, 177, 181–2 

Chesney, Alan M., 7 

Chicago, Illinois, 17, 25–6, 79, 132, 

151, 251 

chick embryo cultivation, 23, 34, 

115–16, 124, 282 n

chicken cholera, 16, 18, 123 

chicken sarcoma, 143 

chikungunya, 229–32, 234, 259 n

children 

AIDS and, 149, 151, 155–6 

immunity and, xv 

polio and, xiv, xv 

Zika and, 228–9, 237–43, 245–52, 

254–7 

Chile, 232, 235 

China, 167–96 

avian influenza in, 172–5 

farming patterns in, 170 

plague in, 42, 44, 48 

quarantines in, 1 94, 195 

SARS in, 175–96 

secrecy about SARS outbreak, 175, 

194 

chlamydia, 73, 113–14, 175 

Chlamydophila psittaci , 103, 106 

cholera, xiv, xv, xvi, 16, 18, 23, 35, 118, 

215, 240 ( see also  chicken cholera) 

in Brazil, 229 

in Hong Kong, 168 

vaccines against, xiv, xv, xvi, 16, 18, 

123 

in Yemen, 246 

CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 118, 

141 

civets, 192–3 

civil rights movement, 118 

Clara Street, Los Angeles, 37–40, 

50–51, 55, 59 

climate and climate change, 268 

Ebola and, 226 

legionellosis and, 112, 132–3 

pandemics and, 268 n

plague and, 48–9, 52, 63, 65, 276 n

Zika and, 249 

CNN, 189 

Cole, Rufus, 5, 12–16 

Coles, A.  C., 85 

Colombia, 72, 240, 243, 253 

colonialism, xx, 139–40, 160, 161, 163, 

168, 175–6, 198, 208, 227, 258 

commensal bacteria, xx, 32 

Communist Party of China, 170, 175, 

194 

‘community of pariahs’, 148 

complacency, threat of, 196 

Conakry, Guinea, xiii, 198, 202, 

208–10, 223, 226 

Condé, Alpha, 223 

confinement, contagion and, xxi, 95 ( see 

also  overcrowding) 

congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), 

228 –9, 237–43, 245–52, 254–7 INDEX 

311 

Congo region, xx, 159, 160, 161, 

162–4, 200, 201, 203, 206–7 

conspiracy theories, 107, 110, 145, 159, 

244, 247–9 ( see also specific diseases )

Conteh, Aniru, 210 

contraception, 257 

Coolidge, Calvin, 62 

Copeland, Royal S., 24, 25 

Cordoba, Argentina, 70 

coronaviruses, xviii, 185–6, 190, 191–3, 

195, 202, 263 

Corrego do Jenipapo, Brazil, 252 

Costello, Mary, 55 

Côte d’Ivoire, 198, 200, 201, 203, 204 

Côte d’Ivoire ebolavirus , 204 

Coxiella burneti , 106, 115 

C.  Quinquefasciatus , 251–2 

Craven, Robert, 103–4, 106 

Creel, Richard H., 59 

Crosby, Alfred, 262 

Cross, Billy, 118, 281 

Cryer, George, 53, 57, 61–2 

Culex  mosquito, 171, 230, 251–2, 279 n

cultural causes and factors, xix–xx, 165 

of AIDS, xx, 139, 165 

of Ebola, xxi, 204–7, 209, 220, 221, 

225 

culture-staining techniques, 16, 123, 

129, 131 

Cumming, Hugh S., 50, 59–62, 68, 71, 

77–8, 94 

Curran, James, 135, 138, 151–3 

cyanosis, 5–6, 11–12, 33, 39–40, 50, 

53, 272 n

cytokines, 33, 289 

cytomegalovirus (CMV), 136, 228, 238, 

255 

Daily Mirror , 151 

Dallas, Texas, xiii, 100, 222, 296 

Darrow, William, 152, 154 

Da Silva family, 255 

Da Silveiro, Paulinho, 254 

Daszak, Peter, 193 

Davis, David J., 17 

Davis, Mike, 170 

Day, Jason, 244 

De Cock, Kevin, 220, 303 

Dehner, George, 123 

De Kruif, Paul, 67, 69, 74–5, 77, 

79–82, 87–8 

deltamethrin, 235 

Democratic Republic of the Congo 

(DRC), 158, 159, 163, 200, 201, 

206–7 ( see also  Belgian Congo) 

dengue, 77, 165, 169, 201, 229–31, 

234, 235–7, 240, 250, 252, 256 

Denver, Colorado, 155 

Devens, Charles, 2 

Deverell, William, 43, 54 

Di Bortoli, 46–7, 49 

dibromohydroxymercurifluorescein, 55 n

Dickie, William, 51, 53, 56–60, 62, 64 

Dieterle’s stain, 282 n

diphtheria, xvi, 82 

disease causation, xv, xix ( see also 

etiology;  specific diseases )

diseases ( see also specific diseases )

confinement and, xxi, 95 

culpability ascribed for, 148 

multidrug-resistant diseases, 264 

multifactorial models of disease, 152 

transmission of, xv 

‘Disease X’, 264 

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 22, 29, 

142–3, 158, 184, 195 

Dolan, Jimmy, 109 

Dolan, Richard, 109 

Donka Hospital, Conakry, 223 

Dos Santos, Claudia Nunes Duarte, 235 

Dos Santos, David Henrique, 255–6 

Dos Santos, Mylene Helena, 255–6 

‘double pneumonia’, 37, 39 

doxycycline, 65, 102 INDEX 

312 

dread, xviii 

‘Dr  Ebola’, 206 

drug-resistant microbes, 264 

drugs, for Ebola, 200, 213, 225 ( see also 

specific drugs and kinds of drugs )

drug use, 148, 149–50, 153, 155 

Dubos, René, xvii, xx, 102, 166, 227, 

264 

Duesberg, Peter, 159, 288 n

Dugas, Gaetan, 152, 154–5, 165 

Duncan, Thomas, 222–3 

Duvalier, François, 164 

Dylan, Bob, 118, 281 n

East Coast Fever, 86 

Ebola, xiii, xvi, xviii, xix, xx, 85, 133, 

157, 160, 164, 166, 182, 197–226, 

235, 240–42, 261, 263–5 

airlifting of health care workers and, 

214 

as biowarfare agent, potential, 218 

as Black Swan event, 224 

climate and, 226 

contagiousness of, 200, 223 

control measures for, 202, 206, 221 

cultural causes and factors, xxi, 

204–7, 209, 220, 221, 225 

declared a pheic, 212, 217 

diagnostic tests for, 200, 215 

disparity in treatment of, 214, 216 

distrust of foreign medical aid in, 

208–9, 213–14, 225, 263 

environmental causes, xvi, 164, 166, 

204, 213, 220, 226, 263–4 

as EID, 166, 218, 222 

evolution of, 204 

globalization and, 222 

index case for, 203, 215, 225 

late detection of, 225 

mutation to aerosol, possible, 218 

panic about, 200, 217–18, 224 

pharmaceutical companies and, 225 

population mobility an d, 225 

public health campaigns and, 221 

rumours about, 207–8, 211–12, 219 

as security risk, 225 

skewed case data about, 208, 263 

slow response to, 265 

spillover mechanisms and, 225 

strains of, 201, 202, 203, 204, 215, 

224, 225 

symptoms of, 199–200 

transmission of, xx, 157, 160, 164, 

197, 203–7, 209, 221, 225–6, 

263–4 

treatment for, 200, 205, 208, 213 

vaccines against, 200, 225, 296 

WHO and, 197, 202–3, 207, 209, 

211–12, 214, 217, 219, 220, 

222–3, 293 

Ebola Treatment Units (ETU), 205, 208, 

217, 219 

EcoHealth Alliance, 193 

ecology, ecological factors, xv, xvii, xix, 

xx, xxi, 64, 165, 169–70, 171–2, 

261, 264 

AIDS, 160, 164 

avian flu, 172–4 

Ebola, xvi, 164, 204, 226, 263–4 

equilibriums, xx, 97, 264, 272 

influenza, 3, 10, 27, 28, 34, 35, 

172–4, 272 n

Japanese encephalitis, 171 

legionella, 129, 130 

plague, 43, 44, 64, 65 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 97 

SARS, 177 

STDs, 153 

economic factors, 97, 139, 160, 169 ( see 

also specific diseases )

Eddie, Bernice, 89–90, 94–5 

Egypt, 49, 71, 161 

Ehrlich, Paul, 75 

electron microscope, 29, 114, 183, 185, 

233 INDEX 

313 

El Niño, 249 

Elysian Park, California, 45, 58, 63 

emerging infectious diseases (EIDs), 

133, 166, 201, 218, 222, 264 

Emery, W.  D’Este, 17 

Emory Hospital, 114, 214 

encephalitis, 69, 77, 88, 171–2, 279 n

equine, 88, 279 n

Japanese, 171–2 

post-vaccinal (sleeping sickness), 69 

St. Louis epidemic (1933), 77 

environment; environmental factors, xiv, 

xvii, xix, xx, 35, 97, 165, 166, 

261–2, 268 n (see also  climate; 

ecology;  specific diseases )

AIDS, 160, 164, 165, 166 

avian flu, 172–4 

built environment, changes to, 130, 

133, 261 

Ebola, xvi, 164, 166, 204, 213, 220, 

226, 263–4 

influenza, 3, 10, 27, 28, 34, 35, 

172–4, 272 n

Japanese encephalitis, 171 

legionella, xviii, 112, 127, 129, 130, 

132–3, 262 

plague, 43, 44, 48–9, 52, 63, 65, 276 

pollution, 118 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 97 

SARS, 177, 180, 262 

STDs, 153 

Zika, 233, 245, 249, 250, 256, 259 

enzymes, 4, 29, 102, 143, 147 

EPI-2, 119 

Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS), 

103–9, 110, 112, 118–19, 126, 207 

‘epidemic meningitis’, 10, 40 

epidemics 

definition of, xiii n, 105 

prediction of, xiv 

preparedness for, xviii–xix 

war and, xxi 

ep idemiology, xiv, xv, xvii, xix, 104–7, 

108, 266 

frequency of exposure and, 105 

induction in, 108 

irrational and prejudical judgments 

and, xix 

microbiology and, 178 

multifactorial models of disease and, 

152 

working case definitions, 105 

epithelial cells, 14, 29, 33 

epizootics,  see  animals, as disease vectors 

Epstein-Barr, 137, 142, 285 n

equine encephalitis, 88, 279 n

Erasmus University, 185 

erythromycin, 102, 113, 131, 132 

Essex, Myron “Max,” 144, 147 

Etaples, France, 2, 5–6, 7, 12, 271–2 n

Eternal Love Winning Africa Hospital 

(ELWA), 214–15 

Europe ( see also specific countries )

avian flu in, 30 

AIDS in, 145–8, 154, 157 

plague in, 42, 61 

SARS in, 181 

‘Spanish flu’ in, xxi, 5–10, 20, 23, 27, 

28, 35 

evolution, xx, 31, 95, 158, 160, 165, 

174, 204 

experimentation, 16 

experts, limitations of, 261 

face masks, 25, 89, 150, 177 

FACTOR VIII, 155 

Falwell, Jesse, 141 

farming patterns, 170 

Farm Laboratory, 29 

Farr, William, xiv 

Fauci, Anthony, 150 

favelas, 227, 229, 241, 245, 252–4, 257, 

262 

FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation), 

291 nINDEX 

314 

Feira de Santana, Brazil, 229, 231 

feline leukaemia, 143, 144, 145 

fermentation, germ theory of, 18 

ferret badgers, 192, 193 

ferrets, 23, 29, 34 

FieldsVirology , 232 

FIFA World Cup, 229, 246 

filoviruses, 200, 203, 206, 223 

‘filter-passing’ agents, xvi, 19, 20, 

79–80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 88, 268 

filters, Chamberland, 19, 21, 84 

Fiocruz (Osvaldo Cruz Foundation), 

229, 236–7, 239, 247, 251, 253 

flaviviruses, 233, 235, 243 

Flexner, Simon, 5, 13, 87 

Flint, Michigan, 132 

Flores, Jesus, 40 

Foege, William H., 121 

fomites, 83, 110 

Fonnie, Mbalu J., 213 

food, xv, 67, 87, 91, 108, 110, 117, 119, 

142 

foot and mouth disease, 19 

Ford, Gerald, 102, 106, 121–2 

Forécariah, Guinea, 207 

forests, clear-cutting of, xvi, 226 

Fore tribe, 142 

Fortaleza, Brazil, 232 

‘Fort Bragg fever’, 126 

Fort Detrick, Maryland, 291 n

Fort Dix, New Jersey, xviii, 102, 103, 

106, 122 

Fort Riley, Kansas, 2, 6, 9 

fowl cholera, 16, 18, 123 

Fowler, Henry, xi 

‘fowl plague’, 172 

Foya, Liberia, 198, 202, 215, 217 

Foya Borma hospital, 215 

France, xvi, 2, 5–10, 12, 27, 35, 71, 

145–8, 154, 217, 222, 271–2 n

France, David, 149 

Fraser, David, 104–13, 118–20, 125, 129 

Freetown, Sierra Leone, xiii, 208, 210, 

211–12, 214, 221, 226, 263 

French, Herbert, 26 

French Academy of Sciences, 20, 22 

French Congo, 160, 162–3 

French Polynesia, 232, 234, 236, 242, 

246, 247, 251, 252 

Frieden, Tom, 219, 223, 265 

Friedman-Kien, Alvin, 137, 151–2 

Frost, Wade Hampton, 108 

Fukuda, Keiji, 172–3, 212 

fungal infections, 106, 136, 284 n

Furman, Bess, 77 

Gabon, 160, 162, 201, 203, 224 

Gage, Henry, 47, 58 

Gallo, Robert, 140, 143–8, 156, 285 n

Garrett, Laurie, 118, 123, 133, 153, 166 

Garry, Robert, 211 

Gates, William ‘Bill’, 253, 264, 265 

Gaudiosi, Albert, 107, 280 n

gay community, 136–41, 147, 148, 

149–56, 165 

gay liberation movement, 140, 153 

stigmatization of, 140, 141, 148, 

152–6 

gay-related immune deficiency (GRID), 

153, 155–6 

GenBank, 184, 185 

genetics, xv 

George Williams Hooper Foundation for 

Medical Research, 87–90, 95, 279 n

Germany, ‘parrot fever’ pandemic 

(1929–1930), 84 

germ-conscious regimes, 75 

germ panic, 75 

germ theory, xv, 16, 86 

Gimenez stain, 124 

globalization, xxi, 160, 165, 166, 222, 

261 

Global Outbreak Alert and Response 

Network (GOARN), 182, 195, 202 INDEX 

315 

Global Pu blic Health Intelligence 

Network (GPHIN), 182 

gloves, disposable, 179 

Goddard, Morrill, 70, 75 

Gola, 198 

Goldwater, Barry, 118 

gonorrhoea, 137, 161 

Goodpasture, Ernest, 270 n

gorillas, 203 

Gottlieb, Michael, 135–8, 141–2, 151, 

165 

Graitcer, Phil, 103, 106 

Gram-negative bacteria, xvi, 8, 15, 74, 

116, 123, 129 

Granjeiro, João, 243 

Great Lakes Naval Station, 25 

grippe , la , see  influenza 

Grmek, Mirko, 148, 285 n

Guan,Yi, 174, 192, 193, 194 

Guangdong, China, 169–70, 174, 175, 

176, 178, 182, 192, 194 

Guangzhou, 169, 170, 171, 174, 175, 

176, 178, 194 

Guéckédou, Guinea, 198–9, 200, 201, 

203, 207, 209, 215, 223, 225, 226 

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), 122, 

235, 236, 237, 242, 245, 247 

Guinea 

AIDS in, 162 

air service cancellations, 217 

distrust of foreign medical aid in, 

208–9 

Ebola in, xiii, 197–9, 200–203, 

207–9, 210, 214, 215, 217, 223–6 

Ministry of Health, 198, 202 

Gutiérrez, Horace, 40, 50 

Guy’s Hospital, 26–7 

H1N1, 31, 33, 102, 106, 265–6 

Mexican outbreak (2009), xiii, 265–6 

‘Spanish flu’ (1918–19), xiii, xv, 

1–35 , 40, 50, 51, 69, 102, 103, 

174, 265, 266, 272n, 290n, 303 

United States outbreak (1976), 102, 

103–4, 106, 117, 121–2, 123, 130 

H2N2, 31, 173 

H3N2, 31, 106, 173 

H5N1, 33, 172–5, 177, 265, 289 n

H9N2, 174 

Haddow, Alexander, 325, 349233, 251 

haemagglutinin (HA), 29 

haemoglobin, 15 

haemolyticus bacteria, 3 

haemophiliacs, 149, 150, 151, 155, 156, 

164 

Hemophilus influenzae , 9 n, 103, 270 n

haemorrhagic fever, 102, 133, 173, 

198–201, 212, 215, 217, 218, 221, 

230, 231, 240 

Haiti, 137, 140, 141, 150, 155–6, 161, 

164–5, 218, 263, 287 n

Halstead, William Steward, 12 

Hammack, Royo, 40 

Hammon, Bill, 279 n

Hanoi, Vietnam, 176, 177, 181, 194, 

262, 303 

Harbin, China, 48, 49, 53 

Harrison, William Henry, 4 

Hartl, Gregor, 202 

Hartz Mountain Distribution Company, 

96 

Harvard Medical School, 10, 104, 144 

Hatfield, Daniel S., 79 

healers, 205, 209, 221, 263 

Health Canada, 190 

‘healthy carriers’, xiv 

Hearst newspapers, 52, 69–70, 304 

Hektoen, Ludvig, 83 

heliotrope cyanosis, 12, 26, 272 n

Helms, Jesse, 141 

Hemo-Caribbean, 164 

Hendra, 193 

hepatitis, 82, 115, 183 

B, 137–8, 153, 285 

C, 161, 163 INDEX 

316 

Herald Exam iner , 51, 52 

Heraldo de Mexico , El , 51 

herbicides, 118 

herd immunity, xx, 234 

herpes, 136, 142 

Heymann, David, 106, 182, 195, 207, 

241–3 

Hib meningitis, 270 n

Histoplasma , 106 

Ho, David, 139 

Hoak, Edward, 100–101, 104 

Hofstadter, Richard, 117 

Hong Kong, 167–96 

avian influenza in, xiii, xviii, 30, 31, 

171–5, 179, 265 

cholera in, 168 

Department of Health, 178, 181, 

190, 289 n

medical facilities in, 170–71, 172 

mosquito-borne diseases, 168 

plague in, 41, 168 

SARS in, xviii, 175–96, 262 

smallpox in, 168 

topography and climate of, 167–9 

typhoid in, 168 

‘Hong Kong’ fever, 168 

‘Hong Kong’ flu, 31, 173 

Hong Kong University, 171, 172, 174 

Hooper, Edward, 159 

Hooper, George Williams, 87 

Hoover, Herbert, 81, 86, 90, 94 

hospitals ( see also specific hospitals )

enforced hospitalization, xiv 

hospital hygiene practices, xvi 

Legionnaires’ disease in, 126 

hosts, parasitic organisms and, 11 

Hudson, Rock, 149 

human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 

xx, 133, 135–66 

cell-destroying properties of, 135–7, 

140–47, 152, 157, 285 n

confirmatory test (“Western blot”), 

146 

conspiracy theories and, 145 

contagiousness of, 199–200 

correct nomenclature of, 145 

ELISA test, 146, 156, 158 

environmental causes and factors, 

164, 165–6 

evolution of, 160, 165 

Haiti, importation from, 140 

HIV-1, 158–63, 288 

HIV-2, 158, 160 

latency and slow onset of, 141, 262 

pandemic strains of, 165–6 

phylogenetic analysis of, 155, 164, 

288 n

progenitor viruses, xx, 160, 162, 

165, 288 

strains of, 158–9, 160, 164–5 

subtypes of, 158–60, 164 

transmission of, 138, 139–40, 141, 

146, 148, 150, 152–6, 158, 161–5 

Human Rights Watch, 256–7 

Human T-cell Leukemia Virus (HTLV), 

144–8, 285 n

Human T-cell Leukemia Virus II (HTLV 

II), 144, 145 

Human T-cell Leukemia Virus III (HTLV 

III), 145–6, 156 

Hussein, Saddam, 177, 267 n

hybrid viruses, 173, 288 

hypervigilance, xviii 

hypodermic needles, 139, 161 

hysteria, xvii–xix, 69, 74, 96, 140, 

148–51, 187, 217, 243–4 

Iceland, 142, 276 n

immigrants, blamed for diseases, xiv 

immune systems, 3–4 

compromised, 3, 102, 129, 136, 284 n

Ebola and, 200 

of hosts, xx, 11, 129 

infancy and, 28 

influenza and, 28, 29–30, 33, 173 INDEX 

317 

immune deficiency, xvii, 135–8, 139, 

141–4, 150, 152, 153, 156 

microbes and, xvi 

old age and, 28, 102 

phagocytes, 3 

plague and, 41 

pneumonia and, 15, 102 

SARS and, 185 

immunization,  see  vaccines 

immunological factors, xv, xvii, xx, xxi, 

3, 27, 33, 34, 35 

‘blind spot’, 33 

immunology, 18, 28, 34, 77, 135, 142, 

266, 285 

index cases, 154, 155, 204, 215, 225 

India 

influenza in, 27 

plague in, 43, 48, 88 

Zika in, 234 

Indiana Memorial Union, 127 

Indonesia, 234 

infectious diseases ( see also specific 

diseases )

aetiology, xvi, 16–18, 269 n

continuing threat of, 261–6 

dormant infections and, xvi 

identification of new since 1940, 264 

influenza, 7 n

aetiology of, xvi, 8–9, 14–21, 23, 25, 

32 

‘Asian flu’, 31, 173 

avian influenza, xiii, xviii, 30–31, 33, 

171–5, 177, 265, 272 n, 289 n

Bacillus influenzae , xvi, 8–9, 14–21, 

25, 32 

chick embryo cultivation, 23, 34 

cyanosis and, 5–6, 11–12, 27, 33 

epidemiology of, 34–5 

etymology of term, 7 n

as ‘filter-passer’, xvi, 20, 21, 268 

H1, 29, 30, 33 

H1N1, 31, 33, 102, 106, 265–6 

H2, 29 

H2N2, 31, 173 

H3, 29, 33 

H3N2, 31, 106, 173 

H5, 172 

H5N1, 33, 172–5, 177, 265, 289 n

H9N2, 174 

Hemophilus influenzae , 9 n, 103, 270 n

‘Hong Kong’ flu, 31, 173 

hybrid viruses, 173, 288 

immunization,  see  inoculation 

incubation period of, 104 

influenza coeli , 7 n

inoculation, xiii, xvi, 16, 21, 22, 23, 

25, 102, 103, 117, 121–3, 175 

Mexican swine flu and, xiii, 265, 266 

morbidity and mortality patterns, 29, 

31, 32, 33–5, 265 

Orthomyxoviridae family , member of, 

28–9 

pandemic strains, 7, 30–31 

pneumococcal bacteria ( Steptococcus 

pneumoniae ) and, 3 

‘Russian flu’, 4, 8, 16, 17, 31, 33, 103 

‘Spanish flu’, xiii, xv, 5–35, 40, 50, 

51, 69, 76, 102, 103, 139, 174, 

265, 266, 268 n, 272 n, 303 

strains of, xiii, xx, 30–31, 33, 173 

swine flu, xiii, xviii, 30, 102, 103–4, 

106, 117, 121–3, 130, 170, 173, 

265, 266 

transmission of, 8, 20, 30 

vaccines against,  see  inoculation 

influenza coeli , 7 n

insecticides, 75, 235, 238, 244–5, 247, 

248–9 

Institute of Medicine, 133, 166, 218, 

222 

Institute of Respiratory Diseases, 

Guangzhou, 175 

Instituto Aggeu Magalhães (IAM), 236, 

301 INDEX 

318 

Instituto Materno Infantil  de 

Pernambuco (IMIP), 237 

integrase, 143 

interleukin-2, 144, 147 

International Committee on the 

Taxonomy of Viruses, 145 

international health workers, 159–60, 

194, 208 

International Plague Conference (1911), 

48 

International Sanitary Convention 

(1922), 60 

intravenous drug use, 148, 149, 155 

Ipitunga, Brazil, 257 

Iraq, 177, 267 n

Ivanovski, Dmitry, 19 

Jaboatão dos Guararapes, 227, 247, 249, 

253, 256 

Jackson, Thomas Jonathan ‘Stonewall’, 4 

Jackson Memorial Hospital, 155 

Japanese encephalitis, 171–2 

John F.  Kennedy Medical Center, 215 

Johns Hopkins University, 5, 12, 76, 82, 

108, 236 

Johnson, Virginia, 151 

Journal of the American Medical Association ,

150 

Kailahun, Sierra Leone, 209, 211, 213, 

221 

Kalmey family, 67 

Kamano, Luisey, 209 

Kamara, Shakie, 219 

Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), 137, 153 

Kellogg, William, 47, 49, 51, 57, 63 

Kenema, Sierra Leone, 201, 208, 

209–14, 215, 221 

Khan, C-Ray, 214 

Khan, Sheik Humarr Khan, 210–14 

Kikwit, Congo, 204, 206–7, 224, 263 

Kinshasa, Congo, 140, 156–9, 161, 163, 

206–7 , 263 

Kinyoun, Jo seph, 47, 58–9 

Kitasato, Shibashuro, 8 

Kissi, 198, 205, 207 

Kissidougo, Guinea, 198 

‘kissing disease’, 285 

Kitchen, Stuart F., 233 

Klasing, Amanda, 257 

Klein, Edward, 17 

‘knock-me-down-fever’, 7 

Koch, Robert, xv, xvi, 8–9, 16, 18, 75, 

85 

Köhler, Georges, 142 

Koindu, Sierra Leone, 209, 211 

Kokomo, Indiana, 151 

Koroma, Ernest Bai, 214 

Kono, 205 

Krumwiede, 85 

kuru, 142 

Kwan Sui Chu, 181, 186 

Kwong Wah Hospital, 176 

Laboratory of Tumor and Cell Biology, 

144 

Lacy, William, 56 

Ladies Home Journal , 75 

Lagos, Nigeria, 216, 222 

Laidlaw, Patrick, 29 

Lajun family, 37–9, 62 

Lamah, Rémy, 203 

Lancet , The , 17, 185, 242, 246 

Langmuir, Alexander D., 105, 120 

Lanham, Robert, 83 

Lassa Fever, 105, 114, 198, 199, 

200–201, 209, 210, 212, 215, 225 

Lattimer, Gary, 113–14 

Lebailly, Charles, 20–22, 34 

Lederberg, Joshua, 166 

legionellae, 125–33, 186 ( see also 

Legionnaires’ disease) 

bozemanii , 126 

micdadei , 126 

pneumophila , xvii, 125–7, 129, 130, 

132 INDEX 

319 

legionellosis, 132 

Legionnaires’ disease, xviii, 99–120, 

121–34, 139, 178, 180, 184, 186, 

262, 268, 282 n

acquired immunity to, 129 

age and, 128 

climate and, 132 

conspiracy theories about, 107, 110 

environmental causes and factors and, 

127–8, 130, 133 

etiology of, 119, 121, 125 

in Flint, Michigan, 132 

gender and, 128–9 

in hospitals, 129 

human behaviour and, 131 

incidence in the United States, 128 

McDade, puzzle solved by, 123–6 

as ‘missed alarm’, 133 

moral panic over, 118 

onset of, 105 

panic about, 106–7 

press and, 105–6, 110, 117, 118, 

120, 123, 126 

smoking and, 128–9 

technology and, 129, 130, 131, 133 

toxic substance theory and, 110, 115, 

116–19 

transmission of, 123–33 

lentiviruses, 141–2 

Leong Hoe Nam, 181 

Léopoldville (Kinshasa), 140, 158, 160, 

161, 162, 163, 164 

leukaemia, 142–5 

leukocytes, 4 

Leviathan , 24–5 

Levinthal, Walter, 85 

‘Levinthal-Coles-Lillie (LCL) bodies’, 

85, 94 

Lewis, Sinclair, 75, 279 n

Lewisburg Hospital, 101 

Liberia, xiii, xxi, 198, 200, 201, 202, 

208, 214–222, 224, 293 n

air service cancellations, 217 

civil war in, 208, 215, 225 

distrust of foreign medical aid in, 219 

firebombing of Emergency 

Operations Center, 216 

Lillie, Ralph, 85 

Lim, Wilimina, 178, 184–5 

‘line lists’, 104, 105, 107, 109, 112 

Lister Institute, 85, 274 n

Liu, Joanne, 217, 218, 220 

Liu Jianlun, 176, 181, 183, 190 

London, England 

Ebola in, xiii 

psittacosis in, 71, 74 

‘Russian flu’ in, 17 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 26–7 

London School of Hygiene and Tropical 

Medicine, 224, 241, 248, 249 

Longman, Miguel, 253 

Los Angeles, California 

AIDS in, xvii, 135–6, 141, 152–4 

control measures in, 50–55, 58–9, 

62, 64, 262 

Legionnaires’ disease in, 126 

Mexican quarter of, 37–9, 50, 51, 

53–4, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 262 

plague in, xviii, 37–66, 91, 262 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 72, 79, 

89, 91 

reputation of, 52 

rodent extermination measures in, 

58, 59–60 

tourism industry in, 52 

Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, 40, 

52, 54, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61 

Los Angeles City Health Department, 

56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 62 

Los Angeles Realtor , 56 

Los Angeles Times , 38, 51, 55, 72 

Louisiana, United States, 9, 61, 93 

Lucas, Frederic, xi 

Ludwig, Carl, 12 INDEX 

320 

lung infections, 3–4, 5–6, 7, 14, 23, 32 

Luz, Kleber, 231–2, 235, 237–8 

lymphatic system, 41, 47, 68, 135–7, 

140–47, 156, 158, 284 n, 289 n

lymphadenopathy, 136–7, 146–7 

lymphadenopathy associated virus 

(LAV), 144–5, 147, 156 

lymphocytes, 15, 135, 140–42, 

143–7, 213, 236, 284 n, 289 n

lymphoma, 142, 144, 156 

lymphocytic choriomeningitis , 116 

macrophages, 128, 135 

Madagascar, 265 

Madrid, Spain, xiii 

malaria, 225, 253, 264 

in Africa, 142, 161, 163, 198, 199, 

206, 213 

Armstrong’s contraction of, 77 

Athens, plague of, xxi 

in Hong Kong, 168, 169 

Meyer’s contraction of, 86 

Malaysia, 234 

Mama Yemo Hospital, 156, 163 

Manchuria, 47–9 

Maner, George, 40, 50, 57 

Mann, Jonathan, 157 

Marburg virus, 114, 160, 200, 203, 240 

Marks, Lara, 285 n

Marques, Ernesto, 236–9, 246–7, 250 

Martin family, 67–8, 70, 78 

Martin, Willis P., 67–8, 71 

Martinique, 231 

Maryland, United States, 30, 67, 82, 

126, 143, 280 n, 291 n, 304 

Mas, Carmen, 70 

mass immunization campaigns, 103, 

117, 121–2, 160 

Masters, William, 151 

Matadi-Leo railway, 162 

Mayibout, Gabon, 203 

Mbeki, Thabo, 159, 288 n

McCoy, George, 43–5, 58, 68–9, 71, 

77, 81–4, 88, 93 

McDade, Joe, 115–16, 123–6, 129, 

131–2, 183 

McKay, Richard, 152 

McNeil, Donald, 233 

measles, xx, 3, 4–5, 7, 11–13, 122, 184, 

200, 262 

Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), 199, 

200, 201, 202, 207–9, 212, 213, 216, 

217, 219–20, 223 

media ( see also specific outlets )

and AIDS, 150, 151, 152 

and Ebola, 218 

irrational and prejudical judgments, 

source of, xix 

and Legionnaires’ disease, 105–6, 

110, 117, 118, 120, 123, 126 

and panic, xix, 52, 65, 74–6 

and plague, 50, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 65 

and psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 68–9, 

74–6, 78, 86, 93, 96 

and SARS, 187, 189 

and ‘Spanish flu’, 8, 26 

and swine flu, 103, 117 

and undulant fever, 75 

and Zika, 232 

medical community 

and AIDS panic, 149–51 

and complacency, 139, 196, 261, 264 

irrational and prejudical judgments 

by, xix 

and hubris, xvii, 165, 265 

medical detection, 236 

medical education, 12 

medical knowledge, as source of panic, 

xviii–xix 

medical microbiology, xv 

medical prognostication, limitations of, 

261 

medical research, funding of, 93 

medical technologies INDEX 

321 

AIDS and, 135, 139–44, 152, 165, 

166 

human behavior and, 131 

Legionnaires’ disease and, 129, 131 

SARS and, 178 

Zika and, 244 

mega-cities, 261 

Meister, Joseph, 18 

Meliandou, Guinea, xiii, xx, 197–8, 

225, 226, 263 

Melo, Adrian, 239 

Mende, 205 

Mendinor, Finda, 209, 211 

Menina dos Olhos rehabilitation center, 

254 

merbromin, 55 n

Mercurochrome solution, 55 

‘messenger’ molecules, 143 

Metabiota, 211 

metapneumovirus, 183, 185–6 

Metropole Hotel, Hong Kong, xviii, 

176–7, 181–2, 190–91, 194 

Mexico 

bird trade, 72 

chikungunya in, 259 n

swine flu in, xiii, 265–6 

Zika in, 240, 244 

Meyer, Karl Friedrich, 86–8, 278–9 n

and plague, 58, 60, 61, 63–4 

and psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 

88–92, 94–7, 113, 279 n

Miami, Florida 

AIDS in, 155, 164 

Zika in, 244–5 

Michael (AIDS patient), 135–6, 141–2 

microbes, xv–xvii ( see also specific kinds of 

microbes )

drug-resistant, 264 

evolution of, xv 

immune systems and, xvi 

mutability of, 261 

mutation of, xv 

weak or attenuated, 18 

microbiology, xv, 18, 75, 152, 171, 172, 

174, 266 

and Japanese encephalitis 171 

and Legionnaires’ disease, xvii, 114, 

115, 119, 123, 131 

and SARS, xviii, 178, 183, 185, 186 

and Zika, 236 

microcephaly, 228–9, 237–43, 245–52, 

254–7 

Micronesia, 232, 234, 252 

microparasites, 165, 289 n

microscopes, xvi, 12–13 

Bacillus influenzae  and 8, 15 

electron microscopes, 29, 114, 183, 

185, 233 

influenza virus and, 29 

LCL bodies and, 85, 94 

Legionnaires’ disease and, 114, 116, 

123, 131 

plague and, 40 

pneumococcal bacteria and, 3 

rabies and, 18 

SARS and, 183, 185 

Zika and, 233 

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 

(MERS), 202, 292 n

Mildvan, Donna, 137 

Millstein, César, 142 

Mitterrand, François, 145 

Mobutu, Joseph, 206 

Moigboi, Alex, 213 

Mok, Esther, 181 

molecular biology, xv, 143 

molecular clocks, 31, 158, 164, 264 

monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) technol -

ogy, 135, 142, 285 n

Monrovia, Liberia, xiii, 208, 211, 214, 

215–20, 226, 263, 295–6 n

Montagnier, Luc, 140, 144–8, 156 

Monteiro, Andre, 253–4 

Moral Majority, 141 INDEX 

322 

Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report , 125, 

138, 145, 151 

Morens, David, 34, 266 

Morse, Stephen, 165–6 

mortuary practices, xxi, 63, 198, 204–7, 

209, 221 

mosquitoes, 229–30, 262 

Aedes , 229–30, 233, 244, 245, 249, 

251–3, 258–9, 279 n

in Brazil, 240, 243–5, 247, 248, 249, 

251–4, 256–9 

and chikungunya, 229, 230 

Culex , 171, 230, 251–2, 279 n

and dengue, 201, 229, 230, 236 

and equine encephalitis, 88, 279 n

in French Polynesia, 235, 252 

in Hong Kong, 168, 169 

in Indonesia, 234, 252 

and Japanese encephalitis, 171–2 

and malaria, 168, 169, 199 

and yellow fever, 201, 229, 230, 233 

in Uganda, 233, 251 

and Zika, xix, 233–5, 240, 243–5, 

247, 248, 249, 251–4, 256–9 

mourning rituals, 204, 209 

mouse leukaemia, 142 

‘Mr  CT’ 178–9 

Mulford Laboratories, Philadelphia, 56 

multidrug-resistant diseases, 264 

multifactorial models of disease, 

epidemiology and, 152 

Murphy, John M., 117 

Muyembe-Tamfum, Jean-Jacques, 206–7 

mycology, 114 

Mycoplasma pneumoniae , 103 

mycoplasma, 101, 103, 114, 183 

mycosis fugoides , 144 

myxomatosis, 19 

N95 masks, 179, 187, 190 

Natal, Brazil, 231, 232, 235, 238, 246 

National Academy of Sciences, 261, 291 n

National Cancer Institute, 143, 156 

National Geographic , 72 

National Influenza Immunization 

Program, 103 

National Institute for Biomedical 

Research (INRB), 206 

National Institute of Allergy and 

Infectious Diseases (NIAID), 150 

National Institute(s) of Health (NIH), 

93, 140, 143, 149, 153, 184 

AIDS and, 140, 143, 149, 153 

GenBank, 184, 185 

National Cancer Institute, 143, 156 

National Review , 154 

Nature , 158, 246 

neuraminidase (NA), 29 

nebulizers, 179 

needle sharing, 155 

neurological disorders, Zika and, 228, 

236–40, 242, 243, 245, 248, 250 

neurotrophic viruses, 77 

New Caledonia, 235, 246 

New England Journal of Medicine , 137–8, 

242 

New Kru Town, Liberia, 211, 215 

New Orleans, Louisiana, plague in, 61 

New York, United States, 87 

AIDS in, 137, 140, 146 n, 151, 153, 

154, 155, 161, 164, 165 

Asian tiger mosquitoes, 251 

Board of Health, xiv, 85 

City Health Department, 14 

Ebola in, xiii 

Legionnaires’ disease in, 132 

polio in, xi, xiv 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 68, 70, 

72, 79, 85, 86, 92, 113 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 23–5, 272 

New York American , 70 

New York  EveningWorld News , 56 

New York  Native , 149 

New York Sun , xi INDEX 

323 

New Yo rk Times , 75, 76, 78, 123, 220, 233 

New Yorker , 218 

Nicholls, John, 183 

nickel carbonyl, 110, 111, 115, 116–17, 

119 

Nicolle, Charles, 19–22, 34 

Nigeria, 10, 158, 159, 216 

Nipah, 193 

Nixon, Richard, 106, 107 

Nocard, Edmond, 74, 80, 84, 96 

Norway, 276 n

Nottingham, England, 126 

Novy, Frederick, 86 

nuclear energy, 118 

Oakland, California, 44, 46, 49, 53, 58, 

61, 63, 125 

Obama, Barack, 219, 222 

Oerlichs, Hermann, xi 

old age, immunity and, xvi 

Olympic Games, xii, 241, 243–5 

oncology, 140, 142, 144 

oncoviruses, 142–5, 285 n

Opie, Eugenie L., 5, 7, 9 

Oran, Algeria, 1 

‘original antigenic sin’, 33 

ornithosis, 72 n

Orthomyxoviridae  family, 28 

Osler, William, 4, 12 

Osvaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), 

229, 236–7, 239, 247, 251, 253 

Ott, Alexander, xi–xii 

Ouamouno, Emile, 197–8, 226 

outbreak investigations 

management of, 104 

questions asked during, 110 

overcrowding, 3, 26, 34, 38, 49, 63, 70, 

262 

overpopulation, 97 

Owen, Wilfred, 8 

Oxford, John, 271 n, 303 

Paki stan, 159 

Pan American Health Organization 

(PAHO), 231, 235, 240 

pandemic century, 261 

pandemics 

as ‘bioterrorism’, 188, 194 

climate and, 49, 65 

definition of, xiii n

environmental causes and factors, 

165–6 

human contributions to, 165–6, 261 

war and, xxi 

panic, xiii, xiv, xviii, xix 

AIDS and, xviii, 140, 148, 151 

avian influenza and, xiii, 174 

Ebola, xviii, xix, 200, 213, 218, 224 

Legionnaires’ disease, xviii, 106, 118 

media and, xix, 52, 65, 74–5 

plague and, 40, 50, 52, 61, 65 

polio and, xiv 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) and, xviii, 

74, 75, 84, 86 

SARS and, xiii, 175, 186, 187, 190 

‘Spanish flu’ and, 25, 26, 35, 266 

swine flu, 103, 266 

undulant fever and, 75 

Zika and, 241, 244, 245 

Papua New Guinea, 142 

Pará, Brazil, 239 

paradigms, xv, 16 

Paraíba, Brazil, 239 

paramyxovirus, 184, 185 

paranoid style, 117 

paraquat, 110, 111 

parasitism, 11, 95, 97, 165, 289 n

and AIDS, 141, 157, 160, 161 

and Ebola, 199 

and Legionnaires’ disease, 127 

and plague, 41, 43–5, 64–5 

and pneumonias, 3 

and psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 73–4, 

86, 95, 97 

and Q fever, 115 INDEX 

324 

and toxoplasmosis, 228 

parasitology, xv, 114, 177 

Paravincini, Florencia, 70 

Park, William H., 14, 25 

Parkin, William, 106 

Parrish, George, 61–2 

‘parrot fever’,  see  psittacosis 

Pascoe, Elmer, 51, 56, 57 

passage experiments, 21, 69 

Pasteur, Louis, xv, 16, 18–19, 21, 40, 

21, 74, 75, 123, 261, 282 n

Pasteurella pestis , 40 

Pasteur Institute, 140, 144–6, 201–2 

pasteurization, 75 

pathogens, xv ( see also specific kinds of 

pathogens )

ecology of, xx 

human impact on evolution of, 165–6 

identifying, xvi 

mutation of, 165–6 

spillover mechanisms, xx, 65, 96, 97, 

160, 225, 288 n

pathology, xiv, 86, 104 

of avian influenza, 174, 265 

of Legionnaires’ disease, 106, 107, 

110, 114, 121, 131 

of SARS, 183, 185 

of Zika, 242, 257 

pathophysiology, 28, 265 

‘patient zero’, 152, 154, 165 

Paul, John R., xiv 

Peiris, Malik, 171–2, 174–5, 177, 178, 

182–6, 190–91, 192, 194 

penicillin, 102, 131 

Pennsylvania, United States 

flu immunization campaign, 122 

fowl plague in, 172 

Legionnaires’ disease in, xvii, 99–120 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 26 

State Health Department, 104 

pentamidine, 138 

People , 154 

Pepin, Jacques, 161, 163, 164 

Pericles, xxi 

Pernambuco, Brazil, 228–9, 235, 237–8, 

246, 248, 250–51, 255–6, 258 

Health Department, 228, 235, 238, 

248 

Perry, James, 50, 57–8, 60 

Pershing, John, 1, 100 

personal hygiene, 75 

Pfeiffer, Richard, xvi, 8, 14–17, 19, 20, 

74, 103 

phagocytes, 3, 102 

pharmaceutical companies, 2, 82, 102, 

104, 117, 141, 225, 266, 296 n

pheasants, 174 

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Legionnaires’ disease in, xvii, 99–120 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 26 

Philadelphia Inquirer , 26 

phosgene gas, 110–11 

‘Pigtown’, New York, xiv 

Piot, Peter, 156, 217, 224, 287 n

Pitié-Salpétrière Hospital, Paris, 146 

plague, xiv, 14, 16, 37–66, 68, 87, 103, 

107, 168, 274 n, 276 n

animal transmission of, 38, 41, 

43–50, 52, 57–66, 274 n, 276 n

antibiotic treatment for, 65 

bubonic, 41–4, 46, 48, 49, 61, 63, 

65–6, 68, 87, 168, 274 n

in California, 37–66 

climate and, 48–9, 52, 63, 65, 276 n

ecology of, 43, 44, 46 

in Hong Kong, 41, 168 

panic and, 40, 50, 52, 61 

pneumonic, xviii, 37–66, 91, 240, 

265, 274 n

septicemic, 41, 46, 63 

serum, 50, 52–3, 55–6 

sylvatic, 49, 61, 64–5, 87 

topography and, 65 

vaccines against, xiv, 50, 52 INDEX 

325 

weather and, 42, 43–4, 48–9, 63, 65 

plasma clotting factors, 164 

pneumococcal bacteria ( Steptococcus 

pneumoniae ), 3, 5, 15, 16, 17 

Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia  (PCP), 

136–8, 151, 153, 155–7, 165, 284 n

Pneumocystis jirovecii , 284 n

pneumonia, xx, 3–5, 6, 7, 10, 11–12, 

13, 14, 15, 23, 25, 31–5, 132 

AIDS and, 136, 137, 138 

antibiotics and, 20 

bronchial, 4, 11, 14, 31–2, 34 

as ‘Captain of the Men of Death’, 4 

causes of, 3, 31–3, 103, 131, 132 

ceases being interesting field of 

research, 102 

community-acquired, xx, 3, 132, 

179, 181 

and cyanosis, 23, 33, 40, 50 

diagnostic tests for, 131 

‘double pneumonia’, 37, 39 

fatalities, decrease in, 102 

as ‘filter-passer’, 19 

Legionnaires’ disease and, xvii, 

101–9, 111, 112, 114–16, 119, 

125–6, 128–32 

lobar, 5, 7, 11, 14, 15 

mycoplasmal, 101, 114 

plague and, 37, 39, 40, 42, 46, 50, 

51, 56 

pnemococcal, 3, 5, 15, 16, 17 

post-influenzal, 7, 9, 32, 172, 270 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) and, 68, 

78, 81, 85, 89, 96 

SARS and, 175, 176, 178, 179, 181 

streptococci and, xx 

treatment for, 102, 130–31 

vaccines, 16 

Victorian and Edwardian periods, 4 

pneumonic plague, xviii, 37–66, 91, 

240, 265, 274 n

‘pneumotyphus’, 73 

polio, xi, xiv–xv, xx, 24, 77, 82, 121, 

122, 159, 202, 220, 240 

AIDS and, 159 

childhood immunizing infections, xv, 

xx 

in New York, xiv, 24 

nonparalytic, xiv n

in Sweden, xiv 

in Syria, 202 

transmission of, xiv 

vaccines against, xv, 121, 122, 159 

poliomyelitis, xiv 

polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests, 

158, 185, 211, 215, 235, 239 

polysaccharide capsules, 3, 15, 102 

Pomeroy, J.  L., 53, 54 

Pontiac, Michigan, 103, 125–6, 130, 

132 

Pooley, Will, 212–14 

Poon, Leo, 184 

‘poppers’, 137, 153, 284 n

population mobility, Ebola and, 225 

Poro , 205 

Port-au-Prince, Haiti, 155 

Porter, Giles, 37, 91–2 

Port of Los Angeles, 52, 57–9, 61, 63 

Pottinger, Henry, 168 

Powers, Luther, 50 

PPE (personal protective equipment), 

213 

pregnancy 

AIDS and, 157 

Ebola and, 211 

Zika and, 228, 238–40, 243–5, 

248–50 

press,  see  media 

Preston, Richard, 218 

preventive medicine, 266 

primates, 204, 218, 264 

Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, 

178–9, 191 

prions, 142 INDEX 

326 

Program for Monitoring Emerging 

Diseases (ProMED), 182 

Progressive Era, 75 

Project SIDA , 157 

prostitution, xx, 109, 140, 157–8, 

163–4 

protozoa, 127, 289 n

proviruses, 143 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), xviii, 67–97, 

113–14, 115, 139, 262, 268 n

animal transmission of, 72, 73, 

79–81, 85, 95 

in Argentina, 68–71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 

90, 94, 95, 96 

asymptomatic carriers of, 80, 90 

ecological factors and, 97 

epizootics, 73, 80 n, 95, 96 

as ‘filter-passer’, 79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 

85, 88, 91 

inherited immunity to, 92 

Legionnaires’ disease and, 113–14, 

115 

media and, 68–9, 74–6, 78, 86, 93, 

96 

overcrowding and, 70, 97 

panic about, xviii, 74, 75–6, 84, 86 

pneumonia and, 68, 78, 81, 85, 89, 

96 

respiratory transmission of, 80 

serum for, 69, 81–2, 84, 93 

viral vs. bacterial infection, 77 

women as majority of victims, 79, 84 

public health, new paradigm in, 133 

Public Health Agency of Canada, 296 n

public health emergencies of interna -

tional concern (PHEIC), 212, 217, 

240–43, 245, 261 

public health profession, complacency 

of, 139, 196 ( see also specific 

organizations )

Public Ledger , 56 

‘purulent bronchitis’, 5, 271 n

pygmies, 160 

Q fever, 77, 106, 115–16, 281 n

Quammen, David, xx n, 288 n

quarantines 

Ebola and, 219, 221 

ethnic, 53 

plague and, 47, 50–55, 58–61 

and polio, xiv 

and psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 90, 

92, 96 

SARS and, 178, 180, 186–9, 194, 195 

and ‘Spanish flu’, 24, 25, 27, 76 

Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, 171, 

178, 183 

rabbit myxomatosis, 19 

rabies virus, xv, 18, 21, 29 

Ralph, John Bryant, 109 

Randsell Act, 93 

Rask, Grethe, 157 

Reagan, Ronald, 145, 149 

Recife, Brazil, 227–9, 232, 236, 244–9, 

251–5, 257–9 

hydrology in, 253 

Red Cross, 207 

Reed, Walter, 19 

Reeves, William, 279 n

religious beliefs, xxi, 63, 198, 204–7, 

209, 221 

Republic of the Congo, 201, 203 ( see also 

French Congo) 

residential developments, encroachment 

of, 66 

respiratory diseases, 3 ( see also specific 

diseases )

respiratory technology, 102 

Reston, Virginia, 204, 218 

retroviruses, 140–48, 159, 165, 263, 

285 n

reverse genetics, 32 

reverse transcriptase, 143, 144, 147 INDEX 

327 

Re volutionary United Front (RUF), 210 

Reye’s syndrome, 172 

ribonucleic acid (RNA), 22, 29, 143, 

158, 203, 233, 235, 263 n

rickettsia  family, 19, 113, 115–16, 124, 

126, 131, 264 

rifampicin, 113, 131, 132 

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 231, 241, 243–5, 

246, 253 

Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil, 231, 238 

Rio Park hotel, Benidorm, 126 

risks, unforeseen, 262, 265 

Ritter, Jacob, 73 

Rivers, Thomas, 5, 7, 9, 80, 85 

Rizzo, Frank, 107, 109 

Robert Koch Institute, 85 

Roche, 175 

Rockefeller Foundation, 233, 244 

Rockefeller Institute, xvii, 5, 14, 22, 75, 

80, 85, 87, 166, 275 n

Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 19, 113, 

115 

rodent-borne illnesses, 41–6, 52, 

58–61, 63–5, 87, 105, 165, 264, 274 

Rodrigues, Laura, 249 

Rolland, William, 6 

Rollin, Pierre, 223–4, 263 

Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, xv, 168 

Rosenau, Milton, 10 

Roux, Emile, 19, 20, 22 

Royal Air Force, 214 

Royal College of Physicians (Britain), 17 

Royal Free Hospital, London, 214 

Royal Society (Britain), 195 

Rucker, William Colby, 44 

Rumsfeld, Donald, xix n, 264, 267–8 n

Russian influenza pandemic, 4, 8, 16, 

17, 31, 33, 103 

Rutherford, Greg, 244 

rVSV vaccine, 296 n

Rwanda, 157, 159 

Sabin, Al bert, 121 

Sadiki Hospital, Tunis, 20 

Salk, Jonas, 121 

salmonella, 74, 83, 84, 96 

Salvador, Brazil, 229, 232, 235 

Samarano family, 37–40, 51, 53–5 

Samaritan’s Purse, 214, 215–17 

Sande , 205 

San Francisco, California 

AIDS in, 140, 150, 153, 154, 155, 

161, 164, 165 

plague in, 43–5, 47, 49, 56, 58–9, 

68, 87 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 25 

San Francisco AIDS Foundation, 154 

sanitation, 75, 229, 251, 253, 256 

Sankoh, Foday, 210 

San Luis Obispo, California, 45, 61, 63, 

90 

Sanofi Pasteur, 231 

San Pedro, Los Angeles, 52, 57, 58, 61 

São Paolo, Brazil, 231, 246 

Saudi Arabia, 202, 292 n

Sawyer, Patrick, 216, 222 

Scarborough, England, 8 

Scarborough Grace Hospital, 181, 

186–7 

Schachter, Julius, 113, 281 n

Schaeffer, Louise, 78 

schistosomiasis, 161 

Schoepp, Randal J., 201, 293 n

Science , 145–7 

scientific authority, public acceptance of, 

122 

scientific community 

AIDS panic, responsibility for 149–51 

complacency of, 139, 196 

networks, xviii 

scientific knowledge, xv, xix, 16, 264, 

266, 303 

scientific medicine, distrust of, xxi 

Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhongshan 

Medical University, 176, 178 INDEX 

328 

secret societies, 204 

Sencer, David J., 99, 102, 104, 105, 122, 

123, 125 

septicemic plague, 41, 46, 63 

septicimia, 7 

seroconversion, 141, 184 

serogroups, 127 

serology tests, 31, 104, 183, 257 

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 

(SARS), xiii, 167–96, 200, 202, 222, 

240, 242, 261, 265 

animal origins of, 185, 192–3, 263 

contagiousness of, 199–200 

coronaviruses, xviii, 185–6, 190, 

191–2, 193, 195, 263 

and ‘cytokine storms’, 33 

diagnostic tests for, 178, 186, 187, 

190 

globalization and, 194 

in Guangzhou, 171, 174–5 

as ‘jetset disease’, 194 

the media and, 187, 189 

panic about, xiii 

persistence in animal reservoirs, 195 

quarantines and, 178, 180, 186–9, 

194, 195 

as ‘super spreader event’, 178, 191 

suspect and probable cases of, 291 n

transmission of, 180–82, 187, 

190–93 

sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), 

136, 138, 152, 153, 161, 163, 164, 

263 

Shandera, Wayne, 136–7 

sharks, xi–xiii, xiv, 51, 147, 257–8, 261, 

267 

Sharrar, Robert, 101–2, 109–10, 112 

Sha Tin, China, 178 

Shaw, George Bernard, xvi–xvii 

Shenzhen, China, 169, 170, 192 

Shepard, Charles, 115–16, 123–5 

Shilts, Randy, 150, 152, 154 

Shortridge, Ken, 174 

Sierra Leone, xiii, 198, 201, 208, 

209–14, 217, 220, 221, 223, 224, 

293 n, 303 

air service cancellations, 217 

civil war, xxi, 208, 210 

distrust of foreign medical aid in, 208 

Ebola in, xiii, 198, 201, 208, 209–14, 

217, 220, 221, 223, 224, 293 n, 303 

Lassa Fever in, 105 

Ministry of Health, 211, 263 n

‘Spanish flu’ in, 10 

Sierra Leone People’s Party, 212 

simian foamy virus (SFV), 160 

simian immune-deficiency viruses 

(SIVs), 160–63, 288 n

Simond, Paul-Louis, 274 n

Singapore, 176, 181, 184, 189, 194 

Sirleaf, Ellen Johnson, 216–20 

Sirr, Henry Charles, 167 

60 Minutes , 154 

Skillings, Clifton, 9–10 

Skinner, Henry, xi 

slave trade, 70, 208, 217, 229, 258–9 

smallpox, xxi, 18, 23, 53, 69, 118, 165, 

168, 240, 262 

Smith, Theobald, 86–7 

social causes and factors, xiv, xvii, xix, 

165 

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 

Animals, 79 

Sondelius, Gustaf, 279 n

Sontag, Susan, 148, 266 

South Africa, 28, 86, 159 

South America 

arboviruses in, 229–31, 262 

chikungunya in, 231–2 

cholera in, 229 

dengue in, 230–31 

mega-cities in, 261 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 70–71, 

72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 90, 94, 95, 96 INDEX 

329 

yellow f ever in, 230 

Zika in, xiii, 227–9, 232–3, 235–59 

Southeast Asia 

avian influenza in, xiii, 30, 33, 177, 

265 

chikungunya in, 259 

malaria in, 264 

SARS in, 176, 181, 184, 189, 194 

tuberculosis in, 264 

‘Spanish flu’, xiii, xv, 1–35, 40, 50, 51, 

69, 102, 103, 174, 265, 266, 272 n,

290 n, 303 

age and, 28, 34 

cyanosis and, 5–6, 11, 12, 23, 27, 33, 

40, 272 

downplayed by public health officials, 

24 

epidemiology of, 34–5 

genome of, 30, 290 n

H1N1, status as, 31, 33, 102, 265, 

266 

immune response to, 33 

media and, 8, 26 

morbidity and mortality patterns, 28, 

32–5 

panic about, 25, 26, 35, 266 

second wave of, 10, 24 

unusual pathology, 28, 34, 35 

virulence of, 11, 24, 26, 33, 35, 265 

World War I and, xxi, 1–15, 20, 22, 

24, 26, 28, 35, 272 n

Spartans, xxi 

Speakes, Larry, 149 

Spencer, Roscoe, 82, 84 

spillover mechanisms, xx, 65, 96, 97, 

160, 225, 288 n

Sprecher, Armand, 208–9, 220 

Sri Lanka, 171–2 

Stanleyville (Kisangani), 162 

staphylococcus, 3, 16 

steamships, xx, 43, 162 

St Elizabeth’s Me ntal Hospital, 

Washington, DC, 103, 119, 125, 130 

Stimson, Henry, 76 

St Louis, Missouri, 77 

Stocking, Barbara, 223 

Stohr, Klaus, 175, 184 

Stokes, Christopher, 223 

Stokes, William Royal, 77, 79, 80, 84 

strep throat, 3 

streptococci, xx, 3, 16, 17, 83 

stress, dormant infections and, xvi 

Strong, Richard, 48 

Sudan, 203, 204 

Sun , 151 

Sunderman, William F., 116, 117 

Sunnybrook Hospital, Toronto, 188 

‘super spreaders’, 154, 178, 191, 195 

Sweden, xiv 

swine flu, 30, 102, 103–4, 106, 117, 

121–2, 123, 130, 173, 265–6 

Ford’s warning of outbreak, 121 

at Fort Dix, New Jersey, xviii, 102, 

103–4, 122 

media and, 103, 117 

in Mexico, xiii, 265–6 

panic over, 103, 266 

vaccinations for, xiii, 102, 103, 104, 

117, 121–3, 266 

syncretistic beliefs and practices, 205 

syphilis, 37, 161, 163, 228, 255 

Syria, 202 

syringes, 139, 161, 192 

Tahiti, 234 

Tai Ping Shan, Hong Kong, 168 

Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 296 n

Tamba Kula, Sierra Leone, 221 

Tamiflu, 175 

Tandala Mission Hospital, Congo, 204 

Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 181 

tartar emetic, 161 

Taubenberger, Jeffery, 30, 34, 266, 290 n

Tax, 144 

T cell lymphoma, 144 INDEX 

330 

T cells, 135, 140–42, 144, 146–7, 236, 

284 

Teague, Oscar, 48 

technologies, xv, xvii, xix, 16, 261–2 

AIDS and, 139, 140, 141–2, 144, 

152, 165, 263 

Legionnaires’ disease and, 129, 130, 

131, 133 

overreliance on, xix 

Temin, Howard, 143 

tenements, xiv, 24, 26 

tetracycline, 96, 113 

Texas Cattle Fever, 86 

Thacker, Stephen, 106 

Thailand, 177 

Theiler, Arnold, 86 

thrush, 135, 136, 137, 138, 165 

Thucydides, xxi, 261 

tick-borne diseases, 19, 68, 82, 86, 113 

Time , 151 

tobacco mosaic disease, 19 

Toledo, Ohio, 78 

Tomes, Nancy, 75 

topography, 65, 168 

Toronto, Canada, 176, 181, 186–8, 194 

toxicology, 114 

trade, xxi, 42, 97, 189, 225 

training camps, xxi, 5, 28 

travel, xx, xxi, 97, 166, 194, 198, 222, 

225, 259, 262 

bans on, xiv, 216–17 

warnings against, 177, 188–9, 217, 

242, 243, 244 

‘Trojan horses’, 97, 127, 173, 250 

Trump, Donald, 217, 223 

Tsai, Theodore, 154 

Tsang Ho-fai, Thomas, 179–82 

tuberculosis, xv, 4, 16, 102, 118, 186, 

187 

multidrug-resistant, 264 

Tulane University, 201, 210–11 

tularaemia, 68, 77 

Tunisia, 19, 20, 34 

Turchi, Celina, 247–51 

Tufts Medical School, 25 

typhoid, xiv, xvi, 16, 67, 68, 70, 71, 74, 

84, 85, 89, 152, 168, 206 

Typhoid Mary, 152 

typhus, xxi, 7, 19–20, 53, 73, 76, 113, 

115 

Uganda, 142, 156, 203, 204, 233, 251 

Uganda Virus Research Institute, 233 

uncertainty, 16, 34, 266, 268 n

undulant fever, 75 

United Kingdom 

AIDS in, 151 

doctor-inhabitant ratio, 214 

Ebola and, 216, 222 

influenza in, xiii 

Legionnaires’ disease in, 126 

National Institute for Medical 

Research, 29, 34, 233 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 71 

‘Russian flu’ in, 4 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 6 

United Nations, 164, 177, 202, 222, 

287 n

United States 

AIDS in, 135–56 

Biological Threats Department of 

White House, 237 

Ebola and, 217, 219, 222 

Legionnaires’ disease in, 99–120, 

121–34 

plague in, 37–66 

polio in, xi, xiv–xv, 24 

psittacosis (‘parrot fever’) in, 67–97 

‘Spanish flu’ in, 1–35 

swine flu in, xviii, 102, 103–4, 106, 

117, 121–3, 130 

Zika in, 243, 244–5, 246 

United States Army 

African Americans in, 9 INDEX 

331 

growth of during World War I, 3 

immunological profiles of recruits, 2, 

3

measles in, 4–5, 11, 12, 13 

Medical Research Institute of 

Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID), 

201, 291 

pneumonia in, 4–5, 6, 7, 9–14 

Rockefeller Institute and, 22 

‘Spanish flu’ in, xxi, 1–28 

swine flu in, xviii, 102, 103–4, 106, 

122 

training camps, xxi, 1–28 

United States Congress, 5, 38, 56, 61, 

93, 102, 117, 121, 133, 222, 245 

United States Defense Threat Reduction 

Agency, 296 n

United States Department of Health and 

Human Sciences, 145 

United States germ warfare program, 

280 n

United States Naval Hospital, 69, 81 

United States Navy, 3, 10 

United States Public Health Service 

(PHS) 

Hygienic Laboratory, 10, 68, 82, 85, 

91 

and plague, 43, 45, 50, 56–7, 58–62, 

64 

and psittacosis (‘parrot fever’), 68, 

69, 77, 93, 94 

reputation of, 106 

Rocky Mountain Laboratory, 82 

and ‘Spanish flu’, 10 

United States Senate, 121, 149 

United States Treasury, 47 

University of Arizona, 158 

University of California, 135–6, 141, 

151, 155, 159, 189, 263 

University of Kinshasa, 158 

University of Pittsburgh, 25, 236 

Urbani, Carlo, 177, 181 

urbanization, 169, 249, 261 

USA Today , 150 

Va’a World Sprint Championship, 246 

vaccines, xiv, xv, xvi, xviii, 16, 18, 23, 

24, 139, 166, 266, 282 n

AIDS and, 159 

anthrax, xv 

chick egg embryo cultivation, 23, 

282 n

chikungunya, 230 

cholera, xiv, xvi, 16 

conspiracy theories and, 159, 248–9, 

266 

dengue, 230, 231, 236, 237 

diphtheria, xvi 

distrust of, 122–3, 159–60, 238, 247, 

248–9 

Ebola, 200, 225, 241, 296 n

hepatitis B, 153 

influenza, xiii, xvi, 5, 8, 16, 20, 23, 

25, 102, 103, 104, 117, 121–3, 

266 

manufacturers of, 102, 117, 266, 

296 n

plague, xiv, 16, 50, 52, 56 

pneumonia, 5, 16 

polio, xv, 77, 121, 159 

smallpox, 18, 69 

rabies, xv, 18 

rubella, 238, 247 

spotted fever, 82 

swine flu, xiii, 102, 103, 104, 117, 

121–3, 266 

typhoid, xiv, xvi, 16 

typhus, 20 

yellow fever, 230, 250 

Zika, 237, 243, 245 

Valdahon, France, 7 

Vancouver, Canada, 181, 188 

Van der Linden, Vanessa, 228, 237 

Van Herp, Michael, 199–202 INDEX 

332 

Vargas, Getúl io, 244 

Vansant, Charles Epting, xi 

Vaughan, Victor, 4–5, 12–13, 15 

vector-borne diseases, 97, 114 ( see also 

animals, as disease vectors) 

Venezuela, 240 

Ventura, Liana, 255, 257 

Ventura, Marcelo, 255 

Veterans Administration Clinic, 103 

veterinarians, 86, 87, 88, 95, 96, 113, 

172 

Vietnam, 10, 118, 170, 176–7, 184, 

189, 262, 303 

‘village of the ancestors’, 205 

viruses 

amplification of, xxi, 63, 139, 

158–65, 172, 202, 224, 261 

arboviruses, 229, 231–2, 237, 240, 

249, 252–3, 258–9, 279 n

dormancy, xvi 

filtering of, xvi, 19, 20–21, 25, 

79–80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 88, 91, 268 

flaviviruses, 233, 235, 243 

lentiviruses, 141–2 

load, 141, 191 

mutation of, xviii, xx, 30, 155, 

173–4, 192, 224, 263 

retroviruses, 140–48, 159, 165, 263, 

285 n

‘traffic’ of, 165 

zoonotic, xx ( see also  animals, as 

disease vectors) 

vision loss, Zika and, 254–5 

visna, 142 

Wadsworth Medical Center, 126 

Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 

126 

war, pandemics and, xxi, 3 

War Department (US), 2, 3, 5 

Washington Post , 52, 72, 84, 117 

water systems, 111, 126, 128, 129, 130, 

13 2

weather, plague and, 42–3, 48–9, 63, 65 

‘web of causes’ 152, 194 

Webster, Robert, 173 

Weisman, Joel, 136–7 

Welch, William H., 5, 12–15, 22, 32, 35 

Wellcome Trust, 253, 303, 304 

West Africa,  see under  Africa 

Westchester, New York, 155 

West Nile virus, 240, 251 n

West Park Hospital, Toronto, 187 

WhatsApp, 232, 236 

Wherry, William, 44 

White, Ryan, 151 

white blood cells, 15, 135, 140–42, 

143–7, 213, 236, 284 n, 289 n

White House Biological Threats 

Department, 237 

whooping cough, 17 

wild habitats, encroachment on, 66 

Williams, Anna, 14, 25 

Williams, Mrs. Percy Q., 78 

Wolbach, Burt, 14–15 

Wolbachia  bacteria, 252–3 

Womey, Guinea, 207 

World Bank, 265 

World Health Organization (WHO), 

xviii 

Africa Regional Office (AFRO), 202, 

241 

and AIDS, 156, 157, 164 

Communicable Diseases Division, 

182 

and complacency, accusations of, 264 

‘decision instrument’, 240 

and dengue, 231 

and ‘Disease X’, 264 

and Ebola, 197, 202, 203, 207, 209, 

211–12, 214, 215, 217, 219, 220, 

222–3, 241, 264 

Emerging and Other Communicable 

Diseases Division, 106, 207 

Global Influenza Program, 172, 175 INDEX 

333 

Global Outbreak Alert and Response 

Network (GOARN), 182, 195, 

202 

Global Program on AIDS, 157 

and influenza, 172, 175, 177, 178, 

179, 182, 183, 184, 185, 188, 189, 

194–5, 202, 242, 266 

International Health Regulations, 

223, 241 

and Legionnaires’ disease, 114, 122 

mass immunization campaigns, 160 

and Mexican swine flu, 266 

and panic, 195, 243, 266 

public health emergencies of interna -

tional concern (PHEIC), 212, 217, 

240–43, 245, 261 

and SARS, 175, 177, 178, 179, 182, 

183, 184, 185, 188, 189, 194–5, 

202, 242 

and Zika, 240–43, 245, 246 

World War I, xv, xxi, 1–15, 20, 22, 24, 

26, 28, 35, 60, 75, 110, 272 n

Worobey, Michael, 158, 164 

Writebol, Nancy, 214, 216 

Wu Lien-Teh, 48 

Xenopsylla cheopis , 44, 65, 274 

Yale University, xv, 5 

Yambuku, Congo, 133, 157, 204, 206, 

207, 218, 224 

Yap, Micronesia, 234 

yellow fever, 201, 229, 230, 233, 244, 

246, 249, 250, 258, 262 

black fluid, vomiting of, 23, 199, 230 

ecological disruption and, 97, 165 

as filter passer, 19, 20 

mass graves, 26 

slave trade and, 258 

vaccinations, 230, 250 

WHO and, 240 

Yemen, 246 

Ye oh Eng-kiong, 179 

Yersin, Alexandre, 41 

Yersinia pestis , 40–41, 44, 48, 49, 50, 61, 

64, 103, 114 

York Central Hospital, Toronto, 187 

Young, George, 52 

Young, James, 187 

Zabolotny, Danilo, 274 n

Zaire,  see under  Congo region 

Zaire ebolavirus , 201, 203, 204, 206, 225, 

293 

Zika, xii–xiii, xix, 227–59, 261, 262 

abortion and, 248 

and climate, 249 

conspiracy theories and, 235, 238, 

244, 247, 248 

and contraception, 257 

control measures for, 245, 253 

dengue and, 231, 234–7, 250, 256 

diagnostic tests for, 239, 243 

environmental causes and factors, 

245, 249, 250, 256, 259 

flavivirus, status as, 233, 235, 243 

Guillain-Barré syndrome and, 235–7, 

242, 245, 247 

immunity to, 234n, 241, 250, 252 

lack of data/knowledge about, 242, 

246, 249, 250, 257 

latency and slow onset of, 238–9 

microbial threat ranking, 240 

neglect of, 247, 253, 256 

other arboviruses and, 249–50 

panic about, 241, 244–5 

as PHEIC, 240–43, 245 

phylogenetic analysis of, 246 

rumors about, 235, 238, 244, 247, 

248 

sexual transmission of, 243, 246, 257 

similarities to other arboviruses, 234 

social and environmental conditions 

and, 245, 249, 250, 251, 256, 259 

strains of, 24 6, 249 INDEX 

334 

symptoms of, 230–31, 232, 233, 234, 

235, 238, 239, 252 

transmission of, xix, 233–5, 238, 

240, 242–5, 247, 248, 249, 

251–4, 256–9 

as ‘Trojan horse’, 250 

unanswered questions about, 246 

underreporting of, 234 

vaccines, 237, 243, 245 

vector-control strategies for, 252 

Zika forest, Uganda, 233 

ZMapp, 213–14, 225 

zoes , 205 

zoology, xv 

zoonotic diseases, xx ( see also  animals, as 

disease vectors;  specific diseases ; specific 

viruses )

Zuckerberg, Mark, 264
